MEMOIRES OF THE FAMILY OF THE Stuarts. And the Remarkable Providence of GOD
toward them; IN An Historical Account OF THE LIVES Of those His MAJESTY's
Progenitors of that Name, that were KINGS of SCOTLAND.

Fallitur egregio quisquis sub principe credit
Servitium: Nusquam libertas gratior extat
Quam sub rege pio --
Claudianus. LONDON, Printed by J. Wallis for Walter Kettleby, at the
Bishop's-Head in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1683.

THE PREFACE.
THough by the Providence of him by whom Kings reign, the most Ancient and
Unconquered Crown of Scotland has continued by Succession (maugre all
Opposition) in the Heirs of the Royal Fergus, the first King of Scotland; whose
Inauguration was about 330 Years before the Incarnation of the Blessed Jesus:
Yet some Translations there have been, for want of Heirs Male; and by
inter-marriages some later Families of their Ancient and Warlike Nobility have
been grafted into that Royal Stock, and have thereby grown up to bear that
Virgin Crown.

The STVARTS were the last that were Honored in this kind, of whom there have
not been many Kings, yet all of them so Good, so Virtuous and Wise, that no
History whether Sacred or Civil, can parallel the Succession.

The Various Dispensations of God toward them (especially in their Dangers and
Deliverances,) may in a great measure be seen in this ensuing Mirror.

As for the Occurrences in Political Affairs, since the day of our happy Union
of Crowns; in James the Sixth of undying Memory, though it be true, we may in
them be furnished with more Instances of signal Preservations than from former
Ages; and though God in our late miraculous Revolutions, as also in those
extraordinary Qualifications conferred upon our Kings, adequate to the weight
of a Prince's Crown, has evidenced a special regard to, and approbation of
Kingly Government: Yet in regard our English Histories do abound with the
Remarks and Memoirs of those times to supply the Defects of our Memories, it
would appear an over-acted Design to lanch further into other Men's Labors,
than what I have here offered to View, and would rather seem to Encumber than
Accommodate the Age we live in.

If it shall appear strange to any that these Posthumous Sheets,
She-Orphan-like be exposed in the World without the Reputation or Protection of
some Honorable Patron. It is not for want of Persons that would willingly and
could truly have Dignified the Endeavors of our Deceased Author by suffering
their Names to be prefixed hereto; but because the Design having relation only
to the Ancestors of our King, I feared an alienation of its Dedication might
look injuriously upon the Royalty of his Sacred Majesty, to whom alone, with
his most Illustrious Brother, I imagine the Right of Patronage does belong: But
so little is my esteem of my Self, and so great my Veneration for Royal
Majesty, that I dare not think my self worthy to offer any thing, (though the
best I have) at his Feet: Which Consideration alone has diverted me from the
thoughts of a Dedication.

Yet I hope, in recommendation of the Work, I may tell the World that the
Author was a Native of Scotland, and so may be thought no Stranger to the
History of his own Country: His early Merits advanced him at the Age of Twenty
Three, to be Preacher at the Cannigate in Edinburgh, about the Year 1636. that
by no worse interest than that of the Learned Spotswood: Here he continued not
long, before the Scottish Covenant (so Fatal to all Loyal and Religious Men)
forced him for the security of his Life and Loyalty, to retire from that
Honorable and Advantageous Employment, to London, whither the Storm pursued
him; The Presbyterian Faction so Embroiling the Affairs of that Blessed Prince,
Charles the First, (whose Memory is too great and too good to be intermixed with
the common History of the Age) that they soon reduced him from his Princely
Estate, wherein he was always ready and willing to afford Protection to his
Friends, to so Low a fortune, that he, the best of Kings, could in his Three
Kingdoms find no place of Safety or Defense for himself.

All that our Author could then acquire, was a presentation to a small Vicarage
in Norfolk, as I suppose, in the King's hands, Sir Thomas Corbet, a Young
Gentleman of an Ancient and Honorable Family the Patron of it, being then a
Minor and his Majesty's Ward.

Here he lived in Repute with all good Men for his Eminency in Learning,
Loyalty, and Religion, until the exrraordinary respects and affections of the
honest and loyal Gentry provoked the malice of the Rebellious Committee against
him, and that place could afford him no longer security.

Then by the favorable Recommendation of Lieutenant Colonel Bendish, one of
his Majesty's Deputy Lieutenants, and Alderman of Norwich, a great lover of
Loyalty, Religion, and Learning; (to whom greater Acknowledgements are due,) he
was removed to Kirkby Cane, a Rectory in the same County, in the Gift of
Richard Cateline Esquire; a Gentleman whose Sufferings were too severe Testimonials
of his Fidelity to his Prince, and his whole Life a Contexture of great
Prudence, Piety, and Charity: Amongst the many blessings that attended his
Life, it was not his least happiness that he was the Father of the present Sir
Nevil Cateline, who was his Eldest Son that survived the Calamity of the Civil
War; a Gentleman he is whose Virtues are sufficient Indications of his Birth,
he Inheriting not only the outward fortune, but also the internal Noble and
Generous Qualifications of his Parents Minds; and though he may seem to have
stepped before some of his Ancestors in Titles of Eminency, yet none that rightly
knows him, can think his Titles keep equal pace with his Merit.

Here he spent a dozen Years and upwards in a Retired and Pious Solitude,
(living in great Regard and Esteem with his good Patron, and is not yet dead in
the memory of his Son) until the happy Restoration of His Sacred MAJESTY, when
True Religion and Loyalty might unmask themselves, and with their Primitive
Confidence look into the World: Then having weathered out the Storm, at the
first appearance of the Long-benighted Sun, he resorted to London to
Congratulate the Joyful Change in National Affairs; he had the Honor to kiss
His Majesty's Hand, and receive some further assurances of his Bounty; but
returning in a Pleonasm of Joy, he expired in the Ecstasy without any more
marks of Royal Favor upon him.

He left these loose and unpolished Papers behind him, doubtless designed, though
not perfected, to be offered to His Majesty, as a Congratulation of his Return
to his Three Kingdoms: But that opportunity being lost, I have since thought
them no better than Useless Papers, until lately perusing of them, and
Reflecting upon the Skepticism of some Politicians, and the Incredulity of all
disaffected and discontented Minds, not to be convinced of Daylight by the
brightest Beams that ever darted from the Sun; I was induced to believe that
the Idiome and Exuberance of the matter and Phrase being a little corrected, an
Epitome might be extracted not undelightful nor unuseful for the present Age:
Being an Age wherein great Attempts have been made against the Succession so
long uninterrupted; and the Rights and Prerogatives of the Crown, though never
so Sacred, have all been disputed, by Men of so loose and disloyal Principles;
that could they effect their Designs upon those Supports to an Hereditary
Crown; would not easily be persuaded to give over attempting till they have
Extirpated, not only the Royal Line, but Royalty and Monarchy it self; Nor can
the most Christian Charity think otherwise, when we see many of those very Men
to be great Sticklers, and all of their persuasion to be great Favorers of the
Design; who thought they had once effectually done it before, and now by the
Terrors of a guilty Conscience, are Stimulated to repent the Wickedness, not
thinking themselves easy or safe under the protection of a Family which they
have so Barbarously and so Inhumanly Affronted, though perhaps the greatest
instance of Royal Clemency and Mercy that History affords: And certainly that
single act of Barbarity committed against the Sacred Person of our late
Martyred Sovereign, were there nothing else in their whole practice, is enough
to sully the fairest Fucus to confute their best Arguments for the support of
their pretended Zeal, and to render their very Principles Odious and Abominable
to all reasonable Men in future Ages.

The Perusal of these few Remarks or Historical Observations, (full of Loyalty
and Impartiality) together with a Reflection, not only upon the Restoration of
His Majesty to the Honors and Dignities of His Three Crowns, but also upon
those Deliverances which bear a later Date and are fresh Instances of Men's
Disloyalty, of our King's great Wisdom, and God's peculiar Providence over him:
These things (I say) taken into Serious Consideration, may afford Men a
Convincing prospect of the Folly as well as the Impiety of all Attempts against
a Throne of Divine Establishment, and that attested by so many miraculous
Deliverances and Preservations: All that the People do is but to imagine a vain
Thing. That God who has set the Crown upon his Head will enable him to break
all their Bonds asunder, and to cast away their Cords from him: Yea, he that
dwells in Heaven shall laugh them to scorn, the Lord shall have them in
derision.

THE PRAYER.
COntinue, O gracious God, to be thus Propitious to thine Anointed, our
Sovereign Lord King CHARLES the Second, and grant that there may never want One
of that Royal Family to set upon his Throne so long as the Sun and the Moon
endure.

THE LIFE OF ROBERT II THE FIRST Of the Royal Family of Stuarts Kings of
Scotland.
RObert the Second of that Name, descended of Walter High Stewart of Scotland
in the days of King Malcolme, came in the Right of his Mother (Sister to King
David, and Daughter to King Robert Bruce to Sway the Scottish Scepter, and was
the First of the Stuarts on whose head that unravished C^^^^ was Set, about the
Year 1371. and the 55th of his Age.

In the beginning of his Reign a French Ambassador sent by Charks the Fifth of
France, arriveth in Scotland to Congratulate his coming to the Crown, and to
renew the Ancient League between the two Crowns of France and Scotland, and to
invite the Scots in persuance of an Article in the same League, to raise an
Army against England, of purpose to force home some or most of the English
Forces then making War in France, the Ancient League is without scruple
renewed; and the Scots soon prevailed withal to raise an Army against the
English, being provoked by denial of Justice on the Murderer of a Scottish
Gentleman, contrary to the Laws Established for preservation of Peace amongst
the Borderers; and being much more incensed by diverse depredations, especially
by the inroad made by the Earl Percy the Year immediately preceding, contrary
to the Articles of Peace concluded for fourteen Years between the two Kingdoms.

To preface the Scottish Expedition into England, Alexander Ramsey with forty
choice Gentlemen, surpriseth Berwick Castle, Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland
immediately Besieges them with 10000 well Armed men, after some few days
valiant defense, the Castle is stormed, the Garrison wholly put to the Sword,
Ramsey the Captain in Chief only preserved.

By this time the Scottish Army advances, and under the Conduct of James Earl
Dowglass, enters England by the way of Carlisle, they plunder Penreth in the
Fair time, and return very richly laden with Spoil, and with their Spoil carry
home with them the Plague of Pestilence, which raged all the Kingdom over for
two Years together,

To avenge this mischief done, Fifteen Thousand English under the Conduct of
General Talbot, are sent into Scotland, they spoil and plunder at pleasure, but
returning laden with Booty, and Encamping nigh the Borders in a strait Valley,
secure and expecting no Enemy, are suddenly surprised by 500 Scottish Horse,
who giving them a Fierce Charge, put all in Confusion, some killed, diverse
taken Prisoners,

The English finding the Wars against both Kingdoms of France and Scotland, a
Burden too heavy, resolve, if possible, to make Peace with Scotland, to which
effect John Duke of Lancaster, Uncle to the English King Richard the Second, is
sent Ambassador to Scotland, is honorably received and entertained by King
Robert, James Earl Douglas is appointed Commissioner to Treat with him; a
Cessation of Arms is concluded for three Years, which King Robert caused
inviolably to be observed, notwithstanding of a great Advantage given him,
England by the instigation of one Ball a Priest, upon occasion of a four penny
Poll imposed on the People.

King Robert Commands his Commissioner Earl Dowglass, to tender a Noble
Entertainment to the Duke, the English Ambassador, if it pleased him to reside
in Scotland during the said Rebellion, or if it pleased him, in such a
dangerous Storm to return to England, to tender to him the Service of a strong
Guard of 2000 men then ready to attend him, Dowglass tendereth both: the Duke
Acknowledging with all Thankfulness the Nobleness of the Scottish King,
refuses both and sets out for England: the Governor of Berwick, I know not
why, denies him Entrance, the Duke returns to Edinburgh, resideth there,
and is very Honorably Entertained,

The Three Years Truce determined in the Year 1384. Archibald Dowglass Earl of
Galloway, Accompanied with James Earl Dowglass, George Earl of Merse or Marches
besieges Maban Castle and after Nine Days Siege in the Cold of Winter, the
Castle is delivered: the Earl of Dunbar likewise surpriseth a great Booty nigh
Piggin, which he conveyed to be secured in Roxborrow, then in the hands of the
English.

King Richard having Notice of the Scottish Stirs and Success, sends down a
Potent Army both by Sea and Land, under the Command of the Duke of Lancaster,
they spoil all to the very Gates of Edinburgh, they Enter the City, and in
their Fury resolve to set it on Fire; but the Duke remembering that it had been
a Sanctuary to himself in a late Danger, Nobly preserves it, and returns
with his Army.

His Army returned, Dowglass immediately marches with an Army, and regaineth
all the Castles in the English Power, Roxborrow only excepted, for which he put
very fair, but that a Burning Fever of which he Dyed, prevented him.

In the mean while a Peace is Concluded in France between all the Three
Kingdoms of France, England and Scotland, the French undertake to publish this
Peace forthwith in Scotland, but are Negligent in it, until the News of a great
havoc done in Scotland after the Conclusion of the Peace, by an Army of 10000
English Horsemen, and 6000 Bowmen, under the Earl of Northumberland and
Notingham, the Scots sensible of this Abuse refuse to hearken to Terms of
Peace, notwithstanding the earnest desire of their King to embrace them;
Dowglass, Lindsey, and Dunbar, privately withdraw from Court, raise an Army,
and flying rather than marching, into England, consume all with fire and sword
even to the Gates of New Castle, return laden with Spoil, and proclaim the
Peace.

In the Year following, French Admiral Jean de Vienna, landeth in Scotland with
about some Two Thousand Auxiliary Foot, and an Hundred Curasiers, with Six
Months Pay.

King Richard of England having Notice hereof, and withal Intelligence of great
Preparations making against him in France by Charles the Sixth the French King
(which soon evaporated into Smoke, by the delays of the Duke of Bury) suddenly
raises an Army of Sixty Thousand Foot, and Eight Thousand Horse, some say One
Hundred Thousand Foot, and Ten Thousand Horse, some Three Hundred Thousand of
both, and in great Fury marches into Scotland, burns and kills all along
Forty Miles, without respect of Place or Person: Edinburgh and Melrose, both
Consumed by Fire, King Robert thinking it no way safe to give Battle to so
great an Army, sends an Army into Cumberland, where they freely Wast and
Spoil all.

King Richard not daring to march beyond the Scottish Frith, as the Duke of
Lancaster Advised him, (whom he therefore Suspected of a Traitorous Design
against him) nor to leave the Sea Coast (having all his Stores of Provision
from his Navy then attending him on the Frith) and the Winter then drawing on,
resolves rather to return home by the way of Berwick, than with the hazard of
all, by reason of Cold and Hunger, to Pursue the Scots in Cumberland: which the
Scots perceiving, withdraw their Army at their own convenience, and return no
less laden with Spoil than the great Army of the English; thus two Armies great
enough are raised, invade other Nations, and return without sight one of
another, the People (the common sufferers in such broils) sustaining the loss.

King Robert knowing that the English could not return in the Winter Season,
sends his Army to reduce Roxborrough, then in the hands of the English,
strongly Fortified and well Garrisoned, the Siege being formed, the French
crave the Possession and Government of the Town, when regained, (the Scots
peremptorily refuse, telling them plainly, their Service deserved no such
Reward as so strong a Garrison; the Possession whereof should enable them to
become at pleasure, Arbitrators both of War and Peace: the Siege breaks up in
discontent, the Scots weary of the Insolence and grievous Plunderings of the
French, send them fairly home, retaining the Commander in Chief until
reasonable Satisfaction made for the wast done by his Soldiers.

King Richard of England now returned home, and his great Army disbanded,
behold a Cloud appears, which breaks out into such a storm as in the end
proved his Ruin.

Whilst all things are in confusion in England, Scottish Nobility unwilling to
loose the opportunity, cry out for a Vindictive Army to be raised to revenge
King Richard's last years inhuman Cruelty, the good King touched with a
fellow-feeling of King Richard's Sufferings, choosing rather to bear the wrong
done, than to wound the afflicted; shows himself very averse to the Counsels
of his Nobility; which his Nobles perceiving, resent it more than well
beseeming them, and privately contrive an Army, without the knowledge of their
King, with which they march into England: one part of their Army marches by
the way of Carlisle, under the Conduct of two of the King's Younger Sons, the
Earls of Fife and Straern, the other by the way of Berwick, under the Command
of James Earl Dowglass.

The first Army spoileth the Country without opposition, and returns with
Spoil enough,

The second has not the like fortune, though it marched with such have and
secrecy, that the smoke it raised in the Conflagration of Towns and Villages
was its first Discovery; having spoiled the Bishopric of Durham, Earl Dowglass
resolves to Attempt New Castle, the Percies (in those days the most Valiant
Family England had) draw their Forces thither for its Defense; some light
Skirmishing there was for three days together, the two Commanders in Chief,
Dowglass and Piercy think it worthy of their Fame to try their single Valor in
view of both Armies, which accordingly they did, with incredible Gallantry on
both sides, Percy is at last dismounted, Dowglass who Thirsted not after Blood
but Honor, as a Noble Cavalier, does not offer one blow to his dismounted
Enemy, lays only hold on his Spear Saying, My Lord your Spear shall home with
me as the Trophee of this Noble Encounter: and with these words Retreateth to
the Van of his Army. Next day after, Dowglass draws off the Field, and
marches to Otturburn some Eight Miles from New Castle, where contrary to the
Advice of his Council, (his Army being inferior in number by one half to the
English) he stays some three days attending Earl Percy his rescue of his
Spear; Percy to regain his Honor, resolves to Fight him, contrary to the
Advice of all his Council too: who presumed (as they had reason) that Douglas
so Discreet and Wary a Soldier, would not hazard to give Battle to an Army so
much exceeding his Number as two to one, unless he had some considerable Forces
laid in Ambush to ensnare them. The two Armies the one not above Five Thousand,
the other not under Ten Thousand, join Battle in the Evening, and with various
and doubtful Success, coutinued Fight almost the whole Night, by the benefit of
the Light they had from the Full Moon: at last the Scots gave ground, which by
the Valor of two Heburnes both Patrick by Name, was quickly regained, Dowglass
Charge so desperately with two Attendants only, Heart and Glendimung, that
having evidenced incredible strength both of Spirit and Body, he falls under
the burden of many wounds, before his Forces were able to take him off, I am
well and in a good condition, I now Dye as almost all my Ancestors have done,
in the Bed of Honor, some things only I Crave of you my Noble and Dear
Friends, which I desire to be performed as you Love and Honor me; First, That
my Death be no Discouragement to you. Secondly, That you Conceal my Death,
during the time of the Battle both from Friends and Foes. Thirdly, That you
suffer not my Standard to be overthrown. And Lastly, That you would Avenge my
Death. These things if you perform I have my desire, and in hope thereof I bear
all other things, and my present Fate with a good heart. With these words
(wherein he showed himself a Soldier) he takes leave of them, and they of him,
and having covered his Body from the sight of the Soldiers; they advance his
Standard, and Charge with the greater Fury, crying out A Dowglass! A Dowglass!
the English are forthwith put into great disorder, the Earl Percy is taken
Prisoner, and in the same Charge his Valiant Son too, being dangerously
wounded: some Nineteen hundred English are slain, some Fourteen hundred are
Prisoners whereof most wounded, and to the Scots it was not a dry Victory.

The next day the Bishop of Durham coming up with some Auxiliaries, the English
Rally again, and resolve to give Battle, the Army being again made up Ten
Thousand Men, the Scots making virtue of necessity (there being no possible
safety for them to endeavor an Escape) resolve to stand to it, under the
Command of the Earl of Murray. The Bishop advancing Murray (having first taken
an Oath of all the Prisoners that they should remain true Prisoners, though
their friends should rescue them by strength of Arms) is ready to receive him,
and commands the Soldiers to wind their Horns (each Soldier having about his
Neck an Horn larger than our ordinary Harvest Horns, the Noise whereof was so
great, and the View of the dead Corpse slain over Night so terrible, that the
Hearts of the raw and new raised Soldiers began to fail, the Bishop is forced
as his Safest course, to retreat into their Quarters from whence they came
without attempting any thing; the Scots are no less glad (being sufficiently
wasted and weary, to look homeward.

Murray dismisseth Percy the Younger upon his Parole, above One Thousand Common
Soldiers are set at Liberty, the Earl himself and about Four Hundred of the
Chief are carried Prisoners into Scotland.

The Joy the Scots had in this Victory which happened July 19. 1390. was wholly
swallowed up in the Death of the dougheir Dowglass, a very noble Cavalier
indeed, whose Body was Interred at Melross with the greatest Evidences of
Sorrow that could be.

Soon after Dyed in Peace the Good and Peaceable King Robert (a general Peace
being concluded in France, England and Scotland,

He had two Wives, the one Elizabeth Daughter to Sir Adam More, by whom he had
three Sons, John Earl of Carist, Robert Earl of Say, Alexander Earl of Buchan
and Badgenoch: the other Enfence Daughter to Hugh Earl of Ross, by whom he had
two Sons, Walter Earl of Straherne, and David Earl of Athol, and one Daughter
Enfence, given in Marriage to James Lord Dowglass, Son to William Earl of
Dowglass.

THE LIFE OF ROBERT III.
JOHN son to King Robert, Anno 1390. who immediately changed his Name, choosing
to be called by the Name Robert, as an Auspicious Name, the former two Roberts
Kings of that Nation, being men eminent in Virtue, and prosperous in
Achievements.

He came to his Crown in a time free of Wars from abroad, but full of Jars at
home, by the unquiet and ravenous disposition of his Nephew Duncan, Son to
Alexander Earl of Buchan, who having Abased himself to be Captain of a
Rebellious Rout of Robers, spoiling and plundering diverse Places, especially in
Angus, was at last, not without some Blood shed, Suppressed by the industry of
the Earl of Craford.

Soon after a dangerous fend fell out between two Great and Populous Families
in the North, for Reducing of whom, were sent Thomas Dunbar Earl of Murray, and
James Earl of Craford, who perceiving the great mischief likely to attend their
Endeavors of a forcible Reducement, contrived a more subtle way to quiet them,
after a representation made to the Heads of those Clans, a part of the danger
of their mutual Fewds, and of the Kings Wrath against both, they Advise them to
conclude their Fewds as the Horatii and Cariatii did at Rome, by the Choice not
of three, but of three hundred on each side, to Fight, Armed with Swords only,
in the sight of the King and his Nobles; whereby the Victor should gain Honor,
the Vanquished safety from further Punishment, and both regain his Majesty's
Favor, whereof they gave them full assurance; the Proposition is embraced on
both sides of St. John's Town, Mounts raised, and Galleries made for the
accommodation of the Spectators, the Combatants are chosen, and on the day
appointed, together with a multitude of beholders, all of them appear on the
place, only one through fear, privately withdrew himself, this puts some
delay to the Encounter, the one party looking upon it as a dishonor to Fight
with the other wanting one of their Number: the other Party not finding one who
would Engage himself to make up their Number, desire one of the Three Hundred
to be put aside, but of all that Number, not one could be induced to withdraw,
accounting it an indelible disgrace to be shuffled out of such a choice Company
of Valorous men; at last an ordinary Tradesman tendereth his Service, desiring
no greater Reward than one single piece of Gold in hand, as an honorable badge
of his Valor, and an Annuity of a small Sum for Life, should he survive the
Conflict, his Demands are soon granted, and immediately begins the Conflict
with as much Fury as the height of Wrath, the insatiable desire of honor, and
the fear of shame more than death could produce, to the horror and amazement
of the Spectators, whose hearts trembled within them to see (as indeed it was
an horrid Sight to behold) such a rueful Sight of Furious men butchering one
another, and observed it was by all, that of all the Combatants none showed
more, shall I call it Valor, than the Tradesman did, who had the good Fate to
survive that dismal day, and on the Conquering side too, whereof only ten
besides himself outlived that hour, to partake with many ghastly wounds the
honor of the day, the vanquished are killed on the place, all to one, who
perceiving himself left alone, and being without wounds, he skippeth into the
River, by which means none of the surviving Victors being able to follow him by
reason of their wounds, he makes a fair Escape with his Life, thus the Heads
and most turbulent of both Clans cut off, their retainers are soon persuaded to
Peace, and for many Years after live quiet enough;

In the Year 1398. Robert Created his Son David at the Eighteenth Year of his
Age, Duke of Rothesay, and his Brother Robert Duke of Albany, the first Honor
of this kind bestowed in that Kingdom. Robert Governor of the whole Kingdom,
preferring the quiet of a private Life to the daily Troubles which attend a
public Employment, though sweetened with many honors and outward respects.

The Year following being the First Year of the Reign of Henry the Fourth of
England, some unhappy seeds of Jarrs between the two Kingdoms were scattered by
George Dunbar Earl of Merse: the Daughter of the said Earl being espoused to
the Duke of Rothesay, and a great part of her Dowry paid; Archibald Earl of
Dowglass Excepteth in Parliament against the Espousals, Robert Duke of Albany
prevails with the King to make void the first Espousal, and to accept the
tender made by the Earl of Dowglass, both which being accordingly done, the
Marriage of the Earl Dowglass his Daughter to the Young Duke is Solemnised by
consent of Parliament.

The Earl George resenteth this as a wrong done to his Family, expostulateth
the matter with the King, and remanded his Daughters Dowry, whereunto present
Satisfaction not being made, the Earl withdraws from Court, breathing out
Revenge, and immediately flies into England, where he enters into league
with Earl Percy, Dowglass his sworn Enemy; and with some Force obtained from
him, he returns into Scotland and spoileth all the Lands in the Meuse
belonging to Earl Dowglass; King Robert, provoked with Indignation, proclaims
him Traitor, and dispatcheth an Herald to King Henry the 4th. of England, to
require the delivery up of the fugitive Earl to Justice: King Henry pretends
faith given to the Earl for Protection, and upon that account refuses King
Robert his demand; King Robert resenteth this as a breach of the Peace
concluded for seven years in the days of King Richard, not yet expired; and
accordingly his Council declares it, and for this and many outrages and
detestations committed by Henry Percy the younger, and by the fugitive Earl,
proclaims War against King Henry.

King Henry thinks it his wisest course to prevent him, and forthwith marches
into Scotland with a very potent Army of Horse and Foot, enters the City of
Edinburgh and lays Siege to the Castle; Duke Robert then Governor of
Scotland, prepares for its relief, but so slowly, that every man suspected him
to have some sinister design in it; Henry finding the Castle impregnable, being
garrisoned with men of honor and integrity (to whom the Macedonian Ass could
have no access, though some not long since could receive his leading) raised
his Siege and returned to England.

Henry Percy and the fugitive Earl continue their plundering incursions, for
repressing of whom several small Parties were sent, to small purpose; at last
by the command of the Governor, Archibald Earl of Dowglass (Son to the late
Earl of the same Name, so much renowned) marches in person against them,
accompanied with diverse of the Nobility, and advances with his Army to the
very Gates of New Castle; Percy the younger, Hemeldon; the Earl Dowglass after
a most furious conflict, is at last overthrown, diverse of the Scottish Nobility
are slain, many taken Prisoners, and with them the Earl himself with the loss
of one of his Eyes; Percy persueth his Victory, enters Scotland, and having
done some spoil in Tiviodale, returns to England, and prepares for a
Rebellion against King Henry: the Earl Dowglass is earnestly solicited by him
to join with him in his design, with promise of freedom; Dowglass embraces the
motion, and with some others of the Scottish Prisoners performs most gallant
service at Shrewsbury battle; contemning all others; he bends himself against
the person of the King only, he dismounteth first one, then another, then a
third, and all in the habit of the King; (King Henry having clothed some
gallant men in his own habit of purpose to encourage his Soldiers at the sight
of their brave deportment) Dowglass admiring from whence so many Kings should
come, rusheth himself into the midst of his enemies, behaving himself with
incredible bravery; but at last the victory falling to the King, Dowglass
grievously wounded is taken Prisoner, the King very nobly takes care of him,
causes his wounds to be cured by the best of his Chirurgions, admits him to
his presence, highly commends his valor, accepts of his ransom, and
grants him liberty to return to his Country where he was received with no
small Joy.

This storm over, Duke Robert wholly bends himself to make away the whole
offspring of his Brother the King, of purpose to make way for his own to come
to the Crown: a fair opportunity offering it self to begin his work, David the
elder of the King's Sons gives up himelfs wholly to his lusts, ravishing both
Virgins and others, contemning all admonitions of his good Father, would not be
reclaimed: The good King much afflicted by the dissolute life of his Son,
commits him to the counsel and care of Duke Robert the Governor; who very
glad of the opportunity to commence his Traitorous design, cheerfully snatcheth
his prey into his Clutches and resolving to take a short course to reform his
manners by the ruin of the man, carries him along with himself to St.
Andrews, from thence to Faulkland, where he coops him up in a loathsome Dungeon
with a design to destroy him, by the cruel pinches of hunger; which had been
speedily done, but that his miserable Life Was preserved for a Season by the
compassion of two tenderhearted Women; the one a Virgin, Daughter to the
Governor of the Castle, who as she came into the Garden, privately conveyed
under the covert of her Apron, some thin Oaten Cakes, which she gave him
through a Cranny, the only conveyance of light into the Dungeon: The other a
poor neighboring Woman, who gave Suck, and by her Breast-milk milked into his
mouth, refreshed him a little. The Duke, his merciless Uncle admiring that he
heard no tidings of his death, appointed a secret Watch about him, the good
Women are discovered,

This Cruelty is for a time concealed from the good King, at last Time
reveals it, not without some indignation of the Author: The Duke is
questioned, but by a cowardly, if not traitorous Jury packed by himself,
acquitted; the poor distressed King, praying to Heaven for a Vengeance upon
them and all their Posterity who were guilty of that horrid Murder; the Duke
to gloss all the better, draggeth some to Prison, Flagitious men indeed, but
altogether innocent of this Crime, condemns and executes them as Murderers
of the Prince, palliating one wickedness with another, as many other wicked men
have done: The good King solicitous for his only Son now remaining, resolves
for his greater safety, to send him over to France, to be educated in the Court
of Charles the Sixth, the French King, and commends him to the safe conduct
and oversight of Lord Henry Sinclare Earl of Orkney; he sets Sail from the
Basse, and passing by Flamborrowe-head, a Storm arises and forces the Ship
into Harbor; the Prince afflicted with Sea-sickness, goes on Shore, is
apprehended by the English, and sent Prisoner to King Henry of England, who
notwithstanding of the Mournful Letters of the afflicted King his Father (sent
up of purpose some weeks before, to prevent the obstruction of his Journey,)
and contrary to the Advice of the most of his Council, pleading for his
Liberty, detaineth him Prisoner. This hard measure is in great measure
recompensed by the liberal Education he gave him, whereby he became the most
Learned Prince of his time; the sad news of his Imprisonment brought to his
still afflicted Father (for the loss of his eldest Son) as he sat at Supper,
cut him to the Heart, and oppressed with Grief, he falls down dead, his
Company about him in vain seeking to recover Life in him, they carry him to his
Chamber, where his Spirits revive a little; but abstaining from all manner of
nourishment, after three days abstinence he departs this Life, oppressed with
two cruel tyrants, Hunger and Grief, in the 16th. Year of his Reign, April the
First, 1406: A Prince of a very proper and proportionable Person, a Good man
and a Meek, not furnished indeed with Austerity, and such like qualities as
might have rendered him more fit, than in truth he was, to Govern a People so
unlike himself in Conditions.

THE LIFE OF JAMESI.
KIng Robert departed this Life, his Son James, Prisoner in England, is
Proclaimed King of Scotland, and his Uncle Robert Duke of Albany, continued by
Act of Parliament in his Government; at this time a sweet calm of Peace
continued between the two Kingdoms above twelve years together, a great
blessing to both Nations.

In the mean while, Scotland, Donald Lord of the Isles pretending the recovery
of his Lands in Ross, which the Governor kept from him by a a trick of Law,
Invadeth Ross, from thence marches into Murray, from thence into Buchan and so
to Aberdeen, doing much Mischief all along as he went. To stop this Current,
Alexander Earl of Mar, and others of the Nobility, advance against him with
such Forces as could be raised on the sudden, both Armies Encounter at Harlaw,
a fierce Battle continues for many hours, with such slaughter on both sides,
that at Night, the darkness whereof was the first commander of Cessation, each
Army thought it self overcome; no man appearing next day morning to claim the
glory of the Victory, only the poor Village Harlaw, where the Battle was, is
famous from it to this day.

This Rebellion over, the Dauphine of France sends an Ambassador to Scotland
to demand Assistance against the English (according to their ancient League)
then warring in France, Henry the 5th. Married to his Sister the Lady
Catharine, declared Regent of France in present, and Heir apparent to the
Crown; with whom likewise the Duke of Burgundy had joined his whole Force; this
pitiful Letter soon quickened the Scottish Nobility, dreading the effects of
King Henry his Greatness, an Army of 7000 resolute and stout men are sent
immediately over into France, under the Conduct of John Earl of Buchan,
Archibald Earl of Wigton Son to Archibald Earl Douglas, with whom were diverse
Persons of Quality; all safely arrive, and are immediately sent by the Dauphine
toward Turon; the Duke of Clarence Brother to the English King, well high
surpriseth them in their way, they take the Alarm nigh Bergie, and on
Easter-Eve they give Battle to the English, fought with great valor and
various fortune on both sides, at last the Duke of Clarence is dismounted, his
whole Army routed, 2000 slain on the spot, amongst whom were the Duke of
Clarence, the Earl of Kime, the Lords, Gray and Ross.

Many Prisoners likewise taken, whereof diverse Persons of Quality, as the Earls
of Huntington and Somerset, and others. The Earl of Salisbury, a man of
singular virtue and valor, endeavors to repay this loss, but could effect
nothing save the recovery of the dead Body of the Duke of Clarence, which he
afterward sent over into England.

After this Victory the Dauphine creates Buchan Constable of France, one of
the highest Preferments in that Kingdom.

In the same Year 1420, Robert Duke of Albany departed this Life, and his Son
Mordake established in his place, Buchan returns from France, and is
immediately recalled; he arriveth at Rochett, accompanied with Archibald Earl
of Douglas, and Five thousand Auxiliary Foot; the Dauphine much cheared up at
their arrival, receives them with ample Gratulation, John Duke of Bedford, is
sent over from England, much about the same time, with 4000 Horse and 10000
Foot, and soon after King Henry himself arriveth, and with him James King of
Scotland, of purpose, by his presence to withdraw the Scots from the Dauphine,
or at least to render them the more suspected to him: but he is disappointed in
both, the Scots unanimously declaring that they could not render whilst a
Prisoner, the Obedience, otherwise due to him.

Soon after both the French and English King depart this Life, Henry the Sixth
of England about Eights Months old, is Proclaimed King of England and France,
John Duke of Bedford appointed Regent of France.

The Dauphine at the same time Proclaimed by his Adherents, King of France, by
the Name of Charles the 7th.

The Regent advances against him with a powerful Army, the Duke of Alenson
encountereth him. Charles himself is with general consent and unanimous request
of all his Friends desired to withdraw, and not to hazard his Person, the
miscarriage whereof was an apparent ruin of them all, and gives him Battle
not far from Vornoil. The Fight continued very fierce for some hours, at last
the English obtain the Victory, 4000 French and Scots killed, amongst whom were
John Earl of Buchan, Archibald Earl Douglas his Son, the Earl Wigton, and
diverse other eminent Persons; the Duke of Alenson and many great ones are taken
Prisoners: a great Victory, and bought at a great price, the lives of above
2000 English lost on the place.

The Scottish Parliament thinks it now more than high time to endeavor the
Liberty of their King; Ambasladors are sent to that end, and are honorably
Entertained by the Duke of Gloucester then Governing all in England, in the
Nonage of his Nephew.

The Scots demand their King, the Duke advises the English Council to Treat
with them: A great Ransom is demanded: The Scots having no other remedy,
consent to Engage for it, in lieu of one Moiety the Dowry of the Scottish Queen
( Joan Daughter to the Earl of Somerset, a woman of singular Virtue and Beauty,
taken to Wife by the Scottish King at the earnest desire of the Duke of
Gloucester) was detained: and for the other, certain Noble Men are sent Pledges;
an hard measure to an Infant Prisoner, who it seems paid Dear for his
Schoolgate.

And thus after his Years Imprisonment, King James returns Anno 1423;

In the same Parliament diverse of the Nobility are Imprisoned for high
Misdemeanors: Mordake Duke of Albany his two Sons, and his Father in Law the
Earl of Lenox remained under restraint; and by Sentence of their Peers (the
usual manner of Trying Great ones in that Nation) are adjudged to Death for
their manifold Treasons, and were accordingly, not without the vigorous
influence of Atholl, their Uncle, Beheaded on the Castle hill at Sterlin.

The same Year came Ambassadors from France to renew the Ancient League, and to
crave in Marriage Margaret Daughter to King James, for the Dauphine of France
Lodovick Son to Charles the 7th. both propositions are cheerfully assented
unto, and the Ambassadors after much honorable Entertainment return satisfied;
the King forthwith bends himself to a Reformation, and great need there was,
for as once in Israel, so now in Scotland, when there was no King, every man
did what seemed good in his own Eyes, whereby the Kingdom groaned under the
greatest Confusions and Disorders that could be; the Civil Estate after much
pain and trouble, is at last reduced into some tolerable Condition: Heads of
Rebellious Factions men, some taken off, some Imprisoned, some in hope of
amendment pardoned; Oppressions suppressed, Roberies restrained, and promising
foundations laid to prevent such Insolence in time to come.

Amongst those pardoned in hope of Amendment, Alexander Lord of the Isles was
one, a Great man and of a restless Spirit, no sooner enlarged, than he
begins to meditate Revenge for his Imprisonment, as short as it was: He
raises an Army of 10000 men, falls down to Ennerness, burns the Town to
the ground and lays Seige to the Castle; the King sends an Army against
him, he raises his Siege, flies to the Mountains, makes a stand about Lough
Aber, resolving to run the hazard of a Battle in those places of advantage; two
great Clanns, Clan-Chaton, and Clan-Chameron, revolt from him, many others are
suspected by him; in this fear he disbandeth his Army, and with a few
Attendants he flies into the Isles: from thence he sends his Orators to the
King, to implore his Pardon; nothing could be obtained, though the Messengers
were gracious enough to their Sovereign, Alexander himself is required to
appear in Person before the King, committing himself wholly to his Majesty's
mercy: the Rebel conscious of his own Guilt, is much perplexed, Edenburg, where
then his Majesty was: On Easter Day Morning he Addresseth himself to Court,
covered with a Flaxen Frock, he prostrateth himself before the King as he past
to Divine Service, with a most humble and penitent Oration he beggeth Pardon
and Restoration to his Majesty's Favor, and that for his sake, whose restoring
to Life they that day Celebrated: The Time, the Place, the Habit, his mournful
Oration move at present to Compassion, especially the Queen, who became a most
earnest Mediatrix on his behalf; the King delayeth his Answer to the end of
Divine Service, which being performed, his Majesty resolving neither absolutely
to Pardon, nor condignly to Punish, for security of the Peace Alexander is sent
Prisoner to Tamtalion, and his Mother, as the great Instrument of all his
Pernicious ways, is sent to St. Colmes.

In revenge of this Imprisonment, Donald Maloc, a Great man in the Isles,
breaks out in a new Rebellion, for Suppressing of whom the Earls of Mar and
Caithnes are sent; Donald Surpriseth them, and puts Caithnes and most of his
Army to the Sword, Mar happily escaping: puffed up with this Success, Donald
marches to Loughaber; the King goes out in Person against him; Donald having
done much Mischief in the Country, flies into the Isles: Diverse Heads of
Clannes undertake to Suppress him; notice whereof being given to that
ArchRebel, he privately conveyeth himself into Ireland, many of his Associates
are killed, 300 of them taken Prisoners, are sent to the King, all without
exception of any, deservedly Hanged, which exemplary Justice proved happily, to
preserve those Barbarous places in Peace for a longer time than could be
expected.

As his Majesty showed his Justice in the Case I now mentioned, about the same
time he gave a manifest of his Mercy, in enlarging two notable Robbers, Duffe
and Murray; being enlarged, they quarrel one with another, Cull together their
Retainers, maintained on the Spoils of the People, and being 1200 on each side,
furiously Engage in a bloody Conflict, such Execution done on both sides, that
not above to on the one,

Notwithstanding all which Disasters, Mr. Donald a notorious Robber, breaks
out into an open Rebellion; after some Mischief done, Mr. Donald is
apprehended, himself Beheaded, and twelve of his Associates Hanged. Before his
Execution the Law of Retaliation is by the King's special Command executed upon
him. A poor Widow pillaged by him, threateneth him with resolution to repair
to the King for Redress; and I will fit thee for thy Journey, said the Rogue;
he calls for a Blacksmith, and commands him to Nail to her Feet two
HorseShooes; go on says he, now these will preserve thy Feet from bruising:
the poor Woman dissembleth her resolution, and is dismissed: Mr. Donald being
afterward apprehended, the Widow repaireth to his Majesty, reports and
proves this Insolent Trick; Mr. Donald is called for out of Prison,
Horse-shooes are clapped on himself and twelve of his Companions, and commanded
to march through the Streets of Edinburgh, an Officer publishing the Cause of
this strange Punishment; their tedious Journey ended, all of them are put to
Death, as before mentioned: King James hearing that Maloc was under the Power
of an Irish Lord, sends a Messenger to Ireland, to require the Lord to
deliver him; the Irish Lord fearing his Escape, and the Anger of so Warlike a
Prince, resolves to make all sure by cutting off the Rebel's Head, which was
accordingly done and sent over to the King. The public Robberies thus
Suppressed, many good Laws are Established for the good, and to the Joy of all
the People.

And as an addition to the Joy, two Popular Lords of the Nobility, Douglas and
Cassils; are enlarged from Prison, and received into his Majesty's favor.

And for the Complement of all their Joy, the Queen is safely brought to Bed of
two Sons, October 14th. 1430.

The Civil Estate thus happily regulated, his Majesty thinks of a Reformation
of the Clergy, but to small purpose; they being then and in those days within
the Verge of the Pope his Jurisdiction, Secular Princes durst not exercise
their Regal Power over them; all this good King could do, was to plant the
Schools and Universities, Seminaries of good Learning, with Pious and Learned
men, to whom he gave so many Encouragements, that the fruits of so good a
Project were soon seen and perceived by all, to the great Joy of all good Men,
and the immortal Praise of so good a Prince.

Neither did this good King rest in the encouragement of the Liberal Sciences,
but resolving to advance all Mechanic Trades (wholly decayed by the
tediousness, misery of an 150 Years War) sends over to Flanders, and from
thence conduces most exquisite Artificers of all sorts, to whom he gave great
Rewards and large Immunities; by which Princely Munificence, Trades of all
sorts thrive and flourish, the Poor set to Work, and many Enriched; every man
acknowledging the happiness of that People who live under the sweet and liberal
Dews of a virtuous and munificent Prince.

Soon after arrived Ambassadors from France to demand the young Lady formerly
Espoused to the Dauphine,

Ambassadors likewise come at the same time from England, with full purpose at
once to break not only this Matrimonial, but also that Ancient National League
between the two Kingdoms of France and Scotland: to which end they propound a
League Offensive and Defensive, with a Tender of Berwick and Roxborrow to be
Restored forthwith; many other things likewise were Tendered, promising very
fairly to the Good of both Kingdoms, if as fully performed as freely promised.
King James remitteth this great Business to the Advice of his Parliament: The
Parliament after much Debate, resolve to keep unviolably their Ancient League
with France, and according to the desire of the French Ambassador, to send over
the young Lady without further delay.

The English Ambassadors resent this Denial, as a Dishonor, and immediately
denounce War against the Scots; threatening withal, by their Navy to Way-lay the
Princess in her passage to France.

The Princess is sent over forthwith under the guard of a very stately Navy,
the English Navy attempting nothing, her Highness safely Arriveth, and her
Marriage to the Dauphine, with the greatest expressions of Joy solemnized at
Turon.

About the same time Earl Percy enters into Scotland with 4000, rather to
spoil than fight: Dowglass Earl of Anyus is sent against him with the like
number, Percy is overthrown, a few slain on either side; of the English 1500
taken Prisoners.

King James thus provoked by Way-laying the young Lady by Sea, and by this
Inroad by Land; raises a great Army, with purpose to Invade Northumberland: in
this way he lays Siege to Roxborrow, then in the hands of the English,
expecting in few days the Delivering of it into his hands.

In the mean while comes the Queen into his Camp discovering to him a most
horrid Treason intended by his own nighest Kindred, against both his Person and
Posterity.

His Majesty perceiving that her Relation proceeded not from Womanish fear, but
from such real Grounds as were not to be slighted, raises his Siege, and
without Advice of any, Disbandeth his Army, to the no less Astonishment than
Discontent of most about him; being Strangers to the cause of this sudden and
unexpected Change: His Majesty posteth to St. John's Town (as a Bird into a
Snare) of purpose to make a fuller Discovery, of that horrible Plot.

The Treason being ripe, and ready for Execution, the Traitors privately repair
thither, with a small hand of Conspirators: The Captains of that Traitorous
Band, Athol and his Cousin Graham, knowing the Weakness of the King's Guard,
enter privately into the Monastery where his Majesty lay, and by Conduct of one
of his Household Servants, debauched into the Conspiracy, they come to the
Stairs which led to the Royal Chamber: The Cupbearer at the same time coming
down, perceiving them in Arms, Cries out with a loud Voice, Treason; him they
forthwith Murder, and make have to the Door, made fast by no stronger bar (the
Iron Bolt being stolen away by the Traitorous Servant in Conspiracy with them)
than the Tender wrest of a young Gentleman, which quickly broke; the
Assassinates furiously rush in, and run toward his Majesty, which the Queen
perceiving, casts her self upon the King, endeavoring poor Lady to preserve
him, they drag her from him, not without some dangerous Wounds; and forgetting
all fear of God and Man, thrust their Swords above Forty times through the
Heart and Body of the most Excellent Prince.

The cause of this horrid Assassination, was that old Mother of much Mischief,
Ambition: Athold, the King's old Uncle, having already by his Hellish Subtlety,
brought some of his nighest Kinsmen, who lay in his way to the Crown, to
untimely Ends, resolves at last to strike at the main Rub, the King himself;
for accomplishing whereof he snatcheth the advantage of the Discontent of
Robert Graham Tutor of Straherne, to whom he propounds his Design, craveth
his Conjunction therein, with assurance not only of Protection but of ample
Rewards, and great Preferments when he comes to his Kingdom. Graham graspes at
all, and joyneth in the Traitorous Design with him. To this Combination Athol
calls his own Grandchild, Robert, a Youth nimble both in Head and Hand, whom
he likewise debaucheth into this Treasonable Plot. The Treason thus Craftily
contrived, is Cunningly carried on, and at last cruelly Executed, as before.

This was a sad Day in Scotland, Robert, and his Cousin Graham, are more
severely proceeded against, to the terror of all Traitors, the Executioners
were to spend some part of three days in the Execution of Athol, himself, being
the Contriver of the whole Villainy: The first day he was drawn in a Cart to the
place of Execution, Crown of burning Iron set on his Head, with this
Inscription; Here stands the King of all Traitors: (whereby came to pass the
Delusion of a Sooth-sayer, who told him (which withal was a spur to his
Ambition) that in a public place he should be Crowned King: The second day he
is tied on an Hurdle and dragged by Horse through the Great Street in
Edinburgh: The third day he was brought again to the place of Execution, and
laid along a Plank, his Bowels are pulled out and cast into Fire prepared for
them, his Traitorous Heart is likewise pulled out and cast into the same Fire,
his Head cut off and set upon a Pole in a public place of the City, as a
Spectacle to all Men; his Body divided into four Quarters, is sent out to four
other chief Cities in the Kingdom, and in public places hanged up, to the
terror of all Traitors. His Grandchild Robert being a Youth only, and Seduced
by the wicked Counsel of his Grandfather, is more mildly dealt withal, being
first Strangled to death and then Quartered; his Quarters are set as Spectacles
in certain public places of the Kingdom. Grahan is more roughly used, being,
though not the chief Contriver, the grand Executioner of that dreadful Murder;
he was first dragged through the City in a Cart backward, then his Hands being
fastened in Iron Hooks fixed in the same Cart, his Flesh all his Body over is
Seared with hot Irons, even to the very Bones; this done, his Body is cut in
Quarters, and disposed on as were the former.

A severe piece of Justice, and well deserved; What could recompense the loss
of that Good King, worthy to be reckoned amongst the best of Kings, a Man of a
low Stature, but of a mavelous strength of Body, far exceeding all his
Contemporaries; of such a vigorous Wit, that he was eminently learned in all
the liberal Sciences; in Poetry and Music he far exceeded the decorum of a
King: a prudent Lawgiver, a singular Justiciary, a Merciful Prince: an
incomparable Maecenas to all Learning: in all his Relations, and their
respective duties, no King, no Man ever better; and yet for all these, it
pleased God to suffer him to fall under the Cruel hands of wicked and bloody
Men, for what cause, whether his own or his Peoples Sins, is best known to him
from whom no Secret thing is hid. His Murder hapened to the inexpressible
Grief of all good Men, the 20th. day of February,

THE LIFE OF JAMES II.
JAMES the Second, only Son to James the First, was Crowned at Halyrude-House
in the 7th Year of his Age: at the same time Sir Alexander Leviston is chosen
Viceroy, and Sir William Chrichton continued Chancellor.

The Nobility are no sooner returned home to the places of their ordinary
Residence, when behold all things fall into a most Pernicious Confusion:
Archibald Earl of Douglas, conceiving himself neglected in the public
Administration, refuses notwithstanding the Letters both of the Viceroy and
Chancellor, directed to him to that effect; to Restrain the Insolent Robberies
committed by his own Vassals, all Anandale over; commanding them withal to deny
Obedience to the Edicts and Proclamations of the Chancellor or Viceroy,
pretending a Regal Power Legally invested in himself over all those who lived
within the Confines of his peculiar Jurisdiction.

The same Devil of Division plays his Prancks between the Viceroy and
Chancellor: the Viceroy discharges by public Proclamation all Obedience to
the Chancellor, and the Chancellor by the like Proclamation, all Obedience to
the Viceroy: The People thus perplexed between contrary Commands, are reduced
by their Opposite Powers in cases of necessary Disobedience to the one or
other, into a most woeful Plight: The Viceroy and the Queen stay at Sterlin:
The King the Tuition of the Chancellor, abides at Edinburgh Castle: the Queen
with a design to rescue the King out of the hands of the Chancellor, repaireth
to Edinburgh, pretending a desire only to see her Royal Son the young King. The
Chancellor Entertaineth her Majesty civily and Princely; which civil
Entertainment the Queen very Graciously accepts; and by her fair and
plausible Discourses concerning the State of public Affairs, the happy
Education of the young King her Son, and the earnest desire she had of an happy
Union between the two grand Ministers of State; She so far Insinuates her self
into the good opinion of the Chancellor, that at all times she has free access
to the King's Person: Her Retinue being such too, as it was so small and of
such mean Persons, that no matter or Jealousy could arise from them. In the
mean while she secretly persuadeth the Child to suffer himself to be conveyed
away by her, and finding her opportunity, Whit-Kirk to perform some Vows and
Religious-Offices: by break of Day she takes her Journey, and with her the
young King her Son, locked up in the Trunk in which her own Linen lay; both
take Shipping at Leith, and safely Arrive that Afternoon at Sterlin, where they
were received with much Joy. The Chancellor amazed and ashamed to see himself
so handsomely cheated, perplexeth himself to little purpose. The Viceroy
forthwith advances with an Army to Besiege the Castle of Edinburgh, where the
Chancellor lay: who immediately dispatcheth a Messenger to Earl Douglas to
crave Aid and Relief; who returns Answer with as little Wit as Fear; saying,
That he knew they were both Knaves, contending not for Public Good, but their
own private Interests; so that wherever the Blow fell, it was not lost; and
should they both Perish, it were the more happy for the whole Kingdom; as to
himself he should not be sorry to see the Ruin of them both. This Indiscreet
Answer, proves as so much Soder to Cement the two grand Contenders: Being thus
Reconciled, they bear a keen Edge toward Douglas, but Death struck more sharp
than their Sword, cutteth the thread of his Life, in a Fit of a burning Fever;
which notwithstanding cutteth not off the current of their Malice, which
unhappily found a more advantageous passage, by the imprudent Deportment of
William the young Earl, his Son, a Youth not exceeding fourteen Years of Age,
who living in a Princely garb, creating Knights, Counselors, and other
Officers; and always guarded with a Guard of Two Thousand Horse, is suspected
and feared of all, and as an addition to his Envy as well as Greatness, he
sends to France, and craveth the Title of his Grandfather, which was
forthwith granted to him, and is immediately declared Duke of Tyron; and which
added more to all Men's fear and jealousy, the Queen and the Lord James Stuart
her Husband, and his Brother William, are suspected to be Engaged in Douglas
his Faction: The Viceroy glad to snatch any opportunity against the Queen,
whom now he Suspected to be none of his Friend, secureth her Person; and not
contented to secure her Husband and his Brother in a strong Prison, he lays
them both fast in Iron Fetters, where they remained until they found sufficient
Sureties for the Peace, engaging withal that they should not bear any public
Office without consent of the Viceroy.

The Viceroy now not a little puffed up, rules all things at pleasure,
contemning the Chancellor and all other Officers of State: the Chancellor not
able to bear this Insolence, withdraws from Court, then at Sterlin, and
retireth himself to the Castle of Edinburgh, the Government whereof he had
Confirmed to him at their last Agreement: who meditating with himself what
might be done to give Check to the Viceroy, resolves to surprise the Person
of the King, who he knew used to follow his sport in Hunting, with a small
Retinue; to which end he marches out in the Night, and lodges himself and a
Band of his most trusty Friends amongst Thickets in a Wood, whither the King
came next day morning in course: the Chancellor forthwith Surprizeth him,
beseeching his Majesty to be of good Cheer, and to rest assured that no other
thing save his Highness Service and Safety was intended by him, telling him
that it was now high time for him to take the Government upon himself, in order
whereunto he came to Rescue him out of the hands of the Viceroy, in which he
lived not much on this side Slavery: and withal, with great shows of Respect
and Duty, he tendereth to his Highness a Guard of Four Thousand Horse: The King
seems not much displeased, puts on a cheerful Counrenance, and guarded
with those Four Thousand Horse, he comes along with the Chancellor to the City
of Edinburgh, where he was received with extraordinary Acclamations of Joy.

The Viceroy no less confounded at this Surprisal than was the Chancellor at
the Queen's lately mentioned, is extremely perplexed: In Council, after many
Self-debates, he resolves at last, not daring to trust himself to the Earl
Douglas, upon all hazards to have to Edinburgh with a small Retinue, to try
whether by stooping so low, the Storm might pass over him: to Edinburgh he
repaireth, and by mediation of the Bishops of Aberdeen and Murray, Men Learned,
Pious, and Prudent; a Personal Conference is obtained with the Chancellor: The
Viceroy with a sad Countenance, deploreth their unhappy Divisions, declaimeth
against them as Dangerous to the Public, and Destructive to their own private
Interests: he imploreth an happy Union between them, without which they must
both Perish; promising on his part an Oblivion of all things past, and all fair
Respect in time to come. The Chancellor well knowing that Destruction to both
must needs be the Issue of the Divisions between them, cheerfully hearkneth to
the proposition of Peace, they presently accord, and an Union is now the second
time concluded between them; and notwithstanding Distress enough to the People,
and Danger more than enough to the young King, flowing from their divided
Government, these two cunning Catchers accord to continue still in their
respective. Trusts and places in Government upon this agreement a Parliament is
called at Edinburgh, for the better settling of the miserable distracted
Conditon of the Kingdom. To this Parliament Douglas is Invited; and by the
advice of the Viceroy and Chancellor (his inveterate Enemies now contriving
his Ruin) public Letters are sent him Sealed by the King, and diverse of the
prime Nobility, inviting him with many Arguments of Love and Respect, to assist
in Parliament, and in the public Administration; assuring him not only of
Safety, but tendering to him what Place he should desire in the management of
public Affairs.

The Earl moved by the public Faith thus engaged, and by the specious Promises
so Solemnly made, repaireth to Edinburgh without Fear or Jealousy: The
Chancellor meets him before he came within ten Miles of the City, and
inviteth him to his Castle at Chrichton, where he Entertaineth him
magnificently, in all his Discourse so highly commending the Noble Family of
the Dowglasses, their worthy Acts and high Deserts both of King and Country,
and so fully declaring the great hopes himself conceived of the young Earl
himself, that the Wiser of Douglas his Retainers began to suspect some Mischief
to lurk under the covert of those specious Words, which they knew were no less
unusual in him, than unbeseeming his Place and Authority. They dissuade their
Lord with all Earnestness from his Journey toward the City, entreating his
return to his own House as he loved himself, and if he must needs go, they
adjure him by all the love he bear to his Family, and by all that reverence and
obedience he owed to the Commands of his Wise Father, who charged him on his
Deathbed, never to trust his whole Family under the hazard of one Blow, that
he would not carry along with him his dear and only Brother; but all in vain,
his Destiny drives him no faster than he is willing to run to his own Ruin; he
enters the City, and is by the Chancellor attended to the Castle, whither the
Viceroy likewise repaireth, and entertaineth him with all Civility; yea, and
to Honor him the more, he is admitted to the King's own Table, and feasted
with no small Solemnity: But behold, amidst all their Cheer and great Mirth, a
Band of Armed Men enters the Dining Chamber, and a Bull's Head is clapped on the
Table (a certain Token, in those days, of an appointed and approaching Death)
the Earl is too late stricken with Fear, and endeavoring to rise, the Armed
Men lay hold on him, David and Malcombe Fleming his dearest Friend, are at the
same time, and in the same manner Cut off.

The young King no less amazed than abused, and stricken with immediate Sorrow,
weepeth as a Child, though now grown well upward toward the years of a Man:
the Chancellor perceiving him, Chides him very sharply for his unseasonable
Tears (as he was pleased to call them) for the Death of a Dangerous Traitor.

The Earl thus destroyed, and without Issue his Cousin James succeeds him in
the Rights and Honors of the Earldom, his Sister Beatrice enjoying whatsoever
was not Entailed to the Heir Male; James dies soon after: his Son William
Succeeds, and Marries his Cousin Beatrice, to the great increase of his
Wealth and Power, with which increased Pride and Insolence, and with both, Envy
and Fear; which the Earl perceiving, resolves to satisfy the People whom he
had deeply Oppressed, and to pacify the King (now come to Age) whom he had
highly displeased: to this end he repaireth to Court, submitting himself to the
King, whose Pardon he craved, promising Amendment in all things done amiss: the
King receives him into Favor, in hope of better things, and indeed such was
his Reformation, that he was admired of all, and dreaded of some, especially
the Viceroy and Chancellor, knowing Guil and Fear, being always inseparable
Companions, who suspecting and expecting the result of all his Counsels to be
their Ruin: they withdraw from Court, laying down their Places in public
Affairs; the Viceroy to his House in the Country, the Chancellor to
Edenburgh-Castle: Earl Douglas takes the opportunity of their Absence, and by
his Counsel especially, both are Summoned to appear before his Majesty and
great Council, to give an Account of their public Employments: both make show
of a great desire to obey, but at present excuse their Nonappearance,
pretending Danger by reason of Earl Douglas his Power and Enmity against them:
by Influence of the Earl his Counsel, they are declared Traitors, and their
Estates confiscate; Costersine a Retainer to the Earl is sent with Commission
to levy their Personal Estates, and to return them to the Exchequer, which was
accordingly done.

In revenge of all which, the Chancellor raises some Forces, first pillageth,
and then burns Costersine his Estate, and many Lands belonging to Douglas
himself. This Quarrel occasioneth many Stirs in diverse places in the Country:
At last Douglas Besieges the Chancellor in the Castle of Edinburgh: After nine
Months Siege, the Castle for want of Provisions is forced to surrender upon
Articles; of which this was the Chief: A general Act of Oblivion to be past by
the King in Parliament in behalf of the Chancellor and his Friends; and leave
to be granted to him to live in peace at his own House without Molestation of
him or his: Douglas bends himself against the Levistons, many of them are
cited before the Parliament at Edinburgh; all accused of Treason, diverse found
Guilty, Condemned and Executed.

Soon after Chrichton is reconciled to the King, and by him made Chancellor
again, and sent Ambassador to France to renew the old League, and to demand
some Princess of the Blood in Marriage to the young King.

Mary, Daughter to the Duke of Geldria by the Duke of Burgundy his Sister, is
forthwith Espoused, and next Year after Arriveth in Scotland, is Married to the
King, and Crowned Queen at Halyrude-House, Anno 1449.

By this time the Truce between the two Kingdoms, England and Scotland,
determines: English break into Scotland, spoil and plunder many places; the
Scots do the like in England; the English raise a great Army to Invade the
Scots, under the Command of the Earl of Northumberland, and one Magnus a
Knight, a Man of great Valor and Experience in Warlike affairs.

The Scots likewise raise an Army under the Command of George Earl of Ormond,
Brother to the Earl Douglas: the two Armies join Battle between Anand and Eske
in Scotland; Magnus, too daring a Man, adventureth too far, and falls by his
own rashness; his Fall is the Ruin of all, the whole Army runs, and is put
to a satal Rout; Three Thousand English killed, and diverse Prisoners of
Quality; a Rich Plunder obtained by the Scots, with the Loss of 600 of their
Men.

This Overthrow enrageth the English; a new Army is appointed to be Levied:
Civil Wars in England cross all: An Ambassador is sent to Scotland to desire
Peace, Peace could not be obtained: A Cessation of Arms only concluded, and
that with much ado, for three Years. Earl Douglas next Year following, desirous
to see the Papal Jubilee, travelleth through France, with a Princely Retinue to
Rome. No sooner gone, than whole troops of People, Oppressed by him, have their
recourse to the King, praying instantly and incessantly for Reparation of wrong
done by him.

His Majesty is in a strait, the Petitions being such, as could not in Justice
be refused; and the Earl not being present, could not in Justice be Condemned:
in the mean time the Earl his Proctor is called, for to get in what Answer he
could; who refusing to appear, is committed to Prison: Many counsel harder
things against him, as guilty of high Contempt of Royal Majesty: the King
inclining to Moderation, calls for him out of Restraint, and Commands him
to Plead for his Lord freely and without Fear, which the Proctor, thus
encouraged, accordingly performed: His Majesty having patiently heard all that
possibly could be said, adjudgeth reasonable Satisfaction to be made to the
Oppressed: The Proctor craveth respite till the return of his Lord; The King
adjudgeth present Satisfaction; and to that end Lord William Sinclare Earl of
Orkney, and at that time Lord Chancellor, is sent into Galloway and
Dowglasdale, to Commissionate Collectors to Levy my Lord's Retinue for
Satisfaction of the Sums adjudged; the Collectors all slighted, and continued,
return home, having done just nothing.

This inrageth his Majesty; the chief Obstructors are sent for, who refusing to
appear, are all denounced Rebels, and Forces sent to reduce them to Order; they
fly to strong Holds, against which the Party sent, could do nothing; the King
marches in Person against them; Maban Castle immediately Yields; Douglas
Castle reduced, not without some loss to the King, is laid level to the ground;
all the Faction at length submits, and pays out of Douglas his Estate, the
Sums adjudged.

The Earl having notice of all these Troubles, returns from Rome much
perplexed, England, until by his Brother he understood the King's gracious
Affection toward him; in the assurance whereof he Addresseth himself to his
Majesty, craving his Pardon for all former Miscarriages, and promising all
dutiful Obedience for the future; is not only received into Favor, but soon
after declared Viceroy.

This extraordinary Grace is as soon forgot, made use on to none other purpose
save to advance his own Ambitious Designs, whereof all Men were the more
Jealous, by his private withdrawing into England, where he entertained a
Clandestine Conference with the English King; of which giving none other Reason
save the Petition of some Plundered Goods, the Scottish King is no less Enraged
against him, than Jealous of him; and which the Earl understanding, and knowing
his Majesty's Clemency, craveth his Pardon with show of great Humility; which
by the mediation of the Queen is soon obtained: The King resolving
notwithstanding, to trust him no more in that height of Power in Government,
commits the chief management of all Public Affairs to the Earl of Orkney,
and to Chrichton the old Chancellor: Douglas reckoning this a Note of Disgrace,
rages against the whole Court, Vowing the Destruction of Chrichton, which he
well nigh made good by an Ambush laid for him, as he pasled from Edinburgh to
his House at Chrichton: A Troop of Armed Men all on the sudden compass him
round, he forces his Paslage, and escapes the Snare, not without some
dangerous Wounds; his Wounds are Cured, he returns to Edinburgh: Earl Douglas
fearing the King's displeasure, withdraws from the City, still resolving
Revenge; for accomplishing whereof he enters a League Offensive and Defensive
with the Earls of Craford, and Ross; in the strength whereof he presumes so
much, as to contemn all Opposition; the King himself is Despised in his Eyes:
Harris and Mr. Lennan, two Galloway Knights, both of Ancient Families, are put
to Death by him, under pretense of Justice, in despite of all the King could
do or say: Rumors are likewise every where cast out, of his aspiring to the
Crown; At last his Majesty sends for him, forthwith to repair to his Court at
Sterlin; the Earl refuses, pretending Danger from the Power of his Enemies
then at Court. Diverse of the Nobles send their Letters of Assurance to him, and
move the King to Seal a Paper in the nature of a Pass; which the Earl
receiving, comes to Court, confiding in the often experienced Clemency of the
King; his Majesty receives him Graciously, and Inviteth him to Supper; after
Supper the King, with some of his most Intimate Counselors, withdraw, and with
them the Earl, into a Withdrawing-Room: In the presence of those his
Counselors he Expostulateth with the Earl his strange Deportment toward him,
mentioning the bounty of the Crown to his Family, and his own Extraordinary
Grace to himself; not only his Pardon more than once granted, but singular
Pledges of his Favor frequently Conferred, and all most strangely abused:
Notwithstanding all which, his Majesty once again tenders to him the assurance
of his Favor and Grace, in hope of amendment; repairing, nay, rather
requesting the Cancelling of that odious League with Craford and Ross, so
dangerous and dishonorable to his Majesty: Douglas answers Dimisly enough to
all, save in the point of the League, wherein he desires to be Excused: The
King presses him with all Earnestness, to persist no longer in it; which the
Earl peremptorily refusing, If thou will not break it, by God I will; and then
before his Counselors were aware, he thrusts his Poniard into his Heart.

This unhappy Accident casts all into Consussion. Douglas his four Brothers
then in Town, raise a Dangerous Tumult; and with much ado, are appeased:
Immediately they fly into their own Country, and break out into open
Rebellion, dragging the King's Pass and the Noble Men's Letter to the late Earl,
at their Horse Heels, with words of Disgrace, not fit to be mentioned: They
Pillage, Burn, and Slay all they suspected bare any Favor to the King. The
King calls a Parliament at Edinburgh, before which they are Summoned to
appear; all Contemptuously refusing, are proclaimed Traitors; with the Countess
Dowager, Wife to the late Earl; and with her, the Earl of Craford.

James, the eldest Brother, and now Earl, to preserve the Wealth of his Family,
Marries his Brother's Wife, craveth the Pope his Dispensation; which being
refused, he allureth as many into his Faction as possibly he could, far more
siding with him than possibly could be expected; insomuch that the whole
Kingdom for two Years together, became a very Stage of Murder and Rapine;
Famine, and the Pestilence threatening Ruin to all.

Diverse of Douglas his Wiser Friends being touched with the Sense of these
Calamities, counsel him to cast himself upon the King's mercy; he scorneth the
Motion, declaiming against them as Pusillaminous, declaring rather to Dye, than
to Submit.

Earl Craford takes another and wiser course, choosing rather to Submit; he
casts himself in his Majesty's way passing through Angus; and like a Penitent
indeed, he comes Barefooted into his Royal Presence, and prostrateth himself
before Him with Tears in his Eyes, and the greatest expressions of Sorrow that
could be made, craving in a most Penitent Oration, his Majesty's Pardon.

The King, and all then and there present, are touched with Compassion toward
him; his Pardon is forthwith granted; the Earl sensible of his Grace, tendereth
his Service to his Majesty; which being accepted, he behaveth himself as a
gallant Man, and a good Subject, to his Dying day.

Douglas sends Hammilton to the English King, to crave Assistance from him,
which could not be obtained unless Douglas should declare himself a Subject to
the Crown of England; a Condition so unreasonable, even in his Judgment, though
sufficiently Rebellious against his native Prince, that he choosed rather to
Perish than to Embrace it. Hammilton therefore returning without hope of
English Help, persuadeth Douglas to put all to the hazard of a Battle, which
accordingly was resolved on: Abercorne Castle: The two Armies in view one of
another, Douglas proves two slow; his Army is thereby much discouraged; which
Hammilton perceiving, withdraws, goes over to the King, craves his Pardon,
and obtains it. Douglas retreateth, and deserted almost of all, flies into
England. The Castle is taken by Storm, and the Garrison put to the Sword; the
Ruins of that stately Castle remaining as a Monument of that Victory.

Douglas soon after returns into Anandale, gives Battle to some of the
King's Forces there, and receives the Foil; his Brother Archilbald is Killed
on the place, his Brother George Wounded, and taken Prisoner, is sent to the
King, and Beheaded.

A Parliament is again called to Assemble at Edinburgh, Douglas and his
Adherents are again declared Traitors, and their Estates Confiscated: Douglas
flies into the Hebrides, and enters into League with Donald Lord of the
Isles: They fall down into the main Country, where they Pillage and consume
all with Fire and Sword wheresoever they came, laying wast diverse Counties.

Beatrice, Wife to both Earls of Douglas, and both Brethren; casts her self
at the King's feet, craveth his Pardon, pretending that she was forced to the
Marriage of her Lord's Brother by fear of present Destruction: She declares
her self as willing to submit to the King's Justice, as to accept of his Mercy,
whereof she acknowledges her self most unworthy; she receives Pardon, and is
beyond all Men's expectation, received into Favor; yea, and Donald Lord of the
Isles, sends his Orators to his Majesty, to crave his Pardon; all that could
be obtained,

Earl Douglas passes over into England, craveth Assistance of Henry Earl of
Northumberland, which was no sooner asked than obtained: Forces are raised, and
under the Conduct of the two Earls they make an Incursion into the Meuse in
Scotland, wasting and pillaging all: the Earl of Angus is sent to give some
Check to the violent Current; which was done to good purpose, being soundly
beaten, they are forced to retreat, leaving their Spoil behind them.

King James not satisfied with this Victory, resolves to revenge the manifold
Incursions made into Scotland, by an Expedition into England, provoked the more
by the Entertainment and Assistance given to the Earl Douglas, a Proclaimed
Traitor.

In the mean while Agents are sent to him by some of the English Nobility, the
Duke of York, the Earls of Salisbury and Warwick, and others then in Arms
against King Henry; to crave some Auxiliary Forces from his Majesty, in
recompense whereof they promise, in case of Success, the Rendition of all the
Scottish Towns, Forts, and Castles in the English Possession.

King James, though unwilling to meddle in this Quarrel; yet being glad of an
Opportunity to regain his Towns, and having formerly concluded a War for
reparation of Wrongs done, declares to the English Commissioners, that he
would hasten his Expedition into England, which he doubted not would be much to
the advantage of the Lords in Arms; and therefore expected, that in case of
Success, Proposition now made touching his Towns, should then be performed.

The English Commissioners return satisfied; the Scottish Army forthwith
advances, which had not marched many Miles, when behold an Impostor, and with
him a Cozening Monk presents himself to the King, pretending himself to be
the Pope's Legate, but sent indeed by King Henry of England: This Jugler
informs his Majesty, that his Holiness intended to settle, if possible, a
general Peace in Christendom, in order to a War against the Turk, the Enemy of
Christians; and therefore in his Holiness his Name, he requires his Majesty to
retreat, assuring him, that in case of Disobedience, he had Command given to
him to denounce the Pope's Curse against him; which in those days was so
Dreadful, that no Man durst be so desperate as to incur the danger thereof:
King James therefore obeycth,

This Cheat is soon discovered; the King enraged, recalleth his Army, and
forthwith advances; and in his way Stormeth the Town of Roxburgh, then
Garrisoned by the English; the Castle refusing to yield, is closely Besieged;
in the interim Messengers come from the English Lords to give notice to his
Majesty of King Henry his Overthrow, and return him thanks for his Royal care
of their Safety, entreating him to desist from the Siege, lest the English,
being provoked thereby, send down an Army, contrary to their minds, against
him. King James much moved at this last Passage, demands of the Messengers
what Instructions they had from their Lords concerning the Promise of
Surrendering into his hands all his Towns, Forts and Castles, in the English
power; they acknowledge none: The King bids them tell their Lords, That not
their Words, but their Swords, must raise him from the Siege. The Siege
continues, and is reinforced by additional Forces under Earl Hantkey and
Donald Lord of the Isles, who to ingratiate himself the more to his Majesty,
tendereth himself and his Forces as a Forlorn Hope, in what Design or Service
soever it shall please his Majesty to command him.

In the midst of all this Preparation, behold the Fatal hour approaches; the
King being himself very skilful in discharging of great Ordnance, draws nigh
to see the Cannoneer discharge a great Cannon called the Lion, newly sent to
him from beyond Sea; the Cannon discharged, flies in pieces, a Wedge whereof
pierces the King's body, and immediately he dies.

Such of his Courtiers and Commanders as were by, though astonished at this sad
Spectacle, yet are so present in mind, as to cover his Body from the view of
the Soldiers, lest all should turn to Confusion.

The Queen, who that very morning came into the Camp, with a cheerful
Countenance, wisely consealing the great grief of her heart, exhorts the
Nobility to go on with Resolution, notwithstanding that sad disaster: and for
their further encouragement produces her young Son the Prince, a Child of
seven Years old, they salute him King; and being much animated by this
courageous Deportment of the Queen, the Siege goes on more furiously than
before.

The English within, England whatsoever belonged to the Garrison: the Castle
Surrendered, is forthwith Demolished.

Thus Dyed James the Second about the 11th. of September 1460, in the 22th.
Year of his Reign, and the 29th. of his Age; he lived in a most desperate time,
and Rebellious Age; but disposed with such a well composed Mind, that
Prosperity and Adversity were equally entertained by him (the Death of Earl
Douglas the only instance of his Impotency,) a Man of singular Courage, and no
less Clemency; munificent to his Friend, and merciful to his Foe: In a sad time
he fell, leaving Sorrow enough behind him, and a sad People for so great a loss.

THE LIFE OF JAMES III.
JAMES the Third enters his Reign at Kelso the 7th. Year of his Age, Anno
1460. The Peers having done the Homage, the King repaireth to Edenburgh-Castle,
to remain there, under the Tuition of the Queen, until a Parliament could
conveniently be called, for settling the Affairs of the King and Kingdom.

In the mean while King Henry the Sixth of England, after various Fortune of
War, is at last, after the fatal Blow he received at Towton, nigh Ferrybridges
(where died 35091 English) forced to fly with the Queen and Prince into
Scotland for Relief; where he is Honorably received and entertained; the
Scottish King's Sister Margaret, Edward. Some considerable Forces are raised
for his Assistance, to recover his Crown, having delivered Berwick to King
James, as part or his Ancient Inheritance before the days of King Edward the
First. King Henry marches with his Army into England, and is overthrown in
Battle by Edward the 4th. nigh Hexham; escapes to Berwick; Edward returns to
London. Queen Margaret procures some Forces from France; all Cast away in the
Holy Island by distress of Weather; such as escaped the Sea, are either Slain
or Imprisoned. King Henry now desperate of Relief, resolves to try the
Affections of his Friends in England, and to that end puts himself into a
Disguise, and coming Southward, is discovered, apprehended, carried to London,
and laid up in the Tower. By this time the Scots are at leisure to meet in
Parliament; great Contention there was, into whose hands the Government should
be committed, during the King's Minority; the Queen claims it; Kennedie
Archbishop of St. Andrews, and George Douglas Earl of Angus, Heads of a
contrary Faction, Oppose her: great Justling between the two Factions, even
unto Blood, had not the Wisdom of the Bishops interposed. In fine, It was
agreed that two of each Faction should be entrusted with the Tuition of the
young King, and the Government of the whole Kingdom: of the Queens Faction,
were James Groham and Robert Boid, then Lord Chancellor: of the other Robert
Earl of Orkney, and John Kennedy, chief of that Clan.

To these were added the Bishops of Glasco, Dunkell, Men of great Learning and
Integrity; the Queen her self only permitted to have some inspection into the
King's Education, without meddling in the public Administration: The younger
Children are wholly committed to her Tuiton, which were Alexander Duke of
Albany, John Earl of Mar, and two Daughters.

These things happily Established in Parliament, Audience is given to the
English Ambassadors, their business was for Peace, and accordingly a Peace for
Fifteen Years is concluded.

Next Year after the Queen Mother dies; Alexander the King's Brother,
returning from France, is taken Prisoner by the English: The Scots complaining
of it, as a breach of Peace; the Child is immediately set at Liberty.

Things now quiet abroad, new Stirs arise at home by the restless and
rebellious Spirit of Donald Lord of the Isles, who falls down into the lower
Countries with an Army, surpriseth Ennerness, and Proclaims himself King of
the Isles, and advances into Athol, with a very powerful Army: The Earl of
Athol, not prepared to oppose so great a Power, flies to the Sanctuary of St.
Brigit; never at any time Violated before by the most barbarous of Men: The
rich Booty of the place was of more price to that barbarous Raven, than the
esteem of its Sanctity: he barbarously enters into the Sanctuary, taking the
Earl and his Lady, and diverse others, Prisoners; puts most of the Priests to
the Sword; and having Pillaged what he could,

This Storm over, a Calm continued for a Season; but all is soon overclouded,
by the malignant Spirit of Ambition and Envy.

The Boids labor to get all into their hands, Thomas, Brother to the Lord Boyd
(appointed to Instruct the King in Martial Discipline and Exercises)
endeavors by evil Counsel, to Alienate his Majesty's affections from all
those Nobles, to whose Tuition he was committed; and watching his opportunity,
the King following his Sport with a small Retinue nigh Luilithquo, is forcibly
snatched out of the hands of Kennedie Earl Casles, by the foresaid Thomas, not
without some Violence offered to the Person of the old Earl.

And now begins the Devil of Deadly Fewd to work, the Boydes bring the King to
Edinburgh: Kennedie, and diverse others repair to their several homes, watching
opportunity of revenge: the Boyds observing the Nobility to keep from Court,
procure a Parliament to be called, in which Robert the Chief of the Boydes upon
his bended knees, Linligtheuo, beseeching his Majesty to declare his sense and
pleasure in that business, whether he or any of his had therein offended his
Highness: the young King, what through the fear of their Power, and afraid of
their flattering words, with which they had seasoned him, declares, that What
they did was good Service done, deserving rather a Reward, than any Punishment:
this Declaration was Recorded in the Books of Parliament, and an instrument to
this effect given the Lord Boyd under the BroadSeal, and the same day he is
declared ViceRoy, until his Majesty should happily arrive at the age of One and
Twenty: and as an addition to all his Greatness, Mary, the King's eldest Sister
is given in Marriage to Thomas Son to the said Robert Lord Boyd. And now such
Foundations being laid, they promise themselves security, in this great Pomp
and Prosperity. But behold the vanity of the World, the envy of the People, the
emulation of the Peers, and the alienation of the King's mind suddenly
overthrow all.

About this time the Lord Chancellor is sent to Denmark, Margaret, Daughter to
the Danish King, in Marriage to James King of Scotland; he safely arrived, is
honorably entertained, and the Marriage immediately concluded. Denmark's
Interest in Shitland and Orkney given in lieu of her Dower.

The happy Issue of this Embassage being signified to the King, an Ambassador,
with a Train of young Noble Men and Gentlemen, is appointed to be sent over
into Denmark, to attend the young Queen into Scotland: the young Lord Boyd Earl
of Aran, and now Brother in Law to the King, is on all hands thought the
fittest Man for this Service, the young Lord accepts of his Honorable
Employment, and with a very stately Train sets Sail about the end of August; no
sooner is he gone than a Parliament is called to Assemble November 22d. in
which the Boydes are all accused of High Treason: Robert the Chief flies into
England, Alexander his Brother appears and Pleads for himself, is adjudged
Guilty, Condemned and Beheaded: the Treason charged on both, was Violence
offered to the King's Person when they forcibly pulled him out of the Arms of
the old Earl of Kennedy Miclinlithquo; Behold the Uncertainty of humane
Judgments, the same Fact declared Good Service in one Parliament, is in another
judged High Treason.

The next Spring the Danish Fleet arriveth with the young Queen; is Solemnized
in a great Concourse of the Nobility. The Lord Boyd hearing of the Disasters of
his Family, dares not Land to partake of this Solemnity, but goes a solitary
Man beyond the Seas, and is entertained by the Duke of Burgundy, by whom he was
Honored above all others for his gallant Service in War; but in Scotland
another account is made of him, where he is declared Traitor, and his Lands
confiscated; and to add to his Calamity the King recalleth His Sister, Married
to the Earl; and being encouraged by some of the Nobility, with hopes of a
Reconciliation between the King and her Lord, by her presence to intercede,
over she comes in obedience to the King's Command; being arrived, a Divorce
from her Husband is presently propounded, in order whereunto public Summons
are given at his House in Kilmernock, and at the chief Seaports in the
Kingdom, requiring his return within Sixty days, according to the Law; which he
not performing (not daring indeed to perform) by reason of his nonadherence, a
Divorce issues out, and the former Marriage declared Null.

The Divorce published, James Earl Hammilton, (the issue of which unhappy
Marriage proved in most after-Generations, an unhappy Annoyance to the Crown,
by whom she had James and Margaret.

The Lord Boyd out-lives not this Disaster, Antwerp, where the Duke of Burgundy
erected for him a most stately Tomb; thus in a trice, fell the flourishing
Family of the Boydes, a real Instance of the instability and vanity of the
World.

These Stirs over, the Peace is renewed with England, and at home Disturbances
not many nor great: But this Calm lasted not long, Fears and Jealousies, the
bane of all States, disturb all, and like an evil Spirit, divide between the
King and the Nobility; Affairs standing thus, his Majesty uses the Counsels of
some Knights and Gentlemen, in whose wisdom and integrity he confided much;
this enrageth the Nobility yet more: and as if this had not been afflictious
enough, his younger Brother John, conspireth his Death, by the means of wicked
Sorcerers, for which Treason he is condemned to Dye by the opening of a Vein,
which accordingly was executed: Alexander the other Brother suspected conscious
to this Treason, is Committed to Edinburgh Castle; from thence he Escapes, and
Saileth into France, where he takes to Wife the Daughter of the Earl of Bononia.

Ambassadors are again sent from England to renew the Peace, and to Ratify
the same by a new Affinity of an inter-marriage between James, Son to King
James, and the Lady Cicilie, Daughter to King Edward, to be Solemnized so soon
as both come to age fit for Marriage; in the mean while a part of the Dowry to
be paid down, and in case the Marriage happened not to be Consummated, the same
to be repaired to the English.

These things were all happily concluded; Douglas an old Exile, and Alexander
the King's Brother, (by this time come over to England) persuade King Edward to
War against the Scots; and on the other hand King Lewis of France, incites King
James against the English: King Edward levieth Twenty thousand Men, pretending
to vindicate some Wrongs done by some late Inroads made by the Scots; and under
the Command of the Duke of Gloucester, accompanied with diverse Noble Men,
amongst whom was Alexander Duke of Albany, they March Northward; King James
prepares an Army for defense, advances to Lawder, not far from the Borders,
where the discontent of some of the Nobility breaks out into Violence against
the King's Counselors; they Surprise them in the Night, and drag most of them
from the King's presence, and are all by special influence of the Earl of Angus
(Sir John Ramsey only except) immediately hanged in the view of the Army; their
great Crime (save that some of them were advanced to the dignity of Noble Men)
was the Coining of Brass Money, in use many days before, and continues in that
Kingdom to this day: The truth is, the King's Favor to them, and their Faith
to the King, was their greatest Treason.

After this Disaster the Army dissolveth, the King returns to Edinburgh, with
no less Fear than Grief and Indignation.

The Duke of Gloucester advances to the Gates of Edinburgh, leaving Four
thousand of his Army to Besiege the Castle of Berwick: the Nobility in this
distraction raises an Army to stop this Current; Alexander Duke of Albany,
with the consent of the Duke of Gloucester, goes over into the Scots Army,
where the Command in chief (so handsomely was the Game played) is immediately
transferred to him; a Treaty immediately set on foot; by agreement Berwick is
immediately surrendered; the Duke returns to England, and a Truce for certain
Years appointed.

King Edward having seen so many late strange Mutations in England, James which
had happened to some of the English Kings, viz. the ruin of his Family;
sends an Herald to Scotland, and at Edinburgh proclaims the late contract
of Marriage between the two young Princesses to be void, demanding the
repayment of that part of the Dowry paid: King James being now at more liberty
than before, repayeth the Money not without some Indignation.

Duke Alexander perceiving that his Majesty's Eye was upon him, and that his
traitorous Design to compass the Crown was discovered; England and betrayeth
the Castle of Dunbar to King Edward; the Parlinment declares him Traitor,
pardoning all his Associates: after pardon granted, Chrichton Son to the late
Chancellor, keeps Correspondence with the Duke; is summoned to answer,
disobeyeth, and is Banished.

The Duke and Earl Douglas both Exiles, resolve to try their Fortune and Favor
of the People, return to Scotland with Five hundred Horse; the Country rises
against them; after a bloody Conflict nigh Lough Maban, the Duke is overthrown,
and escapes: Douglas is apprehended and sent Prisoner to Lindores.

By this time King Edward of England dies, and commits his Son Edward the
Fifth, to the Tuiton of his Brother Richard Duke of Gloucester, the Duke
impiously Murdereth his two Nephews, and sets himself on the Throne.
Scotland, to treat for Peace. King James in detestation of their Master,
refuses them Audience; at last with much ado Audience is granted; no Peace
could be obtained, a Truce only for three Years concluded, by reason of the
King's own unsettled condition.

Soon after this Truce King Richard is killed at Bosworth Field: Henry the
Seventh obtains the Crown and comes in Person to Newcastle, from whence he
sends his Ambassadors to Scotland, Richard Fox Bishop of Exeter, and Sir
Richard Edgcombe; they are Honorably received; their Master and the matter of
their Embassy, which was Peace, both indear them to King James, who very freely
told them that there was nothing he desired more than Peace, though he durst
not promise a lasting Peace with England, by reason of the restless and unquiet
Spirits of his Nobility, which he heartily bemoaned to them, adjuring them to
conceal from his Nobles, the carnest desire he had of Peace, from which he knew
they would be the more averse, finding him bent toward it: and in fine, he
prays them to rest satisfied with a Truce for Seven Years, promising that
before the determination thereof, he on his part should be ready to renew it
Seven Years more, as one passionately desirous to live in peace with the
English all his Life. This Answer is returned to King Henry, and a Truce
accordingly for Seven Years concluded.

In the mean while Alexander Duke of Albany dies in France, leaving behind him
two Sons, Alexander and John, afterward Viceroy in Scotland: King James now
promises himself some quiet, (the Original of all his troubles removed) and in
order thereunto, he Proclaims a general Pardon, receives his Enemies into
Favor, Honors some, Inricheth many, and admits others into his most
Secret Counsels.

But all this cannot serve his turn, main Rub, in their way: The Prince himself
is thought the fittest to countenance this horrid Design: His Keepers are
corrupted: The young and unwary Prince seduced, and to their Proposition he
must yield, otherwise they deal plainly with him, Henry of England: Thus the
young Prince is frighted from all Duty and Loyalty to his Dearest Father, to
countenance as Commander in chief, a most Traitorous Combination of perverse
and seditious Men: An Army is forthwith raised in pursuance of their Design.
The King prepares for Defense; uses all honorable means for Peace, and by
mediation of the Earl of Athol his Uncle, soliciteth for it; the Rebels return
an Answer, telling him, That unless he resign his Crown to his Son, and depart
the Kingdom, there could be no Peace.

This Answer the King dispatcheth to his Ambasladors in France, and England,
requiring them to request the Assistance of both King's, in this common cause,
wherein all Kings are concerned; who accordingly send their Ambassadors to the
Scots, declaring their proceedings against their King to be Wicked and
Pernicious, and not to be endured by Christian Princes so much concerned in
such a dangerous Example: The Pope is likewise sent to, to interpose his
Ghostly and Paternal Power; who accordingly sends to his Legate, Adrian de
Castello an Italian, the great Restorer of the Latin Tongue, then in England,
forthwith to apply himself to Compose the Scottish troubles; but all in vain,
as being too late; the Rebels Army presses toward the King's, Encamped by
Blackness: and to make all sure they Assail him as well by Fraud as Force: Some
of his Council about him are corrupted, so are likewise some of his Commanders
in Martial Affairs, especially the Governor of Sterlin; the Key of the Kingdom,
the corrupt Council about him, with fair pretenses, persuade him to appear on
the head of his Army, and to forsake the Castle of Edinburgh (where he resolved
to secure himself until he heard the result of Foreign Counsels) assuring him
that Sterlin then in the Rere of his Army, and in the hands of Faithful Men,
was a place of no less security for his Person, than was Edinburgh Castle, and
of far greater advantage to receive Recruits, and all other accommodations for
his Army, having the benefit of the Country behind him, and his Navy not far
from him. This Counsel was so fair and promising, that even such as were
faithful to him, persuade him to it; and according to this advice the King
repaireth to Sterlin; the Governor, Sey, perceiving the Rebels Army pressing
after the King's, Traitorously refuses Entrance to him. The poor King is now
in a Pound, and with his small Army is forced to Fight; his Majesty behaveth
himself very gallantly, and routeth the Van of his Enemies: but their Reserve
regains all; the King's Army is overthrown, himself dismounted and wounded;
privately flies into a Mill, hoping to get into his Navy, but the fatal hour
approaches, some of the Rebels discovering him, pursue after him, and
impiously Murder him and all the faithful remnant of his Servants about him.

Thus died King James the Third, a good and peaceable Man, every way well
disposed, but plagued by the Ambition of restless and unquiet Spirits, who
Traitorously sought and wrought his Ruin.

The Battle over and no news of the King, the Rebels supposing that he had
gained his Navy, send to Sir Andrew Wood, chief Captain of the Ships, Seton and
Fleming being left Hostages in the Navy, Andrew appears before the Chief of
them, called the Prince his Council,

The Rebels retreat to Edinburgh, where notice is given to them of the King's
death; the news whereof pierces the heart and soul of the young Prince, now,
when too late, sensible of his Error, and sadly resenting his great
unhappiness, and above that his deadly sin, in being accessory to the
misfortune of his dearest Father, causes a stately Funeral to be solemnized
for him at Kammiskeneth, an Abbey nigh Sterlin, where his Corpse were Interred;
and for himself he prepared an Iron Chain, with which he begirt himself,
wearing it all the days of his Life about his middle close to his Skin, in
testimony of the deep sense he had of his sin, adding yearly one Ring
thereunto, not so much to enlarge it as to remember the sad occasion of it.

THE LIFE OF JAMES IV.
JAMES the Third thus unhappily fallen under the hands of merciless Men, his
Son James Succeeds, and enters his Reign, Anno 1488, Edinburgh and Sterlin
Surrendered to him, a Messenger is sent to Sir Andrew Wood Captain of the
Ships, to call him to attend his Majesty's pleasure; the public Faith being
pledged for his safety, the Captain repaireth to Court: the King, with
inexpressible sorrow and immoderate grief, regretting what was past, and
representing the present dangers of the State by the unhappy Divisions of the
Kingdom, he prevails with the Captain to submit to him, and to take
Commission from him to reduce five English Ships, roving and robbing all along
the Coast; which with small loss and trouble he performed, English Ships are
brought from Dunbar (where the Conflict was) to Leith, and their Captain
presented to King James, who munificently rewarded Sir Andrew for this gallant
piece of Service.

In the mean while the Nobility, who were Loyal to the late King, send their
Messengers to their Friends, adjuring all such as had any sense of their
present oppressions, not to be so stupid as to endure the Usurped Power of
those Men, who breaking through all the Laws of God and Man, Murdered the last
King, detaining upon the matter this present King under the bondage of their
own Wills, which tyranny was so much the rather not to be endured, because they
arrogated to themselves to be called the Restorers and Preservers of the
Scottish Liberties, when indeed they exercised a most cruel and unsupportable
Tyranny, keeping their fellow Subjects in Slavery, and abusing the King's
Authority, to the final destruction of all those who were faithful to his
Father, and to inflame the affections of the People the more, Alexander
Forbese, chief of that Family carries on the point of a Spear, through
Aberdeen, and all the chief Towns, and Cities in the North, the King's Shirt,
torn in diverse pieces, and all bloody by the Wounds his Majesty received;
inviting all Men who had any sense of Humanity or Religion, to avenge that
horrid Murder: the Earl of Lennox bestirring himself on this side Forth, to
the same purpose, an Army in this Popular fury rolleth together as in a moment;
marches to Sterlin, where finding the Bridge Fortified, resolve to Foard over
some Miles above, where they that night Encamped without Order, or Watch, or
any persons designed for the exercise of Military Discipline: This looseness is
bewrayed to the Enemy, who advances, Surpriseth all, Kills many, and
Imprisoneth more, some of whom, were afterward put to death: Thus was this
tumultuary Army as suddenly ruined as raised.

This Tumult over, King Henry of England enraged at the disaster of his five
Ships, and looking upon it as a public dishonor, propounds great Rewards to
all such as would undertake to bring to him Wood the Scotch Captain, dead or
alive; Sir Stephen Bull undertaketh the Service, and with three choice Ships of
the English Navy, sets Sail, casts Anchor at the May, where he attends
Captain Wood then returning from Holland: in few days Wood appears; the Ships
draw up, and give Fire, Fighting bitterly all that day; next day morning the
Conflict is renewed, they Grapple, and fasten by Iron Hooks their Ships one to
another, fighting with that eagerness, that none of them perceiving the motion
of the Tide, Tay, where the Water being shallow, and the English Ships great,
and in danger of the Sands, the English are forced to yield; the Ships are
brought to Dundee, 10. August, 1490. Sir Stephen Bull, and other the most
eminent Officers and Gentlemen are brought to King James, by whom they were
Nobly entertained; after much commendation of their Valor, he grants them
their Liberty, desiring them to return with their Ships, with a tender of his
Royal Respects to their Master, King Henry.

King Henry much pleased, returns thanks to King James, declaring the great
Esteem and honorable Respect he bare to him for his Royal and extraordinary
Munificence.

By this time a Parliament is called in Edinburgh, where his Majesty
endeavored by all possible means, a Composure of the grand Divisions of the
Kingdom; some Laws are enacted for preservation of the Peace, and the late
unhappy Battle nigh Sterlin, where the King was Slain, is so hudled up, that
the business of that Day should never after be remembered to the Prejudice of
either Parties; a very strange Close, considering that this Convention was
composed most of such as opposed the former King: The moderation and discretion
of the young King, not yet arrived at the Fifteenth Year of his Age, was such,
that a Concord is made up far above all means, hope or expectation, every man
had a dutiful regard to so hopeful a Prince.

Being thus settled the reflections of his Grace appear daily more evidently
toward his Fathers Friends; two of his own Cousins, Daughters to his Aunt
Mary, he bestows in Marriage to two Eminent Men amongst them; the one (Daughter
to the Lord Boyd) to the Lord Forbese, the other, (Daughter to Earl Hamilton)
to Matthew Earl of Lennox.

And to Manifest the deep sense he had of his Father's Fall, he begirt himself
with an Iron Chain, as I have mentioned before; which galled the hearts of the
Rebellious Faction, his pretended Friends, more than it did his own Flesh,
though it made impressions therein deep enough; insomuch that Fear more than
Love restrained them from breaking out against him.

About this time a strange Monster was born in Scotland, a Male Child, touched:
This Monster King James carefully educated, and caused them to be instituted in
the knowledge of Letters, wherein they marvellously profited, especially in the
knowledge of diverse Tongues; they were most exquisite in Music, and both
admired for the sweetness of their voices; they lived some twenty eight years;
the one died before the other some three or four Months; by the smell of the
defunct body, the survivor was much annoyed, and daily languished until the
hour of his death.

And about the same time too, a Monstrous Cheat came into Scotland, and much
cherished by the King too, Peter Werbeck, who pretending himself to be Son to
King Edward the Fourth of England, happily escaped from the cruel Claws of his
Uncle Richard, had admittance to King James his presence, who behaved himself
with a behavior so beseeming his condition, and in a most elocuent Oration did
so pathetically deliver himself, touching the distress of his Family, and his
own mavelous preservation, that the King and most of his Council, though not
without the reluctance of some of the wiser, took compassion of him, and
resenting his condition as the common interest of all Princes, with incredible,
in consideration, promise him assistance toward the regaining of his just
Rights; provoked, the rather, as was pretended, to satisfy such as opposed
Peter's design, by the breach of Truce made by the English Ships whilst
Scotland was gasping under the confusion of a Civil War, indeed the late horrid
Rebellion in which James the Third perished: Peter is highly honored, and
exposed to the People by the Title of the Duke of York: a most virtuous and
beautiful Lady Katherine, Daughter to Earl Huntley, one of the chief Peers of
that Nation, is given to him in Marriage; an Army is likewise levied, and
marches into England; passes quietly through Northumberland, no adverse Army
appearing, nay, nor any one Man coming in to own Peter the pretended Prince:
King James admiring that no man would own him, persuading himself that it was
not only Love to their own rest and quiet, but likewise dislike of his Claim
and Title, returns home with his Army, and Winter drawing on, Disbandeth it:
This sudden change smites Peter's Soul with sorrow; but such was his cunning
that he pretends to be well pleased, devoutly professing rather never to come
to his Crown, than to make his way through the blood of his People.

King Henry hearing of the Scots return, resolves for all that, to avenge
himself; to which end he commands a powerful Army to be raised under the
Conduct of the Lord Dawbeny: The Spring drawing on, and the Army ready to
March, a Rebellion breaks out in Cornwall, and diverteth all; King Henry is
forced to wave his Northern Expedition, and to apply his Forces to Suppress the
Western Insurrection.

The Scots hearing of an Army prepared against them, forthwith roll together
some considerable Forces, and with an Army of some Thousands of Horse and Foot,
advance to the Borders of England; but such was the Wisdom of Richard Fox
Bishop of Durham, and the Vigilance of the Earl of Surrey, that the Scots soon
return, no great harm done; the English follow soon after them, take, and
demolish, the Lord of Aton his House, foam four Miles from Berwick, and
forthwith retreat.

King Henry sends the Spanish Ambassador Peter Hialus (then lying at London,
to treat of a Marriage between a Daughter of Spain, and Arthur, Son to King
Henry) to Scotland, to use his best endeavors to compose the Differences
between the two Kingdoms; King James yields such a willing and ready ear to
the Ambassador, that he forthwith sends to King Henry, to desire some English
Commissioners to be sent down to expedite the Treaty so fairly begun: the King
commands the Bishop of Durham to join with the Ambassador; the Commissioners
on both sides meet at Jedburgh: The English press the delivering of Werbeck to
their King's Justice; the Scots desire to be excused, their Public Faith being
engaged for his Safety, which in no case must be violated. This blasts all
hopes of Peace; yet such was the Wisdom of the Commissioners, that a Truce for
some few Months was agreed on.

The Treaty dissolved, King James fairly dismisseth his chargeable Guest,
Werbeck, Viaticum, Werbeck Landeth in Ireland, thence Wafteth himself over into
England, and joyneth with the Remnants of the Cornish Rebels; is at last
carch'd; confesses the whole Cheat, and is Hanged: his Wife is by all much
pitied, and honorably entertained by King Henry, from whom she received such a
liberal Pention as honorably maintained her all her Life.

New Stirs fall out between the Borders, by reason of some Wrongs done by the
English Garrison at Norham. King James complains, and required satisfaction of
King Henry, who very fairly promised it; to which end the Bishop of Durham is
sent into Scotland, who by his wisdom very speedily composeth all things.

At their Conferences, which was at Melcoss, King James makes known to the
Bishop, the earnest desire he had to have Margaret, eldest Daughter to King
Henry, given him in Marriage, as a Pledge to assure a mutual Peace between the
two Kingdoms; and craveth the Bishop's assistance in so good a work: The Bishop
cherishes his desires, and cheerfully promises his assistance: To which
purpose he presently posteth to London, and acquainteth his Majesty of England
with the desires of the Scotch King. King Henry is well pleased with the
proposition; whereof the Bishop gives speedy notice to King James: The
Archbishop of Glascow, and the Earl Bothwell, are dispatched Ambassadors to
demand the Lady in Marriage to their King; the Marriage is concluded in a very
short time; the Espousals published at Paul's Cross; the Earl Bothwell Espoused
her in the Name of King James: Next summer the Lady is sent into Scotland,
attended by the Earls of Surrey and Northumberland: King James received her,
attended by the chief of his Nobility at St. Lambert's Church in Lamermoore in
Scotland, and the Year following Solemnly Married her at Edinburgh; Sterlin
(which if he had lived to finish it in proportion to its beginning, had been a
most stupendous work) his Palace at Falkeland, and some others: and diverse
Ships likewise he commanded to be built, such and so great, as in those days no
Christian King had; but amidst all this prosperity and joy, the Iron Chain
pincheth him, and his Father's untimely Death (to which he ever thought himself
accessory, because by his Presence he countenanced and strengthened those Cruel
hands which impiously Murdered him) lies heavy upon his Spirit.

In this anguish of Spirit he resolves, according to the Superstition of those
Days, to Travel to Jerusalem, there to Mourn away some part of his time, and to
do such Acts of Penance as might expiate his Crimes; his Navy is prepared, his
Attendants appointed, neighboring Princes acquainted with his design for his
more safe and free passage; in the mean while, Wars break out between Spain and
France, and by the earnest entreaty of the Spaniard; the English King sends
over an Army to Invade the Kingdom of France; many other Princes likewise
combine against the French: King James perceiving such extraordinary stirs, and
not knowing what might be the issue of them, is persuaded by his Council to lay
aside his Journey for a season.

The French King in this strait, England; the Scottish Clergy put him on what
may be, but all in vain, he resolves not to stir, having indeed no just nor
honorable Quarrel, only with much ado he was at last wrought on to grant the
sending out of his Navy for the guard of the French Seas, which proved the
ruin of those gallant Ships before mentioned.

James Hamilton Earl of Aran is sent Admiral in this Naval Expedition, who,
willingly it should seem, mistaking his way, arriveth at Knock-Forgus in
Ireland, pillageth and burns the Town; and as if he had performed a gallant
and acceptable piece of Service, returns to Air in Scotland; King James
advertised of this exploit and of his return, is highly enraged, gives
Commission to Arehibald Earl of Douglas, to take Command of the Navy, and
Summons Hamilton to answer for the unsufferable wrong done to his Friend and
Ally: who having notice of the King's wrath, sets Sail, and arriveth in
France, disposing of his Tackling and all his Warlike Instruments, as seemed
good to himself, he lays up his Navy in Breast, where it consumed to nothing.

The restless Borderers soon weary of Peace, fall to their old trade of
Depredation, mutual Inroads are made, and mischief enough done on both sides:
and at this time two Scottish Merchants Ships are unhappily taken by the
English Admiral: The Scottish King is much discontented, which the French
Ambassador Lamote, lays hold on as the fittest opportunity to work him into a
War against the English; his pernicious persuasions, seconded with the daily
solicitations of the Scottish Clergy, especially Foreman Bishop of Murray, his
Ambassador then in France, prevail too much, and overcome him at last to
denounce by his Herald War against King Henry then in France, who answered the
Herald with expressions of the greatest disdain that could be; Arms are raised
on both sides, the Scots under the Command of their King, the English under the
Conduct of the Earl of Surrey: Both Armies advance, and at last join Battle at
Flodden in Northumberland; the Battle is exceedingly furious, and continues
some hours within Night, the darkness whereof commands at last a Cessation of
Arms: No man knowing on whose side the Victory lay, each Army thinking it self
worsted: The Earl of Hume, who traitorously refused to join in Battle; with his
Brigade enricheth himself with the Spoil of the Field, and departs by break
of day: at which instant the Lord Dacres came into Field, and finding the
Scotch Carriages without Guard and the Camp not wholly Pillaged, dispatcheth a
Messenger to the Earl of Surrey forthwith to Rally, and to return, which was
with mavelous Expedition performed; no Enemy appearing, and now the Day being
up, the English Celebrate the Victory with great Joy.

This Overthrow is reckoned by the Scots the greatest that ever befell them,
James himself never after appeared, what to determine of him, I know not; the
English contend that he was killed in the Battle, his Body found and exposed to
public View; the Scots assert, that the Corpse so exposed, were the Relicts of
Sir Alexander Elphinston, in Habit, Stature and Figure, resembling their King,
as some others did that day, the better to encourage the Army: Some contend
that he escaped into Scotland after the Battle, and was traitorously Murdered
by the Retainers of the Earl of Hume nigh Kelso, to avoid his wrath for their
Treachery on the day of Battle: and some there are who are bold enough to
assert, that the King perceiving the huge Slaughter of the Nobility and Gentry,
privately withdrew himself, and in an obscure habit traveled as a Pilgrim to
Jerusalem, to make good his former Vow, where he spent the remnant of his days
in Sorrow: however it was, certain it is, That after the Battle he never
appeared to the World: A Prince of a most comely Person, and of that moderation
and temper, that no provocation could force from him any the least intemperate
word, and yet a man of an undaunted, and indeed too resolute a Spirit, very
much inclined to Mercy, never executing Penal Justice without grief and sorrow
of Heart. I leave him with that Epitaph he had bestowed upon him for his
wanting of a Tomb.

Fama orbem replet, mortem sors occulit at tu
Desine scrutari, quod tegit, ossa solum.
Si mihi dent animo non impar fata sepulchrum
Augusta est tumulo terra Britanna meo.
THE LIFE OF JAMES V.
JAMES the Fourth thus lost, his Son James, a Child of two years of Age is
Proclaimed King; the Queen his Mother (conformable to the last Will of the
King, published before his last Expedition toward England, in which it was
provided, that the Queen should have the Supreme Power during the time of her
Widowhood, and the King his Minority) has the Supreme Government committed to
her, and as a tender Mother, writes with all earnestness to her Brother, King
Henry the Eighth of England, imploring his Royal and Fraternal favor,
particularly that he would be pleased out of his tender regard to her and her
young Son, to abstain from War against the Scots; King Henry very nobly
returns Answer, that the Scots should be choosers of War or Peace: this
gladded the heart of the Scottish Queen, who assuredly by her discreet
Government, had proved a Nursing Mother to that Nation, but that within one
year she was pleased to Marry herself to Archibald Douglas Earl of Angus, by
which Marriage her Government determined; and immediately Divisions break out
amongst the Nobility, touching the choice of a Viceroy: The Dowglasses wholly
for the Queen; the Earl of Hume, a Person then of great Power and Authority,
opposes her, contending for a free Choice to be made of one of the Nobility;
after much Debate, it was at last concluded that the Duke of Albany (John, Son
to Robert, Brother to James the Third) should be declared Viceroy; which being
done, Letters are dispatched to him, France: The Duke accepts the Honor and
Charge, and arriveth at Dunbarton about the 8th. of May, 1515; forthwith in
Parliament is the Duke restored to his Patrimony, and declared Viceroy.

The Viceroy begins his Government in a Progress all the Kingdom over,
endeavoring to establish Peace among all.

The Earl of Hume, the great Instrument of the Viceroy his advancement,
finding himself much neglected, repents him of his Service done to him, and
tenders the same to the Queen, whom he formerly opposed, suggesting to her the
danger of the young King now in the hands of such a Viceroy; whose Father for
his traitorous Conspiring against the King, and his ambitious aspiring the
Crown, was Exiled to his dying day, the present Viceroy his Son, born and
brought up likewise in Exile, appearing a man of no less Ambition than his
Father; the young King the only Rub in his way to the Crown, must needs
therefore be in great danger, if some extraordinary Expedient be not found out
for his Safety; and in order hereunto he advises her, to withdraw herself and
her Son into England, under the Protection of her Brother, who so largely the
other day declared his Royal affection and favor toward her: All is soon and
secretly bewrayed to the Viceroy, who immediately surpriseth the King and his
Mother the Queen in the Castle of Sterlin: The Queen and all Douglas his
Faction, are removed from the King, the Tuition of whom he commits to the care
of three Noble Men, besides the Lord Areskin Governor of the Castle: The Lord
Hume and his Brother withdrew to England; the Queen and the Earl of Angus her
Husband soon follow after; the Viceroy sends his Agents after them, and
complains of their Causeless departure: All of them are by their Friends
persuaded to return, the Queen only, being heavy with Child, is advised to
stay, where soon after she was brought to Bed of a Daughter, Named Margaret.

The Earl of Hume Summoned to appear before the Viceroy in a public
Convention, is Condemned, and his Estate confiscate because of nonappearance:
Ten thousand Horse and Foot are raised to reduce him; which the Earl
perceiving, he casts himself upon the Faith and Favor of the Viceroy; by
whose command Hume is committed to the Custody of James Hammilton Earl of Aran,
engaging the Earl under pain of Treason for his Security. Hume glad of so
favorable a Keeper, persuades Hammilton to withdraw with him, and to take upon
himself the Supreme Government, as being equal in Propinquity of Blood to the
King, (though by a Sister) with the Viceroy himself; Hammilton hearkneth to
him; the Earl of Lennox, Hammilton his Nephew, joyneth with them; after a few
Stirs they return next Spring to Court, are pardoned and reconciled.

The Viceroy retireth to Faulkland, Edinburgh, and thither inviteth Hume and
his Brother, who contrary to the advice of all his Friends, obeys: A
Convention of his Peers is called: Hume and his Brother without objection of
any Crime not formerly pardoned, are Condemned, and Beheaded at Edinburgh,
their Heads likewise set up in the two most public places of the City.

The Viceroy next Winter passes over into France, leaving his Charge in the
hands of Angus, Aran and Arguile, the Archbishops of St. Andrews and Glascow,
to whom he adjoined Darsie, Governor of Dunbar, a Frenchman, assigning to each
of them his Province; soon after Darsie is killed by the Humes, having, as they
conceived, a chief influence in the Death of the late Earl; this Murder much
troubled the rest entrusted with the public Affairs; a Messenger is dispatched
to the Viceroy to desire his return.

After five Years absence, Douglas and Hammilton, the Viceroy returns
October 28th. 1521; Douglas is Banished to France: an Army is raised to divert
the English, then Warring in France, and marches toward the Borders of
England: the Nobility refuse to March out of Scotland; the Viceroy much
perplexed, sends to the Lord Dacres, Governor of the English Borders, and
desires a Conference with him; Dacres, the public Faith being engaged for his
Safety, comes into the Scots Camp, and after some Debate, a Truce for some
Years is concluded.

The Viceroy goes again to France: King Henry notwithstanding of the Lord
Dacres his Truce, sends an Army into Scotland, under the Conduct of Thomas
Howard Earl of Surrey; after some waste done in Merse and Tividale, the Earl
retreats; for revenge whereof the Scotch Borderers make Inroads into England,
which provokes the Earl to return into Scotland to set on Fire the Town of
Jedburgh; which done, he retreats the second time without sight of an Enemy.

The Queen Mother, now returned from England, endeavors a Peace between the
two Nations: King Henry (with a design to break off the Ancient League between
the Scots and the French) tendereth a fair proposition of Marriage of his
Daughter Mary to James the King of Scots: Some heartily embrace his Motion,
pleading for a solemn League and Covenant with England, declaring the great
Benefits, which should redound, from such an Union, to both Nations; some again
strangely oppose it, pretending that the League with France, of the benefits
whereof they have had so long experience, could neither in Policy nor Honesty
be Violated; as for a Covenant with England, though it be possible that some
good may come of it; Yet, knowing that as Covenants, ratified by solemn Oaths,
with hands lifted up to God, are amongst good Men the strongest of all
Obligations; so by some others they are only made use on as Snares to entrap
and Engines to catch the Credulous to their destruction, which done, then are
Covenants laid aside as Almanacks out of date; Therefore, said they, Let us not
be so fond as to relinquish our experienced God, for that which is in Hope
only, and may possibly, ay, and probably too, deceive us.

By this time the Viceroy landeth in the West with Three thousand Foot, and an
Hundred Curasiers; at Glascow, diverse new levied Forces Rendezvous with them;
the Viceroy comes himself to Edinburgh, calls a Council of the Nobility,
commends their Fidelity and Stability to the French, assures them of the
reciprocal affection and constancy of the French to them and their Nation; and
in fine, with all earnestness he inciteth them to an Expedition against
England: This last motion takes not well, the Nobility attending him only to
the English Borders, protest against an Invasion; the Viceroy is forced to
abate of his vigor against England, yet the French must be sent to try their
valor against Wark Castle, where being soundly banged, they return with have
enough to the Scotch quarters: King Henry vigilant enough toward his affairs,
raises an Army of Forty Thousand Horse and Foot, marches toward Scotland,
the Scots retreat to Lawder, a bitter Winter comes on, huge storms of Snow
fall, all action intercepted, and both Armies Disbanded.

Next Spring the Viceroy passes again over into France; the Queen, Aran,
Lennox, Crafurd and some others, take the opportunity of his absence, and
accompany the young King, not yet come to Age, to Holyrude House, where a
Council of the Peers being called, by their advice the King takes the
Government upon him, the Nobility swear Fealty to him, and all Officers of
State receive new Commissions from him.

The Earl of Angus hearing of this Mutation, returns from France; Lennox and
Arguile, neglected in the public Administration, receive him with much joy, in
hope of some Mutation of Affairs: to the Queen (now estranged from him in her
affection) his return is no way pleasing; much less to Hammilton; (who then
ruled all) his deadly enemy the Devil of Division begins now to Reign: the
Queen and Hammilton abide at Edinburgh Castle as a place of greatest Safety:
the Discontented Faction assembleth at Glasow, advances toward Edinburgh, the
Castle unprovided of all things needful for a Siege, yields it self; they
within have liberty to march whither they please, the King only reserved and
committed to the tuition of Angus, and Lennox, who were by course to attend
him, every man his four Months, Angus Monopolizeth all Power into his own
hands, this produces Envy and Emulation; Arguile withdraws, refusing to
meddle; Lennox continues at Court, but medleth not neither; both show their
dislike of Angus his Usurpation: A design is forthwith set on foot, by the
King's own desire, to Rescue him out of the hands of the Dowglasses: The Scots
a powerful Family in the South, attempt it; to that end they appear at Melrose
with some Forces, a bitter Conflict falls out between them and Douglas; the
King himself and Lennox Spectators of the Fight, Douglas had the Day, the chief
and most of the Scots killed on the place, July 20. 1526.

Douglas perceiving now plainly that Lennox was his enemy, by his indifferency
in this Conflict, thought it high time to reconcile himself to the Hammiltons;
the Agreement is made, Hammilton shares with him in the Government; Lennox
repaireth to Sterlin, sends to diverse of the Nobility, consulteth with them
touching the Rescue of the King; all resolve, and unanimously Assistance is
promised accordingly against a day appointed, before the day comes Lennox
thought it necessary, if possible, to prevent the Conjunction of Douglas and
Hammilton; to that end he advances to Linlithquo, where the Hammiltons were
drawn together; Douglas then at Edinburgh, marches with all possible
expedition, bringing along with him to countenance his affairs, the person of
the King, who all along retardeth the journey, accounting Lennox more his
Friend than those with him, pretending indisposition of Body, ever and anon
dismounteth, making show to pay some necessary office to Nature; Douglas frets,
and in vain, spending many entreaties for expedition; at length George Douglas,
Brother to the Earl, is so peremptory with him, as in most Rebellious terms to
tell him, That rather than their Enemies should get possession of his Person,
they would rend him in pieces, and divide him in halves between them: This
Traitorous word made an indelible impression on the heart of the King, though
at present silence was his best and only return: At last the Armies join,
Lennox and his Patty are put to the rout, many slain, the Earl himself killed,
bewailed of all; Hammilton and Douglas both mourn for him; above all, the King
is afflicted; the remnant of his Party with sorrow and grief enough submit, and
are all forced to compound for their Treasons, as was pretended, in bearing
Arms against the King; the Earl of Cassils refusing to submit, was waylaid and
killed by one Hugh Campbell.

Lennox his Death divulged, makes a very deep impression in the hearts of most
men, especially his own Retainers: one of his Servants resolves with himself
to avenge his Lord's death, on the Person of the Bastard Hammilton, by whom
Lennox was killed: To that end he repairs to Edinburgh, and on his way meeting
with one of his Fellow Servants, he asked him, saying, Did thou see Hammilton
the Bastard, Yea said he, I saw him; and have thou not killed him, unthankful
Wretch, who murdered our Dear Lord and Master? said the Fellow, Go and be
hanged, thou art not worthy to live; and with these words he passed on in his
way, and came straight to Holyrude House, where in the Pallace-Yard stood Two
thousand Armed men, all Retainers to Douglas and Hammilton; there the Fellow
walks, full of Revenge, and waiting the opportunity to execute the desire of
his heart, Hammilton unawares, comes in his way without Arms, the Fellow falls
upon him in the Penthouse under the Porters-Lodge, and wounds him in six
several places of his Body; the Armed men are all presently in confusion, and
well nigh in one another blood: The Hammiltons suspecting this bold attempt to
be done by the Dowglasses (newly only reconciled to them) to avenge some old
Quarrels: The Fellow is at last apprehended (who had opportunity fair enough,
had he attempted it, to escape with his Sword in his hand, still smoking with
Hammilton's blood; he is forthwith hurried to Tolbnith, boldly professing that
what he did, was to revenge the death of his Dear Lord, declaring with
inexpressible confidence, that he was sorry for nothing, but that he was
disappointed of his design so bravely begun by him; he is put to Torture for
the discovery of such as animated him to that bold attempt; That unhappy Hand
well deserved this punishment, which executed not the design of a Resolute mind.

The Dowglasses think themselves now secure enough, Faulkland to Sterlin, there
the Nobility from most parts of the Kingdom fly to him, by whose advice his
Majesty issues out an Edict inhibiting the Dowglasses any further meddling in
public Affairs, discharging them or any of their retainers under pain of
Death, to come within Twelve Miles of the Court; this Edict being served on the
Earl in his Journey toward Sterlin, he retreats to Edinburgh, and prepares
Forces for his defense.

A Proclamation issues from the King to call a Parliament to Assemble November
the 3d. in the interim his Army advances toward the City, Dowlas withdraws:
The King peaceably enters the City: Terms of Peace are offered to the
Dowlasses, (viz.) That the Earl himself should confine himself on the North of
Tay, his Brother George and his Uncle Archibald to the Castle of Edinburgh: The
Conditions are refused; they are Summoned to appear before the Parliament, they
disobey; the Earl himself, his Brother George, his Uncle Archibald, and his
dear Friend Alexander Drumond of Carnock, all by sentence of Parliament
Banished: all People charged under pain of Treason not to relieve them; the
Dowlasses break out into open Violence; Arguile is sent to reduce them to
order, whose advance they prevented by flight into England.

The King spends some time with great care and charge, in suppressing the
Depredations then very great on the Borders; which Expedition over, he
establishes the Court of Sessions (formerly indeed set on foot by the
Viceroy, the Duke of Albany) Constituted of Fifteen Judges of the most learned
of the Law, empowered to hear and determine all Civil Causes: a very grave
Court, continuing in great Honor and deserved Respect in that Nation to this
day.

About this time King Henry of England prepares for War against the Scots,
irritated thereunto by the Scotch Exiles and Refuges in England; King James
having Constituted the Earl of Murray his Viceroy, prepares for Defense; by
Mediation of the French,

King James sends Ambassadors to France to treat concerning his Marriage to a
Daughter of France: The King of England to prevent it, sends the Bishop of St.
David's, and William Hrward Brother to the Duke of Norfolk, Ambassadors into
Scotland, to invite King James to a Personal Conference with himself, whereunto
he is soon persuaded by the great Promises they made of Marriage to Mary the
King's eldest Daughter, if all other things succeeded well in the Treaty: The
Scotch Council, especially the Clergy, fearing Innovations in Religion then set
on foot by King Henry, are much troubled that his Majesty had consented to this
Conference; they ply him with continual surmises of Ruin to Himself, to the
State, to Religion, should this Conference hold; the King is overruled and
observes not the day appointed, but forthwith Saileth into France, and is
immediately espoused to Magdalen, Daughter to Francis King of France, the
Marriage solemnized on New Years Day, Scotland about the end of May following;
within six Weeks after the young Queen Dies, to the inexpressible grief of
all; the Nobles put on Mourning Apparel, not before that time in use in that
Kingdom.

Immediately after David Beton Cardinal, and Robert Maxwel, are sent to France
to demand Mary of the Family of the Guise, Widow of the late Duke of
Longoville, in Marriage to King James; the Marriage is agreed to; the Year
following she arriveth in Scotland, and the Marriage solemnized at St. Andrews,

This Year exemplary Justice was done upon diverse Persons of Quality,
conspiring the Death of the King; some the Year following were Burnt, some
Banished for embracing the Protestant Doctrine Preached in Germany by Luther
and others.

James Hammilton the Bastard accused of High Treason, is sentenced to Death,
his Head and Quarters affixed to public places in Edinburgh: the King soon
after thought in his Dream, that Hammilton cut off first his right and then his
left Arm, threatening withal to appear again to take his own Life; the King
awaking, is very much troubled with thoughts of this Dream, and revolving with
himself what might be the meaning of it, a Messenger comes to him with the sad
News of the Death of both his Sons at the same time, the one at Sterlin, the
other at St. Andrews.

King Henry of England sends the second time to invite King James to a
Conference at York; the Scotch Clergy still oppose it, and the Conference again
refused: Henry in great Indignation against his Nephew for refusal of
Conference with him, resolves to talk with him in harder Terms, and to that
end he raises an Army and sends it into Scotland, and under the Command of
the Duke of Norfolk. The Scottish Ambassadors in vain, entreating a Cessation,
King James prepares a considerable Army for defense; the English enter into
Scotland, and after some mischief done, at the approach of the Scotch Army,
they retreat; the Lord Gordon marches before the main body with Ten thousand
Men, doing much hurt and annoyance to the Rear of the English Army. King James
with all earnestness presses an Engagement with the English, the Nobility
peremptorily oppose him in it; the King enraged, upbraideth them with Cowardice
unworthy to be owned as Sons of their Noble Ancestors, vowing that though they
should all desert him, himself and his own Family alone should give the Enemy
Battle: The Lord Maxwell, to pacify the King, tendereth his Service to lead
into Cumberland Ten thousand Men, thereby to divert the Enemy: The King
accepts his Service, but being enraged against the whole Nobility, he
resolves that none of them should have the Honor of any thing done in that
Expedition, and for the cause, gives a Dormant Commission to Oliver Sinclare,
Brother to the Lord Roslin. Having entered Cumberland, and now in view of Five
hundred English Horse, Sinclare produces his Commission, it is read at the
head of the Army; Maxwell is thereby enraged, the whole Army falls in Mutiny,
and in such a confusion that they become a Prey to the Five hundred English
Horse; diverse of the Nobility and the new General Sinclare are sent Prisoners
to the Tower of London: Solway, strikes the Valorous King with such grief and
sorrow that he never after joyed, but soon after departed this Life, having
first made Peace with King Henry, at whose request he recalled Archibald Earl
of Angus.

Thus dyed King James the Fifth, a Prince of singular Endowments, most patient
of Cold, Hunger, and Travel, sometimes setting on Horseback Twenty Four hours,
when the necessity of his affairs required it; a great Justitiary, and a person
of singular Foresight and Wisdom.

THE LIFE OF QUEEN MARY.
QUeen Mary was the only Child James the Fifth, her Father, left to Inherit the
Crown, James Hammilton Earl of Aran is therefore chosen Viceroy, to whom King
Henry of England sent his Ambassador, Sir Radolph Sadler, to procure Peace
between the two Kingdoms, and to demand Mary in Marriage to his Son, by the
influence of the late Prisoners in England, Dowglasses (whom King Henry had
wrought much to his Service by his Royal Favors) whose Counsels were now very
prevalent in the management of public affairs; both were assented, the
Contract of Marriage Signed, and Pledges promised for better performance of all
Conditions agreed upon, notwithstanding of the Opposition of the Queen and
Cardinal, who fearing the Subversion of Popery (still established in that
Kingdom) by this agreement, endeavor what they can to cross all: Tumults are
stirred against the English Ambassador, and daily Affronts put upon his
Attendants, in the Streets; the Ambassador complains, and demands the
Pledges promised for confirmation of the Agreement lately made; exemplary
Justice is executed upon the chief movers in the Tumults in answer to this
Complaint; but the Cardinal, by the influence of his power, had so obstructed
the matter of his demand, that not one of the Nobility would yield up himself
voluntarily a Pledge to the English, and to such a business none could be
compelled.

King Henry hereby provoked, seiseth all the Scottish Ships in the English
Havens and Harbors, and proclaims War against the Scots, in the mean while
the Queen Mother sends to France, to entreat the French King to send home
Matthew Earl of Lennox, English Faction, otherwise Religion and the French
League were like to come to nothing. Lennox is sent home, and forthwith levieth
Four Thousand men, and with this strong guard comes to the Queen; the Viceroy
inferior in Power, sends Commissions to treat for Peace, by agreement the young
Queen is committed to the Education of Four Indifferent Noble Men engaged in
neither Faction (viz.) the Lords Graham, Areskin, Lindsay, and Leviston; and
accordingly they take charge of her at Sterlin, where all the Nobility do
Homage to her: The Viceroy joyneth himself wholly to the Cardinal, which
Conjunction so inrageth Lennox, that immediately he flies to Arms, raises an
Army, marches to Leith, and provokes the Cardinal to Fight; the Cardinal
keeps himself close in Edinburgh Castle. Lennox through want of Provisions is
forced to withdraw, and to put himself in a posture of Defense in and about
Glascow.

King Henry hearing of these Stirs, sends into Scotland to demand the custody
of the young Queen until she came to years fit for Marriage.

The French Faction now prevailing, his Demands are refused: An Army is
therefore forthwith sent into Scotland, under the Conduct of the Earl of
Hereford, and a great Navy of Two hundred Sail, under the Command of Viscount
Lisle as Admiral. The English enter the City of Edinburgh without resistance,
first they Pillage and then they Fire it, and diverse other Towns and Villages
about it; the like fate befell the Town of Leith, and forthwith they return to
England, laden with Spoil.

The Queen Mother writes to the French King, and lays all these mischiefs at
Lennox his door, as the only enemy of their Peace and Union, by reason of his
private Feud against the Viceroy for the death of his Father. At her Request
Lennox is recalled to France, but finding the French King provoked against him,
he still keeps to his posture of Defense: The Viceroy marches against him,
and after some small bickerings, Lennox retireth into England, and is
honorably entertained by King Henry, to whom he tenders his Service in
opposition to the French Faction then prevailing in Scotland, of which his
Majesty so well accepted, that he gave to him in Marriage his Neice, the Lady
Margaret Douglas, Daughter to Margaret his own Sister (and Wife to James the
Fourth) by her second Husband the Earl of Angus. Lennox and his Friends most of
them have their Estates confiscate. The English re-enter Scotland, Fire
Jeeburgh and Kelso, waste most of the Country thereabout, and leaving a
Garrison at Coldingham, they return home with their Booty.

The Viceroy in the depth of Winter lays Siege to Coldingham, and all on the
sudden retireth to Dunbar, leaving his Army, in which he durst not confide, at
the Siege: by this unexpected desertion, the Army falls into Confusion; by the
wisdom and valor of the Earl of Angus, the Cannon and all other things
belonging to the Army, are safely brought off and carried to Dunbar.

Next Spring Thomas Duke of Norfolk, is sent down with an Army to join with
that on the Borders, with a design to reduce all on this side forth to the
Obedience of the English: The Viceroy by the encouragement of Angus, marches
toward the Borders, and at Ancram, obtains a Victory over the English; which
Disaster much inraging the English King, the Viceroy sends to France to crave
assistance, Three thousand Foot and Five hundred Horse are granted, and sent
under the Command of Sir James Montgomery, by whose assistance the Viceroy
marches in a Plundering Expedition within the English Borders, and soon after
Disbandeth his Army; next Winter Montgommery returns to France.

And now some Stirs begin by such as endeavored some Mutations and Reformation
of Religion. George Wisheart having fallen away from Popery and embracing the
Reformation begun, in Germany is apprehended, and at a Council of Bishops and
some others, held at St. Andrews, is Condemned as guilty of Heresy: The
Cardinal sends to the Viceroy to desire the Law to be executed against him,
who wishes the Cardinal not to be too hasty, but to forbear a little, which
distasted the Cardinal not a little; Andrews, the Cardinal beholding the
Tragedy from his Windows, not without some Pomp; which Wisheart perceiving,
said to the Governor of the Castle standing by him, He who now insulteth over
me, shall in few days be tumbled over the same Window, with more disgrace than
now he sets with state: At the uttering of which words he is strangled to
death, and his Body burnt to ashes. This fact of the Cardinal and the manner of
his proceeding without the Authority of the Viceroy, gave distaste to many; at
last his Death is contrived and perpetrated by Norman Lisle, Son to the Earl of
Rothuse, whose discontent arose from the refusal of a private grant, which the
Cardinal conceived not fit to be yielded to him: Lisle calls some sixteen
Consorts together, to whom he discovered his intent, craving their concurrence,
all was agreed unto, the time and manner is appointed for execution; over
Night, they come privately to St. Andrews, and lodge severally in diverse Inns
to render themselves the less suspected: next Day morning by break of day, two
of the Conspirators come to the Castle, and being known Men, the Porter opens
to them, Norman Lisle well known to him and a man much favored by him,
protested they minded him no hurt at all, but that they had a matter of great
Importance to Communicate to him, the dispatch of which required that their
unseasonable coming to his Chamber; the Cardinal trusting their Protestations,
opens his Door, they enter, fall forthwith upon him, and barbarously Murder
him: By this time News are carried into the City of the Surprisal of the
Castle: The Cardinal his Friends and Retainers immediately Arm, beset the
Castle, threatening the death of all within if the Cardinal were not preserved
alive: the Murderers told them it was too late, and therewith cast his dead
Body, barbarously cut, over the same Window from whence he beheld the Tragedy
of the late mentioned Martyr George Wisheart, which added not a little to the
high Opinion the People had of Wisheart, remembering the last words he spoke
concerning the Cardinal.

This Impious Murder highly provoked the Court; the Viceroy Summoneth the
Murderers to appear before him, they refuse, and are declared Traitors: but
they having seized the Cardinal his Treasure, and having in their power the
Viceroy his Son, who then remained with the Cardinal, and confiding in the
strength of the Castle, stand upon their guard: The Viceroy lays Siege to
the Castle, and after some four Months Siege in vain, he withdraws his Force,
and returns to Edinburgh to be present at Parliament then ready to Assemble:
and now behold the Judgment of God upon those Barbarous Murderers, they being
formerly Men in all outward deportment, not only Civil, but Religious, and
reputed Men of tender Consciences, give themselves now over to all manner of
wickedness, Murders, profane Swearing, drinking to Excess, and Whoring, were
things of course with them, their wickedness came to this height: The Viceroy,
too slow in avenging so much Wickedness, lays again Siege to the Castle,
assisted with some French Forces, after much Battery, they are content to
deliver themselves to the French Admiral, Monsieur Strozius; upon Quarter for
Life, they are set on the French Shore, and disperse themselves; all of them
living ever after in great Misery, are in their several turns pursued by the
wrath of God, to violent and untimely Ends.

About this time the Duke of Sommerset (now after the Death of King Henry) the
Lord Protector of England Invadeth Scotland with a powerful Army, the Viceroy
all on the sudden rolleth together Thirty thousand Horse and Foot, to whom the
English Protector sends a very fair Letter, requiring their young Queen may
be assured in Marriage to the young King of England, according to former
Agreement; and for their better Security, he demands the said Princess may be
Educated not in any Foreign Country, but at home, until she come to such years
as might enable her to make her own Choice: Further desiring, that in the
interim there might be Peace between the two Nations, and no treaty of Marriage
admitted with any other Prince: All which being granted, the Protector
promises, not only to withdraw his Army, but likewise, to make reasonable
satisfaction for all the hurt he had done; to all which Proposals the Scottish
Viceroy returns no Answer: The two Armies appearing in view one of another,
the Earl of Huntley sends an Herald to the Protector, offering Combat, either
single, or Ten to Ten, or Twenty to Twenty, for the determination of the
Quarrel, and for avoiding the effusion of Christian Blood: the Protector
enraged, by the slight of his last Letter, slighteth the Challenge: both Armies
Engage in Pinkey Field nigh Musselbraugh; in a bitter Conflict the Victory at
first onset inclines to the Scots, many English slain, their Horse put to
Rout, the Scots pursue; and having spent their Shot, return to the main of
their Army in some Confusion, the Main observing in what Disorder that strong
Party returned, supposed the English to be on their Rear; all on the sudden,
English Rally, and pursue with no small Execution: diverse, both of the Gentry
and Clergy, are killed; many Prisoners of all sorts; one of the Scottish Lords
a Prisoner, being demanded how he liked the Marriage of the Scotch Queen to the
English King; I always liked the Marriage, says he, but upon my Faith, I fancy
not the Wooing, by Fire and Sword. After this Victory which happened to the
English, April 10. 1547, Louthian is most burnt and wasted by them, the Islands
of Inchkeeth and Inchcolme, and the Castle of Brochty, Fast Castle, Hume
Castle, Lauder and Roxbrough, all Garrisoned by the English, the rest of the
Army returns into England.

The Scottish Nobility Assemble at Sterlin, to consult what to do in such an
Exigent as then the Affairs of that Nation stood in: France; Ambassadors are
likewise dispatched thither to crave Assistance according to their League: Six
thousand Men are granted, and arrive at Leith, under the Command of Monsieur
Dessins; by whose assistance the Viceroy lays Siege to Hadington, which
proving too tedious a business, Dessins marches into Tividale, and from thence
makes diverse Incursions into England. Dessins is called home, and Monsieur
Termins is sent over to Command the French: They again prepare to lay Siege to
Hadington, which the English understanding their Stores being spent, they Fire
the Town, and withdraw; some other of their Garrisons are likewise deserted,
and some surprised by the Scots, and all on the sudden the English are wholly
voided out of Scotland, and in May following, the French return into France.

Next Year, 1552, France, whither likewise the Viceroy sent the Lord Carnegi
Ambassador, to render thanks for their Seasonable Assistance: He is honorably
received and entertained: The French King earnestly desires that the Viceroy
would deliver up his Government into the hands of the Queen Mother: The
Ambassador ingageth himself to employ all his interest that his Majesty's
desire may be satisfied; and forthwith returns, accompanied with the Bishop
of Ross, then Legier in France: Both move the Viceroy to satisfy the desire
of the French King; the Viceroy, with much ado, yields his assent, he being
first discharged in Parliament of all Accounts which ought to be made by him as
Viceroy, which accordingly was done, and no other thing required of him, save
that he should promise upon Oath to deliver whatever he had in present
possession belonging to the late King.

The Queen Mother returns into Scotland, accompanied with one Monsieur de
Oysell, appointed to assist her in Council, and in a Parliament held at
Edinburgh, the Viceroy delivers up the Regalia into the hands of Monsieur d'
Oysell, who received them in the Name of the Queen, and delivered them to her
by consent of Parliament, by the Title of Queen Regent, Anno 1555. French King:
The Viceroy is created Duke of Chastellhe-Roy, and Twelve thousand Livres
given him in a Yearly Pension, and he declared in the Scotch Parliament, Heir
to the Crown, should the young Queen dye without Issue: The Queen Regent gives
the first Essay of her Government, against the stubborn Red-Shankes, amongst
whom were many Notorious Robbers, all reduced into Obedience by the Queen
Regent, with little noise, and admired success.

After this Highland Expedition, a design was set on foot by the French Council
about the Queen Regent, to conduce a certain number of Mercinary Soldiers, as
a standing Army, for the Defense of the Kingdom, for maintenance whereof, a
certain Monthly Rate was to be settled on all the Real and Personal Estates,
proportionably through the whole Kingdom: This design is deeply Resented by the
whole Nobility and Gentry: Two are sent, the Lords, Calder and Weems, to
declare their dislike of this design, and to represent to the Queen Regent,
that this design, as it was without Precedent in that Kingdom, so it could not
be endured, being not only Dishonorable to the whole Nobility, whose
Ancestors, from whose worth they were not yet degenerated, have been a
sufficient Guard against the strongest Invasions, and most desperate
Insurrections that ever were, but likewise most Dangerous to the whole Nation,
in regard that the boundless Lusts of such men, so empowered, were like enough
to break out into such Exorbitances as might confound all, and into such
Insolences, as their very Masters and Maintainers might sooner mourn for, than
mend; and that it could not in reason be supposed that Men of mean or no
fortunes should be more tender of the welfare of the Kingdom, than such who by
their Estates and Fortunes were interessed in the Common good, and that it
could not be expected, that such Fellows, who had nothing to lose, could be so
faithful and valiant in defense of other Men's Estates, as they whose large
Fortunes and Families do engage them to assert the Liberty and Welfare of the
Nation; and that it could not be apprehended that such Mercinary Men would be
so tame, as willingly to lay down their Arms, when at once they must therewith
relinquish their living at ease in the Cream of other Men's Estates, and return
to their former painful and Mechanic Occupations: This Remonstrance was so
lively represented to her Majesty, that she utterly disclaimed and cried out
upon the Design, declaring the deep sense she had of all those Mischiefs which
were so discreetly and timely represented to her.

Soon after the young Queen Mary growing on toward years fit for Marriage,
being of singular Beauty, and adorned with such rare and admirable Parts both
for Virtue and Wisdom: the French King, Henry the Second (at whose Court,
whither she was conveyed soon after the Battle at Muslebrugh, she had such
Royal Education as well became her Birth) very earnestly desired to Marry her
to his Eldest Son, the Dauphine of France; to which purpose he writes to the
Queen Regent, desiring that the Scotch Nobility might declare their Assent to
this so much desired Marriage, and forthwith to send over certain Commissioners
to be present at the Nuptials: A Parliament is called at Edinburgh, the French
King's Letters are read; three of the Nobility, the Earls' of Cassils, Rothus,
and Cumberland; three of the Clergy, the Archbishop of Glascow, the Bishop of
Orkney, the Pryor of St. Andrews; two of the Commons, the Provost of Edinburgh,
and the Provost of Montross are sent; they safely arrive and are honorably
entertained at the French Court, the Marriage solemnized April 24. Nostra Dama
in Paris: the Scotch Commissioners, the chief days of the Solemnity being past,
prepare to return to their own Country, abundantly satisfied, not so much by
beholding the incredible Magnificence of the French Entertainment, as by
observing the admired deportment of their most Gracious and Illustrious Queen.
Before their departure, an unhappy dash of Discontent was given; the Chancellor
of France is sent to them, to move, That the Crown of Scotland may be sent over
into France for Coronation of the Dauphine, after the custom and manner of the
Kings of Scotland. The Commissioners refuse the motion, and soon after take
their Leave of the Court, and return home: In their return, the Earl of
Cassils, the Earl of Rothus, the Bishop of Orkney, and the Lord Cumberland,
depart this Life.

And now began the great Stirs touching Reformation of Religion, which we shall
briefly touch: Certain Lords (assisted by some Knights and Gentlemen) who
afterward were termed the Lords of the Congregation, George Wisheart and
Walter Mill, both lately Burnt for Religion; send privately their Scrolls all
the Kingdom over, to receive the Subscriptions of all who favored the
Reformation of Religion; which being done, Propositions are sent to the Queen
Regent by the hands of Sir James Sandelands, Lord Caulder (viz.) That all
Popish Priests be forthwith removed, and Godly Ministers chosen by the People,
established in their places; and that all public Prayers may be said in the
Vulgar Tongue. The Popish Bishops, though much enraged, yet make a motion and a
fair offer, to refer all to public Dispute; the Lords of the Congregation
refuse all Dispute, whilst the Popish Bishops are their Judges: The Bishops
make a second Tender; That if the Mass, Invocation of Saints, Prayers for the
Dead, were continued in due esteem, together with the belief of Purgatory; that
then it should de lawful for them to use the Scottish Tongue in their public
Prayers and Ministration of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper: This is likewise
rejected by the Lords of the Congregation, who peremptorily adhere to their
first Proposals, requiring the Queen Regent to hearken thereunto: Her Majesty
yields to them, That it shall be lawful for them to use their Vulgar Tongue in
their public Prayers, provided all other Rights be duly observed, and none of
their Preachers appear in the Pulpits of Edinburgh. They of the Congregation
finding themselves discountenanced, and unsatisfied; send John Ariskin of
Dunne, a well learned Man, to Solicit the Parliament in their behalf, but with
no success.

In May following, another Parliament is called at Sterlin; thither
Commissioners are sent, Alexander Cuningham, Earl of Glencarne, and Sir Hugh
Camphell Provost of Air, to pacific the Queen Regent, provoked by some Popular
Tumults, and to pray that nothing might be denied through the occasion of the
said Tumults, which was formerly granted to them: The Queen Regent in much
wrath, threameth the Banishment of their Ministers, as main Incendiaries. The
Commissioners urge the remembrance and performance of her Promises, which she
resusing, they peremptory, threaten and protest to renounce all Obedience to
her, beseeching her in time to consider what Mischiefs were like to ensue
thereupon.

In the interim the Ministers of the Congregation, get into the Pulpits at St.
John's Town: A Messenger is dispatched to Patrick Ruthuen Provost of the place,
to Suppress them, and the Stirs made by them; the Provost refuses the Service:
A Messenger is likewise sent to Dundee to demand the Person of Paul Messan, a
Popular Preacher, who privately withdraws, and escapes: A General
Proclamation is likewise made, requiring the Celebration of Easter after the
accustomed manner: Sterlin, May the 10th. to answer their Contempt, for
countenancing of whom a great Confluence rush thither from all parts of the
Kingdom. The Queen Regent calls to her Areskin of Dunne, a Popular Man, and
Requests him to persuade the Multitude to return peaceably to their several
homes, assuring him that nothing should be done against any of their Sect: by
his means some return, more stay; whereby the Queen is highly provoked: such of
the Ministers as were Summoned, and appeared not, are Banished to no purpose.
John Knox Preaches at St. Johnston, and inflameth all; the Multitude forthwith
brake down the Altar and all the Images in the Church, do violence to the
Person of the Priest then attending to say Mass; into immediately after they
rush into the Monasteries of the Franciscans and Dominioans, and by assistance
of the Soldiery then and there in Arms, they spoil and plunder, and in two
days lay all those stately Buildings level to to the ground; at Cowper of Fyfe,
they do the very like.

The Queen Regent, being informed of all these detestable Outrages, sends to
the Earls of Arguile, Hammilton and Athol, to attend her with all their
Retainers, which they forthwith did, and advance to St. Johnston, May the 18.
the Queen perceiving their Forces both greater and more resolute to Fight than
her own, dispatcheth Commissioners, (viz.) the Earl of Arguile and James
Stuart, Bastard Son to the late King, (who remained with the Regent on purpose
to discover all her Counsels and Resolutions to that Adverse Faction) to the
Lords of the Congregation to treat with them for Accommodation: Alexander
Cunningham, and John Areskin, abovenamed, are appointed by the Lords to treat
with them: Articles are agreed upon that the Forces on both sides should be
Disbanded: The Queen, French not to approach within Three Miles of the Town:
all other matters of Difference referred to the next Parliament. The Armies
accordingly dismissed, the Queen Regent, and those of the Nobility, with her,
are received into the Towns: Arguile, with James Stuart, abovenamed, withdraw
to St. Andrews: The Queen Regent, jealous of them, and seeing no hopes of a
lasting Peace, setleth new Magistrates; and having restored the Mass, leaves a
Garrison at St. Johnston's, and returns to Sterlin, from thence sends
threatening Letters to Arguile and James Stuart, to return to her, but all in
vain, they now both publicly join (with whom they were before in private
engaged) to the Lords of the Congregation: New Forces are levied on both sides,
those of the Congregation assemble in great numbers, Vowing the Destruction of
the Adverse Party, enter St. Andrews (having Defaced the Church at Carell,
plunder, spoil and level to the ground the two Monasteries of the Dominicans
and Franciscans, the Archbishop scarce escaping to Faulkland, where the Queen
Regents Army lay) but the Queen understanding their approach, sends from
Faulkland, where her self lay, and requires Hammilton Duke of Casteaulroy, the
Commander in chief, to send Commission to Treat: Three of the most Popular
Nobility are sent, yet could not prevail for any terms of Peace, all that would
be granted, was the agreement to a Truce for eight Days, Provided that the
Queens Army remove into Louthian, Whilst another Treaty may be had at St.
Andrews; which accordingly her Army did: and immediately Hammilton and James
Stuart advance to St. Johnston, lay Siege to the Town, which in few days
yielded to them: They proceed to Scone, which they consume with Fire; and from
thence to Sterlin, where all the Religious houses are pillaged and laid level
to the ground, then advancing to Lithquo, the like is done there: then entering
Edinburgh, they find business enough there to stay them for some days to
demolish Religious houses, to purge the Churches from Images and beautiful
Sculptures, and to establish Zealous Preachers of the Reformation in them. The
Queen having retreated to Dunbar, returned toward Edinburgh: when the Armies
were ready to engage, by the Negotiation of the Duke of Casteaulroy, and the
Earl of Morton, a Cessation of Arms was at last agreed on from July the 24th.
January the 10th. next following.

In the mean time there was an universal toleration of Religion, and no Man
compelled to the use of any Rites or Ceremonies therein; there was no Garrison
to be placed at Edinburgh; the Priests were peaceably to enjoy the Tithes of
the Church for that Year; no more Religious Houses were to be demolished or
alienated: the Pallace-Royal at Holyrude House, with all there belonging to the
Crown, were to be restored to the Regent: This Truce was firmly enough observed
on both sides. But about this time Henry the Second of France, being forewarned
of the Danger of that Day, was strangely killed in a Tilt, by the Earl of
Montgomerry the now French King; and the Queen of Scots advertised of the
design of James Stuart, Prior of St. Andrews, to aspire to the Crown; writ
Letters to him, adjuring him not only by common Duty, but likewise by the
special Favors received, to return to his Obedience by deserting the Faction,
in which he had engaged himself: whereunto James Stuart returned his
Protestations of all due respects to the King and Queen; but withal,
peremptorily declaring, to adhere to those of the Congregation in despite of
all Opposition. This Answer is highly resented, and a Garrison of French is
forthwith sent into Leith; the Earl of Aran, Son to Hammilton, privately
withdraws from the French Court and comes into Scotland, where he joins with
those of the Congregation, with whom he likewise persuades his Father, the
Duke, forthwith to join, and they immediately attempt the Besiege of Leith,
which the French reinforce with Two Thousand Men, sent over under Monsieur de
la Broche, with whom came the Bishop of Ameans and three Doctors of Sorbon, to
dispute, if Occasion offered, the Points of Religion then in controversy. De
la Broche, in capacity of an Ambassador, designed a Conference with the Lords
of the Congregation, which they refused, requiring the return of the French
into France, and the dismantling of Leith, otherwise no Treaty could be
admitted.

The Queen Regent sends Forman, the King at Arms, to them, adjuring them to
return to their former Obedience to their King and Queen, and to the known Laws
of the Land, assuring them, that if they will promise to Disband their Army
then at Edinburgh, her Forces at Leith (who had never been sent over, but that
their repeated Insurrections necessitated their Majesty's to do it) should soon
be returned, notwithstanding the great Contempt offered to the French
Ambassadors, to whom they would not so much as vouchsafe a Conference,
Protesting withal, that nothing should be wanting in her, to condescend to any
thing, not inconsistent with Piety toward God, and Loyalty toward their
Majesty's: In fine, She requires the Duke, his Son, and all others of the
Nobility and Gentry, forthwith to withdraw from all such as were resolved still
to disturb the Peace, under the pain of High -- Treason. The Lords receiving
this Message, are enraged, and in answered thereunto, return her a Suspension
from her Government, and in the King and Queens Name, require her to forbear
all exercise of Power under the pretense of any Title of Regent; assuring her
that against all Hazards they resolved to regain the Town of Leith out of the
hands of the French, and therefore out of the respect they had to her as their
Queens Mother, they requested her to withdraw out of the Town during the time
of the Siege; the like request they sent to the French Ambassadors and all
their Soldiers, out of the respect they bare to the French: the day following
they send their Commands, requiring all Scotch Men, then in Leith, to forsake
the Town; then the Besiege, or rather Blocking up of the Town began; some
Skirmishes there were in which the Besiegers had still the worst of it, and in
all Attempts were repulsed with loss; and what added to their Calamity, they
begin to be jealous one of another; the common Soldiers began to Mutiny for
want of Pay, whereupon they intended to mint their Plate, but wanted Tools to
do it: in their streights they address to the English, to whom John Cockhurne
is dispatched to Sir Ralph Sadler and Sir James Crofts, Governors of Barwick
and the places adjacent, to supply their present necessity with relief: some
Money is granted, but Cockburne in his return is surprised by the Earl of
Bothwell, and sent Prisoner to the Queen. The Besieged frequently make their
Sallies out of the Town to the great prejudice of the Besiegers, in so much,
that at last they are forced to retire to Sterlin, where a Council was called
to consider what was to be done in this Exigency: John Knox Preached before the
Council; and persuading to a further action, and a constant prosecution of the
work begun, be assures them of Success: The result of the Meeting was, to send
a Message to Queen Elizabeth, and crave her Assistance: William Mettelane is
dispatched, and finds Friendly entertainment in the English Court: He solicites
her Majesty's aid in the common cause of Religion and Liberty: Many of the
Queen's Council dislike the Proposal, and declare, That help in this cause of
Subjects against Sovereign Authority, would be a President of most pernicious
and dangerous consequence; others of her Council think and speak more
favorably of it: At length the Queen's Zeal for Religion, and Enmity against
the French, prevail with her, and hopes of Assistance is given; at Barwick
Commissioners meet to sign Articles of Agreement, which was, That in case any
Foreigner should Invade either Kingdoms, mutual assistance is promised the
Queen to pay the English Auxiliaries in Scotland, and the Scottish Auxiliaries
in England; and whatever. Spoils were taken from the Enemy, to be converted to
the Queen's use; the Scots to receive and exercise the same Religion professed
and used in the Church of England, and to send Pledges into England, to remain
there as Hostages during the Marriage of the French King and the Scots Queen,
and one Year after.

All Sealed and Ratified at Barwick, the 27th. of February 1560. Six thousand
Foot and Two thousand Horse Auxiliaries, are sent down under the Command of the
Lord Gray, unto whom the Lords of the Congregation join their Army at
Hadington, and in this conjunction they march toward Leith, lay Siege to it
both by Sea and Land, an English Navy lying then in the Road, many bloody
Skirmishes there were on both sides: The French Bishop comes into the Scots
Camp, and from thence he went to the Castle at Edinburgh, to speak with the
Queen Regent, retired thither for her safety and protection, and earnestly
endeavors a Peace, but all in vain, the Scots not harkening to any, unless the
French were all in the first place sent home, which could not be yielded to: at
this time a great Fire happened in Lies, which put the Besieged into a great
Consternation; the English likewise fired the two Mills belonging to the
Garrison, and assault the Town by Storm, but are repulsed with loss, the French
quickly repairing the Breaches the English made; who at length begin to think
the work tedious and full of trouble, they send to Queen Elizabeth, to know her
pleasure; the Duke of Norfolk encourages them much by sending them new
Supplies, no less than Two thousand well appointed men, Assuring them that
neither Men nor Money should be wanting so long as it was in his power to
supply them; promising, if need were, his own presence; in the mean time he
sends his Tent, and advises them to set it up in the view of the Town: This
gives Life to the business again, the Siege is renewed, and the Queen of
England sends Sir William Cecil, one of the Privy Counselors and Secretary of
State, and Doctor Wootton, Dean of York, one also of the Council, to treat with
the French in order to a Peace; a meeting is appointed in July following,
Edinburgh Castle; a Woman of singular wisdom and virtue, honored by most of
the worst of her enemies, and her Death much lamented by all; after her death
Commissioners are appointed and meet, to treat of an Accommodation, which had
then been agreed upon, but that the French insisted upon a freedom to carry
home whatsoever Booty, Bag or Paggage they had got, whereof they had store by
their Winters plundering of Fife, which would not be granted by the Scots; and
therefore Acts of Hostility, Sallies and Onsets are made with various fortune
and success: At last both Parties sufficiently weary and straightened in
Provisions, the Treaty is renewed, and Articles agreed on, (viz.) That neither
the French King, nor his Queen of Scotland, should thenceforth, use the Arms or
Titles of England; and all Letters Sealed with those Arms should be called in
within six Months space; that the French transport themselves with their
Booties, Bag and Baggage, within twenty days, and that the English supply them
with such Ships as they should want, they leaving Pledges with the English
until the safe return of their Ships: That Leith be delivered up to the Scots
and Dismantled: That the Forts built by the French at Dunbar, be demolished:
That the English immediately after the performance of Articles, do return into
England: That the French should still keep a Garrison at Inch-Keeth, and Dunbar
Castle: That an Act of Oblivion first past by the Queen and the French King her
Husband, be afterward Confirmed by their Authority in the ensuing Parliament
to be held in August: On these Terms Peace was Proclaimed.

Soon after the French King Francis dies; the Queen heavily afflicted with
grief for the death of her Husband, and much perplexed by the turbulent
condition of the state of France, resolves to return into Scotland, and
fearing the English Navy, by reason of an Offense given to Queen Elizabeth, by
placing the English Arms in the Scots Coat, she privately goes aboard a small
Vessel (which none would suspect to be Fraught with so rich a Cargo) and safely
arriveth in Scotland; immediately before her arrival, her base Brother James
procured a Commission from her to hold a Parliament, which was accordingly
done: The French Ambassador moves, That the French League may be renewed, and
that which the English lately made may be broke off, and that the Revenues of
Ecclesiastic Persons may be restored to them: But the Scots Parliament (now
wholly constituted of such as pretend to the Reformation of Religion) answered,
That the French League should be continued, but that with the English could not
be broken without the greatest Dishonor and Ingratitude in the world: The
Restoration of the Revenue of the Ecclesiastics was wholly rejected, and an
Act passed for the demolishing all the Abbeys and Priories in the Kingdom,
which was immediately put in execution.

The sorrowful Queen being arrived, had no better remedy than Silence and
Convenience, and was forced to condescend, That the state of Religion, as it
was lately renewed and established by the Lords of the Congregation, should not
by her nor her Authority, suffer any Change or Alteration; no Mass to be said
publicly any where except in her Majesty's Chapel, which was all the
indulgence the Lords would afford her. The Ministers (moved both by their own
Zeal, and the Instigation of the Earl of Arran) Cry out and Thunder in their
Pulpits against this Permission, and Admonish the Lords of their Duty, to
reduce her, to order a submission to, and a susception of the Directory for
public Worshin: The Nobility, notwithstanding all these overloud Clamours,
encroach not upon the Queen's privilege, for which the Ministers turn the edge
of their Tongues as sharp as Swords against them, crying out of their Apostasy
and lukewarmness in the Cause of God.

William Mettelane is sent Ambassador to England, to tender to Queen
Elizabeth, the great Respects of the Scottish Queen toward her; and with this
Message the Lords sent also their Letters to the Queen, humbly thanking her for
her late Seasonable Assistance, and requesting her to continue her Princely
Favor toward their Queen, and a firmer establishment of Union between both
Kingdoms, as an Expedient thereunto, they propound to her Majesty, That she
would be pleased to pass an Act of Parliament, Declaring, That in case her self
should dye without Issue, the Queen of Scots to be her rightful Heir and lawful
Successor to her Crown. This last motion highly displeased Queen Elizabeth,
saying, That it was most unreasonable to require her to Sew her Winding Sheet
with her own hands, and to expose it every day to her own view.

After much Debate, it was at last agreed upon, First, That the Scots Queen
should forbear the English Arms and Title of the Queen of England and Ireland,
during the Life of Queen Elizabeth. Secondly, That the Queen of England or her
Heirs of her Body, if such should happen, should not do any thing to the
prejudice of the Queen of Scotlands Title to the Crown of England. Thirdly,
That a mutual Care may be had to preserve the Peace and Union of both Kingdoms.

These things happily concluded, there was a fair prospect of a flourishing
State, had not the heart-burnings and emulations of the Religioso's of Scotland
fermented, and by the restless Tongues of their Preachers, discomposed all
their Settlement, they who swell the least punctilio's, that are disgustful to
them, into Enormous Crimes, did not whisper but cry aloud that the Queens
designs were all to reinduce Idolatry and Superstition, the Earl of Arran
contriving withal to get the Queens Person into his Power and Disposal (the
safety of her Person being the only rub in his way to the Crown.

But the Queen having timely Notice of all these Projects, appointed a good
Guard to Attend her Person, which was maliciously intercepted by Adversaries as
a Foundation preparatory to a Tyrannical and Arbitrary Government. The Winter
following the Queen knowing what influence her Base-Brother James had in the
Affections of the People, and Popular Ministers, whose grand Patron he was, and
not Ignorant of his own Ambition is soon moved to Create him Earl of Mar, and
soon after Earl of Murray, which highly displeased the Earl of Huntley the
greatest Peer in the North, conceiving himself and his Jurisdiction thereby
prejudiced, and proved the grounds of a great and lasting feud between them.
Moreover Anne Keith the Earl Martials Daughter is given him in Marriage, his
Greatness is not only Envied by the Gourdons, but also by the Hamiltons, who
look upon him as a dangerous Competitor to the Crown, mutual contrivances there
are to Ruin each other, the Hamiltons as it was suggested, Conspiring the Death
of Murray, by the Wisdom of the Queen their Feuds are kept from breaking out
into open Hostility, only in the North a Skirmish happened between Huntley and
Murray, in which Huntley himself was taken Prisoner, and immediately dyed, not
so much with the Wounds in his Body as in his Mind, his two Sons John and Adan
are likewise taken Prisoners, and carried to Aberdeen: John is there beheaded,
whose untimely death was much bewailed by the Queen, Adam being very young is
pardoned, the Eldest Son George flies to Hamilton his Father in Law, for
Sanctuary, who begs his Pardon of the Queen, but by the prevailing Power of
Murray (who then overruled all) young Huntley must be delivered up, and is
sent Prisoner to Dunbar, from thence he is called to Edinburgh, and there
Condemned for Treason, and returned a Prisoner to Dunbar.

In May following the Queen is Crowned in great State at Edinburgh, and about
Michaelmas after by the Queens favor and approbation, Matthew Stuart Duke of
Lennox, after 22. Years absence returns to Scotland, and has his whole Estate
restored to him to the great content of the Queen: the next Spring his Son
Henry the Lord Darnly also arrives, a man of a very comely and proper Person,
and behaves himself in the Court with such Civility and Prudence that the Queen
with small Arguments was induced to cast her Affections upon him, and to accept
him for her Husband, in order whereunto he is first Created Duke of Rothesay,
and Earl of Ross, and at last (in despite of all the opposition that Murray
could make by the instigation of Queen Elizabeth against it, who to prevent the
Marriage sent Sir Nicholas Throgmorten to Require Lennox and Darnly to return
to England upon pain of Confiscation of their Estates) the Marriage is
Solemnized at Edinburgh July, 28. with consent of most of the Nobility, and by
the public Herald, Henry and Mary are Proclaimed King and Queen of Scotland,
this Marriage uniteth Hamilton and Murray, who with Arguile, Glencarne, Rothes
and others, Combine against the present Proceeding, and upon the Summons to
return to their former Obedience, they all refuse, and are Proclaimed Traitors:
the King and Queen advance to Glascow with an Army of 4000 men and upwards, the
Rebels stay at Paisley, not wholly Unanimous in their Counsels, Hamilton's
Advice tending to no less than the destruction of the King and Queen, ever
inculcating in the Ears of his Accomplices, 'That howsoever private Feuds might
be otherwise compromised, yet the Enmity of Kings could not any other way be
extinguished but by their Death; the rest of the Nobility knowing this to be an
Hellish Design of his own, out of the Ruin of the Queen to raise himself to the
Throne of Scotland, divide from Hamilton and retire toward Dumfreis, and from
thence they Fly into England.

About this time some Discontents unhappily arise between the King and the
Queen, and by the occasion of the ambitious and malicious surmises of ill
disposed men, the King is Enraged (...) Seigneur David a French man, the
Secreta^^, as an Instrument of Mischief between him and the Queen, their Wicked
Design to make the Breach greater between them not being discerned by the King,
he (as being naturally too flexible and credulous) is wrought upon to join with
them in the Destruction of the Secretary. Morton, Linsay and Ruthen, besides
five or six more Armed Men, himself first entering the Queens Chamber, and
Ruthen following him, he finds the Secretary set at Supper with the Queen, and
spying them he arose, and the Queen offering to interpose, he clasps fast hold
about her wast, who not knowing the Design, cries out, but the King forcing
David from his hold, pacified her assuring her That there was no hurt intended
her, only the destruction of one Villain that was about her, whom he runs
through with his Sword, and then they all drag his wounded Body into an outward
Room, and striving who should give him most wounds they cut his Body all to
pieces.

The City of Edinburgh hearing of a Tumult at Court, but altogether Ignorant
what the matter might be, put themselves suddenly into Arms, and forthwith
march to Holy-rood-house, the Kings Palace and the Guard being full of Armed
men, the King calls to them out of a Window, that there was no danger
attending them, himself and the Queen being in health and safety, he thanked
them for their Care and Readiness, and advised them for the present to return
home peaceably to their Houses.

The Day following the Noble men who lately fled into England appear (according
to a late Summons they had received) to Answer what should be objected against
them, no Judge, Accuser nor Witness, appearing against them, they there protest
their readiness judicially to Answer all things chargeable upon them, every one
returns in Peace to his own Lodging.

The Queen Accompanied with the King, retireth to Dunbar, and admits Murray
and Arguile into her Favor, and Consult the raising of some Forces to avenge
the Death of the Secretary Murdered in her own presence, the chief of the
Murderers were fled into England, others into the Mountains, and of the meaner
sort some were Fined, some Imprisoned, and some Executed.

Her Majesty soon after upon the 29th. of June is brought to bed of a Young Son
our Second Solomon, James the Sixth, and great State and Solemnity there was at
the Christning, where were present Three Ambassadors, One from England, and
another from France, and a Third from the Duke of Savoy: but the King being out
of the Queens Favor, was not admitted to the Solemnity, but repairing to his
Fathers house fell Sick on the way, not without suspicion of Poison, there he
continued languishing until the January following, when the Queen went to visit
him, and all differences being made up, he resolved though not well, to return
with her to Edinburgh, where Lodgings remote from the Noise of the Palace, for
Quiet, Privacy, and such like Convenience, (as it was said) were provided for
him, but he had not stayed here above a Formight before his Lodgings were blown
up with Cunpowder, Kirk-field within the City of Edinburgh, Clothed with
nothing but his Shirt, his other Clothes and Slippers laid by him, but not a
Bone of him broken, no bruise nor blackness was seen upon him, nor any
alteration of that kind appeared in his Body, which was also free from all
smell of Fire or Powder.

The News of this Murder amazed all, and astonished the Afflicted Queen almost
to Death, then lying at Holy-rood-house, and there was nothing but Sadness to
be seen in the Faces of all men, every one crying out upon Murray and Morton,
as the Contrivers of this Horrid Murder, which Murray perceiving, cunningly
endeavors to transfer the Guilt upon Bothwell, by the secret surmises of
some (whereof there were a great many) of his Emissaries, and causes Papers to
be scattered about the City for that purpose, not without some Reflections on
the Queen.

Bothwell sensible of the weight of this Burden thrown upon him; earnestly
Labors with Arguile the Justice-General of the Kingdom to Discover if it
were possible, both the Contrivers and Actors of the Horrible Murder, all
imaginable Enquity was made, but nothing found. Lennox at the instigation of
Murray, presses the Queen to bring Bothwell to Trial, Bothwell receives
Commands from the Queens Majesty to appear before the Justice General, and a
Jury of his Peers are appointed in Order to his Trial upon the Twelfth of
April, the High Court of Justice meets, and all Persons concerned have due and
timely Notice given them. Bothwell is Empannelled, and notwithstanding Lennox
his Protestation against the hasty Proceedings of the Court, alleging he had
not time to prepare his Evidence, Bothwell is Acquitted by his Peers, but this
Acquittance did not so much disburden him of the King's Murder, as it loaded
him with his Enemies Malice.

His Ruin and the Queens too, are still contriving, and as a more Politic
Method than that of Slander, Bothwell is Advanced in his Reputation, and cried
up not so much by his Friends as his Enemies, for a man of the greatest
Gallantry in the Nation, and in the Court he is Exalted to the Skies, though
amongst the Popularity by the same Authors debased to Hell. The Queen her self
made sensible of his Worth, and the many Extraordinary Services he had done
her, begins to show him more than ordinary Favor, Murray tells the Queen That
there was a Necessity for her to Marry, and that to some Peer of the Realm, of
Worth and Valor, Times being so Tumultuous and Stubborn that they could not
bear the Government of a Woman, far less of a Stranger, and therefore she must
not think of a Foreigner, nay some Report, that Murray himself whispers her in
the Ear, That Bothwell was the fittest, the only Man indeed to make her an
Husband, Bothwell in the mean time put on by perfidious persuasions on all
hands to attempt this Royal Match, is much perplexed between Ambition and Fear,
durst not listen to it, most of the Nobility subscribe an Instrument in which
they declare their Desires and Assent to the Marriage with the Queen,
Protesting that they would maintain him in it, with their Lives and Estares in
despite of all who should oppose it, and assuring him that the Queen her self
would approve of what they had done. This Instrument gave more Spirit to his
Pride, and his Ambition suggested to him that the Queen designed her Favors as
Indications of her Love, and Invitations to his belief of it, whereupon he
resolves with himself being now Divorced from his Lady, to Attempt the Marriage
of the Queen, to that end he Seiseth on her Person in her return from Sterling
to Edinburgh, and with a Guard of 500 Horse, carries her to Dunbar, the Queen
Enraged with his Rudeness, Checked him with all the Favors Conferred on him,
charge him with the highest Ingratitude and Disloyalty. Bothwell with all
Submission acknowledges his Offense; beseeching her that nothing could have
moved him to forget that Obedience and Reverence due to her Sacred Majesty save
the Force and Impulse of Love, not lightly begun but kindled and kindly
Cherished by Sage Counsels, and Desires of most of the Loyal Nobility.

The Queen more suddenly now surprised than before, Expresses her dislike of
the Motion, though with some abatement of her Wrath, she being now under his
Power from whence she knew not how to be delivered at present, the Earl
produces the Instrument subscribed by the Noblemen, declaring their desires
and assents to the Marriage, then the Queen thirsting after her Liberty with a
more serene Aspect, told him that nothing could be done in a matter of that
Concernment unless she had her wonted Freedom, and the Nobility Liberty of
Access to her, Bothwell perceiving that this was all that could be obtained of
her, takes off his Guard, and honorably attends her to Edinburgh, and the
Queen peaceably resorts with a very Noble Train to the Council Chamber, where
most of the Nobility Advise her to listen to Bothwell, whereunto when she had
given her Consent by virtue of their Counsels, and fastened her Affections upon
him, every where by the underhand dealings of its Contrivers, the People are
suborned and encouraged to Cry out against the Match, but notwithstanding the
Clamors of the People, and the forwardness of John Craig Minister of the
Parish, who refused to publish the Banns, and Protested against the Marriage;
it was Celebrated upon the Fifteenth of May, in the Palace of Holy-rood-house,
by Adam Bishop of Orkney, after the manner of the Reformed Church.

And now their Enemies begin to appear more open Faced, for the prevention of
their designed Mischiefs, the Queen desired the Nobility to renew their
Engagement which they had formerly Subscribed, the King and Queen promising the
Restipulation of their Protection, which was accordingly done, Murray only
refuses to Subscribe the Bond, and gets leave to go into France, having first
set some on work again to Embroyl the State, and to Blow up the Coals of
Rebellion, the chief of them were the Earls of Arguile, Morton, Mar, Athol,
Glencarne, and the Lords Lindsey and Boyd, but Arguile Repents him of the
Confederacy, returns to his Obedience and discovers the whole Design to the
Queen: The others adjoining to themselves the Lord Hume and others of the
South, on the sudden they raise an Army of Two Thousand Horse, and closely
Besieged the Castle of Borthwick, wherein the King and Queen lay, who next day
happily Escaped, the Queen putting her self under the disguise of man's habit,
came to Dunbar, where they Secured themselves in the Castle, and thither
resorted diverse of the Loyal Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty, for the Safety
of the Queen, who resolves to Advance with her Forces toward Leith to disturb
her Enemies then ranting at Edinburgh.

They hearing of the Queens measures, forthwith March, and nigh Musselburgh
came in sight of the Queens Forces. The Armies lying in View of each other and
ready to join in Battle, the French Ambassador interposeth himself, and
endeavors a Pacification, assuring the Lords of the Queens Gracious
Inclinations to them, and that she was ready to Pardon and Pass an Act of
Oblivion for all that was past.

They Insolently Replied, That they came not to Crave her Favor, Nor (said
Glencarn) to Ask Pardon, but rather to give it. The French Ambassador seeing no
hopes of an Accommodation, retires to Edinburgh: the Queens Army begins to
Divide and grow Mutinous, the Queen sends a Messenger to the Conspirators,
desiring them to send William Kircady the Lord of Grange; to whom she purposed
to make some Overtures of Peace, and in the mean while no Acts of Hostility
were to be offered, Kircady is sent, and the Cessation Agreed to, Bothwell
returns to Dunbar, and the Queen offers to come into the Adverse Army,
assurance being given her, That her Army should March off and Return without
Molestation to their several Homes or respective Habitations.

They Accord to this, and the deserted Queen very debasingly Attired comes into
the Rebels Quarter, where she was entertained with such Scorn and Contempt,
with such Vile and Opprobrious Language from the Soldiers, as is neither
Tolerable not Fit to be mentioned. One Banner they had Contrived with the
Picture of the Dead King, and the Infant King James by him, with this
Inscription, Judge and Revenge my Cause O Lord! This they carried upon Two
Spears before her wherever she went, until at last her Spirits over-burdened
with Grief, Edinburgh, all bespattered with Gore and Reproach, and her Face so
bedaubed with Dust and her own Tears which she had plentifully shed, that she
was indeed a most rueful and deplorable Spectacle to behold, and all who had
any sparks of Loyalty or Sense of Duty in them, are much Afflicted at the
Sight; that Night she was sent to Craigmillars Lodgings, who was then Provost
of the Town, the next day she is Conveyed by Ruthen and Lindsey to Lochlevix
Castle, a Place Encompassed with waters on every side for nigh well a Mile.

Bothwell during the time of the Queens Discourse with Kircady, makes his
Escape first into Orkney, and from thence into Scotland. The Conspirators send
to the Imprisoned Queen, and require her to Resign the Crown in Favor of her
Son, and to name Guardians for him during his Minority, the distressed Queen is
forced to yield to all that they had Confidence to Demand; She was through Fear
and Flattery induced to a Resignation of the Crown under her Hand, subscribing
the Writ with Tears flowing from her Eyes, the Tuition of her Young Son is
Committed to James Earl of Murray, John Duke of Castle-Roy, to the Earls of
Lennox, Arguile, Athol, Morton, Glencarn and Mar, James Earl of Murray is by
this time returned from his Retirement in France, and by these Lords he is
Chosen Viceroy, and the Young King now Two Years of Age, is Crowned at Sterlin.

Murray is Confirmed in his Government as Viceroy in a Parliament Assembled,
August 25. Bothwell, who now lay lurking with some few Ships about Orkney:
Kircady is sent against him, who upon Intelligence fled into Denmark, and there
miserably ended his Days, but with his last Breath Cleared the Queen of all
Consent, Privity, or Knowledge of the King's Death, as did also Hephorn, Paris,
Daglish, and other Servants of Bothwell, that were put to Death by Murray for
the Murder, who upon the Gallows charged it upon Murray and Morton, as the
Conspirators with Bothwell.

Some Ambassadors arrive in Scotland from England and France, and desire
Admittance to the Queen, but are peremptorily denied it by the Viceroy, the
hard Usage of the Queen, and the Insolence of that Ill Woman the Mother of the
Viceroy was such, that many even of her Enemies who knew the Truth of it, were
bowed into a Compassion toward her, and began to contrive some Expedient for
her Liberty, which the Queen her self not long after by her own Wisdom and
Prudence, brought to pass. Guarded and Watched she was by the Viceroy's
nearest Allies and trustiest Servants, his Mother and Three Brothers, which
were of another Father, had the Charge of her, in a Place impregnable, and out
of which an Escape had been impossible considering the breadth of the Lake that
encompassed it, had not God turned the hearts of some of her Enemies toward
her, such was her Deportment in that grievous Restraint, and her Meek and
Cheerful entertainment of all Affronts put upon her by the Viceroy's Mother,
That one of the Sons, Half-Brother to the Viceroy, endued with some Principles
of Ingenuity, and in whom were some Remains of Loyalty: out of a sense of Duty
toward the Queen, begs her Pardon for all past, and her Favor for the future,
promising his Service in order to her Freedom. A Boat is forthwith prepared,
and with a few that were made privy to the Honest Design, the Queen escapes
April 5. Seaton with some few Horse were ready to receive her, the first Night
she is Lodged privately at Nudrie in West-Lothian, and from thence the next day
she goes to Hamilton, where a considerable Number of the Nobility and Gentry
meets her in Arms, and a great many of her Enemies Revolt from the Viceroy,
and return to their Obedience.

The Viceroy forth with Advances with an Army against her, and in a Battle at
Landside near Glascow, England to shelter her self under the Protection of
Queen Elizabeth, her nearest Cousin.

The Regent or Viceroy, after his Victory packeth a Parliament, wherein diverse
of the Queens Friends and Adherents are declared Traitors, and their Estates
Confiscate. Himself Marches into diverse Places of the Kingdom, spoils and lays
wast, and demollisheth the Houses and Castles of such as continued in their
Loyalty.

Queen Elizabeth hearing of the Scotch Queens Refuge into England, Commanded
her by a Condoling Letter to stay at the Lord Scroops House until she had
further Order from her, and in the interim writes to the Viceroy of the
danger of the Example, in which all the Kings and Crowns of the World were
concerned, and desiring some Commissioners might be sent to her to give her a
full Account of all their Proceedings against their Queen.

The Viceroy having the French King his Enemy already, durst not run the
hazard of Offending the Queen of England too, whereas now his Friend, in whose
displeasure he might plainly read his own Destruction, he resolves to gratify
the Queen of England, and to send Commissioners to show her the best Prospect
of the Story: but the Nobility ashamed of the thing, refuse to be sent upon so
Unworthy and Dishonorable a Message, or to be Employed in a matter so
detestable, he resolves himself to undertake it, which accordingly he did,
Accompanied with one or two of the Rebellious Nobility, and George Buchanan a
devoted Slave to the Viceroy, whose heart did as much thirst after the Blood
of the Queen, as ever his Venomous Pen had Surfeited it self in the pollution
of her Sacred Name, which so wounded his gangered Conscience, when it was too
late, That he Craved of God no longer time to Live, than he might be able to
Cure those Sores, and Salve those Wounds which himself had made in the Fame and
Reputation of that Good and Virtuous Queen.

The Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of Sussex, and Sir Ralph Sadler, Commissioners
for the Queen of England, give them a Meeting at York, whither likewise
repaired some Agents for the Exiled Queen, who gave their Audience, Protesting
that they did not appear there before the English Commissioners as competent
Judges to determine or give Sentence in the Affairs of their Sovereign Lady;
but rather as in the presence of Friends and Neighbors to convince them of the
unparalle'ld Wrongs and Injuries done to the Person and Honor of their Queen,
(through whose sides they had wounded all the Kings and Supreme Magistrates in
the World) and to Crave the Assistance of the English Queen, her nighest
Kinswoman in the World, either to persuade her Rebellious Subjects to receive
her again as their Sovereign, and restore her to all the Rights and Privileges
of her Crown; or that failing, to grant her so considerable Forces as might be
able to reduce them to Order and Obedience, which would be a Concession no less
Honorable to the Queen of England, than Profitable to the Queen of Scotland.

As a Counterpoize to this Protestation, the English Commissioners do also
Protest, That they allowed not of that Protestation to the Prejudice of the
Superiority that the Kings of England had always Claimed over the Kings of
Scotland, which now belonged to the Queen their Mistress in the Right of the
Crown of England. Then they proceeded to the Business; the Commissioners for
the Exiled Queen first laid open all the Grievances and Wrongs that were thrown
upon her, and under which she now labored in a Languishing Exile. The
Commissioners for the Young King (in whose Name the Commission ran) recriminate
and highly Charge the Queen (no ways Accountable to them) supposing or hoping
the English Commissioners to have Power to pass Sentence against their Queen,
in case they could by any means make them believe her Guilty of those things
they Charge her withal. But being frustrate in these Hopes, and hearing every
Article of the Charge distinctly and fully Answered by their Queens
Commissioners, the Viceroy contends, That nothing was done, which in the like
Cases had not been done by their Predecessors, and their late proceedings being
Confirmed by Act of Parliament, they were now past recall, and could not be
Abrogated by any private person whatsoever, whereby he imagined that he had
prevented all Arguments that might be offered for a Peaceable Reception of the
Queen to her Rights, which were now alienated by Act of Parliament.

But the English Commissioners not satisfied with these things; they urge That
the true Causes of such rigorous Proceedings with their Queen might be
produced; the knowledge whereof was the end of their present Meeting. The
Viceroy having nothing else to offer, desired that first, the Queen of England
would Engage for the Tuition of their Young King, Letters are sent to Acquaint
the Queen with this motion: Her Majesty desires two Commissioners of the
Viceroy's Faction to be sent to her to London, to inform her more clearly in
the whole matter. Two Commissioners are accordingly sent Metellane and
Mackgill: but the Queen upon second Thoughts judges it necessary that the
Regent himself be there, who repairs to London, where after much Debate before
the Queen and the Council, at last the Commissioners are dismissed, and no more
Determined at London than at York.

The Viceroy returns home, and not long after the Lord Boyd brings Letters
from both Queens to the Scots Parliament, wherein the Queen of England makes a
Threefold Overture in behalf of Queen Mary: First, That she might be restored
to her former Government, or this not Granted, That in the second place she
might be admitted to Reign in Title only,

The former Two were peremptorily Denied, and the Last had never been yielded
to, but that they were well assured that the Queen would never Accept of it.

The Queen of Scotland's Proposals were likewise Read, desiring them to Appoint
certain Judges to take her Marriage with Bothwell into Cognizance, That if it
did appear Unlawful, that it might be accordingly adjudged and annulled. The
Letter is Debated, but no Answer returned, only this Concluded, That the Queen
of England be first Advertised, with a Suggestion, that this Motion tended only
to make way for her Marriage to the Duke of Norfolk, wherein her Majesty of
England was indeed much concerned. A Messenger is dispatched with the
Parliaments Resolves concerning both Letters: at his Arrival the Queen of
England was Offended that they should send so mean and inconsiderable a Person
to Treat with Her of so great and important Affairs as the Rights of Princes,
he being one Wood a Domestic of the Regents: He returning in a disgust another
is sent, Pitcarne Abbot of Dunsterling, no sooner was he entered the English
Court, but the Duke of Norfolk was sent to the Tower, Scotland discovered,
Pitcarne is respectfully Treated, and freely heard in behalf of the Regent, and
at last is sent home with Thanks for many Offices done, and Assurance of all
Favor and Assistance to the Viceroy. Which Success of their Message so puffed
up the Faction and so animated Murray, that the Government became intolerable,
and so uneasy to some, that Exasperated with Fear, Rage and Revenge, resolved
upon the Ruin of the Regent whatever were the result of the Attempt: and
accordingly as the Viceroy road through Linlithquo, in his Expedition to the
Borders with some few Troops of Horse, one James Hamilton discharges a Pistol
upon him, and lodging a Bullet in his Bowels in some few Hours it put a period
to his Life, Hamilton safely Escaping by a Postern Door.

The Viceroy thus surprised with Death, put all things into a new Confusion,
the Queens Party begin to stir, but to little purpose, they being Awed and
Checked, and the Adverse Party Encouraged and Strengthened by the Assistance of
the Earl of Sussex, and Sir William Drury, Commanders in Chief for Queen
Elizabeth, upon the Borders of England. So that the Queens Friends dare not put
her Affairs to the Issue of a Battle; in the mean time the French and Spanish
Ambassadors press Queen Elizabeth to be more Kind and Favorable to her Cousin
the Queen of Scotland, whom now she had made a Close Prisoner. The Imprisoned
Queen no less incessantly and importunately prays for her Self by her Letters
in Writing (wherein she had a most Excellent Faculty, as those Copies do make
undeniably evident) the grand matter of her Request was for a fair hearing
before her own Person.

Queen Elizabeth sends to Scotland, giving the Adverse Faction Notice that
she had promised a Conference for Composing, if possible, all Differences, upon
condition that the Queens Party should not stir nor endeavor a forceable
restitution, withal wishing them not to choose a Viceroy or Regent, until her
pleasure was further made known unto them. They not daring to displease Queen
Elizabeth, on whose favor and relief they depended, and finding the necessity
of their Affairs to require a Man in Supreme Power and Authority, by a knack of
their own invention they choose an Inter-Roy, Matthew Earl of Lennox, the same
in Power, though not in Name with Viceroy: Queen Elizabeth soon after advises
them to constitute him Viceroy accordingly as they had formerly done to Murray.

Which being effected, Viceroy sends the Earl of Morton, Pitcarne, and Mack
gill; to the Conference appointed by Queen Elizabeth, with the French, and
Spanish Ambassadors.

In this Conference Queen Elizabeth, had the parience (to the astonishment of
all wise and honest men) to hear the rights of the Crown of Scotland (pretended
by Morton to be Elective) and her nighest Kinswoman infinitely defamed and
callumniated; that tender privilege of all Princes, or Supreme Magistrates,
(viz.) the immunity of their Sacred Persons from Capital Censures by Courts of
their own Subjects, not only disputed but enveighed against and condemned: a
Topic doubtless very ungrateful to her, as being equally concerned in it, had
her English Subjects been then of the same Rebellions temper that the Scots
were: at the conclusion of this Conference the Queen declared that she had
received no satisfaction either in the general Argument, or in the particular
Case of their Queen, and therefore desired that they would hearken to an
accommodation of all differences between them and their Queen.

This was peremptorily refused by them as not being empowered by their
Commission, Elizabeth thought it not safe to enlarge. This nullity of
proceedings left all things in confusion, the English Ambassador Sir William
Drury, laboring for a Cessation of Arms between both parties who had had many
bikerings and skirmishes to the effusion of much blood, Sterlin, by a Party of
the Lord Hamiltons, and in his stead the Earl of Mar is chosen Viceroy, who
by his single Valor defended the Castle of Sterlin, Repulsed the Enemy, and
Rescued the Prisoners that Hamilton was carrying away, in which Rescue Morton
was Killed by a Bullet that had pierced his Bowels, in the midst of this
general Combustion, which filled all places with fears and dangers. Gods
Providence preserved the Young King now lodged in the Castle at Sterlin, the
Scene of the present Warlike transaction.

About this time the Duke of Norfolk that had been quitted the Tower upon his
Confession and Submission, Leicester with unfaithfulness in the matter,
relapsing into the same misdemeanors, was remanded to the Tower: Arraigned
before his Peers, proved guilty of Treason, and Executed; who upon his death
bewailed his breach of promise to the Queen, that had before graciously
Pardoned him, and contrary to his word, had again without the privity or leave
of his Sovereign dealt with Queen Mary about Marriage, and such weighty fairs,
but disowned all kindness for the Romish Religion, and declared himself to die
a Son of the Church of England.

The death of the Duke (when the distressed Queen in all her Letters to Queen
Elizabeth, had endeavored to excuse) was no small aggravation of her sorrow,
and for his sake or his Affection to her she fears the worse, and is now more
closely imprisoned than before: and by her confinement her Health is daily more
impaired, of which she sends many sad accounts to the Queen;

But to consummate her misery, after all this one Ballard an English Priest
with diverse Gentlemen, Conspire the death of Queen Elizabeth, and the
enlargement of Queen Mary, Babington a Gentleman of exceeding good Parts,
writes to Queen Mary a full account of the design they had, the Letter came
safe to the hands of her two Secretaries Man and Curle; who knowing the
averseness of their Lady the Queen to such wicked and detestable designs dare
do no otherwise than conceal the Letter from her, and themselves return an
Answer to it, Babington presuming it was the Queens Hand, shows the Letter to
diverse whom he supposed he might trust, and at last he commits that and all
other their Papers to the trust of one Gifford, who immediately carried them
all to Walsingham, Queen Elizabeth's Secretary, who upon the perusal of them
discovers the whole Plot; the Letter supposed to be Queen Mary's own, he
Communicates it to Queen Elizabeth and her Council, who immediately issue out
Warrants for the apprehending of the Conspirators, amongst the first of these
was Babington taken, and being examined touching his intercourse with Queen
Mary, confessed that he had treated on that unhappy subject with her, which
falsehood he supposed indeed to be truth, being imposed upon by the Forgery of
her Secretaries. After Examinatition and Conviction, they are all Condemned,
and Executed as Traitors.

Upon this discovery Queen Mary is still more closely imprisoned in
Fotheringham Castle, and the Guards set upon her are doubled, her Secretaries
taken from her and imprisoned, and Queen Elizabeth herself by Letter gave her
notice, that she had given Commission to her Council of State to hear her in
Judgment upon the Fact, with which she was accused; the same day Thomas
Bromeley, Knight, Lord Chancellor, and William Lord Burleigh, Lord Treasurer of
England, came to her and declared what Power they had given them in their
Commission, and desired her that she would calmly hear her Accusation, and what
were the Facts wherewith she was Charged, otherwise they both could and would
proceed against her for Contempt: to which she made Answer, That she was no
Subject, and that she would choose rather to Dye a thousand times than by such
an Acknowledgment bring a Prejudice upon her Royal Majesty. The Commissioners
do still insist upon the Tenor of their Commission; She demanded by what Law
Civil or Canon, they would proceed against her? they said, By the Law of
England. Which you have made (said she) on purpose to Trap and Ensnare me, to
which I am not subject, nor bound to submit. Hatton the Queens Vice-Chamberlain
pressed her still to Plead for her self, and to remove the supposed Guilt,
assuring her nothing could be matter of greater Joy to Queen Elizabeth, than
that she should Clear her Self of that Horrid Conspiracy, whereof she stood
Accused. Queen Mary proposes an Appeal to a Parliament, promising to Answer
there to the whole Charge, knowing (as she said) that their Commission was only
designed as a Net to Catch her in, and Entrap her Innocence. Then said the
Treasurer we will proceed to the Contempt, if you do (replied the Queen)
Examine your own Consciences, and provide for your Honors, so God render to
you and your Children, as you shall proceed against me in this Judgment.

The next Morning she sent for one of the Commissioners to know if her
Protestation against their Power or Authority to Try her (she being no Subject
but a Free and Absolute Prince) were Recorded, if it were she could then
Justify her self without any Prejudice to Royal Dignity, or the Crown of
Scotland, in particular; hereupon the Commissioners all do Assemble (but
Shrewsbury and Warwick, who were Sick) in the Chamber of Presence, where was
the Seat-Royal under a Cloth of State to represent the Majesty of Queen E.
zabeth, and upon the one side of it a Chair of Crimson Velvet for Queen Mary:
after a Speech made by Bromley the Lord Chancellor, her Charge is Read, wherein
she is Accused of Conspiring the Death of Queen Elizabeth, the Destruction of
the Realm, and the Subversion of the Established Religion. This done the Queens
Lawyers do most furiously Charge her with all imaginable Aggravations of the
Crime: but of all that they produced against her to Convince her of the Crimes
charged upon her, nothing stuck upon her or pinched her save the Letter to
Babington, whereunto her hand was set; Babington upon his Examination
acknowledged his Correspondence with her, and that he had received that Letter
from her. Man and Curle her Secretaries did Depose, That she dictated it unto
them, and with her own Hand had Subscribed it. To what Babington had Deposed
she Protested in the Presence of the great God, that she never received any
Letter from, nor writ any Letter to the said Babington, neither ever was she
made privy to, or knew of any written to or from him.

As to the Deposition of the Secretaries, if any such Deposition be made by
them, it is said she, in the Presence of God, a most Traitorous and Wicked
Calumny in them, who being my Secreraries are therefore of all men the most
perfidious in the World: I desire my Secretaries who are now Witnesses against
me, may be brought into my Presence where I am Confident, that they dare not
Adhere to any such Deposition pretended to be made by them. Her Secretaries
(who in the Judgment of most unbiased men were corrupted with Money) were
never produced nor brought into her Presence, Emanuensium qui pretio Corrupti
videbantur, testimonio, oppressa est. Camb. p. 493.
yet under the weight of their Testimonies was this Illustrious Princess
crushed a pieces: upon their Testimonies did the Commissioners proceed to give
Sentence against her, and accordingly after long Debates and Consultations,
Sentence was pronounced; which was immediately carried to Queen Elizabeth, and
presented to the Parliament then sitting at Westminster, for publication of it,
where the Sentence of Death was Confirmed, and Beal after some demurr upon it,
was sent by Queen Elizabeth to Acquaint the Condemned Queen with the Mournful
Sentence of her Death, and to tell her, That the Estates of the Realm met in
Parliament had Approved and Confirmed it, and demanded speedy Execution of the
Sentence for Justice, Security and Necessity; which sad News she received with
more than a Masculine Courage or Greatness of Mind, Praising God for all his
Dispensations toward her, and Acknowledging his Favors, she desired a Priest
to Administer the Sacrament unto her, and in all things to Assist her for a due
Preparation, and Christian Dispose to Dye.

The Cloth of State in her Chamber is beaten down by her Guard, and all Marks
of Royalty are taken from her: but the Execution of the Sentence is for a time
delayed by Queen Elizabeth. In the mean time the Condemned Queen writes to
Queen Elizabeth, Requesting Three Things of her, First, That she being Dead,
her Body might be Transported into France to be Buried there nigh the Ashes of
her dear Mother. Secondly, That she might not suffer clancularly, but in the
presence of her Servants. And Lastly, That they might all peaceably Enjoy those
small Legacies, which her Poor and Exiled Condition was capable of Bequeathing
them.

Neither was King James all this time remiss in his Endeavors to procure his
Mothers Deliverance, both by Persuasions and Communications if any way it might
be Effected, to whom the French King joined Endeavors, urging it with Reasons
of greatest Moment. That it was a Business so detestable, that it was without
Example to put an Anointed Sovereign into the hands of the Common Hangman; that
it was an Example of Dangerous Consequence, thus to Prostitute Sovereignty to
the Wills of Rebels: That the Condemned Queen was not only her nearest
Kinswoman, but her Guest, invited by her with Promise of Protection, and in
Assurance of it had taken Shelter under her Scepter: neither would it have been
denied her by any Christian Prince. That the Crime committed was done by her
Secretaries and not by her, and therefore Injustice not to be Charged upon her,
but them. That if this Sentence were Executed, all Christian Kings would
believe all their Honors and Rights wounded in that blow: and would
accordingly resent it and Avenge it. That her only Son King James, could never
in Honor or Duty set down quiet under such an Affront. And in fine, That
Heaven it self must needs Arm against so Bloody a Design: and therefore they
adjure her by all the Love she bears unto her self, by all the Respects she
bears to her own People the Nation of England, that she forbear the Execution.
And if she feared any Evil by her Life, to preserve her under the Power of
strong Guards, of which she could not want plenty in England, if she would not
accept of their Security for her Peaceable behavior.

But as an over-pressing Argument to all these the Enemies of Queen Mary, that
were continually present with Queen Elizabeth, beat it into her Ears, that the
Lives of Elizabeth and Mary were things incompatible, and for the Safety of
one, it was necessary to take away the other, which otherwise would be a
perpetual Sting to her, Sed mortua non mordet, the Grave was the securest
Prison she could be committed unto. Queen Elizabeth at last Signs the Warrant
for Execution, which being past the Broad-Seal, She next day sends Killigrew to
Davison to forbid the Command of Execution, telling him she would go another
way to work, but the Lords of the Council being Acquainted with it, they
without the Consent of the Queen wrested it from Davison, and sent Beale their
Clark with the Mandate, and Letters to the Earls of Shrewsbury, Kent, Derby,
and Cumberland, to see the same performed, which was the only thing that Queen
Elizabeth had to offer in her own Excuse to King James, Protesting that it was
done without her Knowledge, and quite contrary to her Intent, having, as she
said, told Davison her Secretary, her Resolution of taking New Measures, and
that the Warrant was to have remained in his hand without Execution, unless a
Foreign Invasion or Domestic broyls, which Queen Mary's Enemies always
suggested were daily designed, should render it necessary. Davison for his
Disobedience, was Committed, and cast out of Favor. Upon the News of Signing
the Warrant for Execution, King James Commanded the Ministers to remember the
Queen Mother in their Prayers, which they generally refused to do, though the
Form prescribed them, was Pious and Christian, being after this manner: That it
may please God to illuminate Her with the Light of his Truth, and to Save her
from the apparent danger wherein she was cast.


No sooner came the Order to the hands of the Noblemen, Fotheringham Castle,
the Prison where the Queen lay, and raising, her out of her Bed in the Morning,
they read their Commission to her, Advertising her That next day Morning she
was to Dye, which Order she received without any discomposure of Mind or change
of Countenance, saying, She did not think that her Sister Queen Elizabeth would
have brought her to that Extremity: but seeing it was her pleasure she was
willing to submit, Appealing to Heaven and Earth, to witness her Innocence,
adding that it was her Comfort that she dyed for and in the Religion of her
Forefathers, beseeching God to increase her Constancy and Courage to the
Measure of her Afflictions. After these words she besought the Commissioners
that she might be permitted to Confer with her Confessor, which was denied her,
tendering unto her in his stead the Bishop or Dean of Peterborough, whom she
refused, saying, God shall be my Comforter. One of the Commissioners, the Earl
of Kent, told her, your life will be the death, and your death the life of our
Religion: I thank you, said she, that I am thought worthy to dye for my
Religion. After that the Commissioners were rerired, she commanded her servants
that Supper should be dispatched, and according to her usual custom she Supped
soberly, and discoursed to such as were about her with a mavelous calmness
and tranquillity of mind; at the end of Supper she drank to all her servants
with a grave and modest cheerfulness, at which they all fell upon their knees,
mingling floods of Tears with their Wine, so soon as they were able to speak,
having a little digested their sorrow, they craved her pardon for their
remissness in those duties and services her Majesty had deserved at their
hands, and she desired them likewise to forget all her defects and failings
toward them, comforting them, with an invincible courage; and commanded them
to wipe away their Tears, and to rejoice with her for that she was now to be
delivered from an abyss of misery.

After Supper she wrote three Letters, one to the King of France, another to
the Duke of Guise, and a third to her Confessor: this done she took a review of
her Last Will, which she had before committed to writing, and caused an
Inventory of her Goods to be Read; and wrote down the names of those to whom
she had bestowed her Wardrobe; she also distributed money to some with her own
hand, afterward she retired herself, and being refreshed with a little sleep,
she spent the rest of the night in Watching and Prayer.

The next morning being the eighth of February, Thomas Andrews the Lieutenant
of the County signified unto her that her hour was come, and it was time to
come forth, which she soon obeyed, and in a posture full of Majesty, and a
Countenance very joyful, the Commissioners received her in a Gallery, where
they did attend her, there likewise Melvin her Steward did present himself
before her, and weeping fell on his knees to receive her last commands: Melvin,
said she, weep not, but rather rejoice, for this day you shall see Mary Stuart
delivered from all her sorrows, and I adjure you to tell my Son, that I have
always lived, and now I dye a Catholic, and that I exhort him to preserve the
Faith of his Ancestors, to love Justice, and to maintain his people in Peace,
and to Enterprise nothing against the Queen of England. I have committed
nothing against the Kingdom of Scotland, and I always loved France, God forgive
them who have thirsted after my blood: then turning to the Lords she requested
that her servants after her death might be civily used, suffered to attend her
person in the time of her death, and then to enjoy peaceably those poor
Legacies she had bequeathed them: the Earl of Kent opposed her servants
Attendance, yet the passionate desires of the poor Queen, prevailed with the
rest of the Lords to permit six of them to wait on her to the Scaffold, with
this train came she into the Hall hung with black, and ascended the Scaffold
covered with black also: and sat her down in a Chair prepared for her.

Beal read the Warrant for Execution, which she heard very Patiently, the Dean
of Peterborough endeavored to persuade her, at last to relinquish the Roman,
and embrace the Reformed Religion, for the Eternal good of her Soul: She
besought him to forbear, being Resolved to Dye in the Faith of the Roman Church.

Then turning to the People she Protested before God that she had not Attempted
any thing against the Life of Queen Elizabeth, nor any other thing deserving
Death: after some sew words more touching Religion, her Eyes gushed full of
Tears, which were sympathetically Answered with Tears by all that beheld the
Tragedy, Three or Four only in all that Concourse that could be Excepted.

The Executioner desired her Pardon; I Pardon thee (said she) and all my
Persecutors, after she had kneeled down, and Prayed with extreme fervency,
concluding her Devotions in these words: As thy Arms Lord Jesus were stretched
out upon the Gross, so receive me O Jesus into the stretched forth Arms of thy
Mercy. And after this she disposed her self for the Block, her Maids having
undressed her, she laid open the most Beautiful Neck that ever received so
merciless a Blow; then she signed her Attendants with the Sign of the Cross,
and having kissed them all, she smilingly bids them farewell, at which they
poor Souls weep most bitterly, with Sighs and Tears inexpressible, for which
she meekly reproved them, saying, Nay what do you mean, do you suffer your
selves to be Transported with Grief, notwithstanding you know I am going to
Exchange a Temporal Kingdom full of Misery, for an Everlasting Empire filled
with all Felicity. After this she covered her Face, and laid her Neck on the
Block, saying in te Domine speravi, and having repeated once and again, in
manus tuas Domine. The Executioner gave a Blow, and with it made a dreadful
wound in the hinder part of her head, and at two more the Inhuman Butcher
severed her head from her Shoulders, saying, Long Live Queen Elizabeth, and so
let the Enemies of the Gospel perish. Her poor Heart-broken Servants drew nigh
to do their last Office for her, in divesting her Body, and disposing of it for
Burial. But the Earl of Kent commanded them to be gone, and ordered her Body to
be conveyed to a Chamber in the Castle, where it was locked up.

After Nineteen Years Imprisonment, thus Unfortunately Dyed the most Beautiful,
the most Magnanimous, the most Wise, and most Religious Queen Mary. Her Body
was first Buried in the Cathedral Church in Peterborough, and after many Years
in the Reign of her Son taken up and buried amongst her Ancestors in
Westminster, and by an unknown Author had this Inscription set upon her Tomb in
Peterborough.

MARIA Scotorum Regina, regis Filia, regis Gallorum vidua, reginae Angliae
agnata and here is proxima, vertutibus regiis, and animo regio ornata, Jure regio
frustra saepius Implorato, barbara and tyrannica crudelitate, ornamentum nostri
seculi and lumen vere regium extinguitur; eodemque nefario Judicio, and Maria
Scotorum Regina, morte naturali, and omnes superstites reges plebeii facti
morte mulctantur hic extat. Cum Sacris enim vive Mariae cineribus, omnium Regum
atque principium violatam atque prostratam Majestatem hic jacere scito, and
quia tacitum regale satis super que reges sui officii monet, plura non addo
viater.

Translated thus:

Mary Queen of Scotland, the Daughter of a King, the Widow of the King of
France, the near Kinswoman and next Heir to the Queen of England, endued with
Princely Virtues, and a Royal Mind; having often, but in vain, implored her
Regal Right, at length the great Ornament of our Age and the most Sovereign
Light of the World is Extinguished by a most Barbarous and Tyrannical Cruelty,
and by the same pernicious Sentence, Mary the Queen of Scotland is punished
with a Natural Death, and all surviving Monarchs made common Persons, and
rendered liable to the punishment of a Civil Death, a very strange and
unaccountable kind of Grave, in which the Living lie Interred with the Dead,
for with the Ashes of this Blessed Mary, know thou that the Majesty of all
Crowned Heads lies here depressed and basely violated, But because the Reasons
of State do admonish all Kings what is best to do, O Traveller I say no more.

FINIS.

