TWO LETTERS TO A FRIEND, Concerning the DISTEMPERS OF THE Present Times.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Brom at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1686.

THE FIRST LETTER CONCERNING COMPREHENSION, Written 1667.
Good Cousin,
I Am sorry, that the Parliaments casting out the Bill of Comprehension should
so much concern you as to put you into such a passion as you expressed against
them, and me, at our last nights meeting. Sure the Company you now converse
with, and the strange Principles with which they have now possessed you, have
altered your nature, and turned your former reason into prejudice, and
unbelief; if not, you would have believed what I did so seriously affirm to be
a known truth: namely, That this Age is not more severe against the disturbers
of the settled Peace and Government of the Church and State, than they were in
the very happy days of our late and Good Queen Elizabeth. Some of the Reasons
why I said so I do with very much affection tender to your Consideration, and
to your Censure too; and, that the last may be the more charitable, and you not
apt to make the errors or failings of your Governors, seem more or greater
than indeed they are; let me entreat, that you remember what I have very often
said to you; namely, That malicious men (of whom really I do not take you to be
one) are the best Accusers, and the worst Judges. And indeed I fear it would
prove to be a very bitter truth, if some did attain that power which too many
labor for in these days, in which Schism and Sedition are taken to be no sins;
even by men who pretend a tenderness of Conscience in much smaller matters.

And, that I may keep some order, and you be the better satisfied in what I
intend in this Letter; I earnestly entreat that you will at your next leisure
read in Mr. Cambdens true History of the Life and Reign of our Good Queen
Elizabeth; in which you may find, what care was then taken to prevent Schism,
and the sad confusion that attends it; and, how the Contrivers of Libels, and
dispersers of them, have been severely punished; many of them even to death; as
namely, Henry Barrow, and many of his Sectaries for disturbing the public
peace of the Nation, by scattering abroad their monsterous Opinions; as also,
for affirming the Church of England to be no true Church; and the like: Which
you may find written by the said Mr. Cambden in the thirty-sixth year of that
Good Queens Reign.

But, I commend more especially to your Consideration, the story and sad death
of Hacket, and his Adherents; as namely, of Wigirton, Arthington, and Copinger,
all Schismatics, and of one Sect and Brotherhood: But I say, I do most
seriously commend to your Consideration the beginning and death of the said
Hacket; who was first a pretender to a tenderness of Conscience, but a
Schismatic; and stopped not there, but became by degrees, so fully possessed by
the evil spirit, the spirit of pride and opposition, that he publicly reviled
the Queen, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Lord Chancellor; and being
transported with a furious Zeal did at last become from a Schismatic to be so
infamous an Heretic, that he was condemned to death for his abominable Errors;
at which time he reviled and cursed his Judges; and died blaspheming and
reproaching his Creator: This you may read in the Thirty-fourth year of Queen
Elizabeth, as it is written by honest learned Mr. Cambden, who concludes this
sad story of Hacket with this observation, Thus does the enemy of Mankind
bewitch those men whom he sees are not content to be wise unto sobriety. These
stories I say, and too many like them, you may find in Mr. Cambdens History of
Queen Elizabeth; and you may find the like in Bishop Spotswoods History of the
Church of Scotland; and also find the like in Mr. Fullers History of the Church
of Great Britain; in which you may observe what labor has been used by the
discontented Non-conformists to unsettle the Government of the Church of
England, and consequently of the State; and may there also find, how severely
many of them have been punished: So that you need not wonder at what I said
last night; nor think these the only times of persecuting men of tender
Consciences.

And for the better confirmation of what I now write, I will refer you to one
testimony more, in the time of our late peaceful King James: Which testimony
you may view in the second Volume of the Reports of Judge Crook, a man very
learned in the Law. But, I shall first tell you the occasion of that Report,
which was this, The Non-conformists (which are in that Report called by the
name of Puritans) had given out that the King had an intent to set up or give a
Toleration to Popery; and, they had also composed a large Petition complaining
of the severity of some usage, and of some Laws that concerned themselves; and
desired that the severity of those Laws might be mitigated; these and other
like desires were in the said Petition; to which they had procured not less
than seven hundred hands; and the close of the Petition was, That if these
desires were not granted, many thousands of his Subjects would be discontented:
Which indeed was not a threatening, but was understood to be somewhat like it.

This report of his Majesty's intent to set up or tolerate Popery, begot many
fears and discontents in the Nation, and to prevent greater disturbances the
King did appoint many of his Privy Council, and all the Judges of the Land, to
meet together in the Star Chamber; in which Assembly the Lord Chancellor
declared to them the occasion of this their public Convention; and asked the
Judges this following question: ( As you may read it in the very same words in
the said learned Judges Reports in the second year of the Reign of King James.)

Whether it were an offense punishable, and what punishment they deserved, who
framed Petitions and collected a multitude of hands thereto, to prefer to the
King in a public cause as the Puritans had done, with an intimation to the
King, that if he denied their Suit, many thousands of his Subjects would be
discontented.

Whereto all the Judges answered, that it was an offense finable at discretion,
and very near Treason and Felony in the punishment; for, they tended to the
raising Sedition, Rebellion, and Discontent among the People: To which
Resolution all the Lords agreed. And then many of the Lords declared, That some
of the Puritans had raised a false rumor of the King, That he intended to
grant a Toleration to Papists: Which offense the Judges eonceived to be
bainously finable by the Rules of the Common Law, either in the Kings Bench, or
by the King and his Council; or now, (since the Statute of the Third of Henry
the Seventh) in the Star Chamber. And the Lords severally declared, How much
the King was discontented with the said false rumor, and had made but the day
before a Protestation to them, that he never intended it; and, that he would
spend the last drop of blood in his body, before he would do it; and prayed,
That before he or any of his Issue should maintain any other Religion than what
he truly professed and maintained, That God would take them out of the World.

This you may find in that Report of that Learned Judge, as it was left among
many other of Reports, all exactly written with his own hand; and, as they are
now published by Sir Harebottle Grimstone, who is now the worthy Master of the
Rolls. And you may note, that the said Reports were published in the year 1658.
at which time, Oliver the Tyrant was in his full power; and, you may there
find, that even all Olivers Judges allowed these Reports to be made public,
and subscribed their Names to them; and with Oliver's consent doubtless. For,
he had found, that those very Non-conformists, whose Sedition helped him into
his power; became after a short time as restless and discontent with him, as
they had been with their lawful King; and indeed as willing to pull him down,
as they had been diligent to set him up.

Dear Cousin! these Places, to which I have referred you, for a Testimony of
what I said, are not to be doubted; and, though you would not then give any
credit to what I assured you I knew to be a truth; yet I hope you now will: If
not, search, and you shall find them true.

And now seriously Sir! let me appeal to your own Conscience, and ask (though
you would not then believe me) how easily would you have given credit to any
stranger, that had brought you news of any error committed by any Bishop or
their Chaplains; or by any of the Conformable Clergy, though there were not any
reasonable Probability for it. Dear Cousin, consider what I say, and consider
there is a great stock of innocent blood to be answered for; not only the blood
of our late Virtuous King and the blood of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
the Lord Strafford, whose deaths were occasioned by the indiscreet zeal and
restless fury and clamours of the Non-conformists: And not only the blood of
these, but the ruin of many good and innocent Families, that now eat the bread
of sorrow, by being impoverished and und on by these troublesome Pretenders to
Conscience; and which is worse, there is a corruption of the innocence and
manners of the greatest part of the Nation to be answered for; and all this
occasioned by our late Civil War; and that War, occasioned by the fury and zeal
of the discontented restless Non-conformists; and them only; and note, that
till then we knew not the name of Independent, or of Seeker, or Quaker. Cousin,
these are the sad effects of these busybodies; many of whom God has still so
blinded that they cannot yet see the Errors they have run themselves and the
Nation into; nay, that would imbroil it again into greater ruin than not be
complied with in their peevish desires, which they miscall tenderness of
Conscience. Dear Cousin, I will not say all; but indeed, too many of the men
with whom you comply, and do so much magnify, are too like Simeon and Levi,
that were Brethren in this Iniquity. And as you love the peace of the Church,
in which you were Baptized; and the peace of the Land in which you were born,
and the Laws by which you enjoy what you have; nay, as you love the peace of
your own Soul, draw back, and let it not enter any more into their Councils or
Confederacy; but at last take notice that though neither you, nor any of your
Associates scruple at the sin of Schism or Sedition, but rush into it without
Consideration or fear, even as a Horse rushes into the battle; yet, I pray take
notice that St. Paul in his Epistle to the Galatians, reckons it with the deeds
of the flesh, even with Murder and Witchcraft, which you so much abhor; and let
me tell you, many think Sedition a more heinous sin than they, by reason of the
more evil and destructive effects of it: for, Murder may become so by taking
away the life of but one single person: And Witchcraft has its limits and
bounds set to it, perhaps so as not to take away the life of any man, but only
to do mischief to a single person, or a Family, and must end there. But who
knows the limits of Sedition? Or, when the fire is kindled, which is intended
by seditious men, who can, who is able to quench it? And for some proofs of the
miserable effects of it, though I might give you too many instances of them in
former times; yet I will only refer you to the late Long Parliament now fresh
in memory, and the woeful effects of that Civil War, begot and maintained by
schismatical, seditious, discontented men, that believed themselves fit to be
Reformers, when God knows well they were not.

And for the sorrow you express for those men of tender Consciences, that are
scandalized at wearing a Surplice, kneeling at receiving the Sacrament, the
Cross in Baptism, and the like; and would have them therefore taken away, that
so many, so learned, and so godly Men might by taking them away, be brought to
a Conformity. and made capable of preaching the Gospel, which otherwise they
cannot do, by being scandalized at these Ceremonies:

I now ask you, What if more men, and more learned men, and more godly men, and
as tender-conscienced men, shall be scandalized by their being taken away? What
care will you, or those of your Party, take for their tender Consciences? Nay,
I ask again, What if we forget* or neglect the tender Consciences of our own
Party, and comply with yours? What security can you or they give us, that this
shall satisfy them so as to ask no more when this is granted? Or, that a year
hence their Disciples, or their Successors shall rest satisfied with what is
now desired or granted? Rea^ly, I cannot think any security can be given, but
that all this being granted, yet any man of a melancholy, or a malicious, or a
peevish, or a fantastical, or a wanton Conscience; or a Conscience that
inclines to get reputation, and court applause, may call his own a tender
Conscience, and become seditious, and restless, if his tender Conscience be not
complied with: And so no end of their desires, nor any more safety by granting
what is desired.

I shall next endeavor to satisfy your desire, or rather your challenge, why
I go so constantly to the Church Service; and my answer shall be all in love
and in sincerity.

I go to adore and worship my God who has made me of nothing and preserved me
from being worse than nothing. And this Worship and Adoration I do pay him
inwardly in my Soul, and testify it outwardly by my behavior; as namely, by
my Adoration, in my forbearing to cover my head in that place dedicated to God,
and only to his Service; and also, by standing up at the profession of the
Creed, which contains the several Articles that I and all true Christians
profess and believe; and also by my standing up at giving Glory to the Father,
the Son, and to the Holy Ghost; and confessing them to be Three Persous, and
but one God.

And (secondly) I go to Church to praise my God for my Creation and Redemption,
and for his many deliverances of me from the many dangers of my Body, and more
especially of my Soul in sending me Redemption by the death of his Son my
Savior; and for the constant assistance of his Holy Spirit; a part of which
Praise I perform frequently in the Psalms, which are daily read in the Public
Congregation.

And (thirdly) I go to Church publicly to confess and bewail my sins, and to
beg pardon for them, for his merits who died to reconcile me and all Mankind
unto God, who is both his and my Father; and as for the Words in which I beg
this mercy, they be the Letany and Collects of the Church, composed by those
learned and devout men whom you and I have trusted to tell us which is, and
which is not the written Word of God; and trusted also to translate those
Scriptures into English. And in these Collects you may note, that I pray
absolutely for pardon of sin, and for grace to believe and serve God: But I
pray for health, and peace, and plenty, conditionally, even so far as they may
tend to his Glory, and the good of my Soul, and not further: And this
confessing my sins, and begging mercy and pardon for them, I do in my adoring
my God, and by the humble posture of kneeling on my knees before Him: And in
this manner, and, by reverend sitting to hear some chosen parts of Gods Word
read in the Public Assembly I spend one hour of the Lords day every Forenoon;
and half so much time every Evening. And, since this uniform and devout custom,
of joining together in Public Confession, and Praise, and Prayer, and
Adoration of God, and in one manner, has been neglected, the power of
Christianity and humble Piety is so much decayed, that it ought not to be
thought on, but with sorrow and lamentation: And, I think especially by the
Non-conformists.

And lastly, (for I am tedious beyond my intention) whereas you, and your
Party, would have the Bishops and Cathedral-Church Lands sold to supply the
present necessities of the Nation; I say, first, God prevent the Nation from
such necessities, as shall make them guilty of so many Curses as have been by
the Doners of those Lands intailed with those Lands intailed with those Lands
upon those men, that alienate them to any other use than for the use of those
that shall serve at God's Altar; to which end the Priests Portion was kept with
Care and Conscience till the days of King Henry the Eighth, who is noted, to
make the first breach of those Oaths that were always taken and kept by his
Predecessors, and taken by himself too, to preserve the Church Lands; and it is
noted, that he was the first Violator of those many Laws made also to preserve
them; out of which Lands he took, at the dissolution of the Abbeys, a part for
himself; exchanged a part with others, that thirsted to thrive by the
dissolution; and gave the rest to be shared amongst the Complying Nobility, and
other Families, that then were in greatest power and favor with him;
concerning which (if you desire a further information) I refer you to a little
Treatise written by the Learned Sir Henry Spelman, (called De non temerandis
Ecclesiis,) and especially to the Presace before it; in which you may find many
sad Observations of the said King; and find there also, that more of the
Nobility, and those other Families, and their Children that then shared the
Church Lands, came to die by the Sword of Justice, and other eminent
misfortunes in twenty years, than had suffered in four hundred years before the
dissolution; and for a proof of which, he refers you to the Parliament Rolls of
the twentyseventh of that King.

And to me it seems fit that the Observations of the ruin, and misfortune of
the other Families that were sharers of the Church Lands, made by that pious
and learned Knight since the said twenty years, (which he left written) are not
also made public; but, possibly they may pare too near the quick, and are
therefore yet forborne.

I will say nothing of Queen Elizabeth; but for King James, I will say he did
neither follow King Henry's, nor her President; and his Childrens Children sit
this day upon his Throne. And for his Son, Charles the First, (who is justly
called the Martyr for the Church:) He had also well considered the Oaths taken
by all his Ancestors, and by Himself too at his Coronation, to preserve the
Lands and Rights of the Church; and therefore in his Book of Penitential
Meditations and Vows, made in his sad Solitude and Imprisonment at Holmby; you
may, in that Chapter of the Covenant there find, that at that time when he
apprehended Himself in danger of death, yet, that this was then his Resolution.

The principal end of some men in this Covenant is the abasing of Episcopacy
into Presbytery, and of robbing the Church of its Lands and Revenues; But I
thank God as no man lay more open to the sacrilegious temptation of usurping
them, (which issuing chiefly from the Crown, are held of it, and can legally
revert only to the Crown with my consent) so I have always had such a perfect
abhorrence of it in my Soul, that I never found the least inclination to such
sacrilegious reformings; and yet no man has a greater desire to have hishops
and all Churchmen so reformed, that they may best deserve and use, not only
what the pious munificence of my Predecessors have given to God and the Church,
but all other additions of Christian bounty.

But no necessity shall ever (I hope) drive me or mine to invade or sell the
Priests Lands; which Pharaoh' s Divinity and Joseph' s true Piety abhorred to
do. I had rather live, as my Predecessor Henry the Third sometimes did, on the
Churches Alms, than violently to take the Bread out of the Bishops and
Ministers mouths.

There are ways enough to repair the breaches of the state without the ruins of
the Church; as I would be a restorer of the one, so I would not be an Oppressor
of the other, under the pretense of public debts; the occasions of contracting
them were bad enough, but such a discharging of them would be much worse. I
pray God neither I nor mine may be accessory of either.

Sir, I have been longer than I intended; for which I crave your pardon; and
beg of God, that you may at last see and well consider the many errors that
your indiscreet zeal has led you into; and that you and your Party may see
also the many miseries it has helped to bring upon others; and that for the
remainder of your days you and they may redeem the time past, by repenting your
indiscreet zeal, and study to be quiet, and to do your own business; to this I
shall encourage you, and that done, to live as unoffensively to others, and as
strictly to your self as you do intend, and by God's grace added to your
endeavors, he shall make you able; and I humbly beseech Almighty God, that you
and I may daily practice an humble and a peaceable piety, so humble and
peaceable a piety as may stop the mouths of all gainsayers; for, it is certain
such holy and quiet living will bring peace at the last. And in this the
Almighty God give me grace to be like you.

Study to be quiet, and to do your own business, 1 These. 4. 11.
February the 18. 1667. Your Affectionate Friend, and Cousin, R. W.

THE SECOND LETTER.
Dear Cousin,
I Return you, my unseigned thanks for your Letter of the 15. instant, which I
received three days past; it was mixed with love and anger, but I shall in this
my answer, observe what you so earnestly desire; namely, not to justify the
Errors or Irregularities of those that you call my Party, or my Clergy. And for
some testimony, that I will do what I profess, I will begin with a Confession,
that I think as you say; That when a Clergyman appears in a long, curled, trim
Periwig, a large Tippet, and a silk Cossock, or the like vain and costly
Clothing: If he preaches against Pride, and for Mortification, his Hearers are
neither like to believe him, or practice what he preaches, either then, or at
other times, though what he says be an undoubted truth: Because Example is of
greater power to incline men to Vice, than Precepts have to persuade to Virtue.
And I wish as heartily as you do, that all such Clergy-mens Wives as have silk
Clothes, be-daubed with Lace, and their heads hanged about with painted
Ribands, were enjoined Penance for their pride: And their Husbands punished for
being so tame, or so lovingly-simple, as to suffer them; for, by such Clothes,
they proclaim their own Ambition, and their Husbands folly.

And I say the like, concerning their striving for Precedence; and for the
highest places in Church-Pews.

And I wish as heartily as you do, that double Benefices were not dispensed
with, to such an inconvenience as is now too visible. And that no Dispensations
might be granted for any man to be Prebend, or, Canon-Residentiary of two
Churches: Such as Westminster and Durham; or Windsor and Wells: Because
Residence, and the other duties, required in those places, is not consistent
with their distance from each other; nor, with the Donors intention: And also,
because such a single Prebend, is a fair support for an humble Clergyman, and
if he be proud or covetous, he deserves not so much.

And, I confess also, what you say of a Clergy-mans bidding to fast on the Eves
of Holy Days, in Lent, and the Ember Weeks: And I wish those biddings were
forborne, or better practiced by themselves; for it is too visible they do not
what the Church for good reasons enjoins them; and they others, in the Churches
name.

And, I wish as heartily as you can, that they would not only read, but pray,
the Common Prayer; and, not huddle it up so fast, (as too many do) by getting
into a middle of a second Collect, before a devout Hearer can say Amen to the
first.

But, you ought to consider, that there be Ten thousand Clergymen in this
Nation, (for there are Nine thousand Parish Churches in it, besides Colleges
and Chapels) and the number of them that be thus faulty are not many, when
compared with those that be grave, and regular: And, I could name many of the
Episcopal Clergy, whose lives are so Charitable, Humble, and Innocent, that
they might say to their Parishioners, as St. Paul of himself to his
Philippians, Walk so as you have me for an Example. But, I must confess there
are too many that do not live so; and, with whom I am as much offended, as you
express your self to be.

And now, having unbowelled my very soul thus freely to you, and I protest, as
sincerely and truly as I can express my self: My hope is, that I shall in what
follows appear to be so uninterested in any Party, that where I speak evident
truth and reason, you will assent unto it; in which hope, I will endeavor to
lay before you, in my plain way, the many inconveniences, that would I think
follow, if that liberty were granted which you and your Party have so long, and
do still so earnestly strive for; the effects of which liberty would be Schism,
Heresy, Rebellion, and Misery, from which God prevent us*

I did in a Letter, writ now some years past, endeavor to unbeguile your
Brother: And, though it did not at that present wholly do what I designed; yet
it abated so much of that furious zeal that had prepossest him, that he
declared on his deathbed, The remembrance of those hours spent in devotion,
and acts of Charity, were then his comfort, and those spent in disputes, and
opposition to Government, were now a Corrosive, or (as Solomon says of
ill-gotten riches) like gravel in his teeth. And my dear Cozen, in hope of the
like good success, I shall, in the following part of my Letter; commend the
same, or like Arguments to your consideration in order to the undeceiving you:
And I shall not be so curious for words or method, as diligent to speak reason
and truth plainly, and without provocation.

And first, I will consider our happiness that were born, baptized, and do now
live in the Church of England, which is believed by the most learned of all
Foreign Churches, to be the most Orthodox and Apostolical, both for Doctrine
and Discipline, of all those very many that have reformed from the corruptions
of the Church of Rome. And I think it is worthy your noting; that those Bishops
and Martyrs, that assisted in this Reformation, did not (as Sir Henry Wotton
said wisely) think the farther they went from the Church of Rome, the nearer
they got to heaven, (for they might go too far) but, they did with prudent and
deliberate consideration, retain what was consistent with Gods Word, and the
practice of the most Apostolical, Primitive, and purest times; as may appear by
the many unanswerable reasons that have been given against both the
Non-Conformists and Papists that have excepted against our Reformation: The
first, for retaining too much; and the latter, for not enough. For you ought to
note, that neither of them have ever writ against the Doctrine or Discipline of
this Church, but they have received answers to their damage. And this being
considered, you ought to lay to heart the disturbance that many of you, that
pretend to tenderness of Conscience, have formerly made, and do still make, in
this Church and State, even at this present time. And you ought to consider,
that if this Church were overthrown, the Church of Rome would make it their
great advantage; and therefore many of them do encourage and assist you in this
present disturbance, and for no other end: And therefore, look about you in
time, and do not say, when it is too late, You meant not to bring in Popery:
But remember I once told you, there was a Lawyer that was so ignorant, that he
thought he spoke against his Clients Adversary, when he spoke for him, and
meant* it not. And after such a manner you act for the Church of Rome: For let
me tell you, that if ever Popery or a standing Army, be set up in this Nation,
(which God giant I may never see) it is the indiscreet zeal, and restless
activity of you and your Party that will bring both in, though you mean it not.

Let me ask you seriously, Can you think the powerful man, that is now become
of the Romish Church, did love you so much, or, like your Principles so well,
as to get a Suspension of the Laws against Conventicles, because he liked your
Opinions, or your Practices, when the power was in your hands, in the time of
the late mischievous Long Parliament 1640? Or can you think, he or his Party
did hold a Correspondence with some of the Chief of your Party, for any other
end, but to assist in the ruin of the English Church? no doubtless; for they
know, and, you ought to consider, that if that were but down, there were no
visible bank to stop the stream of Popery: And then, farewell the liberty and
care of tender Consciences: There would be an end of that cajouling and
flattery.

And next, let me ask you this friendly question: Do you think there is such a
sin as Heresy? And if you think there be, let me ask you, Whether he that
holds Heretical Opinions should be suffered to go up and down to poison and
persuade others to his belief? And if you believe he ought not so to do, then I
ask, Whether Heresy can be known to be Heresy, or prevented, or punished, but
by some power trusted in the hands of some Person or Persons whom the highest
Power has chosen and trusted to judge what is Heresy: And then, prevent, or
suppress and punish it. And if you grant this, (which no man of reason will
deny) I hope you will grant Clergymen, whose time has been spent in such
studies as have enabled them to know truth and falsehood, are the fittest to
Judge what is Heresy: And if you grant this, then these judges must have some
name to distinguish them from others of the inferior Clergy. And, if by a name
of distinction? I hope the known name of Bishop (or Church Governor) which is
so frequently used in Scripture, and the Writings of all the Fathers of the
Church, and so well known in this and all Nations, will not be by you excepted
against.

And this is told you in order to remembering you, that in the time of the late
Long Parliament, 1640. the common Citizens had been so madded, by the discourse
and Sermons of the Nonconforming Ministers, (which pretended tenderness of
Conscience) that they, being possessed with a furious zeal, went by troops to the
Parliament at Westminster, clamoured, and affronted the Bishops, as they went
thither, and cried out, No Bishops! no Bishops! that is to say, No Judges of
Heresy or Schism: No punishing of these, which you call sins; but, we know are
not: We know what is truth, and resolve to do what is good in our own eyes. And
by such clamours, and, the malicious, misguided, and active Zeal that then
possessed those people, and a minor part of the Parliament then sitting: The
major and more prudent part of it, were so affronted, and threatened, that they
appeared not; and in their absence, the Bishops voted as useless, as the said
Zealous and Ignorant Common people had desired.

And now the hedge of Government, and punishment being broken down: Dell, the
Arch-Heretick, Printed his Book against the Holy Ghost; and that, and so many
such other Haeresies and Blasphemies were then Vented, Printed, and
Justifified: as I am neither willing to remember, or name.

My good Cousin, this was the effect of that ignorant zeal then; and, to this
it tends now again: And to this it will come, if God be not so good to this
sinful Nation, as to make the Women, the Shopkeepers, and the middle-witted
People of it, less busy, and more humble and lowly in their own eyes, and to
think that they are neither called, nor are fit to meddle with, and judge of
the most hidden and mysterious points in Divinity, and Government of the Church
and State: And instead of being Busy bodies, (which St. Peter accounts to be a
sin, 1 Pet. 4. 15.) to follow that counsel which St. Paul gives to his
Thessalonians, To study to be quiet, and to do their own business, 2 These. 4.
11.

I have told you, how the major part of the Parliament, and the Bishops were
used by the minor part, and those pretenders to Conscience, that were of their
Party. Now, give me leave to tell you, how these zealous men, having gotten
into all power, used the two Universities of this Nation, and those of the
Beneficed Clergy, that would not violate those Oaths they had taken, both when
they took their degrees in the University, and at their entering into Holy
Orders, at their being made Deacons and Priests: As also, their Oaths to the
Bishop at their admission into their spiritual Livings, and the care of Souls.

And first for the usage of the Universities: Doubtless, all rational and
uninterested men cannot but think the Universities fittest to make or judge of
all lawful or unlawful Oaths: As also, of obedience to Governors: But it was
so far otherwise, that very unlearned, and very unfit men, were sent to Visit,
judge, and reform them. And, by them was also sent the Covenant, and other
Oaths to be taken without disputing; to be taken, even by all, from the lowest
Graduate to the highest in Order or Power; or to lose their subsistence by
being expelled both their Colleges and the University. And this was executed
with very great strictness, and as much cruelty, by these pretenders to
tenderness of Conscience.

And in like manner were all conformable Beneficed Ministers used by a
Committee of cruel and ignorant Triers; who were to examine and judge of their
Learning, and their measures of Grace: And if they were by them judged
defective in either, then they were unfit to hold their good Livings; And by
this means, and their imposing the Covenant and other Oaths, and their refusing
to take them, those good Livings became void, and fit for those Tryers
themsevles, or their Friends, that had Learning and Grace; (and Gratitude too.)
And they were quickly got into possession, and the right Owners as quickly
imprisoned for not taking the Covenant, and other Oaths, contrary both to their
Consciences, and the many Oaths they had formerly taken.

Solomon in his Book of Wisdom, Chap. 2. makes the wickedness of the ungodly
first to blind them; and then he makes them to say, Our power is the Law of
righteousness. And such was the Power and Law of these Tryers, and such was
their cruel usage of that Power; as was too sadly testified by the great
suffering of the Conformable Clergy: Many, whose great poverty and other
sufferings were such, and undergone with so much patience, and so calm a
sortitude (for many had Wives, and many Children) that I protest, I heard a
very considerable Papist say in those times, That if their Clergy would have
suffered half so much in the days of King Edward the Sixth, the Religion of the
Protestants had never prevailed in England. Which saying seemed to me very
considerable.

And I think this to be considerable also; That those Tryers, and their
Brethren of the several Committees, came by degrees to distinguish themselves
from others, by calling themselves The Godly Party: And by degrees came to such
a confidence that they only were so; that they made God to be as cruel and ill
natured a God as they were men: Not allowing him to save any, but themselves,
and their Party.

But I will urge this no farther; lest the truth I write seem too bitter.

But I return to what may seem more considerable, and probably less provoking.

I do observe, that your Party that scruple many small things, scruple not at
the great sin of Schism: I think, they do scarce consider, or think there is
such a sin. And this is the more to be wondered at, because, in all the Reformed
Churches in Foreign Nations they think otherwise, and punish it. And they think
the Doctrine, and Discipline, and Public Worship of God in our Church to be
most Apostolical, and most agreeable to the Word of God: And many of them wish
theirs were like to ours. And, for a testimony of this, I refer you to a view
of their several approbations of it, as they be collected and summed up, and
lately published by Dr. Durell, sometimes Preacher of the Resormed French
Church in the Savoy in London.

And for one testimony that the sin of Schism ought to be better considered,
and carefully avoided by all people, I shall in what follows give you a
relation that may prove I am not singular in this opinion: Wishing most
affectionately that it may proveas useful as-it is true; and as I intend it.

In the late persecution of the Conformable Clergy, there was Dr. Eleazer
Duncon, a Prebend, (I think of Ely, or Durham) a man of singular learning, and
of an unblemisht life; but sequestered he was; and you may guess why. This good
man being sequestered, and so made useless as to the service of Gods Church
publicly: And being independent of the world, as to Wife and Children; and
weary of beholding the ruin of so many sacred Structures, the cruel usage,
contempt, and poverty of the Conformable Clergy, (for many of them had Wives
and Children) resolved to spend some part of the remaining part of his life in
travel: And thereby to inform himself by conference and observation, what the
belief and public Worship of God was, both in the Greek and all the Latin
Churches; not only those that depend, but those that be independent on the
Church of Rome; and he did so, to his great satisfaction: And after some years
so spent, in his return homeward (which was in the year 1648.) he took Venice
in his way: To which place he came indisposed as to his health; and immediately
fell into a dangerous Fever.

This good man was in his long Travel so noted for his learning, and the
sanctity of his life, that the day after his arrival in Venice he was sent to
by Father Fulgentio, who had been the Pupil, and was now the Successor to
Father Paul in his College of the Service (Father Paul and Fulgentio are both
so known and valued by all the learned of Italy, and all other Christian
Nations, that they neither need my Character or Commendations) to enquire his
health, and an offer of advice to procure it. And, in order to both, he would
wait on him next day, if he pleased to allow it. The last of which being
thankfully accepted; the Father did the next day at a seasonable hour make him
a charitable visit: And after a loving and quiet Conference, the Father having
treated him with words of Christian compassion, offered him a supply of money
if he needed; and being ready to take his leave, told the Doctor, He and his
College should pray for him both day and night. Which good office the Doctor
most humbly accepted of, and after giving thanks, added this:

Father, your Charity is the more perfect, in that you will do this Christian
office for one that your Church accounts an Heretic. To which the Father's
reply was; But I do not: I look upon you as a true Catholic; yea, as a
Confessor, forced out of your Native Country for the profession of the most
true Religion; for, I look upon the Church of England, as I know it by your
Liturgy, Articles and Canons (I know not your practice) to be the most
Apostolical Church in the whole World, and the Church of Rome to be at this
time the most impure.

After which ingenuous profession, the Father observing the Doctor to grow
saint and uneasy, left him for that time; but, after the Doctors recovery, and
during his stay in Venice, the Father and he had many free and friendly
discourses, of the same subject, in one of which, the Doctor said:

Father, your Confession of the impurity of the Roman Church and the 18. of
your own Objections, lately showed to me against it, require an Apology for
your continuing in that Communion.

To which the Fathers reply was:

A man may live in an infected City, and not have the Plague; My Judgment and
public Practice in Religion are both so well known here, and at Rome, (and
both to my danger and damage) that I may continue in it with more safety than
others: And, separation may be a sin in me, who Judge the unity of the Church
in which I was baptized and confirmed, and the peace of the State in which I
was born, to be preferred before my private opinion, interest, or satisfaction;
and I think, to commit a Schism, and separate from that Church, would make me
guilty of the sin of a Scandal justly given; and therefore live in it, and die
in it I must, though it be the impurest of Christian Churches. But let him that
now is not of it, never be of that Church, which is so far departed from the
Primitive purity, and now maintained only by splendor, and the maxims, and
practice of polity.

If you doubt the truth The truth needs not be doubted, by any that shall first
know, that Father Paul writ the History of the Council of Trent: And then,
reads his Life as it is truly writ by his Disciple and Successor, this Father
Fulgentio; and now Printed before the said History.
of this relation, I will give you unquestionable confirmation of it at our
next meeting. It has been longer than I intended, and I beg your pardon; and
beg you also, to consider, with what inconsiderable zeal you and your Party
rush into Schism, and give just cause of Scandal by opposing Government, and
affronting that Church in which you were born, and baptized, (and I hope
confirmed by a Bishop.) I think the doing so, requires your sad and serious
consideration. For if there be such sins as Schism and Scandal (and if there
were not, they could not have names in Scripture:) then, give me leave to tell
you, I cannot but wonder that you and the scruple-mongers of your Party, should
rush into them, without any tenderness, or scruple of Conscience.

And here let me tell you, the Church of England, which you oppose, enjoins
nothing contrary to Gods Word; and has summed up in her Creeds and Catechism,
what is necessary for every Christian to know and to do: And can you, that are
a Shopkeeper, or private man, think that you are fit to teach and judge the
Church, or the Church fit to teach and judge you? Or can you think the safety
or peace of the State or Church in which you live should depend upon the
scruples and mistakes of a party of the Common People, whose indiscreet and
active zeal makes them like the restless Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 13. 15.
who compass Sea and Land to get Parties to be of their opinions, and by that
means beget confusion in both? No, doubtless: Common reason will not allow of
this belief; for a liberty to preach and persuade to your dangerous Principles,
would inflame the too hot and furious zeal of so many of your Party; and beget
so many more restless and dangerous contentions, that there could be neither
quiet or safety in a Nation, but by keeping a standing Army Witness the late
murder of the Scotch Bishop.
, which I know you detest, and from the cause of which God deliver us. I have
told you often, that Samuel says, 1 Samuel 15. 23. Rebellion is like the sin of
Witchcraft; and I cannot tell you too often that Schism is too like that
mysterious sin; for when the fire of Schism and Rebellion is kindled, no man
knows where it will end. Consider this, and remember, that St. Jude accounts
them that make Sects, to be fleshly; and not to have the Spirit of God, which
too many of your* Fraternity pretend to.

And now, after so long seriousness, give me liberty to be so pleasant as to
tell you a Tale, by which I intend not to provoke you, but to explain my
meaning.

There was a North-Country man, that came young and poor to London, to seek
that which he called his fortune, and it proved to be an Hostler in an Inn of
good note in that City, in which condition he continued some years, and by
diligence and frugality got and saved so much money, that in time he became the
Master of that Inn. And not long after his arrival to that happiness, he sent
for three of his Necces, one to serve him in his Kitchen; and the other two did
serve for some years in a like condition in other houses, 'till mine Host their
Uncle died; who, at his death, left to each of them a hundred pound, to buy
each of them a North-Country Husband; and also to each of them ten pound to buy
new Clothes, and bear their charges into the North, to see their Mother.

The three Sisters resolved to go together; and the day being appointed, two of
them bought very fantastical Clothes, and as gaudy Ribbands, intending thereby
to be noted and admired; but the third was of a more frugal humor, (yet aimed
at admiration too) and said she would save her money, wear her old Clothes, and
yet be noted and get reputation at a cheaper rate: For she would hold some
singular new fantastical opinion in Religion, and thereby get admirers, and as
many as they should; and it proved so.

And doubtless this is the Ambition of many Women, Shopkeepers, and other of
the Common People of very mean parts, who would not be admired or noted if they
did not trouble themselves and others, by holding some odd, impertinent,
singular opinions. And tell me freely, do not you think that silence would
become our Cousin Mrs. B -- than to talk so much and so boldly, against those
Clergymen, and others that bow at the Altar, (she says to the Altar) and use
other like reverence in Churches, where she and her Party are so familiar with
God as to use none? And concerning* which let me tell you my thoughts, and then
leave you to judge. Almighty God in the Second Commandment says, he would have
none to bow down or worship a graven Image: Intimating, as I suppose, a
Jealousy, lest that reverence or worship, which belongs only to him, be
ascribed or given to an Idol, or Image. But, that reverence and worship does
belong to him, and was always paid to him, is to me manifest by what the
Prophet David says, Psalm. 5. I will in thy fear worship toward thy holy
Temple. And again, I will praise thy name, and worship toward thy holy Temple.
And again, Psalm. 132. 138. O let us worship, and fall down, and kneel before
the Lord. These and many more might be urged out of the Old Testament. And in
the New, you may see it is a duty to worship God. First, St. Paul says, Heb.
13. 10. We have an Altar. And you may note, Rev. 22. 9. where the Angel that
had showed* St. John a Vision, forbad him to fall down to him, but bad him fall
down and worship God. And again, Chap. 14. 7. Worship him that made heaven and
earth. I omit more Testimonies which might be multiplied, and shall tell you
next, that Churches are sacred, and not to be used profanely: For you may
note, that our Savior did, with a divine indignation, whip the money changers
out of the Temple for polluting it; and said, His house should be called the
house of Prayer.

And let me tell you, that in the Primitive times, many of those humble and
devout Christians, whose sudden Journeys, or businesses of present necessity,
were such as not to allow them time to attend the public Worship and Prayers
of the Church, would yet express their devotion by going into a Church or
Oratory, and there bow at the Altar, then kneel and beg of God to pardon their
sins past: and to be their director and protector that day; and having again
bowed toward the East at the Altar, begin their Journey, or business, and they
thought God well pleased with so short a Prayer, and such a Sacrifice.

Much more might be said for bowing at the Altar, and bowing toward the East:
But I forbear.

And now let me ask you seriously; Do you think this, which I think to be a
duty, ought to be forborne, because our Cousin and her Party are scandalized at
it? Or do you think when I, in a late discourse, told her, how restless and
active her Uncle, and Father, and the rest of the Presbyterian Party had been
in promoting the late Confusions, and placing all Power in that Parliament,
1640. that murdered Dr. Laud, the late religious Bishop of Canterbury, the
late good and pious King Charles, and were the cause of spilling so much
innocent blood, and ruin of so many harmless Families? Can you think hers to
be a reasonable excuse: That God had determined or appointed this, because we
were a sinful Nation.

It shall be granted, that we were (God knows we still are) a sinful Nation:
And deserved a heavy punishment; and God did punish us justly; but they had no
appointment to be the executioners of that Justice: They appointed themselves,
first to judge, and then to be the Executioners of his will. And before I pass
further, I pray observe, it was Gods Will, that his only Son our Savior should
be betrayed: But who would be the Judas to do it? Or the Soldiers that
Crucified him? Or could Judas look back with comfort that he was used in
betraying him? I hope it is far from your thought to think or say so.

Let me tell you, that the learned Dr. Abbot, the late Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, that was next before Dr. Laud, (whose head your Long Parliament cut
off) intended to kill a Buck, 1621. but the Arrow did so glance, that he killed
the Keeper immediately. The Church of England judges sudden death to be a
punishment, and therefore prays against it. And though it is certain God would
not have punished that Keeper with a sudden death if the Keeper had not
deserved it; and certain also that the good Bishop thought so; yet he lamented
to the last hour of his own life, that his hand was used to bring sudden death
upon another. And he testified his sorrow, by what I shall relate to you.

After that restless night, which followed this sad accident, he sent early in
the morning for the Keepers Wife; bemoaned himself to her, and begged her
pardon; which being obtained, he settled upon her an annuity, by which she was
enabled to live with much more ease and plenty, though probly with less
comfort, than if she had still enjoyed her Husband. For her two Daughters, he
provided competent portions; and a better education and settlement for her
three Sons, than the Father could probably have made if he had still lived.

This he did for them. And as for himself, this sad accident begot in him that
which St. Paul rejoiced to find in his Corinthians, 2 Cor. 7. 11. even a godly
sorrow, and revenge; for he kept a severe Weekly Fast, the day that this sad
accident besel him, during the remainder of his life; and died lamenting it.

Let me stop here, and tell you, it is far otherways with you and your
Presbyterian Party, than with this penitent Bishop: For, though it is most
certain you were the cause of the late Confusion in the Church, and of the War
and Blood that followed it; yet I do not find one of you that lays his hand
upon his breast, and says:

Lord what have I done? Lord pardon me. No, you are far from that temper: And,
he that considers the temper of the present times, and your restless activity
in it, may conclude, you are as willing to begin new Commotions, as you are
senseless of the old.

My meaning is not, in saying this to upbraid, or provoke you; but rather to
convince and unbeguile you. And that I may the better do that, I will in what
follows answer some of the most material of your common objections.

You say, the Bishops have great revenues, and preach not for it, to which I
will answer you in love: First, you say that the Bishops revenues are much
greater than indeed they are: And you seem to repine, because you do not
consider, how much must go out of them, by First Fruits, Tenths, and other
payments of necessity. And you ought to consider, much must go out in Bounty
and Charity, and some in Hospitality and State. I say in state and attendance:
For is it fit that the Judge of all the inferior Clergy of his Diocese, and of
many of the Laity, should not have a liberal Revenue, and live in more plenty
and splendor than the Common People do, or can do? Doubtless it is necessary;
For let him be never so prudent and diligent; so inwardly humble, and outwardly
meek, yet if he have not a Revenue to live above the Common People, he must
make himself a Companion for them, and lose the reverence due to his Dignity;
and, by that, make himself both cheap, and contemptible; and he that will
consider the necessity of a Bishop's living thus, and the small Revenue that
most of the Bishops have, may turn his maligning them their Revenue, into a
wonder, how they make their Revenue to do it, and a pity it is no more.

There are indeed, some few of them, whose Revenues do abound; and I think I
shall not be mistaken if I say, there have been by them more Highways mended,
and more Hospitals, Schools, and Colleges built and endowed, than by five
times their number of Lay Lords, or by all the Physcians and Lawyers of this
Nation, though very many of their employments, turn to much more profit; and
yet, theirs is not repined at.

And let me tell you also, it is not often that any is made a Bishop till the
age of sixty years; and then he undertakes the Care and toil of Government, to
prevent Heresy and Schisin, or suppress and punish them; and, as occasion
serves, by his writing to defend this Church from the Clamours of the Church of
Rome, or the restless Sectaries of this. And may not the Revenue of a Bishop be
thought a just reward for his forty years past study, and his present care,
though he preach not? And yet many of them do preach often, though not weekly.
And let me add this to what is said; What if the King should give the Revenue
to a Bishop only because he is learned, and condition with him not to preach;
or make a Doctor of the Civil Law a Bishop, who is not in Orders, and should
not preach, but govern, (which I think he may do,) what is this to you or your
Party? You ought to consider this, and that the Bishops Revenues was never
theirs, nor yours, nor your Predecessors, nor can any man now living claim it
for his. It is only and most certainly Gods; given to him by our Kings
Predecessors, and our King appoints who shall govern the Church under him, and
have the Churches Revenue for their reward.

More might be added, but I am as weary of saying this, as you will be to read
it.

Now for Preaching, I praise God I understand my duty both to him and my
neighbor, the better by hearing of Sermons. And though I be desective in the
performance of both (for which I beseech Almighty God to pardon me) yet, I had
been a much worse Christian if I had not frequented the blessed Ordinance of
Preaching, which has convinced me of my many sins past, and begot such terrors
of Conscience as have begot in me holy resolutions to amend my life, and
earnest Prayers to Almighty God, the giver of all grace, to enable me by his
grace to perform those holy resolutions: This benefit, and many other like
benefits, I, and other Christians have had by Preaching: And God forbid we
should ever use it so, or so provoke him by our other sins as to withdraw this
blessed Ordinance from us, or turn it into a curse by preaching Heresy and
Schism, which too many have done in the late time of Rebellion, and indeed now
do in many Conventicles, and their Auditors think such Preaching is serving
God; when God knows it is contrary. For can you think to sit an hour in a warm
Room, upon an easy seat, your head covered, your mind at rest, and your
malicious humor pleased to hear your Governors scandalized, and with their
scandals some new needless Notions offered to your consideration; and then
their truth or falsehood left for you to judge and determine? Can you think you
are at this time serving God, or satisfying your own curiosity or malicious
humor? doubtless not serving God.

Nay, let it be granted, that you hear nothing but truth preached, yet I
question whether the direction how you should honor and serve God, be
honoring and serving him.

For example, If a Master calls his Servant, and gives him positive directions
what he shall do the day following, and the Servant hears him with good
attention, but neglects to do what he is directed? Can you think the hearing
his Masters direction is serving him? No doubtless, it is not; it is granted he
could not have known his Masters will without hearing it, but he serves him not
by hearing his direction, but doing his Will.

And the like may be observed, concerning your magnifying extemporary Prayer by
gifted men in public: and contempt of the Church Liturgy. The first of which
you call praying by the Spirit; but doubtless, it was an evil Spirit that John
Lilbourn, Hugh Peter's, and many others of your Party prayed by, in the days of
Cromwell the Tyrant, when they prayed to God to prolong his life, to strengthen
his Arm, and enable him with zeal and courage, to perfect what he had so
happily begun, and make a through Reformation in the Church and whole Nation.
And in the same Prayer to libel our late virtuous King, by praying to God, that
if he had not wholly withdrawn his grace, and given him over to a reprobate
sense, that he would at last bring him back from his present evil Council to
his great Council the present godly Parliament.

Thus, or to this purpose, was that pious and prudent King libelled in your
public extemporary Prayers and the Tyrant magnified by those that were so
shameless as to call themselves the godly Party. And many well meaning people
were so beguiled as to say Amen to what was thus prayed. And by this means the
Church- Liturgy came to be abhorred by some, and neglected by almost all: And
can you think, praying thus, and appointing God in their Prayers what he was to
do for them, and their Cause, and when, and by what manner and means he was to
do it, was honoring and serving him? No doubtless.

God forbid, that private Christians should be so tied to set Forms of Prayer,
as not in their retired and private devotions to make their private Confessions
of their private sins to the searcher of all hearts: and beg their pardon of
him, and pray extempore for such a measure of his assisting grace so to
strengthen them, that they may never relapse into those, or the like sins: This
doubtless is to honor and serve God, but this is but to honor and serve him
privately: And if I be mistaken in my private Prayers my mistakes concern only
my self, and end there. But it is not so in your Public extemporray Prayers,
the mischief is not ended when the Prayers are.

And that these should justle out the well-known, and approyed Prayers of the
Church, which were composed, and so pathetically and properly worded by the
assistance of Gods Spirit, in many of those blessed Martyrs and Confessors,
whom he made his Instruments to settle and reform the Church of England from
the gross Corruptions of that of Rome: I say, that you and your Party should
not when you consider this, grieve to think it was done by you, is to me a
wonder; and I praise God that he makes me look upon it with a thankful
detestation.

And now, good Cousin, give me leave to tell you, (as I did your Brother in a
Letter writ some years past) what I do (or ought in duty to do) when I make my
self a Member of any Christian Congregation, assembled to pay reverence to
Almighty God, and pray and praise him according to the Injunction and Custom of
our Church.

First, We all do, I am sure, they that know best, and are most devout do, all
kneel, and as many as well may with their faces toward the East, and in that
order, and humble posture, and, with one consent, all make their general and
humble Confession of their unworthiness to appear before God, by reason of
their many and grievous sins past: And we beg pardon for them, and his grace to
serve him the remaining part of our lives with more purity and holiness: And
having confessed, and prayed thus; if the Searcher of all hearts does bear
witness with us, that this Confession and these Prayers be sincere, and that
our purpose is to amend our lives, and obey him better: We do, and may put on a
modest confidence, that he will assist us with his grace; and be assured, that
he is at peace with us, and loves us.

And this being done in an humble and ardent manner, we proceed to laud and
magnify our God in a joint repeating a part of the Psalms, which are all
composed of gratitude, and mercy. And then apply our selves to the hearing some
part of Gods holy Word read, for our information and comfort.

And then to a public profession of our Christian Faith. And then we again
betake our selves to beg of God, that by his preventing grace we may be that
day delivered from the temptations and miseries that threaten our souls and
bodies; and beg for his assisting grace to strengthen us so, that we may oppose
and overcome both.

And having thus humbly confessed our sins, and thus professed our Christian Faith,
and thus begged his pardon, and both his preventing and assisting grace for the
time to come: And all these in such a manner as they be all, most pathetically
expressed in the several Collects of our Church-prayers: The Congregation is
dissolved with the Priests blessing; and all-betake themselves to their several
employments.

And for my part I think God and his holy Angels look down with joy when they
behold a Christian Congregation thus in one manner adoring, and praising God,
and praying for the remission of their sins.

Your being so much a stranger to our Church Prayers, has inclined me to give
you this large account of them, and of my own thoughts. I might here undertake
also to satisfy your scruples of kneeling at the Sacrament, and the Ring in
Marriage; but there has been so many good reasons given of them, in several
small Treatises, for the justification of them, that I will decline that
trouble, both for yours and my own sake: And offer unto you the few following
observations, and so put an end both of yours and my own trouble.

And, in order to doing this, I desire you to look back with me to the
beginning of the late Long Parliament 1640. at which time we were the quietest
and happiest people in the Christian World: (And praised be God we yet are so,)
we had then a prudent and conscientious King, whose life was a pattern of
Temperance, Patience, Piety, and indeed of all the Christian Graces. He
governed I think by the known Laws of the Nation: Every man sat then under the
shadow of his own Vine, and did eat his own Grapes: that is, enjoyed the
benefit of his own labor, and eat his own bread in peace. We had then no need
of a Court of guard to keep the discontented inferior people from rising
against Government: We had then no need to raise those Monthly Taxes to pay
those Courts of guard, and other Charges, that are now come to be of necessity,
to secure us from the yet unseen Commotions of a malicious, restless,
discontented Party, which were first made so by the example of the ill-natured
Presbyterians: And continue to be so by retaining the destructive Principles
they then taught them; and which do still threaten us with new Commotions; thus
happy we were then; and he that considers the present miseries of Germany,
Poland, France; and indeed, of all Christian Nations, how many Cities lately
were, and at this time are besieged, what devastations, and ravishings, and
fears follow running Armies, what terrors and wants those poor distressed
people now groan under! he that considers all this, and compares our present
condition with theirs, ought to say, that England is at this time the happiest
Nation in the Christian world: But our unhappiness is, that peace and plenty
will not suffer us to think so, and study to be quiet and thankful.

This, I beseech you to consider seriously; and good Cousin, let me advise you
to be one of the thankful and quiet Party, for it will bring peace at last. Let
neither your discourse or practice be to encourage, or assist in making a
Schism in that Church in which you were baptized, and adopted a Christian, for
you may continue in it with safety to your soul; you may in it study
sanctification, and practice it to what degree God by his grace shall enable
you: You may fast as much as you will; be as humble as you will; pray both
publicly and privately as much as you will; visit and comfort as many
distressed and dejected Families as you will; be as liberal and charitable to
the poor as you think fit, and are able. These, and all other of those
undoubted Christian graces, that accompany Salvation you may practice, either
publicly or privately, as much, and as often as you think fit; and yet keep in
the Communion of that Church of which you were made a Member at your Baptism.
These Graces you may practice, and not be a busie-body, in promoting Schism and
Faction: As God knows your Fathers Friends, Hugh Peter's and John Lilbourn did,
to the ruin of themselves, and many of their Disciples. Their turbulent lives,
and uncomfortable deaths, are not I hope yet worn out of the memory of many. He
that compares them with the holy life and happy death of Mr. George Herbert, as
it is plainly and I hope truly writ by Mr. Isaac Walton, may in it find a
perfect pattern for an humble and devout Christian to imitate: And he that
considers the restless lives, and uncomfortable deaths of the other two, (who
always lived like the Solamander in the fire of contention) and considers the
dismal consequences of Schism and Sedition, will (if prejudice, or a malicious
Zeal have not so blinded him, that he cannot see reason) be so convinced as to
beg of God to give him a meek and quiet spirit, and that he may by his grace be
prevented from being a busy body in what concerns him not.

The reasons that I have offered to your consideration, have crowded so fast
into my present memory, that they have made my Letter more perplexed, and
longer, and indeed some expressions in it bitterer than I intended when I began
it: But I beg your pardon for both. And supposing I have it, I will close all
with this friendly advice and caution.

Remember you and I are but Citizens, and must take much that concerns our
Religion and Salvation upon trust: I will explain my meaning for what I say,
and have said; by this following Parable.

There was a man, that was and continued under so great a mistake, that though
he thought and granted his Neighbor to be strong enough to lift a hundred
pound weight from the ground, yet could not be brought to believe, or grant,
that he was able to lift fifty pound weight from it; which was doubtless a
great mistake. But, if you will give me leave, I will explain my self by a more
proper Parable, and then make my Application. The same mistaking-man offered,
and was willing to lend his Neighbor a hundred pound (though it were his whole
Estate) upon his single Bond, but being desired to lend him fifty pound upon
his Bond, he durst not trust him with that lesser Sum, lest the Borrower should
not be able to repay him: And so he (the Lender) prove to be undone by the
Borrowers inability to repay him.

Before I make my Application of what I have told you, give me leave to tell
you, the Papists would obtrude upon all Christians a belief that all those
doubtful Books, which the Church of England calls Apocryphal, were certainly
writ by Divine Inspiration, and ought to be of equal Authority with those which
we call Canonical Scripture; and that the foundation for our faith and manners
to God and man may, and must be laid equally upon both. But I think we agree
with the Papists concerning all the Books of the New Testament; that is, that
all were writ by Divine Inspiratione But the Lutherans deny some part of the
New Testament, which both the Papists and we believe and grant to be writ by
Divine Inspiration.

And now for my Application; let me ask you seriously, Are not you like this
mistaking-man, that durst trust a greater, but not trust the Borrower with a
lesser Sum of money? You have trusted the Bishops, and a select Clergy in a
Convocation to tell you, These you shall take to be Canonical Books of
Scripture, and no other: Upon the truth of those, and only those, that they
declare to be the holy Scripture, you lay the foundation of your Faith, and
hope of Salvation. You have trusted the Bishops, that is, the Church of
England; first, their Learning and Wisdom to know, and then their Integrity to
tell you truly which is the blessed and holy Scripture: With these great and
necessary concerns of your Faith and Salvation you have trusted them; and yet,
like the mistaking man, you dare not trust them with what is of less concern:
Namely, you do not believe them when they tell you how the Primitive Christians
did worship, and praise, and pray to God: And though you have trusted them to
translate the Scriptures into English, as being best learned in the Original
Languages; yet you dare not, or do not trust them with the explanation of many
words which have in the Original an ambiguous or doubtful meaning, especially
to us of the Laity, who cannot know the Customs and Phrases of those Nations
where our Savior and his Disciples preached the glad tidings of our common
Salvation.

Cousin, I hope I have in this made some unforced, and so useful Observations,
as an humble and good Christian will not gainsay: And, doubtless, a soul truly
humble, will both think and say,

Almighty God has appointed me to live in an Age, in which Contention
increases, and Charity decays; and it is certain, that variety of Opinions and
Controversies in Religion declare difficulty to know them truly; but my comfort
is, That without Controversy, there is so much Religion without Controversy,
as by the true practice of what is so I may save my, Soul. And therefore, to
make sure of that, I will first become an humble Christian, and conclude, that
I will in all doubtful things obey my Governors, for sure they see a reason,
which I neither can, or need to know, why they command them: I will be sure to
be humble, to fast and pray, to be Charitable, to visit and comfort dejected
Families, to love my Neighbors, to pardon my Enemies, and to do good to all
Mankind, as far as God shall enable me: For I am sure these be Sacrifices which
please Almighty God, and will bring peace at last: And, I am sure, that by
using these graces, these graces, and my faith in Christ's Merits for my
Salvation, will be more and more confirmed; and by still using them, more, and
more new graces will be still added; and all be still more and more confirmed;
so confirmed, as to bear witness with me, and be my comfort when I must make my
last and great account to the Searcher of all hearts.

Almighty God give me grace to practice what I have commended to your
consideration; for this, and this only, can, and will make my life quiet and
comfortable, and my death happy. And, my dear Cousin, as I wish my own, so I
wish yours may be.

September 12, 1679. Your Affectionate Kinsman, R. W.

THE END.

