THE CASE OF Mary Watkinson, Mother of Hannah Gooding (late Hannah Knight) an
Infant and Thomas Gooding Son of Serjant Gooding.
UPON the Marriage of the said Mary with John Knight, Esquire; her late Husband
deceased, who had with her Five thousand pounds Portion, there was a Setlement
made for a Joynter for her, and a Term of Five hundred Years vested in Trustees
for raising of Portions for Daughters, and if but one, and no Issue Male, then
to raise Five thousand pounds Portion for such Daughter payable at the day of
Marriage, or One and twenty Years, with such maintenance as the Trustees should
think fit, not Exceeding Sixty pounds per Annum.

Now the said John Knight had Issue only one Daughter, the aforementioned Infant.

And the said John Knight dying about May, One thousand six hundred ninty and
three, his Relations used his Widow very hard and unkindly, which caused her to
hasten back to her Father who lived at Chelsea in Middlesex, from whence she
applied her self to the surviving Trustees of the Infants Estate for a
maintenance suitable to her Daughters Fortune, whom she had put with a Maid to
wait on her to a noted Boarding School in the same Town of Chelsea, and under
the conduct of one Mrs. Priest, to whom she gave Thirty five pounds per Annum
for her said Daughter and Maids Diet, and Five pounds for Wages, besides the
charge of her Clothes, and other incident expenses of the School which amounted
to a considerable Sum, and therefore expected an allowance in some proportion
answerable thereto from the said Trustees, but after much solicitation and
attendance could prevail with them but for Forty pounds a Year, and of that
never had but two Payments, in all amounting to Eighty pounds, though the Infants
Father has been dead almost four Years.

And having placed her said Child at this Boarding School, she resolved to have
kept her there till her Years of discretion, not having the least thought or
intention of Marrying her, till finding endeavors were used by her late
Husbands Relations (viz.) Ann Knight his Sister, Bridget Tailor one of the
Trustees Daughters, and others, to take her away from the said School, so that
for her preservation she brought her home to her self, where the like attempts
were still made, and Servants tampered with to betray her to them, and this she
did for no other cause or end, but that her Child might not become a prey to
those who seemed more concerned for her Portion then her Person: Under this
difficulty she consulted with her Friends what was to be done to secure her
Child, and at last determined, that if she could find a convenient March she
would Marry her: After this having a Proposal made to her of Mr. Thomas Gooding
the Serjants Son, and having a good account of the Serjant, did admit his said
Son to see her Daughter, and after several meetings of the Son, which as she
believes was without the knowledge of the Serjant, did direct the Serjant to be
sent for to Treat with him concerning his Son, who coming to her, declared his
unwillingness to Treat with her singly being a Woman, but rather with her
Friends, to whom he would make his Proposals, what he would do for his Son and
for settling her Daughters Portion, and making a provision for her in case they
Married. Whereupon she appointed one Mr. Whitehead an Attorney, and Mr.
Mountney to Treat with the Serjant, who proposed to them to lay out her Child's
Fortune (when paid) in purchase of Lands of Inheritance to be settled as a
Jointure, and in case she survived his Son without Issue, that the Estate so to
be purchased, should come to her and her Heirs; Also the Serjant offered to
setle his intrest in the Office of Custos Brevin' of the Kings Bench on his Son
immediately upon payment of the Portion, and to charge the said Office with
Fifty pounds per Annum, more, as a farther provision for her said Child, with
which Proposals she being acquainted, with the advice of her Friends, whom she
consulted therein, she and they were well satisfied, and looked upon her
Daughter to be thereby well provided for, in case the Marriage took effect.
Upon which the before mentioned Proposals being accepted, they were reduced into
Articles, and by advice of her Council settled and executed by the Serjant:
Whereupon a License for their Marriage was taken out by her the latter end of
September last; at which time she did apprehend and so declared her Daughter to
be about Twelve Years of Age, and soon after, that is to say, about the
beginning of October last, they were with her consent and approbation publicly
Married, and hopes and desires the same may not be avoided or disanulled,
conceiving the same to be for her Child's preferment, and not in the least to
her disparagment or inconvenience.

The Case so far as it concerns the said Serjant and his Son, is as follows,
Viz.
That the Serjant's said Son (whom he has bredd in Grays Inn a Student, and is
almost at Bar standing) having incouragment from the said Mrs. Watkinson, the
Infant's Mother to Marry her said Daughter, had several meetings with the
Mother concerning his Marriage with her without the privity or knowledge of the
Serjant, which the Mother promot'd so soon through the unkindness she had from
her late Husband's Relations and several attempts to take her said Child from
her by indirect means, as is presumed either to Marry her to some one of their
own Relations, or detain her Portion from her, till her age of One and Twenty,
for the benefit of her Uncle the Heir at Law.

In which the Serjant hopes he has done nothing unfaire, or otherwise then any
Father might justifiably do for his Child, having the Mother's consent and
approbation therein, who was her Child's proper Guardian both by Nature and Law,
and had the sole disposeing of her, which (as presumed) she has done without
any the least Wrong or Disparagment.

And whereas it is Objected, That the said Serjant knew there was a Bill
depending against the Mother and her Husband to take the guardianship of the
Child from the Mother,

It Is true he did peruse the Defendants Answer though then a stranger to all the
Parties,

That in Hillary Term last the Surviving Trustees for the Infants Portion,
exhibited a Petition to the Lord Keeper against Mrs. Watkinson and her Husband
concerning the Infant, Hillar. Term last.
who ordered thereupon that Watkinson, and his Wife, and Mr. Serjant Gooding
should appear before him with the Infant the next day of Petitions.

They attended with the Infant accordingly, 12 of March following.
where the Petitioners reading Affidavits that were not filed, his Lordship
Ordered the same to be filed, and though the Defendants were ready with their
Witnesses to make their Defense, his Lordship did think fit that both sides
should file their Affidavits by Tuesday noon following, and to be heard on the
Thursday after.

Both sides appeared, 18 March.
and the Infant was brought into Court; but before the Cause came on, she was
conveyed away, and as is supposed by one Jane Pasmore, who about Five Years
since was a servant to the Serjant: The Serjant, his Wife, her Sister, and
several of his Servants were Examined whether they knew of, or were contriving
to the taking away of the Infant, who all denied it, nor did, or do know any
thing thereof.

As to the Son's Swearing upon the Mothers taking out the License for
Marriage, that the Infant was about Twelve Years of age, tho the same be not
material or essential to the Marriage, or License, where the Parent appears, he
was induced thereunto from what the Mother then declared before the Judge that
took the Oath at Drs. Commons, and also before and after, often declared to
him, his Father and Mother, that the Infant was about Twelve Years old, as she
really believed, and also the said Trustees in their Bill exhibited in July
last set forth, that she was then about Ten Years old, which at Christmas
following would be Eleven. It being agreed on all sides that she was born about
Christmas.

As to the Marriage, Infra Annos nubiles, with the consent of the Father or
Mother, that it is good, there are abundance of presidents, and every days
experience. The Wife is Dowable, it must be certified by the Bishop a good
Marriage. And also the Husband has his Action de vxore abducta cum honis viri,
of a Wife, Infra Annos nubiles.

All which having been transacted both according to the ancient Laws and
frequent usage of this Kingdom, it is hoped no Fault can be imputed where
neither the known Laws, nor common Practice in like Cases have yet found any.

All which the Petitioners are ready to make out upon Oath before your
Lordships at the Bar of this most Honorable House.


