AN EQUAL BALANCE, WHEREIN The Ministers and Churches of of the Anabaptists,
(so called) are truly weighed, etc.
ALthough many are risen up in this Age and Generation, and are joined in
confederacy to make war with the Lamb and his followers, who has both with
Tongue and Pen set themselves to oppose, gainsay, and resist the Truth, and to
raise all manner of false reports and slanders which their wicked hearts can
imagine to cast upon it, and upon those who in sincerity of heart walk in it,
thereby to affright the ignorant, and deceive the simple, lest they should turn
from their wickedness, and be converted, and be healed; and so even shut the
Kingdom of heaven against men, neither entering in themselves, nor suffer those
to go in that would; yet amongst them all I have not observed any more
desperately wicked, and notoriously impudent, then the forementioned Author
has manifested himself in a sheet of Paper, as one indeed past feeling, given
up to a reprobate mind, as if his conscience were double seared, or as one that
cannot blush when he has done wickedly; neither is it pleasant to me to
meddle with such noysom stuff, or the foame of such an unclean spirit, who
like the raging sea, casts up mire and dirt, even foaming out his own shame;
but having considered the said Paper, and finding it stuffed with such notorious
lies, and abominable falsehoods, and in particular, one most horrible false
Accusation, to which I shall speak more particularly in its proper place, and
knovving it meet that such a forger of lies should not be hid, nor pass without
rebuke, and also that the truth might be cleared from those false aspersions
cast upon it; and in love and tenderness toward them who are at present
deceived by the lies and by the lightness of those who usurp Authority over
them, by whom their hands are strengthened in wickedness, so that they cannot
return from the evil of their ways, that they might come to see the gross
hypocrisy and palpable deceit of those by whom they are now led captive, and
so come to be redeemed out of the snares of the Devil, and come to hear the
voice of the true Shepherd, and particularly to discover to them the impudency
and wickedness of the said Author, who has most maliciously (with his venomous
Asp-poysoned tongue, struck at the innocent, and under lies and falsehoods has
endeavored to hide and cover himself in the absence of Thomas Salthouse: For
the Truth's vindication I was c^nstrained to write something in answer to it;
and although the Author has so maliciously and wickedly slandered and
reproached Thomas Salthouse and others, in his said Paper, yet I shall not make
it my work to vindicate Persons, but Truth, which is chiefly my aim and end in
this undertaking; and in clearing the truth from those salse Aspersions,
Reproaches, Lies and Slanders, which the said Author has cast upon it, the
innocence of those at whom in particular he strikes will not only be clearly
vindicated, but also his own folly and wickedness be fully manifested, who
(probably to hide himself from the light) has refufed to subscribe his Name to
his Paper, which renders it in the esteem of all people of understanding, to be
of no credit, and to be reputed as a slanderous Libel. His main work in his
Paper (wherein he has so wickedly and impudently slandered and falsely accused
the innocent) seems to be a Vindication of Thomas Collier; and though he has
not named himself, yet by his Work he has manifested himself to be in the same
nature with T. C. if not in the same person; for whoever has viewed the
Writings of T. C. especially those in which he has set himself to resist and
speak evil of the Truth, and the right ways of God, namely, his Dialogue, his
Looking-glass, (so called) his Answer to T. S. his Epistle, etc. compared with
this sheet of Paper, might almost conclude by the method which he follows, That
this also is his Work; for impudency and lies are the strength of his
Arguments, and his own affirmations offered for proof of his Assertions, when
it is but the same lie told over again, only this last seems to come forth
with more impudency then the former, as if he had now poured forth some of the
very bottom and dregs of that wickedness of which the other was the froth and
the scum.

Now the Author having concealed his Name, I could not direct a particular
Answer to him, and therefore (by advice of some Friends) drew up this sollowing
Paper to make public inquiry after him, and to that end caused it to be posted
in several Market Towns in the County of Somerset.

FOrasmuch as th re lately came to our view ae certain printed Paper, entitul^d
The Hypocrisy and Falsehood of Thomas Salthouse discovered, a noted Quaker,
containing in it many ly^s and ^alse assertion^, and published in the
Vindication of Thomas Collier, as by the Contents thereof appears. And whereas
the Author ^her^of being (as we have just cause to think) conscious of his own
guilt in pu^lishing such lies and falsehoods, and to hide himself from the
reproof of truth, and shame due to such a worker of darkness, has refused to
own it by subscribing his Name: These are therefore to give notice, That if the
Author thereof has not concealed his Name for these or the like reasons, let
him manifest the contrary by discovering his Name to any one of the
Subscribers, that so a particular Answer may be (...), some of us being
concerned therein particularly, and in the mean time there is no rational man
has ground to credit that which the Author himself appears not to own.

Jasper Batt, John Collins, John Dando, William Beaton, Robert Wastfeild.


But as yet the Author has not discovered his Name to any one of us, and
therefore I shall proceed to speak something in answer to his Paper, and so let
it go abroad to find out the unnamed Author.

And first he says (as the Title of his Paper) The hypocrisy and falsehood of
T. S* discovered, a noted Quaker; manifested in a pretended line of true
Judgment.

To which I answer, Thou have plainly discovered thy self to be the hypocrite,
though under falsehood thou have endeavored to hide thy self; and the Truths
asserted by T. S. stands over thee, and his Judgment is according to Truth, as
will more evidently appear when the filth and dirt which thou have endeavored
to cast upon it, is wiped away. And this is one of thy marks whereby thou art
known to be an hypocrite, in that thou have slandered and reproached persons
and Principles publicly in print, and then (left thy Wickedness should be
discovered, and thy lies and falsehoods be turned upon thee) like the Thief or
the Murderer which are afraid of the light, thou have endeavored to hide thy
self by refusing to subscribe thy Name in token of owning thy Work.

Thou say, The abominable hypocrisy and falsehood manifested in T. S. his
pretended Line of true Judgment, occasioned thee to let it lie for some time
by thee, etc.

I say, Thou speak great swelling words of vanity, thereby to allure those
who live with thee in Error, crying out of the hypocrisy and falsehood of T. S.
but is it not strange to hear one in whom abomination reigns, to cry out of
abomination in others? And to hear a Hypocrite cry out of Hyocrisie, and a liar
to cry out of falsehood? But by so doing, he that is indeed the notorious liar,
and the abominable hypocrite, may have hopes to pass undiscovered.

Thou say, Yet for Truth's sake, and for the sakes of poor souls, thou will
give a very brief touch in a sheet of Paper, etc.

To which I say, It is not thy pretenses will hide thee, the light has
discovered thee, and thy unclean spirit, and thy fruits does manifest thee to
all who have an eye open to see thee; and though thou pretend a care for truth
and poor souls, yet thou art found to be one of Truth's greatest Enemies, and
one that labors to keep souls in blindness and ignorance; and by this Work of
wickedness thou haft endeavored to touch the Lord's Anointed, and to harm his
Prophets, for which the Lord will reprove thee in the day of account, which is
near at hand.

Thou recitest some of T. S. his words in the Title Page of his Book, where he
says, The exaltation of the Spiritual Man with his Ordinances and
Administrations, above the Man of Sin, with the weak and unprofitable
Ordinances that does not make the comers there unto perfect. Which sound,
wholesome Words of his, thou go about most wickedly to pervert, and his plain
and honest intention most falsely and hypocritically to interpret, saying, The
Spiritual Man must be the light within, their own fancy and imagination which
they persuade all to follow; and Jesus Christ crucified, raised and ascended,
and made Lord and Christ, he must be the man of sin.

Truly if thou had not (as it were) a brow of Brass, thou would blush* and
even tremble to utter such blasphemous words as these; Did thou never think
to give an account for these (with other thy hard ungodly) speeches, which in
the pride of thy heart thou have uttered forth? Thou accusest T. S. in thy
Paper for Hypocrisy and wretched perverting: Now let all sober-minded people
judge whether thou be not manifestly guilty of that evil which thou falsely
chargest upon him: But because there is some words of truth mixed with thy
unclean filthy language, though it comes out of a polluted Vessel, I shall
separate it from the rest, and when the Jewel is taken out of the Swine's
snout, the remainder may be bundled up for the fire.

Thou say, The Spiritual Man must be the light within: To which I say, The
Spiritual Man is light, and the light of Christ is spiritual, and the Spiritual
Man is within, even the hidden man of the heart; and he that knows not this
Spiritual Man living in him, is not a Member of the Church of Christ* and he in
whom the Spiritual Man lives, does thereby mortify the deeds of the flesh, and
his mortal body comes to be quickened by the Spirit which dwells in him, and
hereby he is made a member of the Church of Christ, and no otherwise, and comes
to partake of his Ordinances, and knows his Administrations and so comes to be
exalted above the Man of Sin, and stands over all the beggarly rudiments, and
traditional invented Will-Worships, set up in the imagination which does not
purify the heart, nor purge the conscience from dead works, nor give victory
over the World, and so makes not the comers thereunto, or practisers of them
perfect, but perishes with the using; and this is not fancy nor imagination,
but sound and wholesome Doctrine; according to the Scripture of truth; neither
do we at any time persuade any to follow their own fancies and imaginations, as
thou most wickedly and falsely chargest us, but it is Christ the true light, the
Spiritual Man, who leads out of darkness all that follow him, and from every
vain imagination; it is him alone that we exhort all men to obey and follow.

And the reason that thou give why Jesus Christ crucisied, raised, and
ascended, etc. must be the Man of Sin, is, Because (thou say) it is his
Ordinances you follow and plead for according to the Scriptures. Thou say,
You own Jesus Christ crucified, and justification by Faith in his blood, which
Faith purifies the heart, (though you confess that abomination reigns in your
souls, and that iniquity is apparently written on your foreheads, and that you
are drawing it with cords of vanity) and Baptism with Water after believing,
and Church Fellowship in breaking of Bread, and Prayer, etc. and this thou
say T. S. calls the Ordinances of the Man of Sin, which is another most
abominable falsehood charged upon him* When? Or where did he ever call
Justification by Faith in the blood of Christ, Baptism, breaking of Bread, and
Prayer, etc. which are Ordinances of Christ, the Ordinances of the Man of Sin?
Thou have made a great outcry of the hypocrisy and falsehood of T. S. doubling
it over to, four times in thy title page, and yet before thou concludest the
same page, how manifestly and publicly do thou play the hypocrite with him,
in drawing such a damnable Conclusion from his Words, and most wickedly and
falsely to accuse him, saying, He calls the Ordinances of Christ* the Ordinances
of the man of sin; when at the utmost it is but the deceit of thy own wicked
heart, and not his words nor intentions, as may evidently appear to any who
have but the least measure of honesty to judge.

But what though you in a hypocritical manner, according to the vain and
foolish imaginations of your dark hearts, have fancied to your selves a Worship
in your Wills, and practice things in imitation of others, which you say you
plead for, and follow, and call Ordinances of Christ, because the Scripture
declares that such things were practiced by those who were thereto led by the
Spirit of God, though you from that Spirit are erred; and says the Scripture
is your Rule; must it therefore follow, that T S. does account Jesus Christ
crucified, etc. to be the Man of Sin, and his Ordinances, the Ordinances of the
Man of Sin? Oh wicked and damnable Conclusion drawn from such an Argument! Thou
tells of the Quaker's Logic; surely this may truly be called the Devil's
Logic; for greater Wickedness, and more horrible iniquity I believe never
dropped from the Pen of any one that pretends to plead for, and follow
Ordinances of Christ; but it is not your professing the Name of Christ, or
professing Justification by Faith in his Blood, or practicing things by
imitation, and calling it the Ordinances of Christ, that will avail you any
thing, whilst the Man of Sin bears rule, and is exalted in you; for
notwithstanding your profession, whilst sin does reign in you, all that you
practice is but the Ordinances of the Man of Sin, and those Ordinances are weak
and unprofitable, and can never make the comers thereunto (or the practisers of
them) perfect; and in this state the Spiritual Man, which is Christ, you know
not, neither of his Ordinances which are spiritual, can you partake; for this I
affirm, That the Ordinances of Christ, which are spiritual, are only used and
practiced in the Church of Christ, and amongst the Saints, and not elsewhere;
and for any other to say that they either follovv them, or plead for them, I
say they are intruders into those things which they have not seen, and are
talking of those things which belongs not to them, neither were they ever
intended or ordained for such to practice; and it will be said to all such,
Who has required these things at your hands? And therefore notvvithstanding
your profession, and your great boasting of the Ordinances of Christ, except it
may appear that you are the Church of Christ, and that his Spirit leads you to
(and guides you in) the practice of those things, they are not the Ordinances
of Christ to you, but a Worship set up in your wills, in imitation of others who
were thereunto led by the spirit of God; for he that has not the spirit of
Christ to lead him and guide him, is none of his, and then no member of his
Church, and such cannot partake of his Ordinances. And he that has received
that spirit, is thereby made a Member of the Church of Christ, and by it led
and guided into all truth, and so into the practice of those Ordinances of
Christ that are spiritual; and this is agreeable with (and according to) the
Scriptures of truth; and therefore I say, except it may appear that you are
Members of the church of Christ, and led and guided by his spirit in the
exercise and performance of those things which you practice, and which you call
Ordinances of Christ, all that you do, is but imitation at the most; and not
withstanding your boasting of the Ordinances of Christ; and that it is his
Ordinances you plead for, and follow, yet it will appear to be but
will worship, and voluntary humility, and the foolish inventions and
imaginations of your own hearts, which will never make the comers thereunto
perfect; and so your Faith (of which you speak) will appear to be vain, and as
(by your own confession it appeats) it has not, so it will not purify your
hearts, nor give you victory over the world, but you will still remain in your
sins, and the Law still have dominion over you; and if you are not Members of
that church whereof Christ is the Head, and so Members of his body, and that
his spirit leads you to (and guides you in) your Worship and your Practice,
then you are of the Synagogue of Satan, and so the man of sin is exalted in you
above all that is called God, and his voice you obey, and his servants you are,
and his Ordinances you practice, and him you worship, and of the true God, and
his Worship, and the true Christ, and his Ordinances, you are ignorant; and
therefore you shall be tried whether you are the church of Christ or not, or
wherein you differ from them; and thereby it will appear what those Ordinances
are, and whose they are, which you say you follow and plead for; and herein you
shall have just measure, for you shall be tried by your own confession, and the
Scriptures of truth shall be witness; which said Confession is recorded in a
printed Paper, directed to all the Churches of Jesus Christ, (as you call them)
from a meeting of the Messengers of the Churches in Tiverton, the 18. day of
the 7. Month, 1657. Signed in their Names, and by their appointment, (as the
Subscribers say, who write themselves) Thomas Collier, Nathaniel Strange,
Thomas Glass: And so this Author, with all the rest of the people called
Anabaptists, are concerned in it; which said Tiverton-Writing, or printed
Paper, was the occasion of T. S. his directing his Epistle to you, called, An
Epistle to the Churches of the Anabaptists, (so c^lled.) Which ought rather to
have been received by you in love, then for any of you thus to reward him evil
for good; but his reward is with the Lord, and whether you hear or forbear,
whether you believe or perish in your gainsaying, he will be clear of your
blood, and be a good savor to the Lord.

And amongst many other particulars contained in your said Epistle, you say,
You have made confession of those reigning abominations in your own souls, and
in the Churches. To which I say, Hereby you appear to be neither Ministers nor
Churches of Jesus Christ, but very much to differ from them; for if abomination
reigns in your Churches, then abomination is the Head of your Church; for that
which reigns in the church, is the head of the church; and if abomination be
the head of your church, then is not Christ your head; but the church of Christ
did witness Christ to be their head, and not abomination; and they were
exhorted to grow up into him in all things, which is the Head, even Christ, who
is both the Head and the Savior of his church, which is his body, according to
the Scriptures, Ephesians. 4. 15. Ephesians. 5. 23. Coll. 1. 18. and thus it is evident that
you are not the church of Christ, which is his Body, because Christ is not your
Head. Again, that which reigns in your churches, has dominion over your
churches; and you say abomination reigns in your churches, and in your souls;
therefore abomination has dominion over your churches, and over your souls;
and this proves you to be no Church of Christ, because you are subjects to
another Prince, and other Lords has the Dominion over you, and you are not
subjects of Christ's Kingdom; but the Church of Christ were in subject on to
Christ, and he did reign over them, and had the dominion over them, as the
Scriptures declares, which says, He shall reign over the house of David for
ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end; who is set far above all
principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named,
etc. to whom they ascribed praise and dominion for ever and ever, Luke 1 33.
Ephesians. 1. 21. 1 Pet 4. 11. Again, Abo nination is that which God hates, and his
wrath and displeasure is against such in whom abomination reigns; for the
fearful, and unbelieving, and abominable, etc. must have their part in the lake
which burns with fire and brimstone; but the Church of Christ are beloved of
God, and have their part, and their inheritance, and fellowship with the
Father, and with the Son, and with the Saints in light, as the Scriptures does
witness, which says, For the Father himself loves you, because ye have loved
me; and the love of God was shed abroad in their hearts, and nothing was able
to separate them from the love of God in Christ Jesus; And they had known and
believed the love that God had to them, John 16. 27. Romans 5. 5. Romans 8. 39. 1
John 1. 3. 1 John 4. 16. And thus you in whom abomination reigns, are proved to
be no church of Christ, for where abomination does reign, there Christ does not
reign; but such were they who sent a Message after him, saying, We will not
have this man to reign over us; who must be brought and slain before his face,
And where Christ does not reign, there his Statutes and his Ordinances are not
known, but every one walks and worshippeth according to the imagination of
his own heart, and every one does that which is right in his own eyes, even as
they did when there was no King in Israel, and the Statutes and Ordinances
which you follow, and plead for, are the dictates of the man of sin which
bears rule in you; yea even from the abomination which is set up where it
ought not to stand, (which makes desolate) do you receive them, and not from
Christ who is the Head, King, and Lawgiver to his Church and People; and in
this state whilst abomination reigns and is head in you, what ever you
profess or what ever you practice, it is all abomination to the Lord; For the
prayers of the wicked (or those in whom abomination reigns) are abomination to
the Lord; and vvhilest that which is abominable in the sight of the Lord*
rules, and is head in you; all that proceeds from you, yea, even your best
performances, (though they may in outward appearance seem to be the same with
the people of God, or Church of Christ, and like that which the people of God
and Church of Christ did practice according to Scripture-Testimony) yet it all
stinks in the nostrils of the Lord, and is an abomination in his sight; for who
can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one. And surely you in whom
abomination reigns, are unclean in the eyes of our God, for he is of purer eyes
then to behold iniquity: And therefore whilst abomination reigns in your
Churches, and in your souls, call not your selves Ministers of Christ, nor
Churches of Christ, nor do not say you plead for, and follow his Ordinances;
for the Church of Christ has an Altar whereof you have no right to eat,
neither can you taste of the Supper of the Lord, neither have you any part or
lot in this matter; for your hearts are not upright before the Lord, neither
into the City of our Solemnity may you enter; for into that City can in no wise
enter any thing that defiles, or works abomination, or loves or makes a lie*

You complain in your Epistle, of a light Spirit, living short of the true
sight and sense of Gods Majesty in his Churches, and among his Saints.

By which also it appears you are not the Church of Christ, neither is that
light Spirit, of which you complain* the Spirit of God; but it was otherwise
with the Church of Christ, of which the Scriptures declares; for they had
received the Spirit of Truth, (which was not a light spirit) by which they
were led into all truth, and had the true sight and sense of Gods Majesty
amongst them, and did not live short thereof, but beheld his glory, and were
made glad with the favor of his countenance, which was lifted up upon them,
Psalm. 89* 15. Psalm* 21. 6* Acts 2. 28. John 14. 16, 17. 1 Cor. 2 12. Gal. 4. 6.
1 Ioh. 3. 24. and your spirit is a spirit of blindness, by your own confession,
so that you cannot perceive the things that pertain to the Kingdom of God, but
you are without the true sight and sense thereof, and so you are walking in the
dark paths, and going on in the broad way which leads to destruction* but the
church of Christ did walk in the light of the Lord, and the spirit by which
they were led and guided, led them out of darkness into the marvelous light of
the Lord, and guided their feet into the paths of peace, as the Scriptures does
witness, 2 Cor. 4. 6. Ephesians. 5 8. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 4, 5. 1 Pet. 2 9. And thus you
who are led and guided by a light spirit, that lives short of the true sight
and sense of Gods Majesty in his Churches, and among his Saints, are not the
Church of Christ, but are under chains of darkness, and the god of this world
has blinded your eyes* Now you seem to confess that Gods Majesty is to be seen
in his Churches, and his presence to be enjoyed by his people, and among his
Saints; and if so, then you who live short of the true sight and sense of his
Majesty which is seen in his Church, and do not behold the glory of his
presence which his Saints does see and behold, and which is amongst them; I
say, Then you are not of that number who are indeed his Church and Saints, but
you live short of the true sight and sense of that glory and excellency which
they behold, and are made partakers of; and in this state of ignorance and
blindness you are groping, but cannot find the door, and you call evil good,
and good evil; you put darkness for light, and light for darkness; you call
your own fancies and imaginations, Ordinances of Christ; and the light of
Christ which is spiritual, and shines in the hearts of his people, by which
they have the true sight and sense of Gods Majesty amongst them, this you call
fancy and imagination; and your own inventions you set up as an Altar to the
unknown God, and you worship you know not what, but of the true God and his
Worship you are ignorant, for his voice at any time you have not heard, nor his
shape you have not seen, and of the true Christ and his Ordinances you are
unsensible* and his body (which is spiritual) you cannot discern, and therefore
though you boast that it is the Ordinances of Christ you plead for, and follow,
as Church Fellowship in breaking of Bread, and Prayers, etc. yet you are
discovered to be of that number that are unworthy to partake of the Supper of
the Lord, and of the Ordinances of Christ; for you being out of the true sight
and sense of Gods Majesty in his Churches, and amongst his Saints, you are out
of the discerning of the Lords body, which is spiritual, and therefore instead
of partaking of the Ordinances of Christ, you eat and drink to your selves
damnation, not discerning the Lords body.

Again, you complain in the said Epistle, of a wretched, wor^^y spirit, which
plucks the Saints down from their excellency, and leaves blackness upon you,
which renders you uncomely, etc.

Which does also manifest you to be no Church of Christ; for the spirit which
is in them, does build them up, and not pluck them down; and does beautify
them, and not render them uncomely, and it causes them to excel all other
people, and does not pluck them down from their excellency, and it is not a
wretched wordly spirit, but the spirit of God, by which they overcome the
world; and this spirit was in the Saints and Church of Christ, of which the
Scriptures of truth does witness; and they had received that Grace which taught
them to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts and had escaped the pollutions which
are in the world through lusts, and they did witness that Faith which overcomes
the world, and knew him to live in them by whom the world is overcome, and were
directed and commended to that Grace which was able to build them up, and they
were built up together, and became a habitation of God through the Spirit, even
a spiritual House, an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices unto
God, 1 Cor. 2. 12. Gal. 6. 14. Tit 2. 12. 2 Pet 1. 4. 1 Ioh. 5. 4. Acts 20. 32.
Ephesians. 2. 20, 21* 22. Jude 20. 1 Pet. 2 5. Isa. 28. 5, 6. Isa. 61. 3. By all
which it appears how much you differ from the Church of Christ, insomuch that
the absolute contrary marks, fruits, and effects, does appear in you, and
amongst you, as was in them, and amongst them; but you are of those who turn
again with the dog to the vomit, and with the Sow that was washed, to the
wallowing in the mire, who were indeed once more excellent while you were
little in your own eyes, before you were thus settled on your Lees; and there
was a time when there was breathings in some of you after the Lord, and
something which did hunger and thirst after righteousness, and there was then
some tenderness amongst you, and a sensibleness of something that was
oppressed, and held captive as under the power of a strange King, and then
there was some groanings for deliverance, and some desires raised in you after
the Lord, and after purity and holiness, which did render you comely whilst you
abode in that state; but you have lost that condition, and the cry of the
oppressed is not regarded by you; but you are joined (and become one) wi^^ ^he
oppressor, and that which onc^ breathed to be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, you have even choked and strangled, and so you never knew that
born or brought forth, which is heir of Gods Kingdom, but an untimely birth is
brought forth, and you are sat down by the way, in an empty form, wanting the
life and power, and have taken up a false rest, but the true rest you have not
known: And thus a wretchedworldly spirit has overcome you, accompanied with
many other evils of the like nature, by your own confession, and has plucked
you from that excellency which you once had, and has defaced that comeliness
which was once upon you, and has left blackness and deformity upon you; and
those desires which once appeared amongst you, are forgotten, and the
tenderness quite lost, and hardness of heart got up, and nothing remains but
deadness, and dryness, and emptiness* amongst you, according to your
confession; and thus the seed even rots under the clods, and you dwell in a
Land of darkness, where the presence of the Lord is not found to refresh you,
nor the dew of the lasting Hills falls not on you, but you remain dry and
barren, bringing forth no fruit to God, but deceit and abomination rules in
your hearts, and the man of sin is exalted in you above all that is called God,
and great clusters of the sour Grapes of Sodom appear amongst you, and is
plentifully brought forth by you to the dishonor of God; So your latter end is
worse then your beginning.

Again, you say in your said Epistle, You have been, as in a great measure
without the sense of the work, so without the true travel of soul, which this
work should have pat you into.

So hereby you utterly exclude your selves from being a Church of Christ, and
are manifested in a great measure to differ from them; for if you are
insensible of the work of God amo^^s^ you, and in you, and if it be not he that
works the will and the deed, and that works all your works for you, and in
you, then you are doing your own works, and your righteousness is your own, and
not the Lords; and so your righteousness is the same with that of the Scribes
and Pharisees, who were not the Church of Christ, but those who crucified him:
But the Church of Christ were sensible of the work of God in them, and amongst
them, as the Scriptures of truth does witness, and they gave a particular
relation thereof, how it wrought in them, saying, That patience works
experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed; and these were
the works of God in them, of which they were sensible, and they said, Lord thou will ordain peace for us, for thou have wrought all our works in us: So they
were sensible of the work, and of him that works, and they knew that they
were of God, and that the Son of God was come, who had given them an
understanding to know him that was true; and they were in him that is true, and
they testified that this was the true God, and eternal life; and those were not
insensible, but had their senses exercised in the knowledge of the Work of God,
and they had known the terrors of the Lord, and therefore did persuade men, and
so were not insensible of the Work, as the Scriptures witnesses, Romans 5. 4, 5.
Isa. 26. 12. 1 Ioh. 5. 19, 20. 2 Cor. 5. 11. Again, the Church of Christ had
known the true travel of soul, and witnessed the birth which is born of the
Spirit, which inherits the Kingdom of God, of which travel it seems you are
ignorant, and therefore never came to the birth which is immortal; but they had
cried as a Woman in travel, and felt the anguish as of her that brings forth
her first child, and every man was seen with his hands upon his loins, as a
Woman in travel; and they have also known the deliverance, and forgotten the
anguish and the pain, for joy that a Man-child is born; and the Minister of
Christ said, That he traveled in pain until Christ was formed in them; And
they were born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the
word of God, which lives and abides for ever, as the Scriptures does witness,
Ier. 4. 31. Mic. 4. 10. Gal. 4. 19. 1 Pet. 1. 23. But you who are without the
sense of the Work, and have not known the souls travel, are not born of the
seed which is incorruptible, and so not heirs of Gods promise; for the promise
is to the Seed, in which all the Nations of the earth are blessed; and those
who are not born of the Seed which is incorruptible, they are under the curse, in
the transgression, alienated from the life of God, and strangers from the
Commonwealth of Israel; out of Gods Covenant, with whom the Church of Christ
can have no fellowship.

You further say in the said Epistle, The world as a Canker, does eat out your
affections to the Lord Jesus.

Which does also prove you to be no Church of Christ, but to differ from them;
For the Church of Christ had their affections set on Christ, and the Minister
of Christ said, If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above,
where Christ sits on the right hand of God; Set your affections on things
above, and not on things on the earth: And he says, If any man love not the
Lord Jesus Christ, let him be, Anathema maranatha. And such who are accursed,
are no Church of Christ. And he said, Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? And he was persuaded* That neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature, should be able to separate them
from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus: And the World had not eaten out
their affections to Christ Jesus; and this was their confidence, That nothing
could alienate their affections from him: And John said, Love not the world,
neither the things that are in the world; if any man love the world, the love
of the Father is not in him; and he says, Every one that loves him that
begat, loves him that is begotten of him, Col. 3. 1, 2. 1 Cor. 16. 22. Romans 8.
35, 38, 39. 1 John 2. 15: 1 John 5. 1. But you say your affections to the Lord
Jesus are eaten out by the World, as by a canker, therefore the love of the
Father is not in you, but the god of this World has blinded your eyes, and
being in love with the World, you are in the enmity against God; for the
friendship of the World is enmity to God: And the World being thus set in your
hearts, you cannot find out the beginning, nor know the end of the Work of God,
but are without the true sight and sense of his Majesty, and without the sense
of his Work in your souls, and in your Churches; and although you may think you
are rich, and increase in goods, because you call your selves Churches of
Christ, and because you have heaped up together a bundle of unprofitable and
carnal Ordinances, according to your own imaginations, (in imitation of the
Church of Christ) which you call the Ordinances of Christ, which you plead for,
and follow, yet in as much as your affections to the Lord Jesus are eaten out
by the love of the World, and you plucked down from your excellency by a
wretched worldly spirit, you thereby appear to be no Church of Christ, neither
do you, nor can you partake of his Ordinances, which are spiritual, but are
(upon trial) found to be miserable, and wretched, and poor, and blind, and
naked.

Likewise you say in your said Epistle, That this Iniquity has been apparently
written on your foreheads.

To which I say, You are thereby apparently known to be no Church of Christ,
but to differ from them; For their Father's Name is written on their
Foreheads, and not Iniquity; And the Lord caused his mark to be set on the
foreheads of all that did sigh and cry for the abominations that were
committed by them whose iniquities were exceeding great; and the servants of
the Lord, and Church of Christ, did receive the seal of the living God in their
Foreheads, and upon them is written the Name of God, and the Name of the City
of God* and the new Name; and such see his Face, and his Name is written in
their Foreheads, and not Iniquity, Ezekiel 9. 4. Rev. 7. 3. and 3. 12. 22, 4. And
these are redeemed from iniquity, and their garments washed and made white in
the blood of the Lamb; For where Iniquity is apparently written, there the
Fathers Name is not written; and where the Fathers Name is not written, and his
mark received* they are not the Church of Christ; For Holy and Reverend is his
Name, and holiness becomes the House of the Lord (which is his Church) for
ever; and his mark is Christ's righteousness, with which his Church is covered
and adorned; and his Seal is the holy Spirit of Promise, by which they are
sealed to the day of Redemption: But you on whose Foreheads Iniquity is so
apparently written, your gathering together is not into the Name of the Lord,
which is a strong Tower to the righteous, who run in thither, and are safe;
neither are you covered with Christ's Righteousness, nor sealed with his holy
Spirit; neither is his mark upon you, or his Name written on your Foreheads,
but your iniquity is marked before the Lord; and Iniquity being your Mark,
thereby you are plainly known to be of that number that worship the Beast* and
his Image, and his Name you bear, and his mark is on your Foreheads, and
whilst you bear this mark so apparently on your Foreheads, (to wit) Iniquity,
you ought not to make mention of the Name of the Lord, for he that names the
Name of the Lord, should depart from iniquity, else it would be said unto you,
Depart hence, I know you not, ye workers of Iniquity; although you may say with
them, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and we have pleaded for, and
followed thy Ordinances; Yet I say, Notwithstanding this plea, if Iniquity be
your mark, you must depart with the workers of iniquity.

Also you say in your said Epistle, That this sin eats out all the divine
sweetness of regenerating and sanctifying Grace.

And by this also it appears that you are no church of Christ, For if that be
eaten out by sin, which should regenerate you, then are you unregenerate; and
if unregenerate, then no church of Christ; For the church of Christ are
regenerated and born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by
the Word of God, and saved by the washing of regeneration, and by the renewing
of the Holy Ghost; and sin had not eaten out that which should regenerate them,
which was the Grace of God; for they were quickened together with Christ, and
saved by Grace, Tit. 3. 5. 1 Pet. 1. 24. Ephesians. 2. 5. Again, if that be eaten out
by sin, which should sanctify you, then are you unsanctified; and if you are
unsanctified, then surely you are no church of Christ; for the church of Christ
were washed, and sanctified, and justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and
by the Spirit of God; and they said they were sanctified by the will o God,
through the offering of the body of Je^us; and Jude did write to them that were
sanctified by God the Father, etc. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Heb. 10. 10. Jude 1. And thus
you being unregenerated, and unsanctified, you cannot enter into Gods Kingdom;
for except a man be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; but he
which is unregenerate, is not born again, and therefore cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. And without holiness no man can see the Lord; but he that is
unsanctified, is without holiness, and therefore cannot see the Lord. And so
though Grace has abounded toward you, yet it seems your sins has much more
abounded, in so much that sin has overcome you, and eaten out all the Divine
sweetness of regenerating and sanctifying Grace; but with the church of Christ
it was otherwise; for though there was a time in which sin had abounded, yet
Grace had much more abounded in them; so that by Grace they were saved from
sin, and were become dead to sin, and alive unto righteousness, and had their
fruits unto holiness, and the end everlasting life.

And so by all these particulars, of which you have confessed your selves to be
guilty, it is evident that you are neither Ministers nor churches of Christ;
but on the contrary, it plainly appears that you very much differ from them:
And also there are many other particulars expressed in the said Tiverton Epistle,
of which you confess your selves to be guilty, which time would even fail me to
insist upon; whereby I could further (and more fully and largely) prove that
you are neither Ministers nor churches of Jesus Christ, some of which are as
follows.

That coldness and deadness is upon your selves, and upon the churches;
formality in holy duties, indifferency, and a Laodicean spirit is sallen in
upon you; that you have been drawing iniquity with cords of vanity; that
there is amongst you personal iniquity, congregational iniquity, national
iniquity, family iniquity, closet iniquity; that you are without soundness,
from the crown of the head, to the sole of the foot, full of bruises and
putrified sores, and the crown is fallen from your head by reason of your
iniquities; that you have but as it were, played with God, and not trembled in
his presence, but have been wanton before him, and without the terror of his
Majesty; and ^^at you have delighted to confess, and to word it out with the
Lord, and being gone away, presently forgot what manner of men and women you
were, and thought no more on your prayers, and so confess that you have often
mocked God; that the World does eat out your time, your strength, your zeal;
and that in the lap of this Dalilah (whilst asleep) your locks have been cut
off, and you are but as other men; that Satan has showed you the Kingdoms of
the world, and this has bewitched you, and alienated your minds from the Lord;
that you are remiss in meetings, and that you neglect the poor Saints and
Ministers of Christ, whose daily complaints and addresses (you say) are living
monuments of this reigning abomination That you are cruel to servants and
children, exacting all their labors, and takes no time to counsel or instruct
them, whereby their souls might be the better for you; that slavish fear has
stopped your mouths, until the mouth of this Iniquity has almost devoured
your poor churches. That these evils are so deeply rooted in your hearts, that
it is hard to get them out; that they have wrested all weapons out of your
hands, that have been formed against them; so that you have labored in vain,
and that which you have brought forth, has been to little purpose. Several
other such like things as these, you confess your selves and your churches to
be guilty of, in the said Tiverton Epistle. To all which I say, If you are
indeed guilty of all these reigning abominations, and apparent iniquities,
according to your confession, then assuredly may I conclude, That you are
neither Ministers nor churches of Christ; and that the Ordinances which you
practice, are not the Ordinances of Christ, but the Ordinances of the man of
sin, which is exalted, and bears rule in you; for of these abominations and
apparent iniquities, the church of Christ was never guilty, as has been
proved: And if you say you are not guilty thereof, according to your
confession, then is this confession of yours a most abominable piece of
hypocrisy, wherein you have even mocked God, as you say you have done often,
which will render you no less culpable of his fierce wrath and heavy
indignation, then the former.

And thus are your skirts discovered, and your deeds brought to light, and you
weighed in an Equal Balance* and true judgment passed upon you; and therefore
although you call your selves churches of Christ, and Ministers of Christ, yet
your presumption is hereby discovered, who call your selves churches of Christ,
and are not; as their blasphemy was known who said they were Jews, and were
not; and you with them are found liars. And although you boast of the
Ordinances of Christ, and say it is his Ordinances you follow, and plead for
according to the Scriptures, and would seem to deck your selves with precious
Stones, and Pearls, yet whilst these abominations reign in you, and such
iniquities so apparentlie written upon you, your Name is, Mysteris Babylon, the
Mother of Harlots, and Abomination of the Earth; a Synagogue of Satan, a
habitation of Devils, a hold of every foul Spirit, and a cage of every unclean
and hateful Bird: And therefore though Joab fly to lay hold on the horns of
the Altar, yet from thence he must be taken, because he is a man of blood, and
so on his head must the blood of Abner be charged, and rest for ever, that
Davia and his house may be clear before the Lord for ever.

And thus the Spiritual Man (which is Christ the true light) with his
Ordinances and Administrations, which are spiritual, are exalted above the man
of fin, and above his Ordinances, which are weak and unprofitable, and which
does not make the comers thereunto perfect; and above that imagined, false
Christ, which does not save his people from their sins; and above that
Justification which justifies people in their sins; and above that blood which
does not reach to the purging of the conscience from dead works; and above that
faith which does not purify the heart, and give victory over the world; and
above that baptism which is not by one spirit, into one body, whereby sin and
transgression, reigning abominations, and apparent iniquities are washed away;
and above that Churchfellowship which is not with the Father, and with the Son,
and with the Assembly of the firstborn, and with the spirits of just men made
perfect; and above that Bread which is not the Body of Christ; and above that
cup which is not the cup of blessing, of consolation, and salvation, even the
Communion of the Blood of Christ, the spiritual Rock of which the Israel of God
drunk. And above those Prayers which are but liplabour, which are so soon
forgotten, and no more thought upon, and wherewith God is so often mocked,
which comes not from a pure heart, and holy hands lifted up without wrath and
doubting; and above that Worship which stands in the will of man, in conformity
to a Rule, or Law without them, not being thereunto led by the Spirit of the
living God, whose Worship is spiritual, and who will be worshipped in the
spirit, and in the truth; I say, The Spiritual Man with his Ordinances and
Administrations, which are spiritual, stands over the man of sin, and over
these his carnal, weak, unprofitable Ordinances, beggarlie rudiments, vain
ceremonies, and traditional imitations, which although you call them the
Ordinances of Christ, yet they are but your own fancies and imaginations.

And thus by a just and a lawful Trial, it plainly and evidently appears that
you are neither Churches nor Ministers of Jesus Christ, but in all the
particulars beforementioned, you are found very much to differ from them; and
because you are not the church of Christ, and that his Spirit does not lead you
to (and guide you in) the practice or performance of those things which you
plead for, and follow, therefore those things by you pleaded for, are not the
Ordinances of Christ, but the Ordinances of the man of sin; and so the
Spiritual Man with his Ordinances and Administrations, are exalted above the
man of sin, with the weak and unprofitable Ordinances that does not make the
comers thereunto perfect, according to the truth asserted by Thomas Salthouse,
which is hereby vindicated, and fully confirmed.

And now I shall return to speak to some particulars in thy Paper, wherein thou
say, Because in the Tiverton Epistle there is a complaint against the sins
that are remaining in the Churches, T. S from hence suggesteth that they are no
Churches of Christ.

I answer, T. S. had sufficient ground from your own confession in the said
Epistle, to conclude that you are no churches of Christ, as was by him fully
proved, and is now again more at large confirmed: For the church of Christ
(which is his body) is in all things answerable and proportionable to him who
is the Head: Now you will all confess that the Head is holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sin and sinners; and if the Body be unholie, full of
abomination, and defiled with sin and iniquity, then is Christ the Head of a
defiled, polluted, unclean, sinful Body; and this is not proportionable* for as
is the Head, such are the members, and they said, As he is, so are we in this
present world, 1 John 4. 17. But in that Epistle you do not only complain
against those sins that are yet remaining in the churches, but you there say
that abominations are reigning in your churches and in your souls. Now these
expressions in thy Paper, where thou speak of sins remaining, etc. might
seem very much to alter the case, and to lessen the crime, in the judgment of
those that have not seen your Consession in the said Epistle; and such might
begin to think that T. S. had dealt something uncharitably with you, to exhort
all that fear God, to separate from you, and to come out from among you,
because some sins were yet remaining amongst you; for to speak of sins yet
remaining, might seem to imply, that some sins were mortified and put off, and
as if you were warring against, and waiting to receive power to overcome those
that remain; and such a condition as this, we could own, though we cannot own
those for a church of Christ, who live in sin; for we own and witness a
spiritual warfare, which all must know before they can be Members of the church
of Christ; and had you been found in such a condition as this, to be armed with
the power of God, and so to stand in the war against sin and Satan, we could
have owned you in such a state, as a people whom the Lord was purging, and
cleanslng, and sanctifying for himself, sitting and preparing you to be a
habitation for the Lord to dwell in, that your bodies might become the Temples
of the Holy Ghost, and so you might be married to the Lord in righteousness,
and become the Spouse of Christ, which is his Church; but it is far otherwise
with you, for sin is not only remaining in you, but reigning in you, and
apparently written upon you; and where sin and abomination reigns, it has the
sole dominion, power, and pre-eminence, and as a strong man armed, keeps the
house, and is at peace, and the stronger is not come that should dis-possess
him, and make the keepers of the House to tremble, and the strong to bow, that
should enter in, and break his peace, and spoil his goods; neither are you in
a condition to war against sin, for you confess that all weapons are wrested
from you, with which you should maintain war against it; so that sin and
abomination has quiet and peaceable possession in you, and has got both
strength and weapons to defend it self upon all occasions. And so you are
altogether servants to sin, and slaves to Satan, and under Egyptian darkness;
and this is much more then to say, Sins yet remaining in you; and as I have
said, does very much alter your case, from what these expressions of thine
might seem to render it.

And (say thou) that which T. C. says, is That the true churches of Christ
have had the same* or as great sins and abominations in them, as are mentioned
in that Epistle, and yet were the true churches of Christ, owned of God, as is
fully proved, etc. to which Scriptures (thou say) T. S. gives no answer.

To this I say, It is a very light thing with T. C. to lay sin to the charge of
Gods elect, and to condemn the generation of the Just, and also to plead
Justification for those in whom abomination reigns, and in whose foreheads
iniquity is apparentlie written, but T. C. will one day know, that he which
justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, even they both are
abomination to the Lord: Yet by all that T. C. has said, (though he has
quoted so many Scriptures, perverting them, and even wresting them to his own
destruction) it does not appear that ever the church of Christ was guilty of
these or the like abominations* as in the Tiverton Epistle is expressed; neither
does any one of those Scriptures at all prove any such thing; therefore it was
needless for T. S to give any answer thereunto; but forasmuch as thou seems to
vaunt thy self because T. S. has not spoken particularly in answer to those
Scriptures which thou call'st T. C. his Cloud of Witnesses* and that both in
thy Paper, and also in T. C. his Answer to T. S. his Epistle, the perverting of
the Scriptures, especially what is written to the church of Corinth, is made
use of as a Stirrup, whereby you may mount you selves upon the Throne of
Iniquity, taking occasion from what the Apostle writes to them concerning such
as had sinned to boast your selves to be the church of Christ, notwithstanding
your great abominations and apparent iniquities, confessed and expressed in
Tiverton Writing; I shall therefore speak something briefly to some of those
Scriptures, thereby to discover thy blindness and ignorance of the things of
God* of which the Scriptures of truth declares: And first concerning the Church
of the Romans, chap. 13. ver. 12, 13, 14. which T. C. mentions, where the
Apostle says, The night is far spent, the day is at hand, let us therefore
cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the Armor of light; let us
walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering
and wantonness, not in strike and envying, but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ,
etc. Does the Apostle here charge them with walking dishonestly, because he
exhorts them to walk honestly? Nay assuredly, for he says to them, I am
persuaded of you my Brethren that ye also are full of goodness, filled with all
knowledge, etc. Romans 15. 14 And if they were full of goodness, then there was
no room for dishonesty; and rioting, and drunkenness, chambering, and
wantonness, strife, and envying, are works of the night, and of darkness; but
he says, The night is far spent, the day is at hand, let us put on therefore
the Armor of light. Now if they had not been come to the day, how could they
put on the Armor of light? And if they were come to the day, then the night was
past, and the works of darkness put off, and this exhortation he gave unto
them, to stir up their pure minds by way of remembrance, as the Apostle Peter
did likewise, who said, Wherefore I will not be negligent to put ye always in
remembrance of these things, though ye know them, and are established in the
present truth, 2 Pet. 1. 12. And so this proves nothing at all for T. C. that
the church of the Romans were guilty of the same, or as great sins and
abominations as is mentioned in the Tiverton Writing.

And as touching the church at Corinth, although the Apostle did write to them
concerning Fornication, yet he does not say that such Fornicators were of the
church of Christ, neither does he tolerate them, though T. C. says that
Fornication was tolerated amongst them; but does exhort the church of Christ
when they were gathered together in the spirit and power of the Lord Jesus
Christ, to deliver such to Satan, and bids them to have no fellowship with
such, nay not to company with such, nor to eat with such, especially if any
such were called a Brother, that was a Fornicator, or covetous, or an Idolater,
or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner; but they were to put away from
among them that wicked person, 1 Cor. 5. chap. And surely this was not to
tolerate them, as T. C. has affirmed; For although such might creep in
amongst them, as Jude says in his Epistle, ver. 4. That there were certain men
crept in unawares, who were before ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men,
turning the Grace of God into laciviousness; yet these ungodly men were none of
the church of Christ; for though they might creep in amongst them, yet they
were not of them; and such John saw, and said of them, They went out from us;
[Mark] They went out: Therefore they had been in, or had crept in: They went
out from us, that they might be made manifest that they were not of us, 1 Ioh.
2. 19. And the Apostle did say to the church of Christ at Corinth, That neither
Fornicators, nor Idolators, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor abusers of
themselves with mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor
Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God; And if they shall
not inherit the Kingdom of God, then assuredly they are not the church of
Christ; and this would be but small advantage to T. C. and his Brethren in
iniquity, if they could shelter themselves under such Fornicators, Idolaters,
Railers, Drunkards, Revilers, etc. and cover themselves with the Name of the
church of Christ, whilst as wicked, and as abominable in the sight of God, as
the worst of them; I say, This covering would be of small advantage to them,
seeing the portion of such is to be shut out of God's Kingdom. And the Apostle
makes a noted distinction between the church of Christ, and such wicked
persons, saying, And such were some of you, [mark] They had been such* but
says he, Ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the
Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6. 9 10, 11. And
this shows your blindness, that you cannot make a distinction between such
ungodlie sinners here spoken of, and the church of Christ; you may truly say
that you live short of the true sight and sense of God's Majesty in his
churches, and among his Saints, who are thus blind, that you cannot distinguish
between a member of the church of Christ, and a Fornicator, especially where
the Scripture has made such a noted distinction; Might not T. C. as well have
instanced Judas for a Member of the church of Christ, as these Fornicators and
unclean persons? Yea rather; for the Disciples were not for bid to keep him
company, nor forbid to eat with him, nor bid to excommunicate him, as the
church of Christ was those beforementioned, and therefore his being tolerated
amongst the Disciples, might better have served for your purpose, from his
example to endeavor to persuade people that you are, and may be accounted a
church of Christ, notwithstanding your great abominations confessed in your
Tiverton Epistle; truly your blindness may even be felt, and if you were not
quite insensible, you might blush, and be ashamed of your gross ignorance.

But T. C. says, The Apostle did not unchurch them, as the Enemies of Christ
do in these days.

Take notice Reader, Did not he unchurch those whom he delivered to Satan, and
those whom he commanded the church of Christ to have no fellowship with, or not
to company with them, nor to eat with them, but were commanded to put away from
amongst themselves such wicked persons? Is not this to unchurch them, according
to T. C. his own expressions? What does he call unchurching, if this be not to
unchurch them?

He says, The Churches of Galatia were so deeply corrupted, that the Apostle
wondered they were so soon removed to another Gospel, etc. yet notwithstanding
(says he) he owns them to be the churches of Galatia, and wishes Grace and
Peace to them* etc.

To which I say* If the churches of Galatia were removed from the Gospel of
Christ, (which is the power of God) then the churches of Galatia were not the
churches of Christ, no more then the churches of the Anabaptists (in whom such
abomination reigns) are the churches of Christ; neither does his owning them to
be the churches of Galatia, prove them to be the churches of Christ, any more
then T. S. his calling you the churches of the Anabaptists, proves you to be
the churches of Christ. And whereas he says, he wishes Grace and Peace to
them, and endeavors their reformation; I say, Your reformation likewise has
been endeavored by the servants and messengers of the Lord, whose counsel ye
have rejected; and Grace has been tendered, and has appeared to you, but ye
have turned from it, and despised it; and except the churches of Galatia did
(and the churches of the Anabaptists do) return to that Gospel from which they
were removed, the Peace of God neither did, nor does belong to them, nor you;
neither could they, or can you be accounted the churches of Christ.

He says, So likewise the church of the Philippians, many so walked, of whom
the Apostle says, I have often told you, and now tell you weeping, that they
are enemies to the cross of Christ, Phil. 3. 18. Yet (says he) they were owned
to be a Church, with their Officers.

To which I say, That those who are enemies to the cross of Christ, are not the
church of Christ; for the church of Christ did glory in the cross of Christ,
and were not enemies to it, Gal. 6. 14. and the preaching of it was to them
(and it is to as many as believe) the power of God, 1 Cor. 1. 13. And the
Apostle tells what is the end of such who are enemies to the cross of Christ;
he says, their end is destruction, and that is not the end of the church of
Christ. But though the Apostle writes to the church of the Philippians, of such
who were enemies to the cross of Christ, yet he does not say that the church of
the Philippians were enemies to the cross of Christ, nor that any of them in
particular were so. He also bids them beware of dogs, and of evil workers, etc.
Does he therefore say that the church of the Philippians are dogs and
evil-workers? But this is some of those Scriptures which are called T. C. his
cloud of Witnesses, to prove that the true churches of Christ have had the
same, or as great sins and abominations in them, as is confessed in the
Tiverton Epistle: Now though T. C. be a noted liar, yet the Scriptures are
true, and cannot be broken. And although by perverting and wresting the true
sense thereof, thereby endeavoring to make the Scriptures speak what he would
have them, to abuse the simple* minded, and deceive ignorant people, he has
drawn this wicked conclusion from the whole; That they are (and may be owned to
be) the churches of Christ, notwithstanding their great abominations confessed
in their Tiverton Epistle. Yet now these Witnesses being honestly examined,
without wresting or perverting, they are found to witness against T. C. and the
same Witness which he brings to prove his assertions, does witness against him,
and proves himself to be the liar; and this is usual, that if the Witnesses
which T. C. offers for proof of any thing, be the Scriptures of truth, they
surely testify against him, and prove him to be the liar, and instead of
witnessing for him, they witness against him. And when he affirms a thing that
is so notoriously salse and wicked, as that he cannot any way wrest the
Scriptures to make them seem to prove what he asserts, he uses to say, That
this is true; Is so evident that it needs no proof; or, That this is true, is
so evident that he that runs may read; and such like words* witness his
Looking-glass, as is at large discovered in a Book, called, Truth vindicated,
by John Pitman, and Jasper Batt. Some other Scriptures are by him mentioned,
whereby he has endeavored to prove the churches of Christ in former ages, to
be sinful, thereby to make way for themselves to be owned as a church of
Christ; but all that he says is to no more purpose then that which has been
already answered, and could as easily be answered, and his folly thereby made
manifest, as it has been sufficiently by what has been answered to those
Scriptures by him quoted. But he says of those before* mentioned, that they
were called to repentance. What? were they then a church of Christ, or the
churches of Christ, before repentance, that he makes use of this to prove them
churches of Christ, because they were called to repentance? Simon Magus was
called to repentance, was he therefore a member of the church of Christ? And
the Apostle said, that God commanded all men every where to repent; Are
therefore all men every where the church of Christ? Oh gross darkness and
ignorance, to use that as an argument to prove them to be the church of Christ
because they were called to repentance! And so are you called to repentance,
and to repentance you must come, before you can be owned as a church of Christ;
for we say Christ came to call sinners to repentance; and his Ministers were
sent to turn people from the darkness to the light, and to bring them from
under Satan's power unto God; but though you have been called to return from
your wickedness, and live, and have been invited to come to him who is the way
to the Father, who gives eternal life to all that come unto him; yet you have
refused to return, and have rebelled against the light. Neither is it only the
calling to repentance, that makes them or you the churches of Christ; but it is
them who answers that holy call, and comes to repentance, even to that
repentance which is never to be repented of; that is, to repent and forsake; it
is such shall find mercy and acceptance with the Lord, and they shall be his,
and accounted members of his church in the day when he makes up his Jewels; but
as for such as have been called to repentance, and have not answered that holy
call by obedience to him that has called them, his call, and his loving
invitation shall stand as a witness against such for ever; and because the Lord
has called, and they would not hear, therefore when they call and cry, there
shall be none to deliver them.

Thou say, That T. S has manifested abominable hypocrisy and deceit, in
that he says that T. C. instanceth the Saints infirmities in former ages, to
encourage in a state of sin, etc. when its evident (say thou) that he
instanceth those examples to stop the mouths of liars and deceivers, etc. and
to discover the simple and vain notions of those who would suggest that the
churches of Christ are none of his, because there is sin in them.

To which I say, I have answered some of those Scriptures called T. C. his
Cloud of Witnesses, which may also serve for answer to all the rest, thereby to
discover the folly and ignorance, sottishness and blindness of those who would
suggest that Fornicators and unclean persons, Drunkards, Railers, Revilers,
Extortioners, Thieves, covetous persons, Idolaters, and such like, are Members
of the church of Christ; and also to stop the mouths of such liars and
deceivers who say the true churches of Christ have had the same, or as great
sins and abominations in them as are mentioned in Tiverton Epistle, and yet
were the true churches of Christ notwithstanding.

And although according to thy wonted manner, thou railest at T. S. accusing
him with hypocrisy and deceit, because he says T. C. does encourage in a
state of sin; I say, It is evident that by what T. C. has written, he does
more then encourage in a state of sin; for he makes it of absolute necessity,
that if any will be a Member of the church of Christ, he must be a sinner; and
that if Christ have any church at all, it must be a sinful one; and that
whosoever says the contrary, is a hypocrite; and so sin and wickedness must be
(as it were the condition or qualification required of all who are capable, or
desires admittance into the church of Christ; for he says God never had yet a
church in the World free from sin, nor were there ever any durst so to say,
etc. And he further says, They that call themselves the church of Christ, and
say they are without sin in this mortal estate, are none of the church of
Christ, for he hadnever yet any such church, nor none ever dare say so, except
the Scribes, Pharisees, and Hypocrites; and likewise he says, That he that
will not be a member of a church till he can find one without sin, is never
like to be a member of any. Now who will believe that T. C. does not write this
to encourage in a state of sin? Or if any should be so ignorant as to believe
what he says, who is it but would strive to be a sinner, especially* if they
have any hopes to be Members of the church of Christ? For by his relation there
can be no other plea for admittance into the church of Christ, but sin and
wickedness; for if any should be purged from their sins, and should say with
John, Rev. 1. 5. He has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own
blood; Such comes (by T. C. his account) under the notion of hypoerites, and
surely hypocrites are no members of the church of Christ; therefore if Christ
never had a church free from sin, it might make people afraid of losing their
sins, lest thereby they should be excluded from being members of his church,
and be cast out to have their portion with hypocrites; and then, whether this
be not to encourage people to live in sin, that so they may not miss to be
members of the church of Christ? Yea, and a discouragement to any that should
be in danger to lose or forsake their sins, lest thereby they should be
dis-priviledged of being Members of the church of Christ? let the wise in heart
judge. And as I said, It is more then an encouragement to continue in sin, if
they have any hopes to continue members of the church of Christ, in T. C.'s
esteem; for if any one should come to him, and tell him that by the blood of
Christ he is purged from his old sins, and that he is come, and lives in him,
who saves his people from their sins, and that by him salvation and redemption
from sin is witnessed; T. C.'s words say, that such a one is an hypocrite, and
no Member of the church of Christ; for he had never yet any such church, nor
were there ever any that durst so to say, but hypocrites; neither does he own
any such Savior, or Salvation, as is clear from his own words at a meeting at
Glastonbury, where he affirmed, That he believed in a Christ that was at the
right hand of God in Heaven, and not in the Saints; therefore if T. C. may be
believed, such a one were better continue in his sins, and then if he can
sometimes make an hypocritical confession thereof, and mock God therewith, and
ask to be forgiven, though as soon as he is gone away, he forget what he has
done, and think no more on his prayers, (as is confessed in Tiverton Writing)
yet such a one shall be esteemed an humble, self-denying Christian, living in
the sense of his own unworthiness, and be esteemed a Member of the church of
Christ; for it seems by this Doctrine, if a man should confess and forsake his
sins, (though thereby he shall find mercy from the Lord, yet) T. C. would
account him an hypocrite, and no Member of the church of Christ; Therefore I
say, if any believe T. C. and receive his testimony, and own his damnable
pernicious Doctrine, such are thereby more then encouraged to continue in sin
and wickedness; yea, they are enjoined under the penalty of being disowned to
be a church of Christ, to continue sinful and wicked, and falls under the
censure of T. C. to be termed hypocrites, if ever they should overcome sin by
the power of God, and make confession thereof. And thus what T. S. has said as
to this particular, is fully proved, and the abominable deceit and hypocrisy
stands charged upon thine own head, who have thus falsely accused him for
hypocrisy and deceit, in a business wherein T. C. is so apparently guilty.

Thou chargest T. S. to be a notorious liar, because he says T. C. has spoken
against the being of the Seed of God, and light of Christ in men; for thou
say T. C. has not affirmed any such thing, but owns the seed of God, and
light of Christ in his people; and in the next line thou say, This light is
not in all men. Now has not T. C. spoken against the light of Christ in men,
if he affirm that it is not in all men? Who is the notorious liar now? He that
says T. C. has spoken against the being of it men, when he says, It is not
in all men; or he that says, He never affirmed any such thing, as that the
light of Christ is not in men, and yet says, It is not in all men? If he say
the light of Christ is not in all men, then there are are some men in which (he
says) the light of Christ is not: And so T. C. has spoken against the light
of Christ in men; and here thou art proved the liar. But I shall prove that T.
C. has also spoken against the being of the Seed of God, and light of Christ
in his people, if he account himself one of his people; For he says in his
Answer to T. S. page 16. Our faith is not in a light within. Now if he believes
not in a light within, either he does not own the light of Christ to be in him,
or else he believes not in the light of Christ, and so is out of the Doctrine
of Christ, and walks contrary to his commands, who says, While ye have the
light, believe in the light, that ye may be the children of the light;
Therefore T. C. is either a child of darkness, because he does not believe in
the light of the Son of God within him; (for where*ever the true light shines,
it is to be believed in) or else he does not own the light of Christ to be in
him. And thus what T. S. has said, is proved, and the lie returned to rest
upon thine own head.

Thou say T. S. says, He will join Issue, and plead with T. C. according to
the Law and the Testimony; but first it must be considered what the Law and the
Testimony is, and that he further says, The Law is in the heart, the Light is
in the heart, the testimony of Jesus, the sure Word of Prophecy is in the
heart, the Word of Faith in the heart: And now come to the matter to which thou
scoffingly and wickedly say, Now he is fit for the work; out with the
Scriptures of truth, and follow the Law of his own heart, of his own
imagination, and be sure Salthouse will prevail, and carry all before him. Thou
hypocrite, Is this outing of the Scriptures of truth, to speak truth in the
very Scripture Language? Has not T. S. quoted the Scriptures for proof of what
he asserts, concerning the Law in the heart, the Light in the heart, the Word
of Faith nigh in the heart, the sure Word of Prophecy in the heart? And yet
thou art so impudent as to say, Out with the Scriiptures of truth, and follow
the Law of his own heart; Is the Law of God in the heart? Or the Light of
Christ in the heart? Or the Word of Faith in the heart? Or the sure Word of
Prophecy, which is the Testimony of Jesus, in the heart? Is this the Law? or
the imagination of his own heart? Thou have no cover for thy wickedness here,
but have manifestly published thy folly, and thy envy, in charging T. S. for
outing the Scriptures of truth, when he has cited the Scriptures of truth for
proof of what he has spoken; therefore because thy wickedness is so plainly
and openly discovered in setting thy self through envy to oppose, gainsay, and
resist the truth, the less needs be spoken in answer to it, and if any will
believe thee, or be deceived by thee herein, it is such who are willingly
ignorant, and are given up to believe lies, and their blood will be upon their
own heads.

But although T. C. has cited the Law and Testimony for a Rule, yet when T. S,
had proved by the Scriptures of Truth, that this Law and Testimony is within,
in the heart, it is like T. C. had no mind to join Issue, or plead with him; for
he well knows, that should he speak no more of the Law of God, or of the
Testimony of Jesus, then what is manifest in him, and written in his heart, his
mouth, and the mouths of many of his Brethren would soon be stopped; for though
that which may be known of God, is manifest within, (according to the
Scripture) yet they that believe not in that which does make manifest, but are
enemies to it, they know little of God, or of his Law or Testimony, neither is
it their rule. Now that which does make manifest is light, Ephesians. 5. 13. But T.
C. says, Your faith is not in a light within; therefore your Faith is not in
that which does make manifest; and how then should you know the things of God,
or his Law and Testimony, of which the Scriptures of truth declares. And thus
though in words you profess God, and talk of his Law and Testimony to be your
rule, yet in works you deny him, and his Law of righteonsness is cast behind
your backs, and the Testimony of Jesus (which is the Spirit of Prophecy) you
have denied, and despised, neither is his Law your Rule, or his Light your
Guide, witness your own confession in Tiverton Epistle: Therefore I say Should
T. C. plead only from what of God is manifest in him, he would have very
little to say, and so no marvel if he refufe to join Issue with T. S. upon
those terms.

Thou say T. S. has said, That T. C. is against the Saints attaining to
perfection and freedom from sin whilst in this mortal state; And thou say, He
is not against perfection by faith in Christ, their perfection to be in
another; nor is he against pressing after perfection; but such a perfection as
the Quakers boast of, he is against, etc. To which I say, The perfection which
the people called Quakers, own, and press after, is the same which the Saints
and Servants of God in all ages did press after, of which the Scriptures of
truth makes mention, which is, to perfect holiness in the fear of the Lord, and
to know him to work all their works for them, and in them, whose works are
perfect in the sight of God, whereby all boasters and boasting is excluded; and
this perfection thou say T. C. is against, and indeed I believe it; and
herein the truth of T. S. his words are verified. But what perfection or
freedom from sin, such do own or press after, who are drawing iniquity with
cords of vanity, and in whose souls such abominations reigns, and out of whose
hands all weapons are wrested (with which theyshould make war against sin) I
leave to the wise in heart to judge. It seems the perfection which you own, is
at a great distance from you, and not holiness perfected in you, but in
another, and so you imagine it shall be imputed yours hereafter, when you are
dead, though you are perfecting wickedness and ungodliness all your life long;
and this imagination you call Faith in Christ; But though we own no other
perfection then that which is by Faith in Christ (who is the perfection of his
people, and is all in all to them) yet except you know him to live in you, and
know him to work in you both the will and the deed, even he of whom its said,
That he came to do the will of God; and so to know perfection and freedom from
sin in your selves, wrought by another; it will avail you nothing to say you
own perfection in another; for what the better are you to tell of perfection
and freedom from sin in another, whilst you are imperfect, and are servants
unto sin? And what pressing after perfection or freedom from sin, is there like
to be with such who affirm that God never had yet a church in the World without
sin, and that who ever affirm the contrary, are Hypocrites? Would any that
believes this, press after that which none yet could ever attain? Or is not
this to press after an impossibility? And if by pressing after it, they should
attain to it, and make confession of it, it seems they must be accounted
hypocrites; this is small encouragement to any to press after perfection or
freedom from sin. But we are not ignorant what that imagined perfection is of
which you speak, and which you say you press after; for although abominations
reigns in your souls, and iniquity apparently written on your fore*heads, and
that you are even drawing it as with Cart-Ropes, yet because you can sometimes
make a hypocritical confession of this condition, and therewith mock God, (as
you confess you have done often) this is called a pressing after perfection:
And because you have read in the Scriptures, of the Righteousness of Christ,
you imagine that his Righteousness shall be imputed yours, and serve to cover
your unrighteousness; and this is your perfection (as you call it) by* Faith in
another, which you say you own and press after; but the perfection which the
people of God in all ages did press after, it seems you are against.

Thou railest at T. S. extremely, charging him with hypocrisy, wretched
perverting, and to be a forger of lies, for saying T. C. has contradicted
himself in directing his Epistle from Tiverton, to them that are called to be
Saints through the immortal Seed that dwells in them; and yet says, It is
language beside the Scripture to mention the oppressed seed; For thou say, He
does not say it is language beside the Scripture to mention the seed within,
but for the oppressed seed, he knows no such Gospel expression, etc.

Now to this I say, If the immortal Seed be in them to whom that Epistle was
directed, and that abominations reigns in them, as in the same Epistle is
confessed, I query, Whether the Seed in them be not oppr^st? If yea, then T. C.
is found in confusion and contradiction, and knows nothing of the immortal Seed
of which he speaks: Now where enmity is put between two, if the one bears
rule, then the other does suffer oppression; and I suppose you will grant that
there is no concord or agreement, fellowship or union, betwixt the immortal
seed and abomination; for that which works abomination, is of the Serpents
seed, betvveen which, and the seed immortal, enmity isput; and whilst
abomination reigns in you, and that iniquity is apparently written upon you,
and you are dravving thereof with cords of vanity, the Serpent's seed is head
in you, and the seed immortal is oppressed; and thus the blind guide is fallen
into the pit which for another he had dug, who streins at a Gnat, and
would seem to make a man an offender for a word, notvvithstanding the
substance of the matter by him declared, be clear and evident.

Thou art much offended with T. S. because he says, It seems they have
refused to return from their wickedness and great abominations, if T. C. may be
credited, but says he trusts they shall be found so more; if this be to be
vile, we shall yet be more vile; for which thou utterest many bitter railing
expressions against him, saying that T C. says, If to deal faithfully with
sins and sinners, if to arraign abominations, etc: If this be to be vile, we
shall yet be more vile, etc.

To which I say, That you have refused to return from your wickedness and great
abominations, is a truth clear and apparent; for T. C. has endeavored to
prove you to be a church of Christ, notvvithstanding your great abominations,
and says, the true churches of Christ have had the same, or as great sins and
abominations in them, as is confessed in Tiverton Epistle, and that Christ never
had a church in the World free from sin; and whether this does not strengthen
the hands of the wicked, (so that they cannot return from their wickedness)
and give encouragement to such to live in sin, let all who are spiritually
minded, judge: And vvhilit you are endeavoring to vindicate your selves in
such a condition, and such practices, there is small hopes, or little
likelihood of your returning from that condition.

And whereas he says, If to deal faithfully, etc. be to be vile, etc. I say,
How can such a deceitful hypocrite deal faithfully with sin or sinners, in
whose own soul (by confession) such abominations reigns, and on whose own
Forehead such iniquities are so apparently written, and out of whose hands
sin has wrested all Weapons wherewith he should deal with it? should not the
hypocrite first pull the beam out of his own eye, and deal faithfully with his
own soul in arraigning and casting out his own abominations by the power of the
Lord, before he go about to pull the mote out of his brothers eye, or to deal
with his sins, or to arraign his abominations? I am sure for T. C. to tell of
arraigning abominations in others, whilst abominations are reigning in his own
soul; or for him to talk of dealing faithfully with sin and sinners, whilst (by
his own confession) he is manifested to be as bad as the worst of them, (if not
the worst of all) and has more need to be taken under dealing, then any of
those with whom he speaks of dealing with, this renders him to be so much the
more vile, as T. S. has truly said.

Some other false accusations thou bringst against T. S. in particular, and
against the people called Quakers in general; as, That he pleads up their own
righteousness beyond all bonds, not only of Religion, but of modesty and
civillity too, and that no people upon earth are so great enemies to Christ,
according to the Scriptures, as they; and that none are more obedient to their
own fancies and imaginations, then they, etc. And thou tells the old lie over
again, saying, He calls the Ordinances of Christ, the Ordinances of the man of
sin.

To all which I say, Thou have made it thy work to slander, and falsely accuse;
and for as much as thou have been so often proved a liar, I shall not spend
time to answer every impertinency and false accusation, especially where no
proof is offered by thee, for what thou affirmest; but let it lie and rot, as
the foame and filth of a Tlanderous spirit, which cannot touch the innocent,
nor gain credit or acceptance with any people of understanding.

Thou go on with thy work propounding queries, and answering thy self, lying
and perverting, slandering, and falsely accusing the innocent, digging a pit,
and spreading a net for them; but into the pit which thou have dug for
others, art thou fallen; and in the Gin which thou have laid, is thy own seet
snared. And because T. S. says, Without boasting we can speak it, to the
praise of his grace who has wrought all our works for us, and in us, that we
are of God, though the whole world lies in wickedness; and that Christ has
had, and yet has a Church without sin in this mortal Estate. Thou therefore
queriest, Whether this Church without sin be not the Quakers? And thou
answerest thy self, Yea doubtless, if they only are of God, and the whole
world lies in wickedness, it must needs be them. And here thou have proved T.
C. a liar; For if it be an undoubted truth, that they who are of God, are a
church without sin, then undoubtedly T. C. is a notorious liar for affirming
that Christ never had a church without sin in this mortal estate; For John
says, We know that we are of God, and the whole world lies in wickedness, 1
John 5. 9. And because they were of God, they were without sin, according to
thy own reasoning.

Then thou queriest, Whether the Quakers have not dealt notoriously wicked with
T. C. in denying their owning themselves to be perfect, and calling T. C. a
liar for affirming it, and now T. S. so openly and publicly not only to
confess it, but to plead for it.

To which I answer* Thou have herein dealt notoriously wicked with T. S. as T.
C. has done with others before: For T. S. has not said he is perfect, nor
confessed that the people called Quakers does own themselves to be perfect; and
therefore thou art a liar for affirming it: And because the ground or
foundation of thy query is a lie, therefore I shall give no further answer to
it.

Thou queriest, Whether John Pitman, Jasper Batt, Robert Wastfeild, etc: (whom
thou call'st Preachers and Leaders in that Faction) be members of the true
Church, or of the Devil? Because T. S. says, That those that remain in sin, in
the unconverted and imperfect state, and are seduced and deceived, being out of
the truth, they are enemies to the cross of Christ, and are not the church of
Christ. And thou say, The forementioned persons at a Meeting at Glaston with
T. C. protested that they were not perfect, nor free from sin, but pressing
after it; Therefore thou queriest, How they shift themselves from being Enemies
to the cross of Christ.

I answer, Though thou have labored much to bring forth this work of
wickedness, hoping thereby to trap the innocent, yet it will not at all serve
for thy purpose, For though (in the words of the Apostle) we did in plainness,
and in the simplicity and integrity of our hearts declare, (which thou call'ft
a Protestation) That we were pressing forwards toward the mark of the price of
the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, not as though we had already attained,
or were already perfect, but were pressing after it* yet this does no more
prove us to be of the Devil, or enemies to the cross of Christ, by any thing
that T. S. has said, then the Apostles words did prove him to be of the Devil,
or an Enemy to the cross of Christ; For though we did say, not as though we
had already attained, or were already perfect, yet we did confess openly to the
glory of God, That we did witness him come, and to live in us, who is perfect;
and that we did believe that perfection is attainable in this life through him*
and that having this hope, it does purify our hearts, even as he is pure, who
works all our Works for us, and in us; and that in this Faith we are pressing
after perfection: And of this Faith did we make confession openly, as many can
testify; and this is the Faith to which we are converted, and so we do not
remain in the unconverted estate, neither are we seduced or deceived, but are
established in the eternal living Truth, and not out of it; and by the Spirit
of Truth which we have received, we are able to judge of seducers and
deceivers: And we did likewise declare, that we were by nature children of
Wrath as well as others* and that we had long traveled under the burden of
sin, and bondage of corruption, whilst the strong man armed kept the house;
and that we had known the terrors of the Lord against sin: And we did likewise
say, That there is sometimes in us motions to sin, from which we are not
freed, and that we are exercised with temptations; but those motions not
being consented unto, nor the temptations joined with, or entered into, but
resisted in the power of God, those motions are not imputed to us as sin; for
it is no sin to be tempted. And we did also declare, That we now vvitness the
stronger come to ease us of our burden, and to save us from our sins, and to
deliver us from the bondage of corruption, that we might serve him without
fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our lives; and
this does not prove us to be no church of Christ, or prove us to be of the
Devil, therefore we are without the reach of thy envy, for we are none of
those which T. S. speaks of, who are enemies to the cross of Christ; but thou
have not contrived thy Work so, as that it may serve for thy purpose; for thou
can not strike us all at once, as it stands, which appears to be thy
intention; neither can thou divide our Testimony, so as to take us in
confusion or contradiction, which thou have labored after; for if we had
protested (as thou say) that we were not perfect, then thou have nothing
against us as to that, it being one main charge against the people called
Quakers, (though a very false one) that they say they are perfect; and now if
we have said that we are not perfect, then are we clear of that charge: But
thou art not willing we should pass so, and therefore thou say, thou do
question whether we did not lie notoriously, etc. And here through thy envy
thou haft manifested thy folly, and in striking at us, thou have wounded thy
self* For if we did lie notoriously in saying we were not perfect, then it will
follow, that if we had said we were perfect, we had spoken truth; and yet if
any say they are perfect or free from sin, such are accounted hypocrites; so if
any confess that he has not attained, but is pressing after perfection, he is
suspected to be a notorious liar, and if any (through the love of God) should
confess to his glory that he is redeemed from sin and transgression, and
brought into the glorious liberty of the sons of God, where he does not commit
sin, such a one is said to be an hypocrite. What work is here! Confusion with a
witness! Who can escape thy slanderous tongue? Truly thou art so drunk with
rage and envy, that it even darkens thy understanding, so than thou can not
see thy folly and confusion; but because of the perverseness of thy spirit,
thou errest in thy Work, as a drunken man staggereth in his vomit.

Thou say, The reason why thou proposest this query, is* Because we owned
T. S. to be a Minister of Christ, and would vvitness for him, and with him,
so that doubtless we must be one in vvitness.

To which I say* Yea doubtless, we are one in witness, and our witness is true,
and does agree together, and thou have lost thy labor in striving to make our
witness disagree; For our vvitness is for the truth, and in the truth, and
there is union and agreement, and not confusion.

And thou say, A perfect Church without sin, cannot admit of an imperfect
Ministry, Pitman and Batt being Preachers amongst the quakers.

I say, The church of Christ cannot admit of an imperfect Ministry; for that
Ministry which is imperfect, is unsound, and untrue; and such a Ministry cannot
be owned by the church of Christ: For the sheep of Christ know the voice of
Christ, and follows him, but will not follow imperfect, unsound voices; and
although such grievous Wolves (like thy self) should array your selves with
the sheeps clothing, to deceive, yet by your strange voices your imperfect
Ministry is known; and by the Spirit of Truth which rules in the Church of
Christ, are all such imperfect Ministers denied. But John Pitman, and Jasper
Batt did declare* That they had received the gift of God which is perfect; and
the Apostle said, When he ascended up on high, he gave gifts unto men, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry: And such who ministers
from that gift of God which is perfect, their Ministry is not an imperfect
Ministry.

Thou say, Thou supposest T. S. will not own two Churches, the one perfect,
and the other imperfect, least there should be room for you.

To which I answer, T. S. can truly allow you the title of an imperfect, sinful
church, or Synagogue of Satan, who are going on in the broad way to
destruction, where you have room enough to commit very great abominations, and
apparent iniquities, (by your own confession in Tiverton Epistle) but in the
Church of Christ there is no room for such; For the church of Christ is a
chaste Virgin, without spot, and cannot join to any thing that is unclean,
neither can any person, or any thing that is unclean, be joined to it; For
although the Gates of the holy City, New Jerusalem, stand always open, yet
there can in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles, or that works
abomination, or makes a lie, but they that are written in the Lambs Book of
Life. And the church of Christ has no fellowship with the unfruitful Works of
darkness; for they walk in the light of the Lord, and what communion has
light with darkness? Or what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? Therefore whilst your abominations reigns, and you are drawing
iniquity, and bears the mark thereof on your Foreheads so apparently,
(according to your own confession) there is no room for you in the Church of
Christ, neither can you have any fellowship with them; For whilst there is no
room for Christ in your hearts, nor in your affections, there is no room for
you in his Church; And you confess that the World as a canker has eaten out
your affections to the Lord Jesus, and your minds are much, yea too much
alienated from him; but it seems by your Tiverton Epistle, that you will leave
no room for your selves in the church of Christ, for there you promise to take
some effectual course to purge sin or sinners out of the House of God. Now to
purge out sin, would be to make such a church as T. C. says God never had in
the World; For he says, God never had yet any church in the world free from
sin: And would you go about to make such a church as you have not so much as a
pattern or president for? You say in your Tiverton Epistle, That whosoever
beholds you, may say, What singular thing do ye? But now it seems you think to
do something that is singular indeed, if you make such a church for God as T.
C. says he never had the like before: But are not you hypocrites by T. C.'s
Words, if you should make such a church? For he says, None durst say that God
had ever a church in the world withous sin, but hypocrites; And if you purge
away sin out of your church, then yours will be a church without sin, which
if you should confess, then you fall under the notion of hypocrites; but if you
cannot purge out sin, then you fall upon sinners, for you promise to purge out
sin or sinners; Now if you purge out sinners, do not you then exclude your
selves from having any room there? And yet this is not all that you do, only
to exclude your selves, (if T. C. his words be true) but you will leave no
church for God at all; for he says, God never had a Church in the world
without Sin; and if he never had a Church without sin in the World, and now you
are promising to purge sin, or sinners out of his Church, is not this to leave
him no church at all, neither with sin, nor without sin? Oh read your
confusion, and blush thereat, you sottish children; What a strange piece of
Work have you promised to undertake, who say that God never had a church in the
World without sin, and yet now you will undertake to purge sin out of his
church? And so you who are as vile as the worst of them with whom you intend
thus to deal, are going about to do that which (according to T. C.'s account)
none of the faithful servants of the Lord, or Ministers of Christ could ever
do, that is, to purge sin out of his church, and if you cannot do that, then to
purge out sinners, and so exclude your selves amongst the rest, who are
abominable ones by your own confession; and when sinners are purged out os that
church which did only consist of sinners, (For T. C. says, They that say they
are without Sin, are none of the church of Christ; And if they that are without
sin, be none of his Church, then all that are of his church must be sinners) I
say, When all those are purged out, what becomes of that church? Or where will
the place of any one of you be found? Or whereof must the church of God
consist? Or must he have no church at all? Therefore mind what you are going
about, left whilst you are supposing T. S* will leave no room for you, in going
about to purge out others, you leave no room for your selves.

Thou say, T. S. has past sentence upon all the churches that ever was in
the world, to be the churches of the Devil; and that he has likewise sentenced
all the Prophets and Apostles in their Doctrine, and the Scriptures, to be all
the Doctrine of Devils, and they the Ministers of the Devil, etc. Because T. S.
has said, That for any to persuade men to join themselves with, and to be
members of a Church that is sinful and imperfect, is no better then a Doctrine
of Devils.

I answer; Thou art sentenced for an impudent liar, and a false accuser; and I
am sure that liars are of the devil; but neither Prophet nor Apostle,
Scriptures, nor church of Christ, are at all concerned in his sentence, nor
comes not under it; For none of them did ever persuade men to join with, or to
be members of a church that is sinful and imperfect, which they must have done
if T: S. had sentenced them for preaching a Doctrine of Devils; but on the
contrary, they did exhort the church of Christ to separate from such, and to
have no fellowship with them, but to come out from amongst them, and not to
touch the unclean thing; and the Prophet of the Lord did complain against those
that did not put a difference between the clean and the unclean; between the
holy and the profane; between the precious and the vile: And those that do
persuade people to join themselves to a church that is sinful, they are the
Devils Ministers, and not Christ's, and they are adding to the Devil*s church,
or to Satan's Synagogue, and are not adding to the church of Christ; and the
Doctrine which such do preach, is the Doctrine of Devils, and not the Doctrine
of Christ, as T. S. has truly said.

And because T. S. says, You follow cunning devised fables; Thou say, He
calls Gospel*Ordinances cunning devised fables, and that in sum he says, our
Lord Christ, and his Apostles, were cunning devisers of Fables*

To which I say, Deceit and Falsehood has summed up the matter, and by the
falseness of the account, the wickedness of the Accountant is discovered, and
he is thereby manifested to be a notorious liar, and a false accuser* but if
honesty had cast up the sum, the account would have appeared otherwise. And I
have already proved, That whilst you remain in that state where you stand at
present, (as appears by your confession in your Tiverton Epistle) that all that
you do, or perform in imitation of others, whilst you are not thereunto led by
the Spirit of God, but your rule is without you, and abomination reigns within
you, though you may call it the ordinances of Christ, or great
Gospel Ordinances, yet it is but Fables and Fancies of your own devisings, and
such things as Christ nor his Apostles did ever ordain or devise for you to
follow or practice; and you might as well charge all the rest of your
abominations and apparent iniquities, upon Christ and his Apostles, and say
they were the devisers of them, as to say that Christ or his Apostles did
devise those Fables, Fancies, and imaginations which you follow, plead for,
practice, and call Ordinances of Christ; For that which you account the best of
all your doings, is as great an abomination in the sight of the Lord, if not
greater then the very worst action, or most apparent iniquity which you confess
your selves to be guilty of; For the very prayers of the wicked are an
abomination to the Lord; and nothing will sooner or more certainly bring
desolation upon you, then the setting up of those abominations in the stead of
the Worship of God, and the Ordinances of Christ, and those Exorcists who
adjured the unclean spirits in the Name of Jesus, whom Paul preached, might as
well say that our Lord Christ had devised those Exorcismes which they used,
because he had commanded unclean spirits to come out of people; as you to say
that Christ and his Apostles devised those Fables which you follow and plead
for, and call Gospel Ordinances, because you imagine that such things were
practiced in the church of Christ; for it is possible that those Exorcists were
as much in the words of Christ and Paul, as you are; and I am sure you are as
great Enemies to the iife and power of Christ as they were*

And after thou have thus wickedly and salsly accused T. S* and so impudently
and grossly belyed him, Thon say, Thou must have done with Salthouse at
present and thou think for ever, unless there were more truth and honesty
appearing in him.

Oh wonderful! that such a notorious liar, and such a vile dishonest person as
thou have manifested thy self to be, (partly by thy own confession, and fully
and largely proved both by thy practice, and by thy principles) should be so
impudent as to accuse another for want of truth and honesty! But although thou
might have hopes to shelter thy self, and to escape undiscovered by accusing
the innocent of the same crimes whereof thy self art guilty, yet know, that thy
covering is too narrow, for thy skirts are discovered, and thy shame and
nakedness does appear, and thy refuge of lies cannot hide thee; and it had been
much better for thee if thou had ended sooner, or that thou had never begun
this work of darkness and wickedness, wherein thou have so desperately hazarded
the loss of thy precious soul, to satisfy thy cruel, envious, blood-thirsty
desires, against the innocent Lambs of Christ; Only (thou say) take this
Interpreter with you, and T. C. his Answer to his Epistle, and this together,
and you will find them to be a choice pair of Spectacles to help you to see
into, and understand what you read in T. S. his Books.

To which I answer* The truth as asserted by T. S. in his Books, are so plain
and clear as they stand, that whoever looks on them with a single eye, and a
mind not stuffed with prejudice, may easily read them, and understand them,
without an interpreter; and all who are not quite blind, and given up to
believe lies, may easily see and discover thy hypocrisy and deceit, thy
railing and false accusing, thy lies and thy confusion, without the help of a
pair of Spectacles.

But although thou have done with T. S. I have not yet done with thee* for I
have yet to question thee concerning a most horrible false accusation twice
charged in thysheet of Paper, where thou say, Would not these men as truly
judge and condemn Saints and Churches in former ages, that were subject to the
like failings and passions, were it not because they know it will not be born?
Else what meant the Answer of a Preaching-quaker, in a public meeting of them
in Bristol? one presenting something concerning the Scripture to him, he
answers, I came not to tell you of Paul, and Barnabas, and Timothy, the
serpents of old* but we were sent to direct them to look to the light within,
etc. And thou say, The same person, at the same time, spoke the same language
of Samuel and the Prophets; and this (thou say) thou had from credible
testimony, who was present and heard him, and proposed to query to him, Whether
he did own the Scriptures to be a rule for Christians to walk by.

Now to this I say, The righteous Lord God of Heaven and Earth is witness for
us against thee in this thing, that we the Servants of the Most High God, who
are in scorn called Quakers, do from our hearts abhor and detest any such words
or thoughts concerning the holy men of God, either Prophets or Apostles, as
thou most falsely from thy envious heart, and slanderous tongue, have cast upon
us; and we do likewise utterly disown any such to be of us, or to have any
fellowship with us, or to be permitted to speak amongst us without reproof, who
should declare or hold forth any such wicked, damnable, unsound, unsavory
words, as to say that either Paul, or Barnabas, or Timothy, or Samuel, or any
other of the holy Prophets or Apostles, were the Serpents of old; for of them*
and of their words, we have a more high and honorable esteem; we being made
partakers of the same eternal life, and have obtained like precious Faith in
which they lived, and by which they obtained a good report, and have received a
measure of the same spirit by which they spoke, and from which the Scriptures
of truth were given forth; and so we have the witness in our selves, of the
truth of what they declared; and I do with confidence affirm, That it cannot be
proved that ever any person who is distinguished from other people by the name
of Quaker, did ever either in Bristol, or elsewhere, either publicly or
privately speak, utter, or declare these, or any such like words; and therefore
be it hereby known unto thee who art our accuser, and to all that own thee, and
to all people wheresoever this shall come* that thou art hereby charged and
required to bring forth the Author, or Authors of this false accusation, which
thou call'st credible testimony, that so the whole sum of this matter may be
found out, to the end that those who are guilty may be discovered, and their
wickedness disclosed, that to shame they may be brought, and from them and
their wickedness, all that fear God may turn away, and of them beware; and also
that the innocent may be cleared, and the truth vindicated* and for this cause
chiefly it was that public inquiry was made after thy Name, to the end, the
truth of this matter may be known; and therefore if thou shall refuse thus to
do, then in the presence of the Lord God, upon thy own head shall this false
accusation be charged, to stand for ever; and all that either own thee, or
believe what thou have said, and shall not endeavor to bring this matter to a
just trial, are not only willing to be deceived by thee but also guilty of thy
most abominable wickedness; therefore until thou have done according to what I
have said, this also shall be numbered amongst the rest of thy lies and false
accusations.

But it seems though thou have done with T. S. thou haft not emptyed out all
the abominable broth out of thy boiling pot, or unclean vessel, under which the
fire of Envy does continually burn; but John Collins must also have a part of
it, something to assuage thy malice, and allay thy burning heat; and although
thou can not touch him concerning any thing which he has written, yet thou will assault him with a company of lies and false accusations, which thou have
mustered up against him, which should they be severed from the rest of that which
thou have written, there would remain very little to be answered unto. But I
shall not need to trace thee in all thy crooked ways and by-pathes, I having
already sufficiently laid thee open, and discovered thy folly, and wicked
lying spirit to all who have an eye open to see thee; therefore I shall speak
briefly to some particulars, and so conclude.

Thou say, He confesses he was one with you in the form of Truth.

But where is that confession? I am sure he does not say any such thing in that
Book to which this sheet of thine is a pretended Answer* nor I think no where
else; For it is a very easy matter to prove that you are neither in the form
nor power of Truth, but out of both: But this he confesses, That he was owned
a Brother by you, whilst running into the same excess of riot; but since in
mercy visited, he has been hated and despitefullie used by some of you, which
is not the Form of Truth to use any one despitefullie*

Thou say, A day will come that John Collins, and others, shall not boast of
their gain in leaving you, when they shall know it to be the saddest separation
that ever they made. And yet thou say in the same Paper, (over, and besides
all the great wickednesses, reigning abominations, and apparent iniquities,
whereof you confess your selves to be guilty in your Tiverton- Epistle) Thou
know that you are bad and that you need purging, and more of the sense of
the evil of your own hearts, and that you need a lamentation, etc.

And would thou persuade J. C. or any other, that ever they shall repent
their leaving you, or repent that the Lord has separated them from such a
company? Verily when ever they look back upon you, and remember the
deliverance that the Lord has wrought for them, in seperating them from
amongst you, they have as much cause to rejoice (if not more) then Lot had when
he escaped out of Sodom, or the Israelites when delivered from Egyptian
darkness and bondage.

Thou say, They have separated themsslves from the Law and Word of Truth.

I say, They are separated from a company of hypocrites, who have cast the Law
of Truth behind their backs, and have hated instruction, and rebelled against
the light, following their vain imaginations, which they call Ordinances of
Christ, who confess they have delighted to confess, and to word it out with the
Lord* and presently forget what manner of men and women they were, and think no
more on their prayers, and so have mocked God often; it is from such they are
separated: But to the Word of Truth, which is Christ the light of the World,
are they turned; and his Law (which is light, which is written in the heart)
have they received; and the Word (at which you stumble) is a lanthorn to their
feet, and a light unto their paths, who in times past did wander with you in
dark and sollitarie places, and in the valley of the shadow of death, stumbling
upon the dark and barren Mountains, wandering from Mountain to Hill, after
those who cried, Lo here, and lo there; and where you are yet wandering in your
vain imaginations, who knows not the Law, nor Word of Truth.

Thou say, If you could, or dare to lie as fast as they, you could quickly be
as perfect, and as free from sin as they, etc.

I say, Witness T. Colliers Writings, and this Sheet of thine, whether you dare
to lie, or no; I verily believe, more impudent Liars did never appear in
Print; and you have attained to as great a measure of perfection in that part
of your Fathers Work, (who was a Liar from the beginning, and the Father of it)
as any people that ever I heard of* who pretend they plead for, and follow
Ordinances of Christ: But this is not our way of perfection or freedom from
sin, it is Christ the Truth and the Light, that is our way of perfection, and
by him alone it is that we have freedom and remission of sins, and not through
lying, though you make use of that way to cover your selves in your sins; but
the light has discovered you, your bed is too short, and your covering too
narrow; Your iniquities are apparent, and your abominations and transgressions
cannot be hid; and the day is come wherein your refuge of lies (unto which you
have leaned, and into which you have sled for shelter from the stroke of truth)
must be swept away.

Thou say, Heaven and Earth, and our own consciences does witness, that what
T. C. has written concerning our principles, is truth.

To which I say, That both Heaven and Earth, and the Witness of Truth in our
own consciences, does testisie against thee* that thou art a most abominable
Liar, and a false Accuser; and were not thy conscience seared, thou would
tremble to utter such damnable lies; but know assuredly, that the righteous
God will bring thee to judgment, where thou must give account for all thy
ungodlie deeds, which thou have ungodlie committed, and all thy hard speeches
which thou have spoken against the innocent; and for all the lies, slanders,
and false accusations which thou have (from the pride and naughtiness of thy
malicious heart) uttered against them:

Thou say, Note this one thing, how John has learned to abuse the
Scriptures, because he says, (speaking of Christ) When he comes in ten
thousands of his Saints. Whereby I note, how little thou know of the being
of Christ in his Saints, that seems to be offended with J. C. for speaking of
the coming of Christ in his Saints; may thou not as well have accused Christ
and his Apostles for abusing of Scripture, for saying, I in them, and thou in
me, Ioh. 17. 23. And Christ lives in me, Gal. 2. 20. And Christ in you the
hope of glory, Col. 1. 27. And Christ in you except you be reprobates; 2 Cor.
13. 5. And if in them, why not in ten thousands of them? But what Scripture is
it that J. C. has abused? Has he quoted any Scripture particularly? Or does
he say, It is thus written in such a place? Or must he be limited by thy
imagination, who thinks he thus speaks, because Jude says, The Lord comes with
ten thousands of his Saints, as thou say the Scripture reads it? But glory to
his Name for ever, we know that he comes in his Saints, and that he is admired
in them, though you like not to hear of it, nor believe it, as T. C. affirmed
at Glaston, that he believed in a Christ that was in heaven, and not in the
Saints; and all such reprobates who know not Jesus Christ in them, must know
that the day is come, in which the Lord comes in thousands, and ten thousands
of his Saints, to execute the judgments written, and to take vengeance upon
all ungodly sinners, for all their abominations wherewith they have provoked
the Lord to jealousy; and therefore if you are not wholly given up to hardness
of heart, and blindness of mind (but that there is in any of you, any
tenderness or breathings after the Lord) to such I say, Hear, and give ear,
and no longer harden your hearts, nor stiffen your necks, nor no longer rebel
against the light, but depart from the Tents of those wicked men with whom you
walk, and come out from amongst them, and be no longer partakers with them in
their Sins, their reigning abominations and apparent iniquities, wherewith the
Lord has been long provoked; nor partake not with them in their vain
ceremonies, and invented Will-worships, which they call Ordinances of Christ,
wherewith the Lord has been so often mocked; but prepare to meet the Lord by
speedy repentance, least his wrath break forth against you; and while ye have
light, believe in the light, lest the Lord turn it into darkness; and when ye
look for light, it be turned into the shadovv of death, and into gross
darkness: And this in love is the counsel of him who loves your Souls, but
hates your Sins,

R. W.

POSTSCRIPT.
SInce the writing of the greatest part of this, we have received information
from some of the People called Anabaptists, that Thomas Collier did write the
said sheet of paper, and so he is the Author of that wickedness also, as an
addition to his account, which is exceeding great, who even hastens to fill up
his measure, that he may be rewarded according to his doings; and indeed I
verily believe, amongst all the enemies of God who has in this day of his Sons
appearing listed themselves as soldiers of Gogs army, and joined themselves in
the war with the Dragon, against the Lamb and his followers, none has more
desperately hazarded himself in the service of the prince of darkness, then
this man Thomas Collier, who has (as it were) set himself in the fore-sront of
the battle, and has bent his tongue like his bow, for lies, to shoot at the
innocent, and yet is so impudent as to say, If he could, or dare to lie as fast
as we, he might quickly be as perfect and as free from sin as we; when as those
very Books that he has written against, and concerning the people called
Quakers, we can justly account above 150. Lies that he has uttered; and it is
high time for all people who hitherto has owned and followed him, to beware of
him, and not to partake with him in his sins, least they also be partakers of
his plagues.

R. W.

The End.

