A Heavenly Visitation TO THE Traveling AND GENERATION Born again of the
IMMORTAL SEED.
With a Testimony of the Regenerate and True Birth thereunto.
THus says the Lord, I am God and changes not, who provideth for the Faithful
in all Ages. The Jehovah, and besides me there is no other God: I made Heaven
and Earth, the Sea and the Fountains of Waters: and there is none to be
Worshipped besides me, neither is their any that can deliver out of my hands
(whom I give to destruction shall be cut off) I am he that delivers from the
Paw of the Bear, and Mouth of the Lion, and from the Firey Furnace. I put
bounds to the swelling rage of the Sea: that it cannot pass the limits thereof.
My Power is unchangeable, and my visitation of Love to my tender Seed and
Offspring has been (extended) since the foundation of the World. And I have
called a Remnant by my Name, in whom I have placed my Fear, and declared my
Counsel (which is received in my Light shining) in their inward parts; and have
given them power to obey at my Pleasure, and my Glory is near to be revealed
unto them; and this Seed, and Generation, and Plants of my Renown, I have
called out of Kindreds, Tongues and Languages, unto the one heavenly Canaan,
and espoused them to be my Church, the Church of the first Born, written in
Heaven; to understand the Tongue of the Learned, and possess a pure Language
through the pure Spirit of the Lamb approaching my Throne. I am he that has
formed thee, and given thee a being; and when thou wast in thy blood, and in
Egypts darkness, I visited in my Love, and said unto thee Live; and now have I
raised thee up from Death to Life, and turned thee from Darkness to Light, from
Satan's power, under whom thou wast in Bondage, unto the glorious power of my
heavenly life. Now arise, arise shine forth, O Sion, shake off the dust of the
Earth, and let no impurity cleave to thy Habitation; let thy Gates be Praiss,
and the Posts of thy doors Holiness, that my excellency may descend upon thee.
Let it be known through the breakings forth of the Splendour of my Glory, the
Innocence of thy Life, and the Beauty of thy Garments, to whom thou belongs:
(that no weapon formed against thee prosper) so shall it be known of a truth I
am the Sword of thy excellency, and thou art saved by me; and let thy Childlike
harmless life demonstate what war thou art engaged in, and in whose hands thou
art a Battle-ax (Spiritually) to Thresh upon the Mountains, and to Subdue the
Hills, that my one Mountain of holiness may be establish on the top of all the
Mountains, and my glorious appearance in Spirit and Truth, springing over all
the Hills of Opposition, and sinful Contradictions (which grieves my Spirit)
and in my Valley (which I have prepared) shall the Righteous Branch take root,
and grow and spread over all Nations, which are before me but as a drop of a
Bucket, and the Islands as the dust of the Balance. Then happy are the People
that tremble at my Word, in whom my Fear is placed, and walk in the Light of my
Countenance, they shall prosper and shine forth as a glorious Habitation; and
in the end of all their Sufferings, which they now pass through for my Name,
shall obtain the Crown of Glory.

A Testimony of the Regenerate etc.
O Blessed Father how great is thy Love, and how gracious is thy Visitation
unto my Immortal soul: Now do I hear thy voice in the still calm manifestation
of thy ancient love, wherein thou made known thy self unto the Patriarks of
old, though after diverse manners thou spoke unto them, yet it was in the same
Power, and the same Spirit of thy Son, whom thou have appointed Heir of all
things before the foundation of the World: In which beloved Son (whom thine is
now to hear in this latter Age) thou now speaks and declares thy Mind and
Counsel unto me, (whom thou have humbled by thy Spirit) and thy voice is
pleasant unto my soul, which thou has quickened and raised from Death to Life;
and through the virtue of the Blood of the Spotless Lamb, which suffered death
upon the Cross (yet could not see corruption) through the one offering in this
eternal Spirit, thou have purged my Conscience from dead works, (and dead
sacrifices) and thou have washed and cleansed my Garments, which were filthy
and poluted, of a deep dye, and stain like Crimson; thou have made them as
white as Wool, thou have given me the fine Linen, and through the deep passage
of tribulation, in a measure implanting me into the likeness of (thy Sons)
Death and Baptism of sufferings, thou has brought me into the Resurrection of
Life, and implanted me into the new name, where my dwelling is with the Church
of the first Born, written in Heaven. And now, Father, what can I do for thee,
who has thus visited me, with the pouring in of thy Spirit from on high, and
declared thy power as in Ancient days; and not only so, but translated me to
the glorious Light and Liberty of thy Son, that in and through the portion of
thy Spirit thou may be all in all, in me and through me. Can I any more
delight in Egypts Glory? can I take up a rest in any polluted path? can I live
any longer in the lust of my former Conversation, where the War and the Strife
lodges? can I hearken any more to the wisdom of fallen man, who feeds on the
Tree of Knowledge? (then would thy Spirit reprove me) is not my soul weaned from
Idolatry, as the Child is weaned from the Mothers Breasts? and have not thou
taught me by thy own Spirit of Truth, the Comforter, which leads into all
Truth, and gives a departure from Iniquity? Collos. 2.11.
Surely, Father, thou have come near unto me with the Circumcision of thy own
Spirit, and have inwardly cut of this Body of the Sins of the Flesh, which
polluted my Soul, and veiled my understanding, so that for want of living
Faith, I could not get the Victory over this World, and Spiritual Darkness,
which covered me, as a Menstruous Garment, Titus 11, 12, 13.
so that I could not behold thy Presence, nor thy Glory shining in me; neither
could I partake of the Riches of thy Grace, though it appeared in me, I could
not lay hold on its Virtue, or believe in its Efficacy, to be taught by it;
till thy Power break in as a Hammer, and thy Word became a Fire, to dissolve
and bruise that Man of Sin (which lodged in the secret Chambers of Darkness)
and searched every corner of my Heart as with thy Candle, till I had found what
I had lost; and brake through the Rocks and Earth of strong corruptions, until
I found the Pearl of great price in me. Then did I willingly (and not till
then) part with all for this most inestinuable Treasure, which is of greater
value (to my soul) then all that is visible. And accounted all which I had
formerly comprehended and gathered (in the fallen state) but as Dross and Dung,
in comparison of this divine excellency, of the grace and knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Savior; in and through whose Spirit, holy Father, thou have raised me
from Death to Life, not any more to Worship in the oldness of the Letter, John
4.23, 24.
but in the newness of the Spirit, even in thy own Spirit of Truth, not any
more to War with Weapons that are Carnal, but the Sword of the Spirit which
slayes, not the Creature, but the enmity in the Creature, and so brings peace
unto the soul, in which now my lise is bound up in the bundle of thy fatherly
Testimonies, which thou have sealed up unto me, with those Disciples that
follow the Lamb in the Regeneration. And now, Father, I get me to my
Watchtower, to hear what thou speaks to my soul, for thou speaks peace unto
thy People, and Redeemed, that they should not turn back to Egypts Folly: and
thy name is become a precious ointment to me, and a Tower of safety unto my
soul, where I find Rest and Peace, and there is none that can make me afraid,
as I here abide under the Shadow of thy Wings; thou seeds me with the pleasant
Fruit, and thy Banner over me is Love; thou makes my Bones to Flourish; the
munition of Rocks is my Defense, my Bread is sure, my Water is sure; and the
Eye thou have opened beholds the King (of Salem) in his Beauty, and he Raigns
with the Government upon his Shoulders, of the Increase and Peace of which
there is no end. Therefore I pray to thee, Father, in thy own Spirit of
adoption, which I have received of thee; Hollowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom
come, or thou have given me to possess the fruits thereof. Thy Will be lone in
Earth as it is in Heaven, for thou has subdued my Will which ruled by Nature,
unto thy heavenly will, which is my Sanctification. And now, Father, this is
that I beg of thee, that through the glory of thy power, I may be kept in thy
word of Patience, to be fully assured of thy preservation in the hour of
Temptation, which shall come upon all the World to try them that dwell therein.
So shall my soul be made glad and rejoice in thy beautiful presence. And here
do I rest and repose my self under the shadow of thy Wing, until the Calamities
and Storms be over past, since thou have assured my soul in being faithful unto
Death I shall enjoy the Crown of Life.

So in bowels of Love I conclude this short Testimony, which opened in me in
the Fountain of divine fullness, for the sake of the traveling Soul, and Birth
which is not of this World, which in the deep sense of the fatherly love, has
not only known his Voice, to gather from the Mountains, but has received
counsel from him, and in obedience to his mind delights now to hearken to him;
and loves nothing more then to Honor him, and to answer his Requirings, in a
daily taking up of the Cross, and making self of no Reputation, that through
the patient exercise in all the Sufferings, Imprisonments, Buffettings and
Reproaches which this Suffering Seed and Generation meets with, in its
Lamb-like nature it may lie down under all: and in that life which is hid with
God in Christ, be cheerful, and repose in the bosom of this beloved (Son of
God) who has overcome the World, and makes his Remnant shine with the rays of
his own glory, and gives them through living Faith to overcome, whereby they
inherit all things. So let every Individual press after this Christian high
calling in the Lambs Spirit; and prize the visitations of a heavenly Father to
their souls, that the mark of holiness they bear in their forehead, and read
daily in the renewing holy Spirit, their names written in the Lambs book of
life: Math. 5.34, 35, 36 37.
then thou Child of the morning is thy joy full, and in fulfilling unto
perpetuity; in the assured Testimony of one who has been taught in Christ's
School, and learns of him to suffer for his Name, who yet continues in the
godly patience in outward Bonds (with a Remnant more) for yiedling obedience to
his Command (nigh Three Years) and is not weary of well doing, but waits in
godly patience till deliverance come, according to his heavenly will who is God
over all Blessed for ever, Amen.

York Castle the 27th of 5th month 1685. Samuel Watson.

Dan. 12.10. Many shall be Purified, and made White, and Tried: but the Wicked
shall do wickedly, and none of the Wicked shall understand; but the Wise shall
understand. 1. Pet. 3.12. The eyes of the Lord are over the Righteous, and his
ears are open to their Prayers: But the face of the Lord is against them that
do evil.
THE END.

