THE ROYAL MISTRESSES OF FRANCE, OR, The Secret History OF THE AMORS Of all
the FRENCH KINGS, From PHARAMOND the First Monarch, Anno 418. to this present
Time.

Made English from the French Original.

London, Printed for Henry Rhodes at the Star, the corner of Bride-lane in
Fleet Street; and John Harris at the Harrow in the Poultry, 1695.

To the READER.
MAny are those Excellent Observations, and Instructive Admonitions, that might
be drawn from the following Sheets; but lest the Men should take amiss my going
about to descant upon their Follies, and the Women be offended with me for
unfolding the Arcana's of their Empire; the Reader is left to make his own
Reflections himself. I am none of those Enthusiast's who dream of Fifth
Monarchies, but I cannot tell what to think of it, when I find the Women in so
fair a way to erect One. Some perhaps there are, who may think these Stories
Fabulous, but such People display their Ignorance. For certain it is, that in
the Main, these short Stories agree exactly with what they call the Truth of
History: and as for the Circumstances which are added, they may be justly
thought rather to illustrate the Stories, and discover the Causes of those odd
Events, which others only barely and obscurely relate. For example, it is
assuredly true, that a Prince committed such and such miscarriages, that such
and such Persons of no Worth or Merit were advanced to high Prefern^^ts, and
that others greatly deserving of their Prince and Country, fell into disgrace,
while the True Historian (as they call him) is at a loss for the Reason of
these Whimseys of Fortune. But here the Riddle is unfolded. Let no Man
therefore censure that for fabulous, which in the least he cannot tax, to
savor either of Romance or Improbability.

THE AMORS OF THE Kings of FRANCE, etc.
The Amors of Pharamond, First King of France.
THEY who apply themselves to the reading or History, to the end they may reap
Benefit by it, ought to understand the true Causes of the most remarkable
Events: and this is that which cannot be known, without being perfectly
acquainted with the Intreagues of the Courts, wherein they were acted. For many
times, what is attributed to Policy, has no other foundation then an erroneons
Indulgence of Princes to their Mistresses, or their Favorites: And at the same
time that they were believed ^o have in their Thoughts nothing more then the
welfare of their Dominions, it was only a burning Desire to revenge the quarrels
wherein the Amors had engaged 'em. This is that which will be found in the
sequel of this History, wherein I have endeavored, as much as lay within my
Power, to clear and give light to matters of ^act that seemed obscure, in
regard the contemporary Historians, were either ignorant, or willing to conceal
the weaknesses of those Princes, under whose Reigns they, lived. I have very
little to say of our first Kings, not only because the Authors disagree among
themselves, touching the most memorable Events, but also because the Princes
themselves, being obliged to be continually on Horseback, for the preservation
and establishment of their Dominions, never minded Love, but only as a trifling
business to pass away time, and were ignorant of the Delicacies of that
passion, which is the refinement of all Pleasure.

All Historians agree, that we ought begin with. Anne. 418.
Pharamond, when we go about to recount the extended series of Kings, that have
ruled the ^^ourishing Kingdom of France; which is justified by a Medal that
represents the Ceremony of his Coronation. We shall say nothing of the
Achievements of that Prince, which relate to the story of his Reign, because
they nothing concern our subject. And for his Amors, we are ignorant of 'em,
as also of the very name of his Wife; and though It be very probable that such a
Prince as he, could not choose but be engaged in amorous Adventures, worthy to
have been transferred to Posterity; yet in regard Historians make no mention of
'em, neither can we deliver any thing of certainty concerning 'em. No body
doubts, but what is said by the Author of the Romance, which hears the Title of
Pharamond, was very ingeniously invented: and thither it is that we refer all
those who are Lovers of Fictions. It Is concluded on all hands, that Pharamond
was He, who first introduced into France the Sallck Law, which excludes Women
from the Succession to the Crown. At length, after he had established his
Empire by several Conquests, and Reigned about 14 years, he died, and left his
Son Clodion to succeed him.

The Amors of Clodion.
CLODION, the Son of Pharamond, was called by the French to succeed his Father.
He was surnamed the Hairy, because he wore his Locks very long; which was at
that time a mark of free Dominion. But we are no more informed of his amorous
Intreagues, then of those of Pharamond. Historians only report, that the Queen,
his Wife, walking one day upon the Sea sto^e, was surpised by a Monster, that
flung himself of a sudden out of the Salt water, and that she had a Son by
him, who was called Meroveu^, and was his Successor. It Is thought this Fable
was invented by Meroveus, to conceal the loose Amors of his Mother, and to
imprint Respect and Awe into the Minds of his Subjects, by attributing to
himself a birth so extraordina^y.

The Amors of Childerick.
Anno 459, or 460.
CHILDERICK, at his first coming to the Crown by no means followed the example
of his Father M coveus's Virtues. For, he debauched the Wives and Daughters of
his Subjects, so notoriously and openly, that he drew the Hatred of the whole
Kingdom upon him, and constrained 'em to depose him. Upon which, he retired
into Turingia, where King Basin at that time reigned, Now, in regard he was of
a very amorous Complexion, and for that his misfortune had not cooled the heat
of his, lustful Desires, he soon became enamored of the King of Turingia's
Wife, who was a most lovely Princess. As for himself, he was handsome in his
Person* and very pleasing in his Conversation; so that it was not long before
he reaped the fruit of his Sighs. The Queen Basina corresponded with his.
Affection in a most tender manner; insomuch that his banishment became a
pleasure to him. But at length his Subjects having recalled him home to the
re-possession of his Throne, his Love was forced to give way to his Ambition,
and he was constrained to quit his Fair Queen. Who not being able to raze from
her Heart the remembrance of Childerick, followed him into France, where he was
re-sett^d in his Kingdom, neither regarding her Honor, nor her Husband.
Childerick, admiring to see her, asked her what reason had induced her to leave
her Husband Basin, to follow him? Thy Modesty answered she, Thy Valor, and thy
noble Carriage, have in a manner constrained me to come and seek thee for my
Husband. I am only in love with thy Virrtue; and if I knew where to fi^d a
person of greater Vitue than t^y self. I would not spare for any paints to
enjoy him. Childerick, charmed with her Language, and inclined as well by his
own passion, forgot the Duties of Friendship, and the Protection which King
Basia had so generously afforded him in his Misfortunes. The pleasures which he
hoped for, in the possession of Queen Basina, would not permit him to hesitate
one moment, nor to ponder: upon the injury, the greatest he could do the Prince
his Benefactor. It Is said, that having desired Childerick not to lie with her
the first Night of their Nuptials, she went three several times to desire him
not to be afraid, but to observe the Apparitions that should present themselves
before his Eyes; and that, by virtue of her occult Magic, she showed him the
first time. Unicorns, Lions, and Leopards; The second time Bears and Wolves;
and the third time Dogs and Cats: to signify the various manners and
conditions of the Princes that should descend from that Marriage. But i^ we
observe the ardent Affection which that Queen had for Childerick, it is enough
to convince us, that this same Story was no more then a Fable invented at
random. For it is not probable that her vehement desires would permit her to
employ her time so ill, as to lie alone, while her Lover was taken up with
gazing and musing upon pretended Apparitions.

The Amors of Clovis, the First Christian King.
Anno 485.
CLOVIS who succeeded Childerick his Father, desirous to devolve and establish
his Authority upon his Legitimate Offspring, (for he had had already by one of
his Mistresses a natural Son, whose name was Thierry,) cast his Eyes upon
Cletilda, the Daughter of another Childeri^, and Neice to Gondebaut, King of
Burgundy, who was a very beautiful Princess, and by the Marriage of whom he
might reap so much the greater Advantage, because it afforded him an
opportunity to aggrandize his Dominions on Burgundy side. For Gondebaut, after
he had defeated his Brother, and cut the Throat of their Wives, and male Issue,
let the Daughter live, and retained Clotilda at Court, where she was so
strictly looked after, that they watched even her very smiles, and all the
meanest her Actions, not, permitting any Man to come near her. But Clovis's
Love and Ambition found out a way to deceive her Guards. Aurelian, a Confident
of Clovis, his Master, took his time to go into Burgundy, when Gondebaut was in
Italy with Thierry, and found a way to speak to the Princess, by disguising
himself in the habit of a ^eggar: for in that disguise he waited for her at the
Church-door and begged an Alms of her; which when she stretched forth her hand
to give him, he squeezed and kissed it after so passionate a manner, that she
presently conjectured there m^st be some secret Mystery in the Beggars
carriage. Having therefore found out a way to discourse him, she listened to
his Propositions, and received the Nuptial Ring that Clovis sent her, with this
condition, that he should turn Christian. The Prince being thus assured of the
Affection of his Mistress, sent a magnificent Embassy to Gondebaut, on purpose
to congratulate his good success and demand his Niece in Wedlock; who ^^ous'd
himself, under pretense of his Religion. But Aurelian, who was Clovis's
Ambassador, promised to remove that obstacle out of the way* so that Gendebaut
having no other exception to make, and not knowing which way decently to avoid
it was forced to comply with his demand.

Deuterie, Theodebert, the King of Austratia's Mistress.
CLovis's Children having divided the Kingdom of F^^^ce bet weul^om, Austrasia
sell to Theoderie est ^^^el Prince; this Dominions were of a large (...) b^
o^p^ che^do not only Lorrain, but the ^o^i Countries and part of Germany, which
was the ancient ^^tismony of: our Kings and ^eath was far as Bauaria Theod. had
but one only Son, whose name was Theadeb^rt, a Prince both stood and ambitious,
and medicated nothing but great designed. His Father b^t bought himself of
Marrying him betimes, and to match him unto such an alliance; as might be able
to assist him in the preservation of the Dominions which he should hear him
alter his Death. To that purpose he ^^st his Eyes upon Wisgard, the Daughter of
Woc^in, King of the Lombards Wa^^o^ as a Parent Prince of his possessed a good
part of Italy, and who was able to assist him to wage W^^ with the other ^^nus
of Clovit, if any of 'em, not contented with his share should attempt to fall
upon Austria. Theoderic having taken his Resolution, sent Ambassadors to
Wachon, to demand his Daughter, and having obtained his desire, he affianc'd
her to his Son; but the Marriage was not consummated, whither it were that
Theodebert had any reluctance to the Match, or that Theoderic growing jealous
of his Son's Ambition, would not entrust him with an oppurtunity to make
himself (...) by that Alliance. All the People of Austras^^^ were charmed with
Theod^bert's Virtues, and they spoke so highly in his praise that the King was
somewhat disturbed at it, and resolved to remove him from the Court. To which
purpose, an opportunity offered it self, which he was unwilling to (...) escape
him. The S^^viant, who possessed Spain, finding themselves over powered by the
(...) who made it their business to (...) of the Kingdom, solicited the King
of ^^^trasia to fall upon Narb^n^ois^ Gaul, to the end, the Enemy might be
compelled to ^epass the (...), in order to defend that Province, which at that
time belonged (...) Theodori^ discovered to his Son the Preposals that had ^een
made to him, and asked him whither he would command the Army, which (...) to
send into (...) the Young Be^^^e was (...), that his Other offered (...)
opportunity to exercise his Valor* and declared that (...) ready too set
forward as (...) few Days after (...) with a powerful Army, and (...) Burgundy
and the (...) to his entering into (...) in all the Towns that he did (...)
Army, and after (...) strong (...) Nimes and Montpelier, to come and (...) his
Camp upon the Banks of the ^i^er Or^ near ^o (...).

Deuterie, Wise to the Governor of that City, laythen at his Castle of
Cup^^^ic, which some call Cabrieret, but others more justly Capost^^. in regard
that Village stands more near to Beziers, whereas Cabrieres adjoyns to Nimes.
She would fain have go away to her. Husband with her Daughter about ten Years
of Age, but She had not time, for they were both taken by the aven^ Couriers of
Theodebert's Army, and presented to the Prince. He was charmed with their
Beauty and after he had made a thousand excuses for the ill usage they had met
with, he surrendered up to them his own Tent, and besought 'em to make use of
it. In the Evening, he went and paid a visit to Douterie, and told her, she was
at her own Liberty, and that she should have a Convey to guard her to Nimes
when she pleased. But Deu^erie, who was not insensible of the goodly presence
and Virtues of Theodebert, was not over desir^^^ to part with him so soon; and
therefore she made him answer, that she would not wrong his Civility, since it
was not just be sho^^^ deprive himself of a Pledge that might he worth him the
Conquest of Ri^iers This Language was accompanied with so passionate a look,
that Theodebert might easily perceive that an Incitement more persuasive then
Generositie, made him refuse a happiness that was to be esteemed and preferred
above all other cares of War, and therefore prepared to attack ^etiers. Which
Deuterie having notice of, gave him to understand, that she could not without a
more then ordinary Grief behold him, shed the Blood of a People, among whom she
was Born; and that during the Siege, she should be in continual fear for the
Person of her Husband, who upon all occasions, would verture himself as far as
the meanest Soldier; which Reasons seemed so plausible, that Theodebert
submitted. Though Deutetie all the while was swayed by a far different mo^^^, as
being (...) afraid of her Husband's Death then of the effects of his anger. Had
be discovered h^^ ^eve, he might have been precipi^^ted to some (...) Viol^^ce,
which made Deute^ie desire, that Theodebert would remove to some farther
distance, that might deprive him of the knowledge of their intreague, and she
understood to (...) to made the best of the indulgence of her Pathronate Lover,
that she obliged him not only to remo^^ from ^^ziers, but to quit Laug^^do^,
and take up his Quarters in Province. They stopped at Arles, where their chiefest
Divertisement were ^alls ^^^ing, and Tournaments Love having lulled the Valor
of the young Prince ^^eep. However Witigez, King the G^b^ not being a little
alaturn'd at the Conquest which he had made, sort an Ambassador to him with an
offer of all Provence, provided he would join his Arm with the Goths against
Belas^rint; whom the Emperor Justinian had sent to drive ^em out of Spain, To
which Theodebert made answer that his Father being alive, he could not determine
any thing positively, in reply to that Proposal, but that he would dispatch a
Messenger to him, to know his pleasure. Soon after, the Courier, instead of
bringing back to Theodebert the answer which he expected, brought him news,
that the King his Father was Dead, and that there was just Reason to fear, that
his Uncles would make themselves Masters of his Dominions, if he did not
speedily return to oppose their Designs. There, upon, Theodebert, immediately
set forward from Arles, taking along with him not only Deuterie, then big with
Child of Prince Theobald, who succeeded him, (...) the Lady's Daughter, whom
she had by the Governor of R^^er. Nevertheless, before his departure, he
assured Witige^'s, Ambassador (...) soon as he had secured the Possession of
the Kingdom, he would do what his Master should desire.

But no soone^ was (...) Crowned King of Austrasia, but the people pressed him
to Marty Wisg^^d, laying before him, that since he had a design to w^ge War
with Justinian, it was him interest, to procure the friendship of the Lombard
King, since it was to his power to set open or stop up the Poss^^, through
which the Emperors Army was (...) march. These Reasons seemed to be of great
weight, and would have prevailed upon The^^^bert, had he been less in Love. But
he was so intoxicated with his Passion, for Deuterie, that his Love closed up
his Eyes against all other Considerations, and to free himself from the
importunities of those that pressed him to solemnize the Nuptials, so much
desired with Wisgard, he publicly espoused Deuterie, with great care
concealing the Truth of her Husband's being alive.

And now his Passion no longer meeting any obstacle to combat, began to
languish, and he yielded to the pressing importunities of Witig^^, who
earnestly solicited him to pass the Alps, and make War upon the Romans. To
that end, he set forward from Me^^, though Deuterie made use of all her Artifices
to stop him, and marching into Italy with Ten Thousand Men, he joined Forces
with Dor-ju, who commanded the Army of the Goths, and thus united they took
Milan. Many other were the events of this War, which I pass over in silence, as
being nothing to our purpose. But at length the Pestilence having ruined the
greatest part of Theodeberts Army, he repassed the Alps, and returned to M^^^.

During his absence, Deuterie's Daughter, Gosminda's Features were arrived to
that perfection, and the color of her Complexion* was become so fresh and
lively, that he became d^zl'd with the sight of her, not could he conceal, his
admiration from Deuteries piercing Eye^, who perceived that their glances met
and that her Daughter vaunted in private the Conquest she had won. She
carefully observed the two Lovers, and being convinced, that Gossmi^'d
corresponded with the passion of her Faithless Husband, she resolved to be
reveng'd^ but in such a manner, that she might not be accused of having
contributed to the Deat of the Young Princess.

The Court was gone to spend some few Days at Verdune, and the ^^^nd Walk was
usually upon the Banks of the Me^^^, which is very deep in that part Kings,
knew not then the use of Coaches, nor Magnificent Calashes, but only little
Chariots, slightly covered over, wherein no more then one Person could sit, and
drawn by Oxen. The jealous Deuterie therefore procured one of these Chariots to
be prepared for Gosswind, and ordered it so, that a pair of Wild Oxen, such as
had never felt the Burden of the Yoke, and kept on purpose without Water for
several Days were put to draw it; so that the Young Princess had no sooner
taken her seat in the Chariot, but the furious Beasts carried her a full Gallop
toward the River, and eager to quench their thirst, flung themselves into the
bottomless and rapid Stream with the Chariot at their Heels, where they were
presently drowned, and the Princess swallowed up in the merciless Gulf.

Theodebert was ignorant for some time, that the Death of Gosswind had happened
so unfortunately, by the Connivance of her Mother; but when he came to
understand it, he looked upon the foulness of the crime with so much
detestation, that he could no longer endure the Person who had committed it.
Thereupon his chief Ministers, seeing him so well inclined, took their
advantage of it, and laid before him so feelingly the wrong which he had done
his Honor in preferring a Lascivious Woman before Wisgard, whose Patience and
other Virtues were admired by all the World, that he submitted to their
Councils. In short, he thrust Deuterie into a Nunnery, and espoused Wisgard,
who enjoyed her new Dignity but a very little while, for that she died within
six Weeks after. Theodebert was extremely afflicted for the loss of her, yet
not being able to reconcile himself to Deuterie, but leaving her in her
retirement without so much as thinking any more of her, he spent all his time
in Hunting, which was the occasion of his Death, for he was mortally wounded by
a wild Bull that had broke from the Toils, wherein he had been entangl'd, as if
he had designed to revenge the Death of Gosswind, whose Ruin he had been the
cause of, by his incestuous Love.

Clotaire's Incestuous Amor.
Anno 560,
CLOTAIRE reunited the Kingdom of France, which had been divided, after the
Death of Clo^is. He had Married Isgend, of whose Family or place of Nativity,
the Historians speak not a word, However, she had a Sister that far exceeded
her in Beauty, for whom she besought the King to provide a Husband, and to that
purpose, sent for her to the Court; but Clotaire found her so amirable, that he
could not endure to part with her. He took so great a delight in her
Conversation, that at length he perceived in himself an affection for her much
more tender then it became him to have for the Sister of his Wife. For some
time therefore he contended with his Incestuous, passion, and strove to
vanquish it: But finding at length, that the more he withstood it, the more is
increased he resolved to speak to her. Heregoud trembled at the King's first
imparting his mind to her, and for some time, avoided coming into his presence,
but afterward she grew less scrupulous, and accustomed her self to listen to
his Allurements, and in matters of Love, when a Virgin begins once to hearken,
she is not far from droping into the share; so that when she once forceas'd to
be deterred with the horor of the Crime, that accompanied the King's Love, she
soon surrendered her Fortress, and became the Mother of Chilperick, who Reigned
after his Father in Normandy, and Paris. But when Clotaire had satiated his
Lust, that same disgust, that usually follows Enjoyment, opened his eyes, and
made him sensible of the wrong he had done Ingoud, by violating the conjugal
Vow, that he had made her, in devoting himself to her Sister. Thereupon he
submitted to the Remonstrances and Reprimands of Pope John III. who constrained
Heregoud to betake her self to a Nunnery. Some time after, the King having
buried the Queen his Wife, espoused Chinsiu or Chimsen for the Historians are
not agreed about her Name.

The Amors of Cherebert, King of Paris.
AFTER the Death of Clotaire, the Kingdom of France was divided, and Paris fell
to Chereberts share, who was the eldest. He had married Ingeberge, (...)
Princess extraordinary Virtue, and who Loved him tenderly; she saw to her
grief, how the King spent all his time in Hunting, and never came near her till
late in the Night, of which she made most grievous complaints to Meroflede and
Marco^efe, her Maids of Honor, in which the most consided. They were Sisters,
and though they were of no higher extraction then the Daughters of a C^mber of
Wool, yet the Queen disdained not their attendance about her Person, because
they were endowed with particular Talents. Marcouefe had spent her Youthful
Years in a Convent, and had also entered into Vows, but in regard she pretended
a constraint upon her, she had ^^^^^^ded her self under the Queen's protection.
She (...) learnt all sorts of Needle Work in the Cloister, and she had a lively
Wit, polished with much Learning. She was serious, yet she had so many charms
in her conversation, that it was a difficult matter to be tired with her
Company. On the other side, Meroflede was of a lively frolic disposition,
danced with a goodly grace, sung most charmingly, and played upon several
Instruments. Now these two Young Lady's proposed to the Queen, as the neatest
course she could take, to divertise the King with courtly ^easts and Banquets,
thereby to retain him longer in his Palace. They also studied a sort of
Pastoral, wherein Meroflede proved so successful, that the ^ing gave her a
thousand praises; he took so much delight in her conversation, and found the
Air of it, so quaint and delicate, that he could by no means forsake her
company: Insomuch, that he very seldom went a Hunting, unless it were upon a
set match. Meroflede, who was Ambitiois, forgot the Duty which she owed her
Mistress and plied all her Artifices with so much diligence, to keep possession
of the King's Heart, that a length, be obtained the utmost of his desires. But
being a wanton, as she was, she could not be content with one single, though so
noble a Conquest: She would be continually ensnaring with her purloining
glances, all that were so daring as to seek their Thraldom in her looks,
Marconefe, who was no less Beautiful, nor no less witty then her Sister, though
more reserved Stomack'd a preferment, that seemed so injurious to her. However
for some time she stifled her Vexation in her Breast, not breaking her mind to
any person whatever: But when she saw the Meroflede let her self loose to
others, besides the King, she discovered her Infidelity to him, after so
discreet and so ingenious a manner, as if her intention had been only for her
sisters sake to reform the Errors of her ill conduct. On the otherside,
Cherebert lodged in Marconefe's Breast, all his vexations and sorrows for
Merofledes wanton, and no less wandering humor, and found so much Judgment in
her arguments and her councils, that he thought he might be far more happy with
her, then with her Sister; and therefore he attempted to gain her affection,
wherein the speed of his success was answerable to the eagerness of his
pursuit. Marconefe spared for nothing, for indeed, her emulation was so great
to deprive her sister of Cherebert's Heart, that she prevented his desires, to
the end, she might compass her ends. Meroflede on the other side, was soon
sensible of this alteration, and did all she could to regain his affections.
Cherebert gave ear to her reproaches, bore 'em patiently, and endeavored to
justify himself; and finding charms in both, unwilling to loose either, he made
it his business to persuade one Sister that he was entirely devoted to her; and
the other, that she was the only Mistress of his affection.

All this while he was so enthralled to his passion for these two Ladies, that
he neglected the Government of his Dominions, and altogether slighted
Ingoberge. And she, unfortunate Queen, acknowledged soon the fault, she had
committed, in drawing off the King from the pleasure of Hunting, to make him
sensible of amorous delights, and found her self more unhappy then she was when
the King forsook her company, only to wage War against the wild Beasts of the
Forest. So that after she had in vain attempted to reclaim him by her caresses
and her complaisance, she had recourse to St. Germain, at that time Bishop of
Paris, who had gained a high reputation for his piety, and begged of him to lay
before the King the wrong he did her, in making her such ill returns of her
kindness. But the remonstrances of that Prelate, were so far from moving him,
that they rather served to render the Person of Ingoberge more hateful to him.
For from that time forward, he looked upon her only as a jealous Woman, that
sought to interrupt his pleasures, and whose revenge was to be dreaded, so that
he redoubled his scorn of her, and obliged her to retire into a Convent. After
the Queen's retirement, the jealousy of ambition intermixing with that of
Love, the two Sisters were emulous each to possess, alone, the King's
inclinations, and dispose of all his Favors; and their embitterment augmented
to that degree, that it enraged 'em to a quarrel, which made a great noise and
divided all the Court. The King in vain endeavored to reconcile and persuade
'em to live peaceably together, at least to keep an outward correspondence of
civility, if they could not love each other as sisters. But at length
disheartened by their transportments, and despairing of doing any good, he sell
again to his old sport of Hunting, and left 'em at leisure, to quarrel among
themselves.

One day, being separated from his Train, and very Thirsty, Anno 524.
he alighted close by a Fountain, for want of a glass he took up the Water with
the hollow of his hand, at what time a young Shepherdess perceiving him, drew
near him and presented him an earthen Cup. The King took it, and observing in
her Face, all the agreements of proportion and color that Nature could afford,
without the help of Art, he asked her name, to which she answered, that her
name was Dandelind, and that she was a Farmers Daughter, who had a House hard
by adjoining. Upon that, Cherbert declared who he was, and told her withal,
that he would carry her to Court, she excused her felf with an ingenuity that
charmed him, alleging that Obedience and Duty which she owed her Father; and
the Grief it would be to her to live absented from him. Go then, and fetch him
hither, replied the King, and I will carry, ye along with me both together.
Immediately away ran the Shepherdess, and soon after returned with the Peasant,
whom she called her Father. Presently the good old Man, who understood by his
Daughter, that it was the King who sent for him, sell at his Feet, and begged
to know his pleasure. It Is my pleasure, replied the King, to make your Fortune,
and your Daughter Happy: come to morrow morning to me, when I rise. The
Countryman failed not to attend upon him, and he made him Keeper of his Palace.
Nor did the King believe he should meet with any reluctance in the Shepherdess;
but she showed him ^o much Prudence and Virtue in her Conduct, that he was
afraid of offering any violence, and rather thought her worthy of a Crown. And
the death of Ingoberge, that happened soon after, afforded him an opportunity
to fulfill his desire. So that he espoused Dandelind, and married his two
Mistresses to two great Lords of his Court. Cherbert, however, could not
continue faithful to his new Queen: for he involved himself in so many Courtly
intreagues, that the young Queen, who loved him entirely, died for grief,
within two years after her Marriage. Cherebe^t after that, Married Theogedild,
who was so far from being troubled at the infidelity of her inconstant Spouse,
that she paid him in his own coin. And her extravagancies were so notorious,
that the King, having in vain made use of entreaties, and Menaces to reclaim
her, fell into a deadly Melancholy, that put an end to his days in the Castle
of Blaye, whither he retired from the World.

The Amors of Guntran, King of Orleans.
GVNTRAN, the Brother of Cherebert, Anno 572
to whom the Kingdom of Orleans fell for his share, being very young when his
Father died, disburthen'd himself of the weight of his Government, and laid it
upon the Shoulders of Rotharic, who had been Prime Minister of State under the
Reign of Clotair. This Rotharic had two Daughters, who might well be said to be
the Ornaments of the Court. The eldest of the two was named Veneranda, not
above fifteen years of age at most: Fame-Rofle the youngest, not above eleven
years old, promised much, but she was not as yet come to perfection. Their
Mother was dead, so that they lived both together in Rotharic^s House, under
the care of an ancient Governess. The King, who often went to visit his Prime
Minister, was charmed with Veneranda's Beauty; so that he never saw her, but he
gave her to understand, by a tender and passionate Look, that she had obtained
the conquest of his Heart. However, Veneranda was a stranger to that language,
or at least she seign'd to be ignorant of it; which troubled the enamored
Prince so much the more, because he could never have an opportunity to speak to
her, in regard her Governess would never permit her out of her sight. Desirous
therefore he was to corrupt the old Woman, nor did he think it impossible, but
he knew not whom to entrust with the secret, for fear it should reach
Rotharie's ear; who having the disposal of all Favors, had all the Courtiers
^t his command. But while he was in this perplexity, fortune gave him a fair
opportunity to get rid of it. For Rotharie recommended to him for one of his
Pages, a Nephew of the Governesses, who discovered so great an affection for
his Service, that the King thought he might impart his Mind to him, without
danger. Thereupon he adventured to speak to him, and found him well inclined to
second his designs. Accordingly, the Page gave his Aunt an account of the
King's desires, and the great advantages she might justly expect as the Rewards
of her faithful Services. Presently the old Woman suffered her self to be
overcome, and being well acquainted with Veneranda's Humor, which was naturally
ambitious, she told her, that 'twould be her fault alone, if she did not come
to be Queen, provided, she would but comply with Gontran's Affection: but in
regard it became her first, to be assured of Gontran's Heart, before Rotharie
were acquainted with the business, 'twas requisite she should admit the King to
visit her in private. Veneranda firmly believed she could never go astray,
while she followed the Counsels of a Woman, to whose care and conduct her
Father had entrusted her, and who had never preached to her any other Lessons,
but those of Virtue: So that by her means, she saw the King more then once; she
hearkened to his Courtship, and entered into those strict engagements with him,
that she became the Mother of Prince Gondebaut.

In the mean time, Fame-^o^le's Beauty, Anno, 574
which augmented as she grew in years, arrived to so extraordinary a
perfection, that Gontran fell in love with her, at the same time that he began
to be tired with Veneranda's Favors. But Fame-Rafle, who was not ignorant how
her Sister had engaged her self, by her example had learnt how unsafe it was to
rely upon Gontran's protestations; and therefore taking better measures, she
kept her ground, and disputed the Conquest inch by inch. She opposed her
Reserv'dness against the Transports of the Prince, and neatly, and ingenuously
gave him to understand, that there was nothing to be got, but by fair and
lawful means; so that the Prince, whose Passion resistance augmented, gave his
consent at length, and married her. Upon that, St. German, who was acquainted
with his former engagements, earnestly remonstrated to him, the heinousness of
such a scandalous Wedlock, and told him withal, that the Church would never
approve his incestuous familiarity; therefore be exhorted him to break it, and
divorce himself from Fame-Rafle; and not being able to gain any thing by fair
means, he had recourse to Anathema's, and banished those two Lovers from the
communion of the Faithful.

Veneranda, tho sensibly nettl'd at Gentran's Infidelity, had a long time
patiently undergone her misfortune; yet not daring to exert her Revenge upon
her unconstant Lover, because he was her Sovereign; nor upon her Rivalless,
whom she could not ruin, without violating the Law of Nature. Nevertheless,
she altered her opinion, when she saw her Excommunicated: for then no longer
looking upon her as a Sister, but as an Abominable Person, whose life lay at
the mercy of any one, that would take it away, she gave her a dose of Poison
and sent her out of the World. However, she was never the more happy for so
doing; for she could never regain the King's Affection, the heat of whose
Passion was quite extinguished. Nor was she less perplexed to see him so
prodigal of his amorous Sedulities to Theodegild, who after the death of the
King her Husband, was fled for Sanctuary to Gentran's Court. That Princess
made him proposals of Marriage, to which he gave ear immediately, more out
Ambition then Love; in hopes, by that means, to join the Kingdom of Paris to
that of Orleans. Nevertheless, reflecting upon the Troubles which the Marriage
of Fame-Rafle had brought upon his Shoulders, he was unwilling to engage
himself in a second Incestuous Wedlock, for fear of emboldning his Subjects to
revolt, and furnishing his Brothers with a pretense to invade his Dominions. He
therefore contented himself, with making the best of his Sister in-law's
confidence in trusting him to lay violent hands upon her Treasure; which done,
he banished her into Provence, and thrust her into a Nunnery. Upon Theodegild's
retirement, he espoused Marcatrude the Daughter of Duke Magnacaire: and this
new Queen had a Maid of Honor, whose name was Austrigild, a Lady of surpassing
Beauty; with whom Gontran fell in love, and having gained her Affections, had
two Children by her, who died both before him.

Fredegond, Mistress to Chilperic, King of Neustria and Paris.
CHILPERIC, the Brother of Cherebert and Gontran, to whoss lot fell the Kingdom
of Paris and Neustria, had for his first Wife, one Audouaire, whose Original is
not known, only it is said that she was the Daughter of one of his Subjects, and
that by her he had three Sons, Theodibert, Meroveus, and Clovis, together with
a Daughter, whose name was Basina, who took upon her the habit of a Nun, in the
Convent of St. Crosse's in Poiters, of which St. Radegond, was then the Abbess.
But while Queen Audonaire lived, she had a Maid of Honor of mean extraction,
that resided with her, who was born in the Village of Auancourt in Picardy, but
whose Beauty, Wit, and other endowments rendered her worthy of high esteem, and
her name was Fr^degond. She had ingenuity enough to gain at the same time, the
affection both of her Master and Mistress, and withal, she knew so well which
way to conceal her feigned commerce Chilperic, that no body at the Court
perceived it: but the King's passion for her, was near, a whit the less
violent, for being secret: and Fredegoud on the other side, who had a piercing
Wit, conjectured shrewdly, that it would be no impossible thing for to see her
self seated in the Throne, if she could preserve that ascendant, which she had
over the Queen; who being a good honest, downright simple Woman, and
consequently never mistrusting Fredegond's tricks and artifices, easily fell
into the snares, which she laid for her.

About that time it was, that Chilperic left Paris to make War upon his Brother
Sigebert King of Austrasia, leaving Audouaire big with Child, nor was it not
long after his departure, that she was brought to Bed of a Daughter, to which
by Fredegond's advice, she stood for one of the Godmothers her self, who
persuaded her, that would it be a means to render her more acceptable to her
Husband. Chilperick being returned, she inflamed his Love by affected Refusals,
and seeing him one day at her feet, protesting that he loved no body but her
self, and that nothing in the world could equal the delicacy of his passion,
she answered him with a cold indifferency, that if his protestations were
sincere, he would not every day as he did, share his caresses between her and a
Princess, whom the laws forbad to look upon as a Wife, since she was become so
near a kin to him, by being God-mother to the Young Basina. Chilperick was at
first surpised at this discourse, but at length suffering himself to be
prepossess d by the artifices of Fredegond, he was made believe that he
committed Incest, in performing the duty of a Husband to Audouaire; and
therefore to avoid all occasions of committing so foul a crime, he shut up his
Wife in a Nunnery.

Fredegond, having thus removed the main obstable, believed that nothing else
could prevent her being Queen: only one politic reason crossed her designs.
For Sigebert had Married Brunebant the Daughter of Athanagild, King of Spain.
Now Childerick fearing least that alliance should render him too Potent, sent
to demand for himself Galsuind, the sister of that Princess, and to oblige
Athanagild the more easily to give his confent, he offered to affiance Basina
to the Prince, his Son. But that was more then he could perform, in regard the
King could not procure the consent of the States of his Kingdom, that his
Daughter should Marry with the Prince of Spain, because he was an Arrian. Which
denial, though it was enough to have incensed Athanagild, nevertheless it infused
into him no occasion of resentment against Chilperic, as being well acquainted
with his sincerity, and for that he knew 'twas none of Chilperic's fault, that
he could not be as good as his word; so that he consented to his demand of
Galsuiud, and gave her to him without any scruple. But in that Marriage,
Chilperic met not with those sweets of Wedlock which he expected Galsuiud was
proud and haughty, as all the Spanish women are, and not of a humor to brook
that her Husband should, share-with another Heart, and that affection which she
believed to be only due to her self: she soon perceived the Love which her
unfaithful Husband had for Fredegond, and displayed her resentment with a
vengeance. Chilperic, accustomed only to the patience of Audonaire, could not
submit himself to Galsuinds outrageous transports, and Fredegond left nothing
omitted to exasperate the King against her. For in regard she beheld her
certain ruin before her Eyes, unless she ruined the Queen, she never boggled at
the taking a resolution to prevent her, and she understood so well how to make
the best of the shallow feeblenesses of which the King had given her such
frequent marks, that she persuaded him to make away Galsuind. Thereupon,
Chilperic, after he had fully resolved upon it, made a show of more then usual
compliance with the Queen's humor, and never visited Fredegond, but withal the
precautions imaginable, that he might take from Galsuind, all occasion of
mistrust, and when he found her quite cured of all her jealous suspicions, one
night that he was in Bed with her, he strangled her with her own Hair.

Sigebert being informed of the Death of his Sister in Law, thought it his duty
to revenge it, and laid the design without ever considering that the Murderer
was his Brother. He engaged also Gontran to join with him. On the other side,
Chilperic raised an Army to defend himself; but before he took the Field, he
Married Fredegund. However, he did not prove successful in that War, for that
his Army being defeated, and his eldest Son Theodebert having lost his Life in
the Battle, he himself made a hard shift to escape to Tournay, where Sigebert
immediately besieged him. But Fredegund, who made a slight matter of commiting
the greatest crimes* suborned a crew of Ruffians, who assasinated Sigebert in
his Tent, and by that means delivered the King her Husband. For which piece of
service, Chilperic thought himself so highly beholding to her, that he could
not imagine any better way to gratify her, then by settling the Crown upon
Fredegond's Children, to the prejudice of those whom he had by Audouaire. But
Meroveus to whom the Kingdom belonged, as being his eldest Son, understanding
what was a brewing so contrary to hi^ interest, took Arms against his Father,
and retired to Rou^u, whither Brunebaut, Sigebert's Widow had been banished by
her Brothers in Law. There he beheld that Princess, and thought her so amiable,
though he were then above forty Years of Age, that he resolved to Marry her, To
that purpose, he made the Proposal to her, and with little trouble obtained her
consent, because she looked upon that Marriage as the means to obtain her
liberty. So soon as Chilperic received the news of this Marriage, he marched
directly to Roueu, with all the Forces that he could muster together; nor did
the City make any great resistance, so that by the taking of it, Chilperic
became master of the new Married couple. Presently he declared the Marriage
void, as being solemnized without his consent; and after he had shut up
Brunebaut in the old Palace of Roue^; he marched to Soissons, taking his Son
along with him, where he was no sooner arrived, but he was besieged by the
Champenois, who took part with Childebert, the Son of Sigebert. Fredegond* that
she might deliver her self from the captivity of a Siege, got out of the Town
with Clovis; the Youngest of Audouair's Children, nor did she return till after
the War was ended, by the defeat of the Champenois. At he return, the invasion
of those People was the subject of all the Town discourse, and Fredegond
cunningly infused it into Chilperic's read, that they had never entered into
his Dominions but at the solicitation of Merov^^^, who by their assistance,
thought to have seized upon the Throne. And though there were a Thousand reasons
to have justified the conduct of that Prince, Chilperic believed him guilty,
because Fredegond accused him, and therefore after he had caused his Head to be
shaved, shut him up in a Cloister. But the cruel Queen was not satisfied with
that punishment, which was not deemed severe enough, for an imaginary crime:
and rightly judging, that she could not secure the Crown to her Children so
long as Audouair's Offspring remained alive, she thought it behooved her to send
them out of the World. Therefore, to bring this to pass, 'twas requisite to
engage Meroveus in some new exploit by which he might incurr his Fathers
farther indignation. For which purpose, she sent Gontran Bosor, who was wholly
devoted to her interests, to discourse him in the Monastery. Presently the
Young Prince know him, because he had seen him at the head of Sigebert's
Armies, but he was ignorant of the secret engagements between him and his
Mother in Law; so that he easily fell into the snare which the traitor had laid
for him, who proposed to him, his leaving the Convent to head a party that he
had ready to embody under his Banners, and to that purpose, gave him an
opportunity to make his escape. But no sooner was he arrived at the place
appointed, but he was assassinated by the very person into whose arms he had
thrown himself, for protection. Which Chilperic looked upon as a great piece of
service, as being misinformed, and not understanding the depth of the affair.

There remained now no more then Clovis, Anno 577.
of all the Children of Audonaire, and Fredegond was not without hopes of being
rid of him too. But Heaven, that would not permit her to enjoy the fruit of so
many crimes, in less then six Months swept away all the three Children she had
by Chilperic, with the Pestilence. So that the King not having any more
Children then Clovis, placed all his affections upon him, and consequently
rendered him more odious to Fredegond. Nor did the Young Prince less mortally
hate his Mother in Law; and though it highly conccern'd him to conceal his
sentiments, which otherwise might prove his bane, yet could he not forbear to
entrust his secret thoughts with one of her Maids of Honor, with whom he had
an intreague. So that as Lovers can keep nothing hid from their Mistresses, he
told her one day, that if he ever came to the Crown, he would not leave the
Death of his Brothers unrevenged, and that he would extend the punishment of
Fredegond to the utmost rigor of the Law. This severe language being reported
to Fredegond, as she had great reason to, fear the dire effects of it, so she
made it her business to prevent her Son in Law: And to that purpose, she
accused Clovis to his Father, for having destroyed the three Children born of
their Body's in lawful Wedlock, by virtue of certain charms, composed by one
of her Maids of Honor and her Daughter, the very same person in whom the
Prince had put so dangerous a confidence. Thereupon the King, falling into the
snare, though so palpable and obvious to the sight, caused the two unfortunate
Lady's to be arrested; who being put to the Rack, that they might free
them-from from torment, whatever was asked 'em, they confessed not only all, but
more then was sufficient for the conviction of Clovis. So that the King, after
he had seen the verbal report of the depositions, commanded Didier and Boson,
the Captains of his Guards and Fredegond's creatures, to seize the person of
his Son; which was presently done with more then ordinary inhumanity.
Immediately by order of the King his Father, they carried the Prince to
Chelles, and from thence to Noisy, beyond the Marne, where they stabbed him, and
upon their return persuaded the King, that he laid violent hands upon himself,
to avoid the deserved punishment of his crime. Some few Days after, the Maid of
Honor and her Daughter were sentenced to be burnt alive, and accordingly
Executed in the public Market place of Paris. Nor did the cruelties of
Fredegond stop there. For being afraid least any one should remain alive, that
might revenge the Death of so many innocents, she sent in like manner to the
other World, both Andouoire and Basina her Daughter; although that, being shut up
in a Cloister, they were not in a condition to give her any occasion of
jealousy. And now there was nothing wanting more, to satisfy the ambition of
this remorstess Princess, but to have a successor to Chilperic born of her own
body. Propitious Heaven also, not yet resolved to punish her transgressions,
gave her one who was called Clotaire, in whose person France being once more
reunited, was never since divided again.

But neither was Cruelty Fredegond's only vice; for her unchastity was no less;
and several Lovers had a share in her favor, among which were Didier and Boson
already mentioned, and Beleran, Archbishop of Bourdeaux. But he who enjoyed her
Heart the longest, was Landry de la Tour, Mayor of the Palace, who being both
Younger and handsomer then the rest, constrained em to give him place.
Nevertheless, although the intreague was publicly known at Court, the King had no
knowledge of it; Husband's being generally the persons who are latest informed
of the disorders of their Families. However he discovered it at length, and
that discovery cost him his Life.

One Day that he had appointed for a match at Hunting, Anno ^^4^
he rose betimes in the Morning, leaving Fredegond a sleep in her Bed. But the
weather not proving favorable, enforced him to return sooner then he was wont
to do. Thus he rode back full speed, attended only by one Page, presently
alighted, and ascending by a back pair of Stairs, entered the Queen's chamber,
who was then fiting at her Toilet with her hair about her Ears; and at the same
time stealing softly behind her chair, tickled her gently upon the Shoulder
with his wand. To whom the Queen, who was intent about dressing her Head and
cur^ing her locks, and having her imagination filled with the Idea of her
Favorite, without ever looking behind her, Ah Landry, said she, that is no trick
of a right Courrier to come behind a Lady. The King surpised at such an
amourous and familiar piece of merriment, slipped out of the chamber again,
without so much as one word, leaving Fredegond, who was become terrible of her
mistake, in a most terrible astonishment, and the less he seemed to take notice
of it, the more did the jealous Princess believe she had reason to be afraid,
as making no question, but she should soon feel the effects of his revenge. By
this time Chilperic was got a Horseback again, and gone to find out his retinue,
who were not yet returned. And Fredegond made use of that interval of time, to
resolve upon what she had to do, in such a nice and delicate conjuncture.
Immediately she sent for Landry, and having told him what had befallen her,
asked his advice what course to take. Landry advised her to retire forthwith to
Guntran, and to put her self under his protection. The Queen beholding him with
Eyes, which, though full of wistfull passion, yet darted forth some certain
mixtures of despite, For a Knight, said she, like you, that have acquired some
reputation by your courage, the resolution which you would infuse unto me, is
nothing generous. As much a Woman as I am, let me take my own course. Chilperie
must die, or we are both ruined; nor have we minute to loose upon this
occasion. He is gone a hunting with a very small attendance: either then
resolve to send him out of the World, or to drop your head upon a Scaffold.
Landry stood a while like one in a trance at such a desparate proposal; but a
length after he had pondered for some few minutes, with a fixed resolution, he
shall die, Madam, said he, and you shall be obeyed. At the same time he flung
out of the Chamber without speaking a word more, and being returned home, he
sent for six undaunted Ruffians, that feat'd no colors, and whom he knew to be
entirely devoted to his interests, to whom he unfolded his design, and having
furnished 'em with the best Horses in his stable, and Money in their Pockets to
make their escapes, which way they thought most convenient, he directed 'em to
the place where the King was a Hunting. Away flew the apposted villains like
Lightning, dogged the King all the remainder of the Day, and keeping close up
with him by the favor of the Dusk, till he was got all alone into a solitary
Village, there they gave him several mortal Wounds, and flung themselves into
the Forest adjoining. Fredegond understanding that the business was done, put
her self under the protection of the Bishop of Paris, and after that, sent to
Guntran, to offer him the Regency of her Kingdom, and the education of her Son;
who accepted both, adn undertook to defend 'em against Childebert and his
Mother Brunebaut, who resolved to dispute the Crown with Young Clotaire.
Fredegond finding her self free from all control, continued her licentious
manner of living, with so much open scandal, that Pretextatus Archbishop of
Rouen, could not forbear severely to reprehend her. But the liberty which he
took, offended the Queen to that degree, as not enduring to be reprimanded by
her inferiors, she caused the Prelat to be assassinated at the Altar as he was
saying Mass. Some time after, Guntran happ'ning to die, Fredegond had still so
great a reputation in the Kingdom, as to give the Regency of the Realm to
Landry. Childebert, who pretended it to be his Right, was so enraged to be put
by, that he entered the Dominions of Clotaire with Fire and Sword. The Queen,
nothing astonished at the approach of his Army, resolved to march in person
against her Enemies; and taking her Son along with her, she carried him from
Rank to Rank, as a sight most proper to encourage the Soldiers: which done, she
gave Battle with so much Valor, Conduct and Success, that she utterly defeated
Childeber's Forces. After which Victory, she fell into Austratia, where she
proved very victorious, till a malignant Fever put an end both to her Days and
her ambitious Designs.

Dagobert's Amonrs.
Anno 626
DAGOBERT, the Son of Clotaire, had espoused in his Father's life time,
Gomartude, an Austratian Princess, a kinswoman to Cunibert and Pepin. But there
was so terrible an Antipathy between the young married Couple, that* it was
never to be reconciled; whither it was through an insnrmountable disagreement
of their Humors, or whither they inherited the hatred of their Families; there
having been always an extraordinary aversion between the Pinces of the Blood of
Meroveus, from whence Dagobert descended,^ and those of the Clodi^^ Branch,
from which the Queen derived her original. Dagobert, who was a great lover of
Music, going one day to the Abbey of Romilly, to hea^ Vespers, heard a voice
that pleased him extremely. So that after Mass was done, he went into the
Convent and desired to see the person that had sung with so melodious a voice.
With that, the Abbess sent for her, and presenting her to the King, told him
her name was Nantild. Nor was Dagobert less charmed with her Beauty, then he
had been taken with her Voice, and leading her aside, told her, 'twas a great
loss to the World, that so amiable a Person should be mewed up in a Cloister.
To which Nantild repl'yd, That she had not assumed the vail of a sequestered
Life, but in obedience to her Parents, who had constrained her to quit the
World; and that if his Majesty would grant her his Protection, she would
renounce her Vows. The King was overjoyed to find his Hopes so fairy flattered
by the yielding disposition of the young Virgin, for whom he began already to
feel a violent Passion. So that he was no sooner returned to Paris, but he
sought which way to break the Knots that bound him to Gomatrude; and finding
his Prelates complaisant enough to approve his Design, he caused his Marriage
to be declared void: and being by that means at liberty, he sent for Nantild
out of her Convent, and publicly espoused her.

But Heaven was not pleased to prosper this Marriage; for the new Queen had no
Offspring; which insensibly cooled the Affection of Dagobert toward her, and
infused into him a desire to go and hold his Grand Assizes in all the Principal
Cities of his Realm, according to the custom of the Kings of the First Race.
Now while he lay at Blois, a young Lady came and presented a Petition to him,
demanding Justice against the Count, who abusing his Authority, had possessed
himself of certain Lands that belonged to her Father. She made her Addresses
with such a comely Grace, that the King was charmed with her deportment, and
promised that Justice should be done her. After she was gone, he sent for the
Count, and being informed of the particulars of the whole Affair, he commanded
him to make Raguetrude satisfaction; for that was the name of the fair Lady.
The next day she came with her Father to return her humble Thanks to the King,
who ordered 'em both to follow the Court, during his Progress. Dagobert also
gave so many marks of his Affection to the Lady, that she could not remain
unsensible; and at length, upon his Return, she was brought to Bed, at Orleans,
of a Son, who was Christened Sigebert by Aribert King of Aquitain, who was
Dagobert's Brother. The Ceremony of Baptism was solemnized by St. Amant, Bishop
of Vtrecht. It Is reported, that the Infant, not then above Forty days old, when
the Bishop pronoun'd these words, VIS BAPTIZARI, answered VOLO, which extremely
surpised the whole Assembly. Raguetrude, for several years, preserved the
Heart and Inclinations, of Dagobert, remaining faithful to him. But happ'ning
again into the company of Nantild, he could not withstand her Caresses; and
then he had a Son by her, that was named Clovis, and who succeeded him in the
Kingdom. The Birth of that young Prince, re-kindl'd his first Flames; he begged
Pardon of Nantild for his youthful going astray, and sacrificed Raguetrude to
her Love. Who seeing her self despised, retired into a Convent.

Alpayde, Mistress to King Pepin, Mayor of the Palace, under the Reign of
Childebert II.
TOward the end of the First Race, the succeeding Kings gave themselves up in
such a manner, to their Pleasures, that they left the care of the Government so
entirely to their Majors, that they never medl'd with Public Business. Pepin
exercised that Dignity under the Reign of Childebert II. He was one of those
Great Genius's that Heaven seemed to have raised, for no other reason, then to
Command others. All the French had so great a Reverence for him, that they
looked upon his Will and Commands, as so many Oracles. It Is true, that his
Virtues rendered him extremely worthy of that absolute Power to which he was
advanced. He was an enemy to Sloth and Effeminacy, and during the first year of
his Ministry, he seemed to be insensible of Love. He had always lived in great
Reputation with Plectrude his Wife, tho she were somewhat stricken in years,
and of an imperious Humor. But there are certain Minutes, when the greatest
Heroes suffer themselves to be surpised by that dangerous Passion, which
equals 'em with other Men. A French Lord, whose Name was Dodon, had had a
quarrel with one of his Neighbors, and had killed him. Upon which, the kindred
of the Person slain, prosecuted him with great fervency: and according to all
outward appearances, he dould not have avoided suffering the extremity of the
Law, unless he obtained the King's Pardon; which his Sister Alpayde went to beg
of Pepin. This Lady was one of the most amiable Persons in the Kingdom, and her
Manners and Deportment were so engaging, that 'twas a difficult thing to refuse
her whatever she demanded. Pepin beheld her with Admiration, and felt, upon the
sight of her, something that he had never been sensible of before. He upbraided
in private his own weakness; and was just going to send back. Alpayde, with the
rudeness of one that scorned the Tyranny of Love. Nevertheless, he could not
resolve to lose her for ever; and therefore, that he might have a pretense to
see her again, he told he would examine the Informations, and that if the Fact
were not very foul, but deserved Pardon, he would grant it her Brother. After
that he counterfeited scruples, started obstacles, and at last, after he had
been often waited on by Alpayde, he declared to her, that Dondon's Life
depended upon her complyances with his Affection. The Lady stood surpised at
his Discourse, which was altogether unexpected; she blushed, and looked pale.
But at length, Pepin, accompanied his Courtship, and his Proposal, with such
passionate Terms, and such large Promises, that Alpayde could no longer hold
out. She yielded to his importunities, and surrendering to his Caresses, became
the Mother of Charles Mar^^ll, who afterward became so famous in History.
Plectrude having discovered this Amorous Intreague, made a most terrible
Harburlie, and became so outragiously troublesome to her Husband, that her
Extravagancies exasperated him to seek out ways to be rid of her. 'Twas a great
vexation to a Person of his Rank and Reputation, to see that such Domestic
Squabbles should render him the object of the Public Lampoonry. Nevertheless,
he could not quit Alpayde: and he believed it no less an unbecoming weakness,
to sacrifice her to his Wife because she made a noise. He therefore made use of
the liberty which the French were wont to take at that time, which was, to
repudiate their Wives, contrary to the Prohibitions of the Church and the Holy
Canons. He put away Plectrude, and continued his Intreague so publicly with
Alpayde, that Lambert Bishop of Liege, after frequent and severe Admonitions,
both in private and public, threatened to Excommunicate him. Alpayde was
alarmed at this, and made her Complaints to her Brother Dodon, who being a Man
Violent and Revengful, murdered the Holy Bishop. For which it was not long
e're he received condign punishment from Heaven; for he fell into the Lowzie
Sickness, which drove him to such a terrible despair, that he threw himself
into the Meuse. Some time after Pepin died, and Plectrude made her self
Mistress, both of the Government, and of the Person of Charles, whom she shut
up in the Castle of Cologne, which was the usual place of her Residence.
Charles, however, found a way to make his escape out of Prison, and having
found a considerable Party in the Kingdom, got himself chosen Mayor of the
Palace, and constrained Plectrude to renounce all her Pretensions.

The Amors of Charlemaigne.
THOUGH Charlemaigne had several Mistresses, Anno 771.
while his four Wives lived, we know the Names of none, but of Reginia and
Adelond: nor do we know who was the Mother of Pepin, the eldest of his Natural
Sons.

This Emperor passing through Mayence, as he was going to make War against the
Saxons, Count Ganelon, considerable for his Rank and Quality, in that part of
Germany, besought him to receive Reginia his near Kinswoman, into the number of
Luigard the Empresse's Maids of Honor, who had accompanied him in that
Journey. Charles, consented to it willingly, and found the Virgin so amiable,
that he many times took delight to divertize himself in her company, after he
had tired himself with the toil of business. And at first the Emperor thought
of making no more then a Pastime of his Discourses with the young Lady, but in
a short time he soon perceived, that he had another sort of Kindness for
Reginia, and begged her to correspond with his Passion. How was it possible to
resist the importunities of a Prince, who was already the Admiration of all
Europe? Reginia suffered her self to be overcome, and grew big with Child.
Charles, afraid lest the Empress should discover the Intreague, left her at Aix
la Chapelle, where she died soon after. In the mean time Reginia was brought to
Bed of Frogon, he was afterward Bishop of Mets; and the next year of another
Prince, whose Name was Hugh. Nor was Reginia ungrateful to her Kinsman Gamelon,
to whom she was beholding for her Fortune; for she procured him Preferments and
Employments, which obliged him to follow the Court. And in regard he was
frequently in his Kinswoman's Chamber, during these marches and journeys he
beheld among the rest of her Companions, a Lady, whose Name was Adelond, with
whom he fell so deeply in love, that he resolved to Marry her. To which purpose
he besought the Emperor's permission, so soon as he returned to Aix la
Chapelle; who at first, readily gave his consent. But having better relished
Adelond's Wit, he could not resolve to behold her in the possession of another;
and having therefore found some pretense to recall his Word, he engaged himself
altogether with Adelond, and forsook Reginia. Nor was this Second Mistress less
fruitful then the First; for she made him the Father of Prince Thierry.
However, the Emperor did not give himself up so absolutely to his amorous
Pleasures, as to forget the Affairs of his Dominions. Understanding therefore,
that Alphonsus, King of Leon had made a League against him with Fortune Garsil,
King of Navarr, and with Marsillus, the Moorish King of Cordona, he crossed the
Pyrenans in order to fight 'em. Ganelon thought this an opportunity to be
revenged of the Emperor for bereaving him of his Mistress, and for having
dishonored his Kinswoman. Thereupon he went over secretly, and by giving 'em
seasonable notice of the march of the Imperial Army, was the occasion of the
loss of the Battle of Roncevaux, wherein the choice of the French Nobility were
slain. However, the Treason of the Count was discovered, and he received a
punishment proportionable to the enormity of his Crime; the marks of which are
to be seen by what befell the Tours of Monthlery, and de la Queve in Brie, that
both belonged to him: for they were half demolished, and so have ever find
remained, Reginia, who had no share in the Conspiracy, was no less exempted
from any Consequences of his punishment; as being all along in high esteem with
Charlemaigne, who put her Children into his Will.

Charles's Galantries had been so public, that they gave an occasion to the
Princesses his Daughters, for whom he had not been very careful to provide
Husbands, to seek out for Lovers themselves: and though the Emperor had notice of
their irregular Conduct, he did but laugh at it, and let 'em live according to
their own Fancies. But after his death, Lewis, his eldest Son, who was of a
different character from his Father, and desirous to remedy these disorders,
gave Commission to the Princes Walon, Warner, Lambert and Tagobar, diligently
to enquire into 'em, and to punish those that should be found guilty. To this
purpose, he sent 'em before to Aix la Chapelle, and followed 'em himself with a
puissant Army, to support the execution of his Orders, and oppose the
Pretensions of his Sisters, who had made a powerful Party against him, and with
their Arms in their hands, demanded their share in the Succession and
Inheritance, left by their Father, The Prisons of Aix la Chapelle were soon
filled with those who had abused the easy Nature of the Princesses, or who had
favored and encouraged their unchaste Amors, and they were punished according
as their Crimes deserved. Harwin, who had been summoned to answer to the
Informations exhibited against him, made his appearance, but armed and well
attended; and when Warner and Lambert ordered him to be examined upon the
Interrogatories, he drew his Sword and slew the first, and dangerously wounded
the other in the Thigh. However, he could not escape death; for he was
massaker'd with all his followers, by the Prince's Officers and Guards. When
Lewis also arrived at Aix la Chapelle, he sent for his Sisters, and after he
had caused his Father's Will to be read in their Hearing, he unbraided 'em with
their loose Conduct, and then sent 'em away to the Lands, of which Charlemagne
had given 'em the Rents and Profits, and which he assigned 'em for their
Dowries, for term of life only.

Valdrade, Mistress to Lothaire King of Lorraine.
Lewis the Debonaire, his Dominions were divided among his Children. Lothaire
was Emperor and King of Italy; Lewis obtained Germany; Charles had Burgundy
with Neustria; and Pepin enjoyed Aquitain. Lothaire turning Monk, left three
Male Children, Lewis, Lothaire and Charles. Lewis shared Italy, together with
the Empire; Lothaire the Kindom of Lorraine; and Charles, Provence, with part
of Burgundy. The young Lothaire had married in his Father's life time,
Thietberge the Daughter of Hubert, Count of Burgundy Transjurana, at this day
called Savoy. He was tenderly beloved by that Princess; and on the other side,
he had all the Affection for her, that her Virtue deserved: but this Union
lasted not long. For Hunting being the chief Divertisement of this Prince, one
day being surpised by a violent Storm, while he was impriming a Stag near
Metz, he retired to a Castle hard by, where he was received after a most
obliging manner by Valdrade, the Daughter of the Lord, who was the owner of it.
He was no less charmed with her Wit, then her Beauty, and thought himself
Happy, that the bad weather had procured him such a fortunate meeting.
Afterward he paid Valdrade such frequent (...), that the Queen perceiving him
so much estranged from her, was resolved to know what sort of pastimes he
followed. To that purpose she caused him to be dogged; and by that means
discovered that she had a Rivaless. Nor could she dissemble her Jealousy. She
plagued Lothaire with such tart and bitter reproaches, that to be revenged of
her, he no longer observed any Decorum. He sent for Valdrade to his Palace, and
allowed her as many Officers, as if she had already been his Wife. Valdrade
also, abusing the Power which she had over the King's Heart, persuaded him to
get rid of Thietberge, whose fretful taunting Humor disturbed the King's
pleasures, and to dissolve the Marriage. Thereupon Lothaire proposed to
Gontier, Archbishop of Cologne, his Grand Almoner, the design which he had to
repudiate the Queen, and that he might engage him to a compliance, the King put
him in hopes, that so soon as he should be at liberty, he would marry his Niece
Hermengard. Flattered with these pleasing Hopes, Gontier summons a National
Council, to meet at Metz, composed of all the Prelates of the Kingdom, and
having gained Thietgand, Archbishop of Treves, who promised to serve him with
all his Friends, he proposed the Dissolution of the Marriage, upon these
grounds, that Thietberge had committed Incest with her own Brother, and that
the King had been affianc'd to Valdrade before he married the Queen. He
likewise produced false witnesses to support the Calumny, and so well managed
his Affairs, that he obta^^'d whatever the King desired. Thietberge was
summoned: she was examined upon the Articles exhibited against her, and
confronted by the Witnesses, who persisted in their Depositions. Upon which,
the Assembly ordered, that she should be divorced from the King her Husband,
and banished whither his Majesty should think convenient. Now, though this
Sentence set Lothair at liberty to enjoy his Amors, nevertheless, he was not
wholly satisfied. Valdrade would needs be crowned, and secure the succession of
the Kingdom to the Children begot upon her Body: and with this design, she
pressed the King so to order the matter, that the Clergy of Lorraine should
more clearly explain themselves upon the invalidity of Thietberge's Marriage.
Upon that, Lothaire calls a second Assembly, to meet at Aix la Chapelle, where
he represented to the Prelates, that it being necessary for the public good,
that he should have Children to inherit his Crown, he desired 'em to consider,
whether his Marriage with Theitberge were contracted in due Form, to the end he
might take her again, if she were his lawful Wife, or marry another, if his
first Nuptials were of no force. Wherein he testified such a seeming Sincerity
to the Assembly, that they gave him permission to marry another: and he
immediately caused this Sentence to be published over all the Kingdom. This
done, he declared to Gontier, that he had a full intention to accomplish his
promise, and engaged the Archbishop to send him his Neice Hermengard; but after
he had obtained whatever he desired, he returned her back to her Uncle, and
espoused Valdrade publicly at Savern.

Thietberge finding her self so unworthily and undeservedly used, Anno 863.
retired to her Brother, who implored the aid of Charles the Bald, King of
France, and Lewis the German, who were both glad of the pretense to invade the
Dominious of their Nephew Lothaire. But Nicholas VI. then Pope, having
intelligence of the War that was just ready to break into a flame, sent away
his Legate Arsenius, with Orders to accommodate the difference and take
cognizance of the affair. After Arsenius has fully informed himself of every
thing, he returned to Rome, accompanied with the two Archbishops, Gontier, and
Thietgaud, who pretended to obtain at Rome a confirmation of the sentence given
against Thietberge, But the Pope understanding their prevarication, and
treachery against the Queen, at a Council assembled on purpose, in St. John di
Laterano, cancelled the sentence, deposed the two Prelates, and excommunicated
'em. Instead of submitting to this Judgment, they retired to the Emperor Lewis,
Lothaires Brother, and wrote an insolent letter to his ^onnels, wherein they
declared himself to be excommunicated. Which done they joined with John
Archbishop of Ravenna and P^otius Patriarch of Constantinople, and had like to
have made a schism in the Church. But Heaven protected the justice of Nicolas's
cause, and enforced all those Prelates to submit to his Authority.

The Pope sent back Arsenius to Metz, that he might oblige Lothaire to take the
Queen his Wife again. But the Legate unwilling to do any thing of his own head in
so nice a matter, assembled all the Bishops of France, and having made known to
those Prelates, the innocence of Thietberge, he desired 'em to instruct him what
course it became him to take for reparation of the scandal which Lothaire had
commmitted. Thereupon it was resolved in that assembly, that Arsenius should
admonish the King in the name of the Holy See, to take his Lawful Wife again,
and to break of all commerce with Valdrade, under pain of Excommunication. The
Legate acquitted himself of his Commission with all the respect that was due to
His Royal Majesty, but yet withal the resolution and constancy that became his
character. Lothair, surpised at such a terrible menace, recalled Thietberge,
and put away Valdrade, who being cited to Rome, ordered Angeltrude, her
confident, and the Daughter of Count Mainfroy to solicit her pardon. For
Angeltrude was obliged to take that journey, with the Legate, for her own
interests, as being under Excommunication for having quitted Boson her Husband,
to marry Auger his Vassal. When Angeltrude departed from Metz, she appeared to
be the greatest penitent in the World, and fully resolved to do penance for her
past disorders. But she was hardly arrived at the foot of the Alps, when being
no longer able to live absented from the person she loved, but she slipped away
secretly without saying any thing to the Legate, and hastened back to seek out
her Lover. Nor was Lothaire more constant in his resolution: For so soon as h^
saw that Arsenius's back was turned, he expelled the innocent Thietberge again,
and renewed his illegal engagements with Vildrade; and carried his violence so
high, that he made an attempt upon the Life of the disgusted Princess.

Thietberge finding her self no longer safe in her Husbands Dominions retired
to Charles the Bald, Anno 865.
who took her into his protection, and offered the King his Nephew, a Champion
to maintain the rights of the wronged Princess according to the custom of those
times. But the Pope would not suffer that no affair which had been already
adjudg'd, should be referred to the hazard of a combat, and gave Charles to
understand, that he could proceed no farther without entrenching upon his
Authority. So that the King being unwilling to displease his Holiness,
contented himself with only exhorting Lothaire to take his Wife again, but could
not obtain any thing from him.

The Princess therefore perceiving there was nothing more to be expected on
that side, Anno 866.
returned to her Brother Hubert, who having no other way to maintain his
Sisters interests, but by Force and Arms, raised an Army and fell into
Lothaire's Dominions with Fire and Sword. In revenge of which, Lothaire
mustered a more numerous power together, led 'em himself, and crossing the
Mountain Iura, repayd Hubert in his own coin; but fortune did not favor him:
For he lost three Armies, without being able to take so much as one Town.
Lothaire discouraged by so many losses sen^ Conrard, the Father of Bacul
against the rebellious Prince; who was more fortunate then the King his master.
For he perceiving the Passes ill guarded, and surprising Hubert, utterly
defeated his Men, and slew him himself with his own hand. Thietberge
understanding the Death of her Brother, retired to Rome, where she took upon
her the habit of a Nun, and shut her self up in a Cloister, leaving the King
her Husband to enjoy his Amors in peace and quiet. But Death soon after put an
end to his Life and his disorders.

Richild, Mistress to Charles the Bald, Emperor and King of France.
Anno 869.
CHARLES the Bald had Married Ermentrude, Granddaughter to Adelart, who had
been Treasurer of the Royal Exchequer, in the Reign of Lewis the Debonaire, his
Father, and who had greatly enriched himself at his Masters cost. This Prince
lived very lovingly with his Queen, and showed himself as complaisant toward
her, as if there had been no inequality in their conditions. But after
Thietberge had quitted the World, Richild her Neice, betook her self to Queen
Ermentrude, who endeavored to comfort her in her misfortune: And she
recommended her so often to the King her Husband, and spoke so highly of her,
that he was desirous to know whither the praises, which his Queen bestowed on
her, were true or no. He several times discoursed her, and as often he found in
her Wit, a Tour so free and yet so delicate, that he could not choose but Love
her. 'Twas a long time however before he durst adventure to discover his
passion; because he perceived her enriched with sentiments so virtuous, that he
was afraid of incurring her displeasure. Nevertheless he could not long contain
himself within the bounds of this reservedness. His dignity and the reputation
he had acquired by a Thousand glorious exploits, put him in hopes that he
should be heard with some kind of indulgence. He spoke, but met with resistance
from Richild's Wit. For she made use of all her address to cure him of his
Love; and told him with an extraordinary constancy, that having been a witness
of the disorders which Lothairs passion for Valdrade had occasioned in his
Family, she would not give the same occasion of grief and vexation to Queen
Ermentrude, her benefactress, and draw down the curse of Heaven upon a Prince
whom she esteemed. Richild persever'd a long time in this resolution; but at
last, (for what Woman is able to resist a lovely Prince and very amorous?) she
suffered her self to be overcome by one had been Victor over many.
Nevertheless, she so well observed her measures, and carried her self with that
decorum in this intreague, that the Queen had never any knowledge of it. Which
in Charles created so high an esteem of her virtue, that after the Death of
Ermentrude, he married her.

Ansegard, Mistress to Lewis the Stammerer, Emperor and King of France.
Anno 876.
DURING the long Wars that Charles the Bald waged with Lewis the German and his
Children, Lewis the Stammerer lived with Richild his Mother in Law, who was
Regent of the Kingdom in the absence of the Emperor her Husband. And in regard
it was his interest to live in friendship with her, as being Mistress of all
the Kings favors, he had a kindness for all persons for whom that Princess had
a value. He had observed, that Ansegard, of all her Maids of Honor, had the
greatest share in her affection, which was the reason that he studied to please
her with an extraordinary assiduity. But long converse and society had begot a
more tender passion between 'em; insomuch that Lewis the Stammerer had two
Children by her, Lewis and Carloman; and she was brought to bed of both,
without any bodies perceiving that she was big with Child. After the Emperor
returned from his Journey into Italy, whither he went to receive the Crown
Imperial from the Popes hands, he bethought himself of marrying his Son, and
told him he had designed him for a Wife Ricarda the Daughter of Alfred King of
England. You may easily conjecture the grief of those two lovers, when they
heard the news. Lewis therefore had recourse to Richild, and besought her to
make use of all her credit to persuade his Father to consent that he might
marry Ansegard. But reason of State prevailed above the Emperors complacency
for his Wife, and Lewis was constrained to conform to his Fathers will.

After the Death of Charles the Bald, Richild who was in great credit and had a
powerful party at Court, endeavored to set the Crown upon the Head of his
Brother Boson, upon whom she had already persuaded the Emperor her Husband to
settle the Counties of Provence, Milan, and Paris, under the title of the
Kingdom of Arles. But the French would not permit that prejudice to be done to
the right and lawful Heir, and therefore acknowledged Lewis for their King. So
that Richild finding her self frustrated in her expectations, employed all her
credit with Ansegard to make her peace with the King, whose passion* for that
Lady was not at all abated; for he had still a high respect for her, though he
lived very contentedly with Ricarda. Richild also promised Ansegard, to employ
all her Friends in order to secure the succession of the Kingdom to her
Children; and to assure her that she would never part from her interests, she
proposed to her a match between her Son C^^leman, and Ingoberge, the Daughter
of Boson. Ansegard relishing the proposal, the two Princesses resolved to make
it to the Emperor at a banquet that Boson was to give him. And they carried it
with so much neatness, and so much artifice, that they obtained of Lewis to
consent to the Match. And for fear the Emperor should alter his mind, they
caused the nuptials to be solemnized in a short time after. But the Emperor
dying the same Year, there happened great disputes about the succession, in
regard that Ricarda, who was left big with Child, was soon after brought to bed
of Charles the Simple. The States assembled at Meaux to regulate this
difference, and Boson left nothing omitted to procure the exclusion of the
Posthumus, but he could not compass his design, and therefore contented himself
with obtaining the regency for Lewis and Carleman during the minority of
Charles. It Is true, that when they were in possession of the Government, they
understood so well how to fix their Authority by Boson's counsel and
intreagues, that they caused themselves to be acknowledged Kings, and divided
the Kingdom between 'em at Amiens.

The Amors of Blanch, the Wife of Lewis Clotaire III, K. of France.
Anno 985.
LOTHAIRE, after he had successfully concluded the War of Lorraine, and taken
Jeoffrey, Count of Verduu, Prisoner, associated his Son Lewis to the Crown, and
married him to Blanch the Daughter of Rothbaud, Count of Arles. She was a
Princess of an exalted Courage, a lively Wit, and a Humor inclined to
Gallantry. On the other side, Lewis was a weak Prince, and whose Genius was
extremely limited. Blanch therefore, well understanding his defects* despised
him, and suffered her self to be taken with the Assiduities which Jeoffrey paid
her. Nevertheless, she carefully concealed his Intreague, and carried her self
so cunningly, that she obtained his Liberty of King Lothaire. At the same time
Ancelin Dalbron, Bishop of Laon, was fallen in love with the Princess, and though
he were already above Fifty years of age, nevertheless, she forbore not to
listen to his Courtship, because the City of Laon, of which he was absolute
Master, was looked upon as one of the best Fortresses in the Kingdom, and she
was willing to be assured of a Sanctuary. Jeoffrey became jealous of her
complacencies for that Prelate, and therefore Blanch, to stifle the Count's
Jealousy, engaged Lewis to go along with her, and spend some time in Provence;
by which means she got rid of the importunate Bishop. In a short time after,
she departed secretly, without giving Lewis any notice, and hastened to meet
Jeoffrey, according to an Assignation by her self appointed. King Lothaire was
desirous to apply some remedy to a disorder of this nature, but it cost him his
life; being poisoned by Blanch. Ancelin on the other side, finding himself
deluded by the subtle Princess, quitted her, to pursue another Amor with Emma,
the Mother of Lewis, who, though advanced in years, yet still preserved a fair
stock of Beauty This Princess pretended to Govern the Kingdom, tho her Son was
come to the Crown; But Lewis, by the counsel which Blanch gave him, caused her
to be seized, together, with her beloved Bishop, by Charles of Lorraine; nor
could they obtain their liberty, tho earnestly su'd for by the Empresses
Adelaida and Theophanis, and all the Bishops of the Kingdom. For Lewis was so
afraid of Blanch, that he durst not release 'em, because she would not have it
so. However, he was but very ill repaid for his complacency: for Blanch
poisoned hi^, as she had done his Father, and obliged him upon his Death* bed,
to declare Hugh Capet his Successor, upon condition he would marry her, as
unchaste as she was.

Almafrede, Mistress to Robert King of France.
CAPET had been too busily employed in Reforming the abuses of his kingdom,
which had taken root in the Reigns of the Kings of the Second Race, and
fecuring the possession of it, to mind Affairs of Love. But his Son Robert, who
had not the same multiplicity of Business, delightfully spent all the time he
had to spare, among such Ladies as he thought worthy of his Addresses. He had
in his Fathers life time made choice of Hugh de Beauvais for his Favorite.
This young Lord one day, entrusted him with his Passion for Almafrede, the
Daughter of the Count of Nogent. But he found her so agreeable, that instead of
promising to assist his Favorite in his design, he prayed him to surrender his
Mistress to himself. Hugh was somewhat difficult at first to resolve, but at
length his Ambition prevailed above his love. Moreover, he himself discovered
to Almafrede the Passion that Robert had for her, and served his Master so
well, that he had no reason to complain of Almafrede's Reluctance. She admitted
him by Night into her Chamber, and not being able to defend her self against
his importunities, was brought to Bed of a Son, who was named Amaury, from whom
are descended the Counts of Montfort. In the mean time* in regard the Matches
of Princes are usually grounded upon Policy, notwithstanding all the
engagements and ties of Affection that had fastened Robert to Almafrede, he was
constrained, in obedience to his Father's Commands, to espouse Constance the
Daughter of William Count of Arles, and Sister of Foulke Nera, Count of Anjou.
However, he concealed from that Princess, his first Engagements, and abstained
from any familiarity with Almafrede, so long as his Father lived. But so soon
as he came to the Crown, he surceas'd to put that constraint upon himself, and
to repay his Favorite for the Sacrifice he had made him of his Mistri^s, he
made him Grand Master of his Household; and wholly relied upon him for the
Government of his Kingdom. Yet did not Hugo's Business so entirely take him up,
as to hinder him from sharing sometimes in his. Master's Pleasures. They often
went together to Nogent, to divertise themselves at Almafrede's Palace: whither
it were, that the King had still the same tenderness for her, or that it was
their Rendezvous, where they met other Ladies. However it were, the Queen being
informed of these Assignations, turned all her Hatred against the Favorite,
upon whom she looked as the Author of this Disorder. Thereupon she sent a
Trusty Officer to her Brother, to give him an account of the injuries done her,
and to desire him that they might not go unrevenged, Presently the Count of
Anjou laid the Resentments of his Sister so deeply to Heart, that he promised
the Messenger to fulfill her desires. With that, he gave his Commission to a
dozen Gentlemen, whom he knew to be Men of resolution, and devoted to his
^nterests. He gave 'em Money and Horses, and sent 'em to King Robert's Court*
where they saw the Queen privately, and agreed with her upon the means of being
serviceable to her jealousy.

One day then, that the King had appointed a Hunting match with Hugo, to the
end, that afterward they might go and visit Almafrede, they followed the King
at a distance, and when they saw him and his Favorite separate from their
company, and take the Road to Nogem, they got before 'em, through by ways, and
poudring full Gallop upon Hugo, gave him several mortal Stabs before the King's
Face, tho he made himself known to 'em, on purpose to stop their fury, out of
that respect which was due to his Person: and when they had done, they threw
themselves into a Forest adjoining, and soon became invisible. Several Months
find away, before the King could discover the Authors of so dating an
enterprise: but at (...) he understood that the Murder was committed by the
Queens Order; and so far he was from showing himself either grieved or
displeased at it, that he loved her the more ever after, and wholly fortook
Almafrede, who out of despair, retired to a Convent, and veiled her self. As
for Foulque^ he underwent a severe Penance for having contributed to the
Homicide, being at Jerusalem, whither he accompanied Godfrey of Benillon, and
others of the Croisado. For he caused himself to be drawn naked upon a Hurdle,
with a Rope about his Neck, and to be whipped till the Blood came, crying out
with a loud voice, Have mercy Lord, upon the treacherous and perjured Foulques.

Bertrade, Mistress to Philip.
Anno 1086.
Foulques Rechin going to pay a visit to Amaney, Lord of Montfort, and condole
with him upon the death of his Mother, fell in love with his Sister Bertrade.
He left nothing omitted to procure her Affection, during the stay that he made
at Montfort, and not being able to obtain any Favor from her, he resolved to
marry her, tho he were already married to Ermengard, the Daughter of
Archambaut, Lord of Bourbon, and that he had a Son by her, who was afterward
called Jeoffrey Martell. To which effect, he caused his Marriage with Ermengard
to be declared null, under pretense of being near akin, and took Bertrade to
Wife, by whom he had a Son that bore his Fathers Name, and who going to the
Holy Land, was King of Jerusalem. In the mean time Foulques Rechin having had a
Quarrel with his Brother Jeoffrey, about sharing the Succession of their Father
Foulques Nera, the contest came to a Battle near Brochelac, where Jeoffrey was
overthrown, and taken prisoner, but took his being detained in Prison so
hainously, that for mere vexation he run mad. Pope Gregory VII. being informed
how hardly Foulques had used his Brother, and of the unlawful Marriage which
he had contracted with Bartrade, excommunicated him. Jeffery Martell, who by
this time was arrived to years of maturity, taking advantage of the
excommunication thundered out against his Father, took Arms to revenge this
Mothers Quarrel, and set his Uncle at liberty. Bertrade seeing her self so
dangerously threatened by the ambitious Youth, who was already become the head
of a potent party, sought which way to rid him out of the World, and caused him
to be poisoned. Pope Gregory being dead, Foulques sent Ambassadors to Urban VI.
who succeeded him to obtain his absolution; offering to set his Brother at
Liberty, and to quit Bertrade. Upon which, the Pope empowered Hugo Archbishop
of Lion to take off the censure, provided the Count performed what he had
promised.

In the mean time Phillip, coming to Tours, to give Foulques a visit, Gatinois,
which the Count had mortgaged to him during the Wat with his Brother, saw
Bertrade* who appeared to him most charmingly beautiful notwithstanding those
Clouds of sorrow that hung upon her countenance, because her Husband was just
going to put her away. The King therefore having engaged her to entrust him
with the cause of her grief, offered her his service and promised to marry her,
having under pretense of consanguinity vacated his Marriage with Bertha, the
Daughter of the Count of Frise, whom he had banished to Montrevil upon the Sea.
Bertrade suffered her self to be surpised with these alluring hopes, and
consented to be conveyed away by force. The King thus satisfied, after he and
Bertrade had consulted upon the ways and means which way to effect their
design, departed for Orleans, and left behind him at Tours a Gentleman, whose
name was William Rechin, to put the project in execution. Bertrade and the
Knight having conserted together how to manage the business, she her self went
to hear Mass at St. Martin's, upon Easter-eve, and after she had sent away the
persons that attended her upon several errands, slipped into a by Street where
Rechin waited for her with two Horses. She made choice of that which went most
easily, and being got a little way out of the City, they met with laid Horses
fresh and fresh every six Leagues, and made such have, that before Night they
reached Orleans, where the King, who had notice of every thing, received 'em
with those transports of joy that are hardly to be expressed. He carried
Bertrade to his Palace, and by a thousand caresses endeavored to alleviate the
Fatigues of her journey. As for Foulques, he did not much trouble himself for
the loss of his Wife, whom he looked upon as an obstacle of his reconciliation
with the holy See; and finding himself well stricken in years, he wholly gave
off his debauchery. Some time after Philip publicly espoused Bertrade, and
caused her to be Crowned with extraordinary magnificence. He had two Sons by
her, Philip, to whom he gave the Barony of Mang upon the L^ire, and whom he
Married to the Daughter of Gontier* Lord of Montbery; Henry, who was designed
for the Church, and a Daughter, named Cecilia, who was first married to
Tancrede, Son of the Sister of Bremond Prince of Antiochia; and after his
death, to Ponce, the Son of Beritand, Count of Tiral in Stiria, descended from
the Counts of Thoulouse. However several Bishops who where present at the
nuptials, to which they were invited according to the custom of the Kingdom,
remonstrated to the King, that the Church could not approve a Marriage directly
contrary to all the Canons, as well by reason of the proximity of Blood between
him and Bertrade, as for that Bertha was still living as well as Count
Foulques. But none of 'em took upon 'em to speak with more freedom then: Yves
Bishop of Chartres; which exasperated the King to that degree, that he caused
him to be apprehended. However, in a short time after he released him again, at
the solicitation of the Clergy. Pope Urban VI. being informed of these
disorders, sent away on purpose a Legate into France, who assembled a Council at
Au^u^, where it was decreed, that Philip should be excomunicated. But the Pope
suspended the effect of the Decree till the next Year; and then he thundered
out his Anathema's against the King in the Council of Clermont. The King
terrified with these censures, parted from Bertrade for some time; but he
recalled her shortly after, by the consent of her Husband Foulques himself;
over whom she had so powerful an ascendant, that he sighed at her feet, like
the most passionate of Lovers. The Popes Legates perceiving that the King had
renew^d his crminal familiarity, assembled another Council at Portiers, where
the Prince was excommunicated again. But Philip, overconstant in his
affections, set so many Engines at work in Rome, that the Pope sent other
Legates to rehear the merits of the cause. They, to that purpose, assembled a
Council at Bougency, where the two Lovers made their appearance, and promised
to separate, till they had obtained a dispensation from his Holiness. Which at
length was granted 'em, after long solicitations, by Pope Paschat II. who was
more indulgent then his predecessors. The nuptials also being solemnized anew
by virtue of that dispensation, the King and Bertrade went to pay Foulques a
visit, who regaled 'em at Angiers withal the divertisements that could be
devised. Soon after Philip dying, Bertrade retired to Angiers to the Son of
Foulques, who had also ended his days, and renouncing all manner of amorous
courtship, applied her self to adorn the Castle of that City, and caused the
Church of St. Maurice, which was gone very much to decay, to be repaired. In a
word, she employed the remainder of her days in acts of Piety, to make an
atonement for the sins of her Youth.

Eleoner of Acquitaine, the Wife of Lewis the Young.
KING Lewis the Young, Eleonor, the Daughter of William V. Duke of Aquitaine; a
Princess of surpassing beauty, of a lively and sparkling Wit, but wanton in her
humor and addicted to coquettry. The King, who as yet had not espied that
defect in her, loved her so tenderly, that he could not find in his Heart to
leave her in France, when he undertook his expedition to the Holy Land, but
engaged her to be the companion of all his dangers. They embarked together at
Aigues-Mortes, and after several hardships, arrived at length at Antiossia,
where Hugo Raymund, the Queen's Uncle, and Brother to Duke William, had
obtained the Principality. He gave the King a most magnificent reception; and
left nothing omitted to oblige him to make a stop there. He laid before him,
the Noradin the Sultan of Damascus, made frequent incursions to the very gates
of the City; and that 'twas greatly to be feared, that that same place, of so
great importance would fall into the hands of the Infidels, if he were not
powerfully assisted by His Majesty. But it was not only interest of State and
Religion that prevailed with Raymund, to wish that the Court of France might
reside for some time at Antioch. He had been bred up with Eleonor, and he was
her Uncle, yet was he not much Older then she: ^and long familiarity had bred
and fostered in both, a passion more tender then became two persons, so nearly
related; neither had Raymund undertaken his voyage to Palestine; but to cure
himself of his amorous passion, when he saw his Neice espoused to the King of
France. But the presence of the beloved object rekindl'd his first flames, and
in regard he found the Queen as favorable to his desires, as she was at
Bourdeaux, he could not find in his Heart to part with her, so suddenly.
However all his, artifices proved fruitless; he could not detain the King but
very few days at Antioch. Lewis therefore, impatient to be at Jerusalem,
pursued his journey, notwithstanding all the reasons that could be alleged to
him; neither was Eleonor so sorry as Raymund. For she was altogether for
present objects, and forgot the Prince of Antiochia, so soon as she had lost
sight of him. She had several others that would not permit her to shed tears
for his absence; and as she never repulsed any one that sighed for Love of her,
her Court was always well filled: but though in the Court of a Queen, yet because
it was in a Camp among none but Soldiers, the discourse was generally Military;
and the warlike atchievments of every day, produced sufficient matter for every
days entertainment. Nor, did they forget their Enemies the Turks, whom were
signal either for their Birth or Valor, so that 'twas impossible to pass in
silence the noble qualities of Saladin, the Sultan of Damascus's Nephew. 'Twas
said of him, that he was a^ person well shaped, nimble in all manners of
exercises, Valiant, Generous, Liberal, Courtly; and in a word, that he was
endu'd withal the French manners. There were also some who added, that he was
descended from the Count of Ponthieu, whose Daughter being taken at Sea, was
presented to the Sultan of Aleppo the Brother of Moradin, who receiving her
into the number of his Wives, had this Prince by her. Now, though this story were
a mere fable, yet it failed not to augment the curiosity which the Queen had
for Saladin: she sought for opportunities; and for a beginning, to enter into a
correspondence with him, she wrote to him in the behalf of Sandebrevil, Lord of
Sauzay, who had been taken some days before by a party which that Mohammedan
Prince commanded. Saladin granted the Queen whatever she desired, and sent her
back the Prisoner without Ransom, Eleonor had several conferences with
Sandebrevil, on purpose to inform her self of several circumstances which she
desired to know, concerning the person of Saladin: She also made use of him to
procure an interview between Saladin and her. To that purpose she appointed a
Hunting match, about two Leagues from Jerusalem, where Saladin met her with
thirty Horsemen only. So soon as he saw the Queen appear, he left his Troop
that had made a halt, and advancing an easy hand Gallop toward her, presently
alighted to salute her: he made her a compliment in the Italian Tongue, which
the Queen understood very well, and after such a manner, as nothing savored of
the barbarity of the Nation; nor was she less taken with his Wit, then with his
deportment: She obliged him to mount his Course* and so they rode softly
together into a Wood of Palm Trees close adjoining, where they were a long time
in discourse together. Eleonor returned him thanks in a most obliging manner,
for what he had done for Sandebrevil at her request, and pulling off an
embroidered Scarf that served her instead of a girdle, presented it to him,
desiring him to keep it as a testimony of her esteem and acknowledgment; which
Saladin afterward wore upon all occasions of danger. But she was discovered by
some Courtiers, who gave an account of the whole story to the King, and others
assured him that the Queen had given Saladin several other meetings. Now though
there were more of vanity on both sides in this same courtly correspondence,
the King was extremely troubled at it, and would stay no longer at Jerusalem.
So that after he had taken his leave of King Baldwin, he set Sail withal his
Fleet; but was obliged to put into Sicily to refit his Ships, which had been
but ill handled by Manuel the Emperor of Constantinople's Navy. It Is very
probable, that the Queen had made her peace in that Island; for she grew bigg
with Child, and lay in, upon her return into France, of a Daughter named Alice,
who was married afterward to Thibaut Count of Blois. But some time after she
was brought to Bed, the King being informed of all Eleonor's Galantries,
resolved to vacate his Marriage. To which purpose he assembled the Clergy of
France at Boisgency, where Alegrin his Chancellor set forth the reasons that
moved the King to desire a separation, and easily obtained what his Master
desired, because the Queen made no opposition. However Lewis, that he might
come off with Honor, surrendered back to her the Duchy of Aquitaine, and the
Earldom of Peitou, which she brought him in Dowry, and only kept the two
Daughters which He had by her.

Eleonor, after this Divorce, retired to Poitiers, where she was visited by
Henry Duke of Normandy, the King of England's Son. Who tho he were a Prince,
whose Person was no way inviting, and had the worst colored Hair in the world,
yet she failed not to admit of his sedulities, and to hearken to the proposals
of Marriage which he made her, because he was Heir presumptive to the Crown of
England. Henry was well informed of all the disorders of her past life; but his
eager desire to join Guyenne and Peitou, to the rest of those Dominions, which
he was to inherit, prevailed over all other Considerations. He espoused
Eleonor; which so enraged Lewis, that he suffered no opportunity of Revenge to
escape him. So that a War was kindled between the two Princes, so soon as Henry
came to the Crown, which lasted till an end was put to it by the Marriage of
Henry the King of England's eldest Son, with Margaret, the Daughter of Lewis,
and Elisabeth of Castille, his second Wife. And tho the affianc'd Princess were
but five years of Age, she was put into the hands of the King of England, for a
farther confirmation of the Alliance. When she came to be of age, proper for
the consummation of the Nuptials, the King of England refused to deliver her to
his Son, for fear he should become too potent, and go about to dethrone him,
with the assistance of France. Thereupon Henry, impatient to enjoy his youthful
Spouse, that was to secure him his Succession to the Crown of England (the
Princess being designed to the Heir of the Kingdom) he stole her away, and fled
into France to the King his Father-in law. From thence he wrote to his own
Father, demanding England, or the Duchy of Normandy, as an Earnest of his
Succession: and upon the King's refusal, resolved to obtain his Pretensions by
force of Arms. Queen Eleonor also engaged Richard Duke of Aquitain, and
Jeoffrey Duke of Bretagne, her Brothers, to take part with Henry: and Lewis
obliged William, King of Scotland to invade England on that side, while he sent
Robert Earl of Leicester with a powerful Army, to make a descent into the
Island out of France. So that a Man would have thought that the King of
England, assailed on every side, must have been overwhelmed by so many Enemies.
But Heaven protected him. His Son Henry died in a short time after, and Peace
was concluded between England and France: and the Marriage of Richard, who was
become Heir to the Crown by the death of Henry, with Alice the Daughter of
Lewis, was the Seal of that Union. But in regard the Princess was very young,
she was put into the hands of the King of England, as her Sister had been, till
she came to years of maturity; and Queen Eleonor was shut up in close
imprisonment, to prevent her contriving new troubles at Court. In the mean time
King Henry showed himself so extremely complaisant to the Princess Alice, that
it was looked upon to be an effect of love; and the Princess answered him with
a frankness, pardonable as her years: however, Richard grew jealous to that
degree, that he could not find in his heart to marry her, when he came to the
Crown. Queen Eleonor also, whom he set at liberty so soon as he saw himself
seated upon the Throne, confirmed him in his aversion, and negotiated a Match
between him and Beranguelle, the Daughter of Don Garcias, King of Navarre, whom
she carried to Richard then in Palestine, where he espoused her. This angered
Philip, surnamed the August, King of France, who at the same time had made a
voyage to the Holy Land; but he would not show his resentment there, for the
injury done his Sister, because he would not give the Infidels an opportunity
to take advantage of the division of the Christians. But so soon as he returned
into France, he entered the Territories of the King of England in revenge. At
length Eleonor, after she had been the cause of many mischiefs in both
Kingdoms, where she had worn the Crown, ended her days at Poitiers, in the
Fourscore and fourth year of her age.

Mary of Moravia, Mistress to Philip, surnamed the August.
Anno 1192.
PHILIP the August, after the death of Isabella of Hainault, his first Wife,
married Isembourg, or Eudelberge, the Daughter of Waldemar the Great, King of
Denmark, but found so little pleasure in the enjoyment of her, that after the
first Night he never would Bed her again. However, he endeavored a long time
to combat this aversion; but not being able to surmount it, he imparted the
secret of his disgust to William, Bishop of Beauvais, who told him, that in
regard there was a near affinity between him and the Queen, it would be no
difficult thing for him to disannul the Marriage, if he would summon an
Assembly of the Prelates of his Kingdom. The King relished this Proposal, and
having sent for all the Bishops of France, and amongst the rest, for the
Archbishop of Rheims, who presided in the Assembly, the sentence of Separation
was pronounced. Some time before the King had seen the Portraicture of Mary
Agnes, the Daughter of Bertol Duke of Moravis, which appeared so charming to
him, that he had always the Idea of her in his sight. Therefore, when he saw
himself at liberty, he sent to demand her in Marriage, and having obtained his
desires, he espoused her with a more then ordinary Magnificence.

Anno. 1198.
Isemburg would not be present at the Nuptial Ceremony, but secretly left the
Court, with a design to retire into Denmark. But when she came to the Frontiers
of France, she bethought her self of the fault she was about to commit, in
abandoning the Justice of her Cause: she returned back again, and shutting her
self up in a Convent, sent an account of her misfortune to King Conuie, her
Brother. He, being astonished at Philip's inconstancy, sent to his Ambassador
then residing in Rome, to make his complaints to Pope Celestin, and to demand
Justice of him. Celestin immediately dispatched away two Cardinals, the one a
Priest, and the other a Deacon, to make inquiry into what had past, in the
dissolution of the Marriage, and to make use of all the Authority of the Holy
See, to oblige the King to take Isemburg again, in case he had no lawful cause
of separation. So soon as the two Legates arrived at Paris, they called
together an Assembly of the Clergy, wherein the Motives to the annulling the
King's Marriage with the Princess of Denmark, were strictly examined. But, though
the Prelates assembled saw well, that the sentence of Separation that had been
pronounced, was slight enough, yet they durst not attempt to revoke it, for
fear of the King's Indignation. However, Pope Celestin being dead, Innocent
III. his successor, at the solicitation of the Danish Ambassador, sent into
France the Cardinal Sta Sabina, with order to make use of all the most
effectual means to oblige the King to a reconciliation with Isemburg. When the
Legate arrived, he assembled a Council at Lion, and cited the King,, together
with all those that had pronounced the sentence of Separation, to make their
appearance, but Philip, instead of appearing, sent a Herald, to Protest the
Nullitie of whatever should be done to his prejudice, and to appeal as from an
improper Judge to the Pope, or the next General Council. But for all that, the
Legate went on, and by advice of the Prelates assembled, Excommunicated the
King, and Interdicted the whole Kingdom. Philip enraged at these violent
Proceedings, caused the sentence of the Assembly to be declared void, by a
Decree of his Parliament of Paris, upon the motion of the Advocate-General: and
to punish the Bishops who had been so daring, as to deal so unworthily by him,
he seized upon their Temporalties. In the mean time, well understanding, that
Isemburg had been the occasion of all these troubles, he sent her to the Castle
of Estampes, with a prohibition not to stir from thence, upon pain of being
declared Guilty of High Treason.

Mary of Moravia, who was a Woman of great virtue, and very nice in her
sentiments, was afraid that all Europe would look upon her, as the cause of the
Divorce, in regard the King had so often given her in public, such
transcendent marks of his affection. She was desirous therefore to be
grateful, and willingly would have resigned her own Life, to have appeased
these troubles, provided that the King her Husband's honor, might not be
wounded by the accommodation. She besought him therefore several times, that he
would permit her to retire into a Convent. But his passion for her was too
violent to consent to such a separation, and he was too haughty to give his
Enemies an occasion to think, that he submitted out of any sentiments of fear.
But as it impossible for Princes long to conceal the most secret emotions of
their Souls, the favorers of Isemburg had found out, that the violent
proceeding of the Legate had not a little contributed to exasperate Philip
against any reconciliation, with that unfortunate Princess. Presently therefore
they acquainted the Pope with the King's inclinations, who yielding to their
reasons, sent into France two new Legates, Octavian Bishop of Ostia, and John
Bishop of Velitri, with Orders to make use of gentler means. Those two Legates,
after they had assembled another Council at Soissons, immediately took off the
excommunication that had been thundered out against Philip. Mary likewise laid
hold upon this opportunity, to beseech His Majesty to take Isembergh again, and
she assailed him with arguments so pathetically moving and so judicious, that
at length he consented. Thereupon he sent for Isemburgh to his Palace; but the
more generous Mary had appeared to him, the more it grieved him to have
separated from her. So that after he had remained about forty days with
Isemburg he sent her to a Monastery. The two Legates having notice of this so
sudden and unexpected change, summoned a new assembly to meet at Soissons. Mary
therefore afraid of the fresh troubles into which the King was about to
precipitate himself, would return to him no more, and pressed him so earnestly,
that she might have leave to retire, that at last with his consent, she betook
her self to the Abbey of Boissy. But it was not without an extreme violence upon
her self, that she took this resolution. She loved Philip sincerely, and it was
merely to procure him that repose, of which he was going to deprive himself for
her sake, that she could prevail upon her self to loose him for ever. And the
combat she had in her mind, before she could obtain this victory over her self,
reduced her to such a low condition of Health, that at length she sunk under
the weight of her affliction, and died within a Month after her retirement from
Court. Just before her death, she wrote to Philip, beseeching him to take
Isemburg again, and to live lovingly with her. The King, not able to refuse her
this complacency, at a time when she gave him such transcending marks of her
Love, took Horse, and rode alone to the Convent, where Isemburg lay. He sent
for her out of the Abbey, and taking her up behind him, carried her back to his
Palace, where he lived with her, after that, in perfect Conjugal society: nor
did she die, till many years after, in the Reign of St. Lewis. The Pope was
also so glad of this reconciliation, that to comfort Philip for the loss of
Mary, he legitimated the two Children he had by her.

The Intreagues of the Court of France under the Reign of Philip the Fair.
PHILIP the Fair had Three Sons who reigned successively after him; Lewis, whom
he made King of Navarre in his life time, and who married Margaret the Daughter
of Robert Duke of Burgundy; Philip Count of Poitou, who married Joan the
Daughter of Otheliu, Count of Burgundy; and Charles de la march, who married
Blanch, the Daughter of the same Count. These three Princesses were endowed
with all the Graces, both of Body and Mind; and being of a gay Humor, their
Courts were always full. They drew to 'em all the young Persons of Noble Rank
and Quality, and their usual divertisement was Hunting, whither they went
sometimes with the Princes their Husbands, but generally alone with the
Officers of their Household, and such Ladies as were wont to be the companions
of their Pastimes: more especially Philip, and Walter de Launoy, of whom the
one was Squire to the King of Navarre, the other to the Count de la March,
never left 'em upon these occasions. They might well be looked upon for two of
the most complete and handsomest Lords in the Court, and they were persons of
that brisk and lively Wit, that 'twas impossible to be tired with their
Conversation. The two Princesses Margaret and Blanch, so well liked their
jolly Humors, that without stopping at Esteem, they proceeded even to Love.
The two Lords, who had great experience in that Passion, and had met with very
few hard-hearted Ladies, easily perceived the progress they had made in the
Hearts of those two Ladies: and the Conquest was so illustrious, that without
reflecting upon the fatal consequences of Intreagues of that Nature, they
thought of nothing so much, as to pursue and preserve it. They dexterously
wrought upon the Princes to declare their Minds; and having drawn from their
own Lips the important Secret, they engaged 'em to facilitate the means to make
'em happy. Nor was it a difficult thing to gain the Usher of the Chamber, and
the Princesses Ladies of Honor, who introduced 'em into their Mistresses
Chambers, at a time when all the world was withdrawn to Rest. Every thing
favored their desires. Their Mistresses were the first movers, and it is easy
to guess, how easy it was to prosper in Rendevouzes of that nature. However,
the Princesses afraid of being at last surpised by their Husbands, begged
leave of 'em to spend the Summer season at Maubuison, near Pontoise, where they
admitted none but persons that were privy to the Intreague, and abandoned
themselves wholly to the pleasure of Loving, and being Beloved. The two Lovers
every night got over the walls of the Garden, and slipped into the Chambers of
Delight, without being seen of any body. It Is true, the Princesses had not
imparted any thing of their Love to their Maids of Honor, in regard, that
being young, they mistrusted their discretion. Nevertheless, the secret, which
it so much concerned 'em to conceal, was at length discovered by her that was
able to make the most mischievous use of it. Mademoiselle de Morfontaine, Maid
of Honor to the Queen of Navarr, had been a long time intreagu'd with Philip
de Launoy, who had also promised her Marriage; but being assured of her
Mistress, he began to neglect her. Morfontaine perceiving his coldness, and
imagining he was become enamored of some, of her companions, resolved to watch
him more narrowly, to the end she might find out her Rivalless. There was
belonging to the Apartment of the Maids of Honor, a pair of Back-stairs that
led into the Garden. One Evening therefore she slipped down those Back stairs,
and walked the Rounds, to see whether or no her perfidious AEneas did not go to
visit some of her companions in the night time. Nor had she long stood
Sentinel, before she perceived somebody jump over the Wall. She accoasted him
softly, and tho the Moon did not shine, she knew, or else she fancied she knew
him to be Launoy, whom she followed, without any noise to the Queen of Navarr's
Apartment. Upon the sight of this, she stood as motionless as a Statue, and was
sstill more embarrass'd then before, not being able to persuade her self, that
he durst make his Addresses to a Person so far superior to him. She saw the
Maid of Honor open the door to him; and when he was entered, she listened, to
try whether she could discover what he was gone to do in that Apartment. It Is
easy to guess at her surprise, when she understood by the Queen of Navarr's
expressions, that 'twas she her self whom Launoy sought for, and that he was
beloved. Presently her jealousy changed into fury, and infused into her
nothing but desire of Revenge. But after the first transports of her Rage were
over, when she sought, in cool blood, the ways to satisfy it, she found 'em
encompassed with a thousand dangers. 'Twas as much as her life was worth, to
accuse her Mistress, without convincing Proofs; and it was to be feared, that
in taking measures to prove the Intreague, she might give her Mistress an
occasion to suspect her design, and expose her to the dire effects of her
anger. She floated several days in this uncertainty, but finding her self at
length with Child, she thought it her duty to sacrifice every thing to the
revenge of her injured Honor. She had a Kinswoman, a Nun, at Maubuisson, whom
she entrusted with the deplorable Estate to which she was reduced, and so well
aggravated the honor of the crime, which the two Lovers committed, in
profaning the place that enclosed the Spouses of Jesus Christ, that she
engaged the Nun to assist her in surprising the impious Couple together. And
they took their measures so truly, that the two Launoy's were surpised in Bed
with the two Princesses, and were stopped in the Convent till the King was
informed of it. They were both sent to prison, and upon their impeachment in
Parliament, their crime being sufficiently proved, they were both condemned to
be Flayed alive, to have their guilty Members cut off, to be tied to the Tails
of two wild Horses, and in that condition to be dragged through a new mowed
Meadow. The two Princesses were shut up in Castle Gaillard, where the King of
Navarr caused his Wife, in a short time after, to be strangled with a Sheet.
The Countess of March obtained her liberty, after the Prince her Husband had
dissolved the Marriage, under pretense that he was the Godson of Mand of
Artois, the Mother of that Princess. The Usher of the Queen of Navarr's
Chamber, who was privy to the Intreague, was hanged. The Countess of Poitou was
also apprehended, but in regard, there was nothing material proved against her,
the Prince her Husband went himself to fetch her out of prison, and by 3
thousand Caresses endeavored to make her amends for the Affront she had
received. As for Morfontaine, after she had thus fully satisfied her Revenge,
she was tormented with most cruel remorses of Conscience, that never would
suffer her to rest, either day or night. Every Minute she thought she saw
before her Eyes her Lover in the same deplorable condition, wherein he lay,
under the tortures of the Hangman; and after she had languish'd in misery for
above a year, she ended her days, detesting, with a sincere repentance, the
disorders of her past Life.

The Intreagues of the Court of France, under the Reign of Charles VI.
CHARLES VI. who fell mad during the journey that he made into Flanders, having
recovered his health, gave order for a sumptuous Ball, which was danced at
Queen Blanche's Palace in the Fauxbourg St. Marcell upon occasion of the
Nuptials of one of that Princesses Maids of Honor. The King would make one of
the number, and danced an entry of Savages with five Lords of the Court, who
were tied together with Ropes of Silk. The King as he was dancing, accoasted
the Duchess of Berry, whom he caressed with somewhat a more then ordinary
freedom, at what time his Brother entering the room, and being over curious to
know who that person was, in Masquerade, so familiar with the Countess, drew
near with his Flambeau, and set Fire to the Habit of one of the Savages. The
flame immediately ran from one to the other, so that in an instant, they were
all in a blaze. Charles of Poitiers, Count of Valentinois, and Hongrinant de
Jansay, di'd upon the spot. The Count of Nantouillet ran to the Cupboard, and
throwing himself into a Charger full of Water, quenched the Fire that
surrounded him. The Count Jony, and Yves de Foix di'd after they had lain for
two days together in a languishing condition: But the Duchess of Berry, knowing
the King, threw the skirt of her Gown over him, and saved him by that means.
Dureing the confusion which this accident had occasioned in the assembly, the
Duke of Orleans found himself near a Lady who was ready to be stifled in the
crowd: he took care of her, and put her into the hands of one of his Gentlemen,
who threw Water in her Face, and after he had fetched her again from the swoon
into which she was fallen, carried her home to his own house. Some few days
after, the Duke calling the Lady to mind, asked his Gentleman what was become
of her, and understood that she was the Wife of Raoulet d'Auteville, who had
been Treasurer of France, upon the recommendation of Philip Duke of Burgundy.
With that he remembered that he had been the occasion of displacing him from
his employment, for several misdeameanors, and believed, that the little
service he had done his Wife would not countervail to extinguish that aversion,
which without question, she had for him. Nevertheless in these contrarieties it
is, that Love takes delight to show his capricious humors, as the Duke soon
after found by experience. For one day that he was at Mass in St. Paul's Church,
he there observed the fame Lady, who as she passed by, saluted him with an
obliging smile. The Duke was too much a Courtier to be ignorant what that
meant; and he was too great a Lover of adventures, to fall of the opportunity
of making the best of 'em. Thereupon he sent a Page to delight Madam d'Auteville
to meet him in the Evening in the Garden of the Palais des Touruelles, where he
should be glad to speak with her, and the Lady accepting the Assignation,
failed not to meet him at the time appointed. And then it was, that in her
melting Breast, the Duke soon met with sentiments far opposite to those of that
same hatred, with which he thought her prepossessed against him, and engaged
her without much trouble, to come to him to his Palace the next Morning. Nor
did she fail of being punctual to her hour, and being introduced into the
Princes Chamber by a back pair of stairs, she gave him no cause to complain of
her cruelty. This visit was attended by several others, by means of which, the
Duke of Orleans understood, that she was very intimate with the Duchess of
Burgundy, and that she had understood by her discourses, that 'twas none of her
fault, if he were not beloved by her. The Duke opened his Ears to this
Proposal: For besides, that the Princess had charms sufficient to inflame his
amorous desires, she might prove advantageous to him in the rearing of his
Fortune, by drawing from her Lips the secrets of the Duke her Husband, who was
declared Regent of the Kingdom during the King's distemper, and with whom he
thought he had a right to dispute the Government of the Realm. He therefore
left Madam de Auteville to manage the intreague, who carried it on with so much
address, that in a short time she accomplished his desires.

body had the least inkling of it; but at length it was discovered through the
imprudence of the Duke himself. For he had hung up in his Cabinet the
Portraitures of all his Mistresses, and he was wont to say, that all those
whose pictures were there to be seen, had never been cruel to him. The Duke of
Burgundy likewise, had often heard him say the same thing, though he never minded
it at first. But one day coming into that fatal Cabinet, he there beheld his
Wife's picture, and then calling to mind the Dukes unlucky rallery, it gave him
no small disturbance. Thereupon he resov'd to be satisfied in his suspicions,
and at last discovered, that the Duke had frequent meetings with his Wife by
the means of Madam d' Autevil1e, whom she had made her confident: but then the
jealousy of Love joining Forces with the jealousy of hatred, he thought it
behooved him to be revenged upon a Prince, who was doubly his Rival. To this
purpose he discovered his design to d' Auteville, who having a share in the
affront, was easily induced to have a part in the revenge, and promised to
serve the Duke according to his intentions. Next Morning therefore the
pr^fligate undertaker, corrupted several Ruffians, needing only the temptation
of Money* and among others, William and Thomas Courtois, and John de la Mothe,
who promised him upon their words to second his pernicious design, to the
utmost of their power. He also gained one of the King's Valet's de Chamber, who
was sent to tell the Duke of Orleans, at that time gone to the Palais de
Tournelles, to visit the Queen, it being St. Cecilia's day in the Evening, that
the King desired to speak with him, at the Hostel de St. Paul. Immediately the
Duke got a Horseback attended only by some of his Lacqueys without any weapons,
and one that carried a Flambeau before him. But when he came to the gate
Barbette, before the house of Marshal d' Eurex, out comes d' Auteville from a
Tavern, where he waited the Dukes coming with about fifteen or twenty of his
accomplices, and flew upon him with his drawn sword; and having cut off his
Bridle hand, threw him off his Horse, and delivered him to the rest of his
Confederates, who stabbed him in several places. When they had done, they set
fire to a house adjoining, on purpose to amuse the People, and made their
escapes through by Lanes and Alleys. The Duke was carried into the Marshal de
Fires house, where he expired; and thence to the Benedictin's Convent. The
Parliament took cognizance of this Murder, and ordered a Councellor to take the
Informations. He presently issued forth a Warrant against the squire of the
Duke of Burgundy's Kitchen, who was charged by the witnesses; and in regard, he
never stirred out of the Hostel d' Artois, where the Duke lodged, and whence
they could not fetch him out by force without his Masters permission, the
Councellor who had took the Information, went to demand him of the Duke at the
Hostel de Nesle; where the Duke of Berry lay, and where the Council was kept.
Louis de Anjon, King of Sierly, being then present, when the Councellor made
his compliment to the Duke of Burgundy, took notice that he turned pale, and
that a sudden disturbance seized upon his mind. Upon which he drew him aside,
and having made him confess, that the Duke of Orleans had been assasinated by
his order, he advised him to retire. The Duke took his advice, and departing
the Hostel de Nesle without any noise, went home, took horse, and never stopped
till he came to D^jon. However, he could not escape the punishment that Heaven
had prepared for him.

The Dauphin resolved to revenge the Death of the Duke of Orleans, Burgundy
entered into a League with the King of England, and France was in a strange
combustion. Persons of high quality interposed to accommodate the difference,
and the Duke was solicited to do homage for the Dukedom of Burgundy. He felt
strange combats in his brea^t, and struggled with more then one single passion
upon this account, and before he would positively determine, he would needs take
advice of Madam de Gyac, with whom he had a long time had an Intreague. That
Lady, who was still young and handsome, did not suit with the Kings age, who
was already going down the hill of his years, and would willingly have been
reconciled to the Court, in hopes of smiting the Dauphin in the Eye, for whom
she felt some kind of amorous inclination, and with that design, she advised
the Duke to do what was demanded from him. The place appointed for the
Ceremony, was Monterault, where a large room of hoards was erected upon the
Bridge, with three bars that were let down, as the Duke passed forward. But
when he was upon his knees, in order to do his homage, a pretense was taken
from hence, that he laid his hand upon the hilt of his Sword; upon which,
Tonnequi du Chastel, who stood next the Dauphin, felled the Duke, with a blow
upon his Chin with his battle ax, and the rest of the Courtiers completed the
Murder. However his death was revenged by his Children, who introduced the
English into France; nor had the Dauphin, who in a short time after came to the
Crown, by the name of Charles VII. saved the Kingdom, but by a particular
assistance that Heaven miraculously sent him.

The Intreagues of the Court of France, under the Reign of Charles VII.
JAQVELINE of Haynault, Countess of Holland, had espoused for her first
Husband, John, Dauphin of France, the Son of Charles VI. and after his death
was married to John of Burgundy, the Son of Anthony Duke of Brabant his cousin.
He was a Prince both old and gouty, who avoided the World, and sought
retirement only. Jaqueline, was quite of another humor, and could not find in
her heart to shut her self up in the Country with her Husband. However she was
bound to obedience, and was constrained to consine her self with him in a
Castle, whither he had withdrawn himself from the hurry of business. Nor had
she any other consolation, then to bemoan in private with her Women, the
fantastic humor of her Husband. Her Maid of honor had formerly made a voyage
into England, attending at that time upon Katherine of France, who had married
Henry V. and she was returned with all the Officers of the Household of that
Princess, whom the King her Husband had sent back, some Months after. Now though
that Lady had made but a short stay in London, nevertheless she had seen all
the magnificence of that Court, of which she made so pleasing a description to
her Mistress, that she infused into her a desire to cross the Sea's, and taste
her share of the pleasures which that Court afforded. The Lady also spoke to
her so advantagiously of Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, the King's Brother, that
she caused her to conceive an esteem for that Prince, which did not a little
disquiet her repose. She desired also to see his Picture, and opened her mind
to her Maid of Honor, who found a way to satisfy her curiosity. And the
Portraicture, and the Persuasions of her Woman, increased her Chimerical
Passion to that degree, that she resolved to cross over into England. She
imparted her design to none but such Officers, whom she could not avoid
entrusting with her Secret, and having made choice of a day for her departure,
she got a Horseback with a small Train, carrying all her Jewels along with
her. She got to Dunkirke, whence she embarked for Dover, and so for London. She
was well received by the King of England, and better by the Duke of Gloucester,
who had been informed how much he was concerned in the voyage which she had
undertaken. And he knew so well how to make the best of her preventing him,
that he obliged her to yield her fell up to him, upon the faith of a Marriage,
which she could not contract, in regard she had a Husband living. But the King
of England's complacency in indulging her idle Passion, had like to have broken
the good correspondence between him and the Duke of Burgundy, Cousin to the
Duke of Brabant his kinsman; but reason af State prevailed above that frivilous
Disgust. Sometime after, John of Bavaria, Duke of Luxembourg, Governor of the
Counties of Holland and Zealand, ordained his Heir Philip Duke of Burgundy, his
Sisters Son, without making any mention in his Will of Jaqueline, his Niece by
the Father's side; which obliged her to return into Haynault, where the Duke of
Gloucester would needs, accompany her. She was received by her Subjects with
extraordinary Magnificence, notwithstanding the opposition of the Counts of
Conversano and Anguien, who sided with the Duke of Brabant. The Duke of
Gloucester also endeavored to make himself Master of such places as he
pretended were fallen to Jaqueline, by the death of the Duke of Luxembourg. But
he was constrained to quit his enterprise, and her whole Rights he maintained,
because Pope Martin V. threatened him with Ecclesiastical Censures if he did
not restore the Duke of Brabant his disloyal Wife. The Duke obeyed without any
reluctance, and was glad of that pretense to abandon Jaqueline, that she might
not perceive he was become unfaithful, and paid his Vows to another Shrine. For
Jaqueline had taken along with her into Haynault an English Lady, who was
called Madam Shelton; and the Duke was soon aware of the advantage which that
Lady had over her Mistress, as well for the Graces of her Body, as for the
fineness of her Wit, and delicacy of her Sentiments. Nor could he withstand so
many charms, and finding they concurred with his Sedulities, he was glad to
find himself at liberty, that he might follow his own inclinations. He
therefore left the Duchess at Mons, and returned into England, where he
married Madam Shelton. But the Duke of Gloucester's infidelity was not the only
thing which troubled the Duchess; she feared the effects of her Husband's just
resentment; and she imagined every moment, that she saw him invading her
Territories with an armed Force. But the death of the Duke delivered her from
these Fears* news being brought her in the midst of her disturbanbances, that a
Fever which seaz'd him at Brussels, had put an end both to his Life and his
Jealousies.

Rene de Anjou Duke of Bar, having had a contest with the Count of Vandemo^;
who should succeed to Charles Duke of Lorrain, they disputed their Right by
dint of Arms. The Count had recourse to the Duke of Burgundy, a sworn Enemy to
the House of Anjou, who assisted him with Men and Money; and after he had
obtained that reinforcement, he marched to find out his Enemy, meeting him in
the Plain of Bullenville, near Neuchatel in Lorrain, he gave him Battle,
defeated his Army, and took him prisoner. Nor could the Duke obtain his
liberty, till the death of Joan, Queen of Sicily, called him to the succession
of that ^ingdom. Isabell of Lorraine, his Wife, Niece to Mary of Anjou Queen of
France, used all her Credit to mollify the Count, and persuade him to deliver
her Husband. To which purpose she addressed her self to Charles VII. at Vienne,
in the Dauphinate, beseeching him to make use of his Authority, with the Duke,
to oblige him to gratify her Request. The King, who was naturally prone to
Acts of kindness, complied with the Duchess, and was desirous to serve her:
but the cruel Wars, which he had at that time with the English, so busily
employed his time and thoughts, that the Duchess would have received but
little satisfaction from him, had not another motive more pressing then that of
Generosity, spurred him forward. The Duchess had brought along with her Agnes
Forelle, who was one of her Maids of Honor: and the King being charmed with
her Beauty, engaged himself to serve the Duke of Bar to the utmost of his
Power; and in short, he did oblige the Count to set him at liberty. Agnes
acknowledged the King's Favor, with all Respect that was due to his Person,
and showed him all the complacency that became her Modesty. And now the Duchess
having done her business, prepared for her voyage into Sicily with the King her
Husband; and according to all outward appearnces, Agnes was to have waited upon
her. But the King, that he might oblige her to abide at Court, made use of
Merlin the famous Astrologer. One day that Charles was alone with Agnes, Merlin
entered the Room; at what time the King, as had been concerted between 'em,
asked him what he thought of the Fortune of that fair Lady. Sir, replied
Merlin, either there is no Truth in the Stars, or else she will be the Mistress
of some Great King. Agnes, who presently perceived the Artifice, made answer
with a smile, If it be so, Sir, I beseech, your Majesty to give me leave to
cross over into England, to the end my destiny may be accomplished: there being
no likelihood that the Prediction concerns your Majesty, who have hardly a
Third part of your Kingdom left ye. Charles understood Raillerie, and joak'd
with Agnes upon her Repartee: but he made his advantage of it however. And it is
said, that his eager desire to render himself worthy the Affections of that
Virgin, exalted his Courage to perform those noble Achievements afterward,
that made his Reign so Illustrious. Agnes, though she had treated him like a
King, despoiled of his Dominions, yet could she not choose but applaud her self
for the conquest she had made of his Heart, which she was no less covetous of
preserving to her self; and therefore was as willing as he, to second the means
of which he had bethought himself to stop her journey. She feigned her self
sick, and the King's Physicians that visited her, confirmed it, by the King's
Order, and gave it for their Opinion, that she could not travel without
endangering her Life; the Queen also promising the Duchess to take particular
care of her, and to send her after her, so soon as she had recovered her
health. Now, though the Duchess well knew, that Agnes was not so sick as she
made her self, and that she suspected the best part of the Truth, she took
little notice of it, believing that if the Queen, who had most reason to
concern her self, were so free to give her consent, 'twas not for her to make
any opposition. After she was gone, Agnes grew better and better every day, and
soon after quitted her bed of Sickness. And then she appeared at Court with new
Charms, and the King's Passion for her, became so strong, that he heaped upon
her new Favors every day. He gave her the County of Ponthieure, and finding
her to be a Woman of a solid Judgment, he consulted her in Affairs of the
greatest importance, and she was the Conduit-pipe through which he conveyed all
his Favors. All the Court looked upon the King's kindness to her with Envy;
but more especially the Dauphin, who being already of age sufficient to have a
share in the Government, stomach'd to see that his Father imparted none of his
designs to him. Tho Agnes let no occasion of doing him good offices escape her,
he looked upon all Kindnesses, all Favors, which he received upon her
recommendation, as so many empoison'd Presents. Therefore he made it his
continual study, by what means he could, to destroy her in the King's
Affection: amd in regrrd there was no way to do it, but by representing her
disloyal to the King's Bed, he made it his business to put a Gallant upon her,
who, as he was sufficiently devoted to his Interests, so he had merit enough to
kindle the King's jealousy. To this purpose he cast his eyes upon Chabane, the
Count of Dammartin, who, of all the Persons at Court, was the most accomplished
for Beauty and Parts, and broke the proposal to him. The Count trembled at the
first overture that was made him, and told the Prince, that tho he owed him all
the services that lay in his power, he could not resolve to engage in an
affair, which would infallibly draw upon him his ruin; whether the King
thought his Passion sincere, or whether he suspected that his love for Agnes
was but counterfeited, on purpose to undo her. The Dauphin encouraged him, and
told him, that so far from running any hazard, he would rather preserve the
King's Favor, by sacrificing his pretended Passion, in giving him an account
of all the marks of tenderness which he had received from the Countess of
Ponthieure, and promising never to visit her more. Chabane, overruled by the
Dauphin's Reasons, applied himself wholly to the business, and made it his
study to bring about his design. He had a Valet de chamber, a crafty nimble
youngster, named St. Colombe* whom he entrusted with the false show of his Love
for the Countess, and engaged him to court Mortaigne, who of all her Waiting
Women, was the person in whom she put the greatest confidence. St. Columbe was
easily persuaded to undertake the business, and in regard he was very handsome,
he found little resistance in Mortaigne's tender Heart, who quickly gave him
all the most particular marks of her Affection. When St. Columbe had obtained
his desires, he insinuated into his Mistress, that it would be more easy for
'em to continue their amorous Commerce, if she could engage the Countess in an
intreague with Chabane. Mortaigne approved her Lovers advice; and from that
very Evening she labored to bring it about. Being alone with her Mistress when
she was going to Bed, she began to talk of all the Lords of the Court, and
after she had given her opinion of every one, she named to her, after a
careless manner, the Count of Dammartin. Upon the hearing of that name only,
the Ladies countenance changed, and she showed such an aversion for him, that
Mortaigne durst nor speak a word more. However, she gave an account to her
Lover, who made his report to his Master, without concealing the least
circumstance. Chabane revolving in his Mind the Countesses behavior, to see
whether the Countess had any reason to hate him, and being convinced that he
had never done any thing to displease her, he Divined the Truth, and rightly
Judged, that those marks of aversion were only an effect of the Indignation of
that lovely Lady, that he was the only person at Court, who had withstood the
power of her Charms, and that he had never answered those passionate glances,
which she had cast upon him in vain. He examined with himself, what course he
ought to take, and thought, it the safest way to engage the Countess to make
the first steps. He gave her to understand, that he understood the Language of
the Eyes; but at the same time he avoided all occasions of speaking to her. But
the Countess was still more offended, when she perceived that he had dived into
the Sentiments of her Heart, yet never stirred a foot to make any advantage of
her favorable Inclinations. She therefore looked upon it as a point of Honor
to make him sensible, and meeting him one day in a dark passage, that led from
her Apartment to the King's, at what time he passed on without making any stop;
Am I so terrible, Count, said she, that you should fly me thus? More then you
can imagine, Madam, replied Chabane: a Lady so beautiful as your self is enough
to make the most undaunted courage tremble. Is it then so great a mischief to
love me, replied the Countess? Yes, Madam, replied Chabane, when a Man can
never hope to be happy, without betraying his Master. You are very nice for a
Courtier, added the Countess; but we know how to cure your scruples. She said
no more, but after she had spoken these words, past on, afraid of being
surpised in a Conversation, which the nature of the place would have rendered
suspicious. Chabane stood there for some time, ruminating upon this Adventure;
for he would have willingly served the Dauphin, but he could not find in his
heart, to betray a person that had appeared so amiable to him. Nevertheless,
his Love prevailed above his Ambition, and he resolved to think of nothing but
making himself happy, and preserving so good a fortune. He saw his Affairs in
so fair a way, that there wanted nothing toward obtaining all that he could
desire, but to be alone with the Countess, and to that purpose, he addressed
himself to Mortaigne. He told her that he found himself very unhappy, to have
drawn upon himself the hatred of her Mistress, tho he knew not which way he had
deserved so great a misfortune, but that he was resolved to know the reason of
it from her own Lips, or to kill himself before her Face; and therefore begged
of her to give him an opportunity to discourse the Countess alone. Mortaigne
excused her self at first, and told him, that knowing so well as she did, her
Mistresses Mind, she must expect the utmost of her Mistresses indignation,
should she contribute to an interview of that nature. But the Count, who knew
well enough, that Agnes would not be so much offended at the sight of him, as
Mortaign imagined, could have easily dis-abus'd her, durst he have discovered a
secret which the Countess had concealed from her, for fear of being accused of
indiscretion. Therefore he made use of another Fetch to encourage her, and gave
her to understand, that she might easily do him such a piece of service,
without appearing in the least to have contributed toward it. These reasons,
and a rich Diamond Ring which he put upon Mortaignes Finger totally defeated
her. She promised to introduce him into a Wardrobe of which she had the key,
from whence he might slip into the Countesses Chamber, so soon as she had left
her. And this expedient prosper'd. Agnes was surpised to see Chabane, so late
in her apartment: but at length, seeing 'twas so, she thought it became her to
make the best of the opportunity; and without spending time in useless
contests, she knew better, then to wast those minutes that Love makes precious.

This intreague lasted a long time, without being discovered, there being
nothing to interrupt it, but the importunities of the Dauphin, who pressed
Chabane to give him an opportunity, to let the King see that his Mistress was
disloyal to him. Chabane excused himself, and denied his being in a capacity to
serve him, under several protences; which though they were accompanied with a
great deal of probability, yet the Prince who was not to be baffled suspected
that Chabane did not deal fairly by him. Therefore to find out the truth* he
engaged the Dauphiness to enter in a strict society with the Countess, and to
admit her into all her sports and Matches that she made. On the othersule,
Chabane, that he might not be known, was introduced into his Mistresses's
chamber in Liveries, sometimes of one color, sometimes of another, feigning to
carry some message. One Evening that he went thither in the Dauphinesses
Livery, the King and the Dauphin entered; and in regard there was no light in
the chamber, the Count stole out again, without being seen. However the
Countess afraid lest the shadow of her Lover might have been perceived, to
remove all suspicion from the King, told him that the Dauphiness had sent her
Lacquey to give notice of a match that she had made against the next day. But
the Young Prince was too cunning to fall into such a snare; he rightly judged,
it was not for nothing that the Countess had no light in her Chamber, and made
no question but the Lacquey was some Lover in disguise. Nevertheless for his
better satisfaction, so soon as he returned to his apartment, he asked the
Dauphiness, what message she had sent to the Countess, and understood from her
own Lips, that she had sent no body to her, of any errand at all.

Now, though the Dauphin were convinced of the truth, by all these circumstances,
these were not proofs sufficient to disabuse the King, who was absolutely
convinced of the Loyalty of his Mistress: and therefore, there was a necessity
of surprising her a Bed with Chabane. To which purpose, he gave order to one of
the Scotch Guards, to have a vigilant Eye upon the actions of the two Lovers.
The Soldier acquitted himself with extraordinary exactness, and came one
Evening to inform the Dauphine, that Chabane was gone into the Countesses
lodging, in the habit of a Lace-Merchant. Immediately the Dauphin posted to her
apartment, but discovered nothing, in regard the Countess had hid her Lover
upon the first noise that she heard. Upon the Dauphines visit, Chabane thought
he was betrayed, and therefore gave order to St. Columbre, to observe whither
any body watched him. Who so faithfully discharged his duty, that they found
the Soldier upon the watch at the entrance into the Countesses apartment, and
presently gave Chabane notice of it; who for that reason forbore meeting his
Mistress that Night, for fear of being surpised, and rightly judging, that it
would be impossible to continue his amorous commerce, unless he could get rid
of the spy that was set to watch him, ordered St. Co^^^^e to have him
assassinated. Thereupon St. Columbe riggl'd himself into the acquaintance of
the Scotch Soldier, and having carried him to a Tavern, after they had done
drinking, led him through a blind street, where he had posted half a dozen
desperate Raskels, that fell upon him, and laid him dead upon the pavement. One
of the Duke of Tremovilles Lacqueys, who was a kin to the Scotch Soldier,
seeing him attacked, went to call some of his comrades, and came to his rescue,
but too late; for the business was done, and the Murderers were dispersed.
However, in regard that several persons in the Duke of Tremouilles Livery were
seen about the body, the Duke himself was accused to have been the author of
the Assasination. The Dauphin was the only person that would not be surpised
by these appearances, as guessing right, that the Murder was committed by the
order of Chabane. Nevertheless he would not take any notice of it to any body,
least the fear of danger should dishearten those that he designed to employ in
the farther espial of these secret rendezvouses, to serve him according to his
desires. Therefore he said no more, but set other spies to work, and caused the
Countess to be so narrowly watched, that word was brought him that Ch^bane was
entered her Chamber in the disguise of a Stationer, with a great bundle of
Books under his Arm. Immediately he went to inform the King. What said he
merrily, I hope it is not la Trimo^^le, but though the Dauphin knew well enoug^,
'twas Chabane, he answered his Father, that he could not tell who it was, but
that his Majesty would be soon satisfied. The Dauphin also had ordered all the
Avenues to be so well guarded, that it was impossible for the Count of
Dammartin to escape. But the Countess having timely notice by Mortaigne, who
kept diligent watch and ward, locked him up in a Closet by the side of the Bed,
which the King had never observed, as being covered with the Hangings. So that
the King found his Mistress a Bed; and while he was examing the Books that lay
by her, the Dauphin asked her between jest and earnest, what was become of the
Bookseller that sold her the Books? To whom the Countess with a countenance no
way concerned, made answer, that he was gone, but that he could not be out of
call, if his Highness had any thing to say to him. The Dauphin took a Flambeau
himself, and finding nothing, after he had sought all about, retired without
saying a word, full of vexation and shame, for the ill success of his
enterprise. The King on the otherside, made a thousand excuses to the Countess,
and the better to make his peace, would needs lie with her that night. Nor
durst the Countess give him the least denial, though she was sure to spend the
night in a strange intermixture of pleasure and disquiet. Nor was Chabane in a
better condition; he was so near the Bed that he durst not breath; and which
was worse, he was forced to lie patient, while his own Ears told him, that
another was enjoying those pleasures which were appointed for himself. But at
length the King rose and left him at liberty, to make himself amends for his
past sufferings. The Countess who looked upon the Dauphin as the Author of all
her vexations, no longer had the patience, to carry fair with him as she had
done before. They had frequent quarrels together, and one day such was the heat
of passion on both sides, that the Dauphin gave her a whirret of the Ear. Of
which she made her complaints to the King, but not receiving that satisfaction
which she expected, despite and vexation threw her into a languishing disease,
of which she died in six weeks after, and was buried in the Collegiate Church.
She had two Daughters by the King; Charlote, married Lewis de Breze, Seneschal
of Normandy, who surprising her in the act of Adultery, stabd' her to death;
and Mary who espoused Oliver de Coitiny, Lord of Rochefort.

Anno 1455.
After the Death of the Countess of Ponthieure, the King engaged with Madam de
Villequiers her Neice, a Lady no less charming then she, and who inherited her
hatred of the Dauphin, and persuaded Charles, that the Dauphin had caused her
Ant to be poisoned. On the otherside, the Dauphin employed all the inventions
of a crafty wit, to set the King at variance with Madam de Villequiers, but not
being able to accomplish his design, he withdrew into the Dauphinate, whither
all the malcontents resorted to him by his own encouragement. The King after
he had made use of all gentle means to reduce him to his duty, commanded
Chabane to march against him, and to apprehend his person; of which the Dauphin
having intelligence, left Grenoble privately, and retired to the Duke of
Burgundy. The King seeing his Son in the hands of his mortal Enemy, began to
mistrust every body that came near him, and imagining every moment that there
was a design to poison him, continued without eating eight days together, and
weakn'd his natural heat by that long abstinence in such a manner, that
afterward when he came to eat again, 'twas impossible for him to digest his
nourishment, which brought him to his Grave. Such was the tragical end of the
Amors of this Prince.

The Intreagues of the Court of France, under the Reign of Lewis XI.
Anno 1469.
LEWIS XI. who had always great designs, sent the Cardinal d'Albret into Spain,
to negotiate a marriage between the Duke of Guienne his Brother, with Isabell
of Castile, the Sister of Henry IV. and presumptive heir of that Kingdom. But
that Princess rather chose to unite Castille to Aragon, by the marriage of
Ferdinand, eldest Son of Don Juan II. This negotiation therefore proving
unsuccessful, Lewis XI. cast his Eyes upon the Princess Joane, which Joane of
Castille had had by one of her favorites, and which King Henry had
acknowledged for his Daughter, notwithstanding he was impotent, in hopes to set
up the rights of that Princess against Isabell. But the Duke of Guienne, to
whom the King made the proposal, would not so much as hear of a match that must
have engaged him in a bloody War with the King of Aragon, and privately sent to
demand Mary, the only Daughter and heiress of Charles Duke of Burgundy. But the
Duke who saw that the greatest Princes in Europe sought his Daughter, would not
determine so suddenly upon the choice of a Son in Law, but without engaging his
promise to any one, kept 'em all in suspense. The Duke of Guyenne vexed at this
hesitation of the Duke, took his leave of the King at Orleans, to go and drive
away his melancholy in his own Government. At Amboise he had a sight of
Magdalen, who had been the Widow of Lewis d' Amboise, about six months, who had
married her for her beauty, but had no Children by her. The Duke was so pleased
with her conversation, that he forgot for some time, that he had left the Court
to retire to his Government of Bourdeaux, and made a proposal to Madam d'
Amboise to go along with him: but she excused her self, alleging the injury it
would be to her reputation. The Duke therefore to vanquish her scruples,
conferred upon her the County of St. Severe, and obliged her by that same
generous present, to answer his passion. The pretense then for her going was to
take possession of certain Lands, which as she gave out, she had purchased of
the Duke; and this served to conceal the Intreague, that was between him and
her. They arrived together at Bourdeaux, very well satisfied with each other;
and Madam d' Amboise, who was not ungrateful for the favors she and received
from the Duke, made use of all talents that Heaven had bestowed upon her, to
preserve his affection. She sung with art, and had a charming voice, she played
upon several instruments, and had a delicate vain in Poetry; so that the hours
they spent together, never seemed tedious. But in regard that Love is not always
satisfied with these innocent pastimes, Madam d' Amboise was delivered of a
Daughter, that after the death of the Duke her Father, was Abbess of St. Paroux
in Perigort. The Dukes affection for his Mistress also daily increased, and
their happiness would have been a subject worthy of envy, had not ambition
interrupted their felicities. For the Duke of Guyenne held correspondences all
a long at Court, which made the King jealous. He was afraid least his Brother
should grow too potent, and therefore suborned Jourdain Fanre, Abbot of St.
John de Angeli to poison him. That traitor upon whom the Duke of Guyenne had
heaped his favors, readily undertook to sacrifice his life for the hopes of a
pitiful reward. To which purpose he presented a lovely Peach to Madam d'
Amboise, which he had envenomed: the Lady gave it her Lover, who sliceing it
into a cup of wine, they eat it both together. Madam d' Amboise di'd the same
day, but the Duke lay languishing for some Months. Nevertheless, the violence
of the poison was so strong, that it fetched off his hair, the nails of his
hands, and deprived him of the use of his limbs. Jourdain was apprehended, and
the Bishop of Angiers was joined in Commission with Lewis d' Amboise,
afterward Bishop of Albi, to prosecute him. But the King put a stop to the
prosecution, and ordered that the impeachment, as well as the informations,
should be sent to him; which discovered to the World, the share which he had in
the fact. But Heaven would not permit so enormous a crime to go unpunished; for
the villain was consumed by a flash of Lightning that burnt him to ashes, at
the bottom of the dungeon, where he lay in Fetters.

Burgundy took the Field, to revenge the death of the Duke of Guyenne, and
entering Picardy, committed great havoc in the Country. The King on the other
side, mustered what Forces he could together to defend the Province, and
arriving at a Village near Amiens, called Gigon, was accoasted by a Woman all
beblubber'd with tears, who falling at his feet, demanded justice against his
Soldiers, who making their way by violence to quarter in the Village of which
her Husband was the Lord, had slain him. The King cast his Eyes upon the Widow,
and perceived so many charms in her countenance, that he was dazzled with the
sight of 'em. He raised her from the ground, and assured her he would punish
the guilty so soon as he came to a place where he made any stay: Soon after,
the King made a Truce with the Duke of Burgundy,, and returning to Paris,
carried Madam de Gigon along with him: he discovered to her the Passion he had
for her, and heaped so many Favors upon her, that he soon made her forget her
loss. Nor was she ungrateful, but signalized her acknowledgment at the expense
of her Honor. She had one Daughter that was afterward married to the Bastard
of Bourbon. The custom of that time was for Ladies to adorn themselves with
Jewels, and they wore Chains of Precious Stones, that came three or four times
about their Necks. The King gave Order to a famous Jeweller, whose name was
Passefilon, to make one of those Chains for Madam Gigon; and the Jeweller's
Wife carried it home to the King's Mistress, so soon as it was finished. The
King was then by accident in her Chamber, and found the Jewellers Wife so
lovely, that his Love for Madam Gigon, could not protect his Heart against her
Charms. However, he could not discover his Passion in his Mistresses Presence,
but commanded Landais his Treasurer to send her to him, when she came to be
paid for the Chain; telling him, that he would drive the bargain himself; which
was a usual thing for him to do, in regard, that being very covetous, he would
be taking notice of the meanest trifles, to hinder his Officers from making any
advantage of their Places. Mrs. Passefilon, then, was admitted into his
Cabinet, and observing her but in an ordinary Dress, he told her in plain
terms, without fetching any great compass about, that if she would comply with
his Passion, she should gain more by him in a year, then she could get as long
as she lived in her Shop. The Jewellers Wife, who loved Money, and had been a
witness of the raising of Madam de Gigon, easily surrendered to this Royal
Temptation, and the bargain was presenly concluded. In a short time she grew
big with Child, and brought the King another Daughter, that was afterward
married to Anthony de Bueil, Count of Sancerre. But when Passefilon saw that
she had wherewithal to live like a Lady, she was as willing as others to taste
some high sauce with her amorous Pleasures, and was resolved to persuade her
Royal Paramour to go more neatly dressed, then he was wont to do. One day
therefore, that the King came to pay her a visit in a homely Suit, and a foul
Shirt, Sir, said she, When I surrendered my Heart to a King of France, I
thought to have sound in the Courtly commerce wherein I had embarked my self,
all the Gayeties of Ornament and Gallantry, that the Magnificence of the most
noble Court in Europe could have afforded; nevertheless, it is my grief, that
when I have an eager desire to abandon my self to to the transports of a tender
Passion; I smell nothing but slovenly Grease, where nothing but Musk and Amber
should perfume my Nose. In truth, should one of my Apprentices accoast me in
that same Garb that you are in, I would kick him out of my sight. What must
Foreign Ministers say, that see you so ill support the Majesty of your Royal
Dignity? What Lampoons did the Spaniards make, between your Majesty and the
King of Castille, upon your threadbare Cap, and your Leaden Agnus Dei, instead
of one beset with Diamonds? The King was so amazed at this Curtain Lecture,
that he had not the power to interrupt her; However, as he was a great
dissembler, he did not discover his disgust, tho he thought it high time to get
him a more complaisant Mistress. To that purpose, having heard much talk of a
young Lady of Dijon, whose name was Huguette de Jaqueline, that was well
descended, but very poor, he sent for her to Court, and having taken her for
his Mistress, he had a Third Daughter by her, whom he bestowed upon Amand of
Poitiers, Lord of St. Valier.

Intreagues of the Court of France, under the Reign of Charles VIII.
Anno 1483.
LEWIS, Duke of Orleans, had the misfortune to be beloved by Ann of France, the
Daughter of Lewis XI. I say the misfortune, because the Passion of that
Princess, was in good part, the cause of all the crosses that befell him,
during his life. She gave him to understand her Inclinations toward him, and
tho the Duke did not comply with her, but in terms rather of Respect then
Tenderness, yet she surceas'd not to interpret 'em favorably, and to believe
she was beloved, because she deserved to be so. She refused for love of the
Duke of Orleans, a Match, which her Father would have made for her with
Nicholas of Anjou, Duke of Lorrain, and acknowledged to that Prince, that it
was the only reason of her refusal. He answered with so much indifferency to
what she spoke to him the most obligingly in the world upon that occasion, that
she began at length to open her Eyes, and to understand that she had flattered
her self to little purpose; when she thought he had complied with her
tenderness, which was the reason that she resolved to marry Peter of Bourbon,
Duke of Beaujou. Upon the first proposal of it, that the King her Father made
her, as she was unwilling to be unfortunate alone, she persuaded Lewis XI. over
whom she had a powerful Ascendant, to marry the Duke of Orleans to Joan of
France, his Daughter, who was neither beautiful, nor of an agreeable temper.
The Duke would fain have excused himself, but the King laid his Commands upon
him so imperiously, that he was forced to obey. It Is true, that the Marriage
was not consummated, whether it were, that he had an aversion for the Princess,
or that she had some natural defects, as it was afterward pretended, which
hindered her having of Children. After the death of Lewis XI, the Duke of
Orleans demanded the Regency, during the minority of Charles VIII. who was not
above Thirteen years of age; but the Duchess of Beaujou carried it before him.
But tho she had got this advantage, yet for all that she could not choose but
seek the Duke of Orleans's friendship, whom she had not the power to hate,
notwithstanding his indifferency, and she offered him a share in the
Government, if he would but live in a friendly correspondence with her: but he
returned those Answers, that ill became him to her civilities. Thereupon, the
Duchess exasperated by his Contempt, studied nothing so much, as which way to
be revenged. She grounded her pretense upon a quarrel which the Duke of Orleans
had had with the Duke of Lorraine, while he was playing at Tennis with him, and
would have had the Duke apprehended; but he withdrew to the Duke of Bretagne.
In whose Court, while the Duke of Orleans resided, he waited most sedulously
upon the Princess Ann his Daughter, and fell so deeply in love with her, that
he preserved his Passion for her, till his death. In the mean time he entered
into a strict confederacy against the Duchess Regent, of which, himself, and
the Duke of Bretagne were the Heads. They betook themselves to Arms on both
sides, and they came to the decision of a Battle in the Plain of St. Aubin:
where the Confederate Princes were defeated, and the Duke of Orleans being
taken prisoner, was afterward locked up in the Tower of Bourges: nor was he
released till after Charles VIII. had espoused Ann of Bretagne, and at the same
time that the King was preparing for his expedition into Italy.

Intreagues of the Court of France, under the Reign of Lewis XII.
LEWIS of Orleans being come to the Crown, made it his whole study to marry the
Princess Ann, Widow of Charles VIII. his Predecessor. He caused the Reasons for
the dissolving of his Marriage with the Princess Joan to be laid before Pope
Julius, as being incapable of ever bringing forth Successors to the Crown, and
desired a Dispensation from his Holiness, to marry the fair Queen, whom he
dearly loved. Nor would his impatience permit him to stay till he received the
Dispensation: 'twas enough to hear by the Legate's Secretary, whom he had
gained to his side, that it was allowed and drawing up. Yet for all this, the
love of that Princess, surceas'd not to cause him new disturbances. She became
jealous of Louise of Savoy, Countess of Angoulesme, Mother of Francis the
First, and their hatred brake forth to that degree of exasperation, that it
divided the whole Court into Parties. Lewis XII. had a design to marry the
Princess Claudia his Daughter with the young Count of Angouleme, whom he looked
upon as his Successor, but the Queen opposed it to the utmost of her power.
Therefore to cross this design, she resolved to marry her with Charles of
Austria, who was already called Prince of Spain, and to give him Bretagne in
favor of that Alliance. To this purpose, she sent privately a Gentleman of the
House of Rieux into Flanders, and thence into Germany. This Gentleman made the
Proposal to the Emperor Maximilian, the Prince's Grandfather, by the Father's
side, and to Chieuvres, his Governor. They agreed upon the Articles, which
were Signed, and there remained nothing but the Ceremony of the Nuptials, which
had been solemnized unknown to the King, had not the tender age of the Parties
been an obstacle to the Consummation; and had it been in the power of the Queen
to have disposed of her Daughter as she would her self: to which end, fortune
sometime after gave her an opportunity, of which she tried to make her
advantage.

The King falling sick at Paris, his distemper increased to that degree, that
the Physicians gave him over for lost, and while the whole Court was in a
consternation upon the desperate condition of the King's health, the Queen took
her opportunity privately, to send away her Daughter by water down the River
Loire, to Nantes. But passing through Angiers, she was stopped by the Marshal de
Gi^, who was Governor of that place. The Marshal was one that took part with
the Countess of Angouleme, and in regard, he was not ignorant that the Queen
opposed the King's design of marrying Claudia, with the Son of that Princess,
he soon conjectured the reason that his masters Daughter was sent away by that
private conveyance, during his Sickness. Nor was he ignorant how prejudicial
the conjunction of Bretagne to the Dominions of Spain, would be to France,
which was the reason, that without many more to do, he resolved to cross a
contrivance so dangerous, notwithstanding he was assured that the Queen would
never forgive him, should the King happen to die of his Sickness. Thereupon he
stopped the Princess,, with most respectful protestations of his sorrow, for
being constrained to come to that extremity. This action of the Marshal was
commended by the King, and all good French men, and the Queen her self feigned
to applaud it; however, when the King was recovered, she made use of her credit
to ruin that faithful subject. Nevertheless she could not prevent the marriage
of her Daughter with the Count of Angouleme, because it was generally desired.
But it was such an inward vexation to her, that sinking under the weight of her
corroding anguish, she died in the thirty seven Year of her age. It Is true, the
King did not express that sorrow for her death, as it is thought he would have
done, considering the passion he had for her, as long as she lived: whither it
were that his mind was taken up with his cares of the Wars of Italy, or that
the Queen's attempts against his authority, had cooled the heat of his Love.
However after that, he lived such a reserved life, that no body believed he
would ever have thought of a third Marriage; but the Duke of Longueville was
the occasion of reviving that desire in him.

That Prince having rashly engaged himself in a battle against the English,
Spurs, and became a prisoner to Henry VIII. of England. To repair this fault,
he undertook during his imprisonment, to bring off that Prince from his
confederacy with the Emperor, nor did he find any great trouble to persuade him
to it. For tho he were very young, he was very thrifty, and he was a weary of
paying the Emperors Troops, who was extremely poor; and of furnishing him a
hundred Crowns a day for his table. There only wanted therefore a plausible
pretense to break the Confederacy; and there was not a better at that time to
be found, then a more strict alliance between France and England.

Henry VIII. had a Sister whose beauty was a domestic mischief to him, as we
shall find in the sequel of this history. She was born after another Daughter,
so much unprovided of the graces of the body, that the King of Scotland had
never married her, but because the King would not marry the youngest before the
eldest. The youngest being come of Age, the Duke of Milan, and several other
Sovereign Princes sought her in vain, because 'twas not then the custom to
marry the King's Daughter, out of the Island. This custom, which had not been
altered for four Ages together, had infused into the young English Lords of the
highest Quality, a confidence to pretend to the Princess, and the King gave way
to it, lest he should be accused of too much severity toward his Sister; though
he had no design to have married her to any of his subjects, for fear of
drawing a civil War upon himself, not unlike to those wherein several of his
predecessors had miscarried. Nevertheless, in regard it is a difficult thing
for a Woman to hold out any long time against Love, when she makes it her
business to allure, the Princess of England, after she had entangl'd in the
snares of Love, all those that could give any cause of jealousy to her Brother,
was her self smitten with one, whom he had little reason to fear. There was
introduced into the Court of England, a young English Gentleman, whose name was
Charles Brandon, without any other recommendation, then that of the King's
Nurse, whose Son he was. He was extremely handsome, well proportioned in his
person, and very active in all manner of exercises. He had the air of a person
of Quality; and there was observed in him that sweetness of temper, and that
discretion, that he was welcome into all societies, and chiefly into the Ladies
company, who were altogether prevalent at Court. The King took him for his
second in all his matches at Tenis, and made him the confident of all his most
secret pleasures. He conferred upon him the office of his chief Huntsman, and
lest his name should remind the Courtiers of the meaness of his Birth, he
caused him to assume the title of the Counts of Suffolk, illustrious for the
merit and quality of the persons who had born it, for above two hundred years.
It is not certainly known, whether this new title had convinced the Princess,
that she might, bestow her affection without any dishonor, upon the person
whom the King her Brother had honored with it; since the English Histories are
full of presidents of several Earls of Suffolk, that have pretended to the
marriage of the Sisters and Daughters of their King's; or whether the Love
which she already had for him, had imprinted that Idea in her mind in his
favor; but it was observed, that in a short time after the Princess looked upon
Suffolk with a more passionate glance, then she was wont to do.

Nor wat it so much to be wondered at, that the Earl should make her suitable
returns, with Eyes no less inflamed and sparkling. And the Courtiers in a
little time were so used to it, that they took little notice of it: whether it
were the custom at that time, to love at well beneath as above their quality,
or whether it were, that the Courtiers thought it not proper to be more
concerned about it, then the King himself was, who only laughed at the business,
and made himself merry with the two lovers, so soon as he discovered their
reciprocal affection. Not that he approved it in the main, or that he had so
high a value for Suffolk, as to make him his Brother in Law, (tho he had a
greater kindness for him, then for the rest of his Courtiers.) But he was in
hopes to draw some advantage from the inequality of this Amor, which he
thought would exasperate the English Lords against her, and cause 'em to desist
from looking any more after her; besides that, he assured himself that he
should be so much the master of his Sister, and Suffolk, that nothing should be
acted between them two, but by his consent.

This was the posture of the Court of England, when the Duke of Longueville
made a proposal as from himself, of a match between the Princess, and Lewis
XII. The King of England listened to him with those marks of respect and
approbation, which suficiently discovered what he had in his Heart. He was
importuned to bestow his Sister out of the way, and he met with the most lucky
means that Fortune ever could have offered him. It Is true, he could not without
some trouble to himself, put an end to a War so advantageous to him, however it
would have been no less a vexation to him, to separate from his new Mistress,
who would have been unwilling to cross the Seas, and follow him in his Armies.

In the mean time he was engaged to repass into France, upon the return of the
Spring, not doubting but that if he failed in his promise, both his Enemies and
his own Soldiers would accuse him of Cowardice. There was nothing but a Peace
that could handsomely disingage him from that excessive expense which he would
be obliged to be at, if he intended to keep the Emperors Army in pay the next
Spring. In short, he grew weary of contributing to the ambitious designs of the
King of Spain, his Brother in Law, yet getting nothing by it, and contented
himself with having been twice deceived by as many Treaties signed by his
Ambassador Quintana, as subtle a Fox of a Castilian, as ever was born.
Nevertheless the King of England being haughty, told the Duke of Longueville,
that it would be time enough to think of his Sister, when she should be
demanded in due form. As much as to say, that it was not from the mouth of a
Prisoner that the King was to take notice of any proposal of that nature.

The Duke of Longueville gave a shrewd guess at the King's thoughts, and sent
into France, under pretense of sending for his ransom, a Gentleman who assured
Lewis XII. that it would be his own fault if he did not make a Peace with
England upon reasonable conditions, and marry the King's Sister, who was the
most lovely Woman in Europe. Lewis, who had always an amourous inclination,
willingly entertained the proposal, and the portraiture of the Princess, that
was sent him, was too powerful a charm to let his affection for the Female Sex
lie dormant. He flattered himself also with the hopes of having a Son, and
casting off all his former fears, of the inconveniences that might befall him,
if Bretagne were separated from the Crown, he dispatched into England the
General of Normandy, who concluded both the Peace and the Match in fifteen
days, and carried the Princess to Boulogne, where the Count of Angouleme, had
Orders to go and receive her.

The Count most gladly undertook and discharged his trust, tho the marriage
which he solemnized by procuration from the King was the way, in all
probability to deprive him of the Crown. However, Francines, the King's chief
Physician, assured him that the King was very unlikely to have any more
Children. So that he appeared at Boulogne like a Prince, who only minded his
divertisement; at what time, he could not forbear falling in Love with her,
whom he married for his Father in Law, as she could not choose but wish, that
Heaven had ordained the Count for her Husband. And the convenience which they
had to entertain each other with private Conversation, might perhaps have
prompted 'em to have taken a far greater liberty, if the Prothonotary du Pont,
who was placed near the Prince to moderate in some measure the transports of
his youth, had not put it into his head, that 'twas not the new Queen's
interest, to keep her self very cbast; because that in regard she was going to
a Husband, by whom, as all People said, she would never have any Children,
'twas to be feared she would submit to a temptation that might help her to a
Child, for the preservation of her race in France, when she came to he a Widow,
and dispense with her return into England, under subjection to her Brother: but
that as for himself, it concerned him above all Men, to take care of the
Queen's living chastily, as being a thing far remote from his Interest, to
solicit her to incontinence: for that if she had a Son by him, that Son would
hinder him from coming to the Crown, and reduce him to be contented with
Bretagne, which his Wife had brought him, while he contrary to the order of
nature, must: be forced to do Homage to a Bastard. This reason cooled the Count
of Angouleme's courage, and caused him to look upon the Queen with no other
then jealous Eyes: and he watched her so narrowly, that at length he discovered
the kindness she had for Suffolk. He followed her with the character of her
Champion of Honor, but carried himself with that discretion, that they could
have never penetrated into his affairs, had they not been already discovered in
England.

The Count understood every thing so well, that the slightest circumstances
were not concealed from him, and because it was no less then either the loss or
gaining of a Crown, that was now in agitation, he sought an opportunity to
speak with Suffolk in private. He told him that he was well acquainted with his
good correspondence with the Queen, and that he was so far from breaking it
off, that he would countenance him in it, provided he might be no looser by it:
that the King was not in ^ondition to have Children, nor to live long: that
Suffolk could never think of making any progresses in the Queen's favor,
without exposing himself to the danger of being discovered, by a multitude of
spies that would never loose sight of him; so that if he took never so little
liberty, he was a lost Man past all redemption. On the otherside, if he would
give him assurance to contain himself within the bounds of respect, he would
engage never to cross his good fortune after the King's death, nay he would
connive at his marrying the Queen in private, and allow him an establishment in
France, as good as he could desire, till he could make his peace with the King
of England.

Tho the Duke of Angouleme never considered at the time of his making those
proposals, whither he could be as good as his word, when he came to the Crown,
Suffolk found 'em so advantageous, that he was charmed with 'em, and accepted
of 'em as real performances. He promised more then the Duke demanded, and
offered to be himself a Spy upon the Queen. But, in regard it would have been a
piece of imprudence to have wholly confided in his Word, Precautions were taken
to hinder him from breach of Faith, should he have gone about to have violated
his promise. The Baroness of Aumont was made of Honor to the Queen, and became
her most intimate Confident. And it was by the advice of the Queen, that she
enlarged the functions of her Office, beyond the usual bounds; and that knowing
the Queen to be fearful and unwilling to lie alone, she pretended that the
Honor of lying with the Queen in the King's absence, belonged to her, and
carried it, to the exclusion of all the Ladies which the Queen brought with her
out of England.

Now because the Count of Angouleme's Friends thought it absolutely necessary,
that he should have secret and faithful Spies about the Queen; Madame, and the
Baroness d'Aumont undertook that Province, and divided their time so exactly
between 'em, that either the one or the other was always by her; nor did she
ever suspect the true Reason, for that she had much more Beauty then Wit. The
Baroness covered their sedulity with the fair pretense of that Duty which they
said they were obliged to pay her, the one as her Daughter-in-law, the other,
as her Maid of Honor. There was only Suffolk who was so quick-sighted as to
perceive their design: but in regard he found at the same time they took care
to conceal it, he rather chose to feign ignorance, then to give the Queen
notice of it, for fear the Count should seek his reine, as taking from thence,
an occasion to tax him with breach of Promise.

This was the posture of the Intreagues at Court, when the King died, the First
day of the year 1515. six Weeks or thereabout after his Nuptials. However, the
Queen was observed with the same exactness as before, so long as there was any
reason to doubt whether she was with Child, or no. But after she had declared
her self free, and that that they were assured by undeniable proofs; that her
Declaration was sincere, the Count of Angouleme being advanced to the Crown, by
the name of Francis I. was desirous to keep his word exactly with Suffolk. To
which purpose he spoke of it in his Council; at what time his Ministers
endeavored to divert him from it, laying before him, that it would be the
committing a fault at the beginning of his Reign, which was never to be
repaired, and an unsurmountable obstacle to his designs of marching into Italy
for the recovery of the Duchy of Milan, which his predecessors had lost; and
that it behooved him before his departure, to secure himself against his
neighbors, more especially the English, who were most of all to be feared:
that Hen. VIII. was the most haughty Monarch in Europe, and that it would be
the most sensible injury that could be done him, to permit an inferior Marriage
of his Sister. However, the consideration of Honor was more predominant over
Francis I. then his own Interests. He suffered Suffolk to marry the Queen
Dowager privately, and the King of England, whose haughty Passion was sometimes
softened by a capricious Humor, which at times got the upper hand of him,
consented to the Marriage when it could not be undone, which he never would
have permitted before the knot was knit. His tender kindness for Suffolk
revived in him, when he saw him guilty of a crime, which it behooved him, either
absolutely to pardon, or to cut of his Head: and that Love, which he could not
brook one day himself, without discovering it to the Party that was the
occasion of it, rendered him indulgent to his Sister, who had forborne to
satisfy her own Affection, till her Widowhood gave her permission. Thereupon
he pardoned 'em both, consented to her second marriage, sent for her into
England, so soon as he had secured her Dowry of 60000 Livres a year, and
renewed his Alliance with Francis I. upon the conditions, that he had signed to
Lewis XII.

The Intreagues of the Court of France, under the Reign of Francis I.
FRANCIS I. was a Prince endowed with all those qualities that were proper to
make a Great Monarch. He was mild and easy, liberal and magnificent in all
things, and moreover, a comely handsome Person. He had a quick Wit, and a true
Judgment, he was stout, and undaunted in danger, indefatigable in labor, and
constant in ill fortune; he was a lover of Learning, and had a great value for
Learned Men. With all these great Talents, it was to be thought that he would
have carried on his Conquests far and near, had not his excessive compliances
with his Mother, and his indulgence to his Mistresses, caused him to commit
those faults, from which he had much ado to redeem himself. His extraordinary
Expenses upon voluptuous Feasts, had so exhausted his Treasure, that he wanted
Money for his necessary Exigencies. The Love of the Countess of Angouleme for
the Constable of Bourbon, and her despite to find that he did not correspond
with her Passion, carried her to those extremities, that he was forced to throw
himself into the Spaniards Arms, to deliver himself from her persecutions. The
choice which Francis I. made of the Brothers of his first Mistress, to command
his Armies in Italy, occasioned the loss of all his Conquests; and the
Intelligence which the Second held with the Emperor Charles V. to make him her
Protector against Diana of Poictiers, the Dauphin's Mistress, reduced him to
make an ignominious Peace with the Spaniasds.

The object of his first Amors, after his coming to the Crown, was the
Countess of Chateau Brian. She was the Daughter of Phoebus de Grailly, a Prince
of the House of Foix; a Person who had all the Graces both of Body and Mind,
that could cause a Woman to be beloved. The Count of Chateau Brian sought her
in Marriage, when she was but Twelve years of age, and ob^ain'd his desire,
because he required no Portion with her. He had a Daughter by her very ^arly,
and he had wanted nothing to complete his Happiness, could he but have kept the
Trea^ure hid, which he concealed so long in a corner of Bretaigne; but noise
and rumor is as inseparable from accomplished Beauties, as the shadow from
substance. The King was easily overrul'd by his own Inclination, or by the
Countess of Angouleme, his Mother, to permit the introducing those Ladies into
Court, which never appeared there before, but upon great Ceremonies, and the
Count of Chateau-Brian was invited to bring his Wife thither, who was to be the
principal Ornament of it. He excused it however a long time, whether he were
jealous, or whether he had any secret Prognostics within himself of what would
befall him.

His evasions were so courtly, and accompanied with so many probable
circumstances, that they afforded no occasion to mistrust 'em of Artifice. He
laid all the fault upon the morose humor of his Wife, which it was impossible
to tame: but all his foresight could not prevent the destiny which the Stars
had allotted him. An unexpected Affair, wherein his whole Estate was concerned,
called him of necessity to Court, and forced him from Bretaigne, where he would
have thought himself a happy Man to have spent all his days.

Now, in regard he foresaw that his stay at Court would be of long continuance,
he put his Invention upon the Rack, to find out an expedient which way to avoid
the King's importunities, yet without depriving himself the liberty of sending
for her, when he pleased himself. After he had weighed and considered several,
he could not think of any better, then to cause two Jewels to be made of a
fantastic fashion, yet so like as not to be distinguished one from the other,
and to make use of one to let his Wife understand his intentions. One he kept
himself, the other he gave the Countess, telling her withal that he was going
to Court, whether he should be constrained to send for her; but that she should
give credit to none of his Letters, if she did not find the Jewel, which he
kept himself, enclosed within in it. The Countess never made many reflections
upon her Husbands endocuments, for that having always lived above a hundred
Leagues from Court, she was neither acquainted with the divertisements, nor the
dangers of it. So that she only locked up the Jewel, and made a promise of
Obedience to her Husband.

The Count was most graciously received by the King, yet gently chiding him now
and then for not having brought his Wife along with him; but having a great
deal of Wit, he excused himself as long as he could, without making any
promise. Afterward he made as if he were willing to leave it to the Countess
to do as she pleased her self, and wrote to her in the very Language that the
Court prescribed him: but because she saw no Jewel, she still answered with
some evasion or other.

This collusion had continued much longer, had not the Count betrayed his own
Secret. But he was governed altogether by one of his Valets de chamber, from
whom he kept nothing concealed; now that Servant seeing him set such a value
upon a Jewel that did not seem to be very rich, demanded the reason of it;
because, said the Count, very imprudently, it contains the Secret, which way to
make my Wife come to Court.

The Valet de chamber did not presently apprehend the meaning of his Masters
words, but after he had pondered 'em for some time in his Mind, he gave a
shrewd conjecture at a good part of the Truth; and as he had been tempted
several times to serve the Court to his Master's prejudice, he went to find out
those that had sounded him, and told 'em, he could put into their hands the
only infallible means to send for his Mistress, and to bring her up to Court,
provided, he might be secured of a Livelihood, if the Count should turn him out
of his Service. The bargain was made, and the Jewel was stolen, and delivered
to an expert Artist, who made another so like it, that the Valet himself could
not discern the one from the other. Thereupon the Counterfeit was intermixed
among the rest of the King's Jewels, and the true one was kept, to fetch the
Countess from her solitary Recess.

This done, they told the Count, that they could never believe that he wrote
sincerely to his Lady to come to Court, and upon his offer to make use of the
most moving and tender expressions, and to deliver his Letter to any Messenger
they should make choice of; he was taken at his word, and the Jewel was sealed
up in the Letter. The Countess deluded by this Artifice, departed from
Chateau-Brian, and made so much haste, that her Husband saw her, before he knew
that she was sent for. But he was not so much surpised, however, at her
arrival, as at the two Jewels which she showed him, and then he founnd that he
was betrayed; but he never called to mind that he himself had been the occasion
of it. He accused Heaven for the fault which himself had committed, and
immediately departed, in order to his return into Bretain, for fear of being
the witness of his own shame.

The Countess thus abandoned by him, whom it most concerned to preserve her
Honor, did no more then what might well be expected from a Virtue that never
was put to the Trial. She resisted for some time, but at length surrendered to
the King's importunities. She had at first a very great Ascendant over the
King, and she might have advanced her Husband to the chiefest Employments in
the Kingdom, had he been of a humor to prefer Ambition before Honor; but he
still refused what he suspected was was only offered him for his Wives sake;
nor would he ever hear talk of her under any pretense whatever.

When the Countess saw, that her Husband withstood with so much obstinacy,
whatever she did to advance his Fortune, she bethought her self of setting up
her two Brothers. They were both as stout as she was Fair: and she caused the
Government of Milanois to be given to Lautrec, who was the eldest; after the
Constable of Bourbon was dismissed from his employment. And it was given out,
that all was done to do justice to his Deserts, and to recompense him for Two
and twenty wounds that he had received at the Battle of Ravanna, fighting to
save the Life of Gaston de Foix, his Cousin German Nevertheless, it is certain,
that if the Countess of Chateau-Brian had not been his Sister, he had never
obtained that employment, because the King knew him to be a Man fixed to his
own Opinion, and one that would never submit to the Counsels of those who had
more experience then himself. His negligence was the reason that Pope Leo X.
lost the Duchy of Vrbin, which made him repent of the Alliance he had made
with France, and of which he made heavy complaints to the King. Trivultio also,
who was one of the greatest Captains of his Age, because, that seeing Lautrec's
faults, he took the liberty to school him, was turned out of Favor. The
Countess of Chateau-Brian, caused him to be recalled at the solicitation of
her Brother, and he came to Court to justify himself against several Crimes
that were laid to his Chatge: but he was so ill received by the King, that it
broke his Heart, and he died with Grief. Thus you see how this Prince,
prepossessed by his Mistresses, entrusted the Command of his Armies with
persons, unable to manage such great employments, and slighted those that were
able to do him profitable Services.

Lautrec therefore having done nothing considerable in Italy, returned to Court
to marry the Heiress of Orval Teligny, whom he had left at Milan, to Command
there in his room, by his good Conduct, repaired the disorders which his
imprudence had caused, and the People appeared so well satisfied, that there
was good reason to hope that all things would have gone well. But the King's
Complacency for the Countess, spoiled all again. She persuaded Lesent her
youngest Brother, made Bishop of Air, to quit his Cassock, and obtained the
same employment for him, while Lautrec minded his own Domestic affairs in
Guyenne.

Lesent had all the virtues and all the vices which are commonly attributed to
the Beruois his Countrymen. His courage was undaunted, and he never appeared
with more a cheerful courage, then when he was to look the greatest dangers in
the Face: but in exchange, he was highly presumptive, prodigal to excess, and
these were two defects, the most contrary that could be to the Genius of the
Italians, whom he was to govern. The first rendered him contemptible to the
Nobility, and the second made him, for slight offenses, confiscate the Estates
of several wealthy Families, without any other motive then to maintain his Pomp
and Luxury; so that he proved as unfortunate in the administration of the
Government as his Brother. When the news came to Court, that the Pope had
quitted his alliance with France, Lautrec was commanded to return to his
Government. He made some scruple at first out of a secret misdoubting before
hand, the ill success of his journey. He knew there was no Money in the Royal
Treasury, and yet he required three hundred thousand Crowns, without which, he
protested that the Duchy of Milan could not be preserved. But at length his
Sisters tears, and the King's absolute orders she delivered to his hands,
obliged him to take Post, after that Semblancay, the King's Treasurer had sworn
to him, that he should no sooner arrive at Milan, but he should receive bills
of Exchange for the Sum he demanded.

But the ill omen that attended his arrival, was enough to have terrified a
courage less undaunted then his. For a flash of Lightning set on Fire the Tower
of the Castle of Milan, where the Powder lay, and blowing it up into the Air,
in a solid bulk, overturned it after so odd a manner, that the top fell
lowermost, and the Foundation stood uppermost. The rest of the structure was so
shaken, that the French who were settled in Milan, and the Senators were
constrained to keep watch, whole Nights together, till the Garrison was
reinforced. The first Action then, wherewith Lautrec signalized his return, was
the punishment of Pallavicini, the Popes kinsman, accused of holding
correspondence with the Spaniards, whose Head he caused to be cut from his
Shoulders, and gave the confiscation of his Estate, amounting to 20000 Crowns a
year, to his Brother Leseut, who was then called the Marshal de Foix, which
only served to incense the most considerable Families of Milan against him, and
to render his Government more odious.

But notwithstanding the aversion of the Nobility and the People to the French,
Lautrec might have preserved the strong holds within his Government, could he
but have retained the Swisses, that were the chiefest strength of his
Infantery, but not being able to pay 'em what was their due, the Cardinal of
Sion found a way to debauch 'em, by supplying 'em with the same Sum. Lautrec
foresaw this inconvenience, and might have avoided it, had the Court of France
been as good as their word. But the 300000 Crowns which he was to have received
at his arrival at Milan, not being sent, and the Contributions which he drew
from the Country not sufficeing for his Men, he was reduced to loose the flower
of his Infantry, for want of five and twenty thousand Crowns.

The King relied upon his Mother for the sending of Money into Italy. But she,
who saw that her Son began to do at every Day more then other upon the Countess
of Chasteau-Brian, was afraid least she should supplant her in what concerned
the Principal Government of affairs. And perhaps she might have been provoked
to take some unhappy resolution against the Countess, if Bonnivet had not
stopped her, by telling her that an unseasonable violence, would gather augment,
then cure the King's passion. And that consideration made her have recourse to
destroy the credit of that Female favorite. To that purpose she made choice of
a way that seemed less hazardous, tho most prejudicial to the Crown; which was
to render her Brother odious, by ruining the success of their endeavors for
the defense of the Milanois, committed to their care. This she thought an
infallible way, since the King's aversion, which they would incurr by the loss
of that Duchy, the fairest in Christendom, would not fail to reflect upon
their Loyalty, who had procured 'em the Government of it.

With this design, the Countess of Angouleme, the same Day that Lautrec
departed from Paris, paid away the Money that was design^d him to another use;
under pretense of Pensions and other gifts, charged upon the five greater
Farms, And when Semblancy endeavored to oppose it, she delivered him an
Acquittance, and told him that the Authority which Nature had given her over
her Son, was enough to secure a Treasurer from being called to any account.
Semblancy was either so credulous or so timorous, that he suffered the Princess
to carry away the Money, and thought it a sufficient dispensation, for the
Oaths that he had sworn to Lautrec; so ingenious a Man is to deceive himself,
when he is afraid of loosing his employment.

What the Countess of Angouleme had foreseen, fell out: for the Soldiers that
were in Milanois disbanded for want of their pay. Lautres, after he had lost
the principal strong holds within his Government, returned into France with two
of his Domestic Servants only, and passed in disguise through the Cantons of
the Swisses. The King refused at first to see him, nor would he admit him into
his presence, till the Countess of Bourbon had assured him, that he had
wherewithal fully to justify himself, and that he came to discover those
secrets, which were of great importance for His Majesty to understand.
Thereupon he was introduced into a full Council, where no less haughty then
ever, he could not forbear complaining of the King's frowning upon him. Francis
I. made answer, that a Man, who had lost in one Campaign, all the Conquests
that he had won in Italy, deserved no other usage; to which Lautrec replied,
without seeming to be any way concerned, that 't was an easy thing to know,
who was the cause of all the mischief.

The King imagining that he would lay the blame upon him, as'd him after a
scornful manner, and as it were to upbraid him, whither he had not received the
400000 Crowns, that were sent him by the way of Genoa? To which Lautrec
replied, that indeed he had received Letters of advice, that Money should be
sent him, but that he had never seen a Farthing. At those words the King stood
like one in an amaze, at what time, Lautrec unwilling to loose the opportunity
to inform him of the Truth, added with a resolute utterance, that no way
betoken'd guilt, that he had often writ to His Majesty, that his Infantery, for
the most part composed of Soldiers altogether mercinary, would infallibly
Desert, if they were not paid by such a time; that the French Cavalry, Loyal
and Constant beyond expression, had served Eighteen Months without receiving so
much as one Muster, but that the Swisses, who were no Subjects of France, did
not think themselves bound to follow their example^ that he lead the remainder
of his Army into the territory of the Firm-land, but that the Venetians grew
weary of supplying 'em, and had sent him word by the Proveditor Gritti, that
they were no more obliged to preserve Milanoise for the French, then the most
Christian King who took no care of it. Upon which he dislodged without sounding
so much as a Trumpet, lest they should have stopped him, and delivered him up to
the Enemy, in hopes of making their Peace.

By this time the King being recovered from his astonishment, interrupted
Lautrec, telling him that he could not but acknowledge the receipt of the
3OOOOO Crowns, that Semblancay had undertaken in his presence to pay him at
Milan. To which Lautrec replied, that he had not received a doite either of the
one or the the other Sum; which put the King into a passion no less just, then it
was violent. Semblancay was sent for, while the King in the mean while seeking
to pick a quarrel with Lautrec, told him after an insulting manner, that
Colonna and Pescara, were no better assisted with Men and Money then he, yet
they had found a way to drive him before 'em; and therefore why could not he
find a way to defend himself without Money which was the easier thing of the
two. Lautrec answered very modestly, that to make the comparison true, it was
requisite, that the Milaneses should have no more kindness for one party then
another. Which might so fall out under the Reign of Lewis XII. when the French
being exactly paid, lived civily and peaceably among 'em. But the Army being
grown licentious for want of pay, the Italians had conceived such a hatred of
'em, that was only to be satisfied by opening their Bellies, and tearing out
their Hearts, as had happened in Navarr and other places. Immediately upon
these words, Semblancay came into the Council Room; but the King instead of
calling him Father as he was wont to do, looked askew upon him, and asked him
why he had not paid Lautrec the 300000 Crowns which he had so solemnly
promised. Semblancay, who knew not the danger he was in, answered with that
Ingenuity which was natural to him, that the same Day the Assignations for
Milanois were drawn up, His Majesty's Mother came to the Treasury, and demanded
to be paid for all that was due to her, till that very time, as well for
Pensions and Gratifications, as for the Duchy of Valois, Tourcine, and Anjou,
of which she was the Donee: that he represented to her, that by the paying away
so great a Sum all at a time, the Royal Treasury would be exhausted, and the
Funds appointed for the Duchy of Milan be delivered another way, contrary to
what the King had ordered that Morning in her hearing, and to which she had
consented; yet the Princess continued obstinate in her pretensions, and
threatened to ruin him, if he did not let her have what she demanded: and
whereas he declared to her, that it was as much as his head was worth, if
Lautrec did not find the Money ready upon his arrival at Milan, she replied,
that she had credit enough with the King to secure him from any prosecution;
and that if he should be called to an account for the payment of the Money
another way, that was designed for Italy, he should say, that 'twas done by her
Order. Thereupon the King, to clear the dispute, sent for his Mother, and
Semblancay repeated in her hearing, what he had said; which put her into such a
rage, that the respect which she owed to her Son, could not restrain her from
giving the Treasurer the lie, and demanding justice of the King, against a hair
brained Fellow, that went about to make her guilty of High Treason. But in
regard, they had the Acquittances which she left in the Treasury to justify her
receite of the Money designed for Lautrec, she confessed that she demanded the
payment of her Pensions, but she stood it out, that Semblancay when he gave her
the Money, never told her that it was ordered for Milan. She denied all the
rest that Semblancay had said, and demanded his Imprisonment with so much heat,
that the King was forced to cause him to be arrested in the Antichamber.

The business being thus cleared up, it appeared that Lautrec was Innocent, and
all the blame fell upon Semblancay; upon which, the Chancellor du Prat, a
Creature of the Countesses, the President Gentil, and certain Counselor who
were the Chancellors Friends, being appointed to try the Treasurer condemned
him to Death, and he was publicly Executed. But the King never recovered the
places which he lost in Italy; the Marshal de Foix also, who was left in
Cr^mona to defend that City, surrenderd it up to Colonna upon very easy term.
These were the fatal effects which the jealousy of the King's mother, lest she
should be supplanted by the King's Mistress produced. But she did a far more
considerable prejudice to France, by her transports against the Constable of
Bourbon; for she constrained him to depart the Kingdom, and treat with the
Enemies of the State; she completed the ruin of the King's affairs in Italy,
and was the principal cause of the King's being taken Prisoner. The story was
thus.

Charles of Bourbon, Constable of France, was the second of Three Sons of
Gilbert Montpensier, and Clarice Gonzaga; that is to say, he descended from the
only branch of Bourbon, that was unfortunate. His Father had lost his Life and
reputation in the Kingdom of Naples, where Charles the VIII. had left him
Viceroy. His eldest Brother expired for grief upon his Fathers Tomb, and the
youngest was slain at the Battle of Marignon. As for himself, he appeared at
Court toward the end of the Reign of Lewis XII. when Claudia of France was
married. The turnament matches, and the divertisements at that time, gave him
an opportunity to signalize his Strengh and Activity; but it was his
misfortune, in despite of himself, to be the object of the Countess of
Angouleme^ affection, who could not be insensible of the rare endowments that
rendered him so worthy to be beloved.

He was extremely Beautiful, Discreet, Liberal and Valiant: nor did his frank
humor, which came near that of the ancient Gauls, hinder him from being
successful in all manner of Intreagues. For tho he seemed to be very open, yet
he governed himself so well in all Negotiations, and managed what he had to say
with so much art, that he tired the patience of the most refined Politicians.
The sweetness of his manners had acquired him the Friendship of the French, and
the exact discipline which he kept among his Soldiers, produced him the esteem
of his own Enemies. It seemed as if fortune had been unavoidably bound to
follow him, because that eversince he bore Arms, the French had been always
victorious wherever he was, and were vanquished wherever he was not. He was
beholding only to his own deserts for the dignity of Constable, and it may be
said, that he wanted nothing to accomplish him for the Hero of his Age, but a
little more complacency for the person that loved him; or a little less
resentment of the injury she did him, when she saw her self slighted.

That haughty Princess made no opposition, either to the growth or progress of
her passion, whither she were weary of living a Widow, or that she was
unwilling, in changing her condition, to be forced to leave France, where she
was assured of being in great credit, when her Son, the presumptive Heir to the
Crown, should come to Reign. But this Love was not reciprocal; whither it were
that the Count of Montpensier (for so was the Constable called at first) could
not find in his Heart to marry a Woman that had a Son almost as old as himself;
or whether it were, that he felt at the bottom of his Heart, a secret antipathy
against her; or lastly, that he feared to create a jealousy in him, whose
Father in law he was to be Slander invented a fourth reason, which could not be
true, because that Montpensier, had not as yet that ill opinion of the
Countesses vitue, as he afterward gave out, when she had deprived him of the
principal function of his employment. However, because he had not a Revenue
sufficient to support the luster of his Birth, and for that he was not of a
humor to neglect any thing that he could lawfully come by, tho his probity and
his continency were exemplary in the age wherein he lived, he corresponded with
the Countess's affection in such a manner, that she should not despair of
rendering him sensible of her kindness, tho she well perceived him so far from
being moved, that still his Heart enjoyed it is primitive liberty, nor to be
enslaved by all her Charms.

With this design she procured him the Command of the Army in Guyenne, where he
proved fortunate; and that of the Army in Italy which he refused, out of a
secret misdoubt of the little satisfaction he should purchase by it. The
misfortune which always accompanied the person who had that employment in his
room, manifested his judgment, and augmented his reputation. The Countess of
Angouleme, who saw that all Men applauded the care which he took of his
Fortune, would have advanced him at the same time to the chief dignity of the
Sword, had he not been constrained out of an unavoidable necessity to espouse
those interests, which were opposite to those of his Benefactrice.

When the Count of Angouleme had married Madam Claudia, the Countess his Mother
began to take her place in the Council, and quarreled with the Duchess of
Beaujen, who till then had the chief management of affairs, and had acquitted
her self with extraordinary reputation. She had ^ ^ol^d judgment, accompanied
with a profound penetration: and it may be said, that she deserved all the
encomiums that were bestowed upon her: but her noble qualities were subject to
two defects. She lived wrapped up with a continual admiration of her own person;
and universally scorned all other Ladies, whatever their rank or merits were.
Nor was she thus haughty without good grounds; for if there were any who
equaled her in Beauty, there were none that came near her for strength and
delicacy of Wit. These happy talents had obtained her the regency during the
minority of Charles VIII. to the Exclusion of the Prince of the blood, who was
afterward Lewis XII. Tho she had married no other then a Younger Brother of
the House of Bourbon, the King, her Father, not deeming it convenient for
reasons of State, to bestow her better, she had reduced the factious to their
duty; she had supported the Royal Authority, preserved the Kingdom in peace at
home, and reunited Bretaign to the Crown. The King her Brother therefore, being
arrived at Years of Majority, and moved with the services she had do^e n^m,
co^ti nu'd her in the prin cipal management of affairs; and Lewis XII. for the
same reason, thought it not convenient for him to remove her. She was also in
Council when the Countess of Angouleme was admitted. Lewis XII. perceiving
these two Princesses embroiled, and not being able to reconcile 'em, chose
rather to declare for the Mother of his Sod in law, then for his Sister in Law.
Which partial giving the precedence to the Countess of Angouleme, enraged the
Duchess of Beaujeu beyond Imagination, and made her greedily embrace the
opportunity of revenge, which offered it self soon after. Her Husband di'd
after he had reaped the succession of Buurbon, and left her but one Daughter
named Susanna, who was afterward the Original of the greatest suit that ever
France beheld for several Ages.

The Count of Montpensier, who was become the eldest of the House of Bourbon,
pretended to the whole Estate, by virtue of a kind of Salic Law, as the
Civilians term it, or rather by virtue of an ancient entail, renewed from time
to time, in both the Houses of Bourbon, which invested in the succession to
their Inheritances, the most remote Males, to the prejudice of the nearest
Females. The Princess Susanna, on the otherside, grounded her right upon Common
Law, and upon the Law of the Kingdom, which never excluded the Daughters of the
most Illustrious Houses, any more then the Daughters of the meanest Families,
from the Inheritances of their Fathers, when they had no Brothers.

Now the only way to avoid the Suit, was to marry both Parties together, and
the Duchess of Beaujeu, who had discovered the Countess of Angouleme's
intention, thought there was no better expedient to cross the Match, then by
insinuating into Monpensier, by trusty Persons, that it belonged to him as his
Right, to marry the Princess of Bourbon. The Artifice of this Proposal
consisted in this, That the Duchess of Beauj^u, was certain of securing by that
means Monpens^er to her self, and bringing him off from her enemy; seeing that
he who had so long withstood the charms of the Countess of Angouleme, when he
was unmarry'd, would the more easily resist 'em, after he had married the
Princess of B urbon.

Monpensier never hesitated upon a Proposal that was doubly to his advantage.
He knew well, that tho the Estate of the House of Bourbon were adjudg'd to him
by Decree, yet he should be liable to perpetual trouble, not only because the
Duchess of Beaujeu's Portion, Jointure, and Right of Eldership were very
considerable; Lewis XI. not having left any thing omitted in his Daughters
Contract, to make the Articles as advantageous as could be; but because the
Princess had expended all the Profits of her Regency, in paying the Debts of
the House of Bourbon, which amounted to vast Sums, and which she was to be
reimburs'd, before she could be put out of possession.

Monpensier convinced by these Reasons su'd to the King for leave to court
Mademoiselle de Bourb^n, and to be so favorable, as to demand her for him. The
King also thought this Match so necessary, that he caused it to be concluded in
three days. His Majesty, the Princes, the Officers of the Crown, and fifteen
Bishops Signed the Contract. But the Learned Lawyers who had drawn it up,
forgot one Formality, of which the Chancellor du Prat made his advantage
afterward, convincing 'em of ignorance, in things which they had been studying
all their life time. The Duchess of Beaujeu had given 'em leave to insert the
most favorable clauses that could be for Monpensier; and they thought they had
secured his Interests, and stretched 'em as far as humane Prudence could have
done, by making the married Couple to exchange a mutual Deed of Gift to each
other, of all their Lands, Rights and Pretensions of what nature soever.
Nevertheless, they never minded that the Bride wanted two or three Months of
being of Age to engage her Estates; and that for a supply of that defect, as to
what regarded the Civil executions; they were, as it behooved,'em, to obtain a
Sentence. This neglect was afterward laid to their charge; but they excused
themselves, by saying, that they foresaw the difficulty, but that they did not
mind it, because, that in Marriages contracted in France, the King's Presence
was a Salvo for the defects of all Conditions, as the Bishops Presence made
good all Ecclesiastical Contracts.

The Countess of Angoulen^e was so much the more incensed at these precipitated
Nuptials, because she had so much the less time to cross 'em: and she made
extraordinary efforts upon her self to curh her Passion. But when she thought
she had reason sufficient to exchange her Love for Hatred, she made choice of
the Duke of Alencon, the First Prince of the Blood, to be the instrument of her
Revenge, believing him fit enough to second her designs, because he was
particularly concerned in the Affair; Mademoiselle de Bourbon having been
promised him before Monpensier sought her in Marriage. So that in point of
Honor, with which the Court of France was at that time highly prepossessed, he
was to look upon Mompensier, as one that had injured him in the most sensible
part, by marrying his affianc'd Lady, before he had asked whether he persisted
in his design to espouse her.

Tho these Reasons, upon which the Countess built her hopes, had a foundation
solid enough, yet they produced not that effect which she expected. For besides
that the Duke of Alencon was not a person to engage in a Quarrel with
Mompensier, he was overjoyed at the Match, which others thought it behooved him
to be offended at. In a word, after he had been designed to Mademoiselle de
Bourbon, while she was yet in her Cradle, he had been in love with Mademoiselle
de Angouleme, the Countess's Daughter; tho he durst not discover his Passion,
for fear of provoking the Princes of Bourbon, who were extremely nice in the
punctilio's of Honor, and all were very stout. But the obstacle being removed,
he thought of seeking Mademoiselle d' Angouleme in marriage, when her Mother
came and offered her to him. He accepted the proffer with joy, and promised
whatever she would have him to undertake to the prejudice of Monpensier:
foreseeing, that otherwise the Countess would never have made use of all the
Authority which Nature and Law had given her over her Daughter, to persuade her
to a Match, against which, she had always testified a reluctance.

But after the Nuptials were over, the Duke of Alencon did not think it so
proper to adventure his Person to content his Mother-in-law; and by good luck,
which he never expected, he was never solicited to accomplsh his promise. For
the Countess, who had not well sounded her Thoughts, when she exacted that
condition, was not long before she perceived, that she had still a kindness for
Mompensier, and that she was deceived in taking the rancour, under which it lay
concealed, for the quenching of her Passion. Her inclination was not exempt
from the destiny common to violent things, that redouble their efforts,
proportionably to the resistance which they meet with, seeing that she loved
Mompensier so much the more vehemently, by how much the less she saw her self
in a condition to be beloved. So that she observed no bounds in reference to
the Favors which lay in her power to procure him; and the first thing that she
demanded for him of her Son, so soon as he came to the Crown, was the
Constables Sword. The new King, altogether young, and without experience, made
some scruple at it, and excused himself, by reason of the danger of committing
all the Forces of the Kingdom into the hands of a Prince, who would soon be
able to overturn it, if his Ambition were answerable to his Birth and Deserts.
But the importunities of the Countess, and the ascendant she had over her Son,
prevailed above his Reason. And that which was most extravagant in this
conjuncture, was, that the King suffered himself to be overruled, when his
Mother told him, that if he intended to merit not only the esteem, but the
admiration of his new Subjects, it was of great importance to him, to let 'em
see, that he had neither the Pusillanimity, nor the want of Courage of his four
Predecessors, that durst not trust the Sword in the hands of the Princes of the
Blood, for fear they should afterward stand in awe of 'em.

Monpensier was no sooner Constable, but he repented his being raised to that
Dignity. His Wife was brought to bed of a Daughter; and the King did him the
Honor to go to Chantilly, and be Godfather to his Child He was received by
five hundred Gentlemen, holding by Fealty of the House of Bourbon, clad in blew
Velvet, with Gold Chains about their Necks consisting of there rows, and rarely
well horsed. But this superfluity was far exceeded by the Luxury of Feasting,
Tournaments, Balls and Masquerades; insomuch, that the King returned home
stimulated with jealousy, as if the Constable had pretended to dispute the
point of Magnificence with him.

This his Majesty's displeasure broke forth in his march to Valenciennes, where
the Duke of Alencon most earnestly desired his Mother-in-law, to procure the
Command of the Vanguard for him, threatening to leave the Army if he did not
obtain it: for, that being the First Prince of the Blood, he could no longer
obey a second, without prejudice to his Quality, and redring himself
contemptible to the French, of whom he might be one day Master before the
Constable.

His reason was easily answered; but he was otherwise so unfortunate, that he
might well deserve to have his real discontents appeased by a shadow of Honor
that was not to last above four or five hours. His Wife, who was the most witty
Woman of her Age, could not find in her heart to love him, as well for his ill
Qualities, both of Body and Mind, as for that she was constrained to marry him,
after she had been so ambitious as to pretend to the Prince of Spain.

This same disagreement between Man and Wife, with which the Countess of
Angouleme was well acquainted, moy'd her so much the more, because she had been
the occasion of it. Therefore to make amends for the mischief she had done, as
much as lay within her Power, she begged of the King to let his Brother-in-law
lead the Vanguard; which pretension of the Countess was grounded upon two
Reasons: One, because the Constable would not be much concerned at it, the King
not being resolved to give battle; and the Other, for that the Duke of Alencon,
would have no more then the name of Chieftain, all Orders being to be given out
by the Marshal de Chatillon, who served under him with the Title of
Lieutenant General. But she was deceived in the first of her conjectures. For
the Constable was as much concerned, that they should go about to set up
another, to execute the most noble function of his Office, as if they had taken
the Sword from him: and then it was, that in the first transports of his
resentment, he let fall some words that reflected upon the Honor of the
Countess of Angouleme. So many persons heard 'em, that the Countess had
immediate notice of what was said, and in regard her Continency was that of
which she principally boasted, tho she had been a Widow Seventeen Years, she
could not bear that the person whom she loved above all the World, should tax
her of a criminal weakness, without seeking all the ways to hate him, that
Reason and Revenge could infuse into her. But whither it were that the affront
she had received was not so violent, as her despite to see her Lover espouse
another person: or whither it were, that all things which ought to have abated
her Love, contributed to augment it, she could not forbear loving the
Constable, notwithstanding his ingratitude; in like manner, as the seeing him
married could not stifle her passion before; it so faling out in Love, as upon
the Sea, that sometimes we discern some rays of hope through the most gloomy
and dismal Tempests.

In May 1522. The Constables Wife died in Childbed, leaving no Children behind
her. Of which the Chancellor du Prat being informed, immediately went to the
Countess of Angouleme with a Congratulation, that Heaven had now opened her a
way to enforce the Constable to espouse her Interest, since he refused to do it
out of his own inclination. Then he told her, that she was the next Heiress to
the Deceased, in regard the Constables Lady was the Daughter of Peter of
Bourbon, and the Countess was the Daughter of that Dukes Sister. Whence he
concluded, that he was in hopes to invest the succession in her, by finding a
flaw in the Constables Contract of Marriage, and the ancient entail of the
House of Bourbon.

That which induced the Chancellor to act in this manner, was not so much his
desire to please the Countess, tho he let slip no opportunity to do it, as to
revenge himself upon the Constable for refusing him the accommodation of a
piece of Land, that lay near his House of Verrieres, where he was born, in
Auvergne. However the Countess returned him thanks, as much as if she had been
beholding to him for the felicity which she expected all the remainder of her
Life. The Chancellor undertook to furnish her with such Memoirs, as were
requisite for drawing up the process. But the Countess before she began,
resolved to make her last trial upon the Constable's inclinations. And she
grounded her resolutions upon this, that she knew the Constable naturally loved
Wealth, and a thrifty manner of expense; tho he were, magnificent upon
occasions that required Pomp and splendour; and for that having married to get
an Estate, he might be induced to a second Wedlock, to preserve his Riches. To
this purpose she employed the Admiral de Bonnivet: But she knew not that he was
the most improper person she could have made choice of, to carry on her design
with success, though he had all the qualities requisite, most delicately to
negotiate an affair of that nature. There were therefore two reasons, which
ought to have obliged the Countess to have cast her Eye upon some other person,
had she known so much. The one was, that he was in love with the Duchess of
Alencon, her Daughter, and that the virtue of that Princess, instead of
vanquishing his passion, by putting him quite out of all hope had caused him to
commit those follies, which in truth had no success, but for which, neither the
excess of his Love, nor the quality of a favorite, ought to have procured a
pardon, had not the King been more kind to him, then he was just to his Sister.
So that the Kings indulgence to him had covered his passion, but had not
extinguished it; and in regard he was perfectly acquainted with the delicacy of
the Constable, he well foresaw, that if that Prince married the Countess, he
would absolutely forbid him the Duchess of Alencon's company. The other reason
was, that Bonnivet, as he was the King's favorite, labored nothing more then
the Constables disgrace, that he might afterward have the command of the
Armies. So that it was no business of his to employ his cares in advancing the
reputation of that Prince, and fixing him at Court, by assisting him to Marry
the King's Mother. But the Countess who was ignorant of all these
circumstances, opened her Heart to Bonnivet, with an entire confidence,
concealing nothing from him of her most secret thoughts.

Nevertheless it was not the perfidiousness of the Negotiator, that was the
principal obstacle to her design; for that another, more faithful, might have
had no better success. Besides, that the Constable was so convinced of the
Justice of his cause, that he did but laugh at whatever they said. On the
otherside, the Queen had signified to him her wishes, that he would Marry Rene
of France, her Sister. A Princess that was Mistress of all the advantages of a
sublime Wit, for want of the graces of her body, and whose Estate was very
large, in regard, a third part of the Free lands of the House of Bretaigne,
belonged to her. The Constable therefore prepossessed with those hopes, sent
away Bonnivet with a flat denial; so that the Countess of Ang^uleme, who could
not dive into the reason, gave the Chancellor leave to set the Suit on foot in
her name, and try her title to the succession of Bourbon.

Monthelon, a famous advocate, pleaded the Constables cause, with so much
strength of argument, that the King thought him worthy to be keeper of the
Seals. Poyet spoke for the Countefs of Angouleme, and tho his Plea were neither
so strong nor so solid as the former, yet he dazzled the greatest part of the
Judges; whither they were propossess'd by the Chancellor, who had furnished
that Advocate with imaginary Nullities, or whither they were afraid of
offending the head of the Law by not favoring the party for whom they saw him
solicit with so much heat; or whither he had promised to reimburse 'em the
twelve hundred Crowns, which they had paid for their places.

Nor had they delayed to pronounce sentence, but at the solicitation of the
Countess of Angouleme, who was willing to gain time, to make her last efforts
upon the Constable, to persuade him to marry her. She laid before him, by the
friends she had in Parliament, that his case was deplorable, and that he would
make himself the poorest Prince in Europe. But those two considerations did but
augment his hatred of her, and perhaps it was but only the more to incense her,
that he begged leave of the King to court Reave, of France, his Sister in law.

The denial which His Majesty gave him, could not be more civil then it was;
and it may be said, that if Francis I. did second his Mothers desires, as
unjust as they were, he did it in such a manner, that nothing could be imputed
to him; since it looked, as if the obstacle proceeded wholly from the Princess
Rene, who, as she said, could not find in her Heart to marry a Man, from whom
they were going to take away his Estate. The Constable however dissembled his
resentment, and for some time was in such a quandary, as made the Countess
believe, it would not be amiss to give him another Attack. To that purpose she
sent Bonnivet to build upon the Land, that went by his name, a stately Castle,
in a place so near to Chastelraut, which belonged to the Constable, that it
commanded it. Bonnivet most joyfully obeyed, and the Constable afterward
acknowledged, that he never was so much concerned at any thing, as at the
boldness of that Favorite, who to brave him, had raised a kind of Citadel
upon a sief that held of himself. So that the Constable not being able to brook
so many affronts, bent an Ear to the proposals which the Emperor made him by
Adrian de Croy, Count of Rieux, first Gentleman of his Chamber, to embrace his
party. That same Envoy crossed all France, in the disguise of a Countryman,
and arrived by Night at Chantilli, where he was lodged in an apartment
adjoining to the Constable's, and where he concluded the Treaty which
afterward proved so pernicious to France.

But in regard, that Rieux's power was only expressed in general terms, and for
that the Constable had reason to fear lest the Emperor should disown his
Minister, he sent privately into Spain, La Mothe des Noyers, to procure a
ratification of the Treaty from the Emperor. While the Constable staid for the
return of his Agent, the Dewager of Bourbon, instigated by her hatred of the
Countess os Angouleme, and her grief to see her Son in law, despoyl'd of his
Fortune, came to him at Chantilli, and told him that she was come to do him the
Office of a real Mother, by discovering to him an infallible way to recover the
lost condition of his affairs. Which Consisted in this, that Lewis XI. when he
married his Daughter to the youngest Son of the Duke of Bourbon, had contracted
by an instrument drawn up in due form, tho it lay concealed, that in case the
Princess survived her Brother in law and her Husband, and had no Children, she
should inherit all their Lands. Whence it followed, that if the Countess of
Angouleme agreed to that Act, she must deprive her self of the succession to
which she pretended; or if she disputed it, she would be no less disappointed,
since she had no way to withstand it, but by the entail of the House of
Bourbon, which would restore the Constable to all his rights. The Dowager
added, and made it appear by authentic papers, which she delivered into the
Constables hands, that she had disengaged with her own Money the greatest part
of the Lands belonging to the House of Bourbon, and that the rest were so
mortgaged for her Dowry, and for performance of Covenants, that tho the
succession were adjudg'd to the Countess of Angouleme, she would be constrained
to quit it, as being more burdensome then profitable, by reason of the vast
Sums which she must pay before she could enjoy it. The same Dowager after that,
made a deed of gift to her Son in law of all her Estate, without any
distinction or reservation, investing him in all her rights.

The Constable was so much the more surpised at the generosity of his Mother
in law, because it was a thing that he so little expected. However, he still
persisted in his design of performing his Treaty with the Emperor; whither it
were that he foresaw that his Adversaries, should they be deprived of the
succession by a contrary sentence, would make use of the King's Authority, to
preserve themselves in it: or that he thought himself so guilty, that he could
not avoid Death if what he had concluded with the Count of Rieux, should come
to be known. After La Mothe had brought him back the ratification from Charles
V. he hid it under ground in a little Box at the Root of a Tree, and sent away
the greatest part of his Friends under pretense of accompanying the King beyond
the Alps; but his project did not succeed. For Matignon and d'Argouges, going
to confession at Easter, discovered to the Curat of their Country, that they
had been tampring in a Conspiracy against the King; the Curate enjoined 'em to
reveal it to the King, and to lead 'em the way; immediately took Horse himself
to inform Brez^, the grand Seneschal of Normandy, what the Gentlemen had
confessed. Who giving themselves over for lost, took post, and overtaking the
King at St. Pierre le Moutier, threw themselves at his Feet, and obtained their
pardon, by giving an exact Account upon Oath of the Constables Negotiation with
the Emperor.

The King was advised to arrest the Constable, and confine him to a place of
security, till his return; but he chose rather to reclaim him by gentle means.
To that purpose he gave him a visit at Moulins, where he feigned himself Sick,
not so much out of a design to deceive His Majesty, as to discover his real
sentiments; the horror of his crime, having already shaken him to that degree,
that he resolved to perform nothing of the Treaty concluded with the Emperor,
provided the process against him, might be suspended.

It Is presumed, the King would have given him that satisfaction, had he known
his thoughts; but he was of opinion, he had gone far enough in telling him,
after he had commanded all the company to withdraw, that he was fully informed
of his Negotiation with the Count of Rieux, and the reason of La Mothe des
Noyers's going into Spain; that they were two great crimes, however that he
made no doubt, but that the Constable was instigated to do what he did, out of
a despite of which he would repent so soon as he knew what he would do for him.
The King added, by way of explanation, that he could not hinder his Mother from
prosecuting her suit, but withal he offered him to give him all requisite
security, for the restitution of whatever should be taken from him by the
decree.

But this proposal, as generous as it was, did not please the Constable for two
reasons. First, because it gave the Countess of Angouleme all the advantage she
could pretend to over him: and next, because there was no judicial means by
which he could be restored during the Life of that Princess, without offending
her; and it was a base thing to be still wishing for her Death; till when, he
must remain deprived of all his Estate. Nevertheless he confessed to the King
what he was no longer in a condition to deny, and applauded the rare
impartiality of his Majesty, who rather chose to preserve a second Prince of
the Blood, then to take the advantage of an inheritance, wherein himself was
concerned. With that the King believing he had won him, embraced him, swore to
him, that he had buried his crime in Oblivion, desired him to mind the recovery
of his Health, and told him that he was going to Lion, where his presence was
necessary to hasten away his Men, and that he would stay for him there. The
Constable promised him to come in his Litter, and to that purpose was actually
upon the Road. But at Palisse, he received advice, that the Parliament of
Paris, at the secret solicitations of the Chancellor, had ordered that all the
Estate of the House of Bourbon should be sequestered, till the suit was fully
decided.

The Constable being by this means disabl'd to do any farther service, feigned
that his distemper increased upon him, insomuch that he could not endure the
easy motion of the Litter, and addressing himself to Varry, who as he verily
believed, was left with him as a Spy, under pretense of bearing him company,
conjured him to go to the King, and let him know the weakness of his condition.
Varry durst not refuse what he requested, for fear of rendering himself
suspected to the Constable; but so soon as he was out of sight, the Constable
returned to Chantilli, from whence he dispatched the Bishop of Auntun to the
Court, with Assurances, written and signed with his own hand, that if they
would cancel the decree of Parliament, and grant him a Pardon in due form, for
what he had done against the State, he would for the future serve the King with
the same fidelity, as he had done before the King's Mother threw him into
despair. But before Varry and the Bishops were arrived at Lion, the Countess
being informed by her Emissaries about the Constable, that he was returned to
Chantilli, and mistrusting that it was in order either to make his escape, or
begin a Civil War, pressed so hard upon the King, that he sent the Bastard of
Savoy, and Marshal Chabanes, with four hundred Lances, and four thousand Foot,
to Besiege him in Chantilli, and seize upon his person.

The Bastard and the Marshal advanced with so much haste that they met the
Bishop of Autun at la Pacaudiere, Palisse, and took him Prisoner: but one of
his Servants escaping, rode full speed to inform the Constable of what had
befallen his Master. Who judging by the seizure of the Bishop, that there was
no longer any trusting to the Court, immediately departed with the small train
he had, and marched all Night to get to Herman, a place in Upper Auvergne, of
which Henry Arnauld, a Gentleman of his Family was Governor. He arrived there
by break of Day, September 8, 1525, and caused his Train to rest themselves.
And when his own People were fast a Sleep, he went himself and waked Pomperan,
and Montaignac d' Estansannes, and told 'em he was going i^to Burgundy, and
wanted one of 'em to accompany him in his flight, and the other to favor and
countenance it. Pomperan, was beholding to him for his Life, after he had
killed in a Duel Amboise Chisay, the most famous galant in the Court: he made
his escape by the Constables assistance, and the safe Convoy that he gave him,
and afterward obtained his Pardon.

Estansannes was a near Confident of the Constables, nor did any thing pass
between him and the Dowager, or any Foreigners, but what was either written or
signed with his hand: and in regard, it was more dangerous to stay with the
Train, then to follow the Constable, the dispute between those two Gentlemen
was, which of the two should remain behind, and chance of lot decided the
business, in favor of Estansannes. He was vigorous and capable of enduring a
long fatigue, tho he were near Fourscore Years of Age. He had all along opposed
the Constables design, accusing la Moth des Noyers, and the Bishop of Autune
for having seduced him to his prejudice. Nor did he serve him but very
unwillingly in a Negotiation, the unlucky consequences of which he foresaw. He
was nevertheless over persuaded to counterfeit himself to be the Constable, and
to lie in his Bed till two hours before Day; at what time he departed from
Herman by Torchlight, clad in his Masters Clothes, and mounted upon his Horse,
at the head of his retinue. He continued to act this part, till finding that
Daylight would discover him, he stopped, and told his Companions with Tears in
his Eyes, ^at the Constable was gone, excusing him to 'em as well as he could,
and then taking his leave of 'em. After that, he rode on alone by himself, and
taking through all the by ways, got to the Castle of Puyguillon, in
Bourbonnois, where he stayed fifteen Days, and shaving his Beard which he wore
as long as his Hair, crossed the Country of Burgundy* disguised in the habit of
a Priest; from whence the Constable sent for him to give him the Government of
the Castle of Milan.

The Constable had taken the same Road, accompanied by Pomperan, without any
other precaution but what Arnauld gave him, which was to Travel with his Horses
should the wrong way. Which advice cost Arnauld dear; for the Bastard of Savoy,
and Chabanes, who had in vain pursued the Constable, being informed of it, went
to the Farrier, who should the Horses, constrained him to confess the truth,
rode away to Arnauld's House, because he had followed the Constable, and
plundered it. In the mean time, the Constable got without any stop to Dole,
from whence he passed into Italy, and visited the Marquis of Mantua. I shall
not here repeat the unhappy consequences of his revolt, which are more proper
for a general History, then the Amors of the Countess of Angouleme. Who after
she had occasioned the taking of her Son Prisoner, out of the jealousy of her
Ambition, contributed not a little to the Tragical end of his Mistress.

The Countess of Chasteau-Brian, finding her self exposed to the hatred of that
Princess, who was left Rege^^ in the King's absence, knew not where to shelter
her self. The eldest of her Brothers was confined in Guyenne. The Second was
slain at the Battle of Pavla. And the Third had lost his Liberty and Life in
the recovery of Navarr. So that finding there was no retiring for her among her
own Friends, she was forced to return home to Chasteau-Brian. Her Husband
received her, tho after a very odd manner; yet so as to put her in hopes that
she might appease him in time.

He refused to see her, and shut her up in a Chamber, which seemed to be
designed for Penance, as being hung all with Mourning. He gave his Daughter,
by this time Seventeen Years of Age, leave to Eat with her; nor could he
forbear looking upon her sometimes after Dinner, from a place where she could
not see him; and comparing the growing Beauty of the one, with that of the
other, which was in the height of its perfection. This usage lasted not above
six Weeks, because the Daughter lived no longer: and now the Count, not having
any longer before his Eyes, the only beloved object that Daily begged the
to others Pardon, thought of nothing more but his Revenge. To which purpose, he
entered his Wives Chamber with Six Men in disguise, and two Surgeons, who
opened the Veins in her Feet and Legs, and so left her to Bleed to Death. The
King upon his return was all for making examples of the guilty, but a new Amor
soon blotted out the remembrance of the first.

Nor was the Count forgetful of his own safety in the excesses to which his
jealousy had transported him: for he prevented the prosecutions of justice, by
a voluntary exile, and lived in Foreign Countries so long as the House of Foix
was in a condition to prosecute him. At length he addressed himself to the
Constable Montmorency, who was become a greater Favorite then before, by the
Death of Bonnivet, and Monchenu, who shared with him in the King's good will.
The Count offered him a deed of gift of his Royalty, provided he could get him
out of his Troubles, and Montmorency chose rather to purchase Chasteau-Brian by
that means, then by a Confiscation, which would have engaged him in perpetual
quarrels, which the House of Laval, from whence the Count was decended. Some
Critiques have pretended, that M. de Varillas, from whom I drew these Memoirs,
was ill informed; and that the Countess of Chasteau-Brian was reconciled to her
Husband, and that she did not Die till ten Years after the King's return. But
these objections are so well answered, that I am convinced of the Countess's
tragical end; so that I made no scruple to follow that famous Historian, word
for word.

No sooner was Francis I. delivered out of the hands of the Spaniards, bat he
re-enter'd into a new imprisonment; which tho more easy and pleasant, yet was
do less dangerous. The Countess of Angouleme going to meet him as far as Mont
de Marsan, carried along with her, the young Ann de Pisseleu, who was called
Mademoiselle de Hell, who was entertained as a Maid of Honor, into the
Household of that Princess. The King found her so amiable, that he was not able
to defend his liberty against her Charms. He married her in a short time to the
Duke d' Estampes, who connived at her conduct; neither willing to approve it,
for fear of injuring his Reputation; nor to condemn her, lest he should bring
himself into trouble. The Duchess finding her self at liberty to make the best
of her good fortune to please the King, never minded any longer the avoiding
any occasion that might advance her prosperity. She had got so much experience
at Court, as to know that the most dangerous Rock that the King's Mistresses
could hazard their Fortune against, was to quarrel with the Favorites or
Ministers, who having often the Prince's Ear, may take the advantage of certain
moments of disgust, and petty fallings out between Lovers, to exasperate 'em,
and persuade 'em to an absolute Rupture. This consideration, made her resolve
to unite Interests with the Constable Montmorency, the Admiral Chabot, and the
Chancellor du Prat, who, by the Authority of their Employments, and by the
King's Indulgence, had got possession of the prime Ministry. Those three
Officers, very obligingly corresponded with the first movements which the
Duchess made toward the Quadruple League; well knowing, that notwithstanding
the Greatness of their Credit, yet it might be shaken, if the King's Mistress
understood how to make the best of those Favorable Minutes, when a Lover can
deny nothing to the person upon whom he doats.

This correspondence between these four Persons proved successful, during the
remainder of time that the Chancellor lived; because that cunning Minister, by
his experience and diligence, provided so well for all the exigencies of the
State, that the Favorites had no other care upon 'em, but to divertise their
Master. But after his death, the Council wanting a Director, the Constable and
the Admiral, who took no heed to instruct themselves, appeared such Novices in
the Government, that the King was constrained to call up the President Poyet.
He was one of the most able Magistrates in the Kingdom; and his Capacity was
equally the same, to manage, as well great as small Affairs, only his Genius
led him rather to put things into confusion, then bring 'em to a final end. So
soon as he had taken his place in the Council, he proposed the removal of the
two Favorites, that only served to fill up the number; because the haughtiness
of the first was become insupportable to him, and he feared the resentment of
the second, by reason of a Suit of great consequence, wherein he had caused him
to be overthrown. Fortune seemed to favor his Designs; for the King disgusted
at the ill success of his Enterprises, had it put into his Head, that he might
justify his ill Conduct to posterity, if he laid the blame of it upon his
Favorites, and that their downfall would render 'em guilty of all the false
steps which he had trod in the public management of Affairs. The Admiral was
the first that was to feel the effects of his ill humor, tho he were in
friendship with the Duchess of Estampes. They who did not dive into the
King's more secret Thoughts, ascribed the Fall of Chabot to his imprudence,
which had hindered his Majesty from utterly despoiling the Duke of Savoy of his
Territories. The King entrusted Poyet, whom he had invested in the Office of
Chancellor, with his Indignation against the Admiral, and consulted with him
the best way to proceed against him, in due form of Law. The Chancellor was
overjoyed to find the King so well disposed to favor his designs, and made him
those Proposals that gave him great satisfaction. Nevertheless, because he
stood in awe of the Duchess d' Estampes's Anger, whose Power he well knew, he
sought the Protection of Diana of Poictiers, Wife to the Seneschal of Normandy,
and the Dauphin's Mistress.

That Lady was the Daughter of John of Poictiers, Lord of St. Valliere, who had
preferred her very young to the Countess of Angouleme: after which, she was
advanced to the service of Queen Claudia, as one of her Maids of Honor.
Neither was St. Valliere deceived in his design of getting some Protection at
Court, through the power of his Daughter's Charms: for it may be said, that she
saved his Life by the secret Engines that she set at work. St. Vallier had had
a hand in the revolt of the Constable of Bourbon, and the misfortune to be
apprehended. For which he had been Arraigned, and was condemned to lose his
Head. Diana was so astonished when she heard the news, that she thought her
self obliged to do her utmost to save her Father from such a threatening danger.
Thereupon, she went and threw her self at the King's Feet, all in Tears, and
begged pardon for him, to whom she was beholding for her Life. And she appeared
to the King in that deplorable condition, so amiable, and so charming, that she
obtained whatever she desired, and infused Love into his Heart, under the mask
of Pity. She preserved her Conquest till the King's fatal march into Italy, and
he endeavored to conceal his Infidelity from the Countess of Chateau-Brian,
for whom he had always a great respect. We have already said, that at his
return, he was so enamored of Mademoiselle d' Hell, that she wholly possessed
his Heart, and rendered him insensible to all the other Ladies of the Court;
Diana, who had been married a long time before to Lewis de Breze, Seneschal of
Normandy, endeavored to comfort her self for that same change of the King's
Affection, with the marks of kindness which the Dauphin showed her, whose
Inclinations she understood so well how to manage, that he continued faithful
to her till death. But tho she had reason enough to be satisfied with this
victory, yet she could never pardon Madam d' Estampes for stealing the King's
Heart from her, and conceived such a mortal hatred against her, that she never
failed of giving the proofs of it upon all occasions that presented themselves.

Poyet, who was acquainted with all these things, believed that he could not
make choice of a better support; and in regard she was no less glad to have the
Head of the Law on her side, the League was soon made. The Chancellor, after he
had taken these Precautions, gave the King such positive assurances of ruining
the Admiral in due form of Law, that he caused him to be arrested, and sent him
to Bois de Vincenues: and Poyet immiediately drew up the Interrogatories, upon
which he was to be examined. Nor was there any need of any great subtilty in
the matter, for that the Admiral answered after such a manner, as did himself
the greatest injury. And in regard, he made his defense more like a brave
Soldier, then a cunning Lawyer, he confessed the very things that condemned
him, believing 'em to be service able to his justification. Nor did he speak
exactly the language of the Seamen, which was only understood by the Mariners
at that time; nor was he sufficiently informed of the difference between the
Privileges belonging to the Admiral, and those which the Laws reserved to the
King. The Chancellor therefore, that he might make the best of these three
defects, persuaded the King to choose Commissioners out of all the Parlaments of
the Kingdom, to decide the Process, and to take the particular cognizance of it
from the Parliament of Paris, the natural judge of Affairs of the Crown, as the
Admiral's business was.

They who were made choice of, were so devoted to the Chancellor, that there
was no question to be made, but they would regulate their Suffrages according
to the Chancellor's Instructions; and had he been contented with that
precaution, the Admiral would have been condemned, and no body should have
known who had been the most active Agent in his ruin. But nothing would serve
the Chancellor, but to put himself at the head of the Commissioners; of which
the Admiral had no sooner knowledge, but excepted against him. It is hardly to
be believed that Poyet should be ignorant that his Dignity exempted him, as
well from the Exception, as from the Reproaches that attended it. Nevertheless,
if we consider his Conduct at that time, it looked as if he understood not the
Privilege that belonged to his Office. To ward off this blow, which broke all
his measures, he had recourse to an Artifice, the malignity of which had never
been practiced in a Court, where there was some decorum still observed in
matter of Probitie. He was assured that the imprisonment of the Admiral had
alarmed the Duchess and the Constable, who could not choose but be
apprehensive of the same usage in a little time, and that the consideration of
their own, rather then of the danger of their Friend, would incite 'em to leave
nothing omitted which they deemed requisite to save his Life. Therefore he
ordered his Agents neatly to insinuate it into their Heads, that it was no less
his interest then theirs, to preserve the Admiral, and that the change which
had happened in the Council, threatened with the same disgrace, all those who
had the Honor to be admitted into it. Nevertheless, that the mischief was not
so great as it might be imagined to be, since the Chancellor was not excluded
from the number of the Commissioners; that be had taken all the precautions
which the Law had taught him, to prevent the Judgment from extending it self
either to natural or civil Death; but that he had understood with equal
sentiments of Vexation and pity, that the Admiral had not a worse Enemy then
his own self: that of necessity it must be concluded, that either the fear of
Death had deprived him of his judgment, or that the Council assigned him of
were false to him, since he talked of refusing the Head of the Law, and the
only Friend that he had remaining among the Judges: that his pretense for
excepting against him, grounded upon the loss of his Suit, was ridiculous; in
regard that besides that the business in controversy, was but a trifle; 'twas
so long while ago, and there had been such a change in the face of affairs
since that, that the Admiral had no more reason to bear it in remembrance, then
two grave Old Gentlemen might have to mistrust one of another, because, that in
their Infancy they had quarreled about a Pin. This comparison as mean as it
was, made 'em so clearly apprehensive of the difference between Poyet, a
Counselor in Parliament only, and the same Poyet, a Chancellor and Minister of
State, that the Duchess and the Constable suffered themselves to be surpised,
They were dazzled with the false hopes which the Chancellor gave 'em, and
communicated their mistake to the Admiral, while they thought to un-hood wink
his Eyes. So that they obliged him to desist from his exception, and the
Chancellor by that means being become Master of the process, by the consent of
the parties, promised to himself that he should be able to manage it as the
King pleased.

A Man would have thought there was nothing now that could have prevented the
ruin of Chabot, after his Friends had so stupidly fallen into the snare that
was laid for 'em, when the King unwilling to take away the life of a favorite,
for a crime which he did not believe him guilty of, signified to the
Chancellor, that he would be content with a decree that might only punish the
Admiral with the loss of all that he had acquired. The sentence then was
pronounced with all the formality that could be, and the King after he had made
use of Poyets Ministry, to show a great example of severity, was no less
desirous immediately after, of his own free will, and without communicating his
thoughts to any body, to make manifest as great an example of his clemency:
doubtless that he might improve the value of his Mercy, and cause the Duchess
to set a higher price upon the favor which he was resolved to do at her
request. For he did not only restore the Admiral to his employment, and his
Government of Poitou, but he ordered the Process to be reviewed, and a
Declaration to be made by way of Interpretation of the Edict, that that same
Officer of the Crown had neither been convicted of Treason nor Treachery.

After the Restoration of the Admiral, the Triumvirate recovered it is former
Authority, and it was thought that nothing could have broken the Union between
those three Persons, when the Constable, through his own imprudence drew upon
himself, a misfortune from which he could never retreive him self, during the
Reign, of Francis I. and if he returned to Court in the following Reign, 'twas
no longer to second the designs of the Dutchess's d'Estampes; for he took part
with her Rivaless, and married his Son to the Daughter of that Lady, the Widow
of Horatio Farnese, of which more in due place.

The Emperor had desired of the King of France, free passage through his
Country, Gaulois, who were revolted against him, and offr'd the investiture of
the Duchy of Milan to the Duke of Orleance, his second Son. The Constable was
for giving the Emperor leave to cross the Kingdom, provided that before he
entered, he confirmed in writing the promise which the Commissioners had made,
and that to that effect, some person of Quality might be sent to meet his
Imperial Majesty under pretense of doing him the more Honor, but indeed, to
get that Writing from him in due form. The Cardinal of Tournon was of a
contrary opinion, but tho supported with reasons so solid, that they seemed to
be beyond all reply, yet it was not followed. And as the Constable in speaking,
had more regard to the Idea that prepossessed him, then to the Truth, so did
the King also give his judgment, rather according to his own inclination, which
had turned his Eyes toward Milan, then with a prospect of the Kingdoms welfare.

Not was the Constable contented to have turned the balance on his side, his
vanity was such, that nothing would serve him, but to be made choice of for the
person, that was to go and meet the Emperor, and receive him upon the
Frontiers; nor would the vain glory of so honorable a Commission, let him see
the dangers that attended it. He met the Emperor beyond the River of Bidassoa,
and pressed him according to his Instructions, to grant before hand the
investiture of the Duchy of Milan, to the Duke of Orleans, who, together with
the Dauphin, stayed for his Imperial Majesty on the otherside of the River.

The Emperor who had his answer ready, caressed the Constable after an
extraordinary manner, and declared to him, that he would wholly refer it to
him, and rely upon what he should advise him to do. Which done, he entrusted
him with a Counterseit secret, feigning to discover to him the bottom of his
Heart, and lest nothing omitted to convince the Constable that he was resolved
at last to satisfy the King. He added that all the scruple lay in the time, and
that he did not stand so much upon preserving his own Reputation, as the credit
of Francis I. for that as his most Christian Majesty chiefly affected to appear
generous, it would be the greatest injury that could be done him in the World,
should his Honor be Eclipsed, by giving all Europe a pretense to presume that
he had not permitted, but sold the Emperor a passage. Which they would not fail
to give out, if the investiture should be given before the passage was granted.
Whereas if the leave were permitted nobly and without conditions, he gave his
Imperial word, that he would cause the Instrument of the investiture to be
dispatched in the first City of the Low Countries; with a preamble no less to
the Honor of his Brother-in-Law, then his own: because it should contain, that
the kind entertainment that he had given him in France, and the Friendship that
he had-shewn him, had engaged him to acknowledge such signal favors by a
present no less magnificent then was the Duchy of Milan-

The Emperor, upon the score of his promise, was regaled from Bayonne, to
Chatelraut, whither the King was advanced to receive him; nevertheless when
Francis I. understood the snare, into which the Constable was fallen, he was
dissatisfied with his Negotiation, and, was just upon the point of pursuing the
Counsel that had been given him, to seize upon the Emperors person, under
plausible pretenses, till he had put the Duke of Orleans in full possession of
the Duchy of Milan. Le Peloux, a French Gentleman, who had put himself into
the Emperors Service, gave him notice of it; who judging the danger so much the
more inevitable, by how much People are apt to believe as soon what they fear,
as what they wish for and desire, he revolved in his mind, all the expedients
that the most accomplished subtil^y could furnish him withal, and and found
none better, then that of a surprising liberality. The Lady whom he feared most,
was the Duchess d'Estampes, who solely governed the King, and had quitted her
association with the Constable ever since the understood that he held
correspondence with the Seneschal's Wife, to the end he might have the
protection of a person near the Dauphin, when he came to the Crown. These two
Ladies had had a terrible falling out, during Montmorenci's journey, and upon
his return he was obliged to choose his side in the quarrel. The occasion of
the quarrel was, that the Duchess should say, that she was born the same Day
that the Seneschal's Wife was married. Which villainous reproach of Old Age, so
hainously offended the person whom it concerned, that it was impossible to
pacify her. The Constable after he had in vain employed all his credit,
declared for the she Seneschal: whither it were, that he preferred the rising
before the Setting-Sun, or that he thought his Fortune so firmly settled with
the King, that nothing could shake it. But his foresight was not true on
bothsides, for that in forsaking the Duchess he incensed a revengeful Woman,
who had too much Wit to omit the first opportunity she met with, to hasten his
ruin. In a word, she had approved the advice which the Cardinal of Tournon
gave, and peal'd continually in the King's Ears, that His Majesty would become
the object of public raillery, if he suffered himself to be so cheated and
deluded. Whither the Emperor were informed or no, of these particulars, is not
so certainly known, but he acted after such a manner, as if he had perfectly
understood 'em. One Day that he was washing his hands with the King before
Dinner, and that the Duchess prereated 'em the Towel, he let fall a Jewel
enriched with a Diamond of great value: presently the Duchess took it up, and
would have returned it, but the Emperor told her with a graceful and pleasant
aspect, which he could put on when he pleased, that he never envied the present
that Fortune had made to so charming a person; that the Ring belonged to her by
an inviolable Law, of the Empire, which was so far from permitting the Emperors
to take back again what had fallen from their hands, how great so ever the
value of it were, that he ordained it to remain with the person, that should
find it, as a testimony of the Adventure. 'Twas no difficult thing to find out
the place from whence this Law was taken, nor to bring examples to justify that
it had been in use. The Duchess therefore made use of all her alluring
language to persuade the Emperor to receive the Jewel back again, and the King
pressed him withal the civility that could be imagined. But the Emperor, who
had too well begun his artifice to leave it off imperfect, persisted so
obstinately in his resolution that the Jewel should remain with the Duchess,
that the King was constrained to let her keep it.

The effect of this Jewel was, that the Duchess, who wanted no Wit, reflecting
upon the Emperors courtship, and upon his suttlety, to make her accept of a
magnificent present at the only conjuncture, wherein the King could consent to
her acceptance of it, found her self engaged to defer her revenge upon the
Constable, for fear least the disgrace of that Favorite, should reflect upon a
Prince so liberal as the Emperor. The Court removed afterward to Paris, where
his Imperial Majesty staid only so long as was necessary to give the King some
time to empty his Coffers by a supersluous magnificence. From thence he went to
Chantilli, where the Constable treated him in his turn. The King also conducted
the Emperor as far as St. Quentin, and commanded the Dauphin and the Duke of
Orleans to accompany him as far as Valenciennes.

A Man would hardly believe the caresses which the Emperor bestowed upon the
Youngest of those two Princes, under pretense of his being charmed with his
pleasant humor. He treated him like one that was to be his Son-in-Law, and put
him in hopes that the fief of Milan was not the only favor which he was to
expect. After the Emperor was got within his own territories, the Constable and
the Bishop of Vabres, the French Ambassador, demanded Audience, and pressed him
to perform his promise. The Emperor durst not disgust 'em at first, because the
King might succor the Inhabitants of Gaunt, and therefore he only returned 'em
for answer, that the King of the Romans his Brother, was upon the road for
Flanders, and that it was necessary to stay for his arrival, to the end there
might remain no dispute about the investiture, which he had promised without
acquainting him who was to succeed in the Empire, with his design. The
Constable upon that, returned to the King his Master, but the Bishop of Vabres
who folow'd the Emperor, continued his importunities so vigorously, that he
constrained him at last to pull off his Mask, and to disown all that he had
said to the Constable.

The King, so much the more nettl'd at this piece of Infidelity, by how much it
equally concerned both his Honor and his Interests, acknowledged his fault in
not demanding a writing, from the Emperor: and because there is nothing so
usual, as for Princes to lay the blame of their own mis-failings upon others,
when they have the least pretense; he complained of his being deceived, for no
other reason but that he might have an occasion to punish the Constable, whom
he upbraided with all the faults he had committed; he confined him to his House
of Chentilly; and people made no question but the Duchess d'Estampes was the
cause of his Disgrace. And the proof of what was alleged was grounded upon
this, that the Dauphin, after he had made use of all his power to support his
Gossip, for so he called the Constable, not only could not prevail with the
King, but drew upon himself severe Reprimands, which he thought he no way
deserved.

Poyet felt those effects of it, which were much more violent, The pretense
that she took to ruin him, was occasioned by John du Tillet, chief Prothonotary
of the Parliament of Paris, and John de la Renaudy, Gentleman of Perigord, who
was afterward the Principal Author of the Civil Wars of France. The credit of
the Parties, or the difficulties of the Questions that were to be decided, had
removed the Affair to several Tribunals, from whence it was summoned to be
heard before the Council, and at last transmitted to the Parliament of Dijon.
La Renaudie, fearing lest he should be overthrown, obtained the King's Letters,
by the favor of the Duchess d'Estampes, whom he had engaged in his Interests,
to delay giving Sentence, that he might have time to perplex the Cause anew.
Gilbert Bayard the King's Secretary, presented the Letters to the Seal, and
failed not to advertise the Chancellor, that it was by his Majesty's express
Order, who could not refuse that Favor, upon the solicitations of the
Duchess d'Estampes. It Is not known whether the Chancellor examined those
Letters, to the end he might acquit himself in his Office, like a person of
Sincerity; or whether it were out of any secret reluctance, to follow the
Capticio's of the Duchess, with a blind adherency; or whether it were that he
favored du Tillet's Cause; but certain it is, that he refused to seal the
Letters, till he had altered 'em in several places. La Renaudie, not finding
'em then fit for his purpose, carried 'em to the Duchess, not a little already
incensed against the Chancellor, since the Admirals arraignment, and quickened
her to Revenge, under pretense of maintaining her Honor. Nor did she delay it
any longer then the Evening of the same day, at what time she presented la
Renaudie, holding the Letters in his hand, to the King, as he rose from the
Table. That Gentleman, naturally eloquent, as he made it afterward appear in
the conspiracy of Amboise, aggravated the importance of the words which the
Chancellor had altered, and endeavored to exasperate the King against him, by
reason of that opposition which he adventured to make aginst his absolute
Power. The King, who for a long time had had a desire to disgrace the
Chancellor, could not have met with a more plausible pretense. He was hated by
all the Court and it was well known that no body would be sorry for him
nevertheless, for important Reasons his downfall was delaid. The King only
ordered La Renaudie to carry back the Letters to the Chancellor, and to command
him peremptorily in his Name, to dispatch 'em without any qualifications. La
Renaudie returned to Poyet, and delivered his Message with an arrogant Tone, in
the presence of the Queen of Navarr, who at the same time solicited for a
Servant of hers, who was convicted for having stoll'n a wealthy Heiress. The
Chancellor was too haughty, patiently to endure, that a Country Gentleman
should put a kind of affront upon him in his own House, and before a Princess,
whose Esteem it concerned him to preserve. But in regard he durst not refuse to
obey the second Order, not to give the bearer ill language, he took the Letters
from Renaudie, and showing 'em to the Queen of Navarr, See here, Madame, said
he, what the Ladies do at the Court, they are not contented to exercise their
Empire, but they undertake to violate the Laws, and to instruct the
Magistrates, the most accomplished in the exercise of their Offices. Now tho
the Chancellor aimed in his Discourse, at no body but the Duchess, yet it
happened unluckily for him, that the Queen of Navarr thought her self nipp'd by
the severity of his short Satyr, by reason that the terms were equivocal, and
might as well be applied to her solicitations, in behalf of her Servant, as
to the constraint that was put upon him to Seal la Renaudie's Letters. However,
she did not discover all her Resentment, for fear of quarrelling with one of
the King her Brother's Officers, only made him answer, That she was too much
concerned in the misfortune of which he complained, to procure him any
reparation, since she could not right her self. But she was no sooner gone out
of the Chancellor's House, but she went to the Duchess, and gave her an
account of the chafe that Poyet was in; nor did she leave her, till they had
concerted both together, which way to put him quite out of the King's Favor.
'Twas no difficult thing for those two Ladies, who had shared between 'em, the
Love and Friendship of that Prince, to make him consent to abandon a Man, whom
he had a design already to be rid of; immediately therefore his Majesty sent
for the Seals, which he gave to Francis de Manthelon, President of the
Parliament, no less famous for his Integrity, then for his vigorous Defense of
the Constable of Bourbon's Cause, when he was an Advocate. Nor would the King
permit so signal an action to go unrewarded, and had therefore advanced him to
one of the principle Dignities of the Gown, tho he had not displayed his
Eloquence, but for pleading against the Countess of Angouleme his Mother. But
the Queen Of Navarr and the Duchess were too much exasperat^d against the
Chancellor, to be satisfied with a punishment, which only suspended him from
the execution of his Office. They had sufficiently penetrated into his
Intreagues, to be convinced, that if he had his liberty, he would infallibly
refix himself at Court; or if that way failed him, such a conjuncture might
happen, that some exigency of Affairs might constrain the King to send for him
to come and take his place in Council. It behooved 'em then to disable him from
waiting for such an opportunity; and the two Ladies to bring about their
design, formed a Faction against him, consisting of the Principal Persons of
the Court, not excepting Queen Eleonor, who made one, tho she had resolved, not
to meddle with any thing, more especially, when there was a War in agitation
against the Emperor her Brother. People were a long time searching after the
reason of this change in the Queens Mind, and the speculative Persons imagined
they had made the discovery, which was this; She had lived in France as it were
in exile, and she had little acqaintance in the Country: She had suffered much
from the Duchess d' Estampes, who left her no share in the King's Affection;
and as an accumulation to her discontent, she was neither able to revenge her
self, nor to better her own condition. Nor had her misfortune moved any of the
Courtiers, but only the Constable Montmorency, who had assisted her out of
Love, as her Enemies reported, or out of pity, which was most probable. She
knew that the Chancellor Poyet had contributed to the Chancellors disgrace; and
her stomaching of that, was sufficient to oblige her to side with a Party,
which gave her the opportunity to be revenged of the one, and to contribute to
the restoration of the other.

The Dauphin appeared at the Head of the Chancellor's Enemies, that he might
give Montmorency, in his retirement to Chantilly, the consolation to
understand, that he who had been the instrument to remove him from the Court,
was himself banished from thence without any hopes of returning thither again.
The King of Navarr joined merely, out of complacence to his Wife: The Count of
St. Paul, out of a certain antipathy, which sometimes happens between the
Princes of the Blood and the Chief Ministers: The Admiral Chabot, that he might
have the satisfaction of seeing his Enemy fall into the snare which he had laid
for him: Mompezat, in hatred of the Counterpoise which the Chancellor gave to
his Favor: And the Cardinal of Tournon, and Marshal d' Annhauit, that they
might remain alone in the Council of State. All these Persons had made so
powerful a combination, that the King was unable to withstand it any longer.
They peal'd in his Ears, how dangerous a thing it was to let a Lion live in a
condition to hurt him, after he had once provoked him. That the Chancellor had
in his hands all the Deeds and Instruments of the Crown, and that his Majesty
had trusted him with his most important Secrets, which Poyet might render
useless, by revealing 'em to the Emperor, and by his perfidiousness, procure
himself a public Settlement as considerable in Spain, as he lost in France.
Whence they concluded, that there was a necessity of confining him to a place
of security, and to watch him so narrowly, that it, might not be in his power
to do any mischief, tho he should design it.

The King rather weari'd with the frequent repetition of these Reasons, then
convinced by the strength of 'em, gave order, at his going to Bed to Lewis de
Nevers, to Arrest the Chancellor, and carry him to the Tower of Bourges. Nevers
discharged himself of his Commission, with as much joy as a Man could be
sensible of, who revenged the Public upon his own particular Enemy. He beset
his House with armed Soldiers, he wakened him with a terrible noise, and
signified the King's Order in expressions full of nipping raillerie; he would
hardly give him time to put on his Clothes, nor would he permit him to go into
his Study, nor to speak to any body, but carried him away in all haste to the
Tower of Bourges.

Nor was this alteration of Fortune so surprising, as that which appeared in
the Soul of the Chancellor. They who had known him for the boldest and most
superb among. Men, before his fall, could not sufficiently admire his abject
pusillanimity and cowardice in his imprisonment. He tired both his Friends and
his Enemies with unseasonable complaints, and ridiculous entreaties, and left
nothing omitted which he thought might inspire compassion into the Ladies that
he had offended, and made use of his liberty to exercise his Pen, which was at
length allowed him to beg of the King, the Cardinal of Tournon, and Admiral
Chabot, to redeem his Life and Liberty at the price of the vast Wealth which he
had acquired. Nothing more manifestly proved him unworthy of his high fortune,
then his extreme desire to survive his disgrace. His carriage quite changed
that fear and aversion which People had against his Person, into a contempt
which was no way advantageous to him; seeing that they left him for some years
in the Tower of Bourges, without so much as thinking of him. At ength he was so
importunate with the Ministers of State, that they ordered him to be brought to
his Trial, but not after such a method as he expected. For they appointed
Commissioners to try him, chosen out of all the Parliaments of the Kingdom.
However, they did him this justice, to make choice of the most able and the
most honest: Nor were there ever in France any Judges, whose Probitie and
Abilities were more universally known, then those of Peter Raymund, President
of the Parliament of Rouen, who was ordered to draw up the Informations. They
were willing to give him that satisfaction; whether it were that his enemies
thought that they had more proo^s then they needed to ruin him, or that the
King who had no mind to pardon him, as he had forgiven Admiral Chabot had taken
all the precautions requisite to prevent any thing that might be spoken against
the severity which he intended to inflict upon the chief Magistrate of the
Kingdom. However it were, the Process lasted till the year 1545. because the
Party accused finding himself abandoned by all the world, and ready to sink
unrder the same Artifices, with which he had oppressed others, made use of all
the tricks that long experience had taught him, and summoned up all his
cunning, and his parts to defend himself. He led his Judges through all the
bypath of Subterfuge and Evasion that Cavil could invent, to elude, or at
least to delay his Condemnation. He puzzled alike both his Judges and his
Witnesses that were brought Face to Face against him; and made so good a
defense that he saved his Life; whither it were that his Judges after a long
debate, did not find reasons enough to condemn him to Death, or that the too
open animosity of the prosecutors, had infused compassion into those
Magistrates, by persuading 'em he was Innocent, because his Enemies were so
violent in seeking his ruin. He heard, bare-Headed, the Decree pronounced that
deprived him of his Dignities and Estate, and confined him to perpetual
Imprisonment, for having Robbed the Treasury, fold Offices, and traffick'd in
several bargains, misbecoming his quality. The King surpised at the mildness
of the Decree, could nor forbear testifying his resentment against the Judges,
and threw upon 'em those reproaches that extended even to accusations of being
corrupted. However his Majesty remitted the punishment of Imprisonment, and
Poyet was constrained for a Livelihood, to resume his first employment of
Chamber-Counsellor in the Palace; deeming himself happy, that he had got
himself out of the Briars at any rate, before Judges of approved integrity; for
that indeed there was as many persons convinced that he deserved Death, as
there were People that knew him.

The Duchess d' Estampes after she had ruined all those that dared to obstruct
her credit, d' Estampes her Husband, had made a judicial enquiry into her
behavior since her Marriage, yet she was well assured that he could make no
use of it, so long as the King lived: however he was not immortal, and the time
would come when that cruel separation would happen. The Duchess also to her
sorrow, beheld the misfortune at a distrance, and was sensible of the
approaches of it. For Francis I. decayed insensibly in his Health; and whither
it were that his Physicians were ignorant of the true cause of his disease, or
whither they durst not discover it; or whither they despaired that His Majesty
would submit to violent Remedies, which could only correct the malignity of it,
they only put a stop in some measure to the outward effects, which were most
incommodious, without ever going to the root of the Disease. So that the King
perceiving himself grow more unweildy every Day then other, and loosing that
vigor and Address which had formerly been the cause that he delighted, with so
much passion, in the sports of Hunting and other laborious exercises, lived a
kind of morose Life, of which the Duchess was forced to bear all the
inconveniences; at the same time, that on the otherside, she was afflicted and
disturbed to think what would become of her after the King's Death, who in all
probability could not be long Lived.

She was in some hopes of reassuming that place in her Husbands affection, from
whence jealousy had expelled her, in regard she was yet young, and was the
Mistress still of that same ravishing Beauty, which had formerly charmed him.
Nor was it unlikely, but that compassion might overrule her Husbands Heart,
after the King's death had extinguished the cause of his jealousy, by producing
these effects therein, which are expected from Love. However it were, Diana of
Normandy's hatred seemed to be much more formidable to her: she was to be what
she her self had been, and it was to be presumed that she would make use of all
her credit to ruin her Enemy.

Diana was the Dauphin's Mistress, as the Duchess was the King's, but there
was no other resemblance between 'em, either in their persons, or their Wit.
The Duchess was never more Beautiful then she was at that time, nor had she
lost any thing of that luster, which had caused her to be looked upon by the
most curious Eyes, even by the Emperor himself, as the most accomplished Beauty
in Europe, whereas the she-Seneschal had none of those Allurements, which at
one and twenty Years of Age, had saved the Life of her Father Sr. Valier. The
Duchess was not above thirty, and the she Seneschal was suspected to be above
threescore; for she had caused her name to be torn out of the Register of the
Christ'nings. The Duchess commanded naturally, Diana of Poictiers by art, and
those different Empires were preserved by opposite means. The Duchess, who
feared not her being degraded, till the King began to decay in his health,
stood less upon her guard, and never laid any constraint upon her self, when
she spoke of Diana; whereas the other concealed under feigned demonstrations of
respect and compliance the despite to see her self contemned; and was in
company when that terrible expression fell from the Dutchess's Lips, that she
was born the same Day that the Seneschal's Wife was married. Nevertheless she
dissembled her resentment so long as the King was strong and lusty, but she no
sooner perceived that His Majesty began to decline, but she began to make the
Duchess sensible, that the time of her revenge was drawing on. The Duchess
being obliged by this ill usage to reflect upon the irregularity of her Tongue,
was so much the more af^aid of the effects of Diana's hatred, by how much the
less she was in a condition to avoidx'em. For instead of managing to her
advantage the Duke d' Estampes her Husband, whose humor insensible and little
subject to the pleasures of Love, might have been amused by slight marks of the
King's liberality and vain employments, provided he had received 'em when he
stood in need of 'em; she had displeased him to that degree, as to incense him
beyond the bounds of decency, out of the strangest capricio's, that ever
jealousy infused, to publish his own dishonor by a judicial enquiry into the
behavior of his Wife, as we have already said. This way of proceeding put the
Duchess out of all hopes of ever returning to her Husband, and reduced her to
that misery, that the Seneschal's Wife, after the King's Death, made use of the
jealous Duke, as an instrument to torment her, till her revenge was fully
satiated.

These inducements of terror that could not be either more powerful nor more
probably grounded, obliged the Duchess to seek out for an expedient to secure
her from the impending storm. And that which seemed to her to be best and the
most easy altogether, was to shroud her self under the Duke of Orleance's
protection, and to set up a faction at Court so powerful in his favor, as to
equal that which Diana had formed for the Dauphin. The Dutches's aim was to
seek for some great establishment for the Duke of Orleance without the Kingdom,
where she might find that repose and security, which she stood in need of. Nor
was there any other establishment which he could pretend to, then what the
Emperor had so many times proposed, which was the investiture of the Duchy of
Milan, or the Low Countries, upon two conditions. The one was, that he should
marry the Emperors Daughters, or his Niece. The other was, to prevent the
Reunion of what ever should be given in favor of either of these two Matches,
to the Crown of France. All the difficulty lay in the last Condition, to which
the pretended sterility of the Dauphiness, was an invincible obstacle That
Princess had been married ten Years, yet never had any signs of a great Belly:
and let the cause be what it would, from whence the defect proceeded, the Duke
of Orleance would be never the less presumptive Heir to the Crown, nor by
consequence less capable, in the Emperors judgment, to hold the fiefs of Milan,
and the Low Countries. Fernelius the Physician after he had sounded the
Dauphinesses temper, took a fancy that he could cure her indisposition, and
whither it were, that the Physic that he gave her wrought effectually, or that
his secret consisted only in revealing to the Dauphin, the particular minutes
wherein his Wife was most capable to conceive; the whole Court perceived in a
few Months after, that the Dauphiness was big with Child.

The Dutchess's surprising joy upon the news would not allow her so much
liberty of thought at first, as to know the advantages that she might draw from
thence, but afterward she ordered the Emperor to be sounded, whether he had
any mind to engage the Duke of Orleans to his Interests, or no. He that was
entrusted with a Commission so nice as this, had all the qualities sufficient
to begin so great an affair, but not those that were proper to bring it to a
conclusion. He was of the Illustrious House of Longueval, and Count of B^ssu,
and he had insinuated himself into the friendship of the Duchess, by the care
which he took to improve her Estate, and give her notice of such opportunities,
as offered themselves to increase it, by begging vacant gratifications of the
King. And in regard, he had Lands in the Low Countries, as well as in Picardy,
he might without being suspected, hold a correspondence in both Provinces. He
had both Wit and Address, Resolution and Reservedness, but he was extremely
felt interested, and in regard he had a greater Estate in Flanders, then in
France; that which he mainly aimed at, was to establish himself in the first of
those Countries, where his posterity afterward fixed themselves, and grew
numerous.

This inducement made him accept of the Order to negotiate for the Duchess;
because it would render him more considerable to the House of Austria; and the
Emperor overjoyed to see so potent a faction among his Enemies that sought to
correspond with him, looked upon this conjuncture, as a favor that Fortune
offered him for the resettlement of his affairs in the Low Countries. He
assured the Duchess that he would give the Duke of Orleance the Duthy of Milan
with his Niece, or the Low Countries with his Daughter: and for sear she should
mistrust he would deceive her, because he granted her demand so soon, and so
readily; he added that he reserved to himself the choice of the alternative,
and that he would not be obliged to explain himself, nor to perform his
promise, till he should have made an agreement with the King; that is to say,
till he should reap all the effects of that friendship which the Duchess and
her faction could procure him, for those remote promises, the performance of
which, depended upon his sincerity.

The Count of Bossu had understanding sufficient to perceive, that the
Engagement was not reciprocal, but he shut his Eyes: and the Duchess, from
whom the Allurement of a retreating place, took away the sight of the Serpent
that lay under the flowers, performed her part in forming so strict a League
with the Emperor, that nothing past either at the Court, or in the Council of
France, which was not immediately conveyed to his knowledge. In short, the
first Letter that he received by the Counts means, did him so signal a piece of
service, that it saved both his person and his whole Army. And the Emperor knew
so well to make his advantage of the intelligence that she gave him, that he
reduced France within two Fingers breadth of utter ruin. But Fortune having
balanced his first successes, the Duchess took an occasion from thence to
manage a peace between the two Crowns.

The reciprocal fears, of Francis I. and Charles V. were the foundation of a
new intreague between Queen Elenor's and the Emperors Confessors, both of 'em
Dominican Friars. The first was called Diegos Chiavez, and the second Gabriel de
Gusman. Chiavez by virtue of a private Order which he concealed, wrote to
Gusman, as if he had pretended only to impart to him a thought that was come
into his Head, that the greatest good they could do both the one and the other,
was to try, whither Divine Providence would make use of 'em, as Instruments to
confound the Wisdom of Men, by employing 'em to make that Peace which so many
great personages could not conclude. Gusman presently apprehended what lay
concealed in his Brothers Letter, and showed it to Queen Eleonor.

The Queen held a correspondence with the Duchess d' Estampes, because not
having any Issue by the King, she expected to be sent back, so soon as she
should be a Widow: and consequently she took no other care but to deserve a
favorable reception from the Emperor her Brother, when she should return to
reside with him, by doing him good Service in an Enemies Court, whither she had
been banished under the specious pretense of Matrimony. Gusman and the two
Ladies labored so successfully with Francis I. that that they caused him to
patch up a Peace very advantageous to the Emperor, and to sacrifice to the
expectation of an imaginary Alliance, several considerable places which
enlarged the Emperors Frontiers, and secured 'em in such a manner, that for a
long time there was no danger on that side. It Is true, that the course which
the Dauphin took in causing the Constable to be recalled, and putting him at
the head of the Army, contributed not a little to make the King resolve upon a
Peace out of his aversion to the chief Officer of the Crown. But the Death of
the Duke of Orleans, which happened some time after, disengaged the Emperor
from his promise, at a time when he saw himself obliged in pursuance of the
Treaty of Crepi, to resolve upon the giving him his Daughter with the
Low Countries, or his Niece with the Duchy of Milan. In the mean time Francis
I after he had spun out his Distemper in several places, felt his Fever gather
such strength upon him, at Rambouille^, that he could not reach St. Germains,
where he thought to repose himself: so that after he had lain in a languishing
condition for some Days, in that House, he gave up the Ghost, leaving the
Seneschal of Normandy's Wife in full power to execute her premeditated revenge
upon the Duchess d' Estampes, by means of her Ascendant over the new King.

The Intreagues of the Court of France, under the Reign of Henry II.
THE Face of the Court was wholly changed after the Death of Francis I. The
Cardinal of Tournon, and Marshal d' Annebaut, who had the supreme management of
affairs, under the preceding Reign, were turned out of the Council, and ^he
Constable who was recal'd from his Exile, was admitted in their Room, Francis,
Count of Aumale, who was Duke of Guise after the Death of his Father, and James
d' Albon St. Andre, were the King's Favorites. But the chief Authority
remained in the hands of Diana of Poictiers, the Widow of Lewis de Breze,
Seneschal of Normandy, who was made Duchess of Valentiuois, The Duchess d'
Estampes fearing the effects of her Enemies revenge, retired to Ville Martin, a
House of pleasure, within a League of the City, which bore the Name of her
Duchy, There she lived for some Years in the exercise of the new Religion
which she had embraced, and to which her example and her Liberality, drew a
great number of People of both Sexes.

But tho the Duchess of Valentinois had reason to be contented with the excess
of confidence and affection which the King showed her, yet could not she not
continue faithful to him. She was charmed with the goodly presence of Charles
de Cosse Brissac: she struggled for some time with her sentiments of tenderness
for him, and at length not being able to extinguish 'em, after she had
consulted her mirror which persuaded her that she had still beauty enough,
notwithstanding the alteration that Age had made to her Face, to engage that
Lord to comply with her passion, she resolved to that purpose, to let him
understand what past in her Hear^. She took an opportunity to do it, when he
came to congratulate her upon the removal of Madam d' Estampes. Are your
protestations sincere, said she, and may I be assured that you have a real
devotion for my person? After he had sworn, that she might put him upon the
Trial, and that he was ready to sacrifice his Life for her Interests, I know,
pursued she, that the credit I have at Court, engages all those who have any
Ambition, to offer me their service; but I require from you more disinterested
sentiments: I would have it that you should only Love in me what I hold from
nature, without considering what I owe to the King's favors. I shall not be
ungrateful; for I will take care of your fortune, provided you let me follow my
own inclinations, and wholly confide in me. She accompanied those words with
looks so passionate, that Brissac who was no novice in Love, readily understood
that it would be his fault, if he did not enter into a particular Intreague
with the Duchess. He was in great danger of incurring the King's displeasure,
if a familiarity of that nature should come to be discovered; but more of
falling under Diana's indignation, if she found her self contemned, after she
had met him so far above half the way. Thereupon he never scrupled which course
to take; and judging it became him not to neglect so fair an opportunity, he
made no other answer, then by a most passionate kiss which he imprinted upon
one of the Dutchesses hands. It Is not known whither Brissac had any real
passion for her; or whether he feigned a true affection, that he might make the
best of her credit; but certain it is, that they had several meetings. Some
time after the Court removed to Chasteau de Chambert which Francis the I. had
built. The Duchess was lodged in an Apartment by it self at the end of the
Park, whither the King went the next Evening, when all People had left his
Chamber, through a Gallery made under Ground, and staid all the Night with her.
One Evening that Brissac had tarried somewhat later then ordinary, word was
brought by some of the Attendants, that they had spied a light at the entrance
into the Vault, and that most certainly the King was at hand. At which, the
Duchess being alarmed, presently sent away Brissac, who not far from the
separate Apartment met Claude Tais, Grand Master of the Ordinance, whether it
were upon any Assignation hard by, or whether his musing thoughts had led him
so far that way. However it were, he knew Brissac, and mistrusting the occasion
of his Nocturnal visit, he accosted him, and jested too close upon him. Brissac
no way pleased with his discourse, acquainted the Duchess with it next Day,
who presently caused the indiscreet Frumper to be discarded, and obtained his
employment for her Favorite. Tais knew well from whence his misfortune came,
but durst not speak a word of it to any Living Soul, for fear of a worse
trouble.

From Chambort the Court removed to Joinville, where the Queen was seized with
a purple Fever, which swelled her Tongue to that decree, that she lost her
speech. Immediately the poor Queen was forsaken by all her Officers, who thought
her Disease had been Mortal, nor did any body remain with her but the Cardinal
of Chatillon. The Duchess was extremely allarum'd at her being so ill, fearing
lest it the Queen should dye, the King would Marry some young Person, whose
Charms might ^o^ her of his Affection. But the distemper, which had been so
violent at first, was but of short continuance: for that in eight days the
Queen was past danger; and her recovery res^or'd tranquillity of Mind to all
that were concerned in her preservation.

Olivier, because he could not comply with the Duchess as he ought to have
done, to preserve himself in the Ministry, fell into disgrace. Nevertheless,
because they could not deprive him of his Employment, without taking away his
life, and for that his integrity would not permit 'em to fasten any accusation
upon him, the Duchess, to suspend him from the execution of his employment,
caused the King to deliver the Seals into the custody of Commissioners;
Bertrand, whom she had already advanced to be first President of Paris, and
Giles le Maitre a Creature of her own.

And now the Duchess, to secure her self a Protection, both within and without
the Kingdom, married her two Daughters that she had by the King, the eldest who
was called Diana, to Heratio Farnese Duke of Castro, the youngest Son of Pope
Paul III. and the youngest to Claudius of Lorrain, Duke of Aumale. she also
procured the Battoon of Marshal of France for Brissae, for, whom she had still
the same tenderness.

Paul III, having embroiled himself with Philip II. King of Spain, sent into
France Cardinal Car^ffa, his Nephew, to engage King Henry II. in a League
against the Spaniards. The Affair was debated in Council, where the Duke of
Guise maintained with great hear, that 'twas requisite to give assistance to
his Holiness, with a design to make advantage of it. He was in hopes that by
sending Forces into Italy, he might be able to advance his Brother the Cardinal
of Guise to the Pontificate, so soon as the Sea should become vacant; and in
the mean time, to make himself Master of the Kingdom of Naples, which, as he
said, belonged to him, as Heir to the House of Anjou. The Queen upheld his
Opinion, in hopes to procure the Command of the Army for her Kinsman Marshal
Frotzi. The Duchess of Valentinoi^, who was in a strict Union with the Guises,
was of the same Opinion; nor durst the Constable Montmoranci oppose her, for
fear of displeasing her, and in hopes that the Guises going into Italy, would
give him an opportunity in their absence, to fix his Credit more steadfastly at
Court. Thus the League with the Pope being resolved upon, a numerous Army was
raised to be sent to the Pope; but Dava^son, the King's Ambassador at Rome, a
Creature of the Guises, who was acquainted with this Intreague, explained
himself so openly upon it, that the King who was informed of it, altered his
opinion, for fear of contributing to their ambitious designs. Their credit also
received a kind of check; but they recovered themselves in a short time, by the
marriage which they negotiated between the Dauphin and Mary Stuart Queen of
Scotland, their Kinswoman. The Duchess of Valentinois, who began to grow
jealous of their advancement, crossed this Match as much as in her lay, but not
being able to prevent it, resolved to unite her self more strictly with the
Constable, by marrying her Daughter to his eldest Son; she being now the Duke
of Castro's Widow, who was slain at the Siege of Hedin. There was one obstacle
in the way which she had much ado to surmount: For the young Montmoranci,
privately, and without his Father's consent, had married Mademoiselle de
Pienne, of the House of Alvin. The Constable sent his Son to Rome in order to
get his Marriage declared void by the Rota. But Montmoranci, after the Affair
had been examined at several Sittings, could obtain no definitive Sentence: for
the Pope was desirous to make the best of the Duchess, and to tie her to his
Interests, by keeping her in hopes of a favorable Judgment. But the Duchess,
tired out with these delays, took a shorter way, obliging the King to make a
Law, by which, all Marriages contracted by Infants under Age, without the
consent of their Parents, were declared void. After this Ordinance was
verified, upon Montmorancy's averrment, that he never gave his Faith to Madana
de Prenne, but upon condition, that his Father would give his consent, the
Parliament cancelled all the Engagements that were between 'em, and then the
young Lord married the Duchess of Castro.

The Guises, seeing that the Duchess of Valentinois treated 'em but very
coldly, and trusted no body but the Constable, who was of kin to the Marshal de
Brissac, her Favorite, endeavored to revenge themselves. The Queen of
Scotland had brought along with her into France, Madam Hamilton a kinswoman of
hers, who was Mistress of all the Graces both of Body and Mind. Presently they
spread abroad the fame of her Beauty, and by their Emissaries, cunningly and
neatly gave her such frequent commendations in the in the King's Ear, that he,
desirous to know whether her applauders did not flatter her, found so much
sweetness, so much life and gaiety in her Conversation, that he could not choose
but love her. He had aleady for some time, taken some disgust against the
Duchess; but she had such an ascendant over him, that he durst not give her
the least offense; and he took as much care to conceal from her his Intreague
with Madam Hamilton, as if she had been his Wife. Moreover, his new Mistress
proving big with Child, he provided for her Lying in, with so much privacy,
that no body at Court knew any thing of it. The Prince that she brought into
the World, was Christened Henry, and under the ensuing Reigns, was Grand Prior
of France, and Governor of Provence.

The King that he might show his activity to Mrs. Hamilton, for whom his
Passion was much increased, since she had brought him a Son, would needs make
one in the Tournaments that were prepared in Honor of the Nuptials of Elisabeth
the King's Daughter, with Philip II. which was a Match concluded in pursuance
of the Treaty of Chateau Cambresis. Toward the end of the third Day, which was
the 30th. of June, 1559, the King who had already broken several Lances with
good success, would needs Tilt with his Beaver up, against the Count of
Montgomery, the Son of Lorge, Captain of the Guards of his Body. The Count did
all be could to excuse himself, but he was at last constrained to obey his
Master; and that Course proved so unfortunate, that Montgomery's Lance being
broken into shivers, the Truncheon that remained in his hand, struck the King
above the Brow of the right Eye, with that terrible force, that the King fell
to the ground, without either Motion or Sense; in which condition they carried
him to his Bed, and notwithstanding all the remedies they could apply to him
for eleven days together that Life remained in him, they could never recover
his Speech; and in that manner he expired.

Intreagues of the Court of France under the Reign of Francis I.
WHen Queen Catherine de Medicis saw that her Husband was mortally wounded, she
consulted with her Confidents whether it were her best way to close with the
Constable, or the Guises. For she looked as well upon the one as the other to be
her Enemies, in regard they were equally allied to the Duchess of Valentinois,
whom she mortally, hated, tho while the King lived, she carried it very fair
with her. At last she resolved to unite with the Guises, because they were the
Queen her Daughter-in-Law's Uncles, and for that, sometime they had carried
themselves but very coldly toward the Duchess. The Constable being informed of
this Union dispatched a Courrier to Anthony of Bourbon, King of Navarr, giving
him an invitation to the Court, there to assume the degree and Authority, which
his Birth allowed him. But the King, who was afraid lest the Spaniards should
possess themselves of his Kingdom, during his absence, remained in his
irresolution so long, that the Queen and the Guises had leisure to form their
Cabal, to remove such persons as they suspected, and fill up the principal
offices with their own Creatures. The Duke of Guise had the Command of the
Armies, and the Cardinal the management of the Treasury, The Duchess of
Valentinois was banished, and forced to restore the Jewels and costly movables
that Henry II. had given her, and more then all this, they took from her the
noble House of Chenonceaux, which the Queen Mother would neeeds have for her
self, giving her in Exchange, the Castle of Chaumont upon the Loire. Bertrandi
was deprived of the Seals, which were restored to the Chancellor Olivier, and
he himself resettl'd as the Head of the Law, in all the functions of his
Office. The Constable had Orders to retire to his House of Escouan, and the
Cardinal of Tournon was recalled. The Duchess of Valentinois made her self
amends for her misfortune with Brissac's company, who continued faithful to
her, and being reconciled to the Guises, prevented her being any farther
persecuted. But the King, being arrived at Orleance, after twelve Days Sickness
di'd, not without some suspicion of being poisoned, in the Eighteenth Month of
his Reign; which gave occasion to new Intreagues.

The Intreagues of the Court of France under Charles IX.
Charles IX. but at last Queen Katherine obtained it, and enforced the King of
Navarr, to be contented with the Lieutenancie General of the Kingdom. The Queen
Mother was a refined Politian, and one who thought she might make use of
illegal, as well as legal ways, so she might Reign. She was magnificent in all
her actions, and loved all manner of divertisements, which she made subservient
to her Ambitious designs. During the troubles that turmoyl'd the State, the
same Wagons that carried the Warlike Ammunition, carried the Accoutrements for
Balls and Masquerades. By these Artifices it was that she retained the Young
Courtiers about her, who finding, in their attendance upon her pleasures,
conformable to their Ages, and their inclinations, and Charmed with the beauty
of her Maids of Honor, generally preferred her part before others that were
set up in contempt of the Royal Authority. The Court was then divided into two
Factions, Huguenots and zealous Catholics. Lewis Prince of Conde headed the
first, and the Guises governed the second. The King of Navarr, the Constable,
and the Marshal de St. Andre, seemed to make a third party, and the Queen's aim
was to preserve the Authority, which the Regency gave her, by dividing and
balancing these three cabals, in such a manner, that the one should not oppress
the other two. The third party, which was usually called the Triumvirate,
seemed to her to be most powerful, and she made use of the Duchess of
Valentinois to divide the King of Navarr and the Constable, for fear least
being united, they should leave her no more then the shadow of Government. And
the Duchess undertook it so much the more willingly, because her Interests
agreed best with the Queen's She feigned as if she had suffered her self to be
overruled by the tears of her eldest Daughter, and the submissions of the Duke
of Aumale her Son in Law, to reconcile her self and renew her good
correspondence with the House of Guise, which had abandoned her to the mercy of
her Enemies: and the Court took this reunion for an effect of Heroic. Virtue,
thao indeed an indispensable necessity was the only motive that induced her to
it. The Duchess had both Wit and experience enough to Judge, that 'twas
impossible for her to preserve the vast wealth which she enjoyed, but by the
support of the House of Guise, which was not in a condition to hold up any long
time, but by a reconciliation with the Constable: so that indeed the Duchess
labored for her self, while the Queen and the Duke of Aumale fancied to
themselves, that she acted for them. In a word, she made such effectual use of
the Authority which she had still over the Constable, that she accustomed him
by degrees, not to look upon the Guises any longer, as his Enemies. Thus the
Duchess maintained her self till she died in the same flourishing condition,
wherein Henry II. had left her, no body daring to cross her any more, when they
saw her have such potent protectors.

But it was not enough for the Queen to have broken the Triumvirate: it behooved
her also, that she might get all the power into her hands, to fasten to her
Interests the two Princes of the House of Bourbon. And in regard she knew that
Love was the most powerful engine to move the inclinations of that Age, she
made use of the Charms of her Maids of Honor to bring about her design. The
two most amiable were, Mademoiselle du Rouet, the Daughter of Lewis de la
Berandiere de Guiche, Lord of the Island of Rouet in Poitou, and Mademoiselle
de Limueil. The first undertook the Conquest of the King of Navarr, and the
second to subdue the Prince of Conde. To that purpose, M. de Rouet, wherever
she came, spoke so highly in praise of the King of Navarr, that she infused
into him a long desire to knoe who it was that so much obliged him with her
encomiums in all companies. Mademoiselle de Limueil, on the otherside, said
nothing that could reflect upon the reputation of the Prince of Conde, but
still she gave out every where, that he should be the last Man that she should
make choice of for a Lover: because he was naturally unconstant, and minding
nothing so much as his Ambition, he could not condescend to those petty
complaisancies that more frequently win upon the affections of Ladies, then
great Services. The Prince of Conde, hearing of these discourses, thought
himself bound in Honor to undeceive M. de Limueil, and by that means fell into
her snare. The Queen at first had governed the King of Navarr by the Artifices
of the Duchess of Montpensier, who had such an ascendant over him, that at
Court she was called nothing but the Siren. The Queen was also beholding to
this Duchess for causing the King to desist from his pretensions to the
Regency, and content himself with the shadow of Authority, in accepting the
Lieutenancy General of the State, that she might enjoy the substance. In vain
his Friends remonstrated to him, that he should want neither Counsel nor power
to force obedience to himself; but the Duchess of Montpensier's persuasions
prevailed with him, beyond all the remonstrances of Mon moranci, Chatillon, the
Calvinists, and the more clear sighted Catholics. But tho the Queen had been
so well served by this Princess, she was afraid lest her Ambition should infuse
into her a desire of sharing her Authority. And rather chose to make use of M.
de Rouet, with whom the King of Navarr took delight to converse, after she
declared her self to be so much Charmed with his Virtues. The King therefore
quite tired with the long resistance which the Dutchess's Virtue had made to
his desires, thought he might quit her without being accused of inconstancy,
that he might devote himself to a person, with whom in all probability he
should better employ his assiduities and where he should meet with as much Wit
and Beauty.

Manriquez, whom he sent to him on purpose, made a proposal to the King of
Navarr, which upon a slight examination only, seemed very advantageous to him.
The substance of it was, that he should put himself at the head of the zealous
Catholics who were about to banish Calvinism out of France: that he should
dissolve his Marriage with Joan d'Albret, under pretense of Heresy, and marry
Mary Stuart, the wife of Francis II. who would bring him in Dowry the Crowns
of England, Scotland and Ireland. M. de Roouet, Who was fallen in love with the
King, while she only sought to entangle him in her snares, being informed of
this Negotiation by d' Escars, one of her Favorites, was extremely allarum'd
at it. Thereupon she sought an opportunity to speak in private with the King of
Navarr; and having met with one, she never left him, till she had made him
promise her to send back Manriquez, without concluding upon any thing.

But tho the King of Navarr were prone enough of himself to do what she
desired, and that he abhorred the proposal of a Divorce, he forbore not however
to make M. de Rouet sensible of a valuable Sacrifice which he had made her of
the fairest Queen in Europe, and drew a promise from her, that she would not
refuse the requests of his Love. So that now there wanted nothing but to find
out opportunities, which it was no difficult thing to meet with. For the Court
being then at Fontain-bleau, the same Evening he bestowed a Consort of Violins
upon the Ladies near the Caual, and while they were busy in harkening to the
Music, or else a Dancing, he went aside with M. de Rouet, and managed so well
the favorable inclination to which he had prepared her, that she became big of
a Prince, who was called Charles of Bourbon, and afterward was made Archbishop
of Rouen. But the Prince of Could had not that great success with M. de
Limeuil. For as she had declared at first a dislike of that Prince's humor,
she was obliged to observe certain outward formalities of disdain, and to make
show of an indifferency, which however was far from real, the more to fire her
Lover; which was the reason that it was less trouble to her Virtue to hold out
so much the longer.

These two Ladies, that lived together in perfect Union, were not a little
troubled to see the two Brothers engaged in different Parties: while the eldest
Brother commanded the Catholic, the youngest the Calvinist Army. The King of
Navarr being wounded at the Siege of Rouen, was carried into the City after it
was taken, and was there frequently visited by M. du Rouet, and in regard their
conversation was a little too vigorous, the King's wound fester'd to that
degree, that it became mortal. The Queen Regent, seeing how little hopes there
was of saving his life, admonished him to prepare himself for death: he took
the advice of that Princess, and renouncing, all of a sudden, his inclinations
both to Honor and Pleasure, he admitted no more visits from the Ladies, and
declared to Chantonay, the Spanish Ambassador, and Brother of Cardinal
Grandvelle, that he thought no farther of Sardigna, which the King of Spain
offered him in exchange for Navarr. After he had confessed himself to the
Official of Rouen, and received both the Sacraments, he so earnestly desired to
he carried down the River to his House at St. Maur, where the Air was
incomparably much better then at Rouen, that they were forced to transport him
thither, and at first he seemed to be much better upon the water; but a cold
Sweat that seized him at Andilli, enforcing him to make a stop there, he died
the 7th of October. 1562. in the Two and fortieth year of his age, and delivered
the Regent from her continual fears, lest he should change his Party. 'Twould
be a difficult thing to express the extreme sorrow that overwhelmed
Mademoiselle de Rouet, for the loss of a Prince whom she dearly loved, and by
whom she was no less tenderly beloved, more especially being conscious to her
self, that she had contributed to his death.

Calvinists, and to draw the Prince of Conde to Court; where he was so well
treated, that he forgot for some time his warlike humor. The Honors paid to
the deceased King of Navarr, his Brother, to retain him in the Catholic party,
were nothing in comparison of those that were conferred upon him, to bring him
off from Calvinism. He was every Day with the Queen, who heaped civilities upon
him. Nothing of importance was debated in Council, nor in any other place but
in his presence: he generally obtained whatever he desired, and all occasions
of giving him offense were carefully avoided. 'Twas not believed however that
he suffered himself to be amused with promises, which he saw frustrated of
their principal effect, since they delayed to give him the Lieutenancy General,
of which the Queen had put him in hopes; for fear, as was given out, lest the
Catholics, who were dissatisfied with the Peace, should take from thence the
pretense they sought for to break it: but Love sided with the party, and
seconded the Artifices of the Queen. For the Prince of Conde's passion for M.
de Limueil was not quite extinguished, tho it had lain dormant for some time as
being benumbed by the fatigues of the War. The presence of the beloved object,
having roused his Affection, he applied himself afresh to the Lady, and gave
her such public proofs of his tenderness that the Princess his Wife, who could
not be ignorant of it, sickn'd of jealousy and Di'd.

The Regent intent upon all occasions that might conduce to confirm her
Authority, looked upon this conjuncture as one of the most favorable that
could have befallen her. She imagined that as the Chatillon's had engaged the
Prince in Heresy, by the Marriage of their Neice, she might also bring him back
to the Communion of the Church, by giving him for a second Wife, a Lady that
had the Honor to be her kinswoman, whose Charms would put a stop to his
inconstancy, and draw from his Lips the secrets of the Calvinists. To this
purpose, she commanded the Lady to leave nothing omitted, upon that
presupposition, to omit nothing that might contribute to detain the Prince in
her Fetters. But to venture an indifferent virtue with a Lover who made use of
the smallest advantages in Love, as in War, to carry things to extremity, was
to expose it to too many hazards. While the Lady feigned an Affection for the
Prince, she became enamored in good earnest; and to her misfortune, she was
not the only person at Court, that found her Heart insensibly engaged.

Margaret de Lustrac the Widow of the Marshal de St. Andre, was neither of a
temper nor inclination to spend the remainder of her Life in Widowhood;
nevertheless, she was engaged to it in some measure, by signing the Articles of
the Marriage of her only Daughter with the Eldest Son of the Duke of Guise;
seeing it was chiefly concluded consideration of the great Estate that she
possessed; and for that the Marshal her Husband had been preserved from
inevitable ruin. However, she was no sooner a Widow but she yielded to the
usual temptation of persons of her Quality; so that she laid a design to marry
again, and break off the Match between her Daughter and the Prince of
Joinville. For which, that she might have a plausible pretense, and withal to
cover what was irregular in her intentions, she feigned to seek out a more
Honorable alliance for her Daughter, and cast her Eyes upon the Marquess of
Conti, the Eldest Son of the Prince of Conde, with an intent to persuade the
less discerning sort of People, that if she married the Prince, 'twas only to
facilitate the union of their Children by her Marriage. But she could not have
addressed her self more unluckily, considering how things stood with the Prince
at that time. For tho he had not had a kindness for Madam de Limueil; he would
have preferred a Country Girl before the remains of the Marshal de St Andre.
However he did not explain his thoughts to the persons that propounded his
Marriage with the Widow, as the only means to secure to his Son, the Marriage
of St. Andre's Heiress; he only replied, that the way did not seem to him to be
so infallible, because the Marquess not being above nine Years of Age, and for
that both the Nuptials could not be solemnized at the same time, the
Marshaless, would be as her liberty, when she was become a Princess to break
the Articles between her Daughter and the Marquess, with the same ease as she
had broken her Covenants with the Prince of Joinville. The Marshaless informed
of this obstacle, and taking no other advice but that of her own passion,
offered the Prince a deed of gift of the manner of Valeri in Gatinois, and all
the magnificent movables with which the Marshal of St. Andre had furnished it.
'Twas thought that by this piece of unpararallel'd liberality, she thought to
have fixed that levity of which she was suspected to be guilty, by disabling
her self to refuse her Daughter to the Son of a Prince, to whom she would have
given beforehand the best part of her Estate; and to have supplanted her
Rivaless by the force of her Acts of kindness, since she could not do it by the
power of her Charms. The present was accepted, without producing, however, the
effect which the Marshalless expected from it: whither it were too great to be
refused by a Prince, whose birth was nevertheless too spendidly exalted to
engage him by the acceptance of it; or whither the Prince blamed in his own
thoughts the prodigality of the Widow, at the same time that he made a benefit
of it.

Mademoiselle de Limueil made reflections remote from Truth upon an accident so
rarely happening. She supposed the Prince less amorous or less concerned then
he was; and imagined that since he had accepted the signiory of Valleri, he
would have married the Marshalless. The suspipition of which increased to that
degree, that not having an Estate sufficient to equal the liberality of her
Rivalless, she took a fancy to surpass it by granting the Prince the dearest
Jewel she had in the World. And her big Belly that soon attended the fault the
had committed, made it so public, that she was forced to withdraw from the
Court. The Queen caused her to be conducted by a Valet de Chamber, whose name
was Gentil, to the Convent of Franciscans in the City of Auxonne.

This banishment of M. de Limueil was not the only punishment of her
incontinency. For the Prince equally touched with disdain as well of a Widow
who had aspired to an Alliance with him, as of a Young Lady that sought to gain
him by an over passionate submission, neglected both the one and the other, to
marry Francese of Orleance, the Duke of Longuevilles Sister; a haughty
Princess, and of an austere Virtue. Such a difference he put between the
dispositions of those Women which he desired for his Wives, and those which he
sought for his Mistresses. Mademoiselle de Limueil after the was brought to
Bed, endeavored to repair the loss of her high hopes by marrying Geoffrey de
Causac, Lord of Tremon, who had been a long time an humble servant of hers, but
had been neglected by her ever since her Intreague with the Prince of Conde.
Nor was Mademoiselle de Rohan better treated by the Duke of Nemours: she had
granted him the same favors, upon a promise of Marriage, in the Reign of Henry
II. But the Prince, to avoid the performance of his word, went to serve in
Piedmont against the Duke of Savoy; nor did he return into France till the
beginning of the Reign of Charles the IX. at which time he threw himself into
the Cabal of the Guises; and so frequently visited the Dukes Wife, that he
could no longer remain insensible of her Charms. Nevertheless he durst not
discover his passion to her, such was the awe that her Virtue had upon him.
However in regard it is as difficult a thing to hide Love as to conceal Fire, M
de Rohan was informed of his infidelity, and resolving revenge, she su'd him
upon his promise. He pleaded her profession of the pretended Protestant
Religion, and having obtained from the Pope a nullity of the Engagements he had
made her, He married the Widow of the Duke of Guise, who was Murdered by
Poltrot before Orleance, some Months before.

After Queen Katherine de Medicis had caused the majority of her Son to be
declared by the Parliament of Rouen, all the Court Ladies strove which should
most powerfully enthral his Heart; but he delighted more in Hunting and other
violent exercises, then in Courtship and making Love. Nevertheless one Day,
Madam de Montpensier taxing him for his insensibility, he swore to her, that if
once he went about to turn Coquet, he should so harass all the Ladies, that
they would repent of having waked a sleeping Lion. In a word, for some time he
laid about him to the right and left, without ever engaging himself in any
Intreagues. But sometime after going to Orleance, he spied a young Virgin, that
came out of curiosity to see him at Dinner, and having inquired who she was, he
learnt that her name was Marie Touchet, an Apothecary's Daughter in the Town.
Thereupon, he commanded la Tour, Master of the Wardrobe to talk to her, and to
persuade her to come to his Chamber. La Tour with very little trouble succeeded
in his Negotiation, and the next night brought Madam Touchet to the King, who
obtained of her whatever he desired, tho she had already engaged her Affection
to Monlue, the Bishop of Valence's Brother, whom she could not forget neither,
whatever marks she received of Charles the Ninths Love. The King requested
Madam Margaret his Sister, to entertain her as her waiting Woman, that she
might have some pretense to follow the Court. However he was forced to take her
away from that Lady, when he returned to Paris, because she proved with Child:
and he provided so well for her lying Inn, that she was brought to Bed of a
Prince, who was called Charles by his Father's name, and honored with the
title of Count of Auvergne. But Madam Touchet for all this, kept a daily
correspondence with Monlue, and frequently received Billet Douxes from him. The
King being informed that she had put one of 'em up in her purse, invited a
great many Ladies to Supper, of which number was his faithless Mistress. Withal
he commanded the Captain of a Company of Gypsies to bring along with him about
a dozen of the most exquisite Cutpurses he could pick out of the whole gang, to
cut all the Ladies purses while they were Eating, and faithfully to bring 'em
all to him at his going to Bed. When the Meat was upon the Table, he placed
Madam Touchet next to himself, for fear she should make away the Billet, which
be had a mind to have. The Cutpurses did their business exactly, and la Chamber
failed not to carry to the King all the booty according to order. The King had
no great trouble to distinguish his Mistress's purse from the rest, and
therefore opening it in very great have, found there the Billet already
mentioned. The next Day he showed it his disloyal Minioness, who disowned it
was directed to her, because there was no Superscription; bur she could not
disavow several other things that were in the Purse, together with the Billet;
so that having no other course to take, she confessed her fault, and begged
pardon. The King also promised to think no more of it, provided she had no more
to do with Monlue, and to separate her the more certainly from him, His Majesty
Married her to Balzac d'Entragues, Bailiff of Orleance. Some time after, the
discourse was very hot, about marrying the King to Elizabeth of Austria, the
Emperor Ferdinand's Daughter. Madam d'Entragues, having seen her Picture,
consulted her Looking-glass, and then told one of her Maids that stood by her,
that 'twas the least of her fears, that ever that Princess would rob her of the
King's Affection: and indeed he loved her to his Dying Day, though he had a great
respect for the Queen his Wife.

The King was extremely haughty and could not brook the ambition of the Duke of
Guise* He took it hainously when he understood that the Duke had been so bold
as to aspire to Madam Margaret his Sister, as also to make her a formal
Declaration of his Love. So that in the first transports of his wrath, he
ordered the Grand Prior, the Son of Hen. II. and Madam Hamilton, to stab the
insolent Pretender. Of which, the Duke being informed by Madam d'Entragues,
avoided the Hunting match, which was appointed on purpose for the execution of
the design that was laid against his life. And to let the King know that he was
not guilty of the crime that was laid to his charge, by the advice of his
Mother, he married Katherine of Cleves, the Widow of Prince Portiano, and by
that means asswag'd his Masters anger. In the mean time he endeavored to
secure to himself the protection of the Duke of Anjou; and the better to gain
his good Will, he offered to be serviceable to him in his passion for the
Princess of Conde, his Sister-in-law. So violent was the Duke of Anjou's love
for that Princess, that he was very near refusing the Crown of Poland, as not
enduring a removal from her. However, he endeavored to cure himself by seeking
other divertisements, and made his applications to Madam Chasteau-neuf, one of
the Queen Mother's Maids of Honor, who did not long withstand his
importunities: and in regard she perceived her self to be not the sole Mistress
of his Heart, she made no scruple to engage her self in an Intreague with
Lignerolet, the Duke's Favorite. But Ligneroles, s who devoted himself to her
only out of vanity, was so indiscreet as to boast to his Master of his good
Fortune, and received the punishment which his insolence deserved, being
stabbed be Villequier, by the Duke's Order. They who were ignorant of this
circumstance, ascribed his death to his indiscretion, in talking of the
Massacre that was to be made of the Huguenots upon St. Bartholomews day, which
his Master had revealed to him, but certain it is, that the Duke had no other
aim then to punish the Vainglory of his Favorite. The Duke finding that the
Princess of Conde's Virtue was not to be stirred, set forward at length for
Poland, where they would fain have married him to Ann Jaqueline, the Daughter
of the last King. But the news that he received in a short time after, of the
death of Chales IX. obliged him to quit his new Subjects, and return into
France. The King, at the very last minutes of his life, could not forget Madam
d'Entragues; but ordered La Tour to tell her, that nothing grieved him so much,
as that death had snatched him from her, before he had done any thing for her
to advance her Fortune.

The End of the First Part.
INTEAGUES OF THE Court of FRANCE, Under the Reign of HENRY III. PART II.
Anno 1574.
NEither Fame nor Absence could extinguish that Love which Henry III. had
conceived in his Heart for the Princess of Conde, and in regard he was assured
that he should not obtain any favor from her, but by lawful means, he
endeavored to persuade her to consent that he should dissolve his Marriage,
under pretense that his Wife was a Heretic, not doubting but he should easily
obtain his desires at Rome. The Queen Mother having notice of the King her Son
s design, was extremely alarmed at it, afraid, least if the Princess of Conde,
who was an Ambitious Woman, and one that had a Genius above the common sort,
should come to be Queen, she would altogether govern the King, and be mistress
of all that authority which she had acquired in his Councils. Therefore to send
off this blow, she set all the most charming Ladies of the Court at work to
inveigle her Sons affections. Mademoiselle de Chateauncuf amused him for some
time, but was obliged to give way to Mademoiselle de E^^o^^f, who neither had
the happiness to retain him long fettered in her Chains. Madam de Sauve, the
Secretary of States Widow was she that triumphed at last over all the
Rivalesses: The King gave himself solely up to Her; but the engagement was not
reciprocal, because she lov d the King of Navarr. Their Intreague first began,
while Navarr and the Duke of Alenson were Prisoners together, and Madam de
Sauve was wont to go and bear 'em company, merely to divert 'em, and alleviate
the vexations of their imprisonment. These two Princess fell equally in love
with her; but she had not the same kind sentiments for both. She hated the Duke
of Alenson, but she made favouraable returns to the tender addresses of the
King of Navarr. When that Prince was set at liberty, the interests of the Party
that acknowledged him for their Head, obliged to absent himself from his
Mistress, but his absence nothing abated the Passion which she had kindled in
his heart, nor did she omit any opportunity to let him understand that she was
still the same, when Henry III. began to cast an eye of Favor upon her. But
she made no other use of his complacency, then to second the Queen Mothers
design, which was to revive in his heart that tenderness which he had formerly
had for Mademoiselle de Vaudemont, and to persuade him to seat her by him upon
the Throne. But this was not all, for (...), more powerful reason overruled
Madam de Sauve to infuse into him the same sentiments. The Duke of Guise was
become an inamor'd Servant of hers, and had insensibly banished from his heart
the tenderness which he had for the Queen of Navarr; and she thought to do him
a great piece of service, by advancing his Kinswoman to that high degree of
honor, which would oblige him to love her the more. And the death of the
Princess of Conde which happened about the same time, gave Madam de Sauve a
fair opportunity to engage him with Mademoiselle de Vaudemont. The King saw her
as he was going to be Crowned at Rheims, and finding in her face the same
Allurements that had formerly charmed him, he resolved at length to marry her.

Francis of Luxemburgh, of the House of Brienne, had made his addresses to her,
before the Lorrain Princes had any hopes of making her Queen. Henry III. who
knew it, had a desire to marry him to Mademoiselle de Chasteauneuf, and whether
he thought it became him to take care of the Fortune of a Person whom he had
once loved, or that he took some kind of Pleasure to change Mistresses with
Luxemburgh, he proposed it to him upon his Coronation Day: To which the Lord
made answer, that he had so great a value for whatever concerned the Queen,
that he could but be highly overjoyed at the advantage which fortune had
procured her, and that he applauded her for having made so happy a change of
her Lover. But in regard there was not so much to be got by him in marrying
Mademoiselle de Chasteauneuf, he besought his Majesty to allow him time to
consider. The King replied, that it was not for him to hesitate upon what he
had propropos'd to him, and therefore he expect'd to be forthwith obeyed.
Luxemburgh finding himself so vigorously pressed upon, desired eight days to
prepare himself, and obtained three, which served him to find a way to quit the
Court, and retire in a place where he might shelter himself from the King's
displeasure. Nor did the King, whose first transports were only to be feared,
think any more of him* after he was once got out of his sight. The pleasures
which he tasted in his conversation with the Queen put Luxemburghs disobedience
quite out of his mind: For he had so much complacency for that Princess, that
he acted the person of a Lover, rather then of a Husbahd in her company. Now in
regard that Age was an Age of Licetiousness, several Lampoons were made upon
all these passages, that would not have been endur^d at another time; and as
they had also a great veneration for the Queen Mother an Edict was made in
railliery against Faithless Lovers, which began in these words, Henry, by the
Grace of God, unprofitable King of France, and imaginary King of Poland;
Turn^^y of the Lovre; Churchwarden of St. Germans de Lauxerrois, Son in Law to
Colas, First Valet of his Wives Chamber, Peddler of the Palace, Gaurdian of
Four-Beggars, Protector of Penitents and Capuchins.

By this Satyr it may be seen, that the King affected to appear devout in
public, but in private abandond himself to all manner of voluptuous
sensuality, without any moderation; and the Queen Mother was so far from
restraining him, that she indulged him in his humors, that she might have the
greater share in the Government. One day he gave a great Entertainment at
Che^^nceaux, where the Ladies appeared like Nymphs, half naked to their Wastes,
and with their hair dishevelled about their Shoulders. Not long after the King
went in Masquerade to Hostel de Guise, where the Duke presented the Company
with a Ball, to honor the Nuptials of Mademoiselle Marcel with the Baron de
V^er^e^, and where the confusion and disorder was so great, that the Candles
were blown out, and the Chastity of the Ladies suffered no small detriment in
the Dark. The King also, to make himself popular, frequently went to divertise
himself among the men of the Long Robe, especially to the President Boncharts
House, whither he was drawn by Mademoiselle de Bussy, his Daughter-in-Law.

All the Courtiers, in imitation of their Master, thought of nothing but making
love: and knowing well, that wild passion never seeks after equality, but makes
all equal, they addressed their vows to persons as well superior as inferior to
'em in Rank and Dignity, never considering the consequences of such ill
concerted Intreagues. St. Megrin, a Gascoine Gentleman, had the confidence to
make choice of the Duchess of Guise for the Object of his Tenderness, and was
well received. But notwithstanding all the caution he had taken to conceal his
Amorous Commerce, he was discovered, and it cost him his Life. One evening
returning from the Lo^^^re at eleven a Clock at Night, thirty men in Vizards
fell upon him in the Street St. Honor, stabbed him in a thousand places, and
laid him dead upon the Stones, where he expired soon after. The King caused his
Body to be carried to (...) House never the Bastille, from whence he was born in
great Pomp to St. P^^d's Church, and there buried. But there was no pursuit
after the Murderers, because the Duke of Ma^^ was known to be at the Head of
'em* and for that the King was not ignorant that St. Megrin had drawn that
misfortune upon himself by his own imprudence, tho his Majesty was wont to make
him a familiar Companion of his Pleasures. Nor was Bussy d^Am^oise, the Duke of
Alenson's Favorite more happy then St. Megrin. He loved Mademoiselle de
Manteran, for tho he had engaged himself in a strict Intreague, and private
enough too with that Lady, by the means of the Lieutenant Criminal of Saumur,
his Confident, who took care to manage their Randevo^zes; whither she thought
by such an act to conceal the dishonor of her miscarriage, of whither she
began to disgust her Lover. However she sent for Bussy to meet her in her
Castle, where she would be alone, but as soon as he was arrived there* the
Marquis of Montera^ who kept himself private in the next Room, fell upon him,
with ten more of his Friends. Bussy, who was stout and brave, defended himself
like a Lion, while his Sword was whole, but when they had broken it, he threw a
way the Hil^, and with Bars and Stools, such as he could lay hands on, wounded
three or four of his Enemies. When he had nothing to defend himself, he
bethought himself of taking his Heels, and as he was preparing of leap out of
the Window, he received a mortal wound, which laid him weltering upon the
Floor. The Duke of A^^nson was no way concerned for his death, because his
excessive Pride and Vanity had disgusted him.

Some months after, there was great rejoying at Court upon the Marriage of the
Queens Sister Mademoiselle de Vaudemont with d'Argues, whom the King had made
Duke of Joyeuse. All the Ladies made their appearances in the place most
magnificently adorned; there were Masquerades, Balls, Runnings at the Ring and
Tournaments. Ransard and Baif had each of 'em a thousand Crowns a piece for
Epithalamiums and Verses upon the Subject of that Festival. All the Princes, to
collogue with the King, treated the new married Couple, every one in their
turn. The Cardinal of Bourbon, who lodgd in the Abbey of St. Germans, prepared a
great entertainment in that place the 10th of October 1581. He had ordered a
most stately Gallery to be erected for their Majesty's to pass to the Pre aux
Clerc^^ It was to have been drawn by four and twenty small Boats, that were to
have been covered with painted Skins, which were to have made 'em appear at a
distance like so many Sea Mousters; and they were to have carried Trumpets,
Hautboys and Violins, which were to have founded and struck up successively
several Consorts of Warlike and Rural Music. But this Machine did not take
effect. So that the King was forced to go in his Coach to the Abbey. But this
defect was repaired by several other Gallantries; among which there was an
Artificial Garden, adorned with all the beautiful products of the Spring, tho
it were in the depth of Winter. When the King treated the same Company at the
Louvre, he caused a Ball to be daunc'd, which represented the divertisements of
Ceres and her Nymphs. This Ball was attented by a Carrousel, wherein the Horses
trampled to the sound of several Instruments, and an Artificial Firework, which
darted forth Rockets, that as they fell, formed the Cifers of the Duke and
Duchess.

The next year, upon Shrove Tuesday, the King ran in Masquerade till six a
Clock the next morning, committing a thousand Follies. For which the Preachers
taxed him in their Sermons with too much freedom. Henry the Third being
offended at it, seal for Rose, a Doctor of the Sor^onne, who had declared
against that Cavalcade, with more heat then any of the rest, nevertheless got
off at the expense of a sight reprimand. For said the King to him, Doctor Rose,
I have suffered you for these ten years together to r^n roaring about the
Streets, and never said any thing to ye, yet here for one fegary at the end of
the Carnaval, you have mangled my Reputation in your Sacred Pulpit, pray be
more discreet another time and do so no more. The King was also so good
natured, that sending for him again, within a few days after, he gave him four
hundred Crowns, and asked him whither that ^^m would suffice to buy him Sugar
enough to sweeten the bitterness of his Sermons.

When Hen. III. took his Progress into Guyenne, the King of Navarr, who went to
meet him at Bourdeaux, entered into an acquaintance there with the Countess of
G^iche, the Widow of Philibert, Count of Gramont, who was Slain at the Siege of
la Fere. He found her very Amiable, and paid her several visits, during his
stay in that Province, and her company made him a mends for the infiedlity of
Madam de Sauve. For he found her altogether as sensible of his affection as his
first Mistress when he parted from Bourbeaux, and besought her not to take it
amiss, if he ^et her hear from him by Parabese, whom he had taken into his
Service, and whose Sister, who was one of the same Province, was one of his
great Friends. The Countess was over^oy'd at her having an opportunity to keep
a correspondence with the King of Navarr, and continued it till he came to the
Crown. As for Henry III. most certain it is, that notwithstanding these
irregularities of his youth, his Subjects would have lived happily under his
Reign, had he not found 'em divided into two Factions, extremely exa^perated
one against the other, when he succeeded his Brother. For he was Courageous,
Eloquent, and Liberal even to profusion* he loved men of Merit, and was so
naturally inclined to mildness, that 'twas always a Grief to him when he
punished.

Intreagues of the Court of France, under the Reign of Hen. IV.
THE first Person to wh^m over Henry IV* gave any mark of his affection, (...)
Antonetta de Pon^, Marchiones^ of G^er^^ (...) Widow of Henry de Silly, Count
of Ro^^^^guyen. He saw her in Normandy, and fell so passionately in love with
her, that he altogether forgot the Countess of Guich^, (...) whom nevertheless
he had always a high esteem, and never refu^'d (...) any Kindness when it lay
in his Power. There was (...) difference between those two Ladies, tha^ the
first was a Country Lady that had never been at Court and that the se^ond had
all the delicacy of Wit and Conversation, which usually distinguishes persons
of the Highest Quality from others. The King found the Marchioness more
reluctant then he imagined, and was so far from offering her any violence, that
he was so charmed with her Beauty, that he had some thoughts to have ma^^^ d
her. But the cares of the War e^^orcing him to absent himself from her, long
absence ab^ted his Passion, and suffered him to be surprised by the Charms of
another Beauty. While he was taken up with the Siege of Paris, Ma^^^ de
Beauvilliers, Daughter to the Count of St. Agnan, and Abbess of Montmartre,
sent to him for a safe conduct, which he granted after a most obliging manner.
She came to return him thanks, and made her addresses so Gracefully, that being
a Woman of a comely Presence, he could not consent that she should be locked up
in a Convent. But being obliged in a short time after to raise his Siege, he
ordered her to be conducted to Senlis, which was under his obedience, where he
paid her those respects and sedulities of which she could not be insensible.
She had been cloistered by force, and for the private interest of the Family,
and she looked upon the affection of the Prince as a kindness of Fortune to
release her out of Prison. But tho the King were extremly devoted to her, yet
could he not forget Madam de Guercheville, and knowing her deserts, he resolved
to make her amends for the loss of his heart, by helping her to a Husband, upon
whom he might heap his Favors. He cast his eye upon Charles du P^essis, Lord
of Liancourt, in whose favor he wrote to the Marchionoss, and so soon as he
had married her, he gave him the Employment of Grand Squire

One evening, the King discoursing of the Beauty of the Court Ladies; cried ^p
extremely the Abbess of Montmartre, and said more over, that he never saw a
person so charming. Upon which the Duke of Bellegard the present, told him that
he would soon be of another opinion, if once he saw Mademo^selle d'Estrees, and
made him so lively a description of her Beauty, that the King had a great
desire to be acquainted with her. Some days after the Court removed to Mante,
where the King divertis'd himself extremely with the Ladies of the
neighborhood, but Mademoiselle d'Estrees never appeared. After that, he went
to Senlis to visit his Admirable Abbess, where he gave here all the
divertisments, that his small stay would admit him to prepare for her.

When he returned to Mante, the Duke of Bellegarde begged leave of his Majesty,
that he might go to Coeuvres, where Gabriella d' Estrees then resided, with
whom he was deeply in love, and for whose sake he had quitted Madam d'Humieres,
tho she had taken great care of him during a sickness that had held him for
some time at Mante, and had also sacrafic'd for his sake the Admiral de
Villars, who had left nothing omitted to gain her affections. However, the King
would not suffer him to take his journey, but upon condition that he might go a
long with him. Bellegard would have been glad to have been rid of such a
Companion, but in regard it became him not to dispute with his Master, he was
constrained to take the King along with him, and which was more, had the
misfortune to see that his Sovereign found her much more amiable then he had
imagined her to be. The King engaged her to come to Ma^te, where she made a new
Conquest, and deprived Madam de Humieres of a Lover, that is to say, of Henry
of Orleans, Duke of Langueville. That Prince, who had endeavored to cheer up
her heart for the loss of the Duke of Bellegard, proved as unfaithful as he,
and went to dash himself against the same Rock, leaving nothing omitted to gain
the affection of Mademoiselle d'Estrees, during the King's absence, who was
forced to take the Field to complete the ruin of the Leaguers, and was
detained in Action longer then he expected. Upon his return, he applied himself
more sedulously to Mademoiselle d'Estrees then ever, and declar d openly, in
the tone of a Master, that he would have no Companion. If the Duke Of
Longueville were not a little disconsolate, Bellegard was much more, who was to
renounce a Heart of which he had been in possession, whereas Longueville built
upon a foundation of ill grounded hopes. Nevertheless he promised obedience,
and contented himself with expressing himself to his Mistress after so sensible
a manner, that she could not forbear to share in his grief. But she was not so
moderate herself: for she flew out against the King, and told him with an
extraordinary resolution, that she would be free in her inclinations, and that
he would but incur her Hatred, if he hindered her from marrying Bellegard,
which was a match that had been agreed upon with the goodliking of her
Relations. She also departed from M^nte without taking her leave, and returned
to Coeuvres.

Her Anger and her departure equally afflicted the King, and he resolved to
make use of the greatest Submission that might be to gain her Favor. The main
difficulty was which way to get to Coeuvres, in regard he was to travel seven
Leagues in the Enemies Country: nor could he march with a numerous Convoy,
without making his Passion known, and giving his Mistress a new occasion of
Distaste; so that he ran a great Hazard with a few Men, For that the Country was
covered with the Enemies Forces, and there was a necessity for him to cross a
very dangerous Forest. However he took the last Resolution, love causing him
to shut his Eyes against all other considerations. Thereupon he got a Horseback
with five or six of his Officers in whom he most confided, whom he dismis'd
when he came within three Leagues of the Castle of Coeuvres; and when he was
alone, he allighted, disguised himself in the Habit of a Peasant, and taking a
sack full of Straw upon his back, trud'g on with his Burden till he came to his
journeys end. Mademoiselle d' Estrees, who together with her Sister Madam de
Villars stood at the Window of a Gallery, that over looked the Country, saw the
Countreyman at a distance, but never dreaming of such a Fantastic adventure,
n'ere examined his Face. When the King came into the Court of the Castle, he
threw down his Burden, and going directly up Stairs, without taking notice of
any body, to the place where he had seen her stand who was the cause of his
Disguise, he accosted her after a most submissive manner. But he surpised her
extremely, when she perceived him in a Garb so little conformable to his
dignity, and far from being obliged to him for what he had done for her sake,
she received him with a disdainful look, which was more suitable to the Habit
which he wore, then the Luster of his Birth. So strangely does hatred Impoyson
the most Heroic Actions. Had Bellegard done as much for her sake, she would
have valued it at a high Rate, because she loved him; but she took it ill at
the King's Hands, because she had no kindness for him. She bid him with a
Scornful Air go and shift his Clothes if he intended to stay with Her, and so
somewhat rudely flung out of the Room, leaving her Sister to excuse her
incivility.

While the King took this unprofitable Journney, the whole Court was in a
strange disorder; nor did they come to themselves till the King's return
disperc'd all their fears He stayed not at all at Coeuvres, finding it in vain
to tarry, since he could not oblige Mademoiselle d' Estrees to show him the
least Favor. However he appeared for some time with such a Melancholy
Countenance, that they who saw him so disconsolate, thought verily he had lost
the half of his Kingdom. But coming at length too himself, he applied himself
to Public business, as he was wont to do: yet not being able to banish from
his Heart the ungrateful Mademoiselle d' Estrees, he sent word to her Father
that 'twas his pleasure to admit him into his Privy Council, on purpose to
oblige him to come to Mante with his whole Family. The favour's which were
bestowed upon the Father obliged the Daughter to use the King a little more
civily. But in regard he was obliged to be every hour on Horseback, either to
execute some Enterprise upon his Enemies, or to prevent their Designs, he could
not be constantly with her.

During the King's Absence, Mademoiselle d' Estrees continued her Familiarity
with Bellegard: nor did she surcease giving an Ear to the Duke of Longueville,
nor to write to him, not to receive Letters from him. But as soon as the King
had appeased the Troubles of his Kingdom, he removed all his Rivals. The Duke
of Longueville sacrificing his Love to the Care of his Fortune, desired his
Mistress to put an end to an Intreague, which could not but be attended with
unluckey Consequences, and inconvenient as well for the one as the other: he
also demanded his own L^tters, and offered to return those which she had
written, Mademoiselle d' Estrees was nothing troubl d to consent to this
Rupture, and appointed the place where to make the exchange. And indeed she was
very sincere in bringing all the Letters which she had received from the Duke:
but the Duke was not so ingenious as to bring all the Letters she had written
to him, but kept the most tender, by that same pledge to keep her as it were
under a kind of dependency. But she was extremely incensed at his
perfidiousness, and to revenge he self did the Duke of Langueville so many ill
Offices with the King, that finding the Court a place where he received nothing
but new Affronts every day, he engaged himself in a treasonable League, and was
slain making his entry into Dourlans with a Musket from a Volley of Honor that
was given him by the Garrison. Some there were who accused Madam d' Estrees to
have hired a Soldier to take away his Life, who made use of that opportunity;
nor was it without some probability.

But notwithstanding all the care which the King took to oblige the Marquess de
Coeuvres by his Favors, he could not win him to like well his sedulities to
his Daughter, fearing least she should complete the dishonor of his Family, of
which the Marchioness his Wife had already began to stain the reputation. For
she like a shameless Woman had followed the Marquess d' Allegre into Auvergne,
and there lived with him in a public Concubinage, not minding the scandal, or
what the world said of her. The Marquess therefore fearing least it should be
laid to his charge if Madam d' Estrees should come to lead a Licentious Life,
resolved to marry her, to free himself from the trouble of keeping a watch upon
her Actions; and for a Husband, he made choice of Nicholas Damarsal, Lord of
Liancourt, a Gentleman of an Illustrious descent, and who had a great Estate,
but whose mind and disposition were as crooked as his Body. Madam d' Estrees
was well informed of all his defects, however she consented to the marriage, to
free her self from the Tyranny of her Father, upon the King's word, that he
would never permit the Marriage to be consummated. But the King being engaged
in an Enterprise which held him longer then he expected, could not be present
at the Nuptials. The new married Lady perceiving the fatal hour approach,
wherein she was to be delivered to the Monster which her Father had made choice
of for her Husband, and no Galaunt appearing to rescue her from the danger to
which she was just ready to be exposed* after she had stormed a hundr'd times
against his negligence, and sworn as many times to be revenged of him she
prepared her self to bear the brunt with all the vigor she was capable to
show. And finding she was to expect no other assistance but what her own
resolution afforded her, she so well opposed her own reluctance to the
importunities of her Husband, that he could not engage her to go to bed with
him that night. The next day he carried her home, in hopes he might more easily
overcome her obstinacy, in a place where he was absolute Master. But she took
along with her all her kindred that had been invited to the Nuptials, and
retained 'em with her tell the King came to set her at liberty.

Henry IV. Being arrived at the next Village, sent for Liancourt to come to
him, and the convenient Husband went immediately, taking his Wife along with
him, in hopes of drawing some advantage for the raising of his fortune from the
King's love for his Wife. But alas! the King without taking any notice of him,
set forward in order to the Seige of Chartres. Madam de Liancourt went along
with him, accompani d by her Sister, and one of her kinswomen. Tho Siege was
long; which gave the King an opportunity to send for Elizabeth Babou to the
Camp. She was the Wife of Francis de Escoubleau, Marquess of Sourdis, and Aunt
to Gabriella d' Estrees; and the King was resolved to make use of her to be her
Neices Governess. To very good purpose as it fell out: For the Marchioness who
was greatly experienced in Amorous Affairs, gave her Neice such good
instruction, that she became mistress of all the Kings Affections by her
Compliances, and obtained for the Marquess of Sourdis the Government of
Chartres, after the place was taken.

Hen. IV. Before his Intreague with Mademoiselle d' Estrees, had persuaded
Queen Margaret his Wife Sister to the three last Kings his Predecessors, but
somewhat loose in her behavior, to consent to a dissolution of their Marriage
under certain conditions. Nay, the Queen her self was already retired to the
Castle of Vsson in Auvergne, seated upon a steep Mountain, and to which she had
added all the Fortifications that could render it Impregnable. But the King's
Amor delayed the conclusion of this affair, as being afraid least when he was
at liberty, his Subjects should press him to Marry her; which he could not find
in his heart to do, in regard it was not lawful for him, because she had a
Husband. Under these circumstances, finding it impossible for him to have a
Successor, he bethought himself of maraying Madam Catherine his Sister with a
Prince of the Blood. With this design he sent for her to come to him; and going
as far as the Loire to meet her, He presented the Duke of Montpensier to kiss
her hand, whom he designed her for a Husband. The Princess gave him but a very
cold reception, whither it were that she did not like his person, or that
having already surrendered her heart to the Count of Soissons, she could not
find room in her breast for another. She arrived at Dieppe, where she met with
Madam Gabriella (for so was Mademoiselle d Estrees called after her Marriage)
and the more she found her worthy of the Love which her Brother showed her, the
more she hated her. She beheld her being in Favor with Envy, and to humble
her, treated her with so much scorn and loftiness, that had it been any other
person, (...) could never have bore it. However Madam Gabriella complained of
her contempt to the King, and besought him to part 'em. But all that the King
could do to satisfy his Mistress, without disobliging his Sister, was to carry
Madam Gabriella along with him wherever he marched to complete the Conquest of
his Kingdom, and to leave his Sister at Dieppe Madam Gabriella, who seldom or
never stirred from the King, began to inform her self in the management of
Public Affairs, by the advice of Madam de Sourdis, and show d so quick a
Penetration and Judgment in matters of the highest importance, that she
procured to her self an entrance into the King's Counsels. Nor did the
Chancellor Chinconi contribute a little to procure her that favor. He had
conceived a most violent Passion for her, nor could he refrain from letting her
understand it, notwithstanding the gravity which the dignity of his Office
exacted from him; but doing himself that justice, as to be convinced that there
was no such Charms in his Person that could engage Madam Gabriella to endure
his Courtship, he had recourse to other means, and made himself useful to her,
in giving her opportunities to satisfy her Ambition.

But her extraordinary joy to see her self mounted to such a high degree of
honor was somewhat allai'd, by the news which she received of her Mothers
death, who was massaker'd at Issoire in A^vergne, by the people that mutini'd
against her Lover the Marquess d' Allegre. But she endeavored to repair that
loss by her Correspondence with Bellegard, whom she met in Private, yet so
warily that the King could never tax her of infidelity, tho he had frequent
jealousies, which she made a shift to dissipate with her Caresses, and her
Protestations of being insensible to any but himself. Nevertheless, Fortune
found away to discover this mystery, notwithstanding all the Precautions which
those two Lovers took to avoi'd surprisal. The King having lain with Madam
Gabriella one night, rose very early the next morning to execute some
enterprise that he had in his thoughts, and left his Mistress a bed, where she
lay under pretense of some little Indisposition; while Bellegard the better to
conceal his Game, gave out that he was returned to Mante. But so soon as the
King was gone, Arphure, a Confident of Madam Gabriella's, commonly called la
Rouse, introduced the Duke into a Cabinet, of which she her self had only the
Key, and let him out again, so soon as her Mistress was rid of all such persons
as were any way suspected to her. But while these two Lovers were tasting all
the Pleasures, that a tender Passion could afford 'em, dreaming of no disaster,
the King who mist his design returned, and by his hasty return put 'em into a
strange Confussion. However a bad shift was better then none; Arphure presently
slipped the Duke into her Cabinet, where she hid him at first, the Door of which
was next the Bedside, and the Window looked into the Garden. The King had a mind
to eat some Sweetmeats, and knowing that Arphure kept her Mistresses junkets in
that Closet, he called for the Key. Madam Gabriella made answer that la Rousse
had it in her Pocket, and that she was gone to visit a kinswoman of hers in the
Town. Upon that, the King whose suspicions were but the more exasperated by
such a refusal, threatend to break open the door and was going to work, tho she
complained that the noise would offend her Head. But the King who was resolved
to be satisfied of his doubts, made as if he had not heard what Madam Gabriella
said, and laid on with his Foot against the Door, that Bellegard finding he
should be forced in his Sanctuary, thought it became him to venture Body and
Soul to get out of the Briars; and therefore opening the Window out he got, and
jumped into the Garden, tho he thought it a little to dear to buy his Pleasure
at the price of such Catts leaps. But fortune happened to favor him so far
that he got no harm by the fall; whether it were that the Ground were moist and
yielding, or that this fear had disposed his body for the danger. Arphure, who
stood Sentinal to see what would become of the business, no sooner beheld the
Jump and the fair Escape, but in she comes, sweating and wiping her face with
her Handkercher, and crying Lord, Madam, I never dreamt you would have had any
occasion for me. With that the Crafty Confident opened the Closet, and gave the
King what Sweetmeats he desired. But then surpised to find no body in the
Closet, he concluded that Bellegard was become invisible, while Madam Gabriella
emboldened by his astonishment, lay reproaching him, and deriding his jealousy
at such a rate, that she made an absolute triumph of it. She told him, that
surely his love began to cool, and that he only sought a pretense to be rid of
her, but that she would not give him the advantage of quitting her first; for
that she would even prove an honest Wife at length, and go home to her Husband.
The King scared with these menaces, threw himself at her feet, begged her
Pardon a thousand time, and promised never to have an ill thought of her more.
Nor durst he for a long time after show the least mark of Jealosie, for fear
she should in earnest take a whimsey so contrary to his Repose.

While the Court was in this posture, the Duchess of Guise who stayed at Paris
with the Heads of the League, sent to desire a Pasport of the King, to go to
one of her Houses in the Country, which the King granted freely, and also gave
her leave to pass through the Town where he lay, Mademoiselle de Guise was glad
of the Journey, not so much out of Curiosity, an Infirmity natural to persons
of her Sex, as to satifie two opposite Passions. She loved Bellegard, and hated
Madam Gabriella, because he was beloved by her. She had a mind to the one, in
hopes to reingage him, and observe the other, in hopes to find out some way to
be revenged of her. But for the better understanding of this intreague, we must
go a little backward for the beginning of this Story.

While Paris was Beseig'd by the King's Army, there were frequent Truces,
during which all the Courtly Cavaliers met by the sides of the Trenches, to
discourse and entain the Ladies, who to that purpose appeared upon the
Ramparts. Annas d' Anglurre, Lord of Giury who was in love with Mademoiselle de
Guise, still made her acquainted with it, or else did her some other Civility.
But she never returned him any favorable answer, because she had some
pretentions to the King's heart, who had desired her Picture, and testified an
inclination to marry her, provided that Marriage would engage the Heads of the
League to return to their obedience. These hopes of a Crown made her despise
all those that durst declare themselves her Lovers. But she could not always
keep in that haughty mind. One day Bellegard suffering himself to be haul'd a
long by some of his Friends to one of the most convenient Posts for conversing
with the ^^dies, took notice of Mademoiselle de Guise, who appeared so amiable
to him, that (...) could not forbear fixing his eyes a long (...) upon her. Nor
was the Duchess insensible of it, and therefore explaining his staring upon
her to her advantage, made no question of an absolute Victory over the Dukes
Heart. She examined him afterward her self, and finding him a person worthy to
be beloved, she thought it might not be Impossible for her to comfort her self
for the loss of those grandeurs to which she had aspired, provided she might
spend the rest of her days with person for whom she had already so great an
inclination. Bellegard had been accused to have contributed formery to the
death the of the Duke of Guise, who was murdered at Blois, and Madam de Guise,
who had been informed of it, represented Bellegard to her self as a person whom
it behov d her to hate: but the more she incensed her heart to hate him, the
less she found it disposed to obey her, but with a strange confusion found that
her sentiments for him were quite of another sort. Thus Mother and Daughter
fell both in love with a Person whom a thousand reasons supported by decency
and point of honor, obliged to detest. Mademiselle de Guise well understood
that her Mother was her Rivaless, and resolved to combat her growing passion,
or at least to conceal the disorder it had made in her Breast. Bellegard on the
other side, thought it behooved him to extinguish those thoughts of tenderness
which he felt budding in his heart for Mademiselle de Guise, or at least to
make as if he knew nothing of any such thing, for fear least Madam Gabriella,
who had been the principal support of his fortune, should go about to ruin him,
when she came to understand his unconstancy.

He knew that Princess had been inform^d of the reports that ran about to his
prejudice concerning the murder at Blois, and not being able to endure she
should be his enemy, tho he gave over all thoughts of being beloved by her, he
employed some of his friends who kept good Correspondence in the House of
Guise, to speak in his justification, as well to the Mother as to the Daughter.
Those excuses were so well received that the Duchess declared to those that
spoke in his behalf, that she never gave Credit to those Calumnies, and forbid
her Daughter to accuse the Duke, for the future, of being concerned in her
Fathers death. Nor did Mademoiselle de Guise show the least reluctance to obey
so pleasing a command: so agreeable to reason, and experience is the Proverb,
that Love justifies all things.

The Dutchesses civilities put Billegard to a new non plus; he called to mind
how Mademoiselle de Guise had answered his passionate looks, and judge d that it
would not be impossible for him to be belov d by her. On the other side, he
laid before himself what a fowl piece of ingratitude it would be, to fail in
his Fidelity, to a Person that preferred him before a King, greater for his
virtue then for the Throne to which his birth had advanced him. Nevertheless,
tho Reason, Ambition and Honor condemned his change, he could not find in his
heart to extingish a Passion supported by such pleasing hopes: nor would he
renounce either the one or the other of his Mistresses, but took a resolution
to serve 'em both at the same time. With this design he thought it behov^d him
to make the best of the Affection which the Duchess of Guise had for him: and
to that purpose he frequently sent her Letters, or Messages, and always
receiv^d obliging answers. The Duke of Guise having made his escape out of
Prison, where he had been confined since the death of his Father, Bellegard,
who knew it particularly, sent away a Trumpeter to congratulate him, and withal
gave him two Letters to deliver to both the Princesses. The Trumpeter who
understood his business, slipped into Mademoiselle de Guises hand the Letter that
was directed to her, unperceived by any body. And she, because she could not
speak to the Messenger, as being too strictly observ^d, gave him to understand
by an obliging sign, that his message no way displeased her. Of which Bellegard
being informed by his Trumpeter, he received the news with as much joy as if
some considerable happiness had befallen him.

This was the condition of these three persons, when Madam de' Guise requested
the Passport already mentioned. Bellegard therefore understanding that the
Duchess was upon the Road, intending for Ma^te, persuaded the King to send
some body to meet her, and obtained that permission himself. I shall say
nothing of what passed at that enterview: But it is easy to guess that the
Mother let slip no favorable opportunity, to give the Duke a full
understanding of her Passion, and that the Daughter answered the Duke's more
passionate looks with glances no less tender, tho her modesty somewhat
eclipsed the vivacity of 'em. When the Duchess arrived at Court, she could
not forbear praising Madam Gabriella's Beauty; but the Princess tho she agreed
in her thoughts to every thing her Mother said, could not find in her heart to
applaud those Charms that disputed with her the possession of an Affection to
which she had such great Pretentions. On the otherside, Madam Gabriella, after
she had cast her eyes sometimes upon Bellegard, sometimes upon Mademoiselle de
Guise, felt in her self a kind of secret vexation to find the Princess so
lovely. So that the two Rivalesses showed as much coldness one for the other as
it was possible for 'em to express, without failing in those Civilities which
it behooved 'em to pay each other mutually, to avoid rudeness. More then that,
Mademoiselle de Guise, being in the Circle toward Evening, told Bellegard, whom
she perceiv d attending her Chair, after she had sometime considered Madam
Gabriella, that she did not believe her so Beautiful as Fame had published her.
To which the Duke durst return no answer, for fear of being overheard by his
former Mistress, who was not far from him.

The King who was informed of the love which the Duchess of Guise had for
Bellegard, readily apprehended, that if he had any complaisance for her, 'twas
only for fear least she should perceive the Passion which he had for her
Daughter. And this judgment which the King made of his Amors prove d two ways
to the Dukes advantage. For it dissipated the jealous sentiments which the King
had of Madam Gabriella, for whom he had a greater kindness then ever; and it
made him utterly renounce his design of marrying Mademoiselle de Guise. So that
Bellegard was at liberty to continue unmolested in his Intreague with both his
Mistresses.

He would have been too happy, could he but have cured Madam Gabriella of her
jealousy as well the King. But she was too quicksighted, and had too much
interest to pry into his Conduct, to be so easily deceived. She was soon
sensible of the Services which he paid to Mademoisselle de Guise, and the
disgust she took would not permit her to taste the Pleasure which the King's
credulity would otherwise have afforded her, if her thoughts had been more at
liberty. Mademoiselle de Guise obsev'd in her turn the restlessness of Madam
Gabriella, and whither it were that she thought by augumenting it, to oblige
her to an absolute Repture with Bellegard, or that out of mere vanity she took
delight to make known the Power of her Charms, she no longer kept her self
within Bounds, but affected, before her Rivallessees face, to give the Duke all
the marks of affection that could foment her Jealousy. It Is true, that she
thought she did her no unjustice in depriving her of the Duke, since she had
taken the King's heart from her. Nevertheless, things were not equal: For it is
certain that Madam Gabriella would have renounced, with little trouble, all the
interests of Fortune, provided she might have met with her satisfaction in
point of Love.

The Duchess of Guise, after she had stayed a day at Court, and obtained a
Neutrality for the House where she desired to spend the Summer, took her leave
of his Majesty. But Madam Gabriella could not pardon her Daughter, for the
attempt she made upon her Lovers Heart: so that she would not see either the
one or the other at their departure, under pretense of being indisposed.
Bellegard, and the Chiefest part of the Grandees of the Court, attended her a
great way, nor did they return till next morning. Madam Gabriella gave the Duke
a very cold reception, which did not a little perplex him: for he knew well,
that it would be a difficult thing to enter into so strict a Correspondence
with Mademoiselle de Guise, so long as the War continu d: and that
consideration made him fear the loss of his former Mistress, the satisfaction
of whose company would make him some amends for the absence of his new
Mistress. He upbraided himself with his own indiscretion, and he had sometimes
the leisure to repent of his being unfaithful to little purpose. But if
Bellegard felt a Tempest in his Breast, the Duchess of Guise enjoyed as little
Tranquillity: She could not live remote from him who took up all her thoughts;
and therefore, to remove all obstacles that kept her from his Company, she
persuaded her Son to treat with the King; of which she gave advice to the King
by a Courrier sent on purpose. Hen. IV. who desierd nothing so much as to bring
back his Subjects to their Duty by acts of Mildness, especially this young
Prince, for whom he had a value, and whom he knew to have a great interest
among the Leaguers, accepted the Proposal, and made choice of Bellegard to
negotiate with the Duchess. Of which Madam Gabriella having notice, she
endeavored to get another appointed in his Room, representing to the King,
that the Duke was a young man without experience, who would never be able to
carry on such an Employment; besides, that his Mediation would not be so
pleasing to the Son as to the Mother. On the other side, Bellegard, who
passionately desired to see his new Mistress Mademoiselle de Guise, made use of
all his Credit with the Duke of Neverse President of the King's Council, to
confirm the King in his first design. Nor did the Duke stand in need of much
Eloquence to persuade the King to it: for inregard the King well knew that
Madam Gabriella acted upon the account of jealousy, the same Passion hindered
him from yielding to her Reasons.

Well at length the Duke set forward; but his Journey proved not so successful
as he promised to himself. For Paris being returned to her obedience, the King,
who saw the Leagures Party utterly ruined refused to grant the Duke of Guise
those Conditions which he demanded. However Bellegarde would not be
discouraged, and being well seconded by the Duke of Nevers, he oblig d the King
to grant the Duke of Guise a very advantageous accommodation. Which being
concluded, the Duke came to kiss the King's hand at Mante, and was graciously
receiv^d. Afterward he went to Madams Apartment, in whose eye he appeared so
handsome that she thought she could do no less then prefer him before the Count
of Soisson's.

1596. Madam Gabriella finding that Bellegarde had made an accommodation for the
Duke, would needs make another for the Duke of Main, in h^pes he might be
useful to her in a design which she had to marry the King. To that purpose she
caused an offer to be made him of her Service; and he promised to employed all
the Credit of the League to advance her to the Throne. The first thing she did,
was the obtaining leave for the Duke to retire to Chalon^, together with a
General Truce for all his Party, and having gained the President Jeannin, who
by the King's order negotiated that Accommodation, she caused the King to pass
a good number of Artic^o^ that would have been very hardly admitted, without
her recommendation.

Sometime after the King set forward in order to besiege Laon: and during his
absence Madam Gabriella was brought to ^ed of Caesar Duke of Vendosme. Of which
when the King received the news at the Camp, he was pleas d to testify his joy
for the Birth of a Son, by Creating his Mistress March^o less of Beaufort. Upon
his Return, Madam Gabriella, labored in good earnest to incline him to the
Marriage which she desired. And because that in order to bring it to pass,
there was a necessity of breaking the Contract which the King had made with
Queen Margaret, she endeavor d to gain the Consent of that Princess. But they
who spoke to her about it, found her no way disposed to give her consent, tho
for no other reason, but that she could not brook without disdain, to see that
room which they would persuade her to quit, supplied by a person so much her
Inferior. But tho the Marchioness of Beaufort understood to her sorrow the ill
success of that Negotiation, the new importunities of the Duke of Bellegarde
made her amends for it, who felt his almost extinguished. Fires rekindle'd by
that augmentation of her Grandeur. He took care to justify himself, and was
favorably heard; because people readily believe whatever they desire.

Tho Bellegarde had made his peace with the Marchioness, he no less assiduously
paid his services to Mademoiselle de Guise, and made her such frequent Visits,
that her Brother began to take it amiss. But all this while that he blamed the
Duke's Temerity, he committed the same error in reference to Madame, and spoke
of him after so a disobliging a manner, that Bellegarde believing himself
obliged to resent it, labored to remove him from the Court. To that purpose,
he gave the King to understand by the Duke of Nevers, that the Duke of Guise's
Courting his Sister without his Permission, was a wounding of his Authority,
and that it would be convenient to Banish him into some remote Province, under
pretense of some Honorable Employment. It so fell out also, that the
Government of Province was then vacant, and therefore the Marchioness of
Beaufort begged it for him. Nor could the King refuse such a Boon to his
Favorite and Mistress. So that the Duke of Guise had the Government confered
upon him before he was aware, and was constrained to depart, without having
time hardly to take his leave of Madame.

She, poor Princess, was strangely surpised when she heard that her Lover was
removed from her, without any hopes of seeing him in a long time, in so much
that she had not the power to bid him adieu. However she endeavored to find
out who had drawn this misfortune upon her, but not being able to discover any
thing, after she had stormed for some days against her evil destiny, she
suffered amends to be made her for that loss by John Lewis de Nogaret de la
Valette, Duke of Espernon, and tho he were neither so handsome nor so young as
the Duke of Guise, she kept a good Correspondence with him till her Marriage
with the Duke of Bar, with Whom she went to live in his own Territories, and
by her departure delivered the Marchioness of Beaufort from a world of
vexation, for being forced to pay many times ill received deferences to the
Birth and Quality, rather then to the person of that Princess.

Bellegarde on the other side, knew how to make the best advantage of the
Marchiness of Beauforts good. Humor, upon the departure of the Duchess of
Bar, to dispose her to a reconciliation with Mademoiselle de Guise; he also
wrought her to consent that he should marry that Princess, as being the only
means to cure the King's Jealousy which began to revive again more and more
every day. On the other side Madam de Guise put it forward as much as lay in
her power, knowing the advantage of such a Match, at a time when the
Marchioness of Beaufort disposed of all the King's Favors. From that time
forward therefore those two Ladys perfectly understood one another, were never
a sunder, and affected the same Habits and the same Dresses. Which
reconciliation deceived the King to that degree, that he no longer suspected
Bellegarde to have any familiarity with the Marchioness, and he had been the
Lord knows how long wrapped up in that error, but for an unexpected accident that
awakened all his suspicions at once. For Bellegarde one evening had written a
very tender Billet to the Marchioness, which Arphure forgot under her Toylet,
not having taken care to lock it up, by reason of some little indisposition of
her Mistress. Now it so fell out that Peter. Beringhon, First Valet de Chamber
to the King, going betimes in the morning by the King's order, to know how the
Marchioness did, perceived the fatal Billet, took it up, and carried it to his
Master. Upon that, the King commanded him to keep a vigilant watch upon those
two Lovers, and Beringhon was so faithful in the discharge of his Trust, that
seeing the Duke one Evening enter the Marchionesses Chamber, he gave the King
notice of it, who presently commanded Charles de Choisul Marquis of Pralin,
Captain of the Guards of his Body, to go and Stabb that insolent Fellow in his
Mistresses Arms.

The Marquess was at his wits end to be charged with an order so rigorous
against two Persons that had obliged him upon several occasions. However he
obeyed, and passing through the Guard-hall, made a sign to five or six to
follow him; but he went so far about and made such a noise, that when he came
into the Chamber he found no body but the Marchioness alone, to whom he
unfolded his Commission. The Marchioness took so kindly the Service he had done
her, that she promised him never to forget it. And it was upon her
recommendation and Mademoiselle de Guises together, who was no less concerned
in the preservation of Bellegarde, then the Marchioness, that Pralin obtained
the Battoon of Marshall of France; and afterward they wrought him so deeply
into the King's favor, as thereby to raise him to that high degree of Fortune
wherein he appeared toward the end of Henry the Greats Reign. In the mean time
the Marchioness upbraided the King with his unjust suspicions; nor had the King
any thing else to support the Transports of his Indignation, then the Letter
that Beringhon brought him. But as to that, she swore that she never read it,
and easily justified herself, because she had a Plenipotentiary Power to make
her Credulous Lover believe whatever she pleased to impose upon him. So that
there wanted nothing to complete the Cure of the King's jealousy, but her
consent to Bellegarde's Banishment, who received an Order to depart the Court,
and not to return, till he was married, and brought his Wife along with The
Duke departed, and because it was impossible to stay long from the Mansion of
Pleasure, he married Ann de Beuil, the Daughter of Honor de Beuil, Sister to
Fontaine, who was slain at the Siege of St. Malo's when that City declared for
the League. With her, he returned to Paris; but there he found a new Beauty,
who never before had appeared at Court; this was Louise de Budo's, Daughter to
James de Budoss, and Katherine de Claremont, married but a little while to the
Constable Montmorency. This young Lady made all that pretended to be successful
in Gallantry tremble: and not without reason, for that there never was any
Lover whose Fidelity could be proof against her Charms. But she was so haughty
withal, that she scorned the love of the one and the jealousies of the other.

Nor could the King defend himself any better then his Courtiers defended
themselves from the sparkling Glances which she darted from her eyes, but was
very officious in paying his assiduities to her, never valuing the trouble it
might be to Madam de Beaufort. The Counstable also took delight in her
disturbances, and jeasted about 'em with Marshal de Biron, who solely possessed
the Kings Inclinations. But Fortune soon after delivered the Marchioness from
so dangerouss a Rivaless: for she died in Childbed, leaving the Constable two
Children, Henry, afterward Duke of Montmorancy, and Charlote Margarite, who
was married to Henry of Bourbon Prince of Conde, which was the occasion of a
very great Intreague, toward the end of this Reign. Madam de Beaufort had also
by the King Katherine Henrietta, legitimated of France, whom in 1619, married
Charles of Lorrain Duke of Elbeuf, and Alexander de Vendosme, commonly called
the Grand Prior, who ended his days in the Dungeon of the Castle of Vincennes,
where he had been confined by the order of Lewis XIII. But the Marchioness was
not brought to bed of this Prince till after the Queen was unmarry'd; and then
it was that finding her self at liberty, she made use of all her wit to oblige
the King to set the Crown upon her Head. The King also, over whom she had an
absolute ascendant, left nothing omitted on his part to have gratified her
desires, and banished Nicholas de Neuville, Lord of Villeroy, and Secretary of
State, for presuming with too much liberty to condemn his design. Now in regard
the King was certain to obtain whenever he pleased the consent of Queen
Margaret, there remained no more to do but only to get the Court of Rome to
allow the Divorce. To which purpose he sent with the Character of his
extraordinary Ambassador, Nicholas Brulard, Lord of Sileri, then President of
the Parliament, and afterward Chancellor of France. He was one of the most
able Ministers the King had, and in regard he was no less Zealous for his
Masters Interests then for those of the Marchioness, to whom he was beholding
for a good part of his Fortune, 'twas to be presumed that he would leave
nothing uneffected to render his Embassy successful. But before we relate the
success of his Negotiation, it will not be amiss to show upon what grounds the
King demanded the Dissolution of his marriage: which cannot be better
understood then by the Manifesto that he published upon that occasion.

The Manifesto of Hen. IV. upon his Divorce from Queen Margaret.
I Thought my self exempt from giving an account to the Public of the motives
that induced me, after twenty years being wedded together, to separate my self
from the Sister of the Kings my Predecessors under pretense of being too near
in Blood: And indeed being above the Laws, I did not think my self obliged to
give an account of my actions to any but God only. But in regard that
Strangers, and several of the French Nation take an occasion from thence to
blame my Conduct, some calling me Voluptuous; others, Atheistical; and both
the other condemning me for ungrateful, I thought my self concerned in honor to
satisfy those who have suffered themselves to be abused, and to confound the
malice of my secret Enemies, by exposing to the Eyes of the World the true
causes of the Divorce which I desire. For considering the high Station to which
God has raised me, it is not sufficient that my life should be without reproach,
it behooves me also to render it free from suspicion, and to draw the Curtain
with which I endeavor to hide the disorder of my Family.

'Ts said that Heaven sends admonitions to those who are born to command over
others, of the misfortunes that will be fall 'em. If the bloody Rain that fell
at Rome before the Battle of Cannae, were a presage of the loss which the
Republic was shortly to sustain, I may say that the Blood that was shed upon
the day of my Nuptials, seemed to foretell the cruel Afflictions that should
befall me, by reason of this fatal Union. But I never minded that unlucky Omen,
nor the words of Charles the Ninth, Brother to this unchaste Woman, who being
better acquainted with her then my self, said by way of Raillery, that he did
not give his Megg for a Wife to the King of Navarr, only, but to all the
Heretics in his Kingdom. I interpreted his meaning another way, and imagined
that he looked upon it as a knot that would for the future inevitably bind to
his Service all the Huguenots: nevertheless, time has but too plainly discoverd
to me the mystery of that Oracle. I was so little acquainted with that
Princess, that I knew not that she had been sensible of love ever since Eleven
years of Age, that Entragues and Charrins, both boasted that they had obtained
her chiefest favors at that Age. I know not whither a Generous Emulation to
dispute the Conquest, or the Transports of his Pleasure caused Entragues to go
beyond his strength, but certain it is that his efforts brought him within two
fingers breadth of the Grave, and made him relinquish his bargain to take a
Wife less beautiful, but more prudent and reserved.

The Prince of Martignes supply^d the place which Entragues left vacant, and
having discarded Charrins, for whom she had no great kindness, he remained the
sole master of her heart. That Prince being naturally vain glorious, was so far
from making a mystery of his good fortune, that there Intreague, after it had
been the discourse of the whole Court, was divulged in the Army, and passing
from mouth to mouth, afforded ample matter of Raillery to all the Foot
Soldiers, of which Martignes was Colonel. That indiscreet Lover, upon all
occasions of greatest danger wore an Embroidered Scarf, and carried with him a
little Dog that she had given him, which he kept to his dying day as a Pledge
of her Friendship. The loss of this Favorite drew tears from her, which the
King endeavored to wipe away, by marrying her to the King of Portugal: But the
Duke of Guise, who pretended, by espousing her, to give some color to his
Ambitious Designs, crossed that Match, by the cunning of the Cardinal of
Lorrain, her Uncle, who was sent to the King of Spain to condole the Death of
Elizabeth of France his Wife. In the mean time the Duke insinuated himself into
the favors of that Princess, by means of the kind Offices which he did Madam
de Carnavalet. It Is said, that the Dukes of Alenson and Anjou broke off that
Intreague, and that she had those complacencies for 'em, that propinquity of
Blood did no way authorize: but I cannot believe that her Debauchery ran up to
that excess. However it were* the mark had been hit several times before our
marriage, and all men will be easily convinced, that I had no need of any great
strength to carry the Ring at the first Course.

So soon as we were married, they who had right to pretend to her familiarity,
discarded themselves, and obliged her by their withdrawing themselves to stoop
to Gallantries not so Illustrious. The Duchess of Nevers her very good friend,
who loved Cocona's, engaged her to favor la Molle a Confident of their
Intreague, to spare him the trouble of holding the Cloak when they were
together. But they preserved not those Lovers very long, for being found guilty
of the Conspiracy of the Marshals Montmorency, and de Cosse, they left their
Heads upon a Scaffold. At what time these Compassionate Ladys, understanding
that they lay exposed to the view of the People, took up the precious
remainders of the Objects of their Amors, and put 'em into their Coach: which
done they carried 'em to St. Martins Chapel below Montmatre, where after they
had bedewed 'em with their Tears, they buried 'em with their own hands.

The Queen was so over pressed with grief for the Tragical end of la Molle,
that she was pitty'd by St. Hue. That Noble Knight was resolved to make her
amends for the loss of him, and out of that Pious Intention, went often to
visit her, at Nerac in several disguises; but finding her melancholy returned
the very same day that she saw herself deprived of his sweet Consolations, she
stood in need of Bussy to cheer her up. Nevertheless, she did not find the
latter fit for her turn, because as it is said he was a better Trencher-man then
a Bedfellow, and for that he was often tormented with a Colic, of which he had
usually a fit at the beginning of his sport.

But the difference between those two parties, did not hinder her from harkning
to the Duke of Main, a good Champion, Plump and Fat, and Voluptuous like her
self. That conformity of humors caused the correspondence to last very long,
notwithstanding that Madam Vitry came in for a share, and did all she could to
interrupt it. Nevertheless, the Duke forgot himself one day, when he wrote to
her Rivaless, that he preferred the Sun before the Moon; that is to say in plain
intelligible Language, Madam Vitry before the Queen of Navarr; because my chaste
Spouse called her self Diana; but there was a reconciliation, and the Moon
Eclipsed the Sun.

This Sacrifice could not make Diana loose her inconstant Humor, nor was it
just that she should continue her fidelity to a Man who separated himself from
her to make War against the Party which Honor and Virtue obliged him to
embrace. The Huguenots also would have had reason to complain, could she have
found no body among 'em worthy to enjoy her, for a few days at least. Vicount
Turenne was the first of their Hero's that entered the Lists, he was Proper and
had a good Presence; and his acceptable outside pleased at first. But she found
him not so amiable in Private as in Public, so that she dismissed him with this
Character that he was like Empty Clouds that only make a fair show. This Lover
in Despair would have gone and hanged himself in some remote Country, and I
know not what would have been become of him if for the Interest of our Party, I
had not obliged her to recall him. She had much a do to find in her heart to be
so good natured because her Vanity had put her in hopes that the Vicount would
have done like Anaxarete's Lover, who hanged himself up at her Door. And it was
a trouble to her, to see her self deprived of the Honor to have forced a Man
of his Merit to have hanged himself for her Sake.

She made me pay dear for this Complainsance; so that I was constrained to
suffer that which she had for Clermont d' Amboise, who embraced her often in
her Night Gown upon the Threshold of the Chamber-dore, while I to give her time
to go to bed, either walked or played in my Parlor with such Officers as I had
about me. The Convenience could not be carried any farther; and I know more
Coquetts then one that would have purchased at the price of any Gold a Husband
of this Character. Nevertheless because I would not be accused of venting my
Morals so extraordinary, to tame the jealous, and take advantage of their
weakness I will set forth the reasons that induced me to observe this Conduct.
I was a King without a Kingdom, and Head of a Party, which it behooved me to
maintain most commonly without Men or Money to raise any: and when I saw the
Tempest ready to pour upon me, had no other way to divert it, then by my
submission. Then this good Lady, such as she is, was not unuseful to me; the
consideration of her, mollifi'd her Mother and her Brothers exasperated against
me. On the other side, her Beauty drew to me a good number of stout Men, which
her easiness retained in my service; and she would have thought it an injury
done to the interest of our Party, had she discouraged any one by the excess of
her severity. Judge you, after all this, if I had not reason to keep fair with
her. However, there were some that were the subject of her railliery, and I had
the honor to be entrusted with their ridiculous Passion. The old Fool de
Pierat was one of that number; Love made him her Chancellor, and he contested
for this Employment, that he might have the privilege to write to her those
Letters which his tenderness dictated, and with which, that perfidious Officer
and my self divertis'd our selves when we were alone together. Those who had
erected her Scheme, had foretold, that her Stars threatened that she should dye
by my hand, between the 21 and 28 of March 1580. and that I would sacrifice her
to my outrag'd Honor, but my prudence or the hopes of my future separation,
rendered that prediction vain, and frustrated the malignity of her Stars. We
continued together as before, I in my Indulgence, and she abandoned over to her
Voluptuousness. She invented also new Ragoos, by laying on black Taffata Sheets
upon her Bed, and lighting up a thousand Wax Candles in her Chamber. And then
it was that she became fruitful, and brought to light that fruit of her
Libertinism, which being educated under a borrowed name, promises one day to
out do her Mother, in her happy talents. These niceties and refinements of her
wantonness had brought her to that delicate pass, that she could not endure me.
When at any time I returned from Hunting with my face all dusty, and bathed in
sweat, lay down by her side, I was no sooner out of the Bed, but she caused the
Sheets to be chang d, tho perhaps I had not lain there above a quarter of an
hour. She did not only scorn my Person, but my Birth, which she thought
inferior to hers. One day, having desired her to let Madam de Thoiras, with
whom I had something of Affinity, sit down at her Table, she answered me, that
then she must wash her feet in a Basin full of Water, as if she had been one of
the poor Women, that come to have their feet washed upon Maunday Thursday. As
if she had not at Florence a hundred Merchants, that were nearer a kin to her
by twenty degrees, then any of the Relations of the Illustrious Families of
Foix and Albret to the House of Bourbon. But those adventures befell her
afterward that humbl'd her Pride.

After she had been shamefully expel d out of Paris, from whence a Captain of
the Guards of the Body sent her packing, and searched her very Litter, to see
what company she had, and whither Mesdames de Duras, and Bethune her Cabinet
Secretaries, who were forbid to follow her, were there or no, she was a little
more cautious, for fear of worse usage. However, her reserv'dness was but of a
short continuance, no longer then the remembrance of the affront: so soon as
the Image of Pleasure had rased it from her memory, she was to be seen plunging
her self in Voluptuousness, with an unbridl'd Incontinency. She left me without
so much as bidding me adieu, and went to Again, a City contrary to my Party,
there to keep her Amorus Court, and to continue her Debaucheries with more
freedom. But the Inhabitants scandalized at her loose manner of living, sent
her packing in so much have, that she had hardly time to get up behind one of
her Favorites, and they that could not tell where to hire Horses traps d after
her, some without Masks, some without Aprons, some not half dressed, and in
so great disorder, that you would rather have taken 'em for Gypsies, then Maids
of Honor to a Great Queen.

They were accompanied by some Officers, some a Horseback without Boots,
others a Foot, under the orders of Lignerac, who carried 'em to Carlat, in the
Mountains of Anvergne, where Marce his Brother was Governor; a Place of
strength indeed, but which you would have rather taken for a Cavern to harbor
Thieves, then for the Residence of a Princess, both the Daughter, Sister and
Wife of a King.

I blush when I think of all these Indignities; well knowing that History will
not fail of transmitting to Posterity the actions of great Personages,
notwithstanding all the care they can take to stifle 'em. What a shame will it
be, when after twenty Ages, an Age less vicious shall come to understand that
this produced such a Monster of Uncleanness, and that there should issue from a
Blood so Noble, and Pure; a Woman whose dissolutness surpassed the Incontinency
of Julia and Mesallina.

I was in hopes, before this last adventure, that her natural inconstancy would
have infused into her a disgust of a Debauchery wherein she met with no
opposition, seeing Our desires are not exasperated but by the obstacles that
oppose 'em; and that in recompense of that indulgence wherewith We suffered all
her Disloialties, she would at length have surceas'd to dishonor me; but
experience has showed me, that Vice being become habitual to her, she never
felt any remorce of Conscience when she betrayed her Duty. This obstinacy of
hers, in violating the Rights and Laws of Conjugal Society, made me at length
resolve to break the Bond that united us together. God who has done me the
Favor to deliver me from this lascivious Woman, well knows how much I wished
it had been in my power to have unfolded this secret Article of our Divorce in
milder terms, and not to have been constrained to publish what ought to have
been buried in eternal silence; but public murmur and calumny force me to it,
and the assurance I have of advancing nothing but what is known all over France
invites me to it.

The King her Brother understanding her flight, and hearing the complaints
which I made of her, wrote me word that if I would have taken his Counsel, and
have treated his Sister, as she deserved, I should have been free from
disturbance, nor should I have been tired with her follies. He also openly
spoke it at Dinner, that the Queen of Navarr did not only prostitute her self
to the Younger Brothers of Gascoine, but to the Mule Drivers and Tinkers of
Auvergne: which words proved true. For after she arrived at Carlas, where she
stayed a good while, not only without any Canopies or Beds of State, but
without a Smock, she made no distinction in the choice of her Favorites. She
honored her Cook with her last favors, not being able to lie idle, while she
stayed for Duras, whom she had sent into Spain for Money, tho her Envoy's Wife
preached Constancy and Loyalty to her every day, to prevent her fullying her
self with such an ignominious Engagement. It Is true that all her other Lovers
had forsaken her, when they saw her in misery, and that St. Vincent was
returned home to avoid the excessive expense he must have been at, had he
undertaken to have kept all her Family.

But the niceness of the Queen of Navarr, could not long comply with a Lover
that always smelt of Grease, and therefore because she could not be without
one, she advanc d into his room her Squire Aubiac, who could never else have
expected with his read hair, and his freckl'd skin to have been admitted to the
Embraces of a Daughter of France. Nevertheless he had subject enough to
satisfy his Vanity, being found a Bed with her by Madam de Marce, who came a
little to early, to pay her respects to the Queen. But that officious visit was
repaid with the death of her Husband, whom the Queen sent into the other world,
by help of a Beverage prepared alamode of her Mothers Country. She thought,
that after she had poisoned the Governor, that it might have been easy for
her, with the help of the Soldiers that Roras, Aubiac's kinsman was gone to
raise in Gascoine, to have made her self absolute Mistress of that Place, and
to have expelled those that had so generously received her during her
misfortune. But she faild in her wicked designs. Duras returning from Spain,
and seeing another Lover in possession of his room, would not let her have any
Money, but feigned to have laid it out in Gloves, Parfumes, Horses and other
Curiosities of the Country from whence he came, what the new Amazon had
designed in order to make War against me. The Gascoine Levies were discovered,
the Garrison was reinforced, and she her self was charitably advised to seek
some other Post; which the fear of an Affront made her do with great
precipitation. She departed with the same Equipage, and in the same disorder as
she arrived, and made such long days Journies, that she got to Jury, a House
belonging to the Queen her Mother. But she had hardly time to alight before she
saw her self besieged by the Marquess of Cavillac, to whom the King had given
such Order. There she was taken with her Paramour, who had hid himself under a
heap of Ordure, without Beard or Hair; she her self having clipped 'em off, the
better to disguise him. Nevertheless, she did not resolve to save him this way,
till she had in vain attempted to infuse Courage into him, and to have
persuaded him by death to have avoided that ignominy which was prepared for
him, offering to show him the way herself, provided he had but the resolution to
follow her. I make no question but they who read this Manifesto will be moved
to compassion, when they shall understand to what extremities this Princess was
reduced to; an unworthy Scien of those renowned Hero's that have so gloriously
extended the Bounds of this Famous Kingdom, and humbl'd the Pride of her
Neighbors. Nor is it less an affliction to me to see their Memory thus
affronted, and their Reputatition tarnish'd by this Enemy of Virtue. But this
is my comfort, that there are very few or no Descents, how illustrious soever
they may be, that are not defective in some part of the Lineage or other; no
Spring so pure and ^impid, which after a long course has not its Chrystial
Streams defiled and intermixed with Slime and Mudd. But so much for Morality,
let us now see how she got clear of this Precipice into which she was fallen.

She had those flattering colloging ways with her, that it was a difficult
matter for a man to resist her, when she had a mind to make use of 'em. And
indeed she courted Cavillac to that degree, that not being able to continue
long insensible, but rather preferring ^^ansitory pleasure to that fidelity
which he owed his Master, he suffered himself to be surppsiz'd by the Artifices
of his Prisoner, he sacrificed the interest of his Fortune to the Lullaby's
that Love had promis d him, and willingly blinded by his jealousy, ordered
Aubiac to be prosecuted by Lug^li. That unfortunate person, who was guilty of
no other Crime, then of having complied with the Caresses of our Circe was
hanged at Aigue-Perse, so constant to his faithless Mistress, that instead of
thinking of his Salvation, he kissed to the last minute of his life, a Scarf of
Blew Velvet, the only remainder of her favors. And it seemed as if the unhappy
Aubiac had had some kind of foresight of his misfortune. The first time that he
saw the Queen, he was so charm d with her Beauty, that he could not forbear
telling the Commander of the Regiment of St. Luke, with whom he was in company
at that present, Good God! what a lovely person is that! could I but have one
nights Lodging with her, 'twould never vex me to be hanged afterward. There is
no pleasure in divining as he did; such Oracles are to be dreaded; and I wonder
that they who succeeded to his good Fortune never made any reflection upon it.
Certainly they rely d upon the Proverb which says, that Gibets are for the
Uunfortunate, not for the Guilty. Cavillac being rid of his Rival, whom he had
sacrificed rather to his Jalousie, then to any Revenge, left nothing omitted to
please his new Mistress. That Illustrious Gallant, who before love had
metamorphos'd him, was no handsommer then my self, began to consult his Looking
Glass, and to make use of all the Dresses and Habiliments that could set off
his dwarfish Stature; but let him spruce himself up as he could, it was
impossible for him to fix the Quicksilver humor of the Queen; her
condescensions to him were only to tame him, to the end that while he thought
himself beloved of her, he might make her absolute Mistress of Vss;on. To
compass this design, she upbraided him with mistrusting her Worth, that he had
not that delicacy for her as to let her follow her own inclinations without
restraint, and that she would live with him with less reservedness, if she once
found he thought that he was not beholding for his Caresses to the heat of her
Passion: Cavillac suffered himself to be deluded by these glozing hopes; but no
sooner had he sent away the Garrison out of the City which he himself had
placed there, and given the Queen leave to bring in another that was at her own
devotion, but she sent him to St. Cirque to gather his Apples, and would not so
much as hear talk of him afterward. When she had strengthened her self with a
Reinforcement that she sent for from Orleleance, she settled the Imperial
Metropolis of her delights upon that Rock, and find-her self independent,
abandoned her self to her inordinate Pleasures, and took for her Model Aretines
Nanna, and benefited so well by her instructions, that she could have read a
lesson to Jocundus's or the King of Lombardy's Wife. It Is true that for fear of
imposing a Master upon herself, she stook to her Secretaries, her Singingmen,
and some other paltry fellows, whose Race and Names are unknown even to their
Neighbors, nor do they merit any room in these Memoires.

Nevertheless, I cannot omit the Famous Pomeni, the Sun of a Tinker in
Auvergne, whom she fetched out of the Cathedral, where he sung amongst the
Queristers. He, having an^ indifferent voice, attain to the dignity of being
one of her Musicians, and rising from the Chapel to the Chamber, and from the
Chamber to the Cabinet, was at length advanced to the degree of a Secretary,
where along time he had several employments, and made dispatches upon matters
of very different natures. This of all her Paramours was the Man whom she loved
most tenderly. Of him it was that she said, that he changed his Body, his
Voice, his Countenance, and his Hair, as he pleased himself, and that he had
Audience in hugger mugger when ever he had a mind to it. For his sake it was,
that she caused the Beds of the Ladies that served her, to be made so high,
that you might see whatever was underneath without stooping, to the end he
might not hid himself any more under those Coverts. Him it was that she so
often grop'd for in the dark behind the Hangings. Lastly, for his sake it was
that she caused those Songs to be made, that she so freequently Sung at Court.
Yet all this while a wicked fellow that puts all her Household in disorder, and
who makes it to apparent to the world, that they who have not the same heart,
have never the same eyes.

I have perhaps enlarged too far upon the Particulars of these Intreagues. But
in regard this Manifesto will assuredly remain to several Ages, I thought it
behooved me to let Posterity know what I was willing to conceal from the Holy
Father, and the Cardinal de Joyeuse, appointed to hear what I had to say upon
the Causes for my Divorce; believing it was but Modesty not to defile their
Imaginations with the Recital of so many Impurities. I had the discretion not
to answer any thing to the two and Twenty Articles of which my Interrogatories
consisted that in the least might sully the Honor of this Ungrateful Woman.
It Is true, when they asked me whether I had consumated the Marriage, I could
not forbear saying that we were both so young that we thought we had no reason
to refuse what the Law permitted, us. If in this Manifesto I have been a little
to free with the Truth, I appeal to her Friends, if her ill conduct have left
her any, whether I have added or diminished in any thing, choosing rather to
omit some Circumstances, then to repeat all her Follies. For such is the real
name that ought to be given to her jealousies and her Extravagant Amorous
furies, which began with Bonnivet and have continued ever since. Who could ever
have suspected the Daughter of one of the greatest and wisest King's upon the
Earth to have been guilty of so much unworthiness. Nevertheless of a Queen she
is become a Duchess; and of the Lawful Wife of a King of France, a Passionate
Lover of one of her meanest Officers. But though she observes no measures in
satisfying her inordinate desires, she thinks to dazzle the Eyes of the world by
prophaneing the most August Mystery of our Religion. Three times a Week she
approaches the Holy Table with Lips as much adulterated as her Heart; with a
Countenance daubed with Black and Red, and her Neck laid bare down to her
Should^rs. Her Dotage upon Pomeni was attributed to some Charm, because she
always wore between her Skin and her Shift, a Blew Silk Purse hanging in a
string from her Neck, wherein was a Silver Box upon which several unknown
Characters were Engraved. She opend it in the Presence of some her Friends, who
saw her own Picture at one end and the Tinker's at the other. She told them
with Tears in her Eyes, that she was never to open it but at such certain
Times, and to keep it till her death. Nor is this the first time that
extraordinary things of which we can give no true Reason have been ascribed to
Supernatural Causes. The same thing is reported of the Duchess of Valentinois,
that she was only beholding to Magic for the great Ascendant which she had
over Henry. II. the Queen of Navarrs Father. No body knows it better then this
Lascivious Woman.

They who read these Heroic Actions of Hers (for she will never want
Historians) will admire her obstinacy in Vice, which neither Age, nor the
abatement of her Charms nor the Affronts which she received could ever
vanquish. They will agree that so virtuous a Life ought to be enregister'd in
the Temple of Paphos, to serve as a Model to those who desire to enrol
themselves in the Famous Corporation of the Daughters of Cyprus. It Is true,
that some there were, who thinking she had the Purse and soul of a Queen,
Dedicated Books to her, and in their Panegyries ascribed those Virtues to her
which she never had. But they had as good have let 'em alone, for long
Tradition far more like to last from Father to Son for many Ages, will give 'em
the lie and convince the world not only of their sordid flattery, but their
vile Imposture; besides the reproach that they are like to undergo from those
that shall read their Writings after their Decease. But which was worse, they
did but labor in vain in this Life, as being all of 'em frustrated of their
great Hopes and Expectations: for that never any body boast of her Liberality,
but all Men complained of her Ingratitude. Her most favored Paramours were
never enrich d with her presents, and the Prisons are full of those that she
has Ruind. She has been sometimes seen to have been Prodigal of her Alms, but
never willingly paid her Debts; she had always so little respect for Religion
that she never was at a Sermon but she slept, at Vespers but she talked all the
while, never at Mass without a Paramour by her side. She gives away, to my
cost, the Tenths of her Rents and Pensions to the next Monasteries, but she
detaines the Wages of her Servants and the price of the Goods which People
trust her with for the support of her Housekeeping. She minds nothing but
outward show and Vanity, but in her heart she has not the least Sense either of
Honor or Piety. I thought to have finished this Manifesto with a Description
of her Inclinations; but Bajomon stops me, and enforces me to give him a dash
of my Pencil. This fellow the greatest sot that ever appeared at Court was
introduc d by Madam Danglure, instructed by Madam Roland, and Le Maire
completed the Polishing of him. This Man she had made her Idol, though He had
been cuft by de Lone, the Son of a Procter of Bourdeaux, and she had taken care
of his fortune, to prevent his ending his days in an Hospital. I shall not
enter any farther into the particulars of their Amors, there being nothing in
'em to be observed but what is base and below the honor of a Queen. It behooves
me now to draw the Curtain, out of a remainder of value for her, and so end
this Story, that I may not be tedious to the Reader. I shall only pray to God
to touch their hearts, and shed down upon em his effectual Grace, without which
they can never hope to be recoverd from that blindness which now obscures their
understandings.

Though we may well judge by this Manifesto, that the King could not be refused
the Divorce which he demanded, yet in regard they are very slow at Rome in the
dispatch of Affairs, therefore the King to oblige the Countess of Beaufort to
awaite the success of that Negotiation with more Patience, he erected the
Signioriy which bore that Name in a Dukedom and Peerage. Sometime after this
the new Duchess became a fourth time quick with Child, which increased the
King's Love for her, and his Impatience to enjoy her under the Justifications
of the Law. For which reason he wrote very earnestly to Silleri not to omit any
thing that might contribute to a quick dispatch of the Affair when rewith he was
entrusted.

Mercoeur would not make his Accommodation, but throwing himself into the Arms
of the Spaniards he headed a Powerful Party in Bretaign where he proposed to
make himself Sovereign: but most of his strong holds being reduc d, he found
there was no way for him to escape but by imploring the Kings Clemency.
Therefore to obtain his Pardon, he had recourse to the Duchess Beaufort, who
offered him her Protection provided he would give his Daughter to the Young
Duke of Vendome, her Eldest Son. Thereupon the Duke of Mercoeur, who expected a
higher match for his Daughter, sent Mary of Luxemburgh his Wife to Court, with
orders to offer His Majesty full power to dispose of his Daughter to what
Prince he pleased, in hopes by that Artifice to elude the Pretensions of the
Duchess: but she was too cunning to fall into that Snare, and prevail d with
the King not to give ear to Madam de Mercoeur, till the Marriage was
concluded. Which done she made the Dukes Accommodation, who came to kiss the
King^s Hands, at Angers where the Cardinal de Joyeuse performed the Ceremony of
Betrothing the Young Couple with great Pomp and Magnificence.

So soon as the Duchess had so laid her design that she was in full hopes to
be Queen, see quite altered her Conduct, and took upon her such an Air of
Modesty, that the King several times repented that ever he had accused her ^of
Disloyalty. But 'twas not enough for him to be satissfi'd of it, the world must
be also no less fully convinced; ^to which purpose the Duchess resolved to
receive the Sacrament at Paris. The King had stayed all the Lent at Fontain
Bleau; from whence he departed upon Palm-Sundy for Melun: at what time the
Duchess ordered a Barge to be made ready to carry her upon the Tuseday in the
Passion Week to Paris; where she arrived the same day, and alighted at her
Sister's the Marshal of Balagni's Wife. The next day she went to little St.
Anthonies to hear the Service called the Tenebres with M^dam and Mademoiselle
de Guise, the Duchess of Retz and her Daughters. The other Ladies went in
their Coaches, but she was carried in a Sedan, a Captain of the Guards of the
Body, walking always by the side of the Sedan, whose business it was to attend
her to a Chapel that was preserved on purpose for her, to the end she might
neither be crowded nor exposed to the View of the People. During the Office,
she shew^d Mademoisselle de Guise certain Letters from Rome, which gave her to
understand that what she desired would be suddenly accomplished. She also
showed her two Letters which she received the same day from the King, so
Passionate and so full of Impatience too see her his Queen, that she had all
the reason in the world to be satisfied. The King sent her word that he was
just sending away to Rome Dufrene Secretary of State, whom she knew to be
entirely devoted to her Interests, as having married one of her Kinswomen, to
press his Holiness to give him his Liberty in a Matter which he was wholly
resolved upon. When Service was done, she told Mademois^lle de Guise that she
intended to alight at the Deanery of St. Germains where she had accstom'd to
lodge, and that she intended to go to bed, not feeling herself ver well,
withal desiring her to come and keep her Company. And at the same time she
went out of the Church and got into her Litter, while Mademoiselle de Guise
went back to her Coach. So soon as Mademoiselle came to the Duchess of
Beauforts she found her undressing herself, and complaining of a great Pain in
her Head. But the Duchess was no sooner a bed, but she was taken with a
terrible Convulsion, from which she recovered by the help of Strong Remedies:
and then it was that she began a Letter to the King; 'tho she could not finish
it, being hindered by another Convulsion. When she came to her self again, a
Letter was presented her from the King, but she could not read it, being seized
by another Convulsion that held her so lohg as she lived. Upon Tuesday she was
brought to Bed of a Still-born-Child, the Violence of her Distemper having
Killed it; and the next day, being Friday, she expired by Six a Clock in the
Morning.

Some there were who ascribed the cause of her Death to another cause; and gave
it outh that she had made a Contract with the Devil to Marry the King, and that
that same Enemy of Mankind had taken away her Life. They farther add as an
Embellishment to set out the Fable that the Duchess was acquainted long before
with the Tragical end that atended Her. For that being one day in the Garden of
the Tuillerys, she met with a famous Magician who was telling several Ladies of
the Court their Fortunes, at what time the Duchess having a desire to know
what should be ber Destiny, was very Importunate with the Magician, who excused
himself for above an hour; telling her that considering the flourishing Fortune
she enjoyed, she could wish for nothing greater. But at length the Duchess
insisting to know at least what end she she should come to, the Magician bid
her at her leisure pull out her Porket-Lookinglass and there she should see the
Object of her Curiosity. Upon which the Duchess, when she pulled out her
Mirror, saw the Devil, taking her by the Throat, which terrified her to that
degree, that she sounded away in the arms of one of her Women that attended
her. The very same thing or very like it, is told of the Constable
Montmorancy's Lady, who died but a little before after a very strange manner.
But People of Sense and Judgment gave no Credit to these Stories.

The same day being Wednesday, La Varenne came to tell the Marshal d Ornano,
who was hearing the Passion Sermon at St. Germains de, Lauxerrois, that the
Duchess was dead, and that it would be convenient to hinder or prevent the
King's coming to Paris, whether he was just designing his Journey; and
therefore desired him to go and meet him, in order to make him alter his Road.
The Marshal requested the Marquess of Bassompierre, then at the Sermon, to go
along with him; which, he did, and so they met the King beyond Saussi, near
Ville Juif, who was coming Post for Paris.

So soon as the King saw the Marshal, his heart misgave him, that he knew
already the Tidings which he came to tell him, and by his Lamentations and
bitter Complaints soon made it appear, that Hero's have their failings as well
as other Men. They carried him to the Abbey dela Saussaye and laid him upon a
Bed, till they could meet with the Convenience of a Coach to carry him back to
Fontain Bleau. Where being arrived before night, be found in his Appartment the
greaest part of the Lords of the Court, who were all got thither upon the noise
of this Mournful Accident.

So soon as the King was entered his Chamber, he desired all the Company to
return to Paris, and pray to God to send him Consolation, retaining only to
keep him Company, Bellegard, the Count de Lauds, Terms, Castelnau, La
Chalosse, Monglas and Fronteval. Nevertheless, as Bassompierre was retiring
with the rest, he bid him stay to give him an account of the Circumstances of
his Mistresse's death, because he was the last that was with her. For Five or
Six days the King was not to be seen but by those whom he had excepted, unless
it were by some Embassador's, whose condoling Complements he was obliged to
receive, but they returned immediately after they had had their Audiences.

When the King's Grief was a little allayed, his Favorites who understood that
the right way to dissipate his Melancholy was to set before his Eyes some other
Dazzling Lady that might make him amends for the loss of his Duchess, engaged
him in a Hunting Match near Malherbe, a Castle belonging to the Marquess d'
Entragues. That Lord had two Daughters surpassingly Beautiful, and Witty above
the Common Rate, especially the Eldest who was called Henrietta de Balzack.
Madam d' Entragues being acquainted with their Design to entangle the King with
one of her Daughters, sent to him to come and repose himself at her House in
his Return from Hunting. The King, who had heard much talk of Mademoiselle d'
Entragues's Beauty, willingly fell into the Snare which was laid for his
Liberty, and accepted the Marchionesse's Offer. He found the Eldest of her
Daughters to be a Thousand times handsomer then she was represented, and
therefore not being able to quit her so soon, he remained for some days at
Malherbe, with those that were his chiefest Considents. During his stay, the
two Young Mademoiselle's Sat at his Table and lay near his Apartment. This
little Court removed afterward to Hallier, and Madam d' Entragues to Chenaut,
whether the King went to Visit her every day, that he might have the pleasing
Opportunity to discourse his new Mistress.

After the Marchioness was returned to Paris, the King went to Orleans, where
he arrived upon St. John's Eve. There he met the Marshal de la Chastre's Lady
with her two Daughters; but tho thy were very lovely, they could not stop him
any longer then two days. He took post for Paris, and alitt, at the Hostel de
Gondy, that he might be so much the nearer to Mademoiselle de Entragues, who
lodged at the Hostel de Lion.

The King often sent his Compliments to her by the Count de Lud^; but the
Father and her Brother, who had not so much Complacency for the King's
Affection as the Mother, told his Agent very surlily, that they took amiss his
bringing messages to their House, that dishonored their Family, and desired
him to forbear coming anymore. Nor did the Marquess think it sufficient to have
quarreled with the Count; he ordered his Horses to be put in the Coach, and
carried away his Daughters to Marcoussis. The King being informed of it, rode
post thither some few days after, faining to take that Rode in his way to
Blois; now in regard his journey to Blois, was only a pretense to cover his
journey to Marcoussis, the King staid their but a very few days, and return d
Post to Paris. He alitt at the President Verdun's, where he called for a bed,
but he was no sooner retired to his Chamber, but Bourigueux, who lay in his
Chamber, rose and committed a thousand extravagances: for the heat of the Sun
had lain upon his head all day, as he rode with his Majesty, and had turned his
Brains. The King surpriz d at his ravings, would have locked him up in his
Chamber; but not finding himself strong enough, he call d for help, and after
they had got the madman out of the Room, he went to Bed, retaining la
Roquelaure with him all night. Now in regard the King had no attendants at
Paris, he dined at the Presidents, and supped with some Prince or other Lord of
the Court, as the fancy led him, never giving 'em notice of his coming, to
avoid expenses.

But his Ministers fearing least a fancy should take him to marry Mademoiselle
de Entragues, who was no less ambitious then the Duchess of Beaufort,
persuaded him to mind only his Interest, and the good of the Kingdom in the
choice of a Wife. To that purpose they proposed to him Marie de Medicis, the
Grand Dukes Daughter, and he consented that they should demand her in Marriage,
giving Silleri Commission to manage the business with the Pope. During this
Negotiation, they endeavored to bring him off from Medamoiselle de Entragues,
who disputed her Ground with him Inch by Inch. Nor had he obtain d any other
then slight favors hitherto; whither he could not find an opportunity to
complete his Conquest or whither she thought to make him the more eager, and
inflame him the more by affected resistance, to find his affection employment.
They persuaded him to spend one night at Zamet, with Mademoiselle de Glandee,
whose virtue was not so morose as that of Madam de Entragues. B^t fortune would
not let him long quietly enjoy ^he pleasure which they had procured him. For he
was no sooner laid in his Bed, but he heard the clattering of Swords upon the
Stairs. He presently called, and Bassompirre went to him, whom he ask d the
reason of that noise, and understood that Bellegarade, and the Prince of
Joynville, afterward called Duke of Cheureuse, had quarreled about some
pretenses and discourses which the latter pretended that Bellegarde had had
with his Majesty about Mademoiselle de Entragues and him: That they had drawn
their Swords, that the Prince of Jonyville had received a wound in his
Buttocks, and that the Vidam Dumans was dangerously wounded in going about to
part 'em. Upon that the King rose in his night Gown, and taking his Sword in
his hand hastened down Stairs, preceded by Bassompierre, who carried a light
before him. But he met with no body but Praslin, who had shut the doors of the
Houfe; the two duellers being retired. The King was extremely offended, and
sent the same night for the first President to come to him the next morning,
together with the Parliament. Accordingly that Illustrious Body attended the
King the next morning at Zamet House, where they receivd orders to take the
Quarrel into examination, and to do Justice. Flessevin and de Turin,
Counselors of the great Chamber, were appointed to draw up the Informations,
and took the Depositions of Cramail, Bazaut, Chasseran and Bassompierre. But
the Duchess of Guise and the Princess her Daughter, being informd of these
Proceedings, made use of all their Credit to put a stop to em, and obtain d a
Supersedeas from the King, during which time the Constable made up the
accommodation at Constans.

Sometime after the King return d to Blois, fro whence he passed on to
Chenonceaux, to give Queen Louise a visit, and there he saw Mademoiselle de
Bourdaisiere, Maid of Honor to that Princess, who found some work for his
Heart. Mad^^^^^^lle de Entragues, having notice fo all these Intreagues, and
fearing least the King should escape her at length, resolved to be less severe.
The King frequently visited her at Malherbe, where he obtain d the full of his
desires, and lodged her in the Hor^ d' A^chand. When he returned to Paris
toward the end of Autumn, she became big with Child, and went to lie in at
Monceaux, whither the King carry d her himself, protesting that he lov d her so
well as to Marry her. But she hurt her self by an unlucky accident; so that a
dead Child being torn from her Body, she lay a long time in a very sad
condition. But at length she recoverd her health, through the care which the
King took of her, hardly ever leaving her till he saw the effects of the
remedies which were given her. When she was in a condition to go abroad, she
understood there was a Treaty going on at Rome, for the Marriage of the King
with Marie de Medecis: which put her into such a violent Rage, that forgetting
all her obligations to the King, and all the marks of friendship which she had
rcceiv'd from him, she treated him with that indignity which no other Lover
would have brook'd. But he was so far from finding his Passion for her abated
by such her extravagant behavior, that he heaped new favors upon her, and
made her Marchioness of Vernueil.

While the King was laboring to pacify his Mistress, the Duke of Savoy
arrived at Court. He had engaged himself, when the Duchess of Beaufort was
living, to take that journey, in hopes by her Mediation to put an advantageous
end to the differences between him and his Majesty, concerning the Marquisate
of Saluces. But when he heard of the Dutchesses death which broke all his
measures, he would fain have excused himself; but then it was too late, because
he had made too far a Progress to go back. He was well received by the King;
and in regard he knew the Ladys had a prevailing power in a Court so amorosly
inclined as that of France, he made most Magnificent Presents to the Fairest,
as well as to the Courtiers who were their Masters greatest Confidents, which
gave a beginning to a Conspiracy that brake forth afterward. However, his
Artifices took no effect, so that he was constrained to return without;
obtaining any thing. The King, who was absolutely resolved to recover the
Marquisate of Saluces, gave orders for his Forces to march toward the Frontiers
of Savoy; and after he had taken his leave of the Ladys at Paris, he went to
Lion. In the mean time, seeing his Marriage with Marie de Medicis had been
solomniz'd by virtue of his procuration, which Bellegarde carried, and for that
Viego de Vrsini, Duke of Bracciano, had Espousd her in the Kings name, the
Princess was brought to Marseilles, whither she was conducted by Elizabeth de
Medicis, her Aunt, the same Dukes. Wife, and Eleanor de Medicis, Wife of
Vincent I. Duke of Mantoua, and Jordano de Vrsini, her Cousin-German. It Is
reported, that Jordan had had those tender sentiments of Affection for her,
which no way became so near a Relation. She was received at her landing by the
Cardinals of Joyeuse, Gondy, Giury, and Sourdis; by the Constable Montmorancy,
by the Chancellor Bellieure, and by the Duke of Guise, Governor of the
Province; by the Dutchesses Dowager of Nemours and Guise, and by several other
Ladys. The Marchionses of Vernueil had always followed the Court; but when she
understo^d that the Queen was arrived at Lion, she returned to Paris, because
she would not be present at a Ceremony that ruined all her hopes. The
Constables two Daughters were at the Marriage; and the Duchess of Ventadour,
who was the youngest, kindled a Flame made no long stay at Court, this new
Passion extinguished as soon as that which he had for the Queen; being obligd to
separate from both, without any hopes of ever seeing 'em again. Nor was Vrsini
the only person that fell in Love with that Charming Duchess. The Dukes of
Guise and Epernon offer d their Sevices to her at the same time, and quarreled
so violently dnring that Rivalship, that the King was constrained to interpose,
in order to make an accommodation between 'em, tho he had something of an
inclination to have become their Rival himself. There was also ^ quarrel about
precedence between Madam de Ventadour, and Mademoselle de Guise; and though
expedients were found to satisfy the Pretensions of both Parties, yet it was
impossible to sweeten that same tartness which the jealousy of Beauty had
created between 'em.

The King publicly declared that he was very well fatisfi'd with his marriage;
but the change of his condition had not altered his sentiments for Madam de
Vernucil, to whom be sent frequent Messages. And those marks of friendship
which she received at a time when she had the least reason to expect 'em, made
her so proud, that she could not forbear talking of the Queen in terms that
were no way conformable to that respect which she ow d her. Of which the
Princess was informed, and declared her self to be extremely sensible of the
Affront. And this hatred of Madam Vernevil which she publicly discovered
formed two factions at the Court, the one declaring for the Queen, and the
other for the King's Mistress.

An. 1600. The King after he had conquered alll Savoy, and concluded an
Accommodation with the Duke, by the exchange of la Bresse, for the Marquisate
of Saluces, through the Mediation of the Legate, who was come to Lion, to give
the second Nuptial Benediction, took Post Horses for Paris. Nevertheless, he
took Barge Rouanne, and went by Water down the Loire as far as Briare; from
whence he came to lie at Fontain Bleau, the next day dined at Ville Neuve St.
George, from whence crossing the S^ine below the Tuilleries (for the red Bridge
was not then built) he lay at Vernueil, accompanid only by four persons; but he
stayed not there above three days, and then returned to Paris. He lodged at
Monglas's, in the Cloister of St. Nicholas du Leuvre, where he had always the
Ladies at Supper, with five or Six Princes and his Favorites.

The Queen departed from Lion, almost as soon as he, but she travelle'd more
slowly, and met by the way the Ladies that were to serve her in the employments
of her Household. The Duchess of Nenours was made Superintendent, Madam de
Guerckeville, Lady of Honor, and Madam de Richlieu Lady Dresser. But the Queen
would by no means permit the latter to do her duty, as having already designed
Eleanor Galigay for that Employment, who had served her along time, and to whom
she had promised the Place, However the business was to remain undetermined,
till the King should put an end to the dispute, which however was no small
vexation to the Queen. But it caused a far grater Heartburning within her, when
she was constrained to send back into Italy all the Persons that had accompanid
her, so that the Ladys who were placed about her were soon sensible of the
effects of her disquieted humor. Upon which, Madermoiselle de Guise, who had
no kindness for the Marchioness of Vernueil, endeavored to persuade the Queen,
that it was an effect of her Counsels, and pretended to share so deeply in the
Queens discontents, that she insinuated her self by that means into her favor.

The King rode to meet the Queen as far as Nemours, changing Horses threescore
times. He carried her to Fontain Bleau, where after he had stayed five or six
days, he accompanied her to Paris, where he lodged her in Gondy House, because
the Loure was not then in a condition to receive her. The same day, the King
commanded the Duchess of Nemours to wait upon the Marchioness of Vernueil at
her Lodgings, and present her to the Queen. Fain would that prudent Princess
have excused her self from such an ungrateful Office, which was the only way to
incur the loss of her Credit with her Mistress; but the King would be obeyed.
Thereupon she carried her to the Queen, who was surpised to see her, and gave
her but a very cold Reception. The Marchioness, naturally confident, was no way
dashed out of Countenance, but managed the Queen so many ways, that she obligd
her at length to speak to her. Nevertheless, because this visit prove d not so
successful as the King expected, the King laid all the blame upon the Duchess
of Nemours, who was no less sourely looked upon by the Queen. Which makes it
manifest, that how prudently soever people may carry themselves in
Court-Intreagues, it is a difficult thing many times to prevent disgraces.

But some days after, a favorable occasion presented it self which surceas'd
the exasperation that appeared between the Queen and the King's Mistress.
Eleanor, who had already made several fruitless efforts to get her self confirm
d in the Office of chief Dresser, which the Queen had bestowed upon her
addressed herself to the Marchioness, and by her means obtained what would
never have been granted her by any other means. The King therefore finding the
Queen somewhat appeased, sent for his Mistress, lodged her in the Louvre, and
furnished an Appartment on purpose for her. Soon after she happened to be with
Child almost as soon as the ^ueen: and all the time of their great Bellies, the
King diverted himself, in a manner equally between 'em, tho his assiduities were
s^mowhat more Partial to the Marchioness.

El^^nor, who still made fair w^ather with the Marchioness by the ^ueens
consent, still stood in need of her Protection, to ^^tain the King s
approbation of her Marriage with Comini, who sought it, not so much for her
Beauty, or for any other Ornaments of her mind, but because he thought her
advantageous to the raising his Fortune, and Eleanor had preferred him before
all her other Suitors, because that being born of the dreggs of the people, she
was glad to marry a Man that had the reputation of a Gentleman in his own
Country Nevertheless the King had no kindness for her, and all the Queen's
Household hated her; so that the Queen her self durst not speak for fear of
being denied, and therefore there was a necessity for a Credit no less powerful
then the Marchionesses to surmont those obstacles. Comini made the first
Overture, but was rejected. Madam de Vennueil also was very unwilling to take
the Office upon her, because she knew the aversion which the King had for both
the persons: Nevertheless, after Eleanor had besought her, and had told her
that the Queen would speak to her about it, she resolved to bring the business
to perfection. The Queen being informed of the assurances which the Marchioness
had given Eleanor; returned her a Thousand Civilities, and after that time she
never received any Present which she did not share with her, and treated her
with that signal respect, that she made no distinction between the Marchiness
and the rest of the Princesses; which pleased the King* extremely.
Nevertheless, there was a necessity for deferring the Marriage till the Queen
was brought to bed, who was delivered of a Dauphin, whose Birth was attended
with that of the Marchionesses Son, who was Henry of Bourbon, Duke of Vernueil,
and died within these few years. This enlargement of the Kings Family was
solomniz'd with several testimonies of Joy and exultation* The Queen gave order
for a grand Ball, which took up two or three months to practice it; and would
needs have the Marchioness to dance an Entry, with which the King was so highly
satifi d, that he caused the Marriage of Eleanor and Comini to be consummated,
and regald the new married Couple with several magnificent Presents. There was
nothing minded but which way to divertise themselves the remainder of the
Winter, and good part of the Summer: and the King was glad to procure his
Mistresses content at any rate. But an accident happn'd that for some time
interrupted the good correspondence of those two Lovers.

The King had some kind of inclination toward the Duchess of Villars, the
Duchess of Beaufonts Sister; and tho there was nothing beautiful about her,
but her Hair, accompani d with a certain lusture of Youth, yet she thought the
Power of her Charms sufficient to make good for no small time the Illustrious
Conquest she had made. But when she saw that the King stuck close to the
Duchess of Vernueil it begat within her a violent animosity, that grew still
the more implacable as the Kings favor to her Rivaless increased. The Queen on
the other side perceiving Madam Villars's jealousy, fomented it, to the end it
might prove serviceable to her Revenge, yet so as she might not be seen to be
any way contributary toward it.

Eleanor, in whose power it was to have broken the Plot, had no knowledge of
it; and Comini, who discovered something was afraid of medding, for fear of
drawing some trouble upon himself that might be injurious to his advancement.
The Duchess of Villars, therefore seeing her self supported by the Queen,
began to set her hand to the Plough. The Prince of Joyinville had ^e the good
luck to have won the favor of Madam Vernueil, and had received several tender
Letters from her, wherein there were some expressions that reflected somewhat
too disrespectfull upon the King. However the Prince was not so faithful to a
person so amiable and so deserving, but that he had cast his eyes upon Madam de
Vilkars, who taking the advantage of his dotage, wheedl'd him in to deliver up
the Letters of her Rivaless. So soon as she had 'em in her Power, she went and
showed 'em to the Queen, who importuned her extremely to let the King see 'em.
She made some scruple at first for fear of incurring the dipleasure of so
formidable an Enemy as the Marchioness of Vernueil. But the Queen pressed her so
hard to a thing that her own interests sufficiently prompted her to, that she
could notwithstand her importunities. All this while Mademoiselle' de Guise,
who had introduced Madam de Villars to the Queen could not devise from whence
this strict correspondence should proceed; because they had not brought her
into the Plot, for that the discovery of such a secret would have infallibly
drawn upon her the whole weight of the Marchioness of Vernueil s hatred a d
revenge.

Madam de Villars, then being willing to obey the Queens orders, sought all
opportunities to discourse the King in private; and to that purpose, went to
find him out at Church whither, he was gone to Mass, under pretense of speaking
to him about some private concern After the sacrifice was over she told him she
had had something of importance to communicate to him. Upon that every body
withdrew, and then the Duchess finding her self alone with the King, delivered
into his hands her Rivalesse's Letters. Adding withal, that as she had
received a thousand favors from his Majesty, and had always a great love for
his Person, she could not find in her heart to conceal any longer the injury
done him by her, whom of all Women in the World he had the most obliged, never
considering how much his Heroic Virtues, his Birth and Sovereign Dignity had
raised him above all other Men.

The good King, who suffered himself to be easily over-rul d by persons that
offered to him the Incense of flattery, returned Madam Villars a thousand
thanks, and promised her the acknowledgment of so great a piece of Service. So
soon as she was gone, he sent the Count de Lude to Madam de Vernucil with
orders to upbraid her with her Infidelity, and to tell her in his name, that he
never intended to see her more. She was extremely surpr^z'd at this Compliment,
yet in the midst of her inward disorders, show d no sign of any outward
discomposure. She answered with a kind of indifferency, that as she had done
nothing to offend the King, she could not divine the reason for incurring his
displeasure; only she hoped that Heaven would do her justice by bringing the
mystery to light, and revenging her upon those who had infused into his Majesty
a bad opinon of her conduct; and so saying she withdrew into her Cabinet, to
hide the confusion of her thoughts. Some days after, Bellegarde, having
discovered the prejudice which Madam de Villars had done the Marchioness of
Vernueil, bent all his thoughts which way to salve the business; not so much
out of any value for that Lady, or the Prince of Joyinville, for whom he had no
kindness, but for the sake of his Sisters interest; and thus he went about it.

He knew that the Duke of Guise had a Secretary that counterfeited all manner
of Characters perfectly well; and therefore he agreed with the Prince of
Joyinville that he should acknowledge he had made use of that man's Art, to
counterfeit Madam de Vernueils hand, by concert with Madam de Villars, who
mortally hated the Marchioness. The King's Mistress having notice of this
design, sent to beseech his Majesty that she might be permitted to justify her
self: which he scrupled at first to do, as not imagining which way she could be
innocent. Nevertheless, he gave her a visit, at what time the Marchioness
expressed her self so movingly, and gave him those plausible reasons for the
proof of her Loyalty, that he suffered himself to be deluded by outward
appearances. He sent the Prince of Joyinville to serve against the Turks in
Hungary, banish d Madam de Villars into the Country, where he confined her to
one of her own Mannours, and sent the Secretary to Prison. This is that which
many times befalls people that will be officiously busying themselves to make
discoveries to their Masters, when they never desire it. Madam de Villars was
separated from a Lover whom she tenderly Lov d, and shamefully banished from
the Court at a time that she thought to have tryumph'd over her Rivaless.

During these Broyls, the Queens hatred of the Marchioness of Vernucil
publicly brake out: for in regard she thought she had been utterly lost in the
Kings Affection, she left nothing omitted to complete her Ruin: nor could they
ever from that time forward be reconciled again. The Marchioness did the Queen
all the ill Offices she could devise, and the Queen, who was informed of it,
spair'd not in all places to manifest the Marks of her Resentment, which
divided the whole Court. On the Otherside, the King tired out with these
Dissentions, began to pay his Visits again to Mademoiselle de Bourdaistere,
whith whom he had been formerly in Love; but he was soon a weary of her, and
therefore marry d her to the Count d' Estampes. After that, he took to
Jaqueline de Bueil, Countess of Moret, who had been bred up in the Princess of
Conde s House.

1602. The Marchioness of Vernueil being informed of all these Intreagues, was
so terribly incensed, that the suffered herself to be persuaded into a Treaty
with Spain, and a Conspiracy against the King, with the Count of Anvergne, her
Brother by the Mother's side. Which Negotiation could not be carried so secret,
but that the King had knowledge of it: nevertheless he would not presently make
use of the Rigor of Justice. He offer d the Count of Anvergne his Pardon,
provided he would come to Court and acknowledge his Crime. But the Count
refused to confide in his Clemency; which was the reason that the King ordered
him to be Apprehended. D E^re, Murat, and Norestan, who had the Kings Warrant,
stopped him at Clermont in Anvergne, under pretense of showing him a Review of
the Duke of Vendomes Reigment, and there Seized him. A certain Lay that Loved
him, was so afflicted for him, that she made use of all her Artifice and
Cunning to have procured his Escape, as they carry d' him by water to Paris,
but her designs took no Effect. The Marquess d' Entragues was clapped into the
Conciergiere, and Madam de Vernueil was arested by the Chavalier Daguet, in
Audicourt House, in St. Paul's Street, were she lodged and was kept under Guard.
These three Persons were also Impeached, and the Proofs being found sufficient,
Madam de Vernueil was Condemned to be strongly guarded to the Abbey of Beaumont
les Tours, there to spend the rest of her days; and her Father and Brother to
have their Heads cut off; which Sentence was afterward, changed into perpetual
Imprisonment.

During the Disgrace of the Marchioness of Vernueil, Hen. IV. had a greater
kindness for the Queen, and lived very lovingly with her ^ Mademoiselle de
Guise, also, who was become his Favorite, took advantage of this favorable
Conjuncture, to procure an Establishment of her Fortune, and wrought with His
Majesty to consent to her Marriage with Francis of Bourbon, Prince of Conti.
And soon after the King, who could meet with no body at Court that was worthy
of his Affections, renewed his Friendship with the Marchioness of Vern^^l, whom
he Visited with that Privacy that the Queen had no knowledge of it: but so soon
as she discoverd the new Familiarity she carried her R^^^tment so high, that
she forbad, all the Lady's, that should offer to visit the Marchioness, to come
to her Court.

The King to assuage her Transports, forbore Visiting Madam de Vernueil for
some time, and in the mean time to employ his Amorous Heart, he Courted
Catherine de Lorrain, the Duke of Maines Daughter, and Wife to Charles Duke of
Nevers, a Princess of great Virtue, who had a very great Honor for His Person,
but would by no means comply with his Passion. The King that he might detain
her at Court, took for his Pretense the Christning of the Dauphin, to whom the
Duchess of Montoua and Nevers were Cousin Germans: Nor could the Duchess of
Nevers in point of Decency refuse to be present at the Ceremony. But the more
the King sought opportunity's to discourse her in Private, the more she took
care to avoy'd 'em; though sometimes her precautions prove d fruitless by reason
of that respect which she was obliged to bear to a Lover of his Quality. The
King however thought he might bring about his design if he did but remove the
Duke of Nevers, and therefore sent him to Rome to obtain his Absolution; but
the Duchess would follow him, notwithstanding all that the King could do to
hinder her. And because the Duke was forc d to stay at Rome about a Year, he
had time to Cure himself of his Passion, and publicly declared at the return
of the Duchess, that he found her very much altered for the worse. Nor was she
troubled in the least at the King's ill opinion of her Beauty, but paid him
the same Civility s as she had done before.

1604. After her departure, the King finding himself constrain d to return to
his Mistress, divided his Heart between the Marchioness of Vernueil, and the
Countess of Moret, and in regard they had each of 'em Favorites, the one being
beloved by the Duke of Guise, the other by the Prince of Joyinv^lle, they
suffer d the Partition without any Jealousy. The King being arriv d at
Buzanci, after he had reduc d Sedad, dispatch d Bassompierre to Queen Margaret,
to compliment her upon the death of Juliendat, whom she tenderly loy'd, and
withal gave the Marquess two Letters to his two Mistresses.

Bassompierre, in the discharge of his Trust, began with the Marchioness of
Vernueil, because her Sister with whom he had an Intreague, lay at her House,
and was so indiscreet as to tell her that he had a Letter for the Countess of
Moret. The Marchioness, curious as all Women are, would needs see it, and
ordered Mademoiselle d' Entragues to lay her Commands upon him to give it her.
What can a Man deny a Woman that he loves? Bassompierre therefore betrayed his
Master to gratify his Mistress, and deliverd into her hands the Letter which
he had for Madam de Moret. The Marchioness after she had read it, returned it
to him again, and told him he might easily save himself from any trouble, by
causing a Seal to be made like the King's, and so closing up the Letter as it
was before.

Bassompierre followed her advice, and sent his Valet de Chamber betimes next
Morning to a Graver to make a new Seal. But as illuck would have it, the
Servant apply d himself to the very same Workman who had made the King's. The
Graver suspecting there was some great Mystery in the Business, took the Letter
under pretense of examining the Impression, and at the same time falling upon
the Lad took him by the Collor, in order to stop him; but the Boy being too
strong for Turpin (that was the Gravers Name) rescued himself out of his hands
and leaving his Hat and Cloak behind him, ran away as fast as his Legs could
carry him, afraid he should have been hanged had he been taken. Bassampierre
ordered his Valet to be hid out of the way, and immediately hastening too the
Countess of Moret, told her that he had inadvertently opened a Letter which he
brought her from the King, mistaking it for a Billet which he had received from
a Lady; and therefore fearing to be accused either of design or Curiosity, he
intended to have Sealed it again with the imitation of the King's Signet, and
then up, with the story of Tarpin and his Servant; and desired her to send to
the Graver and demand the Letter.

The Countess never diving farther into the Matter, only laughed at the
Accident, and immediately sent to Turpin for the King's Letter; but he sent her
word that he had parted from it, and deliver d it to the President Seguier who
was President of the Criminal Court. Now in regard that neither the Countess
nor Bassumpierre could tell how to deal with the President in whom they had no
Interest, and astern man besides, they thought it convenient to, address
themselves to Madam Lomenie, to the end that by her Credit she might stiffle
the business, either by getting the Letter out of the Presidents Hands, or by
obliging her Husband, who was then Secretary of State, to give such an account
of it to the King, as might excuse the Marquess.

Bassompierre, having taken his leave of the King, went to Madam de Lomenie,
whom he found very busy in preparing dispatches for the Court. She prayed him
therefore to sit down till she had finish d a Letter which she was writing to
her Husband. The Marquess suspecting that that same very Letter might relate to
Turpin's Adventure, asked her if there had happened any thing new and so
urgent, that she could not give him a Minuites time to speak with her; to whom
Madam de Lomenie made answer, that some body had been attempting to Counterfit
the King's Signet, but that by misfortune the Criminal had made his escape and
that all that could be done was to secure the Letter which was Writt'n with the
King's own Hand: that she was writing to her Husband that he would understand
from the King's Lips to whom it was dire ed, and with whom he had entrusted it,
by which means the mystery would be easily unfolded; adding withal that she
would have given 2000 Crowns to have had a more certain khowledg, of the Truth.
Bassompierre tell a laughing to see her make such a mighty business of such a
Trifle as that wash and told her that he would satisfy her at a cheaper Rate;
and with that he told her the whole story, as he had related it to the Countess
of Moret. Madam de Lomenie, who was B^ssompierre's intimate Friend, as well as
her Husband, promis d to pacify the Business, provided he would go to Villiers
Cotret, where the King was to be the next Morning, and trouble himself with
another dispatch which she was sending to her Husband upon the same Subject, to
give him a particular account of what she had heard. Bassompierre accepted the
Condition, and having got an answer to the Letter which he had delivered to
Madam Vernueil, and to that which the Countess had not received, he departed
for Villiers Co^ret, and found the King already arrived and laughing with the
Coyntess at the Adventure, and the trouble she had put the Marquess to.

Some days after the King went to St. Germains with the Queen, the Princess of
Conti, and the Duke of Montpensier, and as they were crossing the Water in the
Ferry-Boat of Neuilli, the Coach overturned in the River. The King and the Duke
escaped drenching, because they leaped in time out of the Boot, but the Ladys
were in great danger of being Drown d. The Marchioness of Vernueil, being
informed of the accident, told the King by way of Raillery, the first time he
came to Visit her, that so soon as she had seen the King's Person safe, she
would have cried out, The Queen Drinks. Which unlucky flowt being carried to
the Queen, She was so incensed at it, that in fifteen Days she would not speak
to the King; so that there was much ado to reconcile 'em. After their
reconciliation, there was a Ball propos d, wherein the Queen was desirous to be
one of the Masquers herself, but upon the King's Request that the Marchioness
might Dance amongst the rest, the Queen broke off the Match.

But the Friendship between the King and the Countess was not of long
continuance; Her Intreague with the Prince of Joyinville, with which his
Majesty had been acquainted, having set 'em at Variance; only when she had
nothing else to say for herself, she endeavor d to excuse it, by saying the
Prince had promised her Marriage. Of which the King desirous to be satisfied,
sent for the Duchess of Guise, and blaming the Imprudence of her Son,
threatened to punish him if he relapsed into the same miscarriage and if he did
not repair the fault he had committed by marrying the Countess: adding withal
that he could well endure the having his Mistresse's sought for in Marriage,
but that he would not permit the covering of Criminal Intreagues under that
Veil, and that if he were any thing indulgent to the Prince of Joyinville,
it was for love of her that was his Mother. But the Duchess, naturally haughty,
took amiss the King's Civilities, and answered him in such a manner as highly
provoak'd him. In that ill humor he commanded the Prince of Joyinville to be
seized; but he made his Escape upon notice that had been given him of the
King's Anger. His Parents endeavored to pacify. His Majesty but they could
obtain nothing more, but only that his rash Miscarriage should be pardoned,
provided he departed the Kingdom, never to return again. Which Order he obeyed,
nor was he recal'd from his Exile, till the next Reign.

And now the King to make himself amends for the Disloyalty of the Countess of
Moret, would needs knit an Intreague with the Duchess of Montpensier, who had
been a Widow some few months. And because she was then in the Country, he
ordered the Count of Cramail, her Neighbor, to make her the first Overture.
The Count sounded the foard, but with a design to make himself the advantage of
it; but finding her no way, inclined to act any thing contrary to her Honor,
he said nothing at all to her. All that he could do for the King s satisfaction
was to engage her to come to Court. Nor was the King more successful, and
therefore seeing no hopes of prospering in his Enterprise; he gave it ^^ite
over.

Madam de Vernueil, knew so well how to make her best advantage of the King's
Melancholy upon the ill success of his other Amors, that she triumph d over
all her Rivals: though the Countess of Moret, within a few days after, was
brought to Bed of a Son, who was the same Antony of Bourbon, Count of Moret,
who in the next Reign, was slain at the Battle of Castelnauari, fighting in the
Duke of Montmorency s Army. More then this, the Marchioness, thinking to
increase the King's Passion, by rowsing his jealousy; spread abroad a Report,
that the Duke of Guise had a desire to Marry her, and had caused the Banes to
be published unknown to that Prince who never thought of her, but addressed all
his Vows to Madam d' Entragues her Sister. Nevertheless he was not at all belov
d by Her; For Bassompierre who was the sole possessor of all her Affections,
spent whole Nights with her almost every four and twenty Hours He ascended
through a Private Door, that open d into the Cutlter's Street, in the third
Story of his House which he had caused an unknown Friend to hire, and she met
him by a back pair of Stairs, when Her Mother was a Sleep.

1607. The King being informed that some body slipped in every Night into Madam
d' Entragues's Lodgings, thought it had been the Duke of Guise, and that he
went to Visit the Marchioness of Vernueil. Thereupon, he spoke to the Prince
about it, who appeared so astonishd, that the King perceiving his Innocence by
the marks of Amazement which he discovered in his Countenance, and entrusted
him to make the Discovery. Upon that, the Duke of Guise set his Spies to work
the same Night, who saw Bassompierre make his Entrance, but could not tell who
he was, because he was wrapped up in his Cloak, upon which nevertheless they
could discern the Order of the Holy Ghost upon it. That Cloak belonged to
Bellegard, only he had lent it to the Marquess, by reason of a shower of Rain
that fell just after they had supped. The Spies therefore abused by that
appearance, reported to the Duke of Guise that they had seen a Young Chevalier
whip in at the back Door, before which they watched.

The Duke of Guise not being able togather any thing from this blind Relation,
sent two of his own Servants to the same place, to watch his happy Rival at his
coming out. But Bassompierre observing that he had Sentinels upon him, took the
more care of himself; which was the Reason, that they could inform the Duke
nothing but what confirmed him in his mistake; so that after he had made a
thousand Reflections upon this Adventure, he fixed upon Bellegarde, who was the
only Young Knight that could pretend to so much good Fortune. On the otherside,
Bassompierre acquainted Mademoiselle d' Entragues, as soon as she was awake, of
what had happened, to the end she might be ready with her Answer to the Duke of
Guise.

That Jealous Lover, eager after the Discovery of this same hidden Secret, went
the next Morning to give Bellegard a Visit; but he could not be admitted. They
told him the Marquess had been troubled all Night with the Toothach, and that
he would not be seen till the Evening. Which confirmed the Duke of Guise in his
Suspicions; imagining that Bellegard lay a bed all day, to fetch up the Sleep
he had lost in the Night. From thence he went to Bassompierre, and finding him
abed, desired him to rise and put on his Nightgown, that they might have a
little Discourse together. The Marquess believing he had been discovered, rose
immediately to hear what his Rival had to say to him. But all his Alarums
ceased as soon as he heard the Duke deliver himself in the following manner.
What would you say Marquess, said He, if the Grand Squire should be better
belov d then you, or all the World beside, by Madam d' Entragues. I would say,
replied Bassompierre, very coldly, that cannot be, and that neither He nor She
have any design one upon another. How easily are Lovers deceived replied the
Duke. I would have sworn as well as you, that she had been as chaste as Diana;
yet it is very true that the Grand Squire was with her all Night; and that he
did not leave her till four a Clock in the morning. He was seen to go in, and
my Valets de Chamber, saw him go along fo carelessly, and minding so little the
Discovery of his happiness, that he never so much as took care to hide the Star
upon His Cloak.

During this Discourse the Duke and the Marquess walked together very fast; at
what time the latter perceived the Cloak, which the Duke had taken for
Bellegardes, folded up in such a manner that the Cross appeared outermost.
Presently he clapped himself down upon it, for fear a Testimony so clear beyond
all contradicton should betray his Secret, nor would he be persuaded to rise,
though the Duke Importunately pressed him to walk on, till one of his Valets, to
whom he had made a sign, had carry d it out of the Room, when his Rivals back
was turned. In the mean time, he made a show of being very much troubled, and
stormed with a good Grace, against the inconstancy of Mademoiselle d'
Entragues, and when the Cloak was out of danger he rose up and walked on with
the Duke as long as he stay d.

So soon as the Duke was gone, Bassompierre gave notice to Madam d' Entragues
of the Dukes mistake, and that same Young Wanton, the more to confirm him in
it, treated Bellegarde before his Face as if they had been the most Intimate
Persons in the World. The next Morning the Duke of Guise wag d War with the
Grand Squire, who unwilling to dissabuse him returned him Ambiguous Answers.
Bellegarde gave an account of all that Discourse to Madam d' Entragues, who
approved his Conduct, and desired him to continue it; by which means all the
Kings and the Dukes Suspicious fell upon the Grand-Squire. Thereupon they
informed Madam d' Entragues of her Daughter's Familiarity with him; which was
the reason that she watch d her more narrowly. One Morning, as she drew the
Curtain to Spit, she observe d that Mademoiselle's Bed, who lay in the Room, was
thrown open, and that the Bird was Flown* she presently suspected the Truth,
and rising went softly into the Wardrobe; where seeing the Door belonging to
the Private Stairs open, she called out; at what time, her Daughter hearing
her Voice rose with all speed from Bassompierre, and went to her. Madam d'
Entragues, after she had given her Daughter two or three Wherets of the Ear in
the Transports of her Passion, caused the Door of the Privy Stairs to be broke
open, because Bassompierre had bolted it within side, that he might have
leisure to dress himself. When 'twas open, up she ran in great have three
Stories high; but she was strangely surpriz d to find no body there; but much
more to see the Randevouze-Chamber furnished with Zamet's best Furniture, and
tricked up with Silver Sconces and Candlesticks. Thus ended this Intercourse:
But Love which is Ingenious, provided other ways for those two Lovers to meet
one another at Mademoiselle Dazi's, whom they made their Confident.
Nevertheless this hurly-burly totally extidguish'd all the King s Suspicions of
the Duke of Guise's having an Intreague with the Marchioness of Vernueil.

There was some Discourse of Marrying Mademoiselle d' Entragues to the Count d'
Ache in Anvergne. But that Match was broken off upon examination of the
Articles: after which the Marchioness of Vernueil, and her Sister went to pass
away the fair Season at the Marchioness of Conflans's near Charenton, about
whose House the Duke of Guise and Bassompierre walked their Rounds every Night.
But at last Bassompierre broke off altogether with Mademoiselle d' Entragues,
aspiring to a more Advantageous Alliance; and begged leave of the King to marry
Mademoiselle de Montmorency, and to treat with the Duke of Bouillon for his
Employment of first Gentleman of his Chamber. Nor did the King believe it only
enough to grant him what he asked, but consented also in favor of the Match,
that the Constable, who was out of Favor, should return to Court. The next
morning, at the King's rising, he was admitted to kiss his Hands, had a
Gracious Reception, and in the afternoon the King went to visit the Duchess of
Angolesme, where Mademoiselle de Montmorancy Lodged, and where he saw Madam d'
Essars, with whom he presently embarked, and had two Daughters by her, who
betook themselves to Religious lives, the Eldest being made Abbess of
Fonteleraut: But after the death of her Husband, she privately married Lewis
Cardinal of Guise, the Brother of Charles Duke of Guise. The Cardinal had
obtained a dispensation from the Pope for holding two Benefices,
notwithstanding his marriage; but after his death, the Duke seized upon the
Contract and the Dispensation, which was the reason that Mademoiselle de Essars
was never accounted any other then his Concubine. However she had three
Children by that Conjunction, the Eldest, who died Bishop of Condom, the
Marquess of Romorantin, and a Daughter married to the Marquess of Rhodes. But
notwithstanding the affronts that were put upon her, under the next Reign she
married the Marquess du Hallier, afterward Marshal de l' Hopital. Her Marriage
with the Cardinal de Guise, and the Dispensation, after they had happened into
the custody of several, at length fell into the Hands of Mademoiselle de Guise,
who did in 1608. The Marchioness of Romorantin, understanding that she was
drawing toward her end, caused her Confessor to lay it home to her Conscience,
and make her sensible, that it would be a piece of injustice to detain those
Writings that might be serviceable to reestablish the low Estate of her
Children, and preserve their claim of Succession to the House of Guise. Upon
which the dying Princess was overruled, and sent the requested Papers in a Box
by an unknown hand to Madam de Romorantin. Who immediately went to Court, and
throwing herself at the King's Feet, besought his Protection. To whom that
Great Prince, whose profound wisdom appear d in his meanest Actions, made
answer, that she must address her self to his Parliament, whose business it was
to take Cognizance of those Differences. But to return to Madam de Montmorancy.

The Duke of Bouillon who was Brother-in-Law to the Constable, took it ill,
that a Match should be treated of and he not be acquainted with it; and
therefore he resolved to cross it. One day, that the King had been visiting
Madam de Montmorancy at the Queens lodgings, and was very passionately crying
up her Beauty, the Duke drew him aside, and told him that he wondered he had
given his consent to the marriage of that Lady with Bassompierre, since there
were no other matches that were fit for his Nephew the Prince of Conde, but
either she or the Duchess of Main, and seeing Policy would not admit him to
suffer the Head of the League, too powerful already to advance his Credit by
an Alliance, he was obliged to give Madam de Montmorency to the Prince. The
King heard his advice without making any answer, but the next day going to see
the Practice of a Ball, that was to be danced at the Louvre, Bellegard cried up
the Charms of that Lady, to such a degree, that the King resolved to undertake
the Conquest of her himself. And in regard that for the better bringing about
his Design, 'twas convenient she should marry a Man for whom she had no
kindness, he was desirous of being satisfied what opinion she had of
Bassompierre.

To this purpose an Opportunity offered it self within a few days: for being
constrained by a fit of the Gout to keep his Bed, he was Visited by Madam d'
Angouleme and her Niece; and while the Count of Grammont discoursed the
Duchess, the King entertained Mademoiselle de Montmorency, and told her, that
he would love her as his own Daughter, and Lodge her in the Louvre, during
Bassompierres year of waiting, and desired her to tell him ingenuously, whither
she were pleased with her Match or no; for that otherwise he would break it
off, and marry her to his Nephew the Prince of Conde. Mad. de Montmorancy, who
did not penetrate the King's design, freely answered him, that since it was her
Fathers will, she should think her self very happy with the Marquess. Henry IV.
faign'd to be extremely glad of it; but resolved within himself to find her out
another Husband.

The next morning betimes he sent for Bassompierre, and after he had caressed
him after an extraordinary manner, told him, that he had a full intention to
marry him. The Marquis, ignorant of what he aimed at, made answer, that had it
not been for the Constables Gout, his Nuptials had been already consummated.
That Is not my meaning, replied the King, my design is to marry ye with
Mademoiselle de Aumale, and in consideration of that marriage, to revive the
Duchy of Aumale in her Person. Bassompierre interrupting him, asked his
Majesty, whether 'twas his pleasure that he should have two Wives? It Is
requisite, replied the King, that I should speak to thee as a friend: I am in
Love my self, with Mademoiselle de Montmorancy: If thou marriest her* and she
love thee, I shall hate thee; and if she have an affection for me, then will thou be my Enemy: It Is better to avoid an occasion that may break our
friendship: I have a kindness for thee, and I should feel a terrible combat
within my self, should I be constrained to remove my favor from thee. I am
resolved to marry that Lady to my Nephew the Prince of Conde. She will be the
Consolation of my old Age, and I will give my Nephew who is young, and loves
hunting better then Ladies, a hundred thousand Franks a year for his pastime,
without desiring any thing more from her that I design for his Wife but an
innocent affection. Bassompierre, who saw well that he should but augment the
King's Passion by reluctance, resolved to yield him up cheerfully a Blessing
which he could not preserve to himself, whither he would or no. It Is a long
time Sir, said he, that I have wished for an opportunity to let your Majesty see
my entire devotion to your Majesty's Service; and now I have met with one, that
answers my desires; since the sacrifice which I offer to your Majesty, is the
greatest that Man can be capable of receiving. I renounce at the same time for
the love I bear your Majesty a splendid Alliance; and a Lady altogether lovely,
for whom I have an affection, the fervency and vehemence of which I am not able
to express. Yet I offer up all these advantages, without any trouble to my
self, or any repining in the least: and I wish that this intreague may bring as
much joy to your Majesty, as the loss of my hopes affliction to my self, should
I surrender 'em to any other then my Master: a Master whose Virtues I no less
admire then I reverence his high Extraction. These words so mollifi'd the King,
that he melted into tears, embraced Bassompierre, and promised him to take care
of his Fortune: he also talk d to him of marrying Mademoiselle de Aumale; but
Bassompierre besought him to be contented with taking from him the person that
he loved, without imposing upon him a person that he could not affect.

In the Afternoon the King sitting up in his bed to play at Hazard with
Bassompierre, and some other Courtiers, and Madam d'Angouleme, together with
her Neice, coming to give him a visit, he cause d the Duchess to come between
the Wall and the Bedside, where he discoursed her for some time in private. All
that while, Madam de Montmorency, who knew nothing of the alteration of the
King's mind, talked to the Marquess, till the King beckning her to come to him,
informed her of his intentions, and then went on with his discourse to the
Duchess; while her Neice retiring, shrugg'd up her shoulders, to let
Bassompierre understand the astonishment she was in.

But tho that Action of Madam de Montmorency discovered nothing to Bassompierre
but what he understood before, he could not avoid the assaults of an inward
anguish, receiving that confirmation of his misfortune. He gave over play, and
went out of the King's Chamber, feigning that his Nose bled. His Servants
brought him his Hat and his Cloak to the Stairs, and Betinghen put up his Money
which he had left at random upon the Table. As for the dispairing Lover, he put
himself into the Duke of Epernons Coach which he found next at hand, not being
able to get to his own, and caused the Coachman to drive him home, where be
continued locked up up for two or three days together, without suffering any
Strangers to come at him. When he returned to Court, the Prince of Conde, who
had made a formal demand of Madam de Montmorency, desired his company in the
first visit that he paid his Mistress. But tho the Marquess were somewhat
recovered from his affliction, and to find some pastime for his love, had
renewed his intreague with Madam d' Entragues, whom he had met at Madam de
Senteny's, yet could he not resolve, unless by the King's express command, to
submit to a compliance that would assur'dly put his heart upon the most severe
Trial, that ever a Lover was expos d to. The Cermonies of Affiiancing were
perform d in the Gallery of the Louvre, where the King was pleased out of an
unlucky wantonness to lean upon Bassompierre's Shouldiers, on purpose to make
him stay with the affianc'd couple so long as the Ceremony lasted. But the
unfortunate Lover could notwithstand so many assaults. His despair upon the
sight of that fatal Ceremony threw him into a Fever, which had like to have
cost him his life.

When he was recovered, Fortune, that took delight in persecuting him, raise d
him a new Adventure, which tho of less consequence, yet put him to a great deal
of trouble. Camillo Simoni, Esquire to the Queen lodged in a little Street,
right against the Door of the Mint, and next door to Madam d'Entragues House,
and coming home one Evening, he found a young man a bed with his Landlady, for
whom he had a kindness. Presently he called up the people of the House, who
gave his Rival several cuts with their Swords, and thrust him out of d^ors in
his Shirt. He was so dangerously wounded that after he had gone about fifty
Paces, he sunk down under Madam d' Entragues windows, expecting every moment to
breath his last. At the same time a Gentleman, who had some knowledge of
Bassompierre s affairs; happened to pass by, and taking the dying person for
the Varquiss, knocked at his door, called out his Servants, and bid 'em go and
help their Master if he were capable of relief, or remove him if he were dead.

The Marquisses Servants were easily persuaded to believe the story which the
Gentleman told 'em, because their Master went out that Evening in disguise, in
prosecution of some happy adventure, as he was often wont to do. They ran
without any consideration to the place, where the body by this time, almost
breathless, lay, and altogether carri d it into their Masters House; tho when
the Candles came, and that they perceived their error, they carried it away to
a Surgeon. Neverthless, the noise of this accident being spread about all over
the City, gave an occasion to several Joakes and Jeasts which reflected all
upon Mademoiselles Honor.

This new vexation hindered the Marquess from being fully sensible of that
Affliction into which the Nuptials of the Prince of Conde, solemnized at
Chantilli, would otherwise have plunged him. The King would fain have marri d
him to Mademoiselle de Chantilli, and to that purpose would have erected the
Lorship of Beauprez into a Dukedom and Peerage for his sake. But the Marquiss's
heart was not at liberty to think of new engagements.

1670. The King by Marrying Madam de Montmorency with the Prince for whom she
had no Conjugal affection, verily thought to find less difficulty in the
prosecuting of his Amors; but they had made such a noise, that the Young
Prince did not think it behooved him to brook the continuance of the Kings
Courtship, without making himself the Table talk of the whole Court. He
therefore resolved to break off that Intercourse by retiring privately from
Fontain Bleau where the Court then lay, and withdrawing into the Low Country's.
And preparing all things in a readiness for his retreat, He took Horse one
morning with Rochefort, Touray, an Esquire, who took up Madam the Princess
behind him, Mademoiselle de Certeaux, and a waiting Woman, called Phil^pette.
He lay at Muret, and thence continued his Journey to Landrecy. As for the King,
he was then playing in his little Cabinet, where d' Elboeuf brought him the
Tidings which were confirmed immediately after by the Captain of the Watch.
Upon which the King cried out to Bassompierre that stood nearest to him, with a
transport not easy to be expressed, My dear Friend I am undone, This Man is
carrying away his Wife into a Wood; I know not whether it be to kill her, or to
hurry her out of France; have a care of my money, and play on the Game, while I
go and examine the particulars of this Escape. And so saying he went up into
another Chamber, beckning to the Marquess of Coeuvres, the Count of Cramail, d'
Elboeuf and Lomenie to follow him, and asking their advice in a strange
Confusion and Hurry, furiously grasped at the first proposal, and commanded de
Lomenie to make dispatches for the prosecution of it: but the next moment,
considering the impossibility of it, he alter d his Opinion. One advised him to
send the Captain of the Watch with his Archers alter the Prince with orders to
stop him: another to give the same Commission to Balagny, and Bouvin, and a
third to post away Vaubecourt, then at Court, to the Frontiers of Lorrain to
hinder his Passage.

But the King well understanding how little solidity there was in any of those
Projects, sent for his principal Ministers to understand their Opinions upon a
matter, wherein his heart was so deeply concerned. The Chancellor arrived first
of all, who after the King had set forth the matter of Fact, made answer with a
Gravity becoming his Dignity, that the Prince of Conde had not taken the Right
Course; that it was to be wished, he had been better advised; that he ought to
have moderated his Heart. The King impatient of this Discourse, and
interrupting him in a great Passion, this is not the business said he, that I
ask ye,'it is your Advice, Monsieur Chancellor that I require. Then the same
Minister resuming his Oration, Be it so added He; then I think the best way is
to issue forth effectual and strong Declarations against him, and all that
shall follow him, or lend him any Assistance. While the Chancellor was
delivering his formal hum drum, Villeroy entered the Room, to whom the King,
who began to be tired with the Chancellors phlegm, addressed himself, and after
he had in few words declared the business in hand, demanded his opinion.
Villeroy, after he had twice shrug'd up his Shoulders to signify his
astonishment, made answer, that it behooved His Majesty to send his Curriers to
all his Embasdors at the Courts of Foreign Princes, to give 'em notice of the
Princes departure without his leave, nay and against his prohibition, to the
end they might take all such courses as were requisite in the Courts where they
resided, and represent to the Sovereigns to whom they were sent, that they
ought not admit the Prince into their Territory's, but rather send him back to
his Majesty. After Villeroy had done speaking, the King turn d toward the
President Jeannin and bid him give his Advice; which he did without any
Hesitation. Sir, said He, I think you cannot do better then to send after him
one of the Captains of your Guards, to try whether they can bring him back by
force, with orders in case his endeaveurs prove unsuccesful, to go to the
Prince in whose Dominions he shelters himself, and threaten him with a War, if
he refuses to deliver him. In my opinion his departure was not premeditated,
nor has lie done any preceding Act that may deserve Reception or Protection.
Without question he has betaken himself into the Low Countries, and the
Archduke who neither knows him, nor has received any express Order from Spain
to support him, and who dreads your Majesty as much as he honors your Person,
will never for his sake incur the anger of the greatest Monarch in Europe, and
abide the effects of it, but either oblige the Prince to depart his Dominions,
or deliver him up into your Majesty's Hands.

The King relished this expedient, but he would not positively determine upon
any thing, till he had taken the advice of the Duke of Sully, who came not in
till a long time after the rest with a morose Air, and a frowning Countenance.
To whom the King, advancing toward him, Sir, said he, my Nephew is gone and has
carried away his Wife along with him. Sir, replied the Duke, I do not wonder at
it at all: it is no more then what I foresaw: and I told you some while since,
that he would commit this piece of Folly. Had you followed the counsel I gave
you when he went to Muret, you would have put him in the Bastile, and you would
have found him now, where I would have been sure to have kept him safe. What is
done cannot be undone, but give me your advice what course I shall now take by
way of redress. By my Troth, Sir, I cannot tell, replied the Duke; but let me
return to the Arsenal, where I will Sup and go to Bed, and then as I lie musing
in the night, I shall think upon some expedient, which I will communicate to
your Majesty to morrow morning. No, pursued the King, I will have you tell me
your thoughts presently. I must then consider a little, replied Sully, and at
the same time turning himself to the Window that looked into the Court, after he
had stood drumming a while with his Fingers upon the Board, he returned to the
King, who asked him whither he had thought upon the business and what he ought
to do? Nothing, replied the Duke. How! nothing? replied the King, very much
surpised. I say, nothing at all, added Sully. If you do nothing at all, and
thereby show that you do not value the Prince, but rather contemn him, no body
will assist him; no, not his dearest friends, nor the most zealous of the
Officers he has left here, and within three months pinch d by necessity, and
tired with the flouts and scoffs that will be put upon him, he will return and
implore your Clemency. On the other side, if you are eager to recall him, you
will put a value upon him: he will be with Money assisted by several persons of
your Court, and he will find those that will protect him, on purpose to create
you trouble, who would have abandoned him had they been convinced how little
you minded his absence. But the King, whose thoughts were in too great a
ferment to relish such judicious advice, resolved upon what the President
Jeannin had given him, which as it was more blunt and harsh, so it flattered
his Passion the more, and the next morning dispatched away the Marquess of
Pralin as well to the Prince, as to the Archduke.

The Marquess could not overtake the Prince of Conde, and therefore repaired to
Marimont to the Archduke, of whom he immediately demanded Audience, and went
with the Ordinary Ambassador. He laid before the Archduke that Henry of
Bourbon Prince of Conde, making his Wife the occasion of his Pretense, to cover
his design of raising troubles in France, had withdrawn himself into the
Territories under his Government, and therefore he desired him in his Masters
name to cause him to be apprehended. To which the Archduke replied that he
thought he had done enough in not receiving the Prince, but that he could not
refuse him free passage, and that it should not be long of him, that he did not
return into France, as one that zealously wished the King's particular
satisfaction, and the Tranquillity of the Kingdom.

It Is true, that the Prince of Conde did not stay in the Low Countries; for he
passed forward to Cologne, and had left the Princess his Wife at Breda with the
Princess of Orange, his Sister, who carried her afterward to Brussels, whether
the Prince her Husband came in a short time after. Thither also went the the
Archduke to receive the Ladies, and paid 'em a visit so soon as they were
arrived. The Marquess of Spinola, General of the Spanish Forces, who was then
in the same City, complain d to the Archduke, and blamed him for not allowing
the Prince of Conde refuge, and so continually persecuted him with his
importunities, that he obliged him to send a Gentleman to the Prince on purpose
to invite him to return. Spinola also wrote by the same Courrier, and caus^d
the Spanish Ambassador to write to him also to the same effect. It Is true, that
the Archduke did not act with the same thoughts, as the Ministers of that
Crown; for that he wished an Accommodation as much as they desired Peace. But
soon after he was no longer Master of the differences: for the Catholic King
sent his orders wherein he declared that 'twas his Pleasure to grant his
Protection to the Prince of Conde. This Declaration so enflamed his Courage,
that he made it his business to justify his departure out of the Kingdom, and
published some matters of Fact, of which the greatest part were suppos d. To
the same purpose also he wrote to Pope Clement VII. and Cardinal Borghese, his
Nephew, in terms that might make his Letters pass for so many Manifestos.

Now in regard the King had given no order to Pralin to enter into any
Negotiation with his Nephew, so soon as he heard that he was returned to
Brussels, he sent the Marquess of Couvres, with the Character of his
Extraordinary Ambassador; who as soon as he arrived pressed the Archduke to
deliver the Princess of Conde either into the Hands of the Constable her
Father, or of the Duchess of Angouleme her Aunt. But the Archduke declar d
that he would never dispose of her Person, but with the consent of her Husband.
So that Couvrs finding his Negtiation did not take effect, bethought himself of
carrying away the Princess by force.

There was some sort of coldness in Affection between her and the Prince;
whither it were out of a Natural Antipathy, or out of vexation to see her self
so far* remote from the Court of France: and the French had taken care to
cherish this embitterment, to bring about the King's designs. The Marquess of
Coeuvres being informed of her Inclinations. endeavored to persuade her to
suffer her self to be taken forcibly away; to which proposal she could not a
long time tell what answer she should give. On the other side, she was not
satisfied with the Prince her Husband; she saw herself, to her great grief,
under the Tyranny of the Spaniards: The Archdukes Court by no means pleased
her; seeing nothing there that came near the Magificence of that of France; and
besides, she most passionately desir d to be with her Father and her Aunt, who
by their Letters signifi d the same earnestness on their part. But on the other
side, she durst not forsake her Husband, to put her self into the hands of a
Person who was bound by no tie to her interest; and she was equally afraid of
falling into the hands of a Incensed Husband, and of giving Obloquy an occasion
to blame her Conduct. Nevertheless, after she had a long time revolved these
different reflections in her mind, the desire of seeing her Family once again,
and of returning into France prevailed above all other considerations.

Coeuvres's design was to carry her away from Brussels in the Night, and to get
so far upon the Road while it continu d dark, that when her flight was
discovered, it should be impossible to overtake 'em. But for the bringing this
about, there was a necessity of taking several precautions: which way to climb
or break through the Walls of the City; to have Horses ready upon the Ramparts,
to have Horses laid in several places, with Horsemen to oppose all such as
should go about to stop em.

Now in regard there was a necessity of employing several persons in the
execution of ^his Project, it could not be kept so secret ^^t that the persons
concerned had an inkling of it. The first person who had notice of it was the
Count of Buquoy, Grand Master of the Ordinace in Flanders, who carried the news
to the Archduke and Spinola. Immediately a Council was held, wherein it was
resolved, that under some fair pretense, the Princess should be invited to
lodge in the Palace with the Archduke and the Infanta. This was proposed to the
Prince of Conde* without discovering the mystery to him; withal they
insinuated into him, that in regard there was some unkindness between him and
his Wife, 'twould be the best way to separate a while, that he might have time
to recover himself from his disgust. To which the Prince consented without any
scruple; upon those assurances that the Archduke and the Infanta gave him; not
to part with her out of their Custody without his Consent. Nor durst the
Princess, nor Coeuvres oppose it, not having any manifest pretense to excuse
themselves, besides that hey were in hopes of executing their designs before
the change of her lodging. Nevertheless, because they could not adjust all
their Measures during the time that the Princess was to stay in the Prince of
Orange's Palace, therefore 'twas thought convenient, for the gaining of three
or four days more, that the Princess her self, with whom he faign'd to be in
Love, should entreat Spinola to give her a Ball at his House: the but crafty
Genoese, who smelt the design, excused himself neatly. However Coeuvres, no
ways discouraged by this unlucky accident, resolved to carry away the Princess
upon Saturday night, being the 13th of Feb. 1610. because she was to remove
into the Palace the next day, being Sunday. She pretended she was ill, for fear
her Husband should lie with her, which was a thing that very rarely happened,
and hinder from making her Escape.

The Archduke who was informed of every thing by Buquoy, gave notice of it, by
Spinola, to the Prince of Conde, to whom they had never made any discovery till
then, for fear he should make a noise to no purpose, and it was resolved that
the Archduke should be requested to order the Prince of Orange's House to be
guarded all the Night. Conde was so alarm d at what Spinola had told him, that
not being able to keep the secret, after he had taken sufficient care to
disappoint the enterprise, he brake out into frivolous complaints. As for
Coeuvres he denied every thing, because he had as yet done nothing to convict
him; and because there was nothing more to be done, he dispatched away a
Courrier to the King for new Orders upon this unexpected Change.

The King perceiving that Artifice had nothing availed him, resolved to make
use of Force to get the Princess of Conde out of the hands of the Archduke, and
to declare War against the most Catholic King. To which purpose he sounded
James VI. who after the Death of Queen Elizabeth, succeeded to the Crowns of
England, Ireland and Scotland, and endeavored to oblige him to break with the
Spaniards. But he being already grown in years, was unwilling to engage in a
War of that consequence.

Upon which, Hen. IV. made a League with the Duke of Savoy, the Venetians, and
the States of the United Provinces who were most concerned to humble the Pride
of the House of Austria. The Death of the Duke, of Cleves upon which a
difference arose between the Elector of Brandenbourgh and the Duke of Newburgh
about the Succession, furnished the Most Christian King with a specious
pretense to take Arms, and he began to send his Forces toward the Low
Countries; but the tragical end of that Prince disappointed all his vast
designs. For Hen. IV. going in his Coach to the Arsenal with the Dukes of
Montbason and Epernon, Ravaillac attempted to kill him as he went out of the
Louvre, but could not execute his design in that place, because he found
himself posted on that side where the Duke of Epernon sat. The King moreover
had not ordered his Guards to follow him as he was wont to do, so that when his
Coach entered into the Ironmongers Street, and that his Footmen pass^d through
St. Innocents Churchyard, by reason of a stop that hindered the Coachman from
driving on, the Ruffian had an opportunity to get upon the fore-wheel, and give
the King two Stabs with a broad Knife, the first between the second and third
Rib, which was of little consequence; the second between the fifth and sixth
Rib, which pierced his Lungs and cut the veiny Artery, near the left Valvule
of the Heart, which last wound proved Mortal. Thus this great Monarch ended his
days, when he was about to have made all Europe Tremble.

The Intreagues of France, under the Reign of Lewis XIII.
THE Amors of Lewis XIII. afford but little matter, because that if he cast a
particular eye upon any Lady of the Court, 'twas rather a Pastime then any real
Passion. Nevertheless, there were Intreagues wherein the Ladies bore a part,
which I shall endeavor to relate with as much conciseness and clearness as the
Thing will give me leave. The Duke of Buckingham, a Favorite of Charles I. King
of Great Britain was come to Paris, to conduct Madam Henrietta of France, whom
his Master had married into England, but intruth, to set up a Faction in the
Kingdom, which might prevent the King from putting his design against the
Heretics in execution. To which purpose he thought it necessary to acquire
some familiarity among the Lady's who had most Credit at Court; as being
persuaded that 'twas a difficult thing for persons of their Sex, to conceal the
greatest secrecies from those who are once so happy as to have touched their
Hearts. The Daughter of the Duke of Montbason, who after the death of the
Constable de Luynes, married in second Wedlock to the Prince of Joyinville, and
who was then called the Duke of Chevreuse, was she whom Buckingham deemed the
most proper to second his designs. Her Beauty had purchased her an absolute
power over all the great Lords of the Kingdom. She had a most persuasive
Eloquence, a boundless Ambition, and a wanton Humor, which made her covet the
Conquest of all those whom she thought worthy of particular distinction.
Buckingham, who had a penetrating judgment, quickly understood her Character,
and perceived that the Grand Prior, natural Son to Henry IV. and the Count of
Chalais were the most assiduous to pay her homage, and the two persons likewise
for whom she had the greatest value, but that she treated 'em with so much
equality, that they could not discover which way her heart most inclined.
Buckingham having insinuated himself into their confidence, offer d 'em to make
the Duchess explain her self: and tho a man would have thought a Confident so
lovely as the Duke, a very improper person to fulfill the Trust which they had
reposed in him, yet they never suspected any thing; because that being a
Stranger, and one that was but to make a short stay in France, they did not
believe he would engage in an Intreague with Madam de Chevreuse. The Duke of
Orleans, the King's Brother, was then at Limours, and the Duchess at
Dampierre, that lie not above ten Leagues a sunder. The Grand Prior and
Chalais, who were the Duke of Orleans's principal Favorites carried Buckingham
to Limours, from whence they went every Afternoon to Diampierre. During
Buckingham's stay there, he invented every day some new Courtly feast to
divertise the Duchess, to which he always invited the two Lovers for fear they
should grow jealouss. In the Evening he had the honor to converse in private
with the Duchess, by the means of Madam de Vernet, her good friend, whom he
had engaged in his Interests by his liberality. Now when he had received such
sufficient proofs of the Duchess of Chevreuses Compliance, that he could no
longer doubt but that she lov d him in good earnest, he told her that to
conceal their correspondece from his Rivals, there was a necessity of engaging
em in a Conspiracy against Cardinal Richlieu, who was at that time Chief
Minister, and persuade 'em, that tho they were alone together, yet they never
spoke of any thing but of State Affairs. The Grand Prior, and Chalais easily
fell into this Snare; and whereas they saw, to their great vexation that the
Duke of Orleans, their Master, had no share in the Government, they immediately
rellsh'd the proposal which was made 'em, to persuade the Prince to declare
himself Head of the Faction, that they would set up, upon the assurance which
Buckingham gave em of the King of Great Britain's Protection.

This Intreague could not be carried so secretly, but that Cardinal Richlieu
had notice of it. However he would not presently fly out against the Duchess,
not being well assured that she was in the Plot; So that he only procured the
Banishment of Madam de Vernet. This menace, which one would have thought should
have made the Conspirators afraid of a more severe punishment; did not make 'em
give over their clandestin Practices. The Marshal d' Ornano Monsieur's
Governor, headed 'em, afraid if his Master should marry Mademoiselle de
Montpensier, as the King desired, least she who was a notable Lady, should get
the upper-hand of the Duke, and put him out of his favor. Therefore the
principal aim of the Malcontents was to break off this Match and persuade the
Duke of Orleans to marry Mademoiselle de Bourbon, the Prince of Conde s Sister,
and by that match to unite those two Houses in a strict Alliance, or to put him
upon looking out for some foreign Princess, from whom he might have great
Assistance* and a Powerful Protection. As for Mademoiselle de Montpensier they
designed to marry her to the Count of Soissons, thereby to tie the House of
Guise to that of Bourbon.

Cardinal Richlieu, who had every day advice of this Negatiation, that he might
find out the Bottom of it, went to take the Air for three days at
Bassompierre^s House, who was the Count of Chalais's Father-in-Law, and had the
knack of flattering the Count so ticklingly, that he fetched the whole plot out
of his very Soul. Some days after, the Marshal d' Ornano was arrested at
Fontain Bleau, and carried to the Castle of Vincennes; they also secured the
Duke of Vendosm, and the Grand Prior his Brother at Blois: But it cost them
nothing but their being put in a world of bodily fear; for the real Punishment
fell up- Chalais, who lost his Head. Madam de Chevreuse, who foresaw the
Tempest betimes, secured her life and liberty by Flight, and retired into
Lorrain, from whence she went to Brussells.

There were other Intreagues at Court, after the death of Mademoiselle the Duke
of Orleans first Wife. For this same Prince being fallen in love with Maria de
Gonzaga, the Duke of Montoua's Daughter, had a design to marry her, and the
King himself no way seemed to dislike the Match. But the Queen Mother, whose
aim it was to marry Monsieur to the Princess of Florence, after she had made
use in vain of all her persuasions, and all her authority to make him consent
to the Match, had recourse to violence, and at Columniers caused that Princess
to be seized together with the Duchess Dowager of Longueville. Monsieur being
touch d to the quick with this illusage of a person so dear to him, withdrew
into Lorrain, where nevertheless he proved unfaithful, and being charmed with
the person of the Princess Margaret, the Dukes Sister, to the burying in
Oblivion of his first Affections, he marri d her without his Majesty's consent.

The King, incensed at this match, sent a Powerful Army into Lorrain, under the
Conduct of the Marquess of St. Chaumont. There upon, the Princess Margaret,
seeing that the security of her Country depended upon her Liberty, departed the
City by four a Clock in the morning in man's Apparel, well mounted, and attended
only by a Gentleman, whose name was Dause, who had served Madam de Remiremont,
and two other Ladies; and after they had rode thirteen Leagues without drawing
bit, and hid themselves in a Wood, to avoid some Swedish Troops which they
descri'd at a distance, she arrived very much tyr d at Thimville, into which
place she had much ado to get admittance. Presently she gave Monsieur, who was
retired into the Low Countries advice of her arrival, who immediately sent to
her de Fontaines, Chalandray, de Rames, de Laveauport, the Duke d' Elboeuf, and
Puis Laurens; afterward he went to meet her as far as March en famine,
understanding she was to take that Road from Namur, and carri d her to
Brussells, where the Magistrates came to kiss her hands, and by the Infanta she
was conducted to the Queen Mother, who as well as a good part of the Grandees
of the Kingdom were constrained to seek for Sanctuary in that City, against the
Persecutions of Cardinal Richlieu.

Now in regard the greatest part of the Court of France was at Brussells, I do
not believe it will be any deviation from my Subject, to give some account of
the Gallantries of the French Princes and Ladies that were retired thither.
Monsieur, whose amorous humor could not lie idle, while he waited the arrival
of the Princess Margaret, pai'd his assiduities to the Countess of Rennebourgh;
but she being so austerely virtuous, that she was commonly styled the Savage,
he went to refresh himself with the Company of a Spanish Lady, called Dona
Blanca, whose humor was altogether as morose. Madam de Chevreuse laid all her
Snares to entrap Archduke Leopold the Emperors Brother, to whom the Catholic
King had given the Government of the Low Countries; and the Duke d' Elboeuf
made addresses to Madam de Grincalberque; but all these Amors were only
transitory Gallantries: there was no body but the Duke of Guise that embarked
himself in Intreagues of any long continuance, and such indeed as prove d in
good part the occasion of most of the misfortunes of his Life.

This Prince, being the youngest Brother of his Family was designed for the
Church, and was promoted to the Archbishopric of Rheims: but after his
Brothers death, he quitted his Benefices; and courted Anna de Gonzaga, Sister
to the Princess Marie, of whom we have already made mention Cardinal Richlieu
finding this Alliance to be contrary to the good of the State, made use of the
King's authority to prevent it, and ordered the Princess to be shut up in a
Convent. The Duke of Guise enrag d to see his Passion crossed departed the
Kingdom, and withdrew to Cologne, whither his Mistress having made her escape,
followed him in Man's Apparel; but he obliged her to return, and went to
Brussells, where he met with the rest of the Exiles. Now in regard there was no
good Company there to his mind, he spent the greatest part of the Afternoons
with the Duchess of Chevreuse, his Kinswoman, who fearing least his
assiduities should create a jealousy in the Archduke, endeavor d to engage
him other where, and brought him acquainted with the Countess of Bossu. She was
a young Widow of a sweet and blithe humor, and the Dutchess's great friend. It
was so ordered that she should be of the Dukes side in a match at Cards, and
she put her self to forward, that he could not choose but return her an
answer. It Is true, that for fear she should make a wrong judgment of his
Conduct, she presently spoke to him about marriage, and the Duke declared to
her that he desired nothing so much, as to share destinies with her, but in
such terms as sufficiently showed, that he only sought to divertise himself
during his Exile. But tho the Countess had sounded his drift, yet she made as
if she hade never perceived it, hoping the more easily to engage him by her
feigned Ingenuity.

One day she carried him to a very stately House of here is about a League from
Brussells, and treated him with all the divertisements that were proper for the
Season, which was the most pleasant in all the whole year; for which the Duke
could not choose but testify his acknowledgment to her, and talk to her of
love as he was us d to do. The Countess told him, that if he were so amorous as
he would seem to make her believe, he should show himself more eanestly
desirous of their Marriage The Duke swore to her that there was nothing that he
more Passinonately wished for, then to spend the rest of his life with so
amaible a person as she was, and that it was her fault if she did not put it to
the Trial. The Countess taking him at his word, replied, that she should soon
see whither his Protestations were sincere, since she had both a Notary and a
Priest in the House to marry 'em. The Duke was surpised at this discourse, but
made as if he had not been so, and thought he might take his liberty without
running any hazard, while he made the Duchess the Cully of her own cunning;
seeing that a Marriage of that nature wanting the formalities prescribed by the
Canon, and without the Kings consent, was void in Law. The Duchess therefore
seeing the Duke ready to do what she desired, sent for Manfele Almoner to the
Army, who gave 'em the Nuptial Benediction, and dispensed with asking the
Baines, as if he had the same authority with the Bishop of Malines. Thus the
Duke stayed all that night with his new Spouse, to whom he showed so much
kindness and affection, that she was extremely satisfied with the happy success
of her designs. The next day he returned back, after he had desired the show
Duchess that she would keep their Marriage private, till he got the consent of
the Court and his own Relations.

But notwithstanding all the care they took to conceal this Adventure from
public knowledge, it reached the Ears of the Duke d' Elboeuf and the Duchess
of Chevreuse who both upbraided him with it, as a piece of the foulest
Treachery imaginable. The respect he ahd for Laides curbed him from flying out
against the Duchess; but the Duke d' Elbouf and he had such high words
together, that they had drawn their Swords if the Archduke had no pacified 'em.
The Duke of Guise finding he could not revenge himself by his Sword, sought out
for otherways to plague the two persons that had affronted him, and thought he
could not find a better than to bring the Countess home to his House and treat
her there publicly as his Wife. This was the course he took, and from that
time he lived with her very lovingly so long as she remained at Brussels. But
we must now return to France with the Duke of Orleance, who having obtained of
the King to approve his Marriage, went to wait upon him at St. Germains,
together with Madam.

1640 While the King was busily employed in reducing the Huguenots of his
Kingdom, and defending his Allies against the enterprises fo the House of
Austria, he was governed altogether by his Favorites, never minding the
Conversation of Ladies. The Marquess de Paradas succeeded the Constable de
Luynes, and the Duke of S. S^nogi succeeded him. After that Duke was thrown out
of favor Cadinal Richlieu I^ obtained the sole ascendant over his Majesty,
without any Companion either in his favor, or in the Ministry. But after the
Peace had given the King a little liberty to converse among the Ladies, 'twas
soon perceived that he cast a more particular eye upon Mademorselle de Faye^ro,
tho that same application was wholly Platonic* for he bounded his desires
within the limits of Conversation, never caring to have any particular pastime
with her, and never spoke to her but publicly in the Queen's Chamber. This
Love however as innocent as it was, created a jealousy in the Gardinal; and it
seemed to him so much the more dangerous and prejudicial to his favor, because
Madam de la Fayette was in a strict union with the Queen; and for that the
Marchioness of Senesay, a Lady of Honor, and the Queen's Creature, was the
Confident entrust d with the Secret. The Cardinal therefore used all his
endeavors, to break that Union and at length obtain d an order from the King
to banish those two Ladies, which was carried to 'em by Cavigny, Secretary of
State, and within a little while after, the Marquess of St. Ange, Master of the
Queens Household underwent the same desgrace: Which very much incensed the
Queen against the Cardinal; but in regard he was assured of the King has Master
freindship, he took little notice of it.

Mademoiselle d' Hautefort, soon suceeded in the room of Madam de lu Fayette,
and the Cardinal suffered that growing Passion without any jealousy, because
that Lady had neither judgment nor with, to carry on Intreagues, equal to the
Kings first Mistress. But when he discovered that she was solely guided by the
Counsels of Mademoiselle de Chennerault, whose genius and cunning were no way
inferior to Madem de la Fayette's abil^ties, he was no less disturbed then
before. Nevertheless, he durst not openly assail the King's Passion, for fear
of incurring his displeasure, and putting himself out of favor; but to unhinge
him insensibly from her, he thought it convenient to fix about him a Favorite
depending in such a manner upon his will, that he might ruin him when he was
able to subsist of himself For that purpose the Cardinal cast his eye upon
Henry Deffiat, Marquess of St. Mars, Grand Squire of France, who had all the
qualities requisite to supply such a Post. He was handsome, and genteel in his
Addresses, but he loved his pleasures to that degree, that there was all the
probabilty imaginable that the fear of loosing the means of enjoyment would
hinder him from attemping any thing upon the Credit of the Prime Minister. The
King at first disliked St. Mars's licentious humor, which was absolutely
contrary to his reserved way of living. However this Favorite, following the
Cardinals advice, became so complaisant that at length he vanquished the Kings
reluctance. For when the King made him any Presents he besought him to be
spairing of his Favors, which would but create a jealousy in Madam de
Hautefort, and expose him to the darts of her revenge: and at last he so well
managed his Master during his Journey to Chambort, that he drew a promise from
him never to see Madam de Hautefort any more when he returned to Paris. The
Cardinal however afraid least the King should change his mind upon a fresh
sight of the Charming object, left nothing omitted to keep him at a distance
from her. He invented several pretenses to hinder him from returning to the
Capital City of his Kingdom, and engaged him in a tedious Journey to go and
meet Madam Royale his Sister as far as Grenoble, upon the Fronties of P^emont.
After this Interview, it was impossible to detain the King any longer in the
Country, as being absolutely resolved to return to Paris. The Queen also went
to meet him as far as Fontain Bleau, and carried Madam de Hautefort along with
her. But the King's Passion for that Lady was accompanied with so great a
respect that he durst not allow himself the least liberty with her, as you may
judge by what I shall tell ye. One day the Queen having receiv d a Billet, of
which she had a mind to make some kind of mystery, plan'd it to the Hangings of
her Chamber, that she might not forget to answer it; but the King coming in,
within a little while after, the Queen unwilling he should see the Billet,
commanded Madam de Hautefort, who was one of her Maids ot Honor, to take it
down and lock it up which she did accordingly. The King would fain have taken
it from her, and the King and she contended together after a jeasting manner;
but at last Madam de Hautefort, no longer able to defend her self, clapped the
Billet into her Bosom, a Sanctuary too secure for him to meddle with: for the
King durst not touch it there, nor was he curious in the least any more to see
it. But tho the, King's Passion was accompanied with great reservdness, never
the less it was very nice and attended by jealousy. For the King having a
desire to settle Madam de Hautefort in the World, resolved to marry her to the
Marquess de Gevres, Eldest Brother to the Duke de Gevres, at this day first
Gentleman of the Chamber and Governor of Paris, who was no more at that time
then an Abbot, and commanded her to receive him, as a person whom he designed
her for a Husband; which she did without any constraint; for the Marquess was
well shaped, and had a very graceful presence. Now while all things were
preparing for this Wedding, the Spaniards Besig'd Corbie; and all the brave
Gentlemen of the Court hastened to the relief of that place, and among the rest
the Marquess of Gevres, who was there slain; the news of which the King himself
carried to Madam de Hautefort, and endeavored to comfort her. Some few days
after going into the same Ladies Chamber, he found her upon her knees before
her little Altar, and stealing softly behind her saw that she was reading the
Vespers of the dead; upon which, imagining it was for the Marquess of Gevres,
it seized him with such a sit of jealousy, that for six weeks together, he
would not so much as hear her name mentioned; tho he himself had propounded the
Marriage of the Marquess to her: Which can be attributed to nothing else but
the Capriccios customary to Love, that frequently looks upon those things which
once it desired, as so many befallen mischiefs.

At length Madam de Hautefort was brought into his Presence by another Lady;
but the King gave but a very cool Reception either to the one or the other;
teling his Mistress withal that she had made unhappy. Jokes upon St. Mars.
(...) but bid her have a care how she did so any more, unless she had a mind to
incur his displeasure. Madam de Hautefort, who expected to have received some
marks of kindness from the King after a long absence, was so surpised to see
herself so disobligingly reprimanded, that she burst into tears, not able to
give the King any other answer. So soon as the Cardinal understood by St. Mars
the success of the first meeting, he tho^ght it a proper Season to remove Madam
de Hautefort from the Court, together with Madam de Cheunerault ^er Confident,
for fear the King's passion should re-kindle, by any longer frequenting her
Company. To which purpose the prime Minister, and the Favorite labored by
consert, and so sedulously importuned the King, that he sent an Order to those
two Lady's to depart the Court forthwith; upon which they put themselves into a
Convent in Paris. But the Cardinal would not suffer 'em to harbor long there;
enforcing Madam de Chennerault to retire into Poitou, and Madam de Hautefort to
betake herself to one of her Houses above forty Leagues from the Court.

St. Mar's perceiving that no body had a greater share in his Masters
Affections then himself, thought himself in a condition to aspire to nobler
Alliances. He had a long time Courted Marie de Gonzaga of whom we have already
made mention, and had been so fortunate as to gain her Affection. Nay, report
gave it out, that he had had a Daughter by her, of whom she was privately
brought to bed at the Marchioness d' Arquien's House, who was her Governess,
and which afterward went for her Daughter. St. Mars spoke to the Cardinal
about marrying this Princess; but he, afraid least the Favorite should become
too powerful by means of that Alliance, refused to give his consent, and so
ordered it that the King quickly disposed of her to another: Ladislaus the IV.
King of Hungary, sent to demand her in marriage, and the match was soon
concluded. She carried along with her into Poland Madam d' Arquten, together
with the Daughter, which 'twas said she had by St. Mar's. After the death of
Ladistau's the IV. she married in second Wedlock Casimir his Brother; and being
no less desirous to prefer the pretended Young Madam Darquien, she married her
to a great Lord of Poland, and when she came to be a Widow, to the Grand
Marshal Sobies^ki, at present reigning by the name of John IV. Thus, if the
Story be true, the Daughter succeeded the Mother, and as she did before, now
wears the Crown of Poland.

In the mean time, St. Mar's, to make himself amends for the loss of his
Mistress, applied himself to Marion de Lorme, who in truth was but of a very
obscure extraction, but might well pass for the most lovely Person in Europe;
and as she was none of the cruel ones, so was he soon happy. So soon as the
King was in bed, away flew he from St. Gemains, and rode full speed to meet her
at Paris: and the delight which he took in her hindering him from rising early
in the morning, he was very rarely at the Kings rising. The King, who knew not
the reason of his neglect, asked several of his Officers what was become of him
but they said not a word; whether out of ignorance, or whither they were afraid
to provoak a favorite. But La Chenaye, the Kings first Vaiet de Chamber, who
had very much contributed to the putting his Mistresses out of favor, finding
that St. Mar's never made him any grateful acknowledgment for what he had done,
resolved not to let so fair an opportunity of Revenge escape him. He knew that
the King, who was extremely reserved in his Pleasures, had an Aversion for
those that gave themselves over to their Debaucheries; and therefore thought he
could not meet with a more certain expedient to plague the favorite, then by
acquainting his Master with his Love for Marion de Lorme, which he did: and
faild not to infuse into the King those sentiments which he was desirous his
Majesty should have of him. St. Mar's perceiving the King's coldness toward
him, fetched him about so many way's, that he made him confess the many ill
Offices that Chenaye had done him. After the Count had discovered from what
hand the blow came, he studied nothing but Revenge upon the Author of his
disgrace, and to ruin, so dangerous an Enemy in the good opinion of his Master.
To that purpose he imparted his design to tha Marshal de la Meilleraye, who had
some reason likewise of disgust against the same Officer, and they were so
assiduous in their endeavors to degrade him, that they compass d their design.
La Chenaye had some kind of preceding inward Divination of his fall, and spoke
of it to the Cardinal, who promised to support him. But unfortunately for him,
his Patron was then at his House of Ruel, when the order was brought him to be
gone, so that having no recourse to his Eminency, he was forced to depart
without delay.

The Cardinal was very much surpised when he heard of Chenays's being
dismissed from his employment, and knowing that St. Mars was the author of it;
he upbraided the Favorite with it, and told him, he never thought he would
have removed a Person from the King's Person, whom he khew to be his Creature;
and this too, in his absence and without his knowledge. St. Mars whose interest
forbid him to quarrel with that Minister, while his Credit stood immovable, was
constrained total him all the particulars of the Intreague, and acknowledge
his Affection for Marion de Lorme; and as it is a weakness in all Lovers to
enhaunce the Charms of their Mistresses, he gave the Cardinal so lively a
description of her, that he infus d into the Cardinal a great desire to see
her. How ever the subtle Minister made no the least discovery of his thoughts;
but in the Evening he spoke of it to the Abbot of Bo^s Robert, who was the
Trustee of all his Private Pleasures. The Abbot told him, that he knew
Mademoiselle d' Enclos, commonly called at Court Ninon, who ws an intimate
Acquaintance of Marion de Lorme's, and that by her means it would be and easy
thing to entice St. Mars Mistress to Ru^l, under pretense of seeing the
Writers, and for his Eminency to take a View of her at leisure, yet she
perceiving nothing of his Curiosity.

The Cardinal approved the Abbot of Bois Robert's Project, and desired him to
loose no time. Thereupon the Crafty Confident went the next day to give Ninon a
Visit, and made the match so dexterously, that Ninon, as cunnung as she was,
knew nothing of the design. The Cardinal having notice of the day, that the two
Lady's were to come and see his House, ordered a Magnificent Collation to be
prepared ready in a little Island, in the middle of the Park, where he had also
the King's Music, both Violins and Hautboy's; and all the Gallantry went under
the Abbots name, the Lady's all that while not knowing any thing of the mystery
of the Banquet, which was carefully concealed from 'em. The Cardinal also saw
Marion de Lorme, without being seen himself, and found her a thousand times
handsomer then he imagined her to be. He had a desire to know wheher she had a
kindness for St. Mars, and ordered Bois Robert to make the discovery. Tbe Abbot
on the other side failed not to give his Eminency the satisfaction which he
desired, and gave him to understand that Vanity had a greater share then Love
in Marion de Lorme's complyances with the King's Favorite; but that the Lady
kept all her tenderness for Desbarreaux, a Councellor in Parliament, a Young
Gentlemen of a Graceful Mien, a lievely wit, and bonny Conversation but
debauched and Irreligious to the highest degree. Richilieu ordered the Abbot to
make a proposal to Desbarreaux, that if he would part with his Mistress to the
Cardinal and engage her to correspond with his Affection, he would be so far
beholding to him for such ah acceptable Sacrifice, that he would do for him
whatever he desired to advance his Fortute. Bois Robert discharged himself of
his Commission with an extraordinary address, but Desbarreaux returned him
nothing but jocose answers, not believing the Cardinal could be guilty of so
much weakness. Which incens d tne Prime Minister to that degree, that he
persecuted Desbarreaux as long as he lived, and forced him to fell his place
and quit the Kingdom.

After Desbarreaux was gone, Madam des Enclos, at the request of Bois Robert,
spoke to her friend concerning the Cardinal's being in love with her; and the
first overture of his Affection that he made her was accompanied with a Present
of a Pair of large Silver Andirons, and a Candle-stick, which were valued at
20000 Livers. St. Mars surpised to see this ornamental furniture in his
Mistresses Chamber, would needs know from whom so much liberality procecded,
and not being able to clear the point from her own mouth, he let fall all his
jealousy upon Emeri, Controller of the Finances; who visited her some times.
Nay it made him so ^horn mad, that he resolv d to dudgel his Rival, and told
his mind to Coquerell, Lieutenant to the Grand Provist of the Household.
Coquerell gave Emeri notice of it, who to divert the Storm that threatened him,
for bore to visit Marion, and broke off all intercourse with her.

In the mean time St. Mars's jealousy redoubled his passion for his Mistress,
whom he visited every day and Incognith and in disguise, not withstanding the
Kings Prohibitions. His assiduities, also were so signal, that 'twas reported
he had married her. Lewis XIII. had notice of it from all parts, and St. Mars's
Relations, who were afraid least he should be so much a fool as to match
himself so unequally, were the first that complain d of it to his Majesty. Upon
which the Ingratitude and Obstinacy of this Favorite so sensibly affected the
King that he kept his Bed for some days, feigning himself sick on purpose to
avoid the sight of that unthankful Officer, to whom he could not forbear
showing his resentment. On the other side St. Mars, an enemy of restraint grew
weary of being cu^^^'d by his Master in his Pleasures, and in a sit of
discontent gave ear to the proposals of the Count of Soisons, who offered him
for a Wife, his Neice Mademoislle de Longueville, with several other
advantages, if he would enter into a League against the Cardinal. It Is true
that the Death of the Count of Soisons, which happened within a little while
ater the Battle of Sedan, discomposed this Conspiracy for some time? but it was
renewed again with the Duke of Bouillon, by the means of Madam de Thou.

After St. Mars was once engaged in this Intreague, he forgot to give
intelligence to the Cardinal, as he was wont to do, of what the King said of
him, when he found any fault with his Ministry. On the other side, the
Cardinal, who had placed that Favorite near the King s person, and had
supported him in that Station, only to be a faithful Spy to inform him of his
most secret thoughts, no sooner saw him fail of his sincerity, but he began to
grow cold in his kindness for him, till at last those reciprocal disgusts
degenerated into an irreconcilable hatred. One of the principal causes of St.
Mars's antipathy against the Cardinal, was his obstructing the King's design to
have made him one of his Privy Council. One day, at Re^el, as all the Courtiers
were quitting the King's Chamber, to leave it free for the chief Minsters, the
King took St. Mars by the Arm, and stopping him, said he to the Cardinal, it is
necessary that our Friend (for so he called his Favorite) should be well
instructed in Our affairs, to the end he may be able to serve Us usefully. The
Cardinal, who was perfectly well acquainted with the King's humor, would not
withstand the King's design, but suffer d St. Mars to take his place in the
Council; however he would not permit any matter of consequence to be debated
there, and the next day being in private with his Majesty, he neatly
represented to him, how dangerous it would be to impart his secrets to so young
a man as St. Mars, who might be easily wrought to reveal 'em. The King approved
his Eminencies reasons, and never after that, called his Favorite into his
Council. Which coming with ease to St. Mars's ear, he could never be induced to
pardon the Cardinal.

Upon that the Minister and the Favorite never afterward observed any
measures of Decorum, but displayed their Hatred so publicly, that the King had
much ado to keep 'em quiet. St. Mars being one day with the King, when a
Gentleman who came from Marshal de la Mothe, to bring his Majesty the news of
the Relief which the Spaniards had put into Tarragon by Sea, endeavored to lay
all the fault upon the Archbishop of Bourdeaux, who commanded the French
Fleet, this Favorite left nothing omitted to justify the Archbishop, and
blame the Marshals conduct, who was a Kinsman of Noiers the Secretary of State,
and consequently the Cardinals Creature. Nor did he stop there, for
understanding that the Cardinal had accused him to the King, for having showed
but little Courage at the Siege of Arras, where he commanded the Volunteers, he
slyly put it into the King's Head, finding him inclined to Peace, that the
Cardinal prolonged the War for his own particular ends, and started every day
new obstacles to hinder an Accommodation of the differences between the two
Crowns. In short he omitted nothing to put his Majesty out of conceit with the
Cardinal. And the little kindness which the King showed the Cardinal for some
days, afforded St. Mars, whose Reputation was plainly discerned to increase, as
the Cardinal began to wain and loose his Masters favor, a means to draw to his
party several persons whom it would have been in vain for him to have attempted
at any other time.

The Cardinal, on the other side, who had notice of all these practices,
engaged the King to leave Paris in order to besiege Perpignan himself, and
complete the conquest of Rousillon, in hopes that the cares of the War would
divert the King from familiar Discourses, at what time his Minions took their
opportunity to cry down his Ministry. This Journey infused a Jealousy into St.
Mars, who fearing least the Cardinal during the Campaign, should work himself
again into the King's favor, and make use of it to his ruin, deemed it
convenient to secure a place of refuge for himself. Nor could he think of any
more convenient then Sedan, the Sovereignty of which City belonged to the Duke
of Bouillon. He opend his mind to Madam de Thou, who promised him to obtain
from the Duke all requisite Assurances of the Sanctuary which he desired. In
short, he went to wait upon the Duke at Sedan, to persuade him to come to
Paris; and he got thither at the same time that the Duke was pressed by the
Cardinal to undertake the same Journey, to receive his Commission for command
of the Army in Italy, which the King intended to confer upon him. The Duke
finding himself solicited on both sides, set forward at length and went to
Court; and was at first at a great puzzle which party to adhear to, not knowing
which would be most for his advantage to join with the Cardinal of the
Favorite. But at length his inveterate Hatred against the Cardinal, and the
persuasions of Madam de Thou, overruled him to engage with St. Mars. However
he did not refuse the Command of the Army in Italy: and they drew from him a
promise that he should* admit into Sedan the King's Brother, who had already
declared himself head of the Party. But in regard there were several
particulars that were to be agreed upon, they assigned the Hostel de Venise for
the place of their Rendevouz, where Monsieur had his Stables. There, met St.
Mars, and the Duke of Bouillon, who sent for the Counts of Aubijoux, de Brion,
and de Fonterailles. There, it was propos d whither they should put themselves
under the Protection of the King of Spain, upon which there happened great
Disputes: but at last it past in the Affirmative. Fonterailles was entrusted
with that Negotiation, by reason of his Address and Cunning. Besides that being
not so considerable for his Quality, as the rest, it was to be presumed, that
his absence from Court would be the less taken notice off. 'Twas a good while
before he would undertake the business; but at length away he went, and arrived
at Madrid, concluded a Treaty with the Duke d' Olivarez, the Catholic King's
chief Minister It had been resolved upon, that the Cardinal should have been
Assassinated at Briare; but St. Mars durst not put it in execution; excusing
himself that it was requisite to stay till Monsieur's Arrival, to the end his
presence might warrant those that should commit the Murder from danger. For
Monsieur remained at Paris to strengthen his Party, and sent the Count of
Montresor to draw in the Duke of Beaufort, but he could not prevail.

During the King's Expedition, St. Mars instead of preserving the Kings
friendship by complying with him, did all that he could do to loose it: so far
from closing with his Sentiments, that he made it his business still to thwart
him: and when his Majesty desir^d him near his Person, he affected to be absent
from him. Insomuch that when his friends reproved him, and told him, how he did
himself an Injury by his behavior, he excus^d himself by telling 'em, that the
King's Breath was so offensive, that 'twas impossible to endure it. This
Language of his was carried to the King, and contributed not a little to lessen
the kindness which till then he had showed his Favorite. But St Mars who
thought of nothing so much as the death of the Cardinal took no notice of the
King's growing disaffection, imagining it would be easy for him to regain his
Masters favor, if once he were rid of his Enemy. Nevertheless, the design of
killing the chief Minister was delay^d, by reason of a terrible Sickness that
seized him at Narbonne.

St. Mars seeing that the Physicians looked upon it as very dangerous, thought
it a piece of Imprudence, to go about to take away by violent means the Life of
a Man, whom the had condition of his Constitution threatened with a speedy
death. So that it may be said that the Cardinals Sickness preserved him from
the danger that attended his Life.

Monsieur de Thou, leaving Paris, and going to the Court, at Carcassonne met
Fo^terailles, who imparted to him the Treaty which he had concluded with Spain.
Which surpriz d de Thou, because he had not been at the Conference at the
Hostel de Venise, and had never approved the design, the Negotiation of which
they had for that reason conceal d from him.

Fonterailles had carry d this Treaty to St. Mars, who having made a Copy of it,
had sent the Original to Monsieur by the Count d' Aubijous. De Thou, having
taken his leave of Fonterailles, went to the King, who was marched from
Narbonne, and already sat down before Perpignan. There he met St. Mars. who had
so strengthened his Party, that the Army was divided into two Factions, the one
of which called themselves Royalists, the other Cardinalists; and the Animosity
was so great between 'em, that they were every foot ready to go together by the
Ears. However in regard that St. Mars had no more then the outward appearances
of the King's Favor, he pressed Monsieur to declare himself, and repair to
Sedan. Upon which, his Royal Highness demanded with whom the Duke of (...) had
left orders for his being admitted into the Town. Thereupon the Malcontents,
who had not been so wise as to procure one from him before his departure, sent
away Monmior into Italy to get an Order from the Duke with a letter of Credence
to desire it of him. But the Duke who knew not Monmior, would not entrust him
with a Secret of that Importance. So that Monsieur was forced to send to him d'
Aubijous, disguiz^d in the Habit of a Capuchin. And these Journy^s to and fro
caused 'em to loose so much time, that at last the Conspiracy was discovered.

The Cardinal, who during the King's Absence thought himself not safe in
Narbonne, of which Marshal Sehomberg, who had but little kindness for him, was
Governor, resolved to remave into the Dauphinate or Provence, for that the
Counts of Sault, and Alais, who were in possession of both those Governments,
were his intimate Friends. Thereupon he pretended to go and drink the Waters at
Tarascon, and coming to Agd^, in order to go by Water from thence to Beaucaire,
by the way he received a Packet, wherein he found a Copy of the Treaty made
with Spain, not knowing from whence the Intelligence should come, and presently
ordered Chavigni to carry it to the King, who could hardly find in his heart to
cause St. Mars to be arrested, believing it to have been an Artifice of the
Cardinal to ruin his Favorite. Thereupon he consulted Father Simon upon the
News which he had received, and finding his Sentiments to be the same that
Chavigni had vainly endeavored to infuse into him, he resolved at last to make
the foul Offender a severe Example of his Justice. But because it was a
difficult thing to secure all the Conspirators in the Army, the King returned
to Narbonne, pretending himself sick of an Ague, of which he had already had
some fits. So soon as he arrived there, he caused the Gates to be shut, and
gave all requisite Orders for the seizing all those that had any share in the
Conspiracy. Fonterailles had already made his Escape some days before, shrewdly
suspecting that the Treaty was discovered. To which purpose he had feigned a
Quarrel with the Camp-Marshal d' Epernon; to the end that when his flight
should be known, it might be imagined, that he was only stepped aside to avoid
the Rigor of Justice which punish d Duels very severely. The King had
commanded the Count de Charost, Captain of the Guards of his Body, to secure
the Person of St. Mars, but those orders could not be given out so privately,
but that the Favorite had secret notice of it. He was then debaushing with
some of his Friends, when the Intimation was given him. However he was so much
the master of himself that he never changed Countenance for the matter, but
presently causing his Boots to be pulled off, and feigning the Headache, he
slipped out of his Apartiment which was in the Archbishops House, near the Kings
Lodgings, and hearing that all the Gates of the City were shut, he betook
himself to Madam Bourgeois's House, whose Husband, who made Gunpowder, was out
of Town. He there got admittance by means of a Silver Key, and thought himself
safe, because no body saw him go in. In the mean while the Count of Charost
repaired to St. Mars's Apartiment at the Hour appointed by the King; but found
no body there, but the Surgeon and two of the Favorites Valets de Chamber, who
could tell no tidings of their Master. Them, however he carry^d to the King,
who understanding from their Lips that they knew not what was become of their
Master, ordered the Count to go the next morning with the Deputy Governor and
the Consuls, and search all the Houses. Charost perform d all his Orders
exactly, but to no purpose; which obliged the King to leave Na^bonne, to go to
Beziers, withal commanding the Deputy Governor and the Consuls to continue
their search, and to set forth a Proclamation forbidding all Persons whatever
to conceal St. Mars under the Penalty of Death. By which time Bourgeois, where
the offender had hid himself, being returned home, his Wife told him, that
there was a Man in the House, whom she believed to be the Person sought for by
the description given of him. Within a little while after, St. Mars himself
discovered who he was to his Landlord, in hopes, by confiding in him to oblige
him to secrecy. But Bourgeois, afraid of his life and hazarding the Repose of
his Family, gave notice by some of his friends to the Archdishop and the Deputy
Governor, that St. Mars was in his House. Presently away went the Deputy, with
the Consuls, and a Division of his Company, and Civilly accoasting the
Favorite, told him he had Orders from the King to arrest him, and demanded his
Sword. The Deputy Governor carried him to a Chamber in the Archbishops House,
where he left him in the Custody of an Exempt of the Guards of the Body, whom
the King had left on purpose. At the same time that St. Mars was secured at
Narbonne, de Thou, and Savignac were arrested in the Army; and all three
carried to several Places.

D' Ozonville Lieutennant in the Duke of Bouillon^s Guards who stay d with St.
Mars to give Intelligence, no sooner understood that the Marquess was taken up,
but he took Post for Piemont, to tell his Master what had fallen out, to the
end he might look to himslf. passing through Monfrin, he there found Vicount
Turrenne, his Master's Brother, and imparted to him the misfortune of the
Favorite. The Vicount, not knowing that his Brother was engaged in the
Conspiracy, thought it his duty to give the Cardinal, notice of a piece of News
that so much concerned his Repose, and sent him word withal that he had it
from Ozonville, who was going into Piemont about other Affairs. Upon which
Advice, the Cardinal immediately commanded his under Chamberlain, to take Post
and get before Ozonville, with Orders to the Governors of all the Frontier
Towns to stop him, and to waylay all the Passes into Piemont to hinder the Duke
of Bouillon from the knowledge of a thing that so much concerned him. Thus was
Vicount Turenne, by his Imprudence, the cause of his Brothers Imprisonment.
Ozonville was stopped at Valence, and Saladin carried an Order to the Marquess of
Plessis-Pralin to arrest the Duke. Who rightly deeming that it would be no
easy thing to execute such an Order in an Army of which he was General, made a
Proposal to him, to Visit Casal before the opening of the Campaigne; and while
they were upon the way he sent a Messenger to Cominges, Governor of the Place,
to give him notice of the Order which he had received, to the end he might be
prepared to put it in Execution.

Upon that, Cominges invited the Duke to Supper in the Citidel, and so ordered
it, that not above four Persons were to set at his Table. The Dukes Train were
treated in Rooms apart; so that the Duke being alone with Cominges he demanded
his Sword. The Duke, no way concerned, told him he was ready to obey, provided
he showed him an Order in writing; otherwise he would not suffer him self to be
arrested. Cominges answer^d: that he had it not about him, but he would go and
fetch it. In the mean time, the Duke slipped out of the Chamber, down stairs,
and passing all the Centries, got into the City before he was mist. Cominges
not finding him at his return, was in a heavy Toss, as making no doubt but that
his Head must have answered for the loss of his Prisoner. Presently therefore
he ordered the Drums to beat an Alarm, and made the Soldiers run some one way
some another after the Duke; who to prevent falling into the snare a second
time got into a by-street with one Laquey that always attended him, where he
spent the whole Night, leaning against a Wall, without being discovered. By
break of Day he got into a House feigning that he was pursued for fighting a
Duel, and upon the promise of a good reward persuaded the Man that opened the
Door, to hide him in a Hay-loft, where he remained for some Hours. But the
Soldiers that looked after him entering the House, two among the rest got into
the Loft, and Poking with their Halber'ds missed him very narrowly. However, he
would not stir from his Post, till he was discovered and arrested* Cominges
overjoyed that he had recovered his Prisoner, took care to keep him safe from
making a second Escape, till he was carried by the King's Ord^r to Lion, and
there shut up close in the Castle of Pierre-Encise. St. Mars and de Thou were
also carried thither, and Commissioners were chosen out of the King s Council
and the Parliament of Grenoble, of whom the Chancellor Sig^ier was President,
to try ^em. These Commissioners condemned 'em to loose their Heads: but the
Duke of Bouilion bought his Life with the loss of his Principality of Sedan,
which he surrender d to the King. The Cardinal however did not long enjoy the
pleasure of having triumphd over his Enemies, nor did the King himself long
survive his Chief Minister. But enough of these Tragical Stories. Let us now,
for a little recreation see what became of Marion de Lorme.

She endeavored to comfort her self for the loss of St. Mars by keeping d'
Emery company, who wholly devoted himself to her, and was at such profuse
Expenses to gain her Affections, that when he came to make up his Accounts with
Martial, the famous Persumer, from whom that Lady furnished herself with
Gloves, Fanns, Pomatums, Essences and such like Toys, he found she had taken up
in one year as much as came to fifty thousand Crowns. La Guillaumine, whom she
had advanced from being her Laquey to be her Valet de Chamber, enriched himself
to that degree by the Liberality of this same Super-intendent, that he
afterward gave four hundred and fifty thousand Livers for a Prothonotaries
Place in the Council. Yet was not this Lady true to her Paramour for all this.
She kept Company every day with Desbarreaux who return d to Paris, after the
death of the Cardinal; besides several others to boot. So far was she imitating
the Fidelity of her good Friend Ma^^mois^lle d' Enclos; who thought it a stain
to her Honor, to have above one Lover at a time: and tho she were not so
lovely as Mar^^n de Lorme, yet she had a much wit, played so delicately upon
the Lute, and was so sincere that many preferred her before her friend. These
happy talents induc d the Marquess of Villarceaux, who had always a good
Relish, and a true Judgment, to league himself strictly with her. Upon which
the Marchioness grew so jealous, that she never heard her name mention d but
she fell into a passion.

This occasioned a pleasant Story. She had by the Marquess a pretty young Lad
to her Son, who began to learn Latin, and one day it came into her head to ask
his Master, whither the Boy were likely to be a Scholar. The Master, to
satisfy her curiosity, bid him decline Ninus in his Mothers hearing. The Boy
began Ninus, Nini, Nino, and at length he came to Ninum. But then the Mother
knitting her brows, told the Master, he was an Impudent Fellow to teach her Son
the name of such a Punk. 'Twas in vain for the poor man to protest that he
never thought of Ninon, and that he never knew her; the Mother in her fury
would hear of none of his excuses, but drove him out of the Rome with great
indignation and disdain. Whether this be true or no, I know not, but I had the
story from the Abbot of Bois-Robert.

Toward the end of Lewis the Thirteenth's Reign, there appear d a certain
Prince, by the name of Zagachirst, who said he was one of the Kings of
Ethiopia: he had an excellent Talent at Courtship, and made a world of
Conquests in Paris. Madam Saulnier was so violently in love with him, that she
gave him all she could wrap and rend out of her Housekeeping. Which was a very
great accommodation to that Prince, whose Subjects were not very exact in
supplying him with Bills of Exchange. Monsieur Saulnier, who was a Counselor
in Parliament, could not brook the duration of this Intreague which dishonored
him, and was a very great disturbance to his Affairs, he put in an Information
against him for debaushing his Wife, and obtained a Capias utlegatum against
Zagachrist, who was carrid Prisoner to the Chastelet. The Lieutenant Criminal
Tardieu drew up the Inditment against him, and when he asked him any question,
observed all the Decorum that was due to the Majesty of his Character, the
Party accused being always sitting and covered while the Judge stood up and
with his hat off. However the Abyssiman Monarch died in Prison; nor did his
Subjects ever send any splendid Embassy to demand his Carcass since they could
not have his Person.

Intreagues of the Court of France under the Reign of Lewis the XIV. till the
Death of Cardinal Mazarin.
Ann of Austria, his Mother, and the Lieutenancy General of the Kingdom to
Gaston of Orleance, his Uncle. The Queen made choice of Cardinal Mazarin for
her Prime Minister, as having managed several successful Negotiations for her
in Italy, and fit for the Employment. But the Duke of Beaufert in whom the
Queen put a great Confidence, while she was the Object of Richlieu's
Persecutions, looked upon her choice with an envious eye, because he was in
hopes of governing the Queen during the Regency, or perhaps, for other reasons
which his enemies attributed to him. The Queen who endeavored to prevent
division, did all she could to soder disunited minds, and to oblige the
Grandees of the Kingdom to live in friendly manner with the Cardinal. For there
were then no less then three Factions at Cour^ Monsieurs, who was governed by
the Abbot (...) Riviere; that of the Princes of the House of Bourbon, which
comprehended Lewis, Prince of Conde, the Prince of Conti, and the Duke of
Longueville, who but a little before had married their Sister Mademoiselle de
Bourbon. The third was composed of the House of Vendosme, and the Lorrain
Princes, who were alii d to the Duke of Vendosme, the Duke d' Elbeauf being his
Brother-in-Law. The Ladies governed these Caballs: the Prince of Conde being
engaged with Madam de Coligni, afterward Duchess of Chastillon, Sister to the
Marquess of Bouteville, which had hindered the Prince from chastizing the
presumption of Coligni, her Husband, for making his addresses to Madam de
Longueville. Coligni, who was proper and goodly had expelled the Duke of
Beaufort from her Heart, and she had rudely broken off with him, tho she had
written very tender Letters to him but a little before. The Duke therefore to
make himself amends for the infidelity of Madam de Longueville, intreagu'd
himself with the Duchess of Mombason,, Daughter of the Countess of Vertus, who
might well be thought the greatest Beauty of France, and sacrificed to her the
Letters of the Duchess of Longueville.

This was the posture of the Court of France, when all the Exiles were
recalled. The Duke of Epernon returned out of England, the Counts of Montresor,
Fonterailles, and Aubijous being assured of the Duke of Orleance's protection,
began to show themselves publicly; Mesdames de Senelay and Hautefort, were
restored to their places, and the Duke of Guise, who had quitted Brussells,
came to pay his vows to Madam de Monbason. The Duchess of Cheuvreuse, who was
one of the Gang at the same time, appeared at the Louvre, but was coldly
received by the Queen, and commanded to withdraw to Dampierre, not that she had
any real design to banish her, but she would have her be beholding to the
Cardinal for her being restored into Favor, that she might be oblig d to live
amicably with him. In short, he went to see her the next day, and gave her five
and twenty thousand Crowns and made her great offers of his Service.
Immediately the Duchess put him upon the proof of his sincerity, by demanding
two very important things of him. The one, that he should satisfy the Duke of
Vendome for his pretentions to the Government of Bretagne, in reference to
which, he had as yet been only fed with words: and the next was, that the Duke
of Epernon should be restor d to his Emploment of Colonel of Foot, and his
Government of Guinne. The Cardinal carried himself in both very obligingly, and
offered the Duke of Vendome the Admiralty, in lieu of his Government. The Duke
of Epernon was restored to all his Honors, and nothing was omitted to get the
Government of Guienne out of the Count de Harcourt's hands. Madam de
Cheuvreuse, after she had obtained these two Favors, demanded a third, which
the Cardinal at first was very unwilling to grant, but at length he gave his
consent. This was, that he would confer the Government of Havre de Grace upon
the Prince of Marsillac, whom she had a desire to engage effectually in her
Interests. After two such notable Trials of her skill, she thought it
impossible for that same Prime Minister to deny her any thing; and therefore
she propounded to him the restoration of Madam de Chastetau-Neuf: but in regard
he could not consent to it without prejudice to his own particular interests,
he absolutely refused to gratify her: which occasioned a Rupture; so that
afterward there was never any sincere correspondence or reconciliation between
'em. Chasteau-Neuf had been for some time already at Monrouge, where he
happened to arrive the same day that the Duchess returned to Paris by another
Road. And perhaps if he had not stopped there, but had come directly to Court
without capitulating with the Queen, he had obliged her by that frankness to
have stuck close to him. But being desirous to follow the example of Madam de
Sensay, who refused to return to Paris, till she was resettl'd in her
Employment, he gave the Queen time to understand his temper, without desiring
his nearer approach. But his case was not the same with that of Madam de
Sensay, who had no body to oppose her but a person for whom the Queen had no
kindness, whereas Chastau-Neuf, besides that Monsieur the Prince's whole Family
opposed him, gave an occasion of jealousy to the Prime Minister, and had no
other way but by Addresses and by degrees to gain what the Lady of Honor
obtained upon her first motion. The Duke of Beaufort also lost himself by the
same error; for he thought the Queen so prepossessed with an affection to him,
that he imagined he might be able to ruin Mazarin, by showing himself somewhat
cold to that same Princess. But that behavior of his, altered all the measures
that had been taken for his advancement. He had been already in nomination for
a Cardinals Cap; but when it was seen, that he showed so little acknowledgment,
orders were sent away privately to Rome, to desist from any farther
solicitation in his behalf. Neither did the Duke of Vendome, his Father, carry
himself with more prudence: for he scrupled to accept of the Office of
High-Admiral without the Anchorage, not considering, that it became him first
of all, at any rate, to have worm'd himself into the Employment, and then he
might easily afterward have extended his Privileges. He was so much at
variance with himself what course to take, that he made his addresses sometimes
to the Cardinal, and acknowledged himself beholding to him for his Preferment;
the next moment he sought an opportunity to get the Marshal d' Etrees to speak
to de la Riviere, and conjure him to bring about his designs: and no sooner was
he out of his sight, but he endeavor d by indirect ways to engage Monsieur the
Prince to serve him. In short, there was hardly an hour past over his head, but
he changed both his sentiments and his Party.

The Duke of Beaufort therefore seeing his measures broken by the removal of
Chasteau-Neuf, resolved to rid himself of the Cardinal, and subordain'd certain
persons to kill him, as he went to the Palace Royal, where the Queen then lay,
or else as he returned. But the Cardinal having an inkling of what was
contriving against him, immediately went to the Palace Royal, tho he knew the
Queen was not there, and sent for all his friends. The Duke of Beaufort, who
narrowly watched him, took notice of the swarm he had got about him, and
rightly guest from thence, that his project had taken air, which obliged him to
defer the execution of it till the next day, when he might have a better
opportunity, as he believed, because the Cardinal was to go that day to
Maisons, and consequently to pass by the Hostle de Vendome. However he was
still disappointed: for the Cardinal meeting the Duke of Orleance by the way,
the Duke took him into his Coach, and the respect which they bore to the King's
Uncle, hindered the Conspirators from making any attempt. In the Mean time the
Queen being informed of the Duke of Beaufort's designs, cause d him to be
arrested and sent him away Prisoner to the Castle of Vincennes.

The Duchess imagining, that Monsieur the Prince had been the principle cause
of the Duke of Beaufort's imprisonment, and of Chast^au-Neufs misfortune,
resolved to be revenged. Now tho Ladies are apt to flatter themselves in the
opinion of their Beauty, yet her Mirror had already several times informed her,
that her Charms half worn away stood in need of some younger person to
strengthen her party; nor was she constrain^d to look out farther then her own
Family. The Daughter of the Countess of Vertus, whom the Duke of Monbason, her
Father, had married, was as we have said already, the most lovely Woman in
France: besides, she had a secret despite against Monsieur the Prince's Sister,
who having married the Duke of Longueville, had deprived her of a Lover, and
therefore it was no hard matter for the Duchess of Cheuvreux to win her into a
Confederacy with her. The Duke of Guise also, who since his return, had
declared for that fair Duchess, engaged all the Lorrain Princes to embrace his
Party, to which they were already well inclined out of respect to the Duke of
Cheuvreux, who was of the same Family. These two Ladies, having contracted a
strict friendship, resolved to satisfy their revenge, by attacking the
reputation of Madam de Longuevi^^e. To that purpose they published the Letters
which that Princess had written to the Duke of Beaufort: They also
counterfeited others, which as they said, had been written by Madam de
Longueville to Coligni. The Princess of Conde therefore understanding that the
Duchess of Monbason had spread abroad this report, displaid her resentment,
and engaged all her Friends to assist her in doing her self justice. This
quarrel divided the whole Court, and made the Queen afraid least it should
revive the ancient feud between the two Houses of Bourbon and Guise. These two
parties were equally matched, because the Duke of Lorrain who had married into
the House of Guise, had declared for Madam de Monbason, and so this difference
might be attended with pernicious consequences. And tho the Queen were
concerned to hinder the Duke of Orleance from uniting too closely with the
Prince of Conde, for fear least their authority should prove prejudicial to
hers, yet in regard there was more danger in suffering 'em to push things on to
the last extremity, she labored to reconcile the Ladies. To which purpose she
engaged the Princess of Conde, and the Duchess of Longueville to accept of the
satisfaction which Madam de Monbason was ready to give 'em. Thereupon the
Duchess was wrought to declare in the Queen's presence to the two Princesses,
that she had no share in spreading the reports, and that she utterly disowned
'em. On the other side, the two Princesses as it had been agreed upon before,
declared that they were willing to believe her, because Madam de Monbason said
it. It was also convenanted by the same accommodation, that the Duchess of
Monbason should avoid all occasions of meeting the two Princesses, which in the
conclusion she never took care to observe.

For the Duchess of Cheuvreux having invited the Queen to a Collation which
she had provided for her at Renard*s House, carried her Mother-in-Law with her
to assist her in the management of the Solemnity. On the other side, the Queen
took a long with her the Princess of Conde, who seeing the Duchess of
Monbason, would have gone back again; but the Queen bid her stay, and desired
the Duchess for her sake to to walk off, and divertise her self some where
else. Which she did after such an unmannerly fashion, that the Queen was highly
offended; insomuch that when she returned to the Palace Royal, she sent her an
Order by Guenegaud, the Secretary of State to retire forthwith to her House at
Rochefort. 'Twas thought there would have been an end of this quarrel by the
removal of the Duchess, but Coligny, who did not think himself sufficiently
revenged upon 'em for designing to create a difference with the House of
Bourbon, to which he had the honor to be allied, sent a Challenge to the Duke
of Guise by the Marquess d' Estrades. The Duke accepted the Challenge, and took
for his second the Marquess de Brideu. The Duel was fought in the Royal Piazza,
where the Duke of Guise had absolutely the better, as having disarmed and
dangerously wounded his Adversary; after which he went to part the Seconds, who
fought with great courage, but without any harm done on either side. This Duel
got the Duke of Guise a great reputation, and would have augmented the value
which his Mistress already had for him, had he persever'd in that engagement,
but his heart gave way to other impressions in a short time afterward.

The Queens six Maids of Honor were all of 'em beautiful and wanton, except
Mademoiselle de Segur, upon whom the following Couplet was made.

But how unjust is young Segur!
Flaxen her Hair, Complexion pure,
But Heart so hard, that no Addresses
Can gain her Amorous Caresses.
But the Lady whose Beauty had made the greatest noise was Mademoiselle de
Pons, of an Illustrious Family in Guyenne. Her adorers were the principal
Gallants of the Court, and among the rest the Duke of Candale, the Son of the
Duke of Espernon, admitted by Surviviourship to the Command of Colonel General
of the Infantry. Marshall Schomburg, Colonel General of the Swisses, the
Marquess of Ville^^ier. Captain of the Guards of the Body, the Marquess of
Moissans, Lieutenant of the King's Gens-de-Arms, and the Duke Joyuse, Great
Chamberlain, Brother to the Duke of Guise. This Latter had caused Madam de
Pons's Picture to be drawn in Miniature, but had not taken it away from the
Painter: in the mean time the Duke of Guise happened to go by chance to the
Painters house, where he saw the Picture, and was so charmed with it, that he
put it in his Poket, and carried it away notwithstanding all that the Painter
could say to him, only he was so just as to pay him thirty Pistoles for his
work. The Picture infused a desire into him to make his addresses to the
Original; he discoursed Mademoiselle de Pons; discovered his Passion to her;
and was so assidous in his addresses, that he dispeirc'd the greatest part of
her Lovers. The Duke of Candale engaged himself with the Marchioness of
Castellana, which was the cause of his death; she having given him too violent
marks of her Love, when he passed through Avignon, where usually she lived, in
his return from Catalogna, where he commanded the Kings Army.

The Duke of Joyeuse made his addresses to Mademoiselle de Guerchi, a great
Companion of Madam de Pons's, who sacrificed him afterward to the Commander de
Jars, of the House of Roche Chouard. The Duke therefore to be reveng d of his
Brother for depriving him of his former Mistress, endeavor d to put a
formidable Rival upon him, and to that intent so highly cried up the Charms of
Madam de Pons to the Duke of Orleance, that he set him a gog to get the sole
possession of her. Presently he became her most diligent Servant, and for some
time was a great disturbance to the Duke of Guise; who understanding that his
Brother had raised him up that Rival to perplex him, endeavored to pay him in
his own Coin. Understanding therefore that the Duke of Joyeuse made his
addresses to Mademoeselle de St. Megrin, who was also one of the Queen's Maids
of Honor, he persuaded that Lady that Monsieur was in Love with her, and
knowing there was to be a Ball within an Evening or two at the Regents
Lodgings, he desired her in Monsieur's name to give him a Blew Ribband that she
wore upon her Sleive, assuring her that the Duke desired to wear that favor of
hers when he came to the meeting. The Lady being easily entreated gave Guise
the Ribband, who presently carried it Monsieur, and requested him in the Ladies
name to wear it that Evening at the Ball, which he did accordingly. After
which, to Monsieur, who began to be a weary of the great crowd that usually
environed Madam de Pons, left her, and stuck to Mad. de St. Megrin, who had not
so numerous a throng about her, and by that means delivered the Duke of Guise
from the vexation of his Rivalship.

The time being come for the Army to take the Field, the Duke of Orleance went
to command the Army in Flanders; and was accompani d thither by the greatest
part of the Mettl'd Nobility that belonged to the Court. The Duke of Guise and
Marquess of Villequiers went as Volunteers; and at the same time, to give
proofs of their Valor and their love for their Mistresses, they resolved at
the Siege of Dixmude, to venture so far in the Trenches, that whoever of the
two lost his life, the survivour might be so happy as to enjoy Mad. de Pons
without a Rival. The same day the Besieged made a Salley, where the two Lovers
gave signal marks of their Courage, but tho neither the one nor the other were
any way sparing of their persons, yet they both came off without so much as
being wounded. Upon which, the Duke of Guise, who was very sincere, wrote a
Letter to Mad. de Pons, wherein he highly extolled the undaunted Bravery of his
Rival.

When they reurn'd from the Campaign, the Court removed to Fontain Bleau, where
happened a great quarrel who should have the King's Music, which Villequier
had bespoke to give Madam de Pons an entertainment upon the Canal, and which
the Duke of Guise would have had for the same design: insomuch that the Queen
was forced to make use of her authority to deside the difference. There also
happened another quarrel between the Duke and Marshal Schomburg, about a
certain Lampoon which had been made upon the Queens Maids of Honor, wherein
the Duke of Guise was severely nipt; and Copies were carried to him under the
hand of the Marshal's Secretary; which was the reason that the Master was
accused to be the Author.

But the Duke d' Elbeauf having notice of the quarrel, made up the business,
and reconciled 'em. However the Duke of Guise being desirous to free himself
from the competition of all his Revals, begged leave of the Queen that he might
Court his Mistress upon the account of Matrimony; which having obtain d, he
sent to her Chamber her Diet ready dressed from his own House, and ordered his
own Officers to attend her, which created an extraordinary jealousy among his
Competitours.

1645. But because the Duke of Guise could not marry Madam de Pons, till he had
dissolved his Marriage with the Countess of Bossu, he resolved to go to Rome,
to Prosecute the Divorce before the Tribunal of the Ruota. The Action also was
already commenced, and his Mother sent two Gentlemen thither to farther it. But
when she understood her Son's Affection for Madam de Pons, she sent to her
Agent to desist. At length the Duke himself departed, and after he had escaped
the dangers of the Sea, arrived safely at Florence, where he obliged the Grand
Duke to write in his behalf to Innocent X. then newly advanced to the
Pontificate. When he arrived at Rome, he was kindly received by the Pope, who
also at his request, granted the Cardinals Cap to Mazarins Brother. For the
Duke was in hopes that such a Piece of Service would have engaged the Prime
Minister to have favored his Design; but he was so far from it that the French
Ambassador had Order to cross and frustrate his Proceedings.

After the Departure of the Prince, Mademoiselle de Pons, not being satisfy d
with her usage at Court, retired to the Convent of Chassemidi, where her Lovers
Officers waited upon her every day, in the House belonging to the Convent,
whether she went at the Hours of Dinner and Supper through a long Gallery which
joined the separate Apartment and the Convent together. On the other side the
Duke being informed of her Persecutions, lent an Ear to a Proposal that Touti
made him to put himself into Naples and command the Army of the Rebels. He
wrote therefore to the Cardinal to give him notice of this Proposal, and having
obtained leave, he Embarked in a Shallop, and passing through the midst of the
Spanish Fleet, got safe into Naples, where he met with great difficulties to be
surmounted. For before his Arrival, the sole Authority was in the hands of
Jennaro, who was no more then a Sword-Cutler at first, but he was constrained
at last to give way to the Duke. So soon as the Duke had the Power in his
Hands, he forbid any more Plundring of Houses, which Jenuaro, suffered every
day, to enrich himself. Upon which, that Brute of a Commander conceiv d so
great an Enmity against the Duke, that he would never after pardon him, but
joining with the Magistrate most popular among the Revolters, and no less vex d
then himself to miss his share of the Plunder, they both together framed
several contrivances against the Dukes Life. Besides, he had neither Provision
nor Ammunition in the City, nor money to buy any: for that, the Captain of the
Rebels, till then, had mentain'd his Men by the Plunder of the Houses only; so
that the Duke was constrained to supply all his Exigencies by his own Credit.
For he received no Succor from France, because the Cardinal imagined, as it was
true enough, that the Duke had a design to make himself King of Naples, that he
might set a Crown upon the Head of Mademoiselle de Pons. The Kings Fleet that
came to an Anchor before the Haven of the City, served to no other purpose but
to debase his Reputation among the people, because they brought neither Men nor
Ammunition. Yet for all these dissasters, nothing abated the Dukes Courage nor
lessend his Affection for his Mistress. For after he had driven the Spaniards
from their Principal Posts, and taken diverse considerable Prisoners, he
thought he might then act like a King; so that he sent a Procuration to the
Marquess of Brancas, his Kinsman, to marry Mademoiselle de Pons in his name.

The Marquess informed the Cardinal of all this, who to assure himself of the
Dukes Fidelity, thought it convenient to shut up Mademoiselle de Pons in a
Convent, whether she was sent by the Queen's Order. But the Lady having notice
of the design against her Liberty resolved to fly with two of her Lovers, to
whom she had imparted the reason of the Alarums, and who had promised both to
facilitate her flight, and to bear her company. Thereupon she stole out of the
Convent, leaving behind her the two Maids that were wont to attend her; but she
got no farther then St. Clou. For the two Lovers not being able to agree among
themselves who should have the greatest share in her, advised her to return to
the Convent.

All this while they had been so long contending one with another, till it was
Night, and the Nunns were retired to their Cells: nevertheless, her Maids
having notice of her return, caused the Gates of the Convent to be opened,
pretending their was a Courrier arrived from the Duke of Guise, that was to
speak with their Mistress. By which means she got into the House where he was
accustomed to eat, and so return d to her Apartment, without any discovery
being made of her absence.

However the Queen who had some inkling of her Escape, had sent, whlle she was
at St. Clou, to the Convent an Exempt of the Guards of the Body to know whether
she were there or no, and to speak with her. Upon which one of her Maids that
most resembl'd her in tallness and shape, came to the Grate of the
speaking-place with her face wrapped in her Handkerchif, feigning to have the
^oothach. The Exempt brought back word again to the Queen that he had spoken to
a certain Person that was like her, but could not say it 'twast Mademoiselle de
Pons, because he could not see her Face. The Queen therefore sent the next day
the Dutchesses of Eguillon and Lyancourt with Orders to carry her to the
Convent of Nunns, of the Visitation of the Holy Virgin in St. Anthonies Street;
which they did with so much severity, that they would neither suffer her to
take her Maids along with her, nor to speak with any body. Of all which she
inform d the Duke of Guise by a Letter, who wrought with so much vehemence back
again to the Queen and the Cardinal, that for fear of exasperating his
despair, and forcing him to treat with the Spaniards, they set Mademoiselle de
Pons at liberty, and gave her leave to retire to Angloises upon St. Victor's
Mote, where she was visited by all her Friends.

The same Year there fell out another Accident which had like to have revived
the ancient feuds between the Houses of Bourbon and Lorrain. The Marquess of
Chabet a Favorite of Monsieur the Prince, had married the Heiress of the House
of Rohan without the consent of the Duchess of Rohan her Mother, who to be
revenged of her, set up a Brother, of whom as she said, she lay in privately at
Paris the 18 of December 1630, upon her return from Paris, in the presence only
of two Women and her Apothecary. She pretended also that she had caused him to
be Baptized under Counterfeit Names, because her Husband was then at variance
with the Court, that she had named him Tancrede, and that she had caused him to
be bred up by a Lady of her acquaintance, called Mademoiselle Millet. That the
Duke of Rhoan, returning to Paris in 1634, saw this Son of his several times
with great satisfaction. That the Spaniards having taken Corbie in 1636. and
the Parisians having taken the Alarm, she sent away Tancrede into Normandy, to
the Father of Temon, her Steward to secure his Person, till she could take him
along with her out of France. That this Son was stolen away by people unknown
the 2d of February 1638. That seven Years after, she discovered that Tancrede
had been stolen away by the order of Mademoiselle de Rohan, and carried to
Leyden, in Holland, where his Pension was paid to a Merchant by his Sister.
However it were, the Duchess of Rohan sent for this Son, whether real or
supposed to Paris, and the Duke of Guise, at the Request of M. de Pons, who was
a particular friend of the Dutchesses, went to meet him, took him into his
Coach, carried him to his House, and declared himself his Protector, while
Monsieur the Prince with great heat supported Chabet's Interest; but Tancrede
was kill d in the Civil Wars, and so put an end to that Controversy.

The Duke of Guise understanding what effect his Letters had produced, resolved
to make one fair push for it, to open the Passages and make way for Provisions
to come to the City. To which purpose he went and laid Siege to a little Island
within a League of Naples, and within a few hours reduced the Spaniards that
were in the Fort to Capitulate. Now in regard the place was not to be delivered
till the next day, the Duke was forced to stay there all Night, and in that
time Gennaro, together with the chief Magistrate of the People, and the rest of
the Dukes Enemies, signed the Treaty which they had made with the Spaniards,
and delivered the Principal Posts of tne City into their hands. So that when
the Duke would have returned, he found the Gates shut, and an Enemy fireing
upon him. He sought then to make his Escape with some Squadrons that stook to
him, but all the Passes were so well guarded that he was forced to yield
himself a Prisoner. Don John of Austria, who at that time commanded the Spanish
Army in the Kingdom of Naples, after he had kept him some for time in the
Castle of Puzzuolo, sent him to Segovia in Spain, where he remained some years,
and ran a great hazard of his Life, becuse he had not been owned by France.

During his Imprisonment, Mademoiselle de Pons became unfaithful to him; for
having at a Ball at Chauron the Presidents Wife's House, beheld Malicorne, the
Chavalier de Hautefort's Brother, who seated himself at her Feet to discourse
of Love, she took an Affection to him, and forgot all that the Duke of Guise
had done for her. However, this Passion was thwarted by Malicorm's Family, who
did all they could to break off this Engagement; but all their Obstacles served
only to unite 'em more closely together; nor could the return of the Duke of
Guise oblige 'em to a separation.

But before we speak of the Revolutions that happened the next Year, it is
requisite we should say something of the rest of the Queen's Maids of Honor,
Mademoiselle de Chemeraut had married La Basiniere, Treasurer of the Privy
Purse, and Mademoiselle de St. Louis was wedded to the Marquess of Flavacour.
Mademoiselle de St. Megrin; after she had harken'd a while to the Marquess of
St. Meme, the Monsieur's first Esquire, broke off with him to engage herself
with the Marquess de Broutte, Colonel of the Regiment of Navarr, whom she took
for her Husband, when the Civil Wars were at an end. Mademoiselle de Nevillan
made choice of the Duke of Novailles, who at the conclusion of the Troubles
made her his Wife. So that there was only Mademoiselle de Guerchi that could
not meet with a Husband. She had quitted the Commander de Jaret, wholly to give
her self up to Jeannin of Castille, the King's Treasurer, and she carried
herself with so little reserv'dness, that the Queen expelled her the Court.
However the Duke of Vitry, engag d with her for all that, and treated her with
as much respect as if she had been a Lucretia, though she had had four or five
Children by several Fathers. More then that, she grew with Child a sixth time,
and the Duke being desirous to preserve her Reputation, which he would not
believe to be quite so much lost as it was, nothing would serve his turn but
that she must come before her Time. 'Twas in vain to cry, she should be
overjoyed to have such a Pledge of their Friendship; he was absolutely resolved
she should destroy the fruit of their Amors, and sent her a Midwife, whose
name was Constantine, who would needs deliver her by force: but she died in the
Operation, and Constantine was hang d. The Duke of Vitry was a long time a
comfortless bemoaner of her death, and preserved the Memory of her so charily,
that he afterward engag d himself with a common Harlot, because the Strumpet
resembl'd her. And that Woman being enriched by his Liberality, married
afterward the Marquess of Goudron, a younger Brother to the House of Gamache.

1649. The Duke of Beaufort having made his Escape out of the Castle of
Vincennes, entered into a new League with the Princes of the House of Lorrain,
the Parliament and the People who had taken Arms upon the Imprisonment of the
President Blanc-Menil, and Broussel a Councellor in the same Body; which
enforced the Queen to besiege Paris. Monsieur the Prince, who then adhear'd to
her Interests commanded the King's Army, and constrained the Mutineers to
Capitulate. But the pretentions of the Prince, whose extraordinary service had
augmented his Reputation, were so great, that Mazarin, fearing least he should
grow too Powerful, resolved together with the Queen to arrest not only him, but
the Prince of Conti, his Brother, and the Duke of Longueville, his
Brother-in-Law. The Marquess of Miossans had the Warrant and did this business
with so much address, that in recompense of his service he obtained a Marsh^l
of France's Battoon; and was afterward called Marshal d' Albret. The three
Princes were carried to the Castle of Vincennes, Guarded by the Marquess of
Bar, thence remov d to the Castle or Marcousins, and from thence to Havre de
Grace. The Princess of Conde and the Duchess of Longueville not being able to
obtain their Husbands Liberty, put themselves into Bourdeaux, and caused an
Insurrection over all Guyenne; which enforced the Queen to march thither with
all her Officers to reduce that Province under her Obedience. And when the
Court returned from that Expedition, Monsieur, who had suffered himself to be
gained by the Cardinals Enemies who were then called Slingers, solicited so
powerfully for the Liberty of the Princes, that they were constrained to grant
him their Release, and the Cardinal himself was forced to depart the Kingdom.

When the Queen saw the Princes at Liberty, she endeavored to regain the
Prince of Conde, and by the meditation of the Princess Palatin, offered him the
Government of Guyonne for himself, and that of Province for the Prince of
Conti, provided he would not oppose the Cardinals return, and that he would
break off the Marriage of his Brother with Mademoiselle de Cheuvreuse, which
was one of the Conditions upon which the Slingers had interested themselves in
obtaining his Liberty. This negotiation was kept very private, and tho the
Slingers pressed very earnestly for the Consumation of the Marriage, the
Duchess of Longueville and the Duke of Rochefoucaut left nothing omitted to
cross it, for fear the Prince of Conti, should escape their hands, and join
with the Duchess of Cheuvreuse and Gondi Coadjutor of Paris. Monsieur the
Prince was overjoyed that those two Persons assisted him in his designs
without any necessity of putting himself to the trouble; which made him
endeavor to augment the jealousies which the Slingers had conceived of his
Sister, and the Duke of Rochefoucaut. However they forbore not to send to Rome
in order to obtain a dispensation upon the account of Consanguinity, and the
Prince of Conti waited impatiently for it, because the Person of Mademoiselle
de Cheuvreuse particularly pleased him, and for that he would have been glad to
have quitted the Cause of the Church, which they had forced him to embrace
against his will. However he concealed his last thoughts from his friends with
all the Artifice he was capable of, and chiefly from Madam de Longueville, as
being desirous she should believe that he acted only upon the score of Love.

In the midst of these perplexities, he privately requested the President
Viole, who was to draw up the Articles of the Marriage, to yield to all the
points that should be contested, and to surmount all difficulties. During this
Negotiation, the Queen took the Seals from Chateau-Neuf, and gave 'em to
Matthew Mole, first President of the Parliament, which increased the distrusts
of Madam de Cheuvreuse about the Marriage which she so-earnestly labored for,
because it was upon the Credit of that Minister that she had grounded all her
hopes of procuring to Monsieur the Prince the Establishment for which she had
engaged her self, and which was to have been ratified at the same time that the
Marriage was solemnized. The only thing that cheered her up was the Prince of
Contis, extraordinary Passion for her. He paid her a thousand obsequious
visits, which he concealed from his friends, and more especially from his
Sister, and had very long and private Conferences with L'aygues, and
Marmontieres, of which, contrary to his custom, he never gave an account to
any body. In short, his conduct appeared so extraordinary, that the President
Nemond, the Prince or Conde's particular creature, thought himself obliged to
give him notice of his Brothers design, and told him that he was going about to
marry the Duchess of Cheuvreuse, without either dispensation, or letting any
body know it; that he hid himself from all his friends to treat with L'aygues,
and that if he did not speedily put a stop to it, he would see the Prince of
Conti taken from him by the Datchess of Cheuvreuse, and the Marriage
consummated at a time when people thought he had most reason to prevent it.
This fair warning, settl d his wavering thoughts, so that without any farther
consultation away he went to the Prince of Co^ti, and began his discourse with
joking upon the vehemence of his Love; but he concluded it with talking of
Mademoiselle de Cheuveruse, the Coadjutor Nourmoutier and Commartin whatever he
thought most prevalent to disgust a Lover or a Husband. Nor did he meet with
any great difficulty in bringing about his design, whether it were that the
Prince of Conti thought he spoke truth, or that he durst not make any show of
misdoubting it. He thankt him therefore for his wholesome advice, and took a
resolution never to think of the Duchess more; he also blamed the Dukes of
Longuoville and Rochefoucaui, for not informing him sooner of what the World
said of her. From that time forward they sought to break off the match without
imbitterment on either side, but the Interests were too great, and the
Circumstances too hard to be digested, for any body to think they could produce
any other effect, then an absolute reviving and reinflaming the old Grudges,
which the Duthcess of Cheuvreuse and the Slingers bare the Prince of Conde,
whom they suspected to hay had a share in the Rupture.

However the President Viole was ordered to visit the Duchess of Cheuvreuse,
to disingage the Prince of Conde and Conti, with some sort of Decorum and good
Manners from the promises they had made and broken in reference to the
Marriage. The next day after both the one and the other were to pay her a
little visit: but whither it were that they could not put that force upon
themselves as to wait upon a person to whom they knew their company would be
altogether unwellcome, or that the two Brothers, who fell out every day upon
the most trivial occasions, could not agree about the manner of paying this
visit, neither they, nor the President Viole performed the intended Ceremony.
So that the affair broke off on their side without observing any measures, or
any way endeavoring to justify what they had done. As for Mademoiselle de
Cheuvreuse she was so affected at this same alteration of the Princes humor,
that she threw her self into a Carmalite Nunnery, where she took the habbit
upon her soon after.

But the breaking off this Marriage, which it was thought would have reunited
the Prince and the Queen together, wrought a contrary effect. For the Queen
imagined by dividing the Prince of Conde and Madam de Cheuvreuse to have united
the Slingers to the Cardinals interests, and that things would have been in the
same condition as they were when the three Princes were arrested. But several
different Interests spurred on the Prince of Conde to break off with the Court:
he found himself no longer safe with the Queen, and was afraid of relapsing
into a second Confinement. Madam de Longueville knew that the Cardinal had
irreconcileably embroiled her with her Husband, and that after those
impressions of her conduct which the Cardinal had imprinted in her Husbands
thoughts, she could not repair to him in his Government of Normandy without the
hazard of her Life or Liberty. However the Duke was desirous to have her
company by all manner of ways, nor had she any pretense to avoid this dangerous
voyage, but only that she staid to persuade her Brother to quit the Court in a
fury, and prepare himself for a Civil War. The Prince of Conti aimed at nothing
certain, nevertheless he folow'd his Sisters sentiments, not knowing what they
were, and was desirous of a War, as being that which would give him an
opportunity to quit his Breviary, for which he had no kindness. The Duke of
Nemours also most earnestly advised it; tho his sentiments proceeded not so
much from his Ambition as from his jealousy of Mounsieur the Prince. For he
was fallen most violently in love with the Duchess of Chatillon, who had been
a long time before intreagu'd with the Prince of Conde, and in regard he could
not break off their familiarity but by separating 'em forever, he knew no other
way to succed but by a War; and that was the only motive which induced him to
desire it. The Conduct of the Court, and the Prince's behavior, soon furnished
both sides with occasion of mistrust; and both parties prepared a like for a
Rupture. The Prince of Conde sent the Marquess of Silleri into Flanders under
pretense of disingaging Madam de Logueville, and Marshal Turenne from the
Treaties they had made with the Spaniards to procure his Liberty; but in truth
he had orders to take measures with the Count of Fuensalida Governor of the
Low Countries, and to sound him before hand what assistance the Prince might
expect, if he were constrained to a War. The Count returned his answer to the
proposal according to the usual custom of the Spaniards, and promising much
more then could reasonably be expected from him, left nothing omitted to engage
the Prince to take Arms. The Prince also by means of Vinueil negotiated with
Mademoiselle de Pons to engage the Duke of Guise in his party, obliging himself
when he treated with Spain to procure his liberty, which he did effectually.
Moreover upon notice of a intended design to arrest him, he withdrew to St.
Maur, and by the Duke of Rochefoucaut gave notice to the Duke of Orleance of
the occasion of his withdrawing out of the way. He refused to speak in private
with Marshal Gramont, who came in the King's name to demand the cause of his
withdrawing, and to invite him to return to Paris with a promise of all
security. But the Prince returned him an answer in the hearing of all the
company that were present, That the Cardinal Mazarin were removed from the
Court, his Spirit and his Maxims reigned there still, and therefore there could
be no safety in that place for his person. The Prince of Conti also and Madam
de Longueville repaird to St. Maur, as soon as the Prince arrived there, and
for the first days there was a Court no less numerous nor less crowded with
persons of Quality then the Kings, with all divertisements serviceable to
Politics, as Balls, Comedies, Play, and Hunting; and the welcome entertainment
drew an i^finite number of fickle people, that always offer their Service at
the beginning of parties dividing themselves, and which either betray or
abandon 'em according to their fears or their interests. Thus Mounsieur the
Prince believing he was in a condition to support himself at Pa^is against the
Court, repaired thither, and sent Madam the Princess, the Duke of Enguien, and
Madam de Longueville to Montrond, with a design to pass soon after into
G^yenne, where the whole Province was prepar d to receive him. But when he
arrived in the Capital City of the Kingdom, he found that the Cabal of Slingers
were absolutely against him, in hopes that the Court would protect 'em in their
opposition to him. The Coadjutor, who was the head of 'em, openly declared
himself his Enemy, and never went to the Palace without a great number of armed
Men at his heels; which obliged the Prince to do the same: nay, one day the two
parties were ready to have drawn upon one anoher in the great Hall.

The Prince therefore fearing least the Slingers should be too strong for him
at Paris, passed into Guyenne, where fortune was as little favorable to him,
the Count de Harcourt having always the advantage over him. On the other side,
the Duke of Nemours, who commanded the Army that came out of Flanders, and the
Duke of Beaufort who led the Duke of Orleance's Troops, being ready to join
near the River Loire, corresponded so ill together, that the Prince of Conde
thought it necessary to take the command of both together, to prevent the
unlucky consequences that might attend the misunderstandings of the Chieftains.
To that purpose he at length departed, leaving the Count of Marsin in Bourdeaux
to keep that City with the whole Province under his obedience, and to hinder
his enemies from taking any advantage of the differences between the Prince of
Conti, and Madam de Longueville. For the Prince of Conti could not endure she
should have any Lover, and displayed those transports of his jealousy which no
way became a Brother.

At length the Prince of Conde arrived in the Army with a small train, after he
had escaped many dangers; beat Marshal d' Hoquincourt, and had some advantage
over Marshal Turenne; but tho fortune was favorable to him in both those
enterprises, however he was desirous of Peace and was willing to enter into a
Negotiation with the Court. To which purpose he sent away Gourville, with an
Instrument drawn up in the presence of the Duchess of Chatillon, and the Dukes
of Nemours and Rochefoucaut. Presently the greatest part of the Propositions
made by the Prince were granted, nor had the Treaty been broken off, but upon
the pretentions of the Duke of Bouillon, who desir d that the Duchy of Albret
might be taken from the Prince and settl d upon him, in lieu of what had been
promised him for the loss of Sedan. The Duchess of Ghatillon, seeing the
Negotiation broken off, would needs undertake the accommodation her self, and
persuaded the Prince to give his consent. For she most passionately desired
Peace, out of a design to despite Madam de Longueville, whose interest it was
to hinder a Pacification, that she might not be obliged to return to her
Husband. The Emulation which Beauty and Courtship frequently causes among
Ladies had occasioned an extraordinary feud between the two Dutchesses; and
they had a long time concealed their animosity; but at length it broke out with
a vengence on both sides. Nor did Madam de Chatillon confine her Victory to the
obligation she had laid upon Nemours to break of all familiarity with Madam de
Longueville upon circumstances no less entrenching upon her Honor then
publicly known, she would also deprive him of the knowledge of Affairs, and
have the Conduct and Interests of the Prince solely at her disposal. The Duke
of Nemours, who was deeply engaged with her, approved this design, and thought
that being able to govern and manage Madam de Chatillon's Behavior toward the
Prince, she would infuse into him those sentiments that He should inspire into
Her; and by that means, that he should overruled the Prince, by that power
which he had over Madam de Chatillen. But though the Duchess appeard at Court
with more then ordinary splendor, the Negotiation came to nothing; she being
the only Person that proved a gainer by it; while the Prince bestowed upon her
the Lordship of Morlon in recompense of the pains she had taken.

The Prince of Conde's Army being repulsed by the King's, was constrained to
retreat into St. Anthonies Subburbs, where the Marshal Turenne fell upon it,
and where a great number of Valliant Men fell on both sides, and among the rest
the Duke of Chatillon; and indeed all the Princess Forces had been defeated had
not the Parisians opend St. Anthonies-Gate, and suffered 'em to march through
the City. Nevertheless, the cares of the War did not hinder the Generals from
making Love. For the Duke of Nemours understanding that the Duke of Beaufort
had an Intreague with a Woman of Quality, whose name we know not, endeavored
to deprive him of that Conquest, and his endeavors proved successful, the Lady
appointing to meet him at a certain place assigned in the night time. But as he
was going thither he found a Door open, where some body becken'd to him to come
in. Up went he into the first apartment, and there found the Wife of an
Advocate, handsome enough, and nothing at all squemish, though she perceived the
mistake of her Chambermaid who had introduced the Duke of Nemours instead of
another Advocate who was her Mistresses Gallant. However, whether it were that
the Woman's easy Condescension disgusted the Duke, or that his imagination was
full of the Person that he sought for, he proved such another Person as
Petronius represents Polyenus to be in Company of Circe. He did all that he
could to reinliven his languishing Vigor, and spent so much time in
reinforcing his wasted Ammunition that he mist his opportunity of the other
meeting. However being desirous to make his excuse to the disappointed Lady, he
went to her and engaged her to meet him the next day in the Labyrinth,
belonging to the Physic Garden in the Suburbs of St. Victor. Now it happened
that the Duke of Beaufort going t ither the same day and the same hour; heard
through a thick Hedge, the voice of these two Lovers. With that he fell a
listening, and understood enough to convince him, that the Duke of Nemours, with
whom he was but too much embroiled already, had made his Mistress unfaithful to
him. Thereupon the Duke of Beaufort challenged the Duke of Nemours, who
accepted the Challenge; and tho Brothers-in-Law, they met in the Horse-Market.
The Duke of Nemours discharg d his Pistol first with more fury then good aim,
and having mist his Blow, the Duke of Beaufort discharged his so well to the
purpose in his adversaries Head, that he lay d him weltring at his feet. The
death of this Duke having delivered the Prince from a Rival, his affection for
Madam de Chatillon began to grow cold, and being overruled by the Spaniards,
he passed into Flanders. On the other side the Duchess strove to comfort her
self up for the loss that her disloyalty had brought upon her with the Abbot
Toquet, who fell passionatly in love with her at the Conferences they had
together about the Peace; this Abbot being entrusted by Cardinal Mazarin with
the management of his interests.

1653. The Duke of Guise being released from the Castle of Segovia, in
pursuance of the Treaty which the Prince of Conde had made with the Spaniards,
proved not so generous as to take his Benefactors side, but returned to Paris,
more in love with Mademoiselle de Pons then he was before his imprisonment, but
he met not, in her, with the same sentiments for himself. Her inclinations were
altogether for Malicorne; and in regard she made it her business to find out
all the ways imaginable to be in his company, without giving the Duke of Guise
any cause of suspicion, she engaged the Prince to take his Rival into his
service, faigning that she was highly obligd to the Gentleman's Father, and that
he had assisted her with an extraordinary affection during the Dukes absence;
and that she might have the more easy opportunities to enjoy Malicorne, she
desired the credulous Prince never to visit her but in the Evening; alleging
that their intreague had made a great noise, and therefore 'twas requisite they
should manage their familiarity with so much the more discretion by which means
she had her full liberty to enjoy her Favorite in the Afternoons. Nor did
these scruples serve to any other end then to increase the Duke of Guise's
love, who being resolved to accomplish his Marriage with Madam de Pons, without
minding his former engagements, proposed to her the spending some months in
Guyenne, there to purchase a little House where she might publish the Banes of
Matrimony with more privacy, while he on the other side retired into his County
of Eu, with the same design. Mademoiselle de Pons having accepted this
proposal, he provided for her a magnificent Equipage, and accompanied her as
far as Estampes. Malicorne having notice which Road she took, road privately
before, and staid for her upon the Bank of the River Loire, where she took him
into her Coach, and drove away for Blois. But crossing through that City, upon
the Bridge they perceived the Duke of Orleance, who retired thither after the
majority of the King. Mademoiselle de Pons, unwilling to be known, kept on her
Mask, tho she were obliged to have pulled it off, out of respect to a Prince of
the Blood. The Duke of Orleance no less surpised at her rudeness then the
magnificence of her Equipage, sent a Gentleman after her, as far as Amboise,
with orders to enquire the names of the persons that were in the Coach: which
as it was no difficult thing to learn, so the Duke was fully informed the same
Evening. Now the Duke had a secret Grudge against the Duke of Guise, and was
glad of the opportunity to let the whole Court understand that the Duke was the
Cully to carry on his Mistresses Intreague. To that purpose he wrote to all his
Friends what he had seen, and the news was soon spread abroad. Thereupon the
Duke of Guise's kindred consulted together, which way to make him sensible of
his Mistresses infidelity, so that he might be fully convinced: but no body
would undertake this affair, because they fear^d the transports of the Dukes
fury, and knew it was a difficult thing to infuse into him the belief of any
thing to the prejudice of a person, who as he was fully persuaded, was never
guilty of any miscariage of that nature. However, the Duke of Cheuvreuse was
pitched upon, as being the most proper person of any other, to act that part,
by reason his advanced years would incline the Duke of Guise to listen to him
with so much the more patience; and he was willing to undertake the business.
The Duke of Guise had much ado at first to believe what Aged Cheuvreuse told
him, however it fixed some kind of jealousy in his mind. Now Mademoiselle de
Pons who was obliged to part with Malicorne upon her entrance into Guyenne, not
being able to live absent from him, wrote to the Duke of Guise, and desired he
would be pleased that she might return to Paris. The Duke, well understanding
the cause of her impatience, desired her on the other side to stay for some
time longer with her Parents; but she, without any respect to his request, set
forward and away she came. When she was arriv'e, the Duke of Guise bribed one
of her Chambermaids, and by her means got into his hands the little Box wherein
she locked up all her Lovers Billet douxes, and there he found a great number of
Letters, which plainly made out a formed Intreague; besides some other Letters
from the Marshal de Aumont, and Marshal d' Albert, that spoke the Language of
fortunate Lovers; which drove him to his wits end.

Upon this, he broke off with Mademoiselle de Pons, and us d her very
unworthily: for he su'd her at Common Law, for a pair of Pendants valued at
50000 Crowns, and a rich suit of Tapestry which he had given her, but with very
ill success. So that the loss of his Suite redoubld his indignation, and he
resolved to assault her in her own house; of which she having notice, sent for
the Marshal d'Aumont, and Marshal d' Albert to protect her; the one being
Captain of the Guards, the other Lieutenant of the King's Light Horse.
Presently they hastn'd to her aid with a Body of Cavalry, which was the reason
that the Duke of Guise made no farther attempt. Fain would Marshal d' Albert
have made his Market of this piece of service, and exacted compliances from
Mademoiselle de Pons, which she could not find in her heart to grant, because
she doated altogether upon Malicorne. Thereupon that jealous Lover resolved to
be revenged upon her for her ingratitude, and entering to that purpose, into a
League with the Duke of Guise, they resolved to get an Order from the King to
take her away by force, and send her into an Abbey in the Pyreneans, of which a
Kinswoman of the Marshals was Abbess. Madam de Pons, having notice of this
Conspiracy, stole out of Paris in the habit of a Country market-woman, with
only two of her waiting women, and went to Brussels, under pretense of pursuing
her Steward who having robbed her was fled the same way. At her departure, she
left the fatal Box, wherein were all her Love Letters, with Mademoiselle de
Tieure, who had been a Pensioner with her at Chassemidi, with orders to deliver
it to no person living but her self, which was afterward the cause of her
breaking off with Malicorne, as we shall relate in due place. As for the Duke
of Guise, he, being informed of her departure, resolved to make a second voyage
to Naples, and to that purpose embarked himself aboard the King's Fleet.

1654. Nor was the Duke the only Person that proved unfortunate in his Amors:
for the Abbot Touquet, who was no less violently in love with the Duchess of
Chatillon, left nothing omitted to gain her affection, but all the complacency
she had for him was only in order to coaxe him out of considerable presents.
One day that he went to visit her, he found her upon the Bed in a sullen moody
humor, nor could all that he could say to her put her out of it. Thereupon he
asked her chief woman what he should do to divert her, and propounded several
ways that were not accepted. But at length the cunning Ouistrel, who was
acquainted with all her Mistresses knacks, put it into the Abbots head to carry
her to St. Germons Fair, and the Maid and the Mistress acted their parts so
well together, that they got out of the incontinent Abbot a Service of Gilt
Plate, valued at above Fifty Thousand Crowns. However she had other Admirers,
that came off at a cheaper rate; among the rest Bouchu, Intendant in Burgundy,
and Cambiac, Canon in the Cathedral of Albi, who was above fifty years of Age.

As for Mademoiselle de Pons, she made as great a Hurlyburly at the Court of
Brusselles, as she had done in France. The Marquess of Bouteville, a Favorite
of the Prince of Conde's, and the Marquess of Fuenclara, a Captain under Don
John of Austria, both offered her their Services, and to the first she lent a
favorable ear. The Prince himself also, paid her some sedulities, but finding
more resistance then he expected, he quitted her Lodgings full of Choler and
Indignation. Some days after, he understood that Bouteville had not been so
unkindly repulsed; which put him into such a Chafe, that he swore to him, he
would never pardon him, if he did not quit her forever, offering on his part
never to have any more to do with her. Moreover to let him see that he would be
exact to his word, he obtained an order from Don John, by which Madam de Pons
was commanded to leave Brussells in twenty four hours, and within eight days to
depart the King of Spains Territories. Howerver Bouteville paid her several
private visits, after she had received this Order, and they agreed together,
that she should make a show of departing, and that after she had traveled
about four Leagues from Brussells, she should return in the night time, to a
Chamber which he would hire for her in a by corner of the Town. Nor was she
worse then her word to Bouteville, and for fifteen days together they enjoy^d
each other in great tranquillity. But by misfortune, Fuenclara having espied one
of Madam de Depons's Chamber-maids looking out at the Window, he learnt by her
that her Mistress lay in that Lodging Incognito: for it was not the first time
that that same damsel had tasted of his liberality. Mademoiselle de Pons,
finding her self discovered, would stay no longer at Brussells, for fear of
being affronted, but withdrew to the Hague; where she stayed all the while that
the Spaniards kept the field.

But after they had taken up their Winter Quarters, Bouteville sent for his
Mistress to Antwerp, whither she was coming; but he sent her word by one of the
Trumpeters of his Rement, to miss Antwerp, and return to Brussells, in regard
the Prince of Conde was gone to give instructions about some thing to be done
in the former City. Madam de Pons, no sooner received these tidings, but she
set forward, and by an unlucky mischance, met the Prince of Conde in a narrow
hollow way, in his return form visiting the Frontier Garrisons, who thought he
knew her, but Lainett and the President Viole persuaded him to the contrary.
After this happy escape, Madam de Pons arrived at Brussells, and alighted at
the Appartment which Bouteville had hird and furnished for her. Their first
enterview was very tender and passionate, and at night they parted very well
satisfied the one with the other. But when she was a bed, she was astonished to
hear the door open, and an unknown person come into her Chamber: She asked him
what he would have; but he went out again, without answering so much as one
word: presently she called her Maids, but they could give her no account of
this adventure. But the next morning she was informed that the Chamber where
she lodged, had been hird by an Italian Fencing Master, who had a pretty woman
to his Wife of whom he was jeaous: that being to ride a little way out of Town,
he had carried the Key along with him, thinking to surprise his Wife at his
return, and discover whither she had not some peculiar favorite besides
himself. Thereupon, not knowing that his Wife was removed, he opened the Door
softly with his Key but was in so great amaze to see the Chamber so richly
furnished, and to hear a strange voice speak to him, that he made all the have
he could out again. Madam de Pons told Bouteville the Story, who came in a
short time after, and the Fencing Masters jealousy proved the subject of their
merriment for several days together.

At the beginning of Autumn Madam de Pons went to the Spa, where she saw the
Rhine-Grave, and gained a new Conquest. He carried her home to his Palace,
after she had been drinking the Waters; and there she contracted a most
intimate friendship with her admirers Wife, who was no less innocent then
beautiful; and reported up and down that she was highly obliged to Mademoiselle
de Pons, who had infused good humors into her Husband: but there were some
that were careful to disabuse her; so that Madam de Pons dreading the effects
of that Ladies jealousy, returned to the Hague, where she heard that Malecorne
lay dangerously sick, which obliged her to return into France.

1656. She came to Charlevi^le, where the King s Lieutennant who commanded in
the absence of the Duke of Noitmoutier, who was Governor, received her after a
most obliging manner, and fell so passionately in Love with her, that he offer
d to deliver up Charleville and Mount Olympus into the hands of the Spaniards,
if by that means she could procure to her self a considerable Establishment at
Brussels; but she refus d his Offers. Malicorne, who had by this time recovered
his Health, came to see her Charleville, and after he had stayed with her some
few days, returned to Paris, to prepare a Lodging for her, where she might
remain Incognito, till she could reconcile herself to the Court. At his
departure, she gave him a Letter directed to Mademoiselle Le Fevre, which he
made use of, by adding some lines in a counterfieited hand to get out of her
hands the little Box wherein were all the Letters from all the Lovers of his
unfaithful Mistress, by which he understood her complacency for the Marshalls
d' Aumont and d' Albret, during their Intreagues, and deeming her unworthy of a
real Passion, he resolved to forsake her, utterly broke off with her and never
saw her more.

As for the Duke of Guise, he Intreagu'd himself with Mademoiselle de Gorce,
who was not of so illustrous a Family but who loved him more cordially and
faithfully; so that after his death, she retired into the Convent of Carmelites
where at length she took the Habit upon her.

1656. The same Year the Queen of Sweden arrived in France, the King sending
the Duke of Guise to meet and receive her upon the Frontiers. Love had obliged
that Princess to quit her Crown: for she was in Love with Count Magnus de la
Gardia; and because he refus d to Reign with her, nor could find in his heart
to love her, because he had devoted all his Inclinations to the Sister of
Charles, Prince Palatine, the Father of the present King, after she had made
use of all her address to procure the consent of the States of the Kingdom, she
resigned her Scepter and the Throne of Sweden to the Prince Palatine upon
condition that he should marry his Sister to the Count du la Gardia. This Queen
was perfectly learned in all the Sciences, spoke the greatest part of the
Languages of Europe, and with as much ease as she did the Swedish Tongue. Now
in regard she had a great Reputation among all the European Nations, she strove
to conceal the real Motive of her Abdication, and would have People believe
that Religion was the pretense. She had been bred up in the Lutheran, and was
desirous to embrace the Roman-Catholick-Faith. To which purpose she came into
France, and took into her Service none but Foreign Officers and
Roman Catholics. Among the rest, she made the Marquess de Monaldeschi,
descended from a very mean Family in Italy, her Squire, and did him the Honor
wholly to confide in him

After she had spent the remainder of the Year at Paris, she removed to Fontain
Bleau, at the beginning of the next; where she discovered that Monaldeschi,
from whom she had had complacencies a little too familiar for a Princess to
have with one of her Officers, had boasted of 'em to the disadvantage of her
Reputation. She had also intercepted Letters which he wrote to his Friends in
Italy; for which she first upbraided him with his Ingratitude; but seeing that
he obstinately persever'd in denying his Crime, she convicted him by the
Testimony of witnesses that were not to be contradicted, and then delivered him
to three of her Officers who killd him in the Stag^-Gallery, after she was
withdrawn. Nor did the Marquess dye like a Roman, but like a Modern Italian,
that is to say, like a Coward, not making so much as one struggle to defend his
Life, nor striving otherwise to save it, but by imploring the Queen's Pardon,
which he begged the Priests that confessed him, and the Queen's Almoner, who
came into the Gallery at the time they were just preparing for the fatal
stroke, to sue for. The King was highly offended at this act of Violence, and
sent to the Queen of Sweden to let her understand, that she would have done
more prudently to have addressed herself to him, and to have demanded Justice
against the Marquess, since she had no Privilege to exercise any Sovereign
Authority within his Dominions. The Queen thus reprimanded, made but little
stay in France, but went to Rome, where she was kindly receiv d by Innocent X.
and took into her Service a Frenchman whose name was Alibert, the Son of one
of the deceased Duke of Orleance's Super-intendents. She continud at Rome till
her death, and kept a very modish Court; the Roman Ladys that came to visit
her, relaxing in respect to her Grandeur much of that severity which is usually
practiced in Italy.

Before I finish these Memoirs, I think my self obliged to give some account in
this place of an Intreague wherein Love had a geeat share: which though it began
before the Year 1657, and held on for a good while after, I thought it the best
way to put it altogether. The two Persons that were most entrusted by Cardinal
Mazarin, and who were employ d in his most secret Negotiations, were Gourville,
who had been in the Service of the Duke of Rochefoucaut, as we have already
said, and Langlade, whom he had made Secretary of his Cabinet. These two Men
for some time were jealous one of another, and did all they could to prejudice
each other: but understanding that neither of 'em was able to prejudice his
Companion, they thought it convenient to reunite, and act by concert. To which
purpose they covenanted together equally to share all the profits of their
Employments at Court.

Langlade had been a long time in Love with Madam de St. Loup, the Widow of a
Colonel of Horse, who had been in good request at Court. She had set her first
Affections upon the Duke of Candale, whom she improved to that Politeness which
afterward he showed in Company: for he had but a very ill favored Air when he
first appeared at Court; but she took care to fashion him. These two reconciled
Enemies thought it convenient to make use of her in the discovery of such
matters as it concerned 'em to know: they gave her Money to play with the Queen
Mother, and engaged her to give 'em a faithful Account of what she heard that
Princess say in reference to their Business. Now tho these two Men acted with
sincerity enough after their Reconciliation, Langlade soon perceived that
Gourvilles fortune advanced swifter then his; which made him covet a more
strict Union with him. He had a Sister, handsome enough, which he proposed to
Gourville for a Wife; and Gourville would have gladly accepted his Offer, had
his Heart been at Liberty; but he had been privately along time in love with
Madam de Parville, who had all the Qualities proper to engage the most
scrupulous Lover, so that he could not find in his Heart to quit her. On the
other side it was his Interest by no means to disgust Langlade. So that he
sought for some plausible pretense to avoid the Marriage which wss proposed to
him. The most assured and the most agreeable to his Intentions was privately to
marry Madam de Parville, and he strove to gain her consent. But though she really
loved him, she could not bring herself to that submission, out of a Fantastic
Humor common to Persons of her Sex. Nevertheless, as she was willing to help
him out of the Labirinth he was in, she gave him leave to tell Langlade, they
were marry d, and to make good this lie, she took a Journey into the Country,
pretending she went to lie in; never minding the Prejudice she might do her
Reputation. Langlade deceived by his Artifice, never thought any more of the
Marriage of Gourville to his Sistter; and some after he also broke off with
Madam de Loup, whom he found guilty of much Infidelity. Before he came to
Court, he had fallen in Love with a Damsel of Quality in his Country, called
Mademoiselle de Campagnol, and though he durst not propose Matrimony to her, yet
he exacted from her a promise never to marry any but himself; assuring her that
he would send her word, so soon as he should have raised his Fortune to that
degree as to make her happy. Langlade entrusted Gourville, with the assurance
which he had given the Damsel, and declared with something of Sorrow and
Vexation mixed together, that he thought himself not rich enough to pretend to
that Alliance, as not being worth in all above forty thousand Crowns. Gourville
bid him not be troubled for that, and to encourage him to go and accomplish his
marriage, promised to give him as much more. Upon that assurance away went
Langlade, and married Madam de Campagnol, who was overjoyed to see him so
faithful to his promise. After the Nuptial solemnities were over, Langlade
returns with his new Wife to Paris, where he found that Gourville had hired 'em
a handsome house, and richly furnished it: The movables he gave to Langlade,
and a considerable quantity of Plate and Jewels to his Wife, besides the Forty
thousand Crowns; and Madam de Parville took great care to bring the young
Provanssal into good company. Thus settled together, these two fortunate lovers
lived a long time contented one with the other: but poor Gourville lost his
Mistress by sickness in the full vigor of his amorous heat. That Lady had been
so happy as to be violently beloved by several, more especially by ^refortaine,
the Brother of Lemy, Chief Commissary under M. le Tellier, Secretary of State;
who refused a pension of sixteen thousand Livres which Mademoiselle de
Monpensier offered him, if he would but have wholly devoted himself to her
service. But he could not find in his heart to sacrifice to that Princess, the
Minutes which he desired to spend with her that was the sole Soveraigness of
his heart; tho she had not the same affection for him, and corresponded with
him only upon the bare account of esteem and friendship.

1658. The kindness which the King had for Mazarins two Neices, for the
Countess of Soissons and her Sister ought rather to be looked upon as pastimes,
then any real passion, and therefore I shall pass 'em by Mademoiselle de
Mancini was convinced of the truth of this, when she was married to the
Constable Colonna. Therefore said she to his Majesty, You say you love me, you
are King, yet you and I must part.

Toward the end of the year 1659, the Court removed to Lion, under pretense of
a marriage in Negotiation between the King and the Princess Margaret of Savoy.
The Duke repaired thither with all his Court, and great were the rejoycings for
a month, but the Duke of Savoy having discovered that while they were amusing
him with hopes of that Puissant Alliance, Pimantel had concluded the King's
marriage with the Infanta of Spain, he took post and returned to Chamberi,
where he solac'd himself in the Arms of Mademoiselle de Tercesson for the
affront which he had received. But tho he had heaped his Favors upon her, she
was never the more Loyal to him for that: for the Marquess of Fleuri had
corrupted the fruit of her first affections, and she gave him frequent
meetings; which the Duke suspecting, commanded one of his Lacqueys to attend
her, with orders never to quit her. But the Marquess to rid himself of that
same Spy, caused him to be thrown into the Po; which confirmed the Dukes
suspicions, so that he caused the Marquess of Fleuri to be arrested, and
arraigned for the death of the Lacquey; but all that he pai'd for his folly was
a long imprisonment. After which, the Duke being reconciled to Mademoiselle de
Tercesson, married her to the Marquess of Cohourre, who enjoy d one of the
principal Offices in his Household; but she showed him so many scurvy tricks,
that he was forced to send her into France, where she met with several
adventures that deserve a particular History. The King's Marriage with the
Infanta was solemiz'd in the year 1660, and Cardinal Mazarin died at the
beginning of the year 1661.

Intreagues of the Court of France under the Reign of Lewis XIV, from the death
of Cardinal Mazarin, to this present time.
IF the King's affection were no more then his pastime before his marriage,
'twas not afterward the same. He felt a real passion, and that passion took
possession of him after an extraordinary manner. Mademoiselle de la Valiere,
who was one of Madam's Maids of Honor, perceived the Monarchs humor so
agreeable to hers, that she fell desperately in love with him. She imparted the
secret of her inclination to one of her intimate friends, and this friend not
heing able long to keep the secret with which she was entrusted, there were so
many persons at Court who were acquainted with it, that they made a sport of it
to the King.

Now, in regard there is nothing more natural then for a man to know the
persons that love and admire him, besides that the King was naturally amorous,
'twas not long before he admitted himself into la Valieres company. The first
sight of her wrought no great effect, for that there was nothing extraordinary
in her aspect, besides that she limpt a little: in a word she had nothing of
handsome shape. However it cannot be denied, but that from the very moment that
he saw her, he had something of an inclination for her, yet so limited as only
to think of well bestowing her upon some Lord of the Court; but he could not
resist his Stars. Three days after he went to visit Madam, who was somewhat
indisposed; but there stopping with la Valiere, he was so charmed with her wit,
that he could no longer curb the violent passion that forced him to fall in
love with her. He stayed but a little while with Madam; but he returned the
next day; and continued his visits for a month together, which made most people
believe that he was fallen in love with Madam; and Madam, to say truth,
flattered herself, as if the Conquest had been hers.

These visits plainly showed that the King was passionately in love,
nevertheless, in regard he durst not discover his Passion, and for that it was
contrary to the rules of decency, to be every day at Madams Apartment and never
see her, he found a way to give it out all over the Court, that he was in love
with her. He talked of her continually: he extold her Air and her Beauty to the
Skies, and spoke it openly, that since Mancini's departure, he had never spent
a happy minute but in the company of Madam. Nevertheless, it is certain that all
the Proofs he gave of his being in love with that Princess were only his being
continually with her, and his always whispering her in the ear before company,
when at the same time he talked to her only of things indifferent, or of la
Valiere, after which he fell into most dreadful dumps. Nor did Madam know what
to think, not dreaming that the King could ever love a Damsel so far from
beautiful, that she was the daily subject of the Duke of Roquelaure's jokes and
Lampoons.

But as passionately in love as the King was, he was a long time before he
durst make known his affection, nor did he do it but after an indirect manner.
One day that he was walking in the Park of Versailles, he bemoaned himself
after a manner most extremely tender, that he had not found himself well for
some time. La Valiere, who was present, showed her self to be very much
afflicted at it, and gave marks of an extraordinary tenderness. The King, who
perceived it, took her aside: He told her, that she was extremely obliging to
be concerned for his health; and at the same time declared to her that she was
the absolute Mistress of his Life, his Death and his Repose. La Valiere was at
a stand, and for a while profoundly silent. The King upbraided her with
insensiblity. But then, she made him an answer that altogether charmed him.
Their conversation lasted three hours, and was only interrupted by a shower of
Rain. All the rest of the day, la Valiere moved with a pensive air, and the
King appeared to be no less restless in his thoughts. The next day they met
again, and their discourse was still of the same nature. The same day the King
sent her some Jewels of very great value, together with the following Billet.

D' ye desire my death? tell me sincerely, Madam. It behooves me to satisfy
your longing. All the World most earnestly seeks my disturbance. It Is given
out, that Madam is not cruel, and that fortune wishes me well; but all this
while they neither say, that I love ye, nor that you reduce me to despair. You
bear me a kind of tender affection that overwhelmes me. For the love of God,
change your manner of dealing with a Prince that dies for your sake. Either be
altogether Compassionate, or altogether Cruel.

The King was not satisfied with this Billet wherein he had displai d all his
tenderness, but the next day in the most magnificent apparel that ever he put
on in his life, he went to visit her at Madams Apartment; at what time the
Maids of Honor that were with la Valiere, withdrew, out of respect. On the
other side, the King resolving to know his destiny, and to push on his good
fortune, accosted her in a kind of trembling posture. In conclusion, he told
her all that a tender and violent love could infuse into a person of wit
inspired by an amorous passion. But then Mademoiselle de la Valiere, who was
already in love with him, could no longer hold out against so strong a Battery,
so that the King returned happy. He went to visit her the next day; this
familiarity lasted for fifteen days. But an accident having discovered the
Intreague, the two Lovers no longer dissembled; which extremely perplexed Madam,
who really imagined that the King had had a kindness for her.

Her vexation therefore to see that the King had prefer d on of her Maids
before her, caused her to speak of it to both the Queens: however she forbore
to signify any thing of her resentment. The Queen Mother, who was well
acquainted with the King's humor in this particular, was terribly alarmed, and
resolved forthwith to speak of it to la Valiere; which she did with so much
embitterment, that two days after, she put her self into a Convent.

The King, who knew nothing of this Adventure, was extremely surpised, when he
heard of it. He presently got a Horseback and commanded a Coach to follow him.
So soon as he came to the House where she was enclosed, he demanded to see her.
She appear d at the Grate, whereafter he had made her a thousand tender Vows
and Protestations, he bid her immediately come forth. She excused her self at
first, alleging the ill usage of both the Queens. To which the King replied
that he was King, and that he would fain see who they were that durst control
his Actions. At length therefore she came forth, and put her self into the King
s Coach. Upon the Road the King propos d to provide a House and a Train for
her. But that seeming too glorious, she avoided it for that time by only
returning him submissive thanks. Thereupon the King carried her himself to
Madam, and recommended her to her care, which redoubled the Princesses Despite.
Besides that the King continued his Visits with more assiduity then before. He
openly sent her Presents the most magnificent that Sovereignty could purchase.
All this while, the King continually urging her to take a House, she at last
consented, and he gave her Biron-House, which he went himself to see furnished
with the Richest movables that were in France. The Queen was almost at Deaths
Door for Grief; but her Amends lay in her own hands; what could not be avoided
was to be endured. At the same time also the King fell sick at Versailles. La
Valiere was more prudent then to visit him. However, his Indisposition not
proving dangerous, at the same instant that Liberty was allowed for Persons of
Quality to pay him their Devoirs, she wrote to him the following Lines.

It Is the General Report, that You are very ill. It may be, it is only to
afflict me. It Is likewise said, that You are disturbed at this last Rumor. In
the midst of these Perplexities, I beg the Life of my Lover, and then, am
ready to abandon the Kingdom, and all the World besides, Wherefore, if You love
me, will you not permit me to pay You the Duty of a Visit? Adieu; send for me
to morrow; that is to say, if my Disquiet will suffer me to live till then.

The King kissed the Billet a thousand times and ordered Madam de St., Agnan to
bring Mademoiselle la Valiere to him. His Orders were obeyed: he saw her with a
thousand Transports of joy; and exceeded so far in his Amorous Caresses with
his Mistress, that he fell into a Relaps. But that Excess of his produced no
bad effect, in regard that la Valiere, nine Months after, was brought to Bed of
a Young Princess that proved a most enchanting Beauty.

The King's Love was so violent, that some time after he became jealous of his
Mistress. He went to Visit her every day, but he only mused, or fell a reading
all the while he was there, and sometimes left her without so much as hardly
speaking to her. His jealousy became so prevelent, that he fell into a
dreadful fit of Melancholy. However in regard that jealousy most commonly
proceeds from an excess of Passion, he was taken, one Evening, with so violnet
a Pain in his Head, and such frequent Vomitings, that the Duke of St. Agnan, to
whom the King had imparted his jealousy, thought it convenient to give la
Valiere notice of it. He also put her in mind, that it became her to leave
nothing omitted that might contribute to his Cure. La Valiere made answer, that
the Kings Humor had extremely afflicted her, but that she could not condesend
to beg Pardon for that she was never Guilty of: that in a word, she had reason
to complain of the King, but that His Majesty had no reason to blame her. The
Kings Indisposition redoubl d: but as violent as his Headake was, his Love was
yet far more impetuous. He bid the Duke of St. Agnan go immediately to his
Mistress, and acquaint her with his Malady; who presently returned with the
following Billet.

Did I but know the cause of your Pains, I would apply a Remedy, though it cost
me my Life. But Good God! how much in vain it is to tell you what I say. It Is
not I that can dispose of Your Majesty's happy or unlucky Days.

The King was charmed with the manner of his Mistresses writing, who presently
after came to see him, together with Madam de Montauzier, who retired, out of
respect, to the end of the Room with the Duke of St. Agnan, while la Valiere
sat upon the King's Bed. Where she carress'd him with a thousand tender
expressions, which so enchanted the King, that he begged her Pardon a thousand
times. This their Conversation lasted five hours, and then they parted after
they had reciprocally vowed to Love each other Eternally.

The two Queens were at their wits end, to see the King's excessive Devotion
to la Valiere, nor was their any thing which they left omitted to take him off
from this extreme Passion. But when they found that all their Efforts prove d
fruitless, they thought there was no other way but for Father Anat, who was his
Confessor, to interpose his Spiritual Authority. Which he did, and that too,
after so severe a manner, that the King thanked him for his good Counsel and
his Service; but told him withal, that for the future he would have no other
Confessor but his Curate. Thus was Poor Father Anat turned out of favor, to
the great grief of his Brethren, whom he forgot to consult upon this ticklish
point.

Sometime after it came into the Kings head, that he would have both the Queens
receive la Valiere into their favor. To which purpose he spoke of it to Madam
de Montauzier, who went at the same Instant by his Order, to the Young Queen's
Chamber. Madam de Montauzier was very much perplexed about the complaint she
had to deliver: however she ventured upon her message; but the Queen would by
no means listen to her. Three days after she miscarried; which had like to have
cost her her life. The King appeared to be very much afflicted at it; and one
day as he stood by the Queens Bed side, she desired him, in the presence of the
Queen Mother and a Clergyman of Note, to bestow la Valiere in Marriage. To
which the King made answer, that if la Valiere were so disposed, he would not
be against it, and presently bethought himself of the Marquess of Vardes for
her Husband. But the Marquess who was in love with Madam de Soissons, and had
no mind to any of the Kings Mistresses, laughed at the Proposal. And afterward
the Marquess of Vardes and Count de Guiche, made such bold Lampoons upon the
King's Amors, that they were both banished the Court.

The King, who had a vehement affection for la Valiere, and understood how
terribly she was discomposed upon the Proposal of Marriage, went to see her
three times a day. La Valiere however could not forbear upbraiding the King
with the little love he had for her, since he could consent so easily to resign
her into the Embraces of another. But the King gave her such potent Reasons for
what he did, that his Mistress was satisfied.

The Kings Assiduitie and Affection for la Valiere thus redoubling, they who
approved not his Familiarity would needs proceed to violence. One night certain
Persons in Vizards got into her Chamber by the help of Ladders made of Cords.
But she avoided the danger, I know not how, and the King appointed her Guards,
and a Steward to taste all the Meat that was carried to her Table. People
discoursed according to their Fancies upon this Adventure; but it is an easy
thing to understand from whence the Blow came, without being a Conjurer.

Nevertheless, la Valieres Enemies were not at all discouraged: there was
nothing which they did not attempt to deprive her of the Kings Affection, The
Duke of Mazarin, who pretended to a world of devotion, demanded of him a
Particular and private Audience, which was granted him. ^he Subject of their
whole discourse was upon a Vision which the Duke had seen that the Kingdom
should be quite ruined, if the King did not utterly abandon la Valiere's
Company: withal he told his Majesty at length that he had a Commission from God
himself to give him that fair warning. And I, replied the King, advise ye from
my self, to take a great care of your Brains, which are in a deplorable
condition, and to restore like a Good Christian what your Uncle the Cardinal
has robbed from the Kingdom. Upon which the Duke made him a low Bow, and
withdrew full of shame and confusion.

Two or three Months after, the Queen would needs make her last Efforts. She
talked to him her self of the scandal which he brought upon his Kingdom by a
familiarity that was the sport of all the Courts of Christendom. To which the
King replied, that Kings and Queens had always been the talk of the world, and
that she knew by experience that she her self had not been spared. Which so
netled the Queen to hear him touch upon that string, that she never after
opened her Lips to reprove him for his Amors. The next day la Valiere was
brought to bed of a Prince. The King who was almost all alone with her when her
Pains came upon her, was at a loss; and it may be said, that he was half her
Midwife. Soon after he made her a Duchess; and still the King continued his
Visits to her; and one day he found her in a deep Melancholy. For as for her
Beauty it was never very charming; so she was grown so lean after her last
lying in, that it was a great mortification to her. Now in regard she perceived
that the King was sensible of her Pensiveness, she confessed to him, that she was
afraid he had not the same Affection for her which formerly he had. For, added
she, do you think that my Looking Glasses does not inform me that I have almost
lost those allurements that render Mistresses agreeable to their Lovers. Yet
this I dare say, that you will never meet with otherwhere, what you have found
in me. I understand ye, replied the King; But wherefore do you thus by your
unjust suspicions affront a Prince that adores and ever will adore ye as long
as he lives?

This Protestation charmed la Valiere. Nevertheless, it is certain that the King
began to miss those charms which he had found in her till then; though he was
convinced that he loved her, when he consulted his own thoughts. In a word, he
was never taken with her Beauty, but with her Wit and her Behavior, and
something I know not what, which it is impossible for a Man to express.

About this time it was that Madam de Montespan appeared at Court. And in
regard she was a Person of a Transcending Beauty, she laid great designs to
ensnare the Kings heart. But as yet la Valiere possessed it so entirely, that
all her Plots proved ineffectual. So that finding the King so little inclined
to entertain her, she cast her eyes upon Monsieur, and he complied, however he
had another Mistress who disgusted Madam de Montespan.

It may be said, that the King had still some little inclination for la
Valiere. But for all that, at the same time that Madam de Montespan displayed
all her temptations at Court to render him sensible of her Charms, he had some
little kindness for the Princess of Monaco. That new Mistress was nothing
cruel. However the King grew weary of her in a very little time.

M. de Lausun, who at first had no small share in the Princess of Monaco, was
so enraged at the Infidelity of his Mistress, that he paid all his vows to
Madam de Montespan. Nor was he long before he obtained her last favors. Thus
M. de Lausun's Happiness became the public discourse of the Court, and the
King reflecting upon the good fortune of his Fovourite, of whom all people gave
out, that he was beloved by the most beautiful Woman of France, this made him
look upon Madam de Montespan, as a Person that had all those perfections which
really she had. And from that time forward it was, that he began to fall off
from his affection to la Valiere; for she was still called by that name though
she had the Title of Duchess conferred upon her. Madam de Montespan, on the
otherside, had too watchful an eye, not to perceive as soon that the King began
to have a growing kindness for her, and from that very time she endeavor d to
the utmost of her power to settle her self at Court. This she thought she might
be able to do, ^ once she could but wind her self into a strict amity with
Madam de la Valiere. Nor did she attempt it in vain, while Madam de la Valiere
sought on her side to disburthen into the bosom of some sincere friend her
sorrow for the extinguishing flames of her Lover. And the forwardness of Madam
de Montespan so highly pleased la Valiere, that they became great friends, in
outward appearance, especially on Madam de Montespan's part, who had her aim,
and hated at the bottom of her heart a Rivaless whose favor with the King she
was laboring might and main to undermine. On the otherside, the King who began
already to feel something of tenderness for Madam de Montespan, was overjoyed to
find her everyday with la Valiere. For which reason he was the more assiduous
in his visits. But Madam de la Valiere soon perceived that 'twas not for her
sake that the King so frequently came to see her, but that Madam de Montespan
possessed his Inclinations.

She complained to the King therefore after a most tender manner, and the King
without evasion, and as obligingly as he could told her that Madam de Montespan
was one of the most beautiful women that ever he saw, and that he verily
believe^d she had a passion for him. To this the King added, that she had no
reason to be surpris^d at it; that the change should be no prejudice to her;
that he would always preserve a particuliar esteem for her; and that he thought
she had no cause to be disatisfied. Madam de la Valiere melted into tears. But
then, the King repeated what he had said. He declared to her, that he desired
she should live with Madam de Montespan as she had done: she promised to do it:
and indeed, she lived with her Rivalless with that unanimity and concord as
surpris d all the Court; for all the world knew that la Valiere was not the
favorite Mistress.

The King visited his new Mistress every moment, and because the delicacy of
his love could not endure that another should share of her favors with him, he
resolved to remove Monsieur de Montespan from her, under pretense of advancing
him to greater employments. But Monsieur de Montespan refused every thing, and
it happened also, some days after that he extremely abused his Wife. Madam de
Montespan complained, upon which the King exiled the incommodious Husband, who
was fain to withdraw with his Children into his own Country near the Pyrenians.

He put himself into mourning as if his Wife had been dead: but for all that,
the King sent him a considerable Sum of Money, which he stood in great need of,
as being very much in debt.

As for Madam de la Valiere, she knew that the King had forsaken her, and
therefore strove to comfort her self the best she could, one day to which
purpose she sent the King the following Verses: All things decay, there is
nothing Permanent,
Nor will
The self same Object still
An Amorous Heart content.
Past Ages never knew Love to be Eternal,
Nor will the Future find it always Vernal.
Such are the Secret Laws of Constancy,
That few
Her just Commands pursue.
Not to be curbed your Roving Wishes fly;
To day what pleases, tomorrow you disgust;
Such an unequal Humor who can trust?
Such spots as these, great King, your Virtues stain,
You loved me once, but wavering like the wind,
Your heart is to another now resigned;
While I in vain
Lament the loss of many blissfull hours;
How different are my Sentiments from yours!
Darling of Venus! to whose power I owe
My past delight, and present woe,
Why did you not on him bestow
A Heart like mine, or such a one on me
As others have, without sincerity.


The King was extremely pleased with these Lines; and the Answer which he
returned to it some few Minutes after was, that Kings gave those Laws to Love,
which Love gave to other men; and made her fresh protestations of his eternal
esteem. Now in regard she expected no other Answer, she resolved to put her
self into a Convent, and made choice of the Carmelites Nunnery, where, some
time after, she took upon her the Religious Habit.

Certain it is that Love and Despite had an equal share in this Retirement.
Nevertheless she was willing that the world should attribute it to better
motives. And indeed the following Verses, that were soon after dispersed abroad
seemed to be made in order to the same design.

Two Potent Kings to have me were at strife,
One, King of Heaven, the other, King of France.
Heavens King, Victorious, here to lead my life
Has brought me: Blessed exchange! most Happy Chance!
For now, the Spouse of God am I, no more
Then a Terrestrial Monarchs Miss before.
This Retirement of la Valiere gave equal satisfaction to the King, and M. de
Montespan. For after all, the Presence of an Abandoned Mistress could not choose
but be a continual reproach of the Kings inconstancy and the Protestations of
perpetual love which he had made her. On the other side Madam de Montespan, who
was not unacquainted with la Valieres Genius, was afraid lest she should
recover the King's Affection.

The King had not been so long absent from his new Mistress, but that she was
big with Child, when la Valiere betook her self to the Carmelites. However she
hid her great Belly as much as she could, and was privately brought to bed of a
Son.

All this while Lausun strove to comfort himself up in the Embraces of another;
and corresponded only as a friend with Madam de Montespan at least to outward
appearance. But this same friendship, whether counterfeit or real, lasted not
long. For Lausun and Madam de Montespan fell out, and quarreled to that degree,
that the King was forced to interpose and make up the business, though Lausun had
given out those speeches that were no less injurious to the Monarch of France,
then to the prejudice of Montespan, and very little to his own Honor. For
whatever favors a man receives from a woman are never to be boasted of, though
it be his ill luck to break off with her.

Lausun had like to have been turned out of favor, but after this
reconciliation, which obliged him to beg pardon of M. de Montespan, he was as
great as ever with the King.

The Ambition of this Favorite was so inordinate, that nothing could satisfy
it. For though he were but a bare Gentleman; yet he aspired to a Marriage with
Mademoiselle de Montpensier. And indeed that Princess had a real kindness for
him: insomuch that she protested to him, that if the King would consent to
their Marriage, she was ready to do her part. The first time that Lausun
mentioned it to the King, he was extremely surpised: but by degrees he was
wrought upon to listen to it; and so many Engines were set at work, that he
promised not to oppose the Match; notwithstanding the disproportion between a
single Gentleman and a Princess of the Blood.

Lausun was too hairbrain'd to use his good Fortune with moderation, and
therefore committed a fault upon this occasion, which was never afterward to
be repaired. For instead of Marrying Mademoiselle privately as he ought to have
done, when the King had given his consent, he spent a world of time in making
preparations for his Nuptials, and in the mean while the King altered his mind,
at the solicitation of all the Princes of the Royal Family, who throwing
themselves at his feet, besought him to break off the Match, and retract his
promise.

Lausun believing that Madam de Montespan had played him this trick, went to her
house, and fell a railing at her like a Tinker; he exclaimed against her in all
places where he came, and so little spared the King himself, that the King
caused him to be arrested, and sometime after sent him to Pignerol, where he
was shut up in a Chamber with Iron Grates, without any Company but a few Books,
and a Lackquey, who was told that if he would stay with his Master, he must
resolve to be as close a Prisoner as himself.

Madam de Montespan found her self very easy, after she was thus delivered
from Lausun, who was wont to teize her with stories very ungrateful to her
Ears. The King who loved her as passionately as he had done la Valiere, had
four Children by her, of all which she lay in privately.

Madam de la Valiere, who had a real love for the King, a love not grounded
upon any score of Interest, never procured any advantage either for her Friends
or her Relations. For out of an overstraind niceness, and to show that she had
a love for no man living but the King, she never su'd to him for any favor for
any of her acquaintance. Therefore Marshal Grammont told her very well to the
purpose one day when she complained to him, that every body had forsaken her
since her Rivalless came into credit, That while she had an opportunity to be
merry her self, she should have taken care to make others merry, if she had had
a mind that others should have pitty'd her, when she her self had an occasion
to mourn. But Madam de Montespan took a quite different course. No considerable
Employment was conferred, but upon her solicitation, and by her intercession.
She it was, to speak properly, that bestowed every thing, even to the very
Ecclesiastical Benefices. She advanced all her kindred to that degree of
Grandeur, to which otherwise they could never have attained. In short, she
procured for her Brother, who was no more then the Count of Vironne, the
Dignities of Duke and Peer and General of the Galleys, and the Battoon of
Marshal of France. Which caused a Person of the First Quality in France to say,
speaking of Marshal de la Fueiltade and her Brother, that one was Marshal of
the Sword and the other Marshal of the Scabbard.

Never did Mistress better understand to manage her Lovers humor then she did;
and that too, when the King had not all that kindness for her that people
imagined: for it is said that Madam de Lude, who was but a A Virgin that lives
like a Nun, but makes no vox, nor renounces her Estate.
Canoness of Lorrain, frequently shared with her the favors of the French
Monarch; which gave an occasion to the following Epigram.

Valiere was a Commoner,
Of Noble Race fair Montespan,
Du Lude had in the Church her Place,
And all the Three to serve one Man.
But would you know the main design
Of the most great of Potentates?
The thing's as clear as Noon-Sunshine,
He would unite the Three Estates.
Certain it is that la Valiere was of no very Noble Extraction. Her Enemies
were therefore wont to say, after the King had made her a Duchess, that 'twas
but a few months ago, that she was hardly a Gentlewoman: and Madam, who had
been disapointed by the King upon her account, never called her otherwise then
the little Citizens Daughter of Tours.

However it were, the Canoness of Lorrain was the cause that Madam de Montespan
spent many a night without closing her eyes. Yet this was not the Rivalless
that caused the change of the Kings Affection.

At the same time that M. de Montespan thought her Affairs in the most settled
condition, and that she looked upon her self to be most solidly fixed in the
King s Affections, a young Damsel surprizingly Beautiful was preferred to serve
the Mounsieur's Duchess as one of her Maids of Honor. This was Mademoiselle
de Fontange, who might be said to be a Masterpeice of Nature.

But before M. de Fontange appeared, M. de Montespan's Enemies made use of all
their Artifices to set the King against her. They told him a thousand stories
to put him out of conceit with her. But all their Artifices failing; they
thought there was no other way but to give him a home stroke upon the
Conscienceside. The Confessor who succeeded Anat, had more wit then to
undertake the Employmeut. He knew what it had cost his Predecessor, and the
reproaches it had brought upon that silly Jesuit. However they found out a
Preacher who had the courage one day in his Pulpit before the King to tell him
the story of David and Bathsheba. It Is true, he seemed to turn his matter
another way; but all men easily perceived what he aim d at. But after he came
out of his Pulpit, the King said the Preacher had made a very good Sermon, and
away he went to visit Madam de Montespan.

This pious fraud not succeeding, it came into their heads to show him
something of reality which might infuse into him an Aversion and Contempt of
his Mistress. And the treachery of a Serving Maid gave 'em a favorable
opportunity. This Maid being bribed delivered into their hands a Billet of M.
de Montespan's hand writing; which they counterfeited so well, that by adding
one single word, there was a necessity for the King to fall into the snare, and
to acknowledge himself betrayed. The Billet was given to the King as if it had
been found by accident. He read it; nor was it possible for him to distinguish
the difference of the Character. That which was added, though spoken after an
Ambiguous manner, presently galled him, and put him into such a rage, that he
resolved forthwith to find out the Mystery, Away he flung to Madam de
Montespan, whom he found reading a Courtly Novel. What! Madam, said the King
with a kind ofscornful Air, have you not left of these trifles yet? It Is true,
replied Madam de Montespan, that there is nothing of Solidity in these sort of
books, and I must acknowledge that they are no more then the Dreams and Visions
of others that create in us either joy or sadness. Nevertheless I am so weak
sometimes as to suffer my self to be seduced, and I could not read the
Infidelity of a Mistress mentioned in this little Story without paying some
tears to the misfortune of her Lover. I wonder, replied the King, that a thing
so customary to your Sex, should raise your passion to that degree. He went on
with his discourse in the same tune, and carried it on so far, that Madam de
Montespan began to suspect some mystery. Alas! Sir, said she, such a Prince, so
rarely endowed as your self, have no reason to fear any such thing, had he to
do with the most fickle and inconstant of Women. In a word, they who possess a
Merit so Illustrious as Yours, are above these suspicions. I so flattered my
self, hitherto, replied the King; but Kings are deceived as well as other men.
This Conversation not a little troubled M. Montespan, who was altogether
innocent of what the King believed her Guilty of, and therefore knowing herself
to be free from all reproach, she answered only with tenderness and tears.
Which so mollifi'd the King, that without seeking any farther for the
satisfaction which he desired, he withdrew, after he had privately conveyed
the Billet into Madam de Montespan's Pocket.

The King had no sooner left her, but M. de Montespan pulling out her
Handkerchief to wipe her Eyes, saw the fatal cause of her misfortune fall at
her feet. She took it up, opened it, read it, and soon perceiv d the soul play
of her Enemies. Now it was of that Importance for her to prevent as soon as
might be the Kings first Impressions from sinking too deep into his mind, that
she went to him immediately, and having made it out to him that something had
been added, the King was convinced, and discoursed her with a thousand obliging
tendernesses.

It never could be discovered who the Authors of this Artifice were. The Billet
was so dexterously conveyed into the Kings hands, that 'twas impossible to
have other then weak suspicions. Some thought this Blow to have been given by
Madam la Valiere, who in the midst of the Austerities of her Cloister, could
not be insensible of her disgrace. Others threw this Intreague upon one of the
Queens Ladies of Honor; and others upon some of Lausun's friends; and the
latter perhaps were not mistaken.

One would have thought that after such a satisfaction as this, the King should
not have changed his Affection so soon. But he no sooner beheld Madam de
Fontange, but his heart was smitten, and he began to make her magnificent
Presents. Madam de Montespan was alarmed at it. She flattered herself however
sometimes that the King would not forsake her. But at length she saw so much
coolness in him, that she no longer doubted but that he was altogether in love
with Fontange: nor was she deceived.

The King who was smitten with her Charms from the very first moment that he
saw her, commanded the Prince of Marsillac to tell her in his name that he had
a Passion for her, and that he should be the most happy Monarch in the world if
she corresponded with his Tenderness. Nor did the Prince of Marsillac meet with
any great trouble in persuading her to grant what ever the King demanded, for
that she was brought to the Court with no other design but to please him. She
presently therefore made answer to the Prince of Marsillac, that he had those
Powerful Attractives, that she must be altogether Insensible, not to be charmed
with the Passion of the greatest Monarch in the World. However, that she could
not rely upon what he had said to her, so long as Madam de Montespan was still
beloved; but if she could assure her self that the King had no farther thoughts
of his Old Mistress, she might then build upon his Affection.

The Prince of Marsillac to make a quick end of the business, and to pride
himself in the success of his Embassy, told Madam de Fontage whatever could be
said upon the like occasion; that the King had then no kindness for Madam de
Montespan, but what was only habitual, and he swore and vowed that M. de
Montespan was utterly obliterated out of the Kings heart, and alleged so many
reasons for it, that Mademoiselle de Fontange acknowledged the Adorations which
she had always paid the King in her heart, nor could she conceal the transports
of her joy.

Madam de Montespan, who soon after had notice of all that had past, was at her
wits end. She left nothing omitted to regain the the Kings Affection. And the
Marquess of Lonvois who was one of her sincerest friends, advised her to watch
an opportunity to speak with the King in private. She did so, she sighed, she
sobb'd, complained, and wept a shower of Tears. But all could not force from
the King any more then these words, That he would visit her as he was wont to
do, but that a King ought to have his own Liberty. In a word, he returned to
her as he was wont to do, but always wholly taken up, with his new Passion.

The first time the King saw Mademoiselle de Fontange was at the Tuilleries. At
what time he had a long Discourse with her, wherein he acquainted her after a
most tender manner with his love, and told her, it should be her fault, if in
loving him, she did not meet with all the sweets of a most sincere
Correspondence. La Fontange answered with an Air so full of discomposure, that
the trouble of her mind furnished her with new Charms. And the King perceived
from that very moment that her Heart was not made of Adamant.

In a word, when they parly'd, he told her, that he saw well her shamefastness
and modesty had hindered him from delivering to her his whole mind. After which
he desir d her to write to him; adding withal, that he flattered himself with
having one of her Letters within a few hours, wherein she would express the
sentiments she had for him with more freedom, then perhaps his Presence would
permit her to do.

Mademoiselle de Fontange, who had accompanied to the Tuilleries a Lady of the
Highest Quality in whom she very much confided, and who had left her with the
King, walked a while with that Lady, transported with joy and satisfaction,
because she well perceived that, the King had a real love for her. After that
they took Coach together, and all their discourse was about what the King had
said, most obliging, to her. And in regard she told the Lady that the King had
desired her to write the same day, the Lady advised her not to fail; for that
she ran a hazard of losing her good Fortune if she did not yield him a blind
obedience; and that it was high time for her to declare herself. And therefore,
added she, write immediately such a Letter as Love shall dictate to ye. Mad. de
Fontage followed her advice; so that she was no sooner got home, but she writ
to the King as follows.

Though the vast difference there is between your self and me, ought to oblige me
to look upon your Majesty's Addresses as a piece of Gallantry rather then a
real Declaration of your Affection; nevertheless, if it be true that real
lovers, when they have once beheld each other, know the most secret thoughts of
their own hearts, 'twould be a vanity for me any longer to conceal from you,
the sentiments which I have discovered in yours. I must acknowledge sincerely,
Sir, that the Merit alone of your Person had already disposed of me, before
your Majesty made known to we your inclinations. Pardon me however, if I have
strove against this Passion from the first minute that I perceived it growing
in me. I did so, but it was not out of any reluctance that I had to cherish
what appeared to me so aimable, only I was afraid, Sir, to displease ye. Judge
of my Inclination by so ingenious a Confession of my weakness.

It would be a difficult thing to express the Raptures the King was in, after
he had read this Letter. He could not forbear reading it over and over, and
repeating the last words. He was so well satisfied with his new Conquest, that
some time after, he conferred the Office of Grand Huntsman of France upon
Marsillac. Which drew upon him the following Lampoon.

On Favour's Ocean with full Sails
Marsilliac Swimms: for though he fails
In what belongs to Horn and Hound,
Yet cause he had the happy chance.
To hamper kindly in his Hay
The King his Masters Royal Prey,
The King, for service so renowned,
Grand Huntsman made him of all France.
The sme day that Mademoiselle de Fontange wrote to the King, the Monarch went
to see her privately, and after that was very assiduous in his visits to her.
Two days after, he appointed a Hunting Match where were all the Ladies of
Distinction that belonged to the Court, and among the rest Mademoiselle de
Fontange made her appearance in more then ordinary Splendour. The King never
left her, and after he had given her the pleasure of seeing the Hunted Deer run
just before her, they went aside into the thickest part of the Wood where they
stayed for some time: and from that day forward it was that M. de Fontange
still found her self somewhat indisposed. She had on an Embroidered Justtaucore
of very great value, which the King had presented her, and wore a little flat
Shepherdesses Hat covered with a Carnation and white Plume of Feathers, which
wrought a wonderful effect. 'Twas a most lovely day, but toward the evening,
when the King was returning home, there was a gentle Breeze, which forced M. de
Fontange to leave off her Hatt. After which she tied her Head Attire with a
Ribband, the Knots of which hung down a little upon her Forehead; and that same
dress so highly pleased the King, that he desir^d her not to dress her self
otherwise all that evening. The next day, all the Ladies appear^d with their
Heads dressed after the same manner. And this was the Original of those large
Towers that Women still wear: a Fashion that deriv d it self from the Court of
France over all the Courts of Europe.

The next day after the Hunting March, Madam de Fontange was troubled with
extraordinary pains in her head and faintings of her heart, so violent and
sharp that she could not forbear complaining: nor would the King still from her,
overwhelmed with grief to see her in that condition. At what time all of a
sudden casting her Eyes upon the King, with a tender and languishing
Utterance, Dear Prince, said she, was there a necessity that such great Pains
should so speedily follow such great Pleasures? But it is no matter, added she
immediately, I love the cause of 'em, and shall do, while I live. The
Passionate manner of her delivering these words raised the Kings Pity and his
Love withal to that degree, that he Embraced her with those Transports that he
never had shown for any of his other Mistresses. He vowed to her that he never
loved any one before so dearly as he loved her, and that he would love her
eternally.

After the King had declared himself for his new Mistress, he so little
observed any Measures, that the whole Court knew within two Hours after, all
that had passed upon this occasion, Madam who had as great an aversion for
Madam Fontange as she had for La Valiere, and who was no less vexed to the heart
and the Soul for having supplied the King with two Mistresses, that had quite
balked her of the King's Affection, made it the subject of a thousand Nipping
Taunts and Jokes. Nor could Madam de Montespan forbear from doing very near the
same thing. So that one Evening the King found the following Verses under his
Toilete.

Trouble not thus, Great Pince, your Brains nor Breast,
A Hero like your self too much of weakness shows,
Thus to disturb your rest,
And labor under Female throws
To see Fontange in a Fainting-Fitt;
For Fainting-Fitts never killed a Mistress yet.
How Kings themselves the loss of Reason prove,
When once submitted to the Laws of Love!
Then curb yo^ Sighs, and Lamentations cease,
For this is not the only time, in short,
That your Fontange's Heart
Has been tourmoil'd with Fainting-Fitts like these.
The King, who had been told some days before, that Madam had asserted in
Company, that M. de Fontange had been guilty of Intreagues in the Province from
whence she came, made no question but the Verses proceeded from her hand, on of
some of her Friends. Upon which he declared that the affront touched him so
much the more to the quick because the Attack was made upon his Mistresses
Honor, the most sensible part of a woman. On the otherside M. de Fontange
desired Justice to be done her for the Calumny that was thrown upon her; and
presently let fall a deluge of Tears. But the King told her the best Justice he
could do her was to despise the Lampoons and Satyrs of her Enemies, and she
agreed and Satyrs that 'twas the best course they could take; wherein she acted
very prudently.

In the mean time the King refused no favor that Mademoiselle de Fontange
desired of him. She could but speak and have, and more then that, she obtained
what he refused to several Princes. He grunted Pensions to the greatest part of
her friends, and conferred upon one of her Sisters the Abbey of Chelle, very
considerable for the yearly Revenue. And that new Abbess was Conscecrated with
that Pomp and Magnificence, as it would be a difficult matter to describe. The
Ceremony was honored by a great number of Prelates, almost all the Court was
present, and M. de Fontange appeared with so much splendour, that she drew upon
her the Eyes of all the Spectators as much as the Abbess who was consecrated.

The faintings of the Heart which Madam de Fontange complained of, continued
till she declared herself to be big with Child; which obliged the King to
confer upon her the Title of Duchess, as he had done upon la Valiere, and to
provide her a House; for the maintenance of which he allowed her a hundred
thousand Crowns a Month. But in regard she was extremely liberal, the Duke of
Nouailles was made choice of to regulate her Expenses, to the end the Sum might
hold out. And then, they began to call her Madam.

So soon as Madam de Montespan was fully convinced that she was to make room
for her Rivaless, she began to think of retiring, and gave it out openly. 'Twas
thought at first, that she would have increased the number of the Nunns at
Fonterault, because she had made some journey's thither, but she never had any
thoughts of confining her self to such a Melancholy Life. She withdrew indeed,
but was so far from removing from the Court as her Predecessor had done, that
she tarri'd there, paid her Visits as she was wont to do, and order d her
Affairs after such a manner, that she had always some little share in the
Cabinet Intreagues. This Retirement was better understood then Madam de la
Valieres, but she had reason without doubt for what she did. However it were,
the King forbore not his Visits to Montespan but went to see her sometimes,
which made her give out that her Credit with the King was still greater then
ever it was. That the King's Love for Fontange was but a Transitory unsteady
Affecttion from which he would recall himself as soon as he did from that which
he had for Madam de Lude, which lasted but for a few days; lastly that she had
reason to believe that her Lover would return to her again, more enamored then
ever he had been: her Favorites also and Friends at Court endeavored to give
a Reputation to these Reports. But the more cleare-sighted finding that the
King abandoned himself wholly to Madam de Fontange, began to seek her favor,
who still procured great Preferments and advantages to those for whom she had a
kindness.

Madam de Montespan who saw that no body could be ignorant any longer of the
Kings extreme Affection for his new Mistress, became so highly exasperated,
that she began to rail against it openly; which very much offended the King.

Some time after Maden^oiselle de Fontange was brought to bed; but her Lying-in
proved mortal to her. She fell into such a Consumption that they who knew her
before, hardly knew her when they saw her; which was still attended with such a
Flux of Blood, that every body gave her over for lost. All people believed her
to have been Poisoned, and all people accused Montespan. So far were all the
Remedy's from doing her good, that her languishment continued every day. The
King Visited her duly, and manifested after a most tender manner the excess of
his Grief, to see her reduced to that condition. But in regard she knew there
was no cure for her Distemper, she besought the King that she might retire from
the Court, adding, with tears in her Eyes, that she had nothing more to do in
this world but to prepare herself for Death.

The King who was sensibly touched and disordered by his being present with her
in her affliction, granted her Request. Thereupon she retired into a Convent in
St. James's Subburbs, where the Duke of Fueillade went to Visit her from the
King two or three times a Week. But in a little time after she did, leaving
after her death more visible marks of her being Poisoned, then were to be
discovered during her sickness, by the report of the Phys^tians.

The King's Grief was so extreme, that he could not refrain from showing it;
and certain it is, that he had taken his revenge upon Madam de Montespan after
a more then ordinary manner, had he not had prevailing Reasons to dissemble his
Resentment. For he was fully convinced that Madam de Fontange had been
sacrificed to the Jealousy and despair of that Ambitious Woman, who had
flattered herself that she should still enjoy the King's Affection. In the mean
time to let the world see that he was really sorry for the loss of Fontange,
and that the Esteem and Tenderness he had for her was not extinguished by her
Death, he gave a rich Abbey to one of her Brothers, married one of her Sisters
to great advantage, and did an infinite number of other things in favor of her
Family; which did not a little mortify Madam de Montespan, who imagined, that
she being delivered from her Rivaless, the King might take a new Fancy to her.
But she deceived herself. The King never went to see her but upon a Politic
Account: and resolved for the future to renounce all manner of Amorous
Intreagues.

A little time after Madam Fontange's death, Mademoiselle de Monpens^^r, who
was still in love with the Court of Lansan, threw herself at the King^s feet,
and obtained her Lover's Liberty after ten Years Imprisonment. 'Twould be a
hard matter to express the joy of that Princess, when the understood from the
King's own Mouth, that Lansan was at Liberty, nor the Ecstasies she was in when
he arrived at Paris. However he did not lodge in her House, though he were
permitted to go when he pleased to see her: So that he was which her from
Morning till Night. This Familiarity continued for some Month's; and Madam de
Montpensier was so charmed with him, that she settled upon him two considerable
Lordships, with the King's consent. Nor could Lausun be more assiduous then he
was in waiting upon her. But in regard he loved that Princess in hopes of
espousing her, when he found it impossible for him to marry her, because the
King had positively declared against it, he took a distaste against his
Mistress, and he took himself to a Lady that wanted neither Youth nor Beauty,
and whom he found to be nothing flinty hearted, Mademoiselle de Montpensier was
not long before she found that Lausun was unfaithful to her. Presently
therefore she set Spies upon him in the Country* and was soon informed that he
frequently Visited a Young Widow with whom several Persons of Quality in Paris
were deeply in Love. She complained to him of his Insidelity: nor did Lausun
altogether disown it: and whereas Mademoiselle upbraided him that though a
Princess she had debased herself to a willingness to make him her Husband, he
vowed to her, after he had begged her a thousand Pardons, that he would never
see the Lady more; and he was as good as his word^: for, for five or six Weeks
he was her most diligent Servant. But one Evening, as he was walking alone in
one of the Allies of Luxemb^^gh Garden, while Mademoiselle was in another,
talking about some affairs with a Minister, a Lacquiey without a Livery
delivered him a Billet, wherein he was desired in the name of a Lady of great
Quality to meet her the next day at eleven a Clock in such a Church. Monsieur
de Lausun failed not to meet, and the Lacquey, who waited for him at the Church
door, carried him to a House that was not unknown to him. Presently he
understood the Mystery. The Lady received him blushing, but immediately
recovering herself, she told him, that being endow d with such extraordinary
Qualities, he ought no to wonder that others made the first advances, and that
she should esteem her self happy if she had not been so forward in vain. The
Lady had so much wit and so many Charms, that M. de Lausun, who never dreamt of
such good Fortune, stood like one in a Trance. But being recovered from his
surprise, he spoke as the Lady desired, and swore a thousand Oaths that he had
been enchanted with her Person above six Weeks together, but that the profound
respect he had for all Persons of her Sex, and for those especially that held
that Rank in the world as she did, had kept him from declaring his Passion.
Some days after Lausun gave the Lady a Visit. But Mademoiselle, who was become
extremely jealous and watched him where ever he (...) had presently discovered
this new Intreague: which he must renounce, or else there was no longer Peace
with Her.

It may be said that Lausun was got clear of one dreadful Prison to be confined
to another mo less loathsome for in short he had no longer any kindness for
Mademoiselle, but there was a necessity for him to live in torment upon more
then one account. He was at his wits end with his unhappy rate. However he was
resolved to torment himself, and to engage himself no more in Amorous
Intreagues.

This Resolution lasted for some Weeks, and Mademoiselle was proud of her self,
that she had fixed him at length. Never had he appeared so full of Passion, nor
so affectionate to her. The Princess never stepped a step, but Lausun followed
her. He was with her at her uprising, and he never parted from her till
Midnight; and he showed her so many testimonies of his tenderness, that a
Person more quick fighthed then Mademoiselle de Montpensier might have been
perhaps deceived. However he had an utter Avesion against her, and whatever
Resolution he had taken to resist the Charms of any new Inclination, he could
not forbear falling in love with a Young Duchess next to whom he sat in a Box
at the Representation of an Opera. He told her without any more ado that he
loved her. The Duchess hearkened to him and they became the most intimate
friends in the World. But he was soon crossed in his Amors by the Jealousy
and Reproaches of Mademoiselle: so that he found himself constrained to quit
his Conquest, which brought upon him a Tertian Ague that held him two Months
before he could be cured. He had recourse to an English Physician, and three
times taking the Quinquina rid him of his troublesome Companion. But the same
remedy could not cure him of his disgust of Mademoiselle.

The Jealousy of that Princess made such a noise, that all the whole Court
knew the Count of Lausun had had three or four Mistresses within the space of
five or six Months. Insomuch that the King could not forbear laughing, and
saying at the same time, that he could not but pity his Kinswoman, whom he had
told a thousand times what would befall her; Lausan being a mere Shatter
brains.

Mademoiselles Enemies raised a thousand stories about him, which rendered her
ridiculous* and Lausun, for his part became the subject of all the
Town-Raillery. But that which was the greatest vexation to him was this, that
it got him so ill a repute among the Lady's, that there was hardly a
Chambermaid would admit his Caresses for fear of his Mademoiselle. The Young
Widow that he fell in Love with first of all, and who was almost distracted
because the Count had forsaken her, sell upon him one Evening before a great
deal of Company, and played upon him so cruelly for his Inconstancy, and about
his Ague, the marks of which a Wit as he was, he had nothing to say for
himself. Thereupon he retired so ill satisfied with himself that he had
returned no better answers to the Lady's Raillery, that he went and vented all
his Spleen upon Mademoiselle, where he committed two or three absurd actions,
and his Ague took him again the same Night. Thereupon he returned to his
Quinquina; but his Ague being fixed, his touchey humor became Insupportable.

But as Mademoiselle de Montpensier had brought upon herself so many
Mortifications, so neither was Madam de Montespan exempted from 'em. For the
death of her Rivaless had no way render d her condition more easy. It Is true
the King made her frequent Visits; but they were cold, and to little or no
purpose; and at length she perceived that the King took more delight in the
Company of Madam de Maintenon, who was Governess to his Children, then in Hers.
In a word M. de Maintenon was the Woman in whom the King put all his
confidence. So that Madam de Montespan was again at her wits-end. For in regard
it was she who had made the other what she was, she could not endure that the
Work or her own hands should prove serviceable to her destruction.

The whole Court was no less surpised then Madam de Montespan to see the King
so assiduous to a Woman of whom a thousand stories had been told, and who was
known by most People to have been no better then Scarron's Widow. But the King
loves Wit where ever he meets with it; and every body knows Madam de Maintenon
to be infinitely Witty above the common rate of her Sex, and that there is no
Intreague so difficult which she is not able to carry on.

The first time that Madam de Montespan saw her, she soon perceived what she
was capable of: so that without any hesitation, she retained her in her
Service; and that Crafty Woman understood so well how to insinuate herself into
her good liking, that she entrusted her with all her Secrets* she saw all the
Letters that Madam de Montespan wrote to the King, and all those which the King
wrote to her. And when Madam de Montespan was at a loss, how to compose a
Letter, Madam de Maintenon did it for her, and had incomparable success. One
day she wrote one for the Countess, with which the King was enchanted. The King
knew well that it was above his Mistresses Genius, and and therefore would
needs know who wrote it. Should I tell ye replied Madam de Montespan, you
would hardly believe it. But not to hold ye any longer in suspense, I do
protest to ye Sir, that it was Mistress Scarron who dictated to me. I had such
a cruel pain in my Head that day, and your pleasure was so absolute that I
should return you an answer, that I was forced to have recourse to her
Assistance. From that very day the King had a great desire to see her, and he
was so well satisfied with her Conversation, that he told her a thousand pretty
things the most obliging in the World. At the same time he recommended her to
Madam de Montespan to take particular notice of her, and took such particular
cognizance of her himself, that he purchased for her the Signiory of Maintenon,
which acquired her the Title of Marchioness: and a Herald had order to fetch
her descent from Jone d' Albret Queen of Navarr, who after the death of her
Husband, married privately with one of her Gentlemen, who pretended to be the
Father of Madam d' Aubigny, Madam de Maintenon's Grandfather.

However it were, for many People exclaimed against this Pedygree, Madam de
Maintenon found herself of a sudden to be both the King's Confident and
Favorite, and the only Consolation of that Monarch after the death of Madam de
Fontange.

Madam de Montespan did all she could to put the King out of conceit with her;
but hitherto nothing has succeeded. The King has such a value for her, that he
does not disdain to consult her sometimes in the most Ticklish Affairs of
State: and as things now stand, the King would rather quarrel with the whole
Royal Family then with her. Nevertheless, she has often undergone most Terrible
Mortifications. But still the King's favor has upheld her in the midst of
these petty Anguishes of her Mind, to which the Joys of great People and
Favorites are generally subject. She has had several Letters delivered to her
that have ripped up all the Occurrences of her Life. Among the rest that which
follows was one that was disper'd up and down by her Enemies.

It Is the wonder of the World, Madam notwithstanding you are mounted to so high
a Pinnacle of Favor, that you should so little know your self. We may very well
apply to you the Tale of that vile Aminal, which carrying the Relicques of a
Deity, thought it had been himself to whom the People pai their Adoration, and
nor the Idol with which he was laden. A little consideration of what you were
would do you a great deal of good. It Is requisite to put you in mind of it; for
you look as if you had quite and clean forgot it. All the World knows Madam,
that when Monsieur Scarron talked of Marriage all his friends laughed at him.
They told him that for such a Decrepit Creature as he was, to Marry, was to
list himself in the Family of Acteon, and that because they should not reproach
him with any thing of that nature, he made choice of a crack Vessel. By good
Fortune Scarron lit upon your self; he married ye Publicly, which made him say
very wittily, that they could not lay it in his dish, that his weakness was the
cause of his Wives Wantonness; and no doubt but he was in the Right. As he was
a man of Wit and Sense, be left ye to your own Conduct; and all the World
knows how you behaved yourself. Should the Good Man return from the other
world, how heartily would he laugh to behold your Metamorphosis. And as he was
a Man of a good humor, I make no question but he would bring such an Action
against the King, as would puzzle the Parliament, who could not but do him
Justice, and sentence you to quit Royal Honors, and reassume your old Titles
of Mistress and Gooddy such an one. Adieu, Beldam; take my advice and remember
what you were, I give you wholesome Counsel.

Madam de Maintenon was not much puzzled to know from whence the Letter came,
so sfoon as she had read it. She burnt it in cold Blood, as she did all the
rest of the same nature which she received, without making the least complaint
to the King: and for others that were so full of grating particulars, she show
d 'em to her Monarch to make him sport; and those sort of Confidences, though
indeed they were but Trifles, never fail d of success. In a word Madam de
Maintenon has managed her business so well, that she triumphs over all those
that envied her. The King has a friendship, a value, an esteem for her, and
should the Monarch dye before her, she has an apartment in St. Lewise's House
at St. Cyr, where she is to reside as long as she lives, and to be maintain d,
with all the Persons that belong to her Train, by the Revenues belonging to
the Foundation of that House; and to enjoy all the Honors due to a Foundress.
Care is also taken to canonize her before hand; for notwithstanding all the
Inventions of Obloquy, she has met with Panegyrists who have made it out, that
though Scarron, who married her at Sixteen Years of Age, made choice of her to
solace and refresh his Eyesight, and to discourse with her when he had no other
Company, rather then for any Carnal Society, yet the indisposition of her
Husband was no injury to her Virtue. They have owned, that those Persons who
fell in Love with her, were not the Richest, or of the best Quality in the
Kingdom, yet that she has merited a universal Esteem among all Men, for the
prudence of her Conduct, and that she ought to have this Justice done her, that
she observed a fair Conjugal Amity without practicing the Principal Actions
that belong to it.

As for Madam de la Valiere and Madam de Montespan, they have as much reason to
be satisfied as Madam de Maintenon. It may be said, that when they were
Favorites, the King idolized 'em; and though he grew weary of 'em at length, he
never forgot that they had been his Mistresses. Both the one and the other have
been always looked upon with distinction, and the Children which the King had by
'em have been advanced to Dignities and Matches the most Illustrous in the
Kingdom. The Count of Vermandoise, the Son of la Valiere was made High Admiral
o^ France; and Mademoise^^e de Blois his Sister was married to the Prince of
Conti, last deceased The Prince of Conde who was retired to Chantilli at that
time, and who by that means approved not that match in his heart, was
constrained to undergo the trouble and vexation to see the Title of High and
Potent Lord, which was always allowed him, left out in the Contract of Marriage
which he was to sign. Colbert presented him the Contract; but he refused to set
his hand, and went with his Complaints to the King; but the King after a rough
manner bid him sign it; so that he was forced to do it, though enraged to the
Soul at the contempt that was put upon him: which was not the only Affront
which had been put upon that Prince after this Retirement. Mademoiselle de
Tours, the daughter of Madam de Montespan and the Count of Tholouze, died
before they were Married; but Maidemoiselle de Nantes, and Bloise their Sisters
were as advantagiously bestowed as Madam the Princess of Conti; the first to
the Duke of Bourbon, and the other to the Duke of Chartres. Lastly, the Duke of
Maine, M. de Montespan's eldest Son, Duke of Aumale, Prince of Dombes, Count d'
Eu, Peer of France, Colonel General of the Swisses and Grisons, Governor of
the Province of Languedoc, Colonel of a Regiment of Foot, Knight of the Kings
Orders, and Officer General of his Arms, Married Mademoiselle de Charolois,
the third Daughter of the Prince of Conde that now is, and the Nuptials were
Solemnized upon the 9th. of March.

It Is not to be express d what Respect the whole Court is obliged to give to
the Kings Natural Children, even the Princes of the Blood are constrained to do
the same; which Posterity will hardly believe. One day that the Prince of Conde
was discoursing with some Courtiers, the Duke of Maine, who was then very
Young, and some other Noblemen s Children of the same age made such a noise,
that they interrupted their discourse, which was very serious, so that the
Prince was constrain d to bid the Children be quiet. Which the Duke of Maine
hearing made answer, that he thought his Highness had not been afraid of noise,
he that had made so much in the world. Immediately the Prince went and repeated
these words to the King, with the same gayety, to outward appearance, as if he
had been to have repeated some witty Expression or genteel Act of the Duke of
Burgundy, Nay, the Prince finding it was a Course which of necessity it behooved
him to take, carried his deference a little farther: for when he went to the
Count of Vermandois, to let him know how much he was pleased with the Marriage
of M. de Blois his Sister to the Prince of Conti, he durst not presume to take
an Elbow Chair that was presented him, but sat him down upon a Plain Chair,
because the Count made use of such another.

Nevertheless all these deferences cannot hinder the whole Court from making
private Comments and Censures upon these odd kind of mixtures, which is the
reason that many are turned out of favor.

In a word, they who have bestowed the highest applauses upon the King, have
not forborne to say, that it has been one of the greatest defects of this
Monarch to intermix the Blood of Bourbon with that of la Valiere and Montespan.
And indeed, although the Princes and Princesses who are the Issue of the King's
Amors, are Persons of great virtue and merit, these Alliances can never be
justified. However, if we consider it never so little, the King could not
dispense with doing as he has done. For certain it is, that under a new Reign,
when there is generally a universal change of the Face of affairs, the Duke of
Maine, would have been but little valued had he not Married Mademoiselle de
Charolois, or some of her Quality. Therefore it is merely out of Policy, wherein
Natural Affection has been only listened to, that the Blood of la Valiere and
M. de Montespan has been mixed with the Royal Blood of Bourbon. And whatsoever
may be said against it, there was in this respect a certain Generosity of the
King, which balances the Irregularity of these Matches.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for H. Rhodes, at the Star in Fleet Street: And J. Harris, at
the Harrow in the Poultrey.
THE General History of Europe, contained in the Historical and Political
Monthly Mercuries, from the Late happy Revolution in November, 1688. to this
present Time. Giving an Account of all the Public and Private Occurrences,
Civil, and Ecclesiastical and Military, that are most Considerable in every
Court: The interest of Princes, their Pretenses and Intreagues. etc. and
generally all that is curious. With Political Reflections upon every State.
Done from the Originals, published at the Hague, by the Authority of the States
of Holland. In Four Volumes: With an Index to each Volume.

Memoires for the Ingenious: Containing several Curious Observations in
Theology, Philosophy, Mathematics, Physic History, Philosophy, and other Arts
and Sciences. In Miscellaneous Letters to several of the Reverend Bishops and
Clergy, Eminent Physicians, Fellows ot the Royal Society, etc. for the Year
1604. Bound up in one Vol^me. With a large Alphabetical Table to the Whole. By
J. de la Crose, Eccles. Angl. Presb.

The Triumph Royal: Containing a short account of the most Remakble Battles,
Sieges, Sea Fights, Treaties, and Famous Achievements, of the Princes of the
House of Nassau, etc. Describ d in the Triumphal Arches, Pyramids, Pictures,
Inscriptions, and Devices, erected at the Hague in Honor of William III. King
of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland. Curiously Engraven in 62 Figures on
Copperplates, their Histiory; an Elaborate Piece of Curiosity. First done in
Dutch, then into French, and now into English. Dedicated to her Majesty.

The Present Court of Spain: Or the Modern Gallantry of the Spanish Nobility
unfolded: In several Histories, and Seventy five Letters from the Enamored
Teresa, to her Beloved the Marquess of Mansera. By the Ingenious Lady -- Author
of The Travels into Spain. Done into English by J. P.

Voyage and Travels over Europe. Vol. I. Containing the Curiosities of France.

The Second Volume of the Historical Voyages and Travels: Containing all that
is most Curious in Spain and Portugal.

The Present Condition of France, in reference to her Revenues, comparing them
with the infinite Expenses she is forced to beat. Demonstrating thereby, That
it is impossible for her to support her self, if the War with the Confederates
continues, done out of French.

These two last Sold by Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall: And most
Booksellers.
A Brief Display of the French Counsels, Representing the Wiles and Artifices
of France, in order to ruin the Confederates, and the most probable ways to
prevent them.

Scarron Incensed: Or, his appearing to Madam de Maintenon, his late Wife,
reproaching her Amors with Lewis the Great, present King of France and
discovering several secrets of that Court; at the private Contract of Marriage
between the French King and Madam de Mintenon, several Letters between him and
her, and Father la Chaise, etc. Written by a Lady in French.


