TO THE KING And BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT In PARLIAMENT Assembled.
THE Proposal contained in this Paper is (with submission) conceived of general
advantage to the Kingdom, and thereby sufficiently recommended to obtain
admission to present it self before you, whose Providence and Justice secure
the Proposer of a readiness to embrace and promote whatever may improve the
Welfare of the Public: It Is his part to make the Proposal appear of advantage
to your Common-Interest, wherein the welfare of the Public consists.

THE PROPOSAL.
THAT an Act of Parliament may pass for building and fitting out with
expedition a Fleet of 500 Busses of about 70 Tuns burdens a piece, to be
employed in fishing for Herrings, Cod and Ling, in his Majesty's Seas; and
profits to be disposed for the increasing of the said Fishing-Vessels to the
number of 2000 or thereabouts, as it will be thought necessary; And after the
paying of public debts, and the defraying of all necessary charges, the
property of the said Fleet to be settled in the Crown.

THE ADVANTAGES.
A Fleet of two thousand Busses will employ yearly at Sea, at 15 Men to a Busse
30000 Men! besides at least 30000 more at Land in the service of the Fleet: It
will save the Kingdom 300000 l. per Annum paid yearly to the Dutch for Fish
taken by them in His Majesty's Seas, and sold to the English -- besides as much
more in Taxes to the Poor. The first year the said 2000 Busses Sails, may (with
God's blessing) defray the whole charge of Building, Tackle, Victualling,
Fitting out, Officers and Seamens wages for that year, with an everplus of
1835033 l. 06 s. 8 d and will every year after, Communibus annis, as long as
the Fleet lasts, yield His Majesty the clear profit of at least 2644033 l. 06
s. 08 d. Which is demonstrated as follows:

l. s. d. l. s. d. Fish usually taken in Busses of 70 Tuns, Communibus annis,
is at least Herrings 100 last worth de claro at least 1000 2250. 00. 00. Cod
15000 worth de claro at least 0450 Ling 10000 worth de claro at least 0800 The
Charge of a Busse 70 Tuns the first year (ready to be demonstrated) will not
exceed Building, and fitting for sail 0403 10 00 1332. 09. 08. Victualling, and
furnishing with lasting and wasting Commodities 0695 18 08 Officers, and
Seamen's Wages 0233 01 00. Remains profit de claro each Busse 0017 10 04. Which
for 2000 Busses for the first year will be clear profit 1835033 06 08. Profit
of each Busse after the first year as above 2250 00 00. Charge of Fitting,
Victualling, Sallaries and Wages 0928 19 08. Profit de claro of each Busse 1321
00 04. Which from 2000 Busses will amount to per Annum 2647033 06 8.

This Fleet will be a Nursery of Seamen, no less necessary than useful for
asserting His Majesty's Dominion of the Seas, and the Rights of his Crown, in
Regulating Trade, against the encroachments of Strangers.

The Profits of this Fleet will lessen the necessity of Taxes for Support of
the Government, and will improve the value of Land, and the Wealth of the
nation by saving 300000 pound now yearly exported by the Hollanders for Fish
bought of them, and by the Importation of Coin from abroad by Vent of Fish,
taken and sold by His Majesty's Subjects; the Monopoly of Fish taken by the
Hollander in His Majesty's Seas, being one main support of that Government.

As to Men and Materia's for the Fleet, there will be sufficient of both,
unless Money be wanting to carry on the Design.

1. The Interest of the King does concern every particular Person, his
undertaking of it is for every Man's advantage; whatsoever he gets thereby
saves the Nation so much in their purses: For if the King gains as much by this
as will maintain his Crown and Dignity, His Majesty may in time come to have
the less need of Parliamentary-Taxes. He may also alleviate his Customs as low
as any Nation whatsoever, which will bring the Trade of Holland, etc. into this
Kingdom, invite all Ingenuous Manufactors into the Nation, as well as rich Men
into this Kingdom, and the rest of His Majesty's Dominions, and also will
preserve the Peace of this Nation from being disturbed and violated more than
private Persons or Corporative Bodies will or can do in their undertaking of
it, who cannot protect the Fishing-Fleet from the attemps and injury of
Strangers, and may be apt upon evil instigations and discontents to
strenghthen either domestic or foreign Enemies with their power both of
thi^^i^^ and M^^ (...) by (...) (...) less probable grounds of advantage than
here are proposed, it had lost to that Crown, as it did to this and to the
French, the first discovery of the Mines in the Indies; But this is addressed
to His Majesty and His Parliament, for raising six hundred thousand pounds,
whereof one hundred thousand pounds to be employed for Docks, and for
Storehouses and Wharfs, adjoining one to the other, that the goods may be
conveyed from the Wharfs to the Storehouses, without the charge of Carting
(which said sum will be demonstrated an ample Fund) to carry on and complete
this Design worthy their Encouragement, and reserved by Providence (after the
weak Essays of former times) to be perfected under the Auspicious Government of
the best of Princes, and wisest of Parliaments, who cannot neither want either
power or will to complete what appears so clearly and eminently advantageous
for the public good and the interest of the Kingdom, and in order thereto
raise the Fund proposed, and to secure the Employment of it to the use it is
designed for. 3. The Proposers are ready when commanded to demonstrate at large
the facility of bringing the design to effect, the probability and greatness of
its advantages when effected, and the necessity of it in order to any
considerable Improvement of the Wealth, Strength and Honor of the Nation: And
as to the Objection, they doubt not but to clear all can made against it,
except that of the want of six hundred thousand pounds to carry on the Work;
yet they conceive they have already removed this Objection, by having
demonstrated the Return of this Fund with so great an increase into the Public
Coffers, and presented that Demonstration to them who have power to give and
lay out the Money proposed, but cannot lay it out to better advantage, for
improving their and their Posterities Safety, Honor and Wealth, than by
bringing to perfection this Design, which is not the Project of a Privat-brain,
but An Enterprise of Public good, approved by Queen Elizabeth, and upon solemn
and mature deliberation, embraced and encouraged by King James, King Charles
the First, and His now Majesty, and their several Privy-Counsels, and furthered
by several Grants under the Great-Seal of England, in the respective Reigns of
the Princes last mentioned; And by this present Parliament by a Vote of the
Honorable House of COMMONS 17 February 1670: That a Bill should be brought in
for Encouragement of the Fishery.


S. WATSON. S. WATSON.


Printed by H. Brugis in the Year 1677.

Licensed March the 26.

To. L'Estrange.


