A particular ACCOUNT OF Major General Kirk's Beating the Irish out of their
Bull works and Fort, AND OF Bombing the lower Town In order to The taking of
Limericke.
Printed according to Order, September 1st. 1690.

BY a Letter from the Camp before Limericke, we have advice, that Major General
Kirk and Sir John Hanmore had attacked the Enemy in their Posts, and beaten
them out of two Lines, two Bulworks and a Fort, and that upon our Men's entering
the same, the Irish cried out Quarter, Quarter, and accordingly the Soldiers,
not forgetting Colonel Sarsfield's kindness to Men, Women and Children, gave
them Waggoners Quarter with the But end of their Muskets, killing about Sixty,
those being all they found in the Fort, and after our Forces had taken the
outworks before Limericke by Storm, they played their Bombs into the lower Town
very smartly, which took effect accordingly, and set some of the Houses on
Fire, se that we hope it cannot be long before they must of necessity be forced
to surrender the same.

Three Trumpeters have deserted the Enemy and are come to us, who report, that
Colonel Sarsfield is in the County of Clare at the head of about Seven Thousad
Men.

We have an Account that the City of Galloway for some time refusing the French
Entrance, were at last trappaned by a confident French Lie, viz. That the
People of England were in a Civil Broil, and that the greatest Party were for
King James, and that King William had very few Friends, and that the French
Fle^t had wholly destr^yed the English Navy, etc. Upon which, these poor
deceived People, opened the Gates and let in the French, who presently
enquiring after the principal Persons that opposed their Entrance, were
informed that it was one Justice Dawley, and Mr. Brown a Lawyer, whom they sent
for, and Hanged up immediately.

The Irish do much Mischief in the Country, by Robing and Burning what they
cannot carry off: But Lieutenant General Ginkle with 18^0 Horse, and 600
Dragoons, is in Pursuit of a great Body of them.

A Passenger lately arrived from Ireland, assures us that King William, since
his Cannon are planted on Three several Batteries, has sent a Second Summons
into Limmerick, to let them know he would give them till the Twenty sixth to
surrender, and that he plied them in the mean time to make a Breach; and in
case they refused he would storm it on the Twenty seventh and put all to the
Sword.

Our Army in general are most desperately enraged against the Irish, for their
inhumane and barbarous Murdering our Waggoners, their Wives and Children, (a
Cruelty never known to be acted by the Turks in War) and it is thought nothing
will be able, without the inexhaustable Mercy of the King, to stop the fury of
our Soldiers at the taking of Limmerick, which I hope in my next you will have
^e full Account of its being in the possession of King William, whom God
preserve.

Yours R. W.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for F. Jones in the Strand.


