AN EXAMINATION OF A Late Treatise OF THE GOUT: Wherein John Colbatch's
Demonstrations are briefly Refuted, the College cleared from his scandalous
Imputations; And a short Account of His Vulnerary Powder.

By S. W. no inconsiderable Branch of the College.

Efficiam posthac ne quenquam voce lacessas. Virg.

LONDON, Printed, for the Author, and sold by the Booksellers of London and
Westminster, 1697.

To the President and other Members of the Royal College of Physicians, London.
Gentlemen,
OUR Country is the most famed of any, in the World, for the Liberty we enjoy,
and the security we have made to our Property by its excellent Laws: Yet, I
think Societies are, upon some occasions, so very strict, that to less
discerning Eyes they may seem mere Monopolies. I must complain of my own
hardships in this matter especially; but to whom, I know not; for it is from You
that all my misfortunes flow; and since this Error of the first Concoction
cannot be so easily retrieved among you, by Reason of the fault and defect in
the Constitution that hinders People of singular parts, though now of a mean
Office, at last to arrive to the liberty of being admitted a Fellow among you:
to be a Licentiate will not go down, since Colbatch s admission. I confess I
did once resolve to have suppressed all those aspiring thoughts, with
considerations of Religion; but when I see scandalous Libels thrown about
against you, and these so fitted to the Capacity of the Mob, that you think
their Author below your wrath; I must persuade my self that my Religion obliges
me to secure my Neighbor's good Name, and that the following defense of my old
Masters may entitle me a great deal better to a Diploma, than any thing this
feigned friend of the College can pretend to; and may also prevent my
Petitioning the King and Parliament to oblige you to do me Justice.

But if we look into the merit of the Cause, it must be allowed me that I who
have seen so many Dissections, heard so many Lectures, overheard so many
Examinations of Young Physicians, I who have kept the Books written by our
learned Members, and have very often carried their Gowns and Caps, must be a
great deal more knowing in all the difficult parts of Physic than He. Did I
not hear the learned Dr Harvey talk after so lively a manner of the Blood's
Circulation, and his Generation ex Ovo, that I vow and swear, I have thought I
have seen the Drunken Heart spew out its Blood into the great Artery, and I
could trace its Stages through the whole Body? then for the business of the
Valves, I have so lively an Idea of them, that I can show you them only by
looking upon you Skin. But as for the Generation, that did so tickle me when I
was a Young Man, that I easily apprehended the false Notions of former
Physicians upon that Subject: I can yet give a very plain description of that
genital liquor attacking the ripe Egg in the Ovarium, and a great deal more
that I saw at some diffections he made to King Charles II. nay, for my part, I
thought all this matter was so clear that I wonder the Dr never found the way
to get a Male-child at one bout of a Consummation Action. We have Sir George
Ent's Book too that defends his Circulation contra omnes mortales, for as easy
a matter as Colbatch thinks it; but had he had to do with Parisanus, the old
fellow would have played the Devil with him, and his Ligature too; then came Dr
Glisson with his Livers, Stomachs, and Guts so nicely prepared, that the
Secretion of the Gall, the Digestion, the business of the Chyle, and the
Excrements were so familiar to me, that I had no difficulties left me in that
affair. But as for Dr Willis, he was the first that taught us to dissect the
Brain, that we might see all its parts; when Physicians before him were content
to slice it down like a piece of Pudding, and when Des Carts did see his
Glandula Pinealis sticking in a slice like a Plum, he was a great Master who
could hit upon it once in five times; but our Dr could show you any thing, and
when you pleased; he traced out all the Nerves, and described nobly the whole
Brain: I have heard him talk of his Anima Brutorum, his Books of Fermentation,
Vrins, Fevers, etc. with that exactness, that I must own that I have had
sometimes the Vanity to think my self as learned a Physician as himself. Dr
Wharton began first to number the Glands, and to undeceive the World of a fancy
they had about Parenchymatous substances. Next came Dr Lower, who told us of
the Hearts being Muscular, and put it under the same laws; he tells us in the
same Book of putting Blood out of one Animal into another, and what advantage
that may be in curing some Diseases. Dr Havers gives us a Book of the Make of
the Bones, and Dr Riddley gives us a Lecture upon the Brain, though a Frenchman
one de Vuyssens had made Dr Willis's way more clear, yet not so much neither,
but that the Dr has done it in greater order. Dr Garth read very finely upon
Respiration and the use of the Lungs: Dr Lister has obliged us with the Anatomy
of Snails, and Dr Cockburn with an O Econom. Animalis. Of Botanaists we have
had a vast number, and lately Dr Sloan has given us an excellent account of the
Plants of the Leeward Islands: Pharmacians, a great many, and lately Dr Bates.
But for the Theory and practice of Medicin, no Country has exceeded us: in my
time Willis both for the Theory and the Practice, Dr Charleton, Sir Theoder
Mayern, Dr Bates, Dr Morton, and Dr Cockburn, who first told us how they are
sick at Sea.

Now, can any Man think that I can be such a blockhead, as to have lived among
all these Masters in Medicin, to be bred up as it were at the foot of Gamaliel,
and for so long a time; and not to be better qualified for my Admission than a
fellow that either cannot think, or at least cannot tell us what he thinks, and
yet is so vain as to esteem himself more knowing, than any of your worthy and
learned Members; one of whom he attacks, because he*s Dead, one still alive,
and by Name; and another he has only the courage to hint at, though he has told
his story so plainly over the Town, that it is now no great difficulty to know
him: and therefore I may hope that my thus proving a dutiful Servant, in giving
my self all this trouble, may give me greater pretenses to a Diploma, and to be
more and more,

Gentlemen, Your most Obedient, Humble Servant, S. W.

THE PREFACE TO John Colbatch.
SIR,
YOUR Book fell first into my hands on Ash Wednesday, after I came from Church,
and I was glad to think you had hit upon an absolute Cure of the Gout, a
demonstrative one at least, as you please to call it, in the frontispiece. Your
Dedication smelt somewhat of Gratitude, which is still well; but when I found
this demonstration was to be turned upon Acid and Alkali, or a thing we do not
understand, I began to suspect your knowledge; yet, I thought it possible that
new lights might be discovered even by you, in this matter, and surely you had
not the Impudence to promise us a Demonstration of a thing we know nothing of,
after a great deal of enquiry; and really when I looked first into your Preface
you would make us expect no less than Revelation: but all this soon vanished
into Dreaming, Asserting, Defaming downright all foreign Physicians, then the
lesser half of the College it self, and next the greater, for really the praise
you give them is so invidiously turned, that it is one of the worst pieces of
Satyr. The Scene thus odly changed, very strangely at least as to my
expectation, rais*d in me quite other apprehensions: my Church thoughts were
not the very same; my passion grew almost into fury, to see my Masters so ill
used, and one whom Nature had laid asleep, and forbid us to remember him to his
disadvantage; yet his Ashes were to be raise d for your trifle about the Gout. I
confess I could hold no longer, but the duty that s incumbent upon every man to
defend his own, or his friend s Reputation, made me find some time from
business to become an Author, though that was when I had attempted a second
reading, and after ten days. It Is the defense of all foreign Physicians, and a
great many of our own that I have undertaken; a task I acknowledge too bold for
me, with any one but your self; and ev n these few that are excepted, must fall
too when you are out of the apprehensions of an Answer, or any other
inconveniency from them: this is no forc d and unnatural conclusion; for,
notwithstanding your turning over Books to no purpose, as you say very well,
foreign Physicians and my Masters are agreed in most things of Physic; so that
if your design were to destroy Opinions, and lay under no fears of Men, you
might have as easily run down all the College, as Ignoramus's, as you have done
the learned men abroad: all these foreigners since the beginning of the World,
all our dead Gentlemen, and a third of what is alive; surely my living Masters
that are spared cannot have better pretenses than They; nay, I le answer for
them, that they re ashamed on your behalf, and angry too, that you have parted
them from so good company; but esprcially that you huve joined them to your
self: Have not you done Dr. Cole a great deal of honor, in obtruding upon him
your ridiculous jargon, and to call them his Opinions, Opinions he was very
familiar with, or because you are the first that vends em, opinions that he has
lenrn't from you? Is there any such stuff, in his Book de Secretione Animali,
his letter of an Apoplexy, or his Book of Agues? if my memory fails me not, he
s among one of your Dunces that make that Disease proceed from the Acidity of
the Blood, as Dr. Jones does, and yet you may make him say here, that it is an
Alkali that is the Original of that sickness; old People, men say, are twice
Children, yet he is not quite so old, as to forget what he said lately, to
chatter after you: but since you use your Friend, your Patron no better, I
think your Doctors you make War upon have no reason to complain.

In this Preface of yours, you have got into a Cant of Experimental knowledge,
Experiments upon the Blood, and such things you understand, and use the very
same way that Enthusiasts do the Scripture: these are the best help to Natural
Knowledge, as the Scripture are to Divine; but all this mere Jargon, Cant and
Nonsense in your mouth who cannot understand them: and in my opinion the only
way of proselyting you, must be the same that the Churchmen take with their
Enthusiasts, to despise you. Are not you a rare Fellow to pretend to make an
Experiment, who after all your toil, all your reading, and all your
Disquisition, are pleased to tell us that Physicians have hitherto unanimously
agreed that Acids have abounded in all Diseases, this is as wonderful an
advantage as you have gained by reading of them; for it is manifestly false, and
if we were to look into the state of Physic in former Ages, or even in our own
time, we can find no such Universal Consent; but now when I think of it, you
only said if turning over of Books would do it, that you should rest satisfied;
but that will not do; nay distilling, and combining of Liquors so long as your
eyes are open, will never make one Experiment, without some Book-learning,
which to you is a bugbear. You see how well an accomplished Gentleman you are
like to prove for making Experiments, and so you have very good reason to say
that in your Introduction you have made use of a Familiar and easy Experiment
to confirm the truth of your New Hypothesis; and if any one shall take upon
them to answer what you have said in this, or any of your former Pieces, you
expect that they should back their Arguments with Experiments, or you shall
take no notice of them. What good service your Familiar Experiment is like to
do you, turn the leaf, and there you ll find it: but pray, if one may ask
questions, tell me what Syrup of Violets it self is, Acid or Alkalin; according
to this Familiar Experiment, it is nothing; for Syrup of Violets, added to Syrup
of Violets dissolv d in an aqueous Body, may augment the quantity, but will
still be blue; Ergo it is nothing, because neither Acid nor Alkali: the next time
you write, be sure to make a Syrup of Violets principle, h. e. every thing that
does not change the Color, is Violaceous; and find some Disease to be made or
Cur*d by it, so there will be Three, and Musae gaudent Numero Impari, the
principles of Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury are Three, Des Cartes's are Three, and
yours are Three; but this I Am afraid you will not like, because you affect
singularity.

And as for answering your pieces, I know no body will be at the pains, but a
Porter; nay, I Will promise you that when I had done, I had a great dispute with
my self if I should do you the honor: but a little for my Masters, and helping
off the Bookseller with the damn d Copy, did prevail; but here I faithfully
promise and swear, that no more of my Stolen time from other business shall be
employed that way. But, pray, Why are all your Books Pieces? nothing but
Artillery sounds with you since you was in Flanders: the Preface before, was
Powder and Ball, and now Pieces for the Powder and Ball; not so, good Member,
your Pieces are harmless things enough, any body may attack them, and that more
easily, and with more safety than nail d up Cannon, and you see the following
Sheets are an Attempt of an Ordinary fellow.

AN EXAMINATION OF A New Treatise OF THE GOUT.
SEmper ego auditor tantum, nunquamne reponam,
Vexatus toties rauci Theseide Codri?
Or for our better understanding, as Mr Dryden and I, with a little liberty,
will sing it:

Still shall I hear, and never quit the score*
Stunned with Colbatche' s nonsense over and over.
I have been quiet these forty years, because I was always hearing something
that informed me; but now to have Libels upon our learned Members, by one who
has not learn d his Institutions, is insupportable; and however he may be below
their notice, as he really is, yet he cannot escape me, who have been charmed
so long with their Learn ing. But to do this as shortly as his want of method,
useless repetitions, and ridiculous malice will allow me, I will only consider
the strength of his pretenses, and discover their weakness from such solid
maxims, as I have either heard or read that my Masters do suppose; and
reserving his Preface for mine, the first thing we shall consider shall be his
Introduction; which I shou d take to be the most modest thing of the whole
Book, were it not that he pretends his principles are so very obvious, that
they are to be seen through by any body, and yet they have been removed from the
eye of Physicians. The familiar experiment is, That all Acids, such as Oil of
Vitriol, Oil of Sulphur per came panam, Spirit of Nitre, Spirit of Salt,
Vinegar, etc. being poured into Syrup of Violets in any aqueous Vehicle, will
immediately turn it from a Blue to a very Red Color; and as the Acid is more
or less strong, so will the Red Color be of a deeper or paler Dye. On the
other hand, all manifest Alkalies, such as lixivious Salts, all the volatile
Spirits and Salts, such as Spirit and Salt of Hartshorn, Spirit and Salt of Sal
Ammoniac, Salt of Vipers, etc. will turn the Syrup of Violets, or a solution of
it, either in Spring Water, or in any other aqueous Vehicle, from a Blue into a
Green Color; and as the Alkali is more or less strong, so the Green Color
will be of a paler or a deeper Dye. From this he concludes, that if the Serum
of the Blood change this solution of Syrup of Violets into a Red, it must be
Acid; and if it changes it into a Green color, positively Alkalin; and
confirms this farther with a piece of Logic, which shows sufficiently that he
has nothing of the University breeding, without his telling us so; and
notwithstanding the expense of Money he has been at, in acquiring this
Learning, all he shows is the Ergo, strangely brought in. But pray, Mr Member
of the Royal College of Physicians, do you think that because you were an
Apothecary, and made up the Doctor's Hysterical Juleps and Gargarisms, and saw
sometimes Spirit of Hartshorn added to the Waters which dissolved some of the
Syrup of Violets; or at other times, Spirit of Vitriol, Niter, etc. added to
some such Tinctures, and to make this Red or Green Color: Do you think, I say,
that these Physicians had never seen these changes as well as you? That must
not be suppos d even among foreign Physicians (for those, and such as are dead,
or want a name, you only are pleased to expose) but how came it that they never
fell upon this demonstration of yours, surely it is not so much out of reach;
but the reason you may have, when I Will show you immediately that you have
discovered nothing at all. First, some Physicians, and those most Foreigners,
have said that the principles of mixed Bodies were an Acid and an Alkali, tho
they have had vast difficulties even to describe them so, that we could know
what they would be at; and truly yours is no better; for of all the mixed
Bodies, how many are there that will give your Water and Syrup of Violets a Red
or a Green Color? not the thousandth part, and consequently not the thousandth
part of mixed Bodies are Acid or Alkalin, or the thousandth part of mixed Bodies
have no compounding Principles, h. e. they are something and nothing: Yet it is
very natural to think, with one ^f my named Masters, that if Acids and Alkalies
are the true Ingredients or Components of Bodies, and that they concur as
principles in their action, and bear Contre-parts in this action; then because
the Influence of either upon the other, may be augmented, diminished or lost,
and this is to be faulty or vicious; therefore, or ergo, it is evident, that
either of em may have its defects, and consequently that the blame should not
be laid upon one: h. e. supposing the principle of Alkali and Acid, Dr.
Blankard and the Member, are both wrong; tho I confess if Acid and Alkali were
any thing, Dr. Blancard is most in the right; for the serum of the Blood, in
the healthiest People makes either no such alterations of Red or Green; and
when it does in that circumstance, it is always to the Green, and consequently
the Blood in healthiest People is Alkalin; and because that Constitution of the
Blood that gives us Health can never be the same when we are Sick, and since
the Blood when we are in Health is Alkalin, it must not be supposed so, when we
are sickly, but rather something of a different and opposite temper: and
because that is to be Acid, ergo, our sicknesses do all proceed from an Acid,
according to Dr. Blankard, against the Royal Member; now hehimself has given
judgment upon such ridiculous inferences as he makes, that they ought to be
kicked out of a Commonwealth, for endeavoring to impose upon Mankind: And truly
this is the only thing in the whole Book he and I seem most agreed upon; only I
think we should begin with him. But supposing that that were an Acid which
changes a solution of Syrup of Violets with Water into a red Color, and that
an Alkali, that changes it into Green; and that all mixed bodies made those
changes, and none else, h. e. let us have this Hypothesis in its best light;
yet it is so precarious and obscure, that it cannot help us in the
understanding one Phoenomenon; we know not their properties and powers, nay,
one of them he supposes more useless than a Cipher; pray what knowledge can we
attain to by knowing that a Triangle is a Figure that has three angles, or a
Chiliogonum has a thousand, without knowing any of its properties and relation
to other Figures in practice for the use of Man? We don't apprehend by this
that the three Angles of any Triangle are equal to two right Angles, and that
the whole thousand Angles in an Chiliogonum are but equal to four right Angles,
and much less do we gain all the advantages and knowledge that the Doctrine of
plain and Spherical Trigonometry affords us, by canvassing Triangles upon
different occasions. Now I say, That if we could arrive to as useful a piece of
knowledge, by supposing his Acid and Alkali to be what he describes 'em, by
demonstrating their properties as evidently as we see those of the mentioned
Example, he might, for me, call the one Bow-Church, and the other the Royal
Exchange: but on the contrary, all that ever we are to know of them is, that
the one can make Syrup of Violets, dissolved in any aqueous body, Red, and the
other can make it Green. The poor Philosophers and Mathematicians that knew
nothing of Syrup of Violets and Water, were at a sad loss. But pray, Mr. Member
of the Royal College, since all the Phoenomena in Nature are to be accounted
for by those two principles, except the inconsiderable ones about Motion and
Rest, Light and Darkness, Magnetism, and a great many other, (of this kind) too
many here to insert, I Am afraid that all the Phenomenon are to follow; yet
perhaps you are confident of all those of your own Trade, and that they may
stand your friends, except it may be that little sort of motion of the Blood,
which the Fools of Physicians call the Basis in the O Economy, and curing
Diseases; but let us except that, and tell us the business of seeing from Acid
and Alkali, why we have a Pulse? And I Am sure, that if you cannot do that, you
cannot tell us whether a Stone sees or not, at least you cannot be useful to
any that suffer in their seeing. Pray, good Mr. Member, now tell me, why I,
when I was a young Man could not see any thing ten Yards before me, without the
help of a Glass, and now when I am old, I can see ten times further, without
any such help, and other Men of my acquaintance that accused me of blindness
cannot see their own length now without a Glass? One thing more I would beg of
you, and that is, that when I am a Doctor, and must feel my Patients Pulse, how
we ought to have a Pulse at all, and what kinds of Pulses tell me that my
Patient is Sick, and all this from the Combination and Privy Council of Acid
and Alkali, where you are Secretary, and can tell all their tricks? Moreover,
settling our knowledge upon change of color is the most uncertain thing in the
World; not only because I have seen Dr. Slaer take two Diaphanous liquors, that
were as white as Water, yet, by putting them together soon changed into 20
Colors, some smoakt, some grew thick from being the thinest substances I ever
saw, and a thousand such tricks which are useful to be tried, but I never knew
of the principle that could account for them, though such experiments afford us
many conclusions about the uncertainty of human Understanding; nay, I have seen
Mr. Boil, and Mr. Newton at a deadly work about this business of Color, and I
am told that Des Carts and Mr. Newton have exchanged many a Letter upon that
Subject; though we believe that Mr. Newton had the best by much. Now, Mr. Member,
don't you think that I have given you a very good reason, for former Physicians
making no account of your Shop Experiments, they have seen a Thousand times,
but have left you to take up with it, for no body else wou d. Indeed you are in
the right to make your appeal to the Mob about your discovery; for they know
nothing of the matter: but Gentlemen are generally of so liberal an Education,
that though they could not dispute the fact, yet they have the good Manners to
think every thing true any one tells them, to his knowledge, to be matter fact;
yet I le assure you that your Conclusions and theirs will be vastly different.

This being premis d, we see what a certain foundation he has laid for himself;
yet he thinks it so certain that in the 5th page he tells us, That an ounce or
two of Blood is to be spared in any case. Again, It will plainly appear by this
Experiment, That the Blood of such persons abounds with Alkalies; and if so,
why should we crowd in more Alkalies, unless it were to prolong the Distemper,
to increase the number of Fees. Here he shows abundance of Learning and
Honesty; for in the first he supposes that an Ounce or two of Blood may be
spared in any case, which is so very contrary to what I have heard my Masters
talk about, Revulsion and Derivation, that nothing can be more; for if the
Blood is brought more to one part than another, by the different ways of
bleeding, as this Doctrine plainly intimates; then it may happen that we shall
bring Blood to some part, upon occasions, in a very ill and unlucky time,
unless we understand the business of Revulsion and Derivation somewhat exactly;
but this is neither an Assertion peculiar to him, nor is it my design to Answer
his Book to every particular, but only where he sets up for himself, or asserts
common opinions too peremptorily; and therefore I will only say to his Honesty,
That that is very singular, if he keeps his Patients long under his hand for
gains sake; yet by what he says, one would think him a great Fool or Ignorant;
for to heighten a Disease as he talks, is to kill the Patient outright, and so
farewell Fees, which is his primum mobile, and a principle he is more fond of
than Acid or Alkali; for I m informed he valued his Book among the Booksellers
at twenty Guineas, which he said he wanted to buy a pair of Geldings to put
into his new Coach. But after he has made so great advances by his
demonstrations, he begins still to challenge the ignorance and dishonesty of
Physicians, whom he makes a set of Fools or Knaves, and sometimes both. People,
says he, must long since have known the truth of this hypothesis, or they must
not: If they have not known it, then it is plain they have grop*d in the dark,
and they have cured Diseases with as much certainty as a blind Man can catch a
Hare, as the Proverb is, when they speak of any thing that is very unlikely. If
they have known it before, then the giving of Alkalies at the rate that has
been done, is a plain argument against them that they have not acted like
honest men. But I dare acquit them from this charge, I do believe they have
sworn in Verbo Magistri. And because a few Book-learn'd Gentlemen have dreamt
that the Bloods abounding with Acids has been the cause of Diseases, therefore
right or wrong it must be so, tho it be contrary to the most obvious and plain
experiments. So firm an Hypothesis being once established, his consequences
must be so plain and evident that nothing can withstand them; and therefore he
catches the poor Physicians in this inevitable Dilemma, People, etc. Truly,
good Mr. Member, I told you just now, that your experiment has been seen often
every day, but the Hypothesis you raise upon it, is unworthy of any ones sight
but your own; but since you have got within your Dilemma, as Conjurers are said
to be within a Circle for their defense from the Devil, that we may give you
story for story, I will, for once, suppose that they knew nothing of the
matter, and yet I cannot see how they cured by guess, or groped in the dark,
since they had more certain Rules which you seem to despise, and I Am sure you
know nothing of; and what lumieres you have got from this Hypothesis, we shall
find by your following observations; tho having ruined your foundation already,
the thing is evident of it self. Again, we suppose that they did know it, tho
no otherways than that the Hypothesis of Acid and Alkali is the most precarious
supposition in the world, and that they knew Dr Blankard fond, tho modestly, of
this Castle in the Air, and you a peremptory, dictating Block-head, maintaining
this ill-grounded stuff, and defaming Men of Learning to defend it; and in that
sense they were not confined to your giving of Acids upon all occasions, and to
despise the greater part of Simples, which they must needs do; since the
greater part are either Alkalies, in the common acceptance, or nothing at all.
I said in the common Acceptance, because I am one of those who desires no kind
of jargon in physical knowledge. But what a fine excuse you make for them, I
think the commonwealth of learningought to grace your Birthday with a
Panegyric upon it; that men of learning who will own no other Motto but
Nullius in verba, yet you will bedaub them with your impudence jurare in verbo
(as you call it) Magistri; I must tell you that in governs both the Accusative
and Ablative Cases, and so it may be good Grammar, which I Am sure is more than
you know; but in the sense you design it, 'twas never us d but in the
Accusative: But pray you what Masters' words do you find your College Oath bind
you to, or what Master is that other Physicians follow; since they did shake
off Hippocrates and Galen, the ancient Guides of former Physicians, we see none
other set up, but every one would make Proselytes, or instruct with the force
of reason; they declare, that we may learn a great deal from, and ought to read
Hipp. Gal. Avicen, etc. on one side and all the moderns, of whatsoever sect, on
the other, but not to fight for the Infallibility either of Hippocr. or Van
Helmont; but these old Gentlemen are none of your acquaintance, and therefore
for once, I crave your Mercy, for introducing them into your Company. But pray
Mr Member, must a man be said to jurare in verba, that will not blindly follow
all the nonsense that an impudent fellow would obtrude upon him; if so, then
I Will promise you (...) will be the word still.

Now to what you say of a few Book-learn'd Gentlemen's dreams about Acids,
being the source of all other Diseases; I don t say that you will own my Masters
Book-learned, but we see few of them either fond of Acid or Alkalies being the
causes of Diseases; but if one of them must needs be so against all sense and
reason, I told you before that Dr Blankard appealing to your experiment, has
proved it so, without Book; surely you could not have thought that. I don t
think the rest of this Paragraph worthy my consideration, and especially
because I was by when Mr Boil s Dialogists were at a hot dispute about the
power of Fire, in bringing out the first principles of Mixed Bodies, where it
was carried in the Negative, after many a learned Speech; but you were not
worthy of such a Conversation, nor I neither; but I was Doorkeeper, and did
sometimes peep in, and took care to over-hear as much as possibly I could; and
tho I Am no Book-learn'd Man, nor a Gentleman, yet I was told that That was all
in print; I think they called it the Skeptical Chemist. Now here was a learned
man, that was for trying a thousand tricks upon Blood, and every thing, without
ever dreaming of essential and elementary princlples, as some of the common
Chemists about this town, who were only employed about his Furnace, have done
since; and for any thing I know, you may have got some Learning by blowing his
Bellows, as I have by carrying of Gowns and Caps.

The rest of this Book to the 10th page, containing nothing but Conquest and
the Ignorance of others, I must pass it over, because I cannot be able to
consider it, without letting slip some things as undiscreet as his are. Only I
think that a Man of his Policy and Understanding, would at least have
represented his Antagonists as more knowing, and of more Experience, that so he
might lay his way for a Glorious Conquest, and now if he is struck with the
Servant of these Ignorants, what a damnable misfortune is it to fall by the
Jaw Bone of an Ass. But the 1st. of the 10th page, is so full of Instruction
and Knowledge, that it requires our serious consideration; and therefore we'll
set it down at length. For want, says he, of our taking pains in making
Experiments, has been the only cause of our so long building the Foundation of
our Practice upon so false a Bottom; and I hope, that what I have said will
excite the Physicians of our Age to make such Experiments, that thereby we may
act upon some sort of certainty. The Physicians of our own Age, but more
particularly of our own Nation, and amongst them in a more especial manner
those of our College, have made more and greater discoveries in Anatomy than
ever were made before, I mean in the Anatomy of the solid Parts. But as for the
Fluids, those parts wherein the Cause and seat of most Diseases lurk, they have
in a great measure been neglected: But the College abounds with Men of such
large Capacities, that if once they set about that noble work, I doubt not they
will soon perfect it, to the great satisfaction and Advantage of all Mankind.
This Paragraph consists of three considerable Members, the first is the Cause
why Medicin has not made greater advances, the praise of the Anatomical
discoveries in our Age, but more especially in our own Nation, and the third an
Encomium upon the College, a little healing after his Causticks and Incisions,
as good Chyrurgeons generally do work to the ground of sordid and sinuous
Ulcers, such as he has or will make the present Members, if he can but outlive
them. But pray Mr. Member of the Royal College, do you pretend to be the first
beginner of making Experiments; truly they will be well made, when I dare
challenge you to tell me whether a Stone sees, hears, etc. or not; but have we
not discovered to us by the affiduous labors of learned Men, a more perfect
knowledge of the make of our own Body, the conveyances of its liquors, and the
Circulation of the Blood; have we not noble Experiments about our Body, and its
liquors being affected by ambient bodies, comparisons made, and Histories of
the comparisons that have been by the combination of Salts with Salts, Liquors
with Liquors, and even trials of all those upon our Liquors. I Am of the opinion
that we ought to proceed with all these trials; but how to absolve, and what
use is to be made* of those Observations I am convinced that you do not know;
we shall see immediately what familiar Theories you raise in the curing of the
Gout, from all those discoveries; what vindications you make, and what reason
you give for your Medicines; I Am afraid we shall find you so incapable to
apprehend the circumstances of a nice Experiment, that you are not even able to
give us a genuin History of a Disease. I agree with you that I believe that the
Physicians since the Restoration of K. Chapter II. have made greater discoveries in
the Anatomy than any; but for my part I don't pretend to know the Doctors
abroad; I have told you of my Masters that have been famed for some new piece
of Learning, and all that in my time, so I Am apt to believe what you say; though
I have sometimes heard of a French Fellow that told us a Story of the Lacteal
Vessels, when the noise of discoveries was so great at home; I have heard of
Bartholin, D'Graaf, and some others I cannot call to mind, which makes me
believe we had some pretty Experiments abroad. But as for the Fluids, these
poor, these damned Fluids that make us sick and well, I have seen Mr. Boil and
some others making a great many Experiments upon them; and I have been told
that one Malpighius, Lewenhoeck, and some other Fellows have taken Glasses,
Spectacles, I don't know how you call them, to look into them; but these are
Gentlemen below your notice, and so you think they have been neglected: But the
College abounds with Men of such large Capacities; and Faith so it does, and I
hope will in spite of you, that I hope they will always be a doing something
worthy of that noble Faculty: But you a fearful defamer, to talk as you have of
Physicians, ought to be Scandalum Magnatum; you are convinc d your Book would
never be read abroad, and so you freely call them* Ignorants, guessers, and I
don't know what; but your Malice too does carry you so far, as to defame a
Member of this College, because he is Dead; another you name, because perhaps
his talent is to be modest, or to neglect such pretenders as you, and a third
forsooth you will not name, though you could not conceal him among such as you
take to be your Friends; but I Will tell you that when we come to his Story I le
name them, and him after you, and let you see too that you never exposed your
self more than in relating of that Observation; but all this in good time: and
if thus you deal underhand with our living Members, and openly with him that is
Dead, God have mercy upon the shortest livers, they will be sure to have your
Tongue for a Purgatory in a Protestant Commonwealth.

Now your whole Introduction being completed by the next Paragraph, I will
look into that, and leave the honest Gentleman that intrusts you with his
Letters, to the mercy of the World.

A^ I have before said, so I shall now repent it again, that I may not be
misunderstood by any one; that though I commend Acids in the Cure of Diseases,
yet I do not pretend that any one Acid will answer all Intentions, there being
a mighty difference in the Operation and Nature of Acids. That Acid that will
Cure an Acute Distemper (generally speaking) will not cure a Chronical one. I
have generally observed that volatile Acids are most effectual in Acute
Distempers, and fixed ones in those Distempers we call Chronick ones. But in
these every Man's practice must be regulated and governed by Observation: For
as Physic had its Rise and Original from Observation, so I am sure that by
observation only it is capable of being brought to perfection.

What greater confusion can any Man discover, than there is here in these few
lines; if his only, and certain principles can give him no greater Lights and
Notions in his Study and beloved Opinions, the Lord have mercy upon those
Patients from whom he is to gather the History of Diseases! and if we stammer so
in explaining our selves, our common discourse must needs be self-evident.
Pray, why don't you at least tell us a Story of those vast differences that are
in the Operations of Acids, if you cannot tell me whence that difference comes?
I may very easily mistake one Acid for another, and then play the Devil with my
Patient; it is true he was convinced by his Blood that 'twas Alkalin, and
therefore 'twas to be cured by an Acid, and then if it does not take, but does
him harm he himself was judge, but the Disease did master us: Pray, good Mr.
Member, What is it that this Acid does with the Fluids? Does it make the Blood
run quicker or flower? but I beg your pardon again, for you say you know
nothing of that. What then do you say, That the Acid that will cure an Acute
distemper (generally speaking) will not cure a Chronical one; so far all is
well; for generally, only 'twill not do it; then I may give either without any
considerable mistake; but then generally again, you say you have observed that
Violatil Acids are most effectual in Acute Distempers, and fixed ones in those
we call Chronick ones; now, to speak freely, I do not believe you know the
difference betwixt Acute and Chronical distempers, as you say you call them;
for in the Acute Diseases, such Dr. Willis and my other Masters call Fevers,
the Blood seems to be all volataliz'd, it flies about like lightning, and
therefore every thing that s Volatile, flying (damn those Latin words) I think
must make it fly faster; and in Chronical Distempers, as a Dropsy, etc. How
the Devil would a Sick Man of common Sense, nay one that is in Bedlam, look upon
me; if I bid him drink large draughts of fixed Acids. Vinegar, viz. as you tell
me, etc. every hour of the Day. Cure, that will not take, that is too bare faced,
and I find you smell it, when you leave that to be regulated by ever Man*s
Apprentice. Is this the Man that wou d have a Thousand Pound a Year toward a
Labarotary? This is a way to kill more than a Thousand Pound's worth of Powder
and Ball, and he says that is spent every Year to kill the Enemies abroad, and
he would have as much to kill the Friends at home: If it had been the Jacobites
it had been tolerable, but Friend and Foe, and to give a Fee too to be killed,
is the Devil and all. But pray, what Observations are you like to make? you
have only two things to deal with, and these are both of a sort; yet you cannot
tell us how to manage them; but there s more in this matter: Diseases don't
always appear with the same face, no not in the same person at different times;
Oh then what can I do? nay any thing, and take a Fee. Now in short, Mr. Member,
I le tell you that Physic was neither begun, nor can be promoted by such
Observations. And thus having made a hopeful Introduction; we must expect a
learned and useful practice, which I now will follow him into, and leave him
singing his Io triumph's over the learning of the Introduction, by which he has
baffled all Foreign Physicians, some Dead ones, and all living ones without
names.

CHAP. I. Of the GOVT.
He begins first with the Names the Gout has obtained among Physicians, when
they would tell any one of its having seized upon any one part of the Body;
though this sorting by-name he seems to arrogate to himself; but pray Sir do you
know that the most of the Names you have told us are all Greek, Heathen Greek;
and how came they by those names without ranging this Disease into the same
order you pretend to: They gave name to the Sciatica too; but you have forgot
it. But not to insist too long upon Names, where the thing is so plain,
especially since you have afforded me more matter to reflect upon, than really
I can be at the trouble to consider; that I will tell you, that it is no other
than to read your Book, and to write an answer; for I have no other before me
but your own. And now to begin, you tell us, p. 16. 3. of the different
opinions Authors have vented about the seat and original of this Disease; but I
will delay speaking any thing to that subject now, because its proper place is
a little after this: but since you now begin your description, I will tell you
that I will have no consideration about that, since your owing it to Dr.
Sydenham (which is more than you confess) has miraculously obtained him from
you the Character of a fair and honest man; and I will content my self to
attack you, where you first begin to show your Learning, in p. 16. ult. I
cannot agree, say you, with those Gentlemen, who will have all pain to proceed
from a solution of Continuity, which in plain English is either a Wound or
Ulcer: Now for my part, I cannot see why we should not be made sensible of any
thing that injures us, which whatsoever causes pain does, without destroying
the Integrity of the parts; and it is plain, whatever causes a solution of
unity, must destroy the Integrity of them. Further, Malbranche tells us, that
our Senses were given us to guard ourselves from injuries, and that they never
fail to answer the end for which they were given us: They are never guilty of
Deceiving us-; as, for instance, our Taste, etc. and all these proceed from a
placid vellication of the Membranes. Pain proceeds from a Contraction of the
Fibers, and Pleasure from a pacid relaxation of them) which being granted, etc.
My Masters the Physicians, I assure you, do not care whether you agree with
them, or not; but why the pox will not you agree with your self? for you say that
a solution of Continuity, in plain English, is a Wound or an Ulcer, then in the
very next paragraph, that a Blow with a blunt thing upon any part, which only
bruiseth it, will occasion greater pain than if the same part were cut with a
sharp instrument, although the one only compresseth the parts, and the other
divides them asunder, and so makes a perfect solution of Unity. Now, good Mr.
Member, did ever any one but your self call a Contusion by the name of Wound,
or Ulcer? Nay, I Am convinced you will not say so neither, and I Will undertake to
prove to you that pain is a solution of Unity, and then you ll see that not
only Contusions, but even Wounds and Ulcers, that make more sensible solutions
of Unity, may make pain: yet, still there comes another inconvenience upon the
heels of this; for we see that the pain of a Contusion is greater, by your own
confession, than the pain by a sharp instrument; yet this pain in a Contusion
is not so great, at least not greater than the pain of the Gout, and this you
tell us only comes from the sharp pointed particles that may affect the
membranes of the Toe; and do you think then, that those particles have more
points, and are sharper than the Knives and Saw that Surgeons use in
amputations? but this en passpant. Now, for the other part, that we ought to be
made sensible of any thing that injures us, which whatsoever causes pain does,
without destroying the Integrity of the parts: What he means by this I cannot
understand, neither is it true English; and I don't know any body but will
acknowledge that pain makes him sensible with a vengeance; but why should we be
made sensible without destroying the integrity of the parts? For a Wound, and
an Ulcer, by his own confession, causes pain; and yet he says too, that in
Wounds and Ulcers there is a solution of Unity, or the Integrity of the parts
broke off. But what a Devil brought Father Malebranche hither? was it to let us
know he has seen his Book de la recherche de la verit? More of his works he
pretends not to have seen, and even that I Am convinced he never read in the
Original, or English translation, for this proves nothing to his purpose: But
I Will tell you, good Mr. Member, that the great design of that part of the Book
you quote, is to prove to us the real design and use of our senses; ho tells
you that they are made serviceable to our design of living, and that in a due
distance, in a proper Medium, and when there is a Men's sana in Corpora sano we
are never deceived by them in what they represent to us; he tells you, that
beyond a due distance a House that is square will appear round: The reason he
gives you, but you don't understand it; yet he maintains, that tho the House is
really square, and we apprehend it to be Round, our senses are not deceived,
because the object is not round at a proper distance; but why it appears round
rather than of any other Figure he makes very plain: after the same manner he
tells you, that if you put your black Stick with the white Head (for so much
only you have of a Fop Doctor) into clear Water, your Stick will appear bent;
yet when you pull it out, you find it as straight as it was; and
notwithstanding this Paradox, your Eyes perfectly well, if you but saw as Pere
Malebranch did, your reason, would tell you all the time, It is in the water
that it is very strait. But how comes all this authority in, to condemn poor
solution of Unity? Is it, because he tells you, in the one, that that proceeds
from a placid vellication of the Membranes: I don't know he has any neeessity
to say that, but because you quote it from him, and I have not the Book by me,
I Will believe you. But what does this vellication make for your purpose?
Vellication to you is pain, and nothing that is placid; only people cannot be
kept from showing their reading upon occasions. And because all this will not
do, you wou d palm upon us a description of pain and pleasure; that ought to be
your own, tho it is not truly so; and then wou d make a very ridiculous
conclusion, and that without your learned ergo. The Conclusion I have no time
to consider, but to the description we ll allow a line or two: and I Will suppose
with you, in another part of this Book, that all sense proceeds from
vibrillation, motion, I don't remember how you express it, of the Nerves, and
that pleasure is a more placid relaxation of them, as here: Now, does not the
word Relaxation, at first view, signify a solution of unity: Yet, not to put
this hardship upon you, let us suppose, I say, that sense, and every feeling,
in general, is a accompanied with a vibrillation or trembling of the Nerve,
with viz. an alternat contraction and distraction of the same: but these
motions cannot be performed, if there be not a mutual departure or excursus of
these parts, of which the Nerve is made, in their contact; neither this
excursus, but by a successive change of their Contact, or in plain English, but
by a solution of Unity; and therefore it is evident too, that in all sensation
there is a sort of solution of Unity, and so even pleasure itself is never
without a solution of Unity. But because pain is a trembling of greater power,
hence it is that that solution which is by pain, is greater and more violent
than in any other feeling; and since this gives the doleful feeling alone, this
alone may be said to be a Solution of Unity, insomuch that a solution of Unity
signifies or infers a troublesome sensation and feeling. Pray what* reason can
you persuade us by, that pain proceeds from a Contraction of the Fibers, and
pleasure from a pacid Relaxation of them? These are indeed most peaceable
words; but what authority have you for this positive assertion, as you are
pleased to speak in the following Paragraph. I may agree with you that pain may
be by a stagnation of the Juices, but not by a compression, but a distention of
the vessels that this feeling is made, and of this you are so very fond, that
you assert that there can be no pain but by a stagnation; entirely forgetting
the pain we talked of but now when a cutting. But pray when the Blood is upon
occasions penned up in any Vessel, so that the obstructing power is greater
than that of the approaching Blood, can any Man think that this greater
quantity will rather contract the Vessel or dilate it? I Am sure if it does the
last, the pain that attends it must be a solution of Unity, as I explained
before. The same's to be said of the Blood in a neighboring Vessel, that does
not stop any other way, than by the distended side of the obstructed vessel
compressing its less resisting side. But pray Mr. Member give us an account of
the wonderful flight in the next Paragraph, that positive Assertion (as you are
indeed full of such) by which you would so evidently put upon us, a conclusion
ab absurdo which is natural from your Doctrine, but not at all from ours; in a
palsy there is a wasting and a decay of the Member, and a Man might say that
it is contracted; and if so, supposing your Assertion, there ought to be a
great deal of pain, which indeed is contrary to Experience: on the other hand
such wastings and decays of Members are far from the conditions we proved to be
necessary in feeling, and still further from the conditions of pain; and
therefore (or ergo) this experience you have brought in, destroys your
Hypothesis, but mightily establishes what I proved to you before. All I will
add to this, is, that if you ever have the impudence to show your talent to the
World once more, you will not assert any thing positively, and without a
foundation too; but especially when you are to run down Men and Opinions both.
But to proceed, I pass over the weak Account you give of the Disposition some
People at different times have to this Disease more than at another time; and
we consider your Definition, which I Will assure you is very far from an
University Definition, and 'twill please you mightily, because you hate all the
Art of that place, You tell us, that it is Pain of the Joints, and parts
adjacent, occasioned from an extravasated Alkaline Humor, irritates the
Membranes of the Joints, and parts adjacent Hitherto, we suppose with you, that
all pain is the Extravasation of Alkaline parts upon those Membranes where the
Pain is; but the difference being the Extravasation upon the Membranes of the
Joints that constitute the essence of the Gout: Then all Pains in Joints are
Gouts; but Nocturnal Pains that affect the Vertebrae, are Pains in Joints; Ergo
Nocturnal Pains are either the Gout, which I do not believe you will assert, or
else your Definitio non competit Definito; and that is contrary to the Laws of a
good Definition: But again, why alkaline parts? they are the most innocent,
smoothest things in the World; they have no edges, because you tell us their
Antagonist's have; then supposing that these were Extravasated, and this
condition could effect the Membranes, we cannot see how 'twould irritate them;
but you prove afterward, that these are the offending Particles, and there is
no standing against your Arguments; Ergo, they may be true, tho* not hitherto.
Well let us get another step forward, and see what necessity there is for their
being Extravasated; truly I see none for it, but a great deal to the contrary:
But again, we'll suppose them Extravasated, and as sharp as you say they are,
nay even carrying Chevaux de Frise with them, yet I don't believe they could
provoke Pain, and my reason is, that I have been told by some of my Masters
that Aq. Fortis applied to a Membrane or a naked Nerve, not otherways hurt, did
excite no Contractions as Convulsions, or the like, and if that be true, as I
believe it is, then farewell something else, and your excellent Definition;
which indeed, I believe, you think gone for nothing, but that 'twas never at
the University, and you think to put it upon the University Doctors.

Having thus told us the very Nature of this Disease, by this learned
Definition, we must needs advance and determine the Cure and Original too: You
take your ordinary way in Sacrificing three or four Old Fellows at least, for
every thing you are to Establish; and because some charge the Head, others the
Liver, and your Dear Friend, Helmont, the Stomach, for troubling us with this
Disease; it is below you to charge either: But why did not you tell us who they
were that accused the Liver and Head, as well as him who accused the Stomach?
Was it that you do not know? or is it that you will let the World see that your
Devoirs are only paid to Truth; and in that respect down must go Friend and
Foe, all alike, very Ingenious indeed. But how do you Refute those old
Gentlemen; your first Argument is from the general Disorders that precede a
Fit. Is this an Argument to make us fall upon our Friends? Don't you know that
a Fit of the Stone makes us vomit, makes our Heads ach, our Limbs as if they
were paralitical, makes us Feverish, dry, and makes us sweat; this is a
pretty* general piece of Disordor, and pray, you, did any one carry the Stone
further than the Kidneys, Ureters, or Bladder Again, as you say afterward, an
unclean Stomach makes Impure Chyle, ill Chyle base Juices, base Juices, the
Gout; ergo, an unclean Stomach makes the Gout. Moreover, do you know that for a
long time the Blood, the very Blood, the Storehouse of the other Juices was
believed to be made in the Liver; and if this be true, as I doubt you cannot
prove the contrary, we ought to go to the first thing, since we are digging for
the Fountain. But still Malbranch, another Friend of yours, tells us, that all
Pain is in the Brain, and not at all in any part; because, after a Man has lost
his Leg, he frequently puts down his Hand to scratch the Toe of that Leg that
he had lopped off some time before, and if so, we ought to place our Disease in
the Head. It Is evident that all these three cannot be the Original of this
Disease, and I don't tell you how far any of them are so: All that I pretend to
say, is, that any of those old Gentlemen may enjoy their Opinion,
notwithstanding this your first Argument; and now we will see if the Second is
any better, and that is From the condition of the Blood and Juices during the
time of the Fit: Under which Head, I shall make it appear that the Blood and
Juices during the time of the Fit, abound not with Acid Particles, but on the
contrary, with Alkalious ones. Ha! this a dangerous point to meddle with, here
comes in again the Infallible Experiments, demonstaative Ergo's, nay, as he
tells us afterward, as Demonstrative as any of Euclid*s Propositions. Is not
this a rare Fellow? A rare Promoter and Discoverer of Truth, here is a new one
indeed, the poor People before him never thought any piece of Learning so
demonstrative, as any of Euclid*s Propositions; take any of his, and because,
You may have looked over, or overlookt the first Book, take the 5th. or
Pythagoras's 48th. and let us see the same certainty in your Argument, as there
is in any one of these, you think the easiest and most uncertain. I have made
some considerable Doubts about your Demonstration, but I could never about his
Demonstration, in any of these following Propositions. This second Branch he
defers till afterward, and proceeds now to illustrate further his first
Argument; but instead of doing that, begins already to be jealous of his Acids
and Alkalies, and leaving the Proof of this general Disorder, or that such a
Disorder is peculiar to this Disease, as he ought to prove; he only tells us
that these disorders are different, according to the different Constitutions,
and then going to tell us that Alkalies are always the cause of Fevers, but
never Acids, he falls again into a mad Fit; could he think, that the old
Gentlemen were to be justled our of their Seats by so small a touch; though he
thought, he had set them upon rotten Chairs, altogether fit for that purpose; I
don't know how much in the right, or in the wrong any body supposes them to be;
but 'm sure every body will say, that you never attempt to destroy their
Opinions, otherways than by an old trick of your own, a positive Assertion,
which is not only unmannerly enough, and like a young University Man, but you
are even pleased to grace such Assertions with the Title of Demonstration; and
you will not stop there neither, but they are as evident as Euclid's
Demonstrations. But again, I Will suppose that you understand the Business of
Constitutions, and that a Fever is always one of those general Disorders, how
the Devil came in Acids and Alkalies, in the proof of general Disorders
proceeding a Fit of the Gout: you did always, and evidently prove that the
Juices, and Juices alone were the source of the Disease; but if you think, that
you had made a cunning Retreat into your Circle, it is done so ill that I will
not follow you at this time; your safety there, after what has been said in the
Introduction, being sensible and obvious even to your self; but we shall have
an occasion afterward to talk upon this matter.: Only I must tell you, that I
ll always suppose after this, that it is the damn*d Alkalies that makes all the
Fermentations, and that the Acids check them; and I do assure you, that this
Foundation will go a great way against you. Your History, Sir, which you now
begin very abruptly, and like an ill Tailor sowing together two pieces of
Cloth, you join things very scurvily, you follow Dr. Sidenham close, but you
bring him in by the Head and Shoulders. I told you, before, I had nothing to
say to that great Man; and therefore I Will begin with another Botch of yours,
after you have done with him, where p. 23.. ult. you are so afraid of your
Alkaline Particles, that you carry them always in your Pocket, lest at any time
you might misplace them, and just after you have ended Dr. Sydenham's History,
you begin so; The Blood abounding with too great a quantity of Alkalious
Particles, is the general Cause of this Distemper, in order to which, there are
several other things which concur: As first, etc. Is not this handsomely added
to the Tail of your History; but these things you despise, that is an
University Gloss; yet even, that is necessary for those that would play the
plagiary, and not be so easily discovered, for whether I ever had read Dr.
Sydenham or not, I must see this is a Wen in your Book; but you being too wise
to be instructed, and I seeking information every where, and thinking to find
it with you, who are a promoter of new Truths, one who would have the World to
take nothing upon your Authority, but Demonstrates every thing; I intend to
try, if I can discover any greater certainty in your concurring Causes, than I
have found in the rest. But to begin, I think a way of Aphorism in tbis matter
would have become d your asserting design, better than to tell us, you are to
say nothing without a Reason, and at the same time not one reason you give for
any thing. First, say you, too moist a State of Air, which hinders free
Transpiration, by which means the Excrementitious Alkaline parts, which should
be thrown out by the Cutaneous Pores, are retained, and the quantity, etc. Now
since you are talking of Magic, pray tell me, dear, good, Learned Member of
the Royal College, who it is that manages matters so exactly within, that only
these Excrementitious Alkalies are thrown out; and why not rather the Acids,
who you say are sharp, half Pikes, Spades and Mattocks; surely I wou*d think
that a Body of armed Men are better for breaking into an Encampment (that I may
speak so, since you have brought those fine words out of Flanders) than a
parcel of Boors, sluggards, and heavy fellows that have no Arms at all;
besides, a Master of mine in a Latin Book of his, treating about this business
of perspiration (as he calls it) thinks it a strange Paradox, to assert that
the heaviest Bodies are easiest moved; or to your understanding, that the most
Volatile things are the least apt to rise, or be sublimed; and the most earthly
things the easiest: but to say no more of this Paradoxical nonsense, I must
tell you that perhaps the Transpiration is not so free in moist, as it is in
clear weather; yet you give us no reason for it; on the contrary, because you
are a wonderful fellow at experiments, I Will tell you, that the Transpiration
ought to be more free in moist weather, than in clear; if you will only grant me
that if there are two fellows meeting at a Door, and by plain force the one
keeps the other not only out, but makes his way forward too, this fellow is to
be thought the strongest; now, only grant me this, and then I Will add, that
because you say, in clear weather, our steems can get clear through the pores,
these doors of our Skin, that they will much more easily get through in moist
weather; because by a certain experiment, which at this time shall be nameless,
the Air is a great deal heavier, justles more, and presles against our
departing steems with greater force than when it is moist. You see now, How
well you demonstrate. I have no time to insist upon your Profane, and ill made
parallel that follows; neither much to the second Article, since you neither
prove why variety of Meats, or a great deal of any one sort is hurtful; and
again you make a most experimental parallel betwixt the Stomach and the Root of
a Tree; It may be good Enthusiasm, but it is far from a Man of so nice
experiments as you pretend to be. The third concurring cause is astonishing,
but especially for the wonderful way you have in managing it; we must drink
Wine, and not drink it. We must not drink it, because the Spirits of the Wine
meeting with the Volatile Alkalious salt of the Blood, by a mutual combination
of them, they are turned into Helmont's Offa abba, which can by no means
Circulate with the Blood; I can smell the Experiment this your assertion
depends upon, but I Will tell you that it wants a little Laboratory-work before
that is done; for especially, you ought not to have talked of Wine, but Spirit
of Wine; which has other affections, properties and powers than Wine it self;
then you ought to prove that this Alkalious salt is so plentiful, and in so
great an abundance in the Blood; and I peremptorily challenge you to answer me
upon all the integrity you have left you, whether or no you can by the help of
your Fire show me a real volatile Salt, or Spirit from any kind of sickly (for
out of healthy Blood is allowed to be impossible) Blood new let out of the
Vessel, without any sort of Digestion; and if this be but true, your reason
will not debar us from drinking of Wine; but again, you say that Wine drank in
any great quantity makes them lose their Tensity; and if so, they are more
Relax, and when they are more Relax, they are in the circumstances you place
them, when they are to be the Instruments of our pleasure; but at this time
they are the Causes of the Gout, and before of pleasure, and therefore Wine
must not be drank, because it makes the Gout a pleasure, or a pleasant,
delightful, desirable Gout: O brave Member, Is this the result of your
reasoning? Yet, it is not fair dealing to remember what was said a Page or two
before, and therefore, I Will leave this part, and see why we must drink it; a
small quantity of Wine, says the Member, drank at convenient seasons does
raise the Spirits, and invigorate the Nerves. Now supposing all this to be
true, how are the Vinous Spirits hindered, and kept from combining and taking
counsel with the Alkalious Particles, so as not to make that damnable,
immovable Offa Alba; they will not do it now, because you will not have it so;
but you are so fond of this Tensity and Relaxation, that nothing can be more;
must I tell you, that I Am told, (because I Am no Book Learned Gentleman) that
this was an oversight of Des Cartes's, and perhaps you have seen it in
Malbranch, they tell you indeed, that a Rope stretched and bent a hundred Yards
in length, cannot be struck at one end, but 'twill move at the other; yet can
any Man be so blind, but he must see that this is not the condition of the
Nerves, for they are seen no where to be so, but just where they come out of
the Brain; but if you will try an Experiment that will come nearer the
Condition of the Nerves, take a Rope of what length you please, nail it hard to
a Beam, then stretch it out in a Spiral or any other Figure, half a Foot more,
then nail it again at the end of that half Foot, and so all a long 'till you
have nail*d Forty Yards if you will; that this may be liker the Nerves
implanted so firmly in Muscles, that they make but one Substance; only I must
desire you to leave a Yard, or a Yard and a half after the last nailing, fitted
with a Nooze for your Neck, then go in and swing so long that one that you may
think a fair judge, may cut you down when he observes the end that was first
nailed begin to move, vibrillat, and shake, then indeed, when you give me an
account of this Experiment, you shall be allowed to talk of Tensity and
Relaxation as you think fit.

Fourthly, say you, the immoderate use of venereal exercises, for that it
spends the Spirits, and decays Natural heat, and so procures a weakness to
all the parts of the Body, etc. Good Member, if I had but time and patience
enough, I could show you that there is not one sentence in this whole Paragraph
that is either consistent and agreeable not only with common Sense, but even
your self too; yet not to pass it over without some remarks, I must ask you why
the matter may not be so contrived, that the useless Alkalin parts may be
thrown off in this evacuation, as well as by perspiration before, and
afterward by the Counses in Women? again, Pray are venereal exercises, Acid or
Alkalin? Moreover, a little diversion with a Girl must needs be a very good
Cure for the Gout, according to you; because the Fever you told us before,
which is made by that devilish fermenting Alkali, intimates to us the necessity
of something that may hinder this fermentation, and allay this Heat; and now
you tell us, upon this occasion, that it decays Natural heat, and a little of
it we want to have decayed, that we may cure the Gout and Fever; ergo a touch
or two must be very useful for Gouty People, which is contra hypothesin and
experientiam, though no unnatural consequence of your reasoning. I promised
indeed not to say one word more to this Paragraph, but you think when a Man has
read the institutions, that he is straight fitted not only to be a Physician,
but a great Author; and therefore whether it be to the purpose or no purpose,
or rather playing at cross purposes, you will show your talent there, in a long
story of voluntary and involuntary motion; where you are pleased to be the
first that ever reckoned Respiration among the involuntary motions; it is a
discovery of your own I confess, and no body that I know will dispute it with
you, though I must tell you that I can keep my breath a minute or two,
notwithstanding my performing that action three or four times in that space of
time, when I do not contrive and order it so. Your way of describing
Involuntary motions is peculiar to your self too, for I have walked in my
sleep, I have talked and yet walking and talking were never called involuntary
motions by any one but you self; ergo, I think that you your self ought to read
the principles of Medicin before you begin not only to teach, but even to run
down others. As to the fifth concurring Cause, I Will only desire you to tell me
whether Sleep or overmuch sleep in the Afternoon is Acid or Alkali; Alkali it
must be, but how do you prove it? for further upon this Paragraph I will not
attempt, because I really tell you That in that whole letter of Dr. Cole's,
about an apoplexy, where you read this, I believe it is the most unlucky, ill
spoke thing in the whole Book, and so the Dr. your good Friend, is not only
very much obliged to you for bringing him upon the stage, but for joining him
too with your Novum Lumen Chyrurgicum; which I must tell you is greater
nonsense even than your Treatise of the Gout, if that is possible. But to pass
over at this time, your 6thly, 7thly, 8htly, 9thly and 10thly; both because I
want time, and these are the most inconsiderable, and lastly, That you cannot
write another Book without them, and so we'll leave them yours untoucht, only I
must desire you will please to inform me how overmuch Watching and Fasting, and
Study, and Sorrow, and Care, and much Labor, overmuch Rest, sudden Rest,
exposing the Body to the Air in cold or moist Seasons, after any violent
Exercise, the total leaving off of any accustomed Exercise, the keeping the
Feet either too Hot or too Cold, are Alkalies; For these they are; but how, is
my desire to know. And now to your Eleventhly, because though I am old, yet I
like a little baudy as well as you, and this we cannot pass over with the rest,
without an unpardonable neglect, because of your exact observations on this
point. Eleventhly, say you, from the stopping of any usual evacuation, as the
Monthly Courses in Women, and a Flux of the Hemorrhoids in Men, which I have
frequently known to keep their certain periods to a Day, by means of which
observation the Excrementitious Matter wanting its usual vent is transmitted to
some other part of the Body. And according to the nature of the Part upon which
it is thrown, it exercises its Tyranny accordingly. This is a trick indeed,
good Member, you tell the Women that you know that they have Monthly Courses,
and that you have kept a correspondence with so many of them, that after all
your long conversation, you have met with some of them that have gone to Day;
now more than this, I cannot learn from this branch; you that are a reformer,
are you not yet free of the vulgar Error of the Blood of the Monthly Courses
being rank Poison, do you think still that one drop of this Blood can destroy
whole Cornfieldsd, the periodication or the necessity of having such Courses
has been a very hard task to Physicians to account for, but I remember that one
of my Masters in my Dedication proves very evidently, that the menstruous Blood
must be the same, in every respect, with the rest of the Blood running in the
Arteries; excepting any impurity it may contract, by the way, in the Vagina
Vteri, or further in its way of coming out; so however certain it may be that
Women are not so apt to have the Gout, and even other Diseases, so long as they
keep time in that Monthly Evacuation, yet this is not because there is an
Evacuation of Morbifick Matter, or of Matter that may occasion Diseases, and
really no more than the Key that sticks in your Laboratorydoor, when you make
an Experiment, can be said to be the contriver and manager of it. But pray,
supposing all this were true, what is the necessity of this matter's affecting
the Joints more than any other place? you say nothing of this all along.

Having thus distinctly shown that you have not at all distinctly given an
account of all those things which either cause the Gout at the beginning, or
accelerate a fit on those People who have already received the Morbifick
impression, and also of the general disorders that precede a Fit; I will now
proceed with you to your second and beloved Head; which is, That the Blood and
Juices during the time of the Fit abound not with Acid Particles, but on the
(...) with Alkalious ones. And because I hate Totologies as well as you do, I
wish you would make us happy with this History of Human Blood of yours, that we
are thus plagued with; but let me advise you, for a better guide, to lay before
you an apparatus to such a History, I am told that Mr. Boil has left you; but
it is very probable that a Book-learn'd Gentleman of his small Capacity is
unworthy of your notice. Yet to say no more of this, you delay your giving us
an account of the state and condition of Human Blood in the time of a Fit, till
you bless the World with this your Experimental History, for which your other
Books are but so many obstreporous Trumpets for a Poppit-show; so we must wait
with patience, and, in the mean time, hear what else you are pleased to dictate
upon this occasion, which is, that besides the necessary Conclusions to be made
from reiterated Experiments of Distilling, or Analizing by Fire the Blood of
those People who labor under the Fit of the Gout, the generating of the Chalky
Substance contained in the Node during that time, and those Nodes nor that
chalky Substance are at any other time produced, but during the very time of
the Fit; from this very production alone, it plainly appears that the Blood,
and other Juices, etc. Here I set your Achillean Argument in its best and most
favorable Light, and after I tell you that, I pass your rediculous stuff about
this matter, being bred all in one Fit, etc. I must enquire of you, what this
proves in the general about the Alkality of the Blood in the time of any
Sickness; and then I Will tell you that it is not against the Doctrine established
before, upon supposing the Truth of Acid and Alkali, being the real Principles
of Bodies; though at the same time, Dr. Blankard tells you, that you Chemists,
(as you please to title your self) say that all Fermentation arises from the
Combination of Acid and Alkali, though you say most astonishingly from the Alkali
only; but you are both agreed that Acids are more the causes of Quiet or Rest;
now Quiet is a necessary requisite for Petrification, and consequently that the
Acids is more fit to make the parts of this Stony and Chalky Substance unite;
but a great deal more than that bustling Alkali that causes Fermentation and
Disunion of parts: but again, I must tell you, that you will not have it an
Alkali neither, for you lay this as a general Truth, that whatever changes a
Solution of Syrup of Violets with water, or an Aqueous Body into Green, is an
Alkali; and now you tell us, that when this Chalky Substance is Calcined, it
will turn Syrup of Violets Green, and sometimes (though not always) will do the
same without Calcination. Here is indeed Chemical Sense, every thing that
changes Syrup of Violets dissolved in Water, into a Green Color, is an
Alkaline Substance, the Chalky Stuff taken out of Gouty Nodes seldom do it,
ergo it is an Alkali, positively Alkali; Is not this a hopeful Conclusion? But,
Sir, I know you despise the Maxims of my poor old Masters, that have always
told us that the cause and effect are the same, or the cause and effect are
always together, and never separated; here by a piece of sublimated Knowledge,
you tell us, that it is the Essence of an Alkali, which makes us call a Body so,
because it works these changes upon your Syrup of Violets, yet here is no such
change; but yet it must be an Alkali: How are you to be understood? It Is an
Alkali, and it is not an Alkali; well, but say you, Calcine, it then it will do;
but pray, why must I Calcine it? that it might be more Homogeneous as you call
it, and liker what it is in the Body; but how am I sure that there is such a
Fire in our Bodies, and a Chemist that makes these Alkalines, or that the Fire
has made this Substance more natural; some change it has undergone, it did not
change your Syrup, now it does, but is it become more natural? But these are
things of common Sense, and you Chemists despise all that; and therefore. I
tell you, that I Will leave all the rest of this damned Jargon, and your whole II
Chapter too, about the Regulation of the non Naturales, as you call them,
because I would only vindicate my old Masters, and have a touch at your beloved
Medicine before I Have done; yet I must tell you that Dr. Garth in his Lecture
proved it evidently, that no Air was mixed with the Blood in the Lungs, and
another said, that it would make it less Fluxil if it was so; and because
People live most upon Air by your Experiment which you bring us; I would advise
you to get into a Glass Vessel with a cover that is peirced, to let in the Air,
then Substracting two thirds of your ordinary allowance because of the
Experiment, and a half of the other third, because you now are quiet, and do
not perspire so much as when you go about in your Coach and smoke Tobacco in
the Coffee-Houses, and then we'll know more of the matter. But let us leave
this, and look into your III. Chapter, and there you tell us that, To
Demonstrate the Insufficiency of the Method of Cure, both heretofore, and at
this time in common practice by the generality of Physicians; for the well
performance of which, I shall give you the whole Method taken by a great
Physician, Sir John Gordon since dead, with a Noble Lord, the Lord Carlisle, he
used all the Alkalious Medicines, etc. He was a Man very fit to teach you Mr.
Member, both by Instructing you in any part of Physic, and curbing that
insolent, impudent forwardness of yours, and it is well you have nicked the time
so well, as to accuse him after he is Dead, and when he may have no Friend out
of his own Country; but I can assure you for once, that his Death was very much
regretted by worthy and learned People, that had known his dextrerous Hand in
ordering, and adjusting a Medicine; his Merits I acknowledge are as far above
my praise, as they are above your snarling; and therefore I will only ask, why
this great Man was to expiate for former, and present Physicians? he never told
you that 'twas the Gout he was to cure my Lord Carlisle of, and how come you to
know it? were not there Books of former Physicians that told you, I give
Alkalies for the Gout, and Physicians alive that justify this practice; why was
not their Blood to be sprinkled before your Threshold? dead Authors may have
defenders, and live ones will; but here is a Man for the purpose, he has few
Friends here, and my Books being only designed for the Mob, they are not only
not read here, but they are sure never to go into Scotland. Yet, may I presume
to tell you, that the usage of the French in disturbing the Ashes of the Dead
at Hailbron Two Years ago, after they had taken it, was reckoned a piece of the
most inhuman and barbarous Cruelty that ever was heard of. They were incensed
Enemies, and might have done it in fury and in a mad fit; but for you to do
almost the same thing, and more, considering the circumstances, is
unpardonable: It not only shows the meanness of your Soul, but the
apprehensions you lie under as to other Physicians of your own time. But when
did you learn this Story? was it about the time, that you had the impudence to
come in upon the practice of one of the greatest, and justly eminent
Chyrurgeons of this Town, for my Lady Carlisle, and was in a very short time
after sent a packing for your success? truly this is a very remarkable
occasion! and as I was saying to you but now, How did Mr. Nicholson or you
either know, so certainly as to venture to defame a Man, that Sir J. G. was to
cure that Noble Lord of the Gout? Again, supposing it was so, you cannot prove
by all that is said that this was not a good practice, but even that it was not
the best: then, say you, Why was not he curd? Because he was incurable, and I
suppose Sir J. G. told him so: and when all this is done, is Sir John or the
whole Art of Physic to be ridiculed, because it cannot immortalize Men? or
have you attained to that certainty that you can keep a Man from dying of any
one Disease? truly, I have heard one of my great Masters say, that he would
value himself mightily, if he could but certainly cure Corns: but more than
this you can do; though if I had time, I could very easily demonstrate (since
that is the word) that your own practice, for which you have shed so much
Blood, attacked so many reputations, or made so many hecatombs, is the most
ridiculous stuff in nature: but I Am sure those that are as mad as your self to
try it, will find the event by a great and running name.

And now since I am brought so near an end, and am forced to skip a great many
nonsensical Things hat fall a course, considering the former ruins; I Will
content my self with looking into your observations about Fevers, that I may
see how discreet you are to some living Physicians, and how well you show your
own understanding, in defaming them.

In the first observation, you are a great deal kinder than you have hitherto
showed your self; you tell us here of a Lady of great worth (as all your
Patients are) that was ill treated, by some friend or disciple of yours,
'twou'd seem, because you you have not given us his name; this Lady is just a
going down into the Chambers of Death, and her Friends expressing their loss by
their Tears, when in comes the Great Colbatch with a saving Acid, and gives
them better hopes of their departing Friend. Well done 'faith, Mr. Member; but
who the Devil, do you think, will believe that you cured a deplorable Patient
of a Hectic Fever, in 12 Days especially? I will not doubt of a Cure of
something performed in that time, but that you know what a Hectic Fever is, I
mightily doubt. And that these your Medicines may be of use to the World, as
you say you design them, you ought to have given us a true Observation, or an
exact History of the circumstances of the particular Patient, which you neither
do in all these Observations, nor do I believe you capable to do it. But
lastly, you give us a fine example of what you would do, for curing a Hectic
Fever; which is so fine, that I think the College ought to Fine you excre tuo
for a mala praxis: but if I were to observe all the mistakes you make in every
particular in this and the other Observations (as you please to call them) I
should put an endless task upon my self: You know that is not my main design,
but the Vindication of my Masters, and therefore to pass your second
Observation with one Question only, we shall be brought to the purpose: now the
Question is, Whether or no the giving a Vomit to such a Patient as you describe
here, before you let him Blood, is not the real cause of all the swellings of
his Face, that brought him into so great danger through the whole Cure? I am
apt to believe that if that were determined too, there would be another Twenty
pound. To the purpose again, as much as your cross-purpose will allow us; you
promised us an account of Fevers cured by Acids, but instead of that you will
bring in, over head and ears, a Story to abuse Dr. Richard Robinson; and that
is of an Apoplexy; the fact, I mightily doubt of, as of all yours, you make
them so monstrous to show your skill, that they are not to be believed; here is
now a living Physician, and therefore I will not presume to vindicate him,
because he is more able, in every respect, than I am; and will not observe your
ridiculous cure of a radicated Phtisis, as you call it, because the description
is like all those of your own co ntrivance, very Originals for Nonsense: who
ever described a Phtisis Pulmnum as you do, or cured so soon such an one as you
would describe. Now you come into Fevers again, and to make the story more
formidable, you tell us of a fearful Pestilential Fever, wonderfully described,
but managed by an Honest and Great Physician; very well Member, good words
indeed; But did you never tell over the Town who this Great Physician was? Yes,
you did, 'twas Dr. G -- s a very learned and great Physician, I do assure you,
and one of the fairest Practitioners about Town; but how the Patient was
managed, what his Constitution was, etc. you say nothing of: You tell us he had
a bleeding at the Nose for Thirty hours, and that 'twas stopped by your Vulnerary
Powder, and that he was cured by you afterward. Was not all this very great,
to come in upon an Honest Physician and to Cure his Patient? Your Vulnerary
Powder you are so fond of, will be considered anon; but it is always your good
luck to expose your self most, where you expect the greatest Applause, it is
hard to have to do with Great Physicians: they have designs you can dream
nothing of; you tell us, you stopped the Bleeding, yet the Fever continued; now
the same doubts remains with me, that it seems did with Dr. G. this
evacuationseem'd to be critical, and it is an old Maxim founded upon
Observation, that Nulla Crisis est Parca, and some of my Masters have told us
the reason of it; so that it is more than probable that the Fever would then
have been cured, if you had not stopped the Bleeding too soon, and was really
cured by the very same Evacuation, and perhaps was then cured for all your
saying so; I do not accuse your honesty in this point, but your knowledge; for
a Man that cannot tell me when any one has a Fever, at least the particular
Circumstances can never tell me when he Cures one, and this is much your Case:
For since you do all for the good of Mankind, and all the World knows we want
exact Histories, and Accounts of Fevers, more than Medicines; give us first a
good Indication, Instruments can never be wanting, Ammunition Bread, and a
Bottle of Water, will do very often with a great many: Let me add to all this,
that I think a Mala praxis is more justly your Reward than any thing else; you
need not be afraid of that Doctor, for you are too much below his wrath.

We have seen enough of your Talent of Writing, your excellent art in
describing Diseases, your singular, but unlucky way of Defaming Physicians, and
a great deal of a ridiculous Practice, supposing your descriptions were
natural, or in plain English, we see how honest, and how learned a Physician
you are, and that really you are too much honored, even with my notice of your
Book; and therefore since I have begun, I Will endeavor to do you Justice about
your Vulnerary Powder too, and that from a Letter to you, from your unknown,
yet faithful Servant, and Wellwisher, T. S.

I believe indeed, as you do, that he is a Gentleman of Candor and Ingenuity,
nay and a Prophet too, for he said, you would Write on till you exposed your
self, which is most true. But the Devil's in your Impudence for comparing your
Discovery, as you call it, to Harveys Circulation; you accuse the Ancients of
more Ignorance than Harvey thought fit to do, and even his Discovery it self
must be lessened by you; if you had been before his time it would certainly have
been yours; but I Will swear, I doubt you understand it still, for as evident as
it seems to you, I admire, say you, how People could be so sottish, as to see
Blood run from a Vein below the Ligature, and not from thence infer a
Circulation. Is this all the Evidence you have to disparage Harvey's Discovery
by, and to entitle you to the liberty of making Dunces of former Physicians?
Mr. Member if I were to Examine you upon this Point, I Am afraid, you should be
Remitted to your Studies. Let us suppose then with the Ancients, that Blood
came from the Head, the Liver, etc. into the Arms and Legs, and that this Blood
was returned by these Veins, a Ligature in this case stopping the motion of the
Blood in its return, obliges the Blood to run out of a Wound that is made below
the Ligature, as much on this Supposition, as upon Harvey's Demonstration, and
therefore we hear them talk of Bleeding the Cephalic in the Arm for
Headaches, the Hepatick in Inflammations, and the Median in more Ambiguous
cases. You see now, how well you understand the Circulation; but you confound
every thing you meddle with, if it were even a T -- d. But after all your
boasting, we return to your Powder that cures Wounds of the Guts, and Lungs
certainly; here is Impudence indeed, but for evincing this as shortly as I can,
I Will hint at two or three things about curing of Wounds, and then Demonstrate
what a Medicine must be, that cures the Wounds in the Lungs in particular. It Is
agreeable with common Observation that Wounds on Muscles, or in the more
musculare parts are the easiest cured, supposing our power of coming at them,
(which is a Bull of a supposition were it not made to a Block-head) and
consequently the less Muscular any part is, the less capable it is to be cured:
Now the Lungs are a Congeries of Bladders and Blood Veslels, and consequently
very hard to grow together; but besides this, a Medicine that cures the Lungs
must not only make it grow together in Fifteen seconds, but even so, as to
contain air against its gravity and elastical power in that time, which is an
infinite force: Now, since this is so evidently necessary, let us see if this
Medicin can unite and cure a wound in the best Circumstances, in Fifteen
seconds; and if it cannot do that, or if it cannot cure a Cut-finger in that
time, far less will it ever cure a Wound in the Lungs; and that this must be
the time is evident from the business of Respiration.

Now, for its effects, I can give you a pretty good History of it from a Master
of mine, who talkd with my Lord Cuts about it, in Chaves's Chocolat-House in
the Pall Mall, when my Lord had a design to promote his singular discovery; and
a word out of Flanders about a Lieutenant Colonel, because he only talks of
Granadiers or a Sergeant, then I Have done.

This Nobleman, who I Am told is a very good Friend and promoter of any thing
that may be of public Service, was conducted by this Learned Member to see
some Experiments made upon Dogs; he had then the confidence to desire some of
the Gentlemen that attended my Lord thither, to run one of the Dogs through the
Guts, and the other through the Lungs as near as they could; which was done, and
he dressed up the Dogs, and promised to let his Lordship see them recovered in
Six or Eight Days: My Lord had not seen the Event when he talked with one of my
Masters about that Affair; but next Sunday my Master meeting his Lordship at
Whitehall, he asked him about his Dogs, who was answered that Colebatch had told
him that they had made their escape: This was such a piece 'of stuff that did
not take with his Lordship; but answering, there is a Granadier of mine run
through the Lungs and he has him now under his Cure; I am told that my Master
asked my Lord, if he was sure that he was run through the Lungs, for Chyrurgeons
have not given us any distinguishing Symptoms in this case; but the Lord Cuts
said of that he could say nothing, but that he said he was run through the
Lungs: However, my Master meeting his Lordship again, asked him about the
Granadier, who told him that he was Dead. This I may believe was the true
reason that he never made any further addresses to his Lordship, he not being
very easy to be put upon. Then as to Flanders it is very well known that
Lieutenant Col. Hume, of my Lord Lorne's Regiment, got a wound on the Thigh,
with a Musket Bullet at Namur, and sending for the Member for his Cure, was
dispatched, before his Friends heard that he was wounded, his Thigh swelling
prodigiously, which next day gangreen'd, of which he died.

Here, good Mr. Member, you have both Reason and Experience about your Powder,
and they are both in their own Nature so convincing, that I doubt you cannot
bring your self off; a little impudence does very well with a Quack, and if you
had staid there, you might have been safe for me; but Ignorance being once
joined with it, no body can be safe; You attack my Dead Master with a Name, a
Living one without a Name, and the whole College in a very plain way: I have
told you this once, Verbum sapienti sat est, but a Fool's never to be mended.

FINIS.

