SOME OBSERVATIONS UPON THE Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction OF THE KINGS of
ENGLAND. WITH AN APPENDIX In Answer to part of a Late Book Entitled, The KING'S
Visitatorial Power Asserted.

LONDON, Printed for William Battersby, at Thavies-Inn Gate in Holborn, and
Thomas Basset, at the George in Fleet Street. 1689.

To the Reader.
A Late Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, whereby the King Assumed a Power
of Suspending All Penal Laws in matters of Religion, The Ecclesiastical
Commission, and suspending by virtue of it the Bishop of London, and depriving
the Fellows of Magdalen-Colledge, occasioned a general dissatisfaction in the
Nation, and produced some Pamphlets to justify all those Proceedings, viz. One
Entitled The King's Right of Indulgence in Spiritual Matters, with the Equity
thereof Asserted; Another, A Vindication of the Proceedings of his Majesty's
Ecclesiastical Commissioners against the Bishop of London and the Fellows of
Magdalen-Colledge; A Third, The Legality of the Court held by his Majesty's
Ecclesiastical Commissioners Defended; And last of all, The King's Visitatorial
power asserted. Perusing these Pamphlets, I could not but observe that one and
the same inveterate error ran through them All, viz. Their ascribing to the
King all such power, Jurisdiction and Authority, as by the Law of England and
the very Original Constitution of our Government, is lodged in the Legislative
body of the Kingdom; and which the King is entrusted only with the
Administration of, and that in his Courts of Justice. I had attempted the
answering more than one of those Pamphlets, but I found that at every turn I
met with that mistake in the Authors: who either through Ignorance or Design or
both, argue for the King's Prerogative from whatever they find to have been
done in Great Councils of the Realm, or in Ordinary Courts of Justice: this one
mistake, together with some rash and unwarranted expressions gleaned out of a
few, late Writers, will be found to be the main strength of their Cause. I
thought therefore that it might be a work of some use, especially at this time,
to endeavor the removal of this rubbish, and the laying open in some measure
the nature of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the Crown of England: both
because we have lately seen how dangerous and fatal these mistakes are, and
because although much has been written since the Reformation by Mr. Prynn, Sir
Roger Twisden and others, to vindicate the Ecclesiastical Supremacy from Foreign
Pretensions and Usurpations, yet I know not whether any has yet taken in hand
to give an Account of it, as stands by Law here at home. I do therefore offer
these few Observations upon it to the public, desiring the Judicious Reader's
pardon for what slips and imperfections he may find herein; and have added in
an Appendix an Answer to a Section in the Book concerning Visitatorial Power;
wherein I hope the Reader will be satisfied how groundless and weak most of the
arguments are, which our Prerogative-mongers pretend to draw from Antiquity.
These following Observations are brought down no lower then to the latter end
of King Henry the eighth's Reign. I design a Continuation, with Remarks upon
some Judicial Presidents, that have passed since the Reformation, if these
Papers are well received; if not, I shall save time and be eased of trouble.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Upon the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Of the King's of
ENGLAND.
IT is obvious enough to judicious and intelligent Persons, by what unhappy
Circumstances it comes to pass, that one great Mean of our Preservation seems
at present in a manner hid from our Eyes. But since Experience is said to be
the Mistress of Fools, it is hoped that at least in this our Day we may see the
things that belong to our Peace; Luke 19.42.
and remember that the reason why the Ostrich leaves her Eggs in the Dust, Job
39.13, 14, 15, 17.
forgetting that the Foot may crush them, is, because God has deprived her of
Wisdom, neither has he imparted to her Understanding.

If Interest or Ambition have swayed with some of us, Prove. 22.28.
as far as in them lay, to remove the ancient Landmarks which our Forefathers
have set; Josh. 7.19.
let such give Glory to God, and take Shame to themselves. In the mean time,
what effect soever these ensuing Papers may have upon our Friends, at least let
our Adversaries see that there is a Remnant left in Israel, 1 Kings 19.18.
that have not bowed their Knees to Baal.

An Archbishop may tell us, The Legality of the Ecclesiastical Commission
defended. page 6, 7.
that the King may take what Causes he pleases to determine, from the
Determination of the Judges, and determine them himself; and that it is clear in
Divinity, that such Authority belongs to the King by the Word of God. But as we
are not to receive even the Word of God it self, under the Sanction of a Human
Law, from the Mouth of an Archbishop, or from the whole Body of the Clergy;
much less are we bound to submit to any Courtly Glosses upon that Sacred Text,
concerning the Power of Kings; whose Authority, as we suppose it to be grounded
wholly upon Municipal Laws, so we know the Law to be a better Foundation, and a
better Security, than any imaginary Authority pretended from Scripture. And if
the Defender would have observed what the Lord Coke in the Presence, and with
the clear consent of all the Judges and Barons of the Exchequer, Coke 12. Rep.
page 63, 64, 65.
answered upon that occasion before the King himself, both from Reason and
Authority, he would have silenced the Archbishops Divinity, and saved me the
trouble of taking notice of that part of his Discourse. It was their Opinion,
that the King could not in Person adjudge any Case: Which they confirm with
such Reasons and Authorities from judicial Records and Acts of Parliament, that
it seems very imprudent in the Defender, to urge that as an Authority, which
received so solid, so learned, and so honest an Answer.

Judges and Sergeants may entertain themselves with what Discourse they please
post prandium, Legality of, etc. defended. page 10, 11. Coke 12. Rep. page 19,
etc.
and in their mooting upon one extrajudicial Point may talk of another by the
by; and if one of the Company put this transient Discourse into Paper, so that
afterward it gets into the Press, Good God! what condition are we come into,
when Tablechat must be obtruded upon us for Law!

To go a little further; Judges in Courts of Justice may pretend to resolve
what Points of Law they please; but if their Resolutions are not pertinent to
the Matter depending before them in Judgment, and necessary for the deciding
it, such Resolutions go for nothing, because the Judges had no Authority so to
resolve: And I am fully assured, that this Point, Legality of, etc. defended.
Page 8.9. Coke 5. Rep. Cawdry's Case.
viz. Whether any King or Queen of England for the time being might issue an
Ecclesiastical Commission, such as, etc. by the Ancient Perogative and Law of
England, never yet came in question judicially before any Court whatsoever.

The Case betwixt Cawdry and Atton turned upon this Point, viz. Whether the
High Commissioners might deprive for the first Offense, whereas the Act of 1mo.
Eliz. cap. 2. inflicts it only for the second? Pop. Rep. page 59, 60.
And resolved that the Statute is to be understood, when they prosecute upon
the Statute by way of Indictment, and not to restrain the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction. What Is this to the Question, Whether such a Commission might have
been issued without an Act of Parliament impowering the Queen to issue it?

Nor do the Judges in that Case, nor the Lord Coke in his double-tongued Report
of it, nor the post prandium Judges and Sergeants so much as pretend to any
manner of Authority for their Opinion there delivered, that the King might
grant such a Commission by his Perogative at Common Law: Nor does the late
Defender quote any ancient Record, History, Maxim of Law, or any other Legal
Authority, or Historical Proof whatsoever, to clear the Point: Nor will I
reflect upon some Resolutions of Judges that have been in former times, or in
this Age of ours; Ship Money.
which gained so little Credit upon their Authorities, that exemplary
Punishments have and may be inflicted upon some of the Resolvers.

But tho this Point be left so forlorn by the Defender, as having nothing to
support it on his side, but an ipse dixit; and tho we live in an Age, in which
(blessed be God) most Men have a better Opinion of their own Understandings,
than to take things upon trust; yet, because this Question concerning the
Legality of an Ecclesiastical Commission resolves it self into the mistaken
notion of a Personal unbounded Supremacy; and because some of our Clergy give
us Schemes of Government, according to which this Commission is the most
justifiable thing in the World; I am desirous to offer a few Observations
concerning the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the Kings of England; in doing of
which, the only thing I aim at, is the putting others who are better qualified,
and perhaps misinformed upon farther Inquiries, if happily I may compass that.

We are told that our Common Lawyers have often affirmed, Legality of, etc.
defended. page 38.39.
That whatever the Pope de facto formerly did within this Realm by the Canon
Law, that of right belongs to our Kings: That on this ground it has been
adjudged, That the Legislative Power in Matters Ecclesiastical is lodged in the
King. The Pope made Laws for the Government of the Clergy, and so may the King;
and so much Queen Elizabeth, as supreme Head of the Church of England,
exercised, etc. And that the Power in the King in Matters Ecclesiastical, is
too ample to be bounded by an Act of Parliament.

But notwithstanding these and other Bravado's, we are told also, that the Acts
of Parliament which restore the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to the Crown, are
but Declarative, Vindication. page 6. Legality of, etc. defended. page 8.
that they give no new Power, but recognize what always was de Jure the King's
Right: Which naturally sends us back to Antiquity, to enquire how the Supremacy
was then managed and exerted, before a Foreign Power had made inroads upon it.
They that affirm this or the other Act to be but Declarative, and that this or
that may be done by the Common Law, always allege (if they intend to persuade)
some Judicial or other President, some Record or other, some anciently received
Maxim or Rule of Law: They that resolve without such grounds for their
Resolution, set up for Lawmakers and not Interpreters.

Now it was to difficult matter to resolve that the Supreme Jurisdiction,
Ecclesiastical as well as Temporal, did originally belong to the Crown of
England. Every Chronicle Writer can tell us when the power of the Court of Rome
prevailed, to lop off some of its Branches: And the Crown must needs have it
before it could lose it. But whether our modern conceptions of the Supremacy
are adequate to that Ancient Legal Supremacy at the Common Law, of which we
agree the restoring of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by Act of Parliament to be
but Declarative, is certainly worth their Enquiry, who pretending that All Laws
concerning it are but declarative, must either justify that Position and other
modern Ascriptions from Antiquity, or confess the vanity of them.

The Ancient Ecclesiastical Supremacy of the Kings of this Realm, was no
personal Prerogative: But our Kings were Head of the Church as they were Head
of the State, governing both by Laws made by the same Authority (if designed to
be binding to all) and administered in the same Courts, till King William the
Conqueror's Reign, and from that time downwards, in the Spiritual and Temporal
Courts apart.

All Matters whatsoever concerning Religion, Discipline, Ceremonies, with all
Laws, Canons, and Articles whatsoever relating thereunto, by which the Laity
were to be bound, were anciently Enacted by the same Authority that made our
Temporal Laws: and without such Authority are not binding to the Laity to this
day, nor ever were.

Nor has the King any power by the Law to impose any New Article, Ceremony,
Practice, Rule, or Order whatsoever, upon the Clergy or any of them under any
sort of Penalty, without an Act of Convocation at least.

In the first place I will give a few Instances before the entry of the Saxons,
by which it will appear in some measure how the Law stood in those days with
respect to the Supremacy.

In the Year 448, Germanus and Lupus, two Learned Bishops, were sent hither out
of France to suppress the Pelagian Heresy: Upon which occasion a Synod was
assembled at Verolam. Aderat Populus, expectabatur futurus Judex. Adstabant
parts, etc. After a long debate Populus arbiter vix manus continet, Judicium
clamore contestando, etc. In this first Synod that we read of in England, the
People were present, and were Judges; and by their determination a great
Controversy of Religion was settled Vide Spelm. Council. Tom. 1. p. 47, 48. An
Account of this Council, and of the time when it was held.
Bed. Eccl. Histor. Gent. Anglor. Lib. 1. Cap. 17. Thus it was in the first
Christian Council that ever sat, viz. the 15th Chapter of the Acts of the
Apostles. After the matter had been debated, whether the believing Gentiles
ought to be Circumcised, and to keep Moses his Law? verse 22d. It pleased the
Apostles and Elders with the whole Church to send, etc. And they wrote Letters
after this manner, The Apostles, and Elders, and Brethren send Greeting unto,
etc. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, etc. So that the Laity as well
as the Clergy had in this Council decisive Votes. And if it shall appear by
what follows, that the People of this Nation never were, nor can to this day be
bound by the settling or determining any point of Religion any where else than
by themselves in Parliament; then at least the power of settling and
determining Points of Doctrine and Practice, either is no part of the King's
Ecclesiastical Supremacy, or is not personal; But must be exerted in Parliament.

In the British times Bishoprics were conferred in Parliament. Petivit Rex
[Arthurus] Eboracum, instantis Natalis Domini Festum celebraturus. Cumque urbem
intrasset, visa Sacrarum Ecclesiarum desolatione, condoluit. Expulso namque
beato Samsone Archiepiscopo, cunctisque sanctae Religionis viris, Templa
semi-usta ab officio Dei cessabant. Tanta etenim Paganorum insania
praevaluerat. Exin convocato Clero and Populo Capellanum suum Metropolitanae
sedi Destinat. Ecclesias usque ad solum dirutas renovat: Atque Religiosis
caetibus Virorum and Mulierum exornat. Galfrid Monumeth. lib. 9. cap. 8. Here
King Arthur in an Assembly of his Clergy and People makes an Archbishop,
restores ruinous Churches, and replenishes Monasteries with Monks and Nuns. If
a Judge or a Lawyer should say, though he took along with him the concurrence and
assistance of his Parliament, yet he might have done all this by his
Prerogative without them; I must insist upon proof of such Prerogative. If a
Divine tells me, that by the Law of God such Prerogatives belong to Princes,
for that the Power of the Prince is Superior to that of the Law, not given by
Law, but from God; then cannot I comprehend how our Churchmen can value
themselves upon their being Established by Law, if they acknowledge a Power
upon Earth above the Law.

But if it shall appear by what follows, that till the Reign of King John,
Arch-Bishopricks, Bishoprics, and other Ecclesiastical Dignities were
conferred in and by the Parliament; then will a common mistake appear to run
through many of the Books of Law; wherein we frequently read, Cr. Jac. 553,
554. To. rep 2d. part. 130. Sir John Dav. rep.
that before his time they were donative, and conferred by the King Per
Traditionem annuli baculi: Confounding the Election with the Investiture, and
ascribing that to the King solely, which was the Act of the King and Parliament.

Bishop Usher in his Antiqu. p. 63.
Britan. Eccles. Gives us other Instances of Bishops Elected in Parliaments or
Great Councils. Postquam praedicti senioris (Germanus and Lupus) Pelagianam
Haeresin extirpaverant, Episcopos pluribus in locis Britanniae consecraverunt.
Super omnes autem Britannos dextralis partis Britanni beatum Dubricium summum
Doctorem a Rege and ab omni Parochia Electum Archiepiscopum consecraverunt. Hac
dignitate ei a Germano and Lupo data, constituerunt ei Episcopalem sedem,
concessu Regis Maurici, Principum, Cleri and Populi apud Podium Lantavi. Addit
Galfridus ab eodem Dubricio Vrbis Legionum tunc Archiepiscopo Arthurum Regni
Britannici diademate insignitum; eundemque (Dubricium) in Curia illa magna,
quam apud urbem legionum Arthurus tenuisse dicitur, in eremiticam vitam
anhelantem, sese ab Archiepiscopali sede deposuisse.

Eodem tempore, Davide procurante, Meneviam Metropolitanae sedis factam esse
translationem, refert Giraldus Cambrensis: and postea in Breviensi Synodo
confirmatam. In illa scil. Synodo magna omnium Episcoporum and Abbatum totius
Cambriae, nec non and Cleri Universi, una cum Populo Collecta propter
Pelagianiam Haeresin, (that Doctrine it seems revived, tho it had been publicly
overruled,) ubi and unanimi totius Conventus tam Electione quam Acclamatione,
quanquam invitus and renitens David in Archiepiscopum est sublimatus. Usher
Britan. Antiqu. page 64.

Now if in the times of the Britains the People assembled in the Common
Councils of the Nation, had decisive Votes in Controversies of Religion, in the
Election of Archbishops and Bishops, if by their Authority ruinous Churches
and Houses of Religion were repaired and furnished with Monks and Nuns, Bishops
Sees founded and translated; if in those Assemblies Resignations of Bishoprics
were made, etc. Then we may reasonably conclude, that the Supremacy, commonly
so called, was lodged and vested just where the Legislative Power in Temporal
Matters resided; to wit, in the King's, together with their Commune concilium
Regni. But the first is true, as appears by the foregoing Authorities. Ergo,
etc.

Nor was it peculiar to this Nation, V. Dr. Burnet's History of the Rights of
Princes in the disposing of Ecclesiastical Benefices, etc.
to have the People choose Bishops. It was the Universal Practice of all
Christendom for many hundred years, as is notoriously known to all that read
any History.

In the second place I will exhibit a very few Instances of the Saxon Times,
during the Heptarchy. The Reader may consult many more at his leisure.

No marvel if we find this People submitting to nothing in Religion, but what
was ordained by themselves. Tacitus de moribus Germanorum. cap. 11.
De majoribus omnes was one of their Fundamental Constitutions before they came
hither; and it is continued here to this day. And Matters of Religion were
amongst their Majora, even before they received Christianity.

Accordingly Edwin King of Northumberland, Vid. Bed. Eccl. Hist. Lib. 2. Cap.
13. Huntington. Lib. 3. Page 188.
habito cum sapientibus concilio, renounced his Paganism, and he and they
embraced the Christian Faith. This is described in Bid and Huntington, to have
been done in such an Assembly of Men, as the Parliaments of those days are
generally mentioned to consist of.

After the Christian Religion had spread amongst the Saxons, the Bishops and
Clergy frequently held Synods without the Laity for Church-Visitation, Vid.
Spelm. Conc. ubique.
and made constitutions for the Regulation of the Clergy, which they obeyed and
submitted to by reason of their Oath of Canonical Obedience: But, as nothing
transacted in those Assemblies of the the Clergy bound the People, so can no
instance be produced of the Clergy's being bound by any Act of the King, not
assented to in the Provincial Synods of those Times. But the Clergy themselves,
both as to Doctrine, Discipline and Ceremonies, were bound by the public Laws
of the Kingdom, enacted in the Great Councils of the Nation.

In the year 673, Matt. West. page 122, 123.
Concilium Herudfordiae celebratum est sub initio primi anni Lotharii Regis
Cantiae, Praesidente Theodoro Cantuariae Archiepiscopo. At this Council says
Matthew of Westminster.) were present Episcopi Angliae, and Reges, and Magnates
Vniversi: Where Theodore proposed december capitula out of a Book of Canons before
them All; which were there Assented to, and Subscribed. The first was
concerning the observation of Easter; the ninth, that the number of Bishops
should be increased crescente fidelium numero. The rest were concerning Bishops
Bishoprics, Monks, Marriage, Fornication, etc. Spelm. Council. Vol. 1. page
152, 153.

The Presence of the Bishops and all the Magnates, makes this Assembly appear
to have been a Parliament of those Times. What Orders of Men were comprehended
under the word Magnates, is not material to our present purpose. The Great
Councils that made the Laws, and without whom no Laws were made, are frequently
so described by our ancient Historians.

In the year 692, Ina King of the West Saxons, enacted many Constitutions for
the Government of the Church, as, De formula vivendi Ministrorum Dei. De
baptizandis Infantibus. De opere in die Dominico. De immunitate fani, etc. The
Preface to which Laws runs thus; Ego Inas Dei beneficio Occiduorum Saxonum Rex,
suasu and instituto Cenredi Patris mei and Heddae and Erkenwaldi Episcoporum
meorum, Omnium Senatorum meorum, and natu Majorum sapientum Populi mei, in
magna servorum Dei frequentia, religiose studebam tum animorum nostrorum
saluti, tum communi Regni Nostri conservationi, ut legitima nuptiarum faedera,
etc. Here the King, his Bishops, all his Senators, the Natu Majores and
Sapientes of his People (which are Descriptions of the Laity in Parliaments of
those Times,) and a great number of Gods Servants (by which the Clergy are
meant) make Ecclesiastical Laws. This was a Parliament, as appears, not only by
the presence of the Laity, but by many Temporal Laws enacted at the same time.
Spelm. Conc. Tom. 1. Fol. 182, 183, etc.

In the year 694. Concilium Magnum Becanceldae celebratum est, Presidente
Withredo Rege Cantiae, necnon Bertualdo Archiepiscopo Britanniae, cum Tobia
Episcopo Roffensi, Abbatibus, Abbatissis, Praesbyteris, Diaconibus, Ducibus,
Satrapis, etc. All these pariter tractabant, anxie examinabant de Statu
Ecclesiarum Dei, etc. Here the King's Legislative Power in Ecclesiastical
Matters exerted it self, not Personally, but in this Great Council. They do all
enact, Statuimus, decernimus, praecipimus. For when the King himself is spoken
of, the Singular Number is used, Nullus unquam habeat licentiam accipere
alicujus Ecclesiae vel Familiae Monasterii Dominium, quae a meipso vel
antecessoribus meis, etc. Spelm. Conc. Page 189, 190.

A Council was held at Berghamjtede, Anno 5to. Withredi Regis Cantiae, i. e.
Anno Christi 697. Sub Bertualdo Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, praesentibus
Gybmundo Episcopo Roffensi and omnibus Ordinibus Gentis illius, cum Viris
quibusdam militaribus. In quo de moribus cavetur ad Ecclesiae cognitionem
plerumque pertinentibus. These Ordines Gentis illius seem by the Preface to
these Laws, to be meant of the Ordines Ecclesiastici Gentis illius; but withal,
that they cum viris utique militaribus humanissime and communi Omnium Assensu
has Leges decrevere. Spelm. Conc. 194. So that these Ecclesiastical Laws were
enacted by the assent of the viri Militares, as well as of the King and the
Clergy.

A Council was held at Cloveshoe sub Cuthberto Doroberniae Archiepiscope,
praesentibus (praeter Episcopes, Sacerdotes and Ecclesiasticos quamplurimos)
Aedilbaldo Merciorum Rege cum suis Principibus and Ducibus, Anno Dom. 747. In
quo decernebatur de unitate Ecclesiae, de Statu Christianae Religionis, and de
Concordia and pace, etc. Spelm. Conc. 242, etc.

In the Year 787, Concilium Legatinum and Pananglicum was held at Calchyth, in
which many Canons were made de fide primitus suscepta retinenda, aliisque ad
Ecclesiae regimen pertinentibus. This Council was held Coram Rege Aelfwaldo and
Archiepiscopo Eanbaldo and omnibus Episcopis and Abbatibus Regionis, seu
Senatoribus and Ducibus and Populo terrae; who All confirmed them. After these
Ecclesiastical Laws had been thus enacted by Aelfwald King of Northumberland,
the Legates carried them into the Council or Parliament of the Mercians, where
the glorious King Offa, cum Senatoribus Terrae, una cum, etc. convenerat. There
they were read in Latin and Teutonick, that All might understand, and All
promised to observe them; and the King and his Princes, the Archbishop and his
Companions, signed them with the Sign of the Cross, Spelm. Conc. Vol. 1. Fol.
291, 292, etc.

Many Instances of this kind might have been added, as particularly that of the
Council at Hatfield, An. 680. wherein the Canons of five General Councils were
received; which was a Witena Gemote, a Conventus Sapientum: But I spare time,
and am endeavoring only to open a Door.

By these Instances it is apparent, that the same Body of Men that enacted the
Temporal Laws of the Kingdom, did in the very same Councils make Laws for the
Government of the Church. Indeed, the whole Fabric of the English Saxon Church
was built upon Acts of Parliament; nothing, in which the whole Community was
concerned, was enacted, decreed or established, but by that Authority. For
whose reads impartially the Histories of those times, and compares them with
one another, will find, that as most of those Ancient Councils, commonly so
called, were no other than (to speak in our Modern Language) Parliaments; so
not any thing whatsoever in Religion, obligatory to the People, whether in
matters of Faith, Discipline, Ceremonies, or any Religious Observances, was
imposed, but in such Assemblies as no Man can deny to have been Parliaments of
those Times, that has not a Forehead of Brass. For the Presence not of the
King's only, but of the Duces, Principes, Satrapae, Populus terrae, etc. shows
sufficiently, that neither the Kings, nor the Kings and the Clergy, without the
concurrent Authority of the same Persons, that enacted Temporal Laws, could
prescribe General Laws in matters of Religion. I do not dispute what Orders of
Men among the Saxons were described by Duces, Principes, etc. but sure I am,
that they were Laymen; and as sure, that they assented to and confirmed those
Laws, without whose assent they had been no Laws: So that the Kings of those
Times had no greater Legislative Power in Ecclesiastical Matters than in
Temporal.

The tearing the Ecclesiastical Power from the Temporal, was the cursed Root of
the Kingdom of Antichrist: It was that that mounted the Papacy. Those Powers
never were distinct in England, nor most other Nations, till that See got the
ascendant. And it is a strange inconsistency to argue one while, that whatever
the Pope de facto, formerly did by the Canon Law, that of right belongs to our
Kings; and another while, that the several Acts that restore the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction to the Crown, are but Declarative. It shows how little the
Supremacy is understood by Modern Asserters of it, and how little they are
acquainted with the ancient Government of England.

The Third Period of Time to be considered, shall be from the uniting of the
several Kingdoms of the Saxons under one Monarchy, to the Norman Conquest.

In this Division we find a Letter from Pope Formosus to King Edward the Elder,
wherein the Pope complains, that the Country of the West Saxons had wanted
Bishops for seven whole Years: Upon the receipt of this Letter, the King calls
Synodum Senatorum Gentis Anglorum, who being assembled, Singulis tribubus
Gervisiorum (West-Saxonum) Singulos constituerunt Episcopos, and quod olim duo
habuerunt in quinque diviserunt. Spelm. Conc. 387, 388.

The Ecclesiastical Laws of King Edward the Elder and Guthrune the Dane, begin
with this Proaemium: Haec sunt Senatus consulta ac instituta, quae primo
Aluredus and Guthrunus Reges, deinde Edwardus and Guthrunus Reges, illis ipsis
temporibus tulere, cum pacis faedus Daci and Angli ferierunt. Quaeque postea a
sapientibus (Tha Witan) saepius recitata atque ad Communem Regni utilitatem
aucta atque amplificata sunt. The Titles of some of these Laws are, De
Apostatis, De Correctione Ordinatorum, (i.e.) Sacris initiatorum, De incestu,
De jejuniis, etc. All of Ecclesiastical Cognizance, or at least of Aftertimes
so reputed. These are called Senatus Consulta, than which a more apposite Word
could scarce have been used for Acts of Parliament, and were assented to by the
Wyten; from which Word the Saxon term for Parliaments, Wytena Gemot, is
derived. Spelm. Conc. 390, etc.

A Concilium Celebre was held under King Athelstane, in quo Leges plurimae, tum
Civiles, tum Ecclesiasticae, statuebantur. It Is true, the Civil Laws are
omitted; and Sir Henry Spelman gives us an account only of the Ecclesiastical
Laws made at this Assembly, which conclude Decreta actaque haec sunt in celebri
Gratanleano Concilio, cui Wulfelmus interfuit Archiepiscopus, and cum eo
Optimates and Sapientes ab Athelstano evofrequentissimi. Spel. Conc. p. 396,
etc.

King Edmund held a Council Anno 944, where many Ecclesiastical as well as
Secular Laws were made, as, De vitae castitate eorum, qui Sacris initiantur, De
fani instauratione, De pejerantibus, De iis qui barbara factitarunt Sacrificia,
etc. And this Council is expressed to have been Conventus tam Ecclesiasticorum,
quam Laicorum; celebris tam Ecclesiasticorum quam Laicorum frequentia. Spelm.
Conc. p. 419, etc.

I will give no more instances before the Conquest, tho numbers are to be had
which lie scattered up and down in the Monkish Histories; and being compared
with one another, will sufficiently disclose what I assert. For sometimes Laws
that concern Temporal Affairs, as well as Ecclesiastical, are said to have been
made by such or such a King in one Author; which very Laws another Historian
tells us, were made in the Great Council; which yet they have no Uniform,
appropriated Expression, Term or Denomination for: Just as we in common
Parlance say, King Edward the Third, or King Henry the Seventh, made such or
such a Law; which yet every Man understands to have been made in Parliament,
because else it were not a Law.

That Bishoprics and other Ecclesiastical Dignities, For the Election of
Wulstan Bishop of Worc. Temp. Edw. Confess. v. Matt. Paris. p. 20. That in his
Election there concurred Plebis Petitio, Voluntas Episcoporum, Gratia Procerum,
Regis Authoritas.
were in the Saxon times conferred in Parliament; we have the further Testimony
of Ingulphus, who was Abbot of Crowland in King William the Conquerors Reign. A
multis annis retroactis nulla erat electio Praelatorum mere Libera and
Canonica: Sed omnes Dignitates tam Episcoporum quam Abbatum Regis Curia pro sua
complacentia conferebat. Ingulph. Hist. Fol. 509. b.

Concerning Appeals in Ecclesiastical Causes, I shall say more in the next
Division: Only here it will be proper to insert, that the Constitutions of
Clarendon, one of which is expressly concerning Appeals, are said to contain the
Avitae Consuetudines Regni. Malmesbur. de gestis Pontificum Anglor. Lib. 3.
And William of Malmesbury relates a remarkable Story of Wilfrid Archbishop of
York, whose Archbishopric being divided by the Common Council of the
Northumbrian Kingdom, into four Bishoprics; he appealed to the Pope, who wrote
Letters to the King in his behalf; upon the receipt of which, the King told the
Legates, Se quidem Legatorum Personis honorem ut parentibus defer; caeterum
assensum legationi omnino abnuere, quod esset contra rationem homini jam bis a
toto Anglorum Concilio damnato, propter quaelibet Apostolica Scripta,
communicare. This shows, that tho a Prelate thought the Pope's Authority might
stand him in stead, yet the Nation acknowledged no Foreign Jurisdiction, and
that the Supreme Judicature here from which the Archbishop appealed, was that
of the Parliament and not of the King.

The Power of dispensing with Laws concerning Church Matters, could not be a
Personal Perogative in the King in these days; for Dispensations were not born
till Two hundred years after the Conquest; as will appear hereafter.

The fourth Period of Time shall be from the Norman Entrance, down to the Reign
of King John: In this time it was, that the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the
Crown suffered a Rape, and that four very considerable Branches were cut off.
By this time the Pope had shaken off his Dependence upon the Emperor; the Laity
were excluded from voting in his Election: And the Game played at Rome, was, by
setting the Clergy in a state of Exemption from Temporal Laws, as to their
Persons and Possessions; and excluding the Laity, King's themselves as well as
Parliaments, from Ecclesiastical Power, to govern Men's Consciences first, and
then all they had, directly or indirectly. But this was a work of Time, and
could not be effected but by degrees.

King William the First, made one step this way, by dividing the Spiritual and
Temporal Courts; without which perhaps it had been impossible for the Canon Law
to have broken in upon us.

But yet in his time, tho he was certainly in the sense of his Great Council,
Lambard de priscis Anglorum Regibus. p. 138, 142. and Hoved. p. 345.
as much Head of the English Church as any of his Predecessors were, or his
Successors are by Law; for he was declared to be Vicarius summi Regis, ad hoc
constitutus ut Regnum terrenum and Populum, Domini and super omnia, Sanctam
veneretur Ecclesiam ejus, and regat, and ab injuriosis defendat, and maleficos
ab ea evellat, and destruat, and penitus disperdat: Quod nisi fecerit, nec
Regis nomen in eo constabit. Yet in his time (I say) a Personal Supremacy,
independent of the Great Council of the Nation, was never pretended to: For he
reformed the Ecclesiastical Laws and Canons of the Church, no otherwise than de
Communi Consilio Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Seld. Not. and Specileg. ad
Eadmer. p. 167 Lamb. de priscis Anglor. Legib. p. 158.
Abbatum and omnium Procerum Regni sui, etc.

Nor was this the Constitution of the English Church only: Ordericus Vitalis,
Folio 552. gives us a remarkable Instance out of Normandy of the same platform
there.

Rex Guillielmus in Festo Pentecostes Anno ab Incarnatione Domini 1080. apud
Illebonam resedit, ibique Gulielmum Archiepiscopum and omnes Episcopos and
Abbates Comitesque cum aliis Proceribus Normanniae simul adesse praecepit: ut
Rex jussit factum est. Igitur 8. Anno Papatus Domini Gregorii Papae 7. Celebre
Concilium apud Jullam bonam Celebratum est. Et de Statu Ecclesiae Dei totiusque
Regni Providente Rege cum Baronum suorum consilio utiliter tractatum est. Then
he inserts the Laws made there, all concerning Ecclesiastical Matters.

In the next Reign, that of King William Rufus, there was a Schism in the
Popedom between Clement and Urban: Anselme whilst he was Abbot of Bec in
Normandy, had Sworn Obedience to Urban: and being Elected Archbishop of
Canterbury, desired leave to go out of the Realm to fetch his Pall from him.
This the King opposed (for that Urban had not been received for Pope in
England) and told the Archbishop, he could not keep his Fealty to him (his
Prince) saving the Obedience, which he owed to Urban. Anselme upon this
referred himself to the Judgment of the Archbishops, Bishops, Proceres, etc. in
Parliament, who accordingly were Convened at Rochingham, Ex Regia Sanctione;
and the matter discussed before them. If the Archbishop had had any Notion of a
Personal Supremacy in the King, separate from, and independent of the Great
Council of the Realm, it had been absurd in him not to acquiesce in the King's
Judgment, but Appeal to a Parliament. If the King himself had been possessed
with an opinion of any Legislative or Supreme Judicial Power in Ecclesiastical
Matters, lodged in his Person, he would never have consented to call a
Parliament to determine a cause which himself, as far as in him lay, had
determined already. The History may be read at large in Eadmer. Hist. Nov. Lib.
2 page 24, 25, 26, etc.

In King Henry the First's time, Anno Dom. 1102. A Council was held at London,
in which at Anselm's request to the King, the Laity were present, Quatenus
quicquid ejusdem Concilii authoritate decerneretur utriusque Ordinis cura and
sollicitudine, ratum servaretur. Sic enim necesse erat. Quum multis retro annis
Synodali cultura cessante, vitiorum vepribus succrescentibus, Christianae
Religionis fervor in Anglia nimis tepuerat. This is a clear Testimony that the
Assent of the Laity was necessary to the Enacting such Ecclesiastical Laws, as
they were to be bound by: And that neither the King by his Prerogative, nor the
King and the Clergy could impose any Constitutions upon them without their
Assent, Eadmer. Histor. Nov. Lib. 3. Will. Malmesb. De Gest. Pontif. Anglor.
Lib. 1. p. 129.

But though the King could not make Laws Himself, could he not permit a Legate to
exercise his Legatine Power here? King Henry the Eight indeed permitted Wolsey
to exercise his Office here, and afterward brought the whole Clergy under a
Praemunire for submitting to him, and owning his Authority. But the Statutes of
Praemunire were then in being. Could not our ancient Kings, that Reigned before
any Act of Parliament now upon Record was extant, they that must needs have had
all the inherent Prerogatives that are involved in the Notion of Imperial
Sovereignty, Doctor Hicks.
they that understood their power somewhat better perhaps than it is now
understood, because they lived nearer to the creation of it, and exercised it
before it was sophisticated; could not they (I say) by virtue of their
Ecclesiastical Supremacy, permit the Popes Legate to domineer a while within
the Realm? Why, King Henry the First was very well satisfied that himself had
no such power: For when Petrus Monachus Cluniacensis was sent hither by
Calixtus the Pope, to exercise his Office of Legate within this Realm, the King
would not suffer him so much as to Lodge upon the Road in any Religious House:
And when he came into his presence, and had told him his Errand, Rex obtensa
expeditione, So Anno Dom. 1225. Magister Otto, Domini Papae nuncius, in Angliam
veniens, promagnis Ecclesiae Romans negotiis, Regi literas praesentavit, sed Rex
cognito literarum tenore, Respondit, quod solus non potuit definire, nec
debuit, negotium quod omnes Clericos and laicos totius Regni tangebat. Matthew.
Paris. p. 325.
in qua tunc erat (nam super Walenses ea tempestate exercitum duxerat) dixit se
tanto negotio operam tunc quidem dare non posse, cum Legationis illius stabilem
authoritatem non nisi per conniventiam Episcoporum, Abbatum and Procerum ac
totius Regni Conventum roborari posse constaret. Eadmer Hist. Nov. p. 138. And
so the Legate went back as he came. He tells it him as a known, truth
(Constaret) that the giving him leave to exercise his Office here, was too
great a work for him to go about (as his affairs then stood) for that it could
not be done, but in and by the Parliament. If the Parliament had not a share in
the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, how came their Assent to be necessary? If they
had, when did they lose it? If the King's Supremacy was personal, why might not
he (if he would) have licensed him himself? If it was not personal then, but is
so now; then do not assert over and over that the late Acts of Restitution are
all declarative, and give no new power. If the Pope's power de facto exercised,
be translated to the King, show the conveyance.

This same King in a Letter to Pope Paschall about Investitures, tells him that
if himself should be so mean (in tanta me dejectione ponerem) as to part with
them, yet Optimates mei, imo totius Angliae Populus id nullo modo pateretur.
December Scriptores 999. The Investitures were performed by the King in person,
but subsequent to an Election by the Parliament; and yet the Parliament were so
concerned in them, that they were not, nor could be parted with, but by an Act
of Parliament: Which accordingly ensued, notwithstanding the King's
resoluteness at first; for when Anselme came from Rome, the King was persuaded
to withdraw his claim, and it was granted in a Parliament held at London;
Astantibus Archiepiscopis, caeteraque multitudine maxima Procerum and Magnatum,
ut ab eo tempore in antea nullus electus per dationem Baculi pastoralis vel
Annuli de Episoopatu vel. Abbathia investiretur per Regem vel aliam quamcunque
personam secularem. Ibid. Et Sim. Mon. Dun. 228, 229, 230.

But though Investitures were lost, Elections remained as they were (at least of
right) till King John's time. Concessit Rex Johannes liberas in omnibus
Ecclesiae Anglicanae electiones, Matthew. Par. p. 262, 263. The Charter it self,
which was certainly an Act of Parliament.
See Presidents of many Bishops and Abbots Elected in Parliament in the Reigns
of King Stephen and King Henry the Second. In Spelm. Conc. Second. Part. p. 42
and 119.

Innumerable are the instances of Canons and Constitutions made in the Reigns
of the first Norman Kings in their Great and General Councils, concerning
Churchmen and Church Matters: Which any one may have recourse to in Spelm.
Council. Eadmer. Hist. Mat. Paris. and others.

In the beginning of King Henry the Second's Reign, there was another Schism in
the Popedom between Alexander and Victor, upon which a great Council of Clergy
and Laity out of the Kingdoms of England and France met to determine, whether
of the two should be acknowledged Pope within those Realms. The matter was
debated in Conspectu Regum and Praesulum, coram universa, quae convenerat,
multitudine Cleri and Populi. And Alexander was received for Pope, and the
Schismatics Excommunicated. The History is in Nubrig. Lib. 2. c. 9.

Pursuant to which President, when there happened in King Richard the Second's
time to be another Schism in the Papacy, and Act. of Parliament was made, to
declare who should be received Pope in England; and a Law made for punishing
any of the Clergy that should acknowledge the other Pope. Vide Catt. Records,
Ann. 2. Rich. 2. p. 180.

What thing can be more purely Ecclesiastical, than the determining who it
lawfully chosen to be the Universal Bishop? And yet neither the King, nor the
King and the Clergy would settle the point without the Laity.

By what has been said it appears, That the Ancient Supremacy, of the Kings of
England in Ecclesiastical Matters, was a very different thing, not so much from
what it is now by Law, as from what it is apprehended to be by many amongst us.
The Error is fundamental, and consists in ascribing Things, Acts, Powers, etc.
to the King in person, which belonged to, were done and exercised by him no
otherwise, than in his Courts. Appeals are said to have been to the King at
Common Law: And so an Abridgment of Law has it; so Fox, Rolls, cap. 8. vid.
Chron. Gerv. p. 1387.
Speed, and others. And the Authority quoted is the Assize of Clarendon, which
in one Chapter directs that Appeals shall be from the Bishop to the Archbishop;
from the Archbishop to the King.

But another Act of Parliament made about 12 years after clears the matter. Sir
Roger Twisden.
For in the mean time Becket was Murdered, and King Henry the Second being put
to hard Penance for it, part of his satisfaction was, that he should agree not
to hinder Appeals to Rome in Causes Ecclesiastical, Mat. Paris p. 126.
yet so as the party going was to give Security that he would not endeavor
Malum Regis nec. Regni. But within Four Years after, the Nation Assembled in
Parliament would not quit their interest: But the Assize of Clarendon was again
renewed, and a more close expression used concerning Appeals, and such persons
as had prosecuted any; Justitiae faciant quaerere per consuetudinem terrae,
illos qui a Regno recesserunt, and nisi redire voluerint infra terminum
nominatum, and stare Juri in Curia Domini Regis, utlagentur, etc. This Gervas.
Dorobern. (who well understood it) tells us, was but renewing the Assize of
Clarendon: Rex Angliae Henricus, convocatis Regni Primoribus apud
Northamptoniam, renovavit Assizam de Clarendon. Here we see, that such as were
aggrieved by a Sentence given by the Archbishop, were, pursuant to the Statutes
of Clarendon, not to appeal to Rome, but to the King: Which the Statute of
Northampton, made but twelve years after, explains to be to the Curia Regis.

By this, and by what has been said before upon this Subject, it appears, that
the ultimate Appeal in Causes Ecclesiastical as well as Temporal, was to the
Curia Regis or Parliament; and that, as the same Assemblies made Laws both for
the Government of Church and State, so the Supreme Judicature Ecclesiastical
and Temporal, was one and the same.

After that time Appeals were sometimes prosecuted in the Court of Rome, that
Statute and the Assize of Clarendon notwithstanding; but this was only by
connivance. At last, when the Pope got the better of King John, who lay under
great Disadvantages, as all our Historians tell us; and that in his Magna
Charta these words were inserted: V. Matthew. Paris. Page 258.
Liceat unicuique de caetero exire de Regno nostro, and redire salvo and secure
per terram and aquam, salva fide nostra, etc. Then Appeals to Rome multiplied
for every little Cause, and the Masterpiece of Papal Encroachments was wrought
effectually.

But it cannot be too often inculcated, that the Laws of Clarendon which gave
the ultimate Appeal to the Curia Regis, as aforesaid, are so often styled the
Avitae Consuetudines Regni: Which shows sufficiently where the Supreme
Judicature resided, according to our old Constitution.

It appears by what has been said, that King William the Conqueror was
acknowledged to be God's Vicar, appointed to govern his Church; and yet, that
neither He nor his Successors pretended to make any Ecclesiastical Laws to bind
the whole Kingdom, but in a General Council of the Kingdom: That the King's
Supremacy was so far from being Personal, that an Archbishop did as it were,
appeal from himself in Person to himself in Parliament, and that the King
submitted and owned the Jurisdiction: That the same Archbishop understood the
Law to be, that the Assent of the Laity was necessary to the making of
Ecclesiastical Laws, by which they were to be bound: That the King could not of
his own Authority, permit a Legate to exercise his Office within the Realm:
That leave to exercise his Office could not be given him but in Parliament:
That the King could not part with Investitures if he would, without the Assent
of the People: That Parliaments determined, who ought to be received as Pope
within the Realm: That Appeals were to the Curia Regis, by the Avitae
Consuetudines Regni: And that Bishops were elected in Parliament. Whence I
conclude, that a Personal Supremacy has no warrant from Antiquity.

The clearing the Ancient Supremacy and stating the Matter aright, is of great
use in this present Age; in which, as one sort of Men over-stock us with Jure
Divino's, so the Lawyers accost us often with the Common Law, and the King's
Perogative at Common Law; and that this and the other Act is but declarative of
the Common Law, and gives the King no new Power. And yet, as the Divines have
little or no ground for their Jure Divine's; no more have the Lawyers in these
Matters of the Supremacy, any thing to warrant their late Hyperbole's, but
Shadows and Imaginations: They found a Power exercised by the Pope, which they
had good reason to think injurious to the Crown; they had heard, that from the
beginning it was not so: And thus far they were right. But how it was exercised
before the Court of Rome and the Clergy invaded it, they had forgot; it having
been usurpt upon Four hundred years before they were born. For it is in vain to
look for a true Scheme of the Ancient Legal Supremacy at a nearer distance than
from the Reigns of King John, King Richard the First, King Henry the Second
King Stephen, and so backwards. And yet we find no Resolutions concerning what
the Supremacy at Common Law was, and wherein it consisted, grounded upon
Authorities of those Times, which only can afford a right Idea of it: Nor
indeed can any thing be found in our Old Books of Law, as Bracton, Glanvil,
Britton, Fleta, the Mirror, nor in the Ancient Histories of those Times, that
warrants such an Ecclesiastical Supremacy in the Crown as we now adays dream
of; no Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Matters, other than in Temporal (which in a
Nation of Saxon descent, could never exclude the Ordines Regni) having ever
entered into the thoughts of Man, as lodged in the King's Person, or any
Temporal Prince. The Pope pretended to it, (but our Kings never did:) Only
where the Constitutions of Clarendon mention Appeals from the Archbishop to the
King, they take up with the Letter, and examine no farther: As some
Philosophers have ascribed Phenomenon in Nature, which they could give no
rational Account of, to occult Qualities; so the Lawyers resolve puzling
Questions, by telling us Magisterially, that so and so it was at the Common
Law, as occult in these Matters to many of them, as any Secret of Nature to the
Philosophers.

That Branch of 1o. Eliz. which unites Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to the
Crown, appears by the Journal of the House of Lords to be in the sense of the
Parliament, V. Sir Simon Dewes.
that past it but Declarative: But that all other Acts and Clauses of Acts
which were passed at the time of the Reformation, with respect to the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction are so too, I cannot believe, till I see Authorities
of Antiquity proving it.

Those particular Branches of the Supremacy, concerning the making of Bishops,
Appeals, etc. with some Temporary Laws, now expired, as they were guided and
limited by positive Laws made in King Henry the Eighths time, and King
Edward's, and revived in Queen Elizabeth's; so they are grounded upon those
Laws only, and have no other Foundation, so far forth as they are Personal. For
the Ancient and Legal Supremacy having been so long overshadowed, as to be
almost forgot, they did not upon the Restitution of it, return all things to
their former estate. They prescribed another course for Appeals, than had ever
been known in our Law before: They did not resume the Elections of Bishops to
the Parliament, who had had them formerly, but leaving a show of an Election in
the Consistory, they authorize the King to name the Man. The power of making
Laws and Constitutions Ecclesiastical for the Government of the whole Kingdom,
we find no Resumption of, no declarative Act concerning it, other than in the
Recital of 25 Hen. 8. cap. 21. For that Point had never been gained from them.

From the Reign of King Henry the Second downward, to King Henry the Eighth, we
find little or nothing of any Canons and Constitutions for the Government of
the Church, made with assent of the Laity: For the Clergy had now established
their Exemption, and had set up Imperium in Imperio: But many Acts we meet
with, setting Bounds to their Encroachments, and limiting their Jurisdiction,
and all made by the same Authority that enacted the Temporal Laws of the
Kingdom: And therefore the Supremacy, so far forth as it remained in the Crown,
was not Personal, but exerted it self in the Legislative Body of the Kingdom.
For the Parliaments, tho in a great measure Anti-Christ-ridden, did not even in
these Times, so far forget the old Constitution, as to let the Church and
Religion run adrist for all them, and be wholly managed either by the King or
their Ghostly Fathers.

The Writs of Summons to Parliaments both ancient and modern, have this special
Clause in them: Pro quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis, nos, Statum and
defensionem Regni Angliae and Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus, quoddam
Parliamentum, etc. So that the State of the Church is as properly within the
care of a Parliament, as the State of the Realm. And in the Prologues to most
Acts of Parliaments, the Honor, the Profit, the Reverence, the Benefit, the
Advancement of Holy Church, is mentioned, as the End of their Meeting, no less
than the Safety and Defense of the Realm.

Accordingly innumerable Acts of Parliament were made, and are now in print,
concerning Churchmen, the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, Matters of Religion,
etc. As the Statutes of Mortmain, Circumspecte agatis, the Statute upon the
Writ of Consultation, Articuli Cleri, several Statutes entitled Pro Clero, the
Statutes of Praemunire and Provisors, concerning Priests and Salaries, against
Appeals to Rome, prohibiting Bishops to meddle in Matters of the Peace,
removing Bishops from Temporal Offices, restraining the Popes Exactions and
Usurpations, and Encroachments of the Canons upon the Civil Jurisdiction,
freeing Clergy Men from Arrests during the time of Divine Service, for the
Instruction of the People by Preaching, concerning Priors dative and removable,
etc. Exempting of Pilgrims from the Punishment of Vagrants, Hunting on
Holy Days, Consecrations of Churchyards, and Appropriations of Churches and
Alms, concerning Provisions of Exemptions from regular or ordinary Obedience
granted to Religious Persons from Rome, the Suppression of Sectaries, Heretical
Books, Schools, Working on Holy Days, Entering into Religion without Consent of
Parents, Tithes, Chalices, Ornaments of the Church, etc. So that whatever
remained of the Supremacy, remained in the Legislative Body of the Kingdom, and
was there exerted.

During this time the question was not, Whether the King could by his
Prerogative impose Laws upon the Clergy, or in concurrence with the Clergy
conclude the Laity (these are Notions started up since the Reformation, which
has brought to light in Politics, as well as Religion, Mysteries that had been
hid from Ages) but whether the Spirituality or State Ecclesiastical, of whom
the Pope was now de facto the Head, could bind the Laity, without their Assent
in Parliament.

This was a fifth Encroachment, which was attempted by introducing the Canon
Law, and drawing to themselves by a side wind all Temporal Jurisdiction in
ordine ad Spiritualia. But the design was never brought to perfection; such was
the Genius of a Government built upon this noble Foundation, that no man ought
to be bound by a Law that he does not consent to, that muffled up in Darkness
and Superstition, as our Ancestors were, yet that Notion seemed to be engraven
in their Nature, born with them, sucked in with their Mothers Milk; the
impression was so strong, that nothing could deface it: Accordingly we often
find them protesting that this and the other thing did not bind them, because
it was done without their Assent; Rott. Par. 40. Edw. 3. nu. 7, 8. Rott. Parl.
5 Ed. 3. art. 46. Rott. Parl. 6 Rich. 2. nu. 62.
that they would not be bound by any Ordinances of the Clergy, without their
Assent: That they would not subject themselves to the Prelates, no more than
their Ancestors had done. And in the 25. H. 8. cap. 21. They tell the King,
That this his Grace's Realm, recognizing no Superior under God but only his
Grace, has been and is free from subjection to any Man's Laws, but only to
such as have been devised, made and ordained within this Realm, for the wealth
of the same, or to such other, as by sufferance of your Grace and your
Progenitors, the People of this your Realm have taken at their free Liberty, by
their own consent, to be used amongst them, and have bound themselves by long
use and custom to the observance of the some, not as to the Laws of any foreign
Prince, Potentate, or Prelate, but as to the accustomed and anoient Laws of
this Realm, originally established as Laws of the same, by the said sufferance,
consent, and custom, and none otherwise. By those other Laws, not ordained
within the Realm, they mean the Canon Law. For the Clergy extended the bounds
of it daily, and always got ground. But the Sufferance and Cousent here spoken
of, was not a bare tacit Submission to it by the People, but a Consent in
Parliament: Where they not only received foreign Canons into the body of our
Municipal Laws, but also from time to time came to a Compremise with the
Clergy, with respect to several Matters, of which the Clergy claimed
Cognizance, as appertaining to what they called. Spiritual Jurisdiction, First
(For our Records of Parliament, yet extant, go no higher) by the Statute De
Circumspecte agati^, but that would not satisfy them. In King Edward the
Second's time they got Jurisdiction in many other Causes, as you may see in the
Statute of Articuli Cleri. And in King Edward the Third's time they went yet
farther; Nine new Points were gained, 25 Edw. 3. by the Statutum pro Clero. The
Conusance of these Matters, which by these Statutes were left to the Clergy,
belonged before to the King's Courts, as part of the Common Laws of the Realm,
by which the King governed his People, and which he administered in his ordinary
Courts of Justice, and by the ordinary proceedings of Law. And therefore before
they were allowed to the Cognizance of the Ecclesiastical Courts by Act of
Parliament, Prohibitions were granted.

The King's Right of Indulgence, page 28.
The granting of Prohibitions in these Cases, is urged by a late Author, as an
instance of the King's Ancient Supremacy, and urged amongst other things, to
prove a right in the King's Person to dispense with Civil Laws about
Ecclesiastical Matters. Whereas Prohibitions were granted then, no otherwise
than as they are now, to Spiritual and other Courts, when they exceed the
bounds of their Jurisdiction. When the Spiritual Jurisdiction broke in upon the
Temporal, and the Ecclesiastical Courts assumed an Authority in Cases not
allowed by the Laws of the Realm, to be within their Cognizance, this was an
Offense against the King's Crown and Regality (as the Statutes of Praemunire
run) and Contra Coronam and Dignitatem Regis, as the forms of some Prohibitions
in the Register run, and yet the Kings Temporal Jurisdiction was not personal.

In this period of time it was that Dispensations brake forth. They began in
King Henry the Third's time, which is not old enough to give the Crown a title
to them by Prescription; for it is within the time of Memory. The History of
their Nativity may be read in Matthew. Paris. The Pope led up the Dance, taking
upon him by Non Obstante's to revoke his own Grants, and to dispense with the
Canons upon a pretense of some plenitudo potestatis or other, derived to him,
as Pastor of the Universal Church by Succession from St. Peter. And Secular
Princes Writ after his Copy in taking upon them to dispense with their own
Penal Laws. Which before were religiously observed as the Laws of the Medes and
Persians, Sir John Daries Case, De Commenda.
which could not be dispensed with. And therefore a Canonist says that
Dispensatio vulnerat jus commune. And another says that all Abuses would be
reformed, Si duo tantum verba, viz. Non Obstante, non impedirent. And Matthew
Paris, Anno Dom. 1246. having recited certain Decrees made in the Council of
Lions, which were beneficial to the Church of England, Sed omnia haec and alia
(says he) per hoc repagulum, Non Obstante, infirmantur, Dav. Rep. 69, 70. etc.
Secular Princes, it seems, had not learnt that part of their Prerogative, till
they were taught it by their Ghostly Father. Nor could they well have any
notion of it, since as Sir Henry Spelman tells us in his Glossary, tit. Assisa,
Reges and Proceres in condendis Legibus earum olim jurabant observantiam. Hence
Bracton calls the Laws of England Leges Juratas. Now the taking of an Oath to
observe them, and the being allowed a power by Law to break them, seem to me
very inconsistent things. It Is observable to this purpose what Bracton tells us
concerning the Laws of England, Legis vigorem habet quicquid de Consilio and
Consensu Magnatum and Reipublicae Communi sponsione, authoritate Regis sive
Principis praecedente, just fuerit definitum and approbatum. So that a Statute
of the Kingdom of England is an Agreement betwixt all parties concerned: Which
for any one of them to set aside, is against Natural Reason.

And Fortescue who was Lord High Chancellor of England in the Reign of King
Henry the Sixth, cannot be supposed to have known of any such Prerogative in
the King, by the account that he gives us of the Solemnity of Enacting Laws
here in England, and of the course that was to be taken when any of them were
found by Experience to be inconvenient. Page 39, 40.
Statuta tunc Angliae bona sunt necne, solum restat explorandum. Non enim
emanant illa Principis solum voluntate, ut Leges in Regnis, quae Regaliter
tantum gubernantur, ubi quandoque Statuta ita constituentis procurant commodum
singular, quod in ejus subditorum ipsa redundant dispendium, and jacturam.
Quandoque enim inadvertentia Principum hujusmodi, and sibi consulentium
inertia, ipsa tam inconsulte eduntur, quod corruptelarum potius quam Legum
nomina mereantur. Sed non sic Angliae Statuta oriri possunt, dum nedum
Principis voluntate, sed and totius Regni assensu ipsa conduntur, quo Populi
laesuram illa essicere nequeunt, vel non eorum commodum procurare. Prudentia
enim and Sapientia necessario ipsa esse referta putandum est, dum non unius,
aut centum solum consultorum virorum prudentia, sed plusquam trecentorum
electorum hominum, quali numero olim Senatus Romanorum regebatur, ipsa edita
sunt. Et si Statuta haec tanta solemnitate and prudentia edita, efficaciae
tantae, quantae conditorum cupiebat intentio, non esse contingant; concito
reformari ipsa possunt, and non sine Communitatis and Procerum Regni illius
assensu, quali ipsa primitus emanarunt. A Power in the Prince to suspend Laws
by wholesale, is altogether needless in a Constitution wherein Concito
reformari possunt, by the same Authority that made them. In Forty days time a
Parliament may be summoned to consent to what alteration they shall think fit
to be made. And it is the constant practice observed to this day, that at the
beginning of every Parliament a Committee is appointed, to consider what Laws
are inconvenient, and have need to be altered, continued or repealed. If the
Parliament shall not think fit to make any alteration, the Laws must remain in
force, and ought to be put in execution, for there can be no Reformation of
them made Sine Communitatis and Procerum assensu. And the reason is, because by
such assent Primitus emanarant. The Repealing of a Law, or, which is all one, a
total Suspension of a Law, is making a new Law, whatever quibbles and foolish
distinctions may be pretended to be made in the Case. Now the Laws of England
do not oriri Principis voluntate, and rherefore a Repeal or total Suspension of
a Law grounded upon the voluntas Principis only, is not warranted by that model
of the English Government, that Fortescue presents us with. He that asserts
such a Power in the King to Suspend Laws Enacted by the Consent of the whole
Kingdom, turns the Government of this Nation topsie turvie: Lord Chief Justice
Herbert in Sir Edward Hales his Case.
And makes the Laws of England indeed the King's Laws; contrary to the style of
all Antiquity, of all History, and contrary to the forms of Legal Proceedings
even to this day; Lex terrae, and Leges terrae, Leges and Consuetudines
Angliae, Leges Angliae, Statuta Angliae, and Assiza Regni, are known and common
Expressions: Leges Regis sounds harsh: the phrase is uncouth, because the
Notion included in it, is false; nor was ever thought of by our Forefathers.

The Statutes of Praemunire and Provisors, and the method of dispensing with
them before the Reformation, will abundantly disclose to us where the power of
dispensing with Acts of Parliament, even in Ecclesiastical Matters, was vested.
In the 16th Year of King Richard the Second, the Archbishop of Canterbury
declared the Causes of the Parliament: The second of which was, to provide some
remedy touching the Statute of Provisors, for eschewing debate betwixt the Pope
and the King, and his Parliament, Cot. Records, p. 346.

King Richard needed not have put himself to the trouble of convening his
Parliament, in order to provide a Remedy in such case, if by the Law, as it was
then understood, he might by his Perogative have dispensed with the Statutes of
Provisors, and all other Laws concerning Ecclesiastical Matters. In the 17th.
R. 2. It was enacted in Parliament, that Tydeman, late Abbot of Beawliew and
Elect of Landaffe, by the Popes Provision, should enjoy the same Bishopric,
notwithstanding any Act, so always as this be taken for no Example. Ibid. p.
354. So that tho Tydeman had a Dispensation from the King, he durst not trust
to it, without getting his Title to his Abbey confirmed in Parliament. The like
President occurs in 18 H. 6. The Archbishop of Roan had the Profits of the
Bishopric of Ely granted to him by the Pope, and confirmed in Parliament.
Ibid. p. 623. But in the Fifteenth year of King Richard the Second, the Commons
for the great Affiance which they reposed in the King, granted, that the King
by the Advice of his Lords, might make such Toleration touching the Statute of
Provision, as to him should seem good until the next Parliament, so as the
Statute be repealed in no Article thereof, nor none disturbed of his lawful
Possession: So also, as they may disagree thereto at the next Parliament, with
this Protestation, That this their Assent being in truth a Novelty, be had or
taken for no Example. Ibid. p. 342. And in the Sixteenth year of the same King,
the Commons grant to the King, that he, by the Advice of his Lords, should have
power to moderate the Statute of Provisions, to the Honor of God, and saving
the Rights of the Crown, and to put the same in execution, so as the same be
declared in the next Parliament, to the end the Commons may then agree to the
same or no. Ibid. page 347. The occasions of these Concessions were the then
circumstances of the Kings Affairs, who was often at enmity with France, and
made advantage of the Pope's Friendship, which he obtained by this, and other
Methods of the like kind. The like Instances occur in the same Collection, p.
362, In the Twentieth year of the same King. p. 393, In the First year of King
Henry the Fourth. p. 406, In the Second year of King Henry the Fourth.

From hence it appears, that those Times had no notion of any absolute Power,
any inseparable Perogative in the King himself of dispensing with those Laws
without his Parliaments consent: For they grant the King such Power, and that
but for a time, and so as they may disagree to it at their next Meeting, and
with a protestation that this their Assent be not drawn into Example, and
declare their giving the King such Power to be a Novelty: And all this they do
with a saving to the Rights of the Crown; which let them (if they can) explain
the meaning of, who imagine that the uniting of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to
the Crown of England, by the Statute of 1 Eliz. is a vesting of it in the
King's Person.

In this same interval of Time, the Statutes of Praemunire were enacted, viz.
27 Edw. 3. cap. 1. and 38 Edw. 3. cap. 1. 16 R. 2. and some others, with which
how far it was lawful for the King to dispense, take an account from what
happened to Cardinal Wolsey in King Henry the Eighths time. He had a Commission
from the Pope to exercise his Office of Legate here in England; he had the
King's leave so to do; he exercised that Office many years without control,
and was submitted to almost universally. I remember but one Obstruction offered
to have been made to him, and that was by Hunne a Merchant-Taylor in London.
The History of which may be read at large in Fox, and Dr. Burnet's History of
the Reformation: And yet the whole Clergy were afterward attainted of a
Praemunire, for submitting to such Foreign Authority, as the same Authors, the
Lord Herbert, and others abundantly testify. But Stephen Gardiner's Letter to
the Duke of Somerset concerning that Matter, as it is very remarkable for many
other Passages, so this ensuing part I think proper to be here inserted,
because it will save me the trouble of relating the History, and of
endeavoring to open the Reasons of that Proceeding. Now whether the King may
command against an Act of Parliament, and what Danger they may fall in that
break a Law with the King's consent? I dare say, no Man alive at this day, has
had more Experience with the Judges and Lawyers than I: First I had experience
in my old Master the Cardinal, who obtained his Legacy by our late Sovereign
Lord's request at Rome, and in his sight and knowledge, occupied the same with
his two Crosses and Masses born before him many years; yet, because it was
against the Laws of the Realm, the Judges concluded it the Offense of the
Praemunire, which conclusion I bare away, and take it for the Law of the Realm,
because the Lawyers so said, but my Reason digested it not. The Lawyers for
confirmation of their Doings, brought in a Case of the Lord Tiptoft, as I
remember, a jolly Civilian; he was Chancellor to the King, who (because in the
Execution of the King's Commission he had offended the Laws of the Realm, he
suffered on Tower Hill,) they brought in many Examples of many Judges that had
Fines set on their Heads in like Cases, for doing against the Laws of the Realm
by the King's Commandment, and then was brought in the Judge's Oath, not to
stay any Proces^ or Judgment for any Commandment from the King's Majesty: And
one Article against my Lord Cardinal was, that he had granted Injunctions to
stay the Common Law, and upon that occasion Magna Charta was spoken of, and it
was made a great matter the stay of the Common Law; and this I learned in that
Case, sithence that time being of the Council, when many Proclamations were
devised against the Carriers out of Corn; at such time as the Transgressors
should be punished, the Judges would answer, It might not be by the Laws,
whereupon ensued the Act of Proclamations, in the passing of which Act many
liberal Words were spoken, and a plain Proviso, that by Authority of the Act
for Proclamations, nothing should be made contrary to an Act of Parliament or
Common Law.

A known and notorious Judgment has been lately given in favor of a
Dispensation, with an Act of Parliament, Sir Edward Hales's Case.
in a cause of extraordinary great consequence; and the Court grounded
themselves upon a Case pretended to have been adjudged in the Second year of
King Henry the Seventh, concerning Sheriffs. It had been enacted by several
Statutes, That no Sheriff, Undersheriff, etc. should abide in his Office above
one whole year, as by the 14 Edw. 3. cap. 7. and the 42 Edw. 3. cap. 9. And in
King Richard the Second's time, it was enacted, That no Man who had been
Sheriff of any County by one whole year, should be another time chosen into the
said Office within three years ensuing, etc. Notwithstanding which Statutes,
the contrary was often practiced by color of Dispensations with those Laws:
Which Dispensations of what validity they were in Law in the Judgment of
Parliaments, may be seen by diverse Instances in Cotton's Abridgment of the
Records of the Tower; V. Cott. Abr. p. 387. Anno 1. H. 4^ One Artic. of
Impeachment against King Rich. 2.
some of which are very untoward.

To obviate the mischief of these Non Obstante's, the Parliament in the Twenty
Third year of King Henry the Sixth, enacts, That the said Statutes above
recited, shall be duly observed, and inflicts the Penalty of 200 l. upon any
Sheriff, Undersheriff, etc. that shall hold the said Office longer than a
year: And farther enacts, That every Pardon thereafter to be made for such
Offense, or Occupation, or forseiture of Sums before recited, shall be void,
and not available; and that all Patents made, or to be made of any of the said
Offices, for term of Years, for term of Life, or in Fee Simple, or in Fee Tail,
shall be void, and of no value by the same Authority; any Clause or Word of Non
Obstante, in any wise put, or to be put in any such Patents notwithstanding.
And moreover, that whosoever shall take upon him to have or occupy the said
Office of Sheriff by virtue of such Grants or Patents, now to be made for term
of Years, for term of Life, Fee Simple, or Fee Tail, shall stand for ever, and
at all times disabled to bear the Office of Sheriff within any County of
England.

That that Statute was ever after looked on as a Law binding to the King, and
restraining any Non Obstante's in such case for the future, will appear by
considering some Statutes subsequent to the Law it self, both before and after
the pretended Judgment in 2 H. 7.

The first is that of 28 Hen. 6. cap. 3. Whereby it is ordained and granted
that the Sheriffs, etc. which were for the year last passed, shall be quit and
discharged against our Sovereign Lord the King and all his Liege People, of the
Penalties and Forfeitures of 200 l. which they or any of them might fall in, or
incur by force of the said Statute made in the 23d. Year of the said King, as
for the occupation or exercise of the Office of Sheriff longer than by a Year,
etc. So that such Sheriffs as had exercised their Office longer than a Year,
contrary to the said Statute of 23 Hen. 6. could not be safe by any
Dispensation granted by the King, without an Act of Parliament to indemnifie
them against him and his People.

In the Eighth Year of King Edw. 4. cap. 4. the Parliament reciting the Statute
of the 14th of King Edward 3. and of the 42 of the said King (abovementioned)
and that of the 23th of King Hen. 6. concerning Sheriffs, and that contrary to
the said Ordinances diverse Sheriffs, etc. in the First, Second, and Third Years
of the said King Edward the 4th. that then was, the Realm then being in great
trouble, and the Peace not fully established, did occupy over a Year, the said
King by Advice and Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and at the
Request of the Commons ordained and established, That no manner of persons
being Sheriffs, Undersheriffs, etc. in the said Three first Years of his Reign
or any space within the same for the occupation of the Office of Sheriff, etc.
in the said Three Years, or any part or space within the same, or of the same,
or any of the same above a Year, although their Occupation were against the
Ordinances above recited, be damnified nor in any wise hurt by any Action,
Pain, or Forfeiture in the same Ordinances or any of them comprised, etc. Yet
nevertheless the said Ordinances, and every of them to remain in their strength
and force against all Sheriffs, Undersheriffs, etc. for their occupation all
other Years than the said Three Years as aforesaid. If the King's Pardon could
have saved them harmless, the Act of 26 H. 6. notwithstanding, which provided
that all such Pardons should be void, then these Offenders had not need to have
recourse to an Act of Parliament for their Security.

These two Laws subsequent to the said Act of 23 H. 6. cap. 8. and prior to the
said pretenced Judgment of 2 H. 7. show it to have been the Sense of the
Parliaments and People of those times, that all Pardons and Dispensations with
the said Statute were nullities in Law. Whether they received any further light
as to the King's Prerogative in Dispensing with it, notwithstanding all the
caution that the Wisdom of a Nation could use in such a case, from the
pretended Opinion of the Judges in that Case we may guess at, by observing the
Act of 6 H. 8. cap. 18. Which Act, reciting the Act of 13 Ed. 3. and of the 23
of King H. 6. and the Forfeitures and Penalties thereby imposed, and that every
Pardon for such Offense should be void, and all Patents with Non Obstante's of
the said Statute void in like manner, does yet Enact, Establish and Ordain,
that the Undersheriffs, and other Officers of Sheriffs in the Shire of the
Town of Bristol, may continue to occupy their Offices in like manner as the
Undersheriffs, and other Sheriffs Officers in London do, without any Penalty
or Forfeiture for the same, the said Acts or any other Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

By this Act it appears that in the Judgment of that Parliament a Patent to
exercise the Office of Sheriff longer than a Year with a Non Obstante of the
Statute of 23 Hen. 6. cap. 8. was a Patent void in Law: For they recite the
Act, not only as an Act in force, but that particular clause in it, whereby Non
Obstante's to it are declared to be void, as a reason why the Under-Sheriffs of
Bristol could not be safe in acting contrary thereunto; without Assent of
Parliament, which was therefore had for their Security, and would have been
needless, if a Patent with a Dispensation had then been accounted legal.

These Acts of Parliament might be thought sufficient to invalidate the
Authority of that Judgment, if any such had been given; but the truth of it is,
there never was any such Judgment given, as that the King might by his
Perogative dispense with the said Statute of 23 Hen. 6. by which it is expressly
enacted, That no Non Obstantes in such case shall be available. The Question
indeed was upon the validity of a Grant made by King Edward the Fourth, of the
Shrivalty of Northumberland to the Earl of that County, for his Life: And the
Judges held the Patent to be good. But they did not ground their Judgment upon
the Non-Obstante therein; for there is not a word spoken of the Non-Obstante,
but by Rocliffe (who was then second Baron of the Exchequer,) after the Court
had agreed the Patent to be good, By reason of a Proviso in an Act of
Resumption. But I shall forbear meddling any more with that Case, for that a
very good Account of it will be shortly given by another Hand; as also of the
five Points pretended to have been agreed by the Judges in Sir Edward Hales's
Case, and a sufficient Answer to that slight Pamphlet, entitled, A short
Account of the Authorities in Law, upon which Judgment was given in Sir Edward
Hales's Case: Written by Sir Edward Herbert in Vindication of himself.

Indeed Non Obstante's, as they were first invented and introduced by Popes
between the years of our Lord 1200 and 1250, V. Matthew. Paris. p. 810, 811.
Ibid. p. 817, 818. p. 854. p. 875.
and afterward inserted into the King's Patents and Protections in imitation
of them by King Henry the Third; so they were never made use of by any of our
Kings to elude Acts of Parliament, till after the Statute of Mortmain, which
was made in the 7th. of Edw. 1. Which first attempt, as it must needs be
illegal, First, because contrary to Magna Charta, cap. 36. (which is the first
Law that prohibits Alienations in Mortmain, and was not only sworn to, when
enacted and confirmed, but is also by many after Acts of Parliament, ordered to
be observed in all Points, as by 2 Edw. 3. cap. 1. 4 Edw. 3. cap 1.14 Edw. 3.
cap. 1. and innumerable others.) Secondly, Because when the Clergy petitioned
King Edward the First, for a relaxation of it: His Answer was, Hen. Knighton,
p. 2502. in Dec. Script.
that he could not do it, because it was enacted de Consilio Magnatum suorum,
and sine eorum Consilio non erat revocandum. And Thirdly, Because the sole Act
of the King could not with any color of Reason prejudice the Rights and
Interest of the Mesne Lords; yet such was the misguided Piety and Devotion of
those Times, that such Non Obstante's were obtained, as appears by the Patent
and Charter Rolls in the Tower, from 8 Edw. 1. downwards, abounding with
special Licenses to purchase and hold Lands, etc. Statuto de terris and
tenementis in manum mortuam non ponendis non Obstante. And yet were not these
Licenses accounted legal, or the Clergy safe in purchasing Lands, Rents,
Advowsons, etc. by virtue of them, till it was enacted in Parliament, Anno 18
Edw. 3. cap. 3. That if Prelates, Clerks beneficed, or Religious People, which
have purchased Lands, and the same have put to Mortmain, be impeached upon the
same before our Justices, and they show our Charter of License and Process
thereupon, by an Inquest of Ad quod damnum, or of our Grace, or by Fine, they
shall be freely let in Peace, without being further impeached for the same
purchase: And in case they cannot sufficiently show, that they have entered by
due Process, after License to them granted in general or in special, that they
shall well be received to make a convenient Fine for the same, and that the
Enquiry of this Article shall wholly cease, according to the accord comprised
in this Parliament.

But Non Obstante's with the Statute of Mortmain, having been introduced, as
aforesaid, tho undeniably illegal at first, and gaining afterward a
countenance from this Act of Parliament, have given occasion to the dispensing
with other Acts of Parliament.

Tho at first they were very rare, and seldom occur in the Old Books; and tho
they are more frequent in the New, and that Judges and Courts of Justice have
invented little Distinctions betwixt malum in se and malum prohibitum; betwixt
Laws made pro bono publico, and Laws of a more private regard; betwixt Laws in
which the King's Profit and Interest is concerned only, and Laws in which the
Subject has an interest, and is entitled to an Action, as pars gravata; yet
the Cases that have hitherto come before them judicially, have been Questions
upon Dispensations granted to particular Persons, to exempt them prohic and
nunc, from incurring the Penalty of such or such a Law. A Dispensation
suspending the Effect of a Law at once, has been so far from receiving any
countenance from Courts of Justice hitherto, Thomas and Sorell's es. of
Wine-Liceneer.
that it has always been a fatal Objection against any particular Dispensation,
if it was such as consequentially quite eluded and frustrated the whole Law:
For that such a Dispensation is in effect a Repeal of the Law.

It would be endless to launch out into a Discourse upon such particular
Dispensations as have been granted, and either allowed or condemned: The
principal Cases in our Modern Books, in which the conceits of latter times are
displayed, are these following: Coke's 8th. Report, the Princes Case. The Case
of the City of London. 11th. Report, the Case of the Tailors of Ipswich, and
the Case of Monopolies. Dyer, 52. a. 54. a. 224. b. 270. a. 303. a, b. Plo.
Com. Grendon against the Bishop of Lincoln. Vaughan's Reports; Thomas and
Sorell's Case. V. Roll's Abridgment: Second Part, p. 179, 180. Let. Y. Co.
12th. Report. p. 18, 19. Sir John Davie's Reports. Le Case de Commenda. p. 68,
etc. Moor's Reports, p. 244, 245, etc. cs. 384.

But how correspondent the reason of some of these Judgments is to the sense of
former Parliaments, and consequentially to the Judgment of the whole Nation,
and the very Constitution of this Government, take a hint from a notable Record
in the Fiftieth Year of King Edward the Third, whereby it appears, That Richard
Lions Merchant of London, was impeached and accused by the Commons, of many
Deceits, Extortions, and other evil Deeds, committed by him, against our Lord
the King and his People, as well in the time that he had been belonging to the
House and Council of the King as otherwise, during the time that he was Farmer
of the Subsidies and Customs of the King; and more especially, for that the
said Richard, by Covin had between him and some of the Privy Council of our
Lord the King, for their singular Profit and Advantage, had procured and gotten
many Patents and Writs of License to be made, to carry great Faith and Credit,
whereby Skins, Wool and other Merchandises, were transported otherwise than to
the Staple of Calice, against the Ordinances and Defenses made in that behalf
concerning the same before time in Parliament. He was charged with other
particular Crimes; to some of which he offered to make a Defense, but to
others, and this amongst the rest he made no answer: Wherefore the said Richard
was a warded to Prison during the King's pleasure, and distrained to Fine and
Ransom according to the quantity of his Trespass, and that he should lose his
Freedom of the City of London, and be no more in Office under the King, and to
incur other Penalties and Forfeitures; as may be seen at large in the Record
printed by Mr. Seldom, in a Book entitled. The Privileges of the Baronage of
England. page 34, 35, 36, etc. So that Licenses for the shipping of Wool,
contrary to an Act of Parliament, tho mentioned by Rocliffe in the Book of King
Henry the Seventh, as legal, and grantable by the King with a Non Obstante, and
countenanced sufficiently by latter Judicial Authorities. Vide Dyer, 52. a, 54.
a, etc. Yet appeared otherwise to ancient Parliaments; and if the Judgment of a
Parliament be of greater Authority than that of a Court in Westminster Hall, or
indeed than that of all the Judges put together, and if Judicial Presidents do
not make the Law, but ought to declare it only; then is the Legal Perogative in
dispensing with Acts of Parliament much straiter, if any at all, than modern
Opinions would represent it to us.

And that Parliamentary Presidents are of the highest Authority in this Nation,
will appear by considering, that in former Times it was very frequent with the
Judges in Westminster Hall, if any Case of Difficulty came before them,
especially if it depended upon the Construction of an Act of Parliament, to be
so cautious of making any new, unwarranted Presidents, that they frequently
adjourned the Matter, ad proximum Parliamentum.

By the Statute of Westminster the Second, made Anno 13. Edwardi primi; cap.
23. It Is enacted, That Quotiescunque de caetero evenerit in Cancellaria, quod
in uno Casu reperitur breve, and in consimili casu, cadente sub eodem Jure, and
simili indigente Remedio, non reperitur, concordent Clerici de Cancellaria in
brevi faciendo, vel atterminent querentes in proximum Parliamentum and
escribantur Casus, i^ quibus concordare non possunt, and referant eos ad
proximum Parliamentum. My Lord Coke in his Second Institutes, page 407. tells
us, That before this Act the Justices did punctually hold themselves to the
Writs in the Register, because they could not change them without an Act of
Parliament: And page 408. That Matters of great Difficulty were in ancient
Times usually adjourned into Parliament, to be resolved and decided there. And
that this was the ancient Custom and Law of the Kingdom, Bracton bears witness;
Si aliqua nova and inconsueta emerserint, quae nunquam prius evenerunt, and
obscurum and difficile sit eorum judicium, tunc ponantur judicia in respectu
usque ad Magnam Curiam, ut ibi per Concilium Curiae terminentur: And hereof the
Lord Coke says, There are infinite Presidents in the Rolls of Parliament, and
quotes in his Margent many Presslents out of the Year Books. Observable to this
purpose is the Statute of 14 Edw. 3. cap. 6. which reciting that diverse
Mischiefs have happened for that in the Chancery, King's Bench, Common Bench and
Exchequer, Judgments have been delayed, sometimes by Difficulty, and sometimes
by diverse Opinions of the Judges, and sometimes for some other Cause: It is
assented, established and accorded, That from henceforth at every Parliament
shall be chosen a Prelate, two Earls, and two Barons, which shall have
Commission and Power of the King, to hear, by Petition delivered to them, the
Complaints of all those that will complain them of such Delays, and they shall
have power to cause to come before them at Westminster, or elsewhere, the Tenor
of Records and Processes of such Judgments so delayed, and cause the same
Justices to come before them, which shall be then present, to hear the cause of
such Delays: Which Cause and Reason so heard; by good Advice of themselves, the
Chancellor, Treasurer, the Justices of the one Bench and of the other, and
other of the King's Council, as many, and such as they shall think convenient,
shall proceed to take a good Accord and make a good Judgment. So that our
Parliaments of ancient Time looked upon the Judges, not as absolute Oracles of
the Law, but as Men that were both liable to Mistakes, and under the Regulation
and Direction of Parliaments, even in their Ordinary Proceedings. The Nation
did not so far entrust them, as they themselves would persuade us of late.

In the Three and thirtieth of H. 6. a Question arose in the Exchequer Chamber,
Whether a Record then and there certified as an Act of Parliament, were really
an Act of Parliament or no? Fortescue who gave the Rule, says, They would be
well advised before they annulled an Act of Parliament; and the Matter was
adjourned to the next Parliament, that they might be certified by them of the
certainty of the Matter. 33 Hen. 6. Fol. 18.

Indeed the Question, Whether such or such a Record certified, were an Act of
Parliament or no, may seem too high for modest Judges to take upon themselves
the Resolution of? (Tho nothing can be too high nor too difficult for such
Judges to determine, who are wise enough to declare Acts of Parliament void.)
Co. 8. Rep. Fol. 118. a. Moor's Reports, page 828.
But what shall we say of them in 40 Edward 3. who because the Statute of 14
Edw. 3. cap. 6. had empowered them to amend the misprision of a Clerk, in
writing a Letter or a Syllable too much or too little, not only made a
Question, Whether they might amend where there was a Word wanting, but went to
the Parliament to know the Opinion of them that made the Law? See the Story in
Coke's 8 Report, 158. a. So sacred were Acts of Parliament accounted in those
days, and so little was the Authority of the Judges in Westminster Hall; or
rather of so great Credit and Authority were the Resolutions of Judges in those
days, when they were wary and cautious of making Alterations, and in difficult
Matters consulted their Superiors. Other Examples of Adjournments ad proximum
Parliamentum, may be seen in Cotton's Abridgment of the Records in the Tower.
But that which surprizeth us is, That all our Judges since the Reformation,
should have attained to such an omniscience in the Law, that I think I may
confidently affirm, there has not been an Adjournment, ad proximum Parliamentum
propter difficultatem, these Hundred and fifty Years last past. Sure I am, that
no President of any such thing appears in our modern Books of Law. And yet
Cases of as great moment, concern and consequence to the Government and the
whole Nation, have come in question within that space of time, as ever did or
could in former Ages.

But there is a Notion broached amongst us, that the Kings of England have
greater Power and larger Prerogatives in Ecclesiastical Matters, than in
Temporal, and that by virtue of their Ecclesiastical Supremacy they may
dispense with such Acts of Parliament, as concern Religion. But they that say
so, do not consider, that before the Reformation, the Kings of England had much
less power in Ecclesiastical Matters than in Temporal, and therefore they
cannot have greater now, unless some Act of Parliament give it them. And
therefore this power of dispensing with Acts of Parliament in Matters of
Religion, must be given by some Acts of Parliament since the Reformation; or
else the King has it not.

And admit for the present their Hypothesis, who would invest the King with
whatever power the Pope de facto exercised here: Yet that will not serve the
turn, for as much as the Pope himself, whatever power he might claim, and
attempt to exercise, yet was never allowed a power to dispense with Acts of
Parliament concerning Ecclesiastical Matters, even when it was full Sea with
him here in England. Take one remarkable President out of Matt. Paris, p. 699.
that in the Year of our Lord 1245. The King, the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and
Great Men of the Realm (then Assembled in a most general Parliament at
Westminster) drew up several Articles of Grievances against the Popes
Exorbitances and Illegal Oppressions, one of which was conceived in these
words; viz. Item, Gravatur Regnum Angliae ex adjectione multiplici, illius
infamis nuncii, Non Obstante, per quem juramenti Religio, consuetudines
antiquae, Scripturarum vigor, concessionum authoritas, Statuta Jura and
Privilegia debilitantur and evanescunt. And it cannot but seem strange, that
after such public Complaints (for many others of the like nature might be
cited) of the whole Kingdom against Non Obstante's, as intolerable Grievances
they should be afterward countenanced, and screwed up to such a transcendent
Sovereignty, as to frustrate Laws, Statutes, and Acts of Parliament; and that
by virtue of an Ecclesiastical Supremacy by which the King is pretended to have
whatever power the Pope had, when the Pope himself was never allowed this.

To these Presidents and Authorities of former times, it may not be improper to
add what happened in the latter end of the Reign of King James the First, and
the beginning of King Charles the First, upon occasion of the Spanish Match,
with relation to the Penal Laws against Roman Catholics: The whole Negotiation
of that Affair may be read at large in Rushworth's first Volume of Historical
Collections, and in Prynne's Introduction to the Archbishop of Canterbury 's
Trial. I will only point at two or three passages that are most material to the
present purpose. 1. King James in a Letter written with his own hand to the
King of Spain, has these words; viz. Leges nostrates, quae mulctam Catholicis,
non mortem irrogant, aboleri aut rescindi a nobis Seorsim non posse, leniri it
a posse, cum erit usus, exploratum habeat Serenitas vestra, omnibus ut dictorum
Catholicorum Romanorum animis mansuetudine ac lenitate nostra conciliatis, etc.
he had promised that no Romish Priest, or Catholic should be proceeded against
for any Capital Crime; but for the other Laws, ut supra.

Yet afterward, when King James was made to believe that the Match was just
upon the point of being concluded, a Proclamation was prepared for granting a
toleration to Papists, though it never came out. But Archbishop Abbot wrote a
Letter in the nature of a Remonstrance to King James, in which besides other
Considerations of Religion and Policy, these words follow, Prynne's Introduct.
p. 40. Besides, this Toleration which you endeavor to set by your
Proclamation, cannot be done without a Parliament, unless your Majesty will let
your Subjects see, that you will take unto your self a Liberty to throw down
the Laws of the Land at your pleasure.

And in the Second Year of King Charles the First, the King commanded his
Attorney General to charge the Earl of Bristol at the Bar of the House of Lords
with High Treason and other Offenses and Misdemeanors, that they might proceed
in a legal Course against him, according to the Justice and usual Proceedings
of Parliaments; the fifth of which Articles is in these words, That from the
beginning of his Negotiation, and throughout the whole managing thereof by the
said Earl of Bristol, and during his said Embassage, he the said Earl, contrary
to his Faith and Duty to God, the true Religion professed by the Church of
England, and the Peace of the Church and State, did intend and resolve, that if
the said Marriage so treated of as aforesaid, should by his Ministry be
effected, that thereby the Romish Religion, and the Professors thereof, should
be advanced within this Realm, and other his Majesty's Realms and Dominions,
and the true Religion and the Professors thereof discouraged and
discountenanced. And to that end and purpose the said Earl, during the time
aforesaid, by Letters unto his late Majesty, and otherwise often counseled and
persuaded his said late Majesty to set at Liberty the Jesuits and Priests of
the Romish Religion, which according to the good, Religious and Public Laws of
this Kingdom, were imprisoned or restrained; and to grant and to allow unto the
Papists and Professors of the Romish Religion, free Toleration, and silencing
of all Laws made and standing in force against them. Vide Rushworth, Vol. 1. p.
251. and Prinne 's Introduct. p. 32.

So that King James thought himself had no power to rescind or repeal the Laws
Seorsim, though he could so moderate the execution of them, as to make his
Roman Catholic Subjects be obliged to him. Yet when afterward, in hopes of
obtaining the Infanta for his Son, he had agreed to issue a Proclamation for
Indulgence to Roman Catholics, and a Proclamation was drawn accordingly, but
never published; we may read the Sense of the Church of England upon it in
Archbishop Abbot's Remonstrance. The Reason why the Proclamation was not
published, was because the putting of it in practice or not, was to depend upon
the success of the Match, which miscarrying, the Proclamation was stifled. And
that may be the reason why the Parliament in 21 Jacobi take no notice of it.
But in the Parliament of 2 Car. 1. The Earl of Bristol was charged by the
King's own Direction, for having persuaded the King to it, as having committed
a very high Crime in so doing. Whereas if the King had a power by Law to do it,
it could not well be a Crime in him, to persuade him to make use of his Power,
when the Circumstances of his Affairs required it.

And as it was then conceived a Misdemeanour to Advise the King to it, so who
knows how far future Parliaments may account it a Misdemeanour to have been in
any wise instrumental toward the carrying on of a design, which some will not
stick to say now, as the Archbishop did then, is to give the King a Power of
throwing down all the Laws of the Land at his pleasure?

Thus I have endeavored to give some small account of the rise and progress of
Dispensations with Acts of Parliament; by which it does appear, that as the
clause of Non Obstante was first introduced by Popes, and first applied by the
instigation of the Popish Clergy, to break through Acts of Parliaments, (though
our Parliaments never Countenanced them, and our Courts of Justice never
extended the dispensing power farther than to particular persons, or at most to
Corporations) so Dispensations suspending at one blow the whole effect of Laws,
were invented at Rome too, in favor of English Papists, upon the Treaty of the
Spanish Match in King James's time: But they never appeared barefaced in view
till King Charles the Second's time; in whose Reign they were twice damned in
Parliament. The third effort has been made of late, since which no Parliament
has yet sat down.

It may seem strange, considering the great Solemnity and Caution that is used
in passing Acts of Parliament, that so impudent a conceit, as that of the
Legality of a dispensing Power, should ever enter into the thoughts of Men.

For if a Bill be first brought into the House of Lords, after it is read, it
is committed to a Committee of Lords, and certain Judges are appointed to
attend them, that nothing may be put into the Act, which may be mischievous to
the King or Kingdom. After which, when it comes to be read in the House again,
the Judges sit as Attendants upon the House, and hear all the Debates of the
Lords upon it. Indeed they have no Voice in the House of Lords, but if any Bill
that is passing should in their Judgments have any ill Consequences to the King
or Kingdom, they might either have offered their Reasons at the Committee, or
suggested what their thoughts were to some of the Lords in the House, who would
have acquainted the House with it. A Bill having passed the House of Lords with
all this Caution, is afterward sent down to the Commons by some of the Judges
themselves, and sometimes by the Chief Justices and Chief Baron, who coming
into the House of Commons with Reverence, and the respect of three Bows,
deliver the Bill to the Speaker. And the method is the same in case of a Bill
coming from the House of Commons, and committed by the Lords, some of the
Judges are always appointed to attend and wait upon the Committee of the Lords.

After all this Solemnity, the Bill yet signifies nothing, without the Royal
Assent.

In order to which, before the King is to give it, the Clerks of the House of
Lords are to bring the Bills before the King and the Privy Council, before whom
they are read, and not only the King's Council are ordered to attend, and be
present, but likewise all the Judges in Westminster Hall: And if any Bills
should be thought of mischievous Consequence, they, as being the King's Council
in Matters of Law, are bound by the express tenor of their Oath, to show and
disclose it to the King.

But if no such thing be done, then the King in full Parliament gives his Le
Roy le Voet, and so it becomes a general Law, to bind the whole Kingdom.

Now after a Law made with such caution and solemnity is entered upon Record, as
a Statute binding to the whole Kingdom; it must needs seem strange, that the
Judges in Westminster Hall should dare to allow of Dispensations with such a
Law, grounded upon the sole Act of the Prince: and much more, that they should,
as a late Honorable Author tells us they have done, declare Acts of Parliament
to be void, Coke 8 Rep. Fol. 118. Heb. 87.
and contrary to the Law of God or Natural Equity, or that they should suppose
any Law thus made to be so, without assuming a power to themselves of
Impeaching both Houses of Parliament, the King himself, all the Privy
Councillors, nay and themselves too, or at least their Predecessors, for want
of Knowledge, Prudence or Foresight, as not being capable to judge of common
Sense, or not foreseeing Inconveniences, which either themselves now perceive,
or would persuade us the King by some new illumination has discovered:
especially when these inconveniences, if real, may easily be redressed In
Parliament, without having recourse to a Westminster Hall Prerogative, or
Dreams of Imperial Power vampt up with Ignorance, a good Fancy, and a
tolerable Pen, by some scurrilous Authors, whose names I cannot prevail upon
my self to defile paper with.

I cannot leave this period of time betwixt King John and King Henry the
Eighth, without a remark upon an Act of Parliament made in the Second Year of
King Henry the Fifth, cap. 1. That Act recites that many Hospitals have been
founded by the Kings of this Realm and diverse other Estates of Men and Women,
to which Hospitals the Founders have given part of their moveable Goods and of
their Lands, therewith to sustain impotent Men and Women, etc. And that the
same Hospitals be now for the most part decayed, and the Goods and Profits of
the same withdrawn and spent in other uses: And therefore Enacts, That as to
the Hospitals which be of the Patronage and Foundation of the King, the
Ordinaries by virtue of the King's Commissions to them directed, shall enquire
of the manner and foundation of the said Hospitals, and of the Governance and
Estate of the same, and of all other matters requisite and necessary in that
behalf, and the Inquisitions thereof shall certify into the King's Chancery;
And as to other Hospitals, which be of another Foundation and Patronage than of
the King, the Ordinaries shall enquire of the manner of the Foundation, Estate
and Governance of the same, and of all other Matters and Things necessary in
this behalf, and upon that make due correction and reformation, according to
the Laws of Holy Church, as to them belongs.

This Act apparently makes a distinction betwixt Hospitals that are, and that
are not of the King's Foundation and Patronage, with respect to the Right of
Visitation. Those of the King's Foundation the Ordinaries were to visit by the
King's Commission. But those that were not of the King's Foundation the
Ordinaries were to visit too, but how? Not by any Commission from the King, but
as special Commissioners, special Visitors, appointed by that Act. The King did
not pretend to issue a Commission to Visit an Hospital of a Subject's
Foundation. The Parliament were strangers to such a conceit. The right of
Visiting, de communi Jure belongs to the Founder; he that gave the Laws, ought
to see them executed. If the Parliament had appointed that Hospitals of the
Foundation of Subjects, should be Visited by the Ordinaries by Commission from
the King; they had in effect translated the Rights of all Founders that were
Subjects to the King, which they never intended.

For the Legal Notion of Visitation in such Cases, is no more than this, viz. A
Man Founds and Endows a College. The Rule of Law and of Natural Reason teaches,
cujus est dare, ejus est disponere. As a Man may give Lands to a private person
upon what condition the Donor pleases, provided it be not against Law: so a Man
may give Lands to a Society of Men upon what terms he pleases. The terms
expressed in the Foundation, are called the private Laws, by which the Society is
to be ordered and governed. And just as when a Man makes a Lease for Life or
Years, the Lessor may enter of right to see whether waste be done or no, so a
Founder may come and enquire whether those of his Foundation observe the Rules
and Orders prescribed by him or his Ancestors; and proceed according to the
Statutes and the Powers thereby reserved, in case he find any neglect or
misdemeanour. What right the King has to interpose his Authority in such case,
any more than in the Government of a private Family, I cannot discern.

But Colleges in Universities are pretended to be visitable by the King's
Commission, by virtue of his Ecclesiastical Authority: Here we must
distinguish. A College of Divines, for Example, founded by a Subject and
Endowed, and receiving Laws for their Governance from their Founder, are
visitable by their Founder and his Heirs or Successors. They may be also (for
any thing here alleged to the contrary) visitable by the Bishop of the
Diocese, or (if exempt from Episcopal Jurisdiction) by the King's Commission.
But what Power have these Visitors? The Founder enquires, whether the Statutes
of the Foundation are observed, and punishes according to the Statutes, but
goes no farther. The Ordinary, or Archbishop, or (if the place be exempt) the
King's Visitors enquire, Whether they profess the Doctrine, and observe the
Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England.

If the King had any thing to do to intermeddle with the Statutes and
Government of such a College in the first Instance, by virtue of his
Ecclesiastical Supremacy, it seems very strange that in the third and fourth
Year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, when the Bishop of Winchester, Founder of
Maudlyn College in Oxford, had at a Visitation deprived the President, and he
appealed to the Queen in Chancery; the Judges and Civilians having had a
Conference upon the Business, agreed, that the Appeal lay not as the Law then
stood; for that this Case was out of the Statutes of 24 and 25 Hen. 8. (which
direct Appeals to the King in Chancery) and this Deprivation was a mere
Temporal Thing, and inflicted as by a Lay Patron: And that, if he were
wrongfully expelled, he might have an Assize, or other Suit at Common Law.

Concerning the King's Power with respect to the private Statutes of a College
of a Subjects Foundation, I will acquaint the Reader with one Act of Parliament
made 1 Mariae, which will yield some very useful Inferences. The Act recites,

Whereas the late Noble Prince of Famous Memory, King Henry the Eighth, Father
unto our most Gracious Sovereign Lady the Queen, amongst other his godly Acts
and Doings, did erect, make and establish diverse and sundry Churches, as well
Cathedral as Collegiat, and endowed every of the same with diverse Manors,
Lands, Tenements and Possessions, for the maintenance of the Deans,
Prebendaries and Ministers within the same, and for other charitable Acts to be
done and executed by the same Deans, Prebendaries and Ministers, and also did
incorporate the same Deans, Prebendaries and Ministers, and made them Bodies
politic in perpetual Succession, according to the Laws of this Realm of
England: And where also, as the said late King, for the better maintenance and
preservation of the said Churches, in a godly Unity, and good Order and
Governance, granted unto the several Corporations and Bodies Corporate of every
of the said Churches, that they should be ruled and governed for ever,
according unto certain Ordinances, Rules and Statutes, to be specified in
certain Indentures, then after to be made by his Highness, and to be delivered
and declared to every of the Bodies Corporate of the said several Churches, as
by the said several Erections and Foundations of the said Churches, more
plainly it does and may appear: Since which said Erections and Foundations, the
said late King did cause to be delivered to every of the said Churches, so as
is aforesaid erected and incorporated, by certain Commissioners by his Highness
appointed, diverse and sundry Statutes and Ordinances, made and decreed by the
same Commissioners, for the Order, Rule and Governances of the said several
Churches, and of the Deans, Prebendaries, and Ministers of the same; which said
Statutes and Ordinances were made by the said Commissioners, and delivered unto
every of the Corporations of the said several Churches in writing, but not
indented, according to the Form of the said Foundations and Erections; by
reason whereof the said Churches, and the several Deans, Prebendaries, and
Ministers of the same, have no Statutes or Ordinances of any Force or
Authority, whereby they should be ruled and governed, and therefore remain as
yet not fully established in such sort, as the godly intent of the said late
King Henry the Eighth was, to the great imperfection of the Churches, and the
hindrance of God's Service, and good Order and Regiment to be had and continued
amongst the Ministers of the same.

And forasmuch as the Authority of the making of the said Statutes, Ordinances,
and Orders, was reserved only unto the said King, and no mention made of any
like Authority to be reserved unto his Heirs and Successors, the same Orders,
and Statutes, cannot now be made and provided without Authority of Parliament.

And then the Act proceeds to empower that Queen during her Life, to prescribe
such Orders and Statutes; and to alter, transpose, change, augment or diminish
the said Orders, Statutes, etc. And gives her likewise Authority to make,
ordain, and establish Statutes, Ordinances and Foundations for the good Order
and Government of Grammar Schools erected by King Hen. 8. or King Edw. 6. and
to alter Statutes already made. V. Rastall's Statutes, 1 Mar. Par. 2. Act 9.

And she dying before the work was finished, there was another Act in Queen
Elizabeth's time impowering her to do the like, and to alter the Statutes in
being.

Hence I infer, first, if King Henry the Eighth having reserved a Power to
himself of appointing private Laws, etc. as aforesaid, and coming to die
without executing that Power, his Successor could not make such Laws, though
for the Government of Colleges, etc. of which the King himself was Founder (as
most evidently, according to the Opinion of those two Queens and their
Parliaments, she could not) and for the Government of Colleges, etc. that had
no private Laws at all for their good Order and Government, then a power given
by Commission to Survey, Alter, Reform, Amend, etc. the Statutes of the
Foundation of Colleges, Halls, etc. was not in those days looked upon as Law.

Secondly, If the King could not appoint New Laws for the Government of
Colleges, etc. of his own Foundation, then he could not alter the Statutes of
Colleges founded by Subjects.

I infer from hence in the third place, that some Commission grounded upon
these Statutes of Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, which were Temporary, and
gave those Queens Power but for Life; has been the pattern for that Clause in a
late Commission, which relates to the Colleges in Universities, etc. And that
the Gentleman who drew the late Commission, had forgot those two Acts of Queen
Mary and Queen Elizabeth, because the latter never was printed, and the former,
being expired long before his Statute-Book was printed, is left out of it (but
it is to be seen in Rastall.)

And finding such a Commission upon the Roll, he concluded the King had a Power
by the Common Law to grant it.

Archbishop Laud pretended to visit both Universities, Jure Metropolitico, and
it was decreed at the Council Table, that he had right to visit; but he claimed
only a Right to visit them, as to their Doctrine, and Church Discipline, and
Ceremonies, not to meddle with the private Statutes of their Foundation: Which
he disclaimed any Right to enquire into. V. Rushworth's Collections.

I mention this only to show how a College may be subject to a double
Visitation diverso respectu.

The Question is not here concerning the King's Authority to visit the
University, but what Authority he has to visit a private College for their good
Government, and to meddle with their Statues, himself not being the Founder, I
cannot see as yet.

HAVING given some Account of the Nature of the Ancient Legal Jurisdiction,
which in former Ages the Crown claimed and exercised in Ecclesiastical and
Spiritual Matters; come we now to King Henry the Eighth's Reign, in whose time
all Foreign Power was excluded, the Ancient Supremacy restored, and New Powers
given, some to that King personally, some to Him, his Heirs and Successors. I
shall run through the Acts, as they lie in order of Time.

The first Act that made an open Breach with Rome, was that of 24 Hen. 8. cap.
12. That no Appeals should be used, but within the Realm: The Preamble to that
Act will afford us considerable Observations, and very pertinent to the chief
Subject and Occasion of this present Discourse. It runs thus: Where by diverse,
sundry, old, authentic Histories and Chronicles, it is manifestly declared and
expressed, That this Realm of England is an Empire, and so has been accepted
in the World, governed by one Supreme Head and King, having the Dignity and
Royal Estate of the Imperial Crown of the same: Unto whom a Body Politic,
compact of all sorts and degrees of People, divided in Terms, and by Names of
Spiritualty and Temporalty, been bounden and own to bear, next to God, a
natural and humble Obedience: He being also institute and furnished, by the
Goodness and Sufferance of Almighty God, with plenary, whole and entire Power,
Pre-eminence and Authority, Prerogative and Jurisdiction, to render and yield
Justice, and final determination to all manner of folk Resiants, or Subjects
within this his Realm, in all Causes, Matters, Debates and Contentions,
happening to occur, insurge and begin within the Limits thereof, without
restraint or provocation to any Foreign Princes and Potentates of the World;
The Body Spiritual whereof having Power, when any cause of the Law divine
comes in question, or of Spiritual Learning, that it was declared and showed,
by that part of the said Body Politic, called the Spiritualty, now being
usually called the English Church; which always has been reputed, and also
found of that sort, that both for Knowledge, etc. it has been thought, and is
sufficient and meet of it self, without the intermedling of any exterior Person
or Persons, to declare and determine all such Doubts, and to administer all
such Offices and Duties, as to their Rooms Spiritual does appertain: And the
Law Temporal, for trial of Property of Lands and Goods, and for the
conservation of the People of this Realm in Unity and Peace, without Rapine or
Spoil, was and yet is administered, adjudged and executed by sundry Judges and
Ministers of the other part of the said Body Politic, called the Temporalty;
and both their Jurisdictions and Authorities, do conjoin together in the due
Administration of Justice, the one to help the other.

From this part of the Preamble we may observe, First, That for the Kingdom of
England's being an Empire, consisting of two Estates of Men, and governed by
One Supreme Head, the King and Parliament appeal to old, authentic Histories
and Chronicles; and consequently, wherein the power of this One Supreme Head
does consist, must be learnt from Antiquity. Secondly. That the Exclusion of
Foreign Jurisdiction was the main thing in their Eye; without restraint or
provocation to any Foreign Princes or Potentates of the World. Thirdly, That as
this Supreme Head administered ordinary Justice to his Subjects in Matters
Temporal, by proper Officers, sundry Judges and Ministers; so in Causes of the
Law Divine, or of Spiritual Learning, the same was to be declared, interpreted
and shown by the Spiritualty, (which is to be understood of ordinary
Proceedings.) And consequently, not by Commissioners appointed by the Supreme
Head: For he can appoint no Commissioners to determine Matters of civil Right,
but where special Acts empower him, and no Act had yet empowered him to do so
in Ecclesiastical Matters; nor did his Predecessors or himself, practice it
till afterward: For his diverse, sundry, old Histories and Chronicles, afforded
him no president of any such thing; and therefore it could not be either in the
nature of the thing, or in the sense and meaning of the King and his
Parliament, any essential part of his Legal Supreme Headship, to have a
Personal Supremacy, either independent of the Estates of the Realm, or which
might be administered otherwise than in the Course settled by Law, i. e. by
proper Officers, appointed thereunto either by express Act of Parliament, or
the Original Constitution of the Government, or both.

The Body of the Act prohibits Appeals to the Sea of Rome, and enacts, That in
such Cases, where heretofore any of the King's Subjects and Resiants have used
to pursue, etc. any Appeal to the Sea of Rome, and in all other cases of
Appeals, in and for the Causes aforesaid, they may and shall from henceforth
take, have and use their Appeals within this Realm, and not elsewhere, in
manner and form as hereafter ensues, and not otherwise; that is to say, First,
From the Archdeacon or his Official, if the Matter or Cause be there begun, to
the Bishop Diocesan of the said See, if in any case the Parties be aggrieved.

And in like wise, if it be commenced before the Bishop Diocesan, or his
Commissary, from the Bishop Diocesan or his Commissary, within fifteen days
next ensuing the Judgment, or Sentence thereof there given, to the Archbishop
of the Province of Canterbury, if it be within his Province; and if it be
within the Province of York, then to the Archbishop of York, and so likewise to
all other Archbishops within the King's Dominions, etc. there to be
Definitively and Finally ordered, decreed and adjudged, according to Justice,
without any other appellation or provocation to any Person or Persons, Court or
Courts.

By the next Clause, Matters or Contentions to be commenced before the
Archdeacon of any Bishop or his Commissary are appointed, in case either Party
be aggrieved, to be brought by Appeal to the Court of Arches or Audience of the
same Archbishop of the Province, there to be Definitively and Finally
determined.

The next Clause appoints that Causes to be commenced before any of the
Archbishops, shall before the same Archbishop be definitively determined;
saving always the Prerogative of the Archbishop and Church of Canterbury, in
all the aforesaid Causes of Appeals, in such and like wise as they have been
accustomed and used heretofore.

Then it is Enacted that Causes touching the King, his Heirs and Successors,
shall be finally decreed by the Prelates, Abbots, and Priors of the Upper House
of Convocation.

Hitherto no Appeal lay to the King in Person, or in Chancery: You have heard
already, that originally the ultimate Appeal in Ecclesiastical and Temporal
Matters, was to one and the same Tribunal. Afterward the Sea of Rome gained
Appeals by Usurpation and Connivance. Now they are lodged in the Diocesan, the
Archbishop, and Upper House of Convocation, and their Sentences respectively
are appointed to be final and definitive. And therefore, neither the Clergy in
their Submission, wherein they Recognized the King to be the Supreme Head of
the English Church, V. Burnet's Collect. ad. Vol. 1. p. 128, 129.
nor this Parliament, who had been informed by Old Authentic Histories and
Chronicles, that the Spiritualty and Laity of this Realm are governed by One
Supreme Head and King, did so much as imagine, that by virtue of that Office or
Title the Supreme Cognizance of Appeals, belonged to him personally. If Appeals
to the King in Person or in Chancery, or Commissions of Review had then been
dreamt of, there needed not another Act in the Year ensuing, to take off the
odium of these definitive Sentences from the Archbishops. It is the Stat. of
25. H. 8. cap. 19. Wherein it is Enacted, That for lack of Justice at or in any
of the Courts of the Archbishops of this Realm, or in any of the King's
Dominions, it shall be lawful to the parties grieved, to Appeal to the King's
Majesty in the King's Court of Chancery. And that upon every such Appeal a
Commission shall be directed under the Great Seal, to such persons as shall be
named by the King's Highness, his Heirs or Successors, like as in case of
Appeals from the Admiral's Court, to hear and Definitively to determine such
Appeals.

By a subsequent Clause Appeals from the Jurisdiction of any Abbots, Priors, or
other Heads and Governors of Monasteries, etc. and places exempt, etc. shall
be made immediately to his Majesty into the Court of Chancery; which Appeals so
made, shall be Definitively determined by Authority of the King's Commission.

It looks like a blemish to the Notion of Supreme Head, in the modern
acceptance of the Word, to have the final Judgment in Causes Ecclesiastical
referred by the Parliament to the Bishops, Archbishops, or to Commissioners
appointed by virtue of an Act of Parliament, etc. and yet the Parliament in 25
Hen. 5. cap. 21. takes Notice of, and allows the Clergy's Recognition, nor was
it till many Years after, to wit, the 39 of Eliz. that the Lawyers found out a
way to make these Acts consistent with their imaginary personal Supreme
Headship; and that was by introducing Commissions of Review. Which they tell us
the King, after such a definitive sentence may grant, as Supreme Head, Ad
revidendum, 4 Instit. p. 341. Where two reasons are given for it, First, For
that it is not restrained by the Act, which seems to be a mistake: For it is
restrained by the Act, as much as it was capable of being restrained; and that
by these words, viz. that such Judgment and Sentence as the said Commissioners
shall make and decree, in and upon such Appeals, shall be good and effectual,
and also definitive. How could Commissions of Review be restrained more
expressly, than by these words? They are not named indeed, and good reason why,
viz. because there never had been any such things in our Law before. For he,
that will apply to this Case that common Rule of Law, viz. that where the King
is not named in a Statute, he is not intended to be bound by it; must prove
that Appeals lay to the King in Person or in Chancery, before these Acts were
made. And then perhaps I may yield, that such Commissions of Review are not
hereby restrained.

How comes it to pass, V. Cr. Car. 40 Jones Rep. p. 147. Duke's Law of Char.
Uses; p. 62. Windsor and Hilton's Case.
that the Chancellor's Decree upon Complaint of a person aggrieved by a Decree
of the Commissioners of Charitable Uses, is final; upon which no Bill of Review
is to be allowed? Why, because the Statute of 43 Eliz. cap. 4. gives an Appeal
to him, and goes no higher. And since there were no such Commissions of
Charitable Uses before that Statute, therefore the Statute, being introductive
of a new Law, must be pursued, and where the Statute does not provide a Remedy
there is none. Now the Statute of 24 H. 8. cap. 12. and 25 Hen. 8. cap. 19. So
far forth as they concern Appeals, are for the most part introductive of New
Laws too. And the latter of them gives Appeals to the King in Chancery, which
never lay before. And therefore, as. the Act gives them, he ought to take them,
and no otherwise; for the Act is his title, and it has negative words.

But the Lord Coke's Error in ascribing that Power, Jurisdiction, and Authority
to the King in person, which was ab origin in King, Lords, and Commons, runs
through almost all that he has written upon that Subject. And our Lawyers (who
look upon him as an Oracle, for his Learning and Judgment in the Controversial,
profitable part of the Law, in which he was unquestionably a very great Man)
follow him blindfold in some mistakes They study Resolutions of Judges in
cases of Property, and till of late have gone by that lazy rule, that the
latest authorities are the best. So they forget Antiquity, and hardly cast
their thoughts further backward than Dyer and Plowden. Those of them, that are
more inquisitive, go as high, as to the Quadragesms and Book of Assizes. But
the Government is not so much beholden to them as were to be wished. They
deserve worse of it than other Men, for it being the only honor of their
Profession, to support it by understanding and asserting it, and the natural
bent of their Studies carrying them into it, their narrow Spirits, private
Interests, Et illud quod dicere nolo, prevail with too many of them to betray
it by neglecting it.

The Lord Coke's second Reason for a Commission of Review, to examine a
definitive Sentence given by the Delegates, is, because the Pope as Supreme
Head by the Canon Law used to grant a Commission ad revidendum, and such
Authority as the Pope had, claiming as Supreme Head, does of right belong to
the Crown, and is annexed thereunto by the Statutes of 26 Hen. 8. cap. 1. and 1
Eliz. cap. 1. And so it was resolved, says he, in the King's Bench, Trin. 39
Eliz.

You see the English on it is; the King may do so, because the Pope did so; for
the Pope was Supreme Head then, or claimed to be so, and the King is
acknowledged to be so now.

This pretended Translation of the Pope's Power to the King, is another
fiction, that has contributed exceedingly to raise the Supremacy in some Men's
Imaginations.

But it will appear by running through the several Acts made in King Henry the
Eighth's, King Edward the Sixth's, and Queen Elizabeth's Reigns, concerning
Religion and Church Government, that no Power given to the King, or
acknowledged to be in him, has any respect or relation whatsoever to the Pope's
pretended Power, heretofore exercised. The Pope's Power was abolished and
abrogated. Stat. 28. Hen. 8. cap. 10.
The Ancient Jurisdiction of the Crown, which by the Common Law and Fundamental
Constitution of our Government, was inherent in it, was restored; only some
branches of it put into another method of Administration: And that by the
Supreme Power of the Nation, from whose Authority and Jurisdiction nothing
within this Kingdom is exempted.

That such Authority as the Pope had, does of right belong to the King, he
would prove by the Statutes of 26 Hen. 8. cap. 1. and 1 Elizabeth, cap. 1. The
first of which, to wit, that of 26 Hen. 8. cap. 1. was repealed long before the
Case in 39 Eliz. came in question, and consequently is there alleged to no
purpose. As for the Second, that of 1 Eliz. cap. 1. how far that goes, we shall
have occasion to enquire hereafter, when we come to it in order of time.

He gives us a Corollary, viz. that upon a Sentence given by the High
Commissioners, a Commission of Review may be granted, by virtue of an express
Clause in the Commission; and if no such Clause had been, says he, yet a
Commission of Review might have been granted, Quia sicut fontes Communicant
aquas fluminibus cumulative, non privative, sic Rex subditis suis
Jurisdictionem communicate in causis Ecclesiasticis, vigore Statuti in ejusmodi
casibus editi, and provisi cumulative, and non privative, by construction upon
that Act.

But a Commission of Review upon a Sentence given by the High Commissioners, is
not now disputed. The High Commission was erected long after the 25 Hen. 8. And
consequently a Review of their Sentences (which it seems some construction upon
that Act gave color for,) was not provided against by that Statute. But by
what Law a Review should be granted of a Sentence given by the Delegates, which
by the Act is to be Definitive, I am yet to seek.

I would fain know, whether a Cause determined by Virtue of this Act in the
Upper House of Convocation (for there Ecclesiastical Causes in which the King
himself is concerned, are to be definitively determined,) may be drawn in
question ever after, before Commissioners, ad revidendum, or not? And if not,
why is a Sentence of the Delegates liable to be examined any more than that?

Do these Men really believe that the Judicial Authority of the Nation, is by
the Law lodged in the King's Person? What means then the Act of 16 Car. 1. cap.
10. That neither his Majesty nor his Privy Council, have or ought to have any
Jurisdiction, Power or Authority, by English Bill, Petition, Articles, Libel,
or any other Arbitrary Way whatsoever, to examine or draw in question,
determine or dispose of the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods or Chattels
of any the Subjects of this Realm; but that the same ought to be tried and
determined in the Ordinary Courts of Justice, and by the Ordinary Course of Law.

If it be said, the King appoints the Judges, and has formerly sat in the
King's Bench in Person: For his appointing the Judges; since the time is known
when it was otherwise, that cannot be urged as a Perogative originally inherent
in the King: That our Kings have sometimes sat in the King's Bench in Person,
I yield, and will agree to all the Inferences that can be drawn from it; do but
allow me, which cannot be denied, that Writs of Error lie from the Court of
King's Bench, and Appeals out of Chancery (whoever sits there) before the Lords
in Parliament; who, whether the King be present or absent, agreeing with, or
disagreeing from the Sense of the House, affirm or reverse the Judgments and
Decrees, as they see Cause: And were it not more honorable to ascribe no
Judicial Power at all to the King in Person, than to make him Judge of an
Inferior Court. But you will find that our Kings never sat in the King's Bench or
the Starr Chamber Juridically: The Courts gave the Judgments, Co. 12. Rep. p.
64.
and they were entered per Curiam.

Nay, take in their Hypothesis, Brady, Johnson, Filmer.
who would persuade us, that Parliaments of old time before they were
christened by that Name, were but Assemblies of the King's Tenants, in the
nature of a Court Baron. Why, even in a Court Baron the Suitors are Judges.

And all the Judges of England told King James the First, Co. 12. Rep. 64.
That the King could not in Person adjudge any Case.

If therefore our King's have no Judicial Power personally in them, how can
they derive to others what themselves have not? How comes it to pass that the
King can grant a Commission to review a Decree, when himself cannot review it,
nor is empowered by Act of Parliament to grant any such Commission?

I will dwell no longer upon these Acts concerning Appeals. It appears (I hope)
already, that Appeals, which by the Ancient Law of the Realm, were to the Curia
Regis, had been gained from it to the Court of Rome. That King Henry the Eighth
caused such Foreign Appeals to be restrained, and directed how they should be
prosecuted within the Realm for the future. Which Direction ought to be
pursued; for so far forth as it gives Appeals to the King in Chancery, it is
introductive of a New Law: Which I must believe, till I can be informed that
our Kings in former times ever received Appeals out of Parliament, or their
Magna Curia, what ever that was.

The next thing in our way, is another part of the forementioned Statute of 25
Hen. 8. cap. 19, viz. That the Clergy in their Convocations shall enact no
Constitutions without the King's Assent. The words of the enacting Clause are,
That they (the Clergy) nor any of them from henceforth, shall presume to
attempt, allege, claim, or put in ure any Constitutions or Ordinances,
Provincial or Synodals, or any other Canons; nor shall enact, promulge, or
execute any such Canons, Constitutions or Ordinances Provincial, by whatsoever
Name or Names they may be called, in their Convocations in time coming (which
always shall be assembled by Authority of the King's Writ) unless the same
Clergymen have the King's most Royal Assent and License, to make, promulge and
execute, such Canons, Constitutions and Ordinances, Provincial or Synodal, upon
pain of every one of the Clergy doing contrary to this Act, and being thereof
convict to suffer Imprisonment, and make Fine at the King's Will.

This Act cannot be pretended to give the King and the Clergy any new power:
For it is penned in Negative Words. It is but declarative of what the Ancient
Law of the Kingdom was. The Clergy had frequent Provincial Synods ever since
the Christian Faith was introduced amongst us; but till the Pope had set his
Foot here, our Kings sometime presided, were frequently present in them: Their
Assent was had to all Constitutions made for the Government of the Church. And
Canons intended to bind the Laity, never obtained as Ecclesiastical Laws here,
without the Assent of the Temporalty. But when the Clergy had got an Exemption
from the Temporal Laws, and looked upon themselves as a distinct, separate Body
of Men from the rest of the King's Subjects, as having a dependence upon, and
owing Canonical Obedience to a Foreign Head; then they proceeded to make Canons
without consent of the King or the Temporalty. But even in those days when ever
they entrench't upon the Common Law of the Realm, which was the Subjects Fence
and Protection, the Temporal Courts galled them with Prohibitions: They had not
in the times of Popery a Power of binding the Laity, even in Matters of
Religion, without their Assent. But themselves they bound, and the inferior
Clergy were all subjected to the Power of Provincial Synods, because of their
Oath of Canonical Obedience: And these Canons by which they bound the whole
Body of the Clergy, never had any Royal Assent to them since King Stephen's
days. No Ecclesiastical Laws, other than what were enacted in Parliament,
having since that King's Reign derived their Authority from the King. This Act
therefore ties up the Clergy from any power of making Canons and Constitutions
without the King. But since it gives them no manner of Power or Authority
whatsoever, their Power (even the Royal Assent taken in) is no other since this
Act, than it was before they had withdrawn themselves from the King and the
Laity: Which how far it extended has been sufficiently explained already.

I will not go so far as some have done, to affirm, Sir Edward Bagshaw's
Argument concerning the Canons.
that the King's Assent here spoken of, must be understood of his Assent in
Parliament. But I think it is very observable, that the Parliament did by this
Act appoint Sixteen of the Two and thirty Commissioners, (who were to view,
search and examine the Canons, Constitutions and Ordinances Provincial and
Synodal heretofore made, in order to the keeping of some and rejecting others)
to be of the Upper and Nether House of Parliament. They would have Committees
of their own Houses inspect all Canons formerly made, and judge which were fit
to be retained. How can we then imagine, that they had any thoughts of
subjecting themselves and their Posterities, to the King and the Convocation of
the Clergy in Matters of Religion for the future?

Nay, they seem, as it were, jealous lest this Act, tho as cautiously penned as
the Wit of Man could contrive it, should be made use of to color some
unwarrantable Power of the Clergy in Convocation, having the Royal Assent to
their Constitutions: And therefore they add a special Proviso, that no Canons,
Constitutions or Ordinances, shall be made or put in execution within this
Realm, by the Authority of the Convocation of the Clergy, which shall be
contrariant or repugnant to the King's Perogative Royal, or the Customs, Laws
or Statutes of the Realm. Now whether it was against the Laws of the Realm or
not, in the Opinion of this Parliament, for the King and the Clergy to top any
Laws upon them without their consent, will appear by the Preamble of another
Act of this very Session of Parliament, and therefore I will pass it by now.

Nor was there any thing in the future practice of this King's Reign, which
gave or asserted any Power to the King and Convocation, to bind or conclude the
People without an Act of Parliament concurring and enforcing the same.

The next Act is the Twentieth Chap. of this same Session of Parliament,
concerning the Election and Consecration of Bishops. This Act does not resume
the Election to the Parliament, from whom it had been gained, but leaving a
shadow of Election in the Consistory, impowers the King to name the Person,
commands the Dean and Chapter, under the Penalty of a Praemunire, to choose the
Person nominated to them in the Writ of Conge d'eslire, and appoints how he
shall be Consecrated without Pall, Bulls, or other things formerly requisite to
be obtained at the Sea of Rome.

This Prerogative that our Kings now have in the Election of Bishops, stands
upon the foundation of this Act of Parliament, and other it has none. The
Supreme Headship, it seems, did not include the power of appointing Bishops,
for that had been allowed two Years ago, and is acknowledged by way of recital
in this Session, cap. 21. and yet the Election and Consecration of Bishops is
appointed by Act of Parliament; so that the title of Supreme Head did not then
imply any such exorbitant Power, as some have imagined.

Next comes the Act entitled, No Imposition shall be paid to the Bishop of
Rome, etc. It recites, That where this your Grace's Realm, recognizing no
Superior under God, but only your Grace, has been and is free from subjection
to any Man's Law, but only to such as have been devised, made and ordained
within the same, for the Wealth of the said Realm, or to such other, as by
sufferance of your Grace and your Progenitors the People of this Realm have
taken at their free Will and Liberty by their own Consent to be used among
them, and have bound themselves by long use and custom to the observance of the
same, not as to the observance of the Laws of any foreign Prince, Potentate, or
Prelate, but as to the accustomed and ancient Laws of this Realm originally
established as Laws of the same, by the said sufferance, consent, and custom,
and none otherwise. These other Laws, which the People of this Realm are said
to have taken at their free Will and Liberty, by their own Consent, and are
said to have bound themselves to, as to the Established Laws of the Realm, by
the said sufferance, consent, and custom, and none otherwise, are the Canon
Laws. Which here the Parliament disclaim any Obligation to the observance of,
otherwise than as they had bound themselves by their own sufferance and
consent. And consequently they did not look upon any Ecclesiastical Laws, as
obligatory to themselves and their Posterity, but what themselves had, or for
the time to come should Consent to. This would never have proceeded from them,
if they had imagined, that the Legislative Power in Ecclesiastical Matters, was
or ever had been vested in the King's Person, as some amongst us have not stuck
to assert of late.

But the Act goes on; It stands therefore with natural equity and good
Reason, that in all and every such Laws humane, made within this Realm, or
induced into this Realm, by the said sufferance, consent, and custom, your
Royal Majesty, and your Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons, representing
the whole state of your Realm in this your most high Court of Parliament, have
full Power and Authority, not only to dispense, but also to authorize some
Elect Person or Persons, to dispense with those and all other humane Laws of
this your Realm, etc. and also the same to abrogate, amplify or diminish, as
it shall seem to your Majesty, and the Nobles and Commons of your Realm,
present in your Parliament, meet and convenient, etc. Here is no dispensing
Power acknowledged to be personal in the King. Nor is the Parliament so much a
stranger to Matters of Religion, as not to have a share even in the dispensing,
as well as the abrogating Power, with respect to Ecclesiastical Laws. You see,
as soon as ever the foreign Yoke was cast off, they put in for their share of
the Supremacy, nor did the King look upon it as any diminution to his own legal
right, to admit their claim. It was in concurrence with them, and with their
assent that the method of prosecuting Appeals had been settled; they joined
with him in tying up the hands of the Clergy from promulging any Constitutions,
without the Royal Assent; their Authority concurred in appointing how Bishops
should be Elected, Invested, and Consecrated; and here they empower the
Archbishop and the King to grant Dispensations.

Then they proceed to Enact how, and by whom, and in what cases Dispensations
shall be granted for the future. And first they empower the Archbishop of
Canterbury for the time being, and his Successors to grant Dispensations to the
King, his Heirs and Successors, for causes not contrary to the Scriptures and
the Laws of God. How? Could not the King by virtue of his inherent Prerogative
dispense with himself? Dr. Hicks.
Was not this involved in the formal conception of Imperial Sovereignty? No. If
he will act contrary to Law, he must have a Dispensation, and that Dispensation
granted by a Subject, empowered by Act of Parliament so to do. This is the
first and only Act that gives the King a power of dispensing in Ecclesiastical
Matters, and the Archbishop of Canterbury may dispense in all cases, which the
King by virtue of this Act may dispense in; only in cases unwont to be
dispensed in at Rome, he must advertise the King or his Council; who if they
determine that such Dispensation shall pass, then the Archbishop, having the
King's License, shall dispense accordingly: But who ever heard of the King's
Licensing an Archbishop to dispense with an Act of Parliament? How would it
found in our Ears, if Divina Providentia Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus should
issue a Non Obstante to an Act of the King, Lords, and Commons in Parliament?
And yet the Archbishop may grant Dispensations with the King's allowance in all
Cases whatsoever, that that Act extends to. Therefore, I say, the King's Power
of dispensing by virtue of that Act, is with the Canon Law only, which in
effect was no Law at all.

To say that the King is not restrained by this Act, Hob. p 146. in Colt and
Glovers Case.
but his power remains full and perfect as before, and he may grant them still,
as King, for all Acts of Justice and Mercy flow from him, is a sound of words
only, vox and praeterea nihil. And yet we find by Experience, that hae nugae
seria ducunt in mala; there is likewise a strange Expression in Moor's Reports,
542. cs. 719. Al tierce point ils semblont que la Royne poit granter
dispensations come le Pape puissoit en cases lou l'Archevesque n'ad authority
per le Stat. de 25 H. 8. de granter dispensations: quia tout l'authority, que
le Pape usoit, est done al Corone. But these and many other scattered Cases and
extravagant Expressions of Reporters (which have been made use of as Judgments
in after times) there may possibly be some account given hereafter in a
Discourse by it self.

The latter part of the Statute of 25 H. 8. c. 21. concerns the visiting of
Colleges, Hospitals, and places exempt. It is enacted that the Archbishop of
Canterbury or any other person or persons, shall have no Power and Authority,
by reason of this Act, to visit or vex any Monasteries, Abbeys, Priories,
Colleges, Hospitals, Houses, or other places Religious, which be or were exempt
before the making of this Act, but that Redress, Visitation, and Confirmation
shall be had by the King's Highness, his Heirs and Successors by Commission
under the Great Seal, to be directed to such persons as shall be appointed
requisite for the same, etc.

This Act of Parliament, having abrogated the Pope's Power here in England,
those places that had been exempt from ordinary Jurisdiction, would naturally
have fallen back within the Visitation of the Diocesan (I mean, such places, as
had been exempt by virtue of any Bulls, Licenses, or Dispensations from Rome
only) if it had not been especially and expressly provided that nothing in the
said Act should be taken nor expounded to the derogation or taking away of any
grants or confirmations of any Liberties, Privileges, or Jurisdiction of any
Monasteries, Abbeys, Priories, or other Houses or places exempt, which before
the making of this Act have been obtained at the Sea of Rome: and if the
Visitation of them by Commission under the Great Seal, had not been provided
for.

In the next Year, Ann. 26 H. 8. The Statute was made, which enacts that the
King our Sovereign Lord, his Heirs and Successors, Kings of this Realm, shall
be taken, accepted and reputed the Only Supreme Head on Earth of the Church of
England, called Anglicana Ecclesia, and shall have and enjoy, united and
annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, as well the title and style
thereof, as all Honors, Dignities, Preheminences, Jurisdictions, Privileges,
Authorities, Immunities, Profits, and Commodities to the said Dignity of
Supreme Head of the same Church belonging and appertaining.

What was then meant, understood, recognis'd etc. by the word Supreme Head,
will appear by these following Considerations; First, that the recital of the
Act shows they intended not by that recognition to invest him with any new
Power: For they recite that the King's Majesty justly and rightfully, is, and
ought to be the Supreme head of the Church of England; and so is recognized by
the Clergy of the Realm in their Convocations, yet nevertheless for
corroboration and confirmation thereof, etc. So that this Act so far forth, as
it gives or acknowledges the Title of SUPREME HEAD, is but Declarative. And
consequently they, that upon this Act ground a Translation of the Pope's Power
by the Canon Law, to the King, utterly mistake the matter: For our King's
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was not grounded upon the Canon Law, but the Common
Law of the Realm; it was a Native of our own, and not of any foreign
extraction: Secondly, That this Supreme Head-ship of the Church, consists only
in his being Supreme head of that Church of England, which then was called
Anglicana Ecclesia; and who they were, appears First, by the Statute of 24.
Henr. 8. cap. 12. aforementioned: The body Spiritual whereof (of the Realm of
England) having Power, when any Cause of the Law Divine, happened to come in
question, or of Spiritual Learning, that it was declared, interpreted, and
showed by that part of the said body Politic, called the Spiritualty; now
being usually called the English Church. So that the Spiritualty are the
Ecclesia Anglicana, of whom the King is here declared the supreme head.
Secondly, It appears by the Recognition of the Clergy, who having no Authority
to declare a Supreme Head in Ecclesiastical matters for the Laity, did but by
that Submission acknowledge themselves to be to all intents and purposes, the
King's Subjects and not the Pope's. But Thirdly, This same Parliament in this
very Session tells us, that the King had of right always been so: It is in the
third Chapt. for the payment of first fruits to the King. The words are,
Wherefore his said humble and obedient Subjects, as well the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, as the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, etc. do pray
that for the more surety, continuance, and augmentation of his Highness Royal
estate, being not only now recognis'd (as he always indeed has heretofore
been) the only Supreme Head in Earth, next and immediately under God, of the
Church of England, but also their most assured and undoubted, natural Lord and
King, having the whole Governance of this his Realm, etc. They tell him, That
he was not only the Supreme Head of the Church of England, but their (viz. the
Temporalties) Lord and King; so that he had the Governance of the whole Realm
and Subjects of the same. What can be more plain, than first, That by Supreme
Head of the Church of England, was meant the Supreme Head of the Spiritualty?
which was necessary to be recognized, because they had acknowledged formerly
another Supreme Head. Secondly, That they gave no new Power by that word, since
they tell us, that indeed he had always been so. And Thirdly, That his
Supremacy consists only in a power of Governance. Fourthly, This title of
Supreme Head does not give the King any power of dispensing with Acts of
Parliament in Matters of Religion or Ecclesiastical Affairs whatsoever. That
power was never yielded to the Pope himself, during that whole time that he was
uncontroulably submitted to, as Head of the Church. That power they complain of
in the Act of 25 H. 8. cap. 21. as an Usurpation, an Abuse, a Cheat. They
declare it to be in the King and themselves. Fifthly, Dr. Burnet in his History
of the Reformation, p. 142, 143. First Part, has these words; But at the same
time that they pleaded so much for the King's Supremacy, and power of making
Laws for restraining and coercing his Subjects, it appears that they were far
from vesting him with such an absolute Power, as the Popes had pretended to;
for they thus defined the extent of the King's Power. Institution of a
Christian Man.
To them (speaking of Princes and Magistrates specially and principally it
appertains to defend the Faith of Christ and his Religion, to conserve and
maintain the True Doctrine of Christ, and all such as be true Preachers and
setters forth thereof, and to abolish Heresies, Abuses, and Idolatries, and to
punish with corporal pains, such as of Malice be the occasion of the same. And
finally to oversee and cause that the said Bishops and Priests do execute their
Pastoral Office truly and faithfully, and speally in these Points which by
Christ and his Apostles were given and committed to them; and in case they
shall be negligent in any part thereof, or would not diligently execute the
same, to cause them to double and supply their lack; and if they obstinately
withstand their Prince's kind monition, and will not amend their faults, then
and in such case, to put others in their rooms and places: And God has also
commanded the said Bishops and Priests to obey with all humbleness and
reverence, both Kings and Princes and Governors, and all their Laws not being
contrary to the Laws of God) whatsoever they be, and that not only propter
iram, but also propter conscientiam. Thus it appears, that they both limited
obedience to the King's Laws, with the due caution of not being contrary to the
Law of God; and acknowledged the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in discharge of
the Pastoral Office, committed to the Pastors of the Church by Christ and his
Apostles; and that the Supremacy then pretended to, was no such extravagant
Power as some imagine. Sixthly, That the Supremacy ascribed to the King by this
Act, had no reference to any such absolute Power as the Pope pretended to,
appears by the whole course of the King's Reign; forasmuch as the Exercise of
this Supremacy in every Branch of it, was directed by particular and positive
Laws made much about the same time; nor perhaps were any Acts of Supremacy
exerted during this King's Reign, that some Act of Parliament or other did not
warrant, as will appear in our Progress.

The truth of it is, that no more can be made of it, than an utter Exclusion of
the Pope's pretended Authority, and an acknowledgment that the King is (not an
absolute Dominus fac-totum in Spiritualibus, but) the Fountain of Justice to be
administered according to Law in Cases commonly called Ecclesiastical, as well
as Temporal, without any dependence upon a Foreign Potentate.

Hence it is, that in these Acts of King Henry the Eighth concerning
Ecclesiastical Affairs, the Crown of England is so often mentioned to be an
Imperial Crown and the Realm of England, an Empire. Sir Edward Hale^'s Case.
Tho that Word has been made use of of late to countenance a very strange and
unheard of Judgment: But the Gentleman that made use of the Word, either
understood it not, or wilfully misapplyed it. The Crown of England is said to
be an Imperial Crown, because it is subject to no Foreign Jurisdiction. The
Kings of England are not Homagers nor ever were, for their Kingdom to any
other, as many Kings have been. A Regal Crown does not ex vi termini, exclude a
Subordination; an Imperial Crown does. The Emperor of Germany (whose Crown must
needs be Imperial) has less Power in the Empire than most Princes in their own
Dominions.

But it must be confessed, that the Word Supreme Head, tho legally understood,
it be no such Bugbear, yet was a Term borrowed from Antichrist; a Word that
gave offense, especially to those that knew little of its Signification, but
what they had learnt from a Jurisdiction pretended to be exercised by the Pope
as such; and claiming to be so, as Vicar General to Christ. Papists thought the
Right of St. Peter's Successor injuriously invaded; and Protestants, though
universally submitting to the Legal Power of the Crown, yet many of them
boggl'd at the Title, as making too bold with our Saviors Prerogative of being
the only HEAD of the Church. And so great Powers were given to King Henry the
Eighth by Acts of Parliament, (of which by and by) in Ecclesiastical and
Spiritual Matters; which, though given by particular Laws, and those Laws
occasioned by the then Circumstances of Affairs; yet by some unadvised Persons
are confounded with his Legal and Original Supremacy at the Common Law, or at
least are looked upon as incident to the Title, Style, and Dignity of Supreme
Head; that no wonder the Title has found little countenance from Protestant
Writers.

The other part of this short Act of 26 Hen. 8. cap. 1. is very observable, and
discovers a Secret that few observe; but rightly considered, lays open a very
fine Scene, and gives an undeniable Answer to the only material Argument that
can be produced in favor of the late Ecclesiastical Commission. The Argument
lies thus: King Henry the Eighth issued a Commission to Cromwell, whereby he
constituted him his Vicegerent in Ecclesiastical Matters, and delegated to him
the Exercise of all his Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, long before the 1 Eliz.
which empowered Queen Elizabeth and her Successors from time to time, to issue
such Commissions: And this Commission to Cromwell cannot be denied to have been
a Legal Commission, because it is recited in an Act of Parliament, 31 Hen. 8.
cap. 10.
admitted to be according to Law, and a place appointed him in respect of that
Office, above the Archbishop of Canterbury in the House of Lords. And there
having been no Act of Parliament in King Henry the Eighths time, whereby he was
expressly empowered to issue such a Commission; the Commission was warranted by
the Common Law. This being the Argumentum palmarium, tho foolishly omitted by
those that have undertaken to write in Vindication of the Proceedings of the
late Commissioners, receives a full and satisfactory Answer from this very Act
of Parliament, this being the Act which was the Ground and Foundation of that
Commission, and, as far as I know of the Commission, did really warrant it. The
Words are these, viz. And that our Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and
Successors, Kings of this Realm, shall have full Power and Authority from time
to time, to visit, repress, redress, reform, order, correct, restrain, and
amend all such Errors, Heresies, Abuses, Offenses, Contempts and Enormities,
whatsoever they be, which by any manner Spiritual Authority or Jurisdiction
ought or may be lawfully reformed, repressed, ordered, redressed, corrected,
restrained or amended, most to the Pleasure of Almighty God, the increase of
Virtue in Christ's Religion, and for the conservation of the Peace, Unity, and
Tranquillity of this Realm, any Usage, Custom, foreign Laws, foreign Authority,
Prescription, or any thing or things to the contrary hereof notwithstanding. By
these Words a Personal Authority (not of Legislation) but of visiting,
redressing, correcting, etc. is given; to whom? To the King, his Heirs and
Successors. This Power was given by the Parliament, nor was enjoyed or
exercised by the King or any of his Predecessors before; and being vested in
the King, his Heirs and Successors, may consequentially be delegated to
Commissioners. After this Act was passed, out comes Cromwell's Commission of
Vicegerency, and not till then, tho the Clergy had recognized the Supremacy two
years ago; and the Parliament in the 24 Hen. 8. cap. 12. and the 25 Hen. 8.
cap. 21. had in effect done so too: Yet was not the recognis'd, restored and
declared Supremacy looked upon as any Warrant for an Ecclesiastical Commission,
till a new Power was given to the King by this Act: And this Act of Parliament
having been Repealed by the First and Second of Phil. and Mar. and never since
revived; there is now no ground from this Act, or from that President of
Cromwell's Commission, for a like Commission in our Days. How far the Statute
of 1 Eliz. gives countenance thereunto, shall be enquired into when we come to
it.

The next Act that I shall take notice of, is the Thirteenth Chapter of this
same Session, entitled, By whom Suffragans shall be nominated and elected: The
Act recites, that sithen the beginning of this present Parliament, good and
honorable Laws and Statutes have been made and established for Elections,
Presentations, Consecrations, and investing of Archbishops and Bishops of this
Realm, with all Ceremonies appertaining to the same; yet nevertheless, no
Provision has been made for Suffragan Bishops; and therefore enacts, what
Towns shall be taken and accepted for Sees of Bishops Suffragans: And gives the
King Power and Authority to give to one of two Persons to be presented to him
by any Archbishop or Bishop, the Style, Title and Name of a Bishop of such a
See, etc. provides for the Consecration of such Bishops; limits what Authority
they shall have in the Diocese, etc.

Hence I infer, that the Parliament had its share in the Government of the
Church, The Letters Patents made pursuant to this Act, conclude, Vigore Statuti
in ejusmodi casu editi and provisi. Dr. Burnet. Coll. of Rec. ad Vol. 1. p. 130.
notwithstanding the Restitution of the Supremacy; and the King could not as
SUPREME HEAD, without this Act of Parliament appoint the number of Suffragan
Bishops, or give, limit or bound their Power and Authority.

In the Twenty eighth Year of this King, it was enacted, That all Archbishops
and Bishops of this Realm, or of any the Kings Dominions consecrated, and at
this present Parliament taken and reputed for Archbishops and Bishops, may by
the Authority of this present Parliament, and not by Virtue of any Provision or
other Foreign Authority, License, Faculty or Dispensation, keep, enjoy, and
retain their Archbishopricks and Bishoprics, in as large and ample manner as
if they had been promoted, elected, confirmed and consecrated according to the
due Course of the Laws of this Realm: And that every Archbishop and Bishop of
this Realm, and of other the King's Dominions, may minister, use and exercise
all and every thing and things pertaining to the Office or Order of an
Archbishop or Bishop, with all Tokens, Insigns and Ceremonies thereunto
lawfully belonging.

Here the Parliament impowers the Archbishops and Bishops that then were, to
use and exercise their Offices and Orders, not by Virtue of any Foreign
Authority, but by Authority of this present Parliament. This the King could not
have done without consent of Parliament, because he could not dispense with the
Statutes of Praemunire and Provisors, as has been said already, and as appears
by a notable Act in the Twenty fifth Year of this King's Reign, Burnett's
Collect. of Records. ad Vol. 1. page 121, 122, 123.
concerning the Deprivation of the Bishops of Salisbury and Worcester: The Act
recites, That where by the laudable Laws and Provisions of this Realm, it had
been established that no Person or Persons of of what Degree, Estate or
Quality, should take or receive within this Realm of England, to Farm by any
Procuracy, Writ, Letter of Attorney, Administration, by Indenture, or by any
other Mean, any Benefice or other Promotion within this Realm, of any Person or
Persons, but only of the King's true and lawful Subjects, being born under the
King's Dominions: And also, that no Person or Persons of what Estate and Degree
soever, by reason of any such Farm, Procuracy, Letter of Attorney,
Administration, Indenture, or by any other Mean, should, etc. Notwithstanding
which said wholesome Laws, Statutes and Provisions, the King's Highness being a
Prince of great Benignity and Liberality, having no Knowledge, or due
Information or Instruction of the same Laws, Statutes and Provisions, has
heretofore nominated and preferred, and promoted Laurence Compegius Bishop of
Sarum, with all the Spiritual and Temporal Possessions, etc. belonging to the
same; And has also nominated, preferred and promoted Hierome, being another
Stranger, to the Sea of Worcester, etc. Be it enacted by Authority of this
present Parliament, That the said two several Sees of Salisbury and Worcester
shall be taken, reputed and accounted in Law void, etc. Here we see the King
was not allowed to act contrary to Acts of Parliament concerning Ecclesiastical
Matters: We see Bishops deprived by Act of Parliament, and by the Act of 28 H.
8. cap. 16. other Bishops and Archbishops, who in strictness of Law were no
Bishops of those Sees, by reason of their foreign Provisions, quieted in the
enjoyment of their Bishoprics and authorized to exercise their Episcopal
Function, there by Act of Parliament; though it is not to be doubted, but if
the Rolls of those times were searched, Dispensations formerly granted to those
Bishops would be found amongst them. But they stood them in no stead, because
contrary to the Laws, Statutes, and Provisions aforesaid. So that here the King
and Parliament acknowledging that the King had no knowledge or due Information
or Instruction of the said Statutes (which is a modest and respectful way of
expressing the King's doing an illegal thing) what else can we infer than that
they disown, and he disclaims any personal Prerogative inherent in himself, to
violate those (and, consequently other) Laws concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs?
Which shows both that the King's Supremacy was not accounted any such unbounded
Power, as some fancy, and that the Parliament retained its share in the
Jurisdiction over Ecclesiastical Persons and Things, notwithstanding the
restitution, recognition (or call it what you will) of the Supremacy.

I pass by the Act of 31 H. 8. c. 14. whereby certain Opinions then accounted
Heresy, and Marriage of Priests, are brought within the compass of Treason and
Felony (for that the inflicting of such Punishments, for what Crimes or
pretended Crimes soever, is an Act of Civil, not of Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction) and come to the Act of 32 H. 8. cap. 26. which laid the top stone
of King Henry the Eighths Supremacy, and mounted it one story higher than ever
it was carried before or since. It was thereby enacted, that All Decrees and
Ordinances, which according to God's Word and Christ's Gospel by the Kings
Advice and Confirmation by his Letters Patents, shall be made and ordained by
the Archhishops, Bishops, and Doctors, appointed or to be appointed by his
Royal Majesty, or else by the whole Clergy of England, (nota been) in and upon
the matter of Christian Religion, and Christian Faith, and the lawful Rites,
Ceremonies, and Observations of the same, shall be in every point thereof
believed, obeyed, and performed to all intents and purposes, upon the pains
therein comprised. Here Matters of Doctrine and Worship are given up to the
King's determination and appointment. But he was to determine by such Advice,
as was appointed by the Act. And this Power was personal, died with him, and
was never pretended to by any of his Successors. It was given him by
Parliament, who could not have given it him, if they had not had it themselves:
for there was no Act of Convocation in the case. He had it not before, for then
there would have been no need of the Act. It is greater to give than to
receive. They give it him with a restriction, that affords a good Argument
against a pretended power in the King, of dispensing with all Acts of
Parliament concerning matters of Religion, viz. Provided that nothing shall be
ordained or defined which shall be repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of the
Realm. It seems the Parliament at that time was so far from apprehending any
power lodged in the King, either by virtue of any inherent Prerogative, or by
virtue of his Imperial Sovereignty, or as incident to his lately recognis'd
title of Supreme Head, of breaking through all Acts of Parliaments relating to
Religion and Ecclesiastical Affairs, that now in the 32 Year of his Reign, when
he had been declared the Supreme Head by Act of Parliament Six Years ago, when
every Act of Parliament about Church Matters carried an acknowledgment of that
Declaration in the front of it, when a Legislative Power as to Doctrine and
Ceremonies was given him by Act of Parliament, yet even then when the Supremacy
blazed like a Meteor, and had so malignant an influence, as to strike opposers
dead, when it was armed with such a Power as never any King of England enjoyed
before or since, yet then were Acts of Parliaments accounted so Sacred that
nothing was to be ordained or defined by this new Legislative Authority
contrary to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm.

And this very Legislative Power, owing its birth to a Parliamentary
Concession, which qualified it with a Restriction, which perhaps was not
acceptable, is sufficient to inform us that a Parliament can give more power
and larger Prerogatives to the King, even in Ecclesiastical Matters, than he
has by common right; and that is all the use that can be made of this Act now in
our days.

The next Act is that of Marriages; cap. 38. of this Session, the Conusance of
Marriage had time out of mind belonged to the Spiritual Jurisdiction; which was
now vested in a great measure in the King's Person; the executive part he might
administer by Commissioners delegated, by virtue of the Stat. of 26 Hen. 8.
cap. 1. (as has been said) a Legislative Power was given him by 32 Hen. 8.
cap. 26. But that Act did not enable him to make any binding Laws about
Marriage, for the Declarations, Decrees, Definitions, Resolutions and
Ordinances which he was empowered to make according to God's Word and Christ's
Gospel, with his Bishops and Doctors to be appointed, were only in Matters of
Christian Faith and the lawful Rites and Ceremonies of the same. And the
settling of the Degrees of Marriage not falling under either of those two Heads,
viz. Matters of Faith, or Ceremonies; it was necessary there should be an Act
of Parliament to make a Regulation therein.

The next Act is the 34 and 35 Hen. 8. cap. 1. which prohibits the settling or
using of any Books of the Old or New Testament of Tindal's Translation, or
comprizing any Matter of Christian Religion, Articles of Faith or Holy
Scripture, contrary to the Doctrine set forth since Anno Dom. 1540. or to be set
forth by the King; prohibits the retaining any English. Books or Writings
concerning Matters against the Holy and Blessed Sacrament of the Altar, or for
Maintenance of the Anabaptists, or other Books abolished by the King's
Proclamation; forbids any thing to be taught contrary to the King's
Instructions, etc. under severe Penalties. In which there is this farther
Clause: And be it farther enacted, That the King's Majesty, our said Sovereign.
Lord that now is, King Henry the Eighth, may at any time hereafter at his
Highness liberty and pleasure, change and alter this present Act and Provisions
of the same, or any Clause or Article therein contained, as to his Highness
most excellent Wisdom shall seem convenient, any thing in this Act to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding. So that a Power in the King of Changing
and Altering (and consequently of Suspending, which in effect is Repealing,)
Acts of Parliament concerning Matters of Religion, unless given by a
Parliament, is not according to the Constitution of our Government, nor is it a
Perogative inherent in the King of common Right: For if he had had such a Power
in himself, this Clause (which no doubt, was put in by the King's Order) would
have been vain and nugatory.

The Act of 35 Hen. 8. cap. 16. gives the King Authority during his Life, to
name Thirty two Persons, viz. sixteen Spiritual and sixteen Temporal, to
examine all Canons, Constitutions and Ordinances Provincial and Synodal, and to
establish all such Laws Ecclesiastical as shall be thought by the King and them
convenient to be used in all Spiritual Courts. This the King could not do by
Virtue of the Act of 32 Hen. 8. cap. 26. For that Act gave him a Power
concerning Matters of Christian Faith and Ceremonies only: Nor could the King
and the Clergy settle these Canons and Constitutions, without an Act of
Parliament; for the Laity in all Matters Ecclesiastical, in all things of
Spiritual Conusance, were to be bound by them: Nor would the Parliament trust
the King and the Spiritualty to settle the Canon Law, without an equal number
of the Temporalty added to them.

The next and last Act that I shall observe in this King's Reign, is the 37
Hen. 8. cap. 17. 'which Act reciting, That the Archbishops, Bishops,
Archdeacons and other Ecclesiastical Persons, have no manner of Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, but by, under and from the King, Enacts, That all Persons, as
well Lay as Married Men, being Doctors of the Civil Law, may lawfully execute
and exercise all manner of Jurisdiction, and all Censures and Coercions
appertaining to, or in any wise concerning the same, etc. any Law, Constitution
or Ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding. What can be more purely Spiritual
than exercising. Ecclesiastical Censures, and yet this King, though he had a
Personal executive Power given him in all Matters Ecclesiastical by the 26 Hen.
8. cap. 1. a Legislative Power in part, by the Statutes of 31 Hen. 8. cap. 8.
and 32 Hen. 8. cap. 25. and a Power of Dispensing with the Canon Law, by the
Statute of 25 Hen. 8. cap. 21. yet thought it convenient at least, to have the
concurrence of his Parliament, in breaking through those Ordinances and
Constitutions, whereby Laymen and Marryed-men were disabled to exercise any
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, or be Judge or Register in any Court commonly
called Ecclesiastical Court.

I cannot well deny but that the King might have dispensed with those Canons
and Constitutions by Virtue of the Statute of the 25 Hen. 8. cap. 21. which
empowered him to allow the Archbishop of Canterbury to grant Licenses and
Dispensations even in Cases not wont to be dispensed in at Rome: Nay, and these
Constitutions whereby Lay and Married Men were disabled, as aforesaid, are in
the Preamble of this Statute, said to be utterly abolished, frustrated and of
none effect, by a Statute made in the Twenty fifth Year of the Kings most Noble
Reign: By which seems to be meant the Nineteenth Chapter of the then Session of
Parliament: And yet because the Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, and other
Ecclesiastical Persons practiced the contrary; which might give occasion to
some evil disposed Persons to think, and little to regard the Proceedings and
Censures Ecclesiastical, made by your. Highness and your Vicegerent, Officials
and Commissaries, Judges and Visitors, being also Lay and Married Men, to be of
little or none Effect or Force; Therefore it is ordained and enacted by
Authority of this present Parliament, That all and singular Persons, as well
Lay as those that be Married, being Doctors of the Civil Law, etc. The enacting
of a thing by Parliament to silence all Doubts, to give credit to the
Proceedings of such Laymen as then did actually exercise Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction by Commission, or otherwise, shows sufficiently, that even in
Matters never so Spiritual, the Act of King, Lords and Commons, carried a
greater Authority than any Commission, Dispensation, or other Act whatsoever
proceeding from the King solely, and that at a time when the Supremacy was at
the height.

There were many other Acts passed in this Kings Reign, concerning Church men
and Matters confessedly of Ecclesiastical Conusance, as 21 Hen. 8. cap. 5.
concerning Probates of Wills. Cap. 6. Concerning Mortuaries taken by Priests
and others. Cap. 13. Against Pluralities of Benefices and taking of Farms by
Spiritual Men. 23 Hen. 8. Cap. 1. Abridging the Power of Ordinaries, and taking
away the Benefit of Clergy in some Cases. Cap. 9. That no Man be cited into any
Ecclesiastical Court out of the Diocese wherein he dwells, unless in certain
Cases. Cap. 10. Concerning Feoffments and Assurances to the use of any Church
or Chapel. 25 Hen. 8. Cap. 14. For the punishment of Heresy and Heretics,
limiting the manner of proceeding against them, defining what shall be Heresy,
how it shall be punished, and abridging the Authority of the Bishops and the
Canon Law. Cap. 16. Concerning Pluralities. 26 Hen. 8. Cap. 3. For the payment
of the First Fruits of all Dignities, Benefices, Promotions Spiritual and
Tenths, to the King and his Heirs, abolishing the Pope's Usurpation and
Authority herein. Cap. 13. For abolishing the Privilege of Sanctuary in Cases
of High Treason. Cap. 15. Against some Exactions of Spiritual Men within the
Archdeaconry of Richmond. 27 Hen. 8. Cap. 8. That the King's Spiritual Subjects
shall pay no Tenths whilst they are in their First Fruits. Cap. 19. Limiting
Sanctuaries and Sanctuary Persons. Cap. 20. Concerning the Payment of Tithes
within the City and Suburbs of London. Cap. 28. For the suppressing of
Monasteries, Priories and Religious Houses, vesting their Revenues in the King,
and erecting a Court of Augmentations. 28 Hen. 8. Cap. 10. For extinguishing
the Authority of the Bishop of Rome, prescribing an Oath of Abjuration of it,
and Popery, together with the Pope's Usurpations, and excellently setting forth
the King's Supremacy and Parliaments Authority in Matters Ecclesiastical. Cap.
11. For the Restitution of the Profits arising, during the Vacation of a
Benefice to the next Incumbent. Cap. 13. Compelling Spiritual Persons to reside
upon their Livings. Cap. 16. Releasing such as had obtained pretended Licenses
and Dispensations from the Sea of Rome. 31 Hen. 8. Cap. 16. Enabling such as
were Religious Persons to purchase Lands, to sue and to be sued in all manner
of Actions, which they were disabled formerly to do by the Common and Canon
Law. Cap. 9. Enabling the King to make Bishops by his Letters Patents, and to
erect new Bishoprics, which he did. Cap. 13. For dissolving all Monasteries
and Religious Houses, and vesting them in the King. Cap. 14. For abolishing
diversity of Opinions in Matters of Religion, most fully and exactly
demonstrating the Parliaments Jurisdiction in Matters of Religion. 32 Hen. 8.
Cap. 7. For the true Payment of Tithes and Offerings. Cap. 10. For the
Punishment of incontinent Priests and Women offending with them. Cap. 12.
Concerning Sanctuaries and the Privileges of Churches and Churchyards. Cap.
15. Prescribing the manner of proceeding against Heretics, and impugners of
the Act for abolishing of enormous Opinions in Christians Religion. Cap. 25.
Dispensing with the Marriage between the King and the Lady. Ann of Cleve. 33
Hen. 8. Cap. 29. For enabling Religious Persons to sue and be sued. Cap. 31.
Severing the Bishoprics of Chester and the Isle of Man from the Jurisdiction
of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and uniting them to the Province and
Archbishopric of York. Cap. 32. Making the Church of Whitegate a Parish Church
by it self, and severing it from the Parish of Over. All these Acts, and
perhaps some few not here enumerated, evince beyond all possibility of
contradiction, that the whole Fabric of the English Church, both as to the
Doctrine, Discipline, Ceremonies, Censures, Rights, Jurisdictions, Endowments,
Privileges, etc. was from time to time ordered, molded, governed, altered,
improved or impaired, by Authority of Parliament, and not by the King in right
of his mere Supremacy; nor by the Clergy, upon the score of any pretended
Authority derived from from Christ, or from the King as SUPREME HEAD on Earth:
That no one Pin was fastened in this Tabernacle, but according to what the
Legislative Body of the Kingdom prescribed, and directed from time to time:
That this Age had no other Notion of the King's Supremacy by common right, than
our Forefathers had before the Pope, and his Faction grew upon our
Constitution: That many Powers and Authorities given to King Henry the Eighth
by Parliament, which are now either abrogated or expired, as they show, that
our King's were not, nor are entitled to them of common Right, nor can
justify the executing any such Authority by Presidents in his Reign, which
were grounded upon Laws then in being, but which are now of no force: so they
show unquestionably, that there is a greater and more Sovereign Supremacy in
Matters Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, in the King and both Houses of
Parliament, than is lodged in the King himself, or in the King and Convocation.
It appears farther, that those Temporary Powers given to that King expiring
with him, and the Act of 26 Hen. 8. Cap. 1. being now Repealed, the Legal and
Ancient Jurisdiction of the Crown in Matters Ecclesiastical, is the same now
that it was Five hundred Years ago, notwithstanding any thing that passed in
this Reign; only that a new Course is now settled, and that by Act of
Parliament too, for the Electing of Bishops and Prosecuting of Appeals.

Only one Thing more I shall add, viz. That in Matters Spiritual, as well as
Temporal, several Resolutions of the Judges being grounded on Temporary Acts of
Parliament then in being, following Judges both Ecclesiastical and Civil,
meeting with such Resolutions, and not considering that those Acts upon which
such Resolutions were made, were but Temporary or Repealed; they have made such
Judgments to be Presidents, to graft their Modern Opinions upon.

FINIS.
An Answer to CHAP. 4. SECT. 1. Of a late BOOK, Entitled, the King's
Visitatorial Power Asserted, By way of APPENDIX.
SInce the foregoing Papers were Written, a late Mercenary Writer, One
Nathaniel Johnson, Doctor in Physic, has published a Book, Entitled, The
King's Visitatorial Power, Asserted; in which Book he has inserted a long
Section (how pertinently to his main design, in that Treatise, may perhaps be
shown hereafter) concerning the King's Supremacy and Power in Ecclesiastical
Causes, and Visitations, page 144. etc. to page 160.

In which Section, because he pretends to set up an imaginary Personal
Supremacy, quite different from what I have endeavored to assert from some
Remarks, upon Ancient Histories, and late Acts of Parliament, but agreeable
enough with some Opinions that have been espoused of late, and made use of to
warrant some late Proceedings. I thought it might not be amiss to trace him
through that Section, and submit to the Judgment of the Unprejudiced Reader,
whether the Doctor has afforded the World a right Scheme of the King's
Ecclesiastical Supremacy.

I beg the Reader's Pardon, if he meet with some few passages over again here,
that were touched upon in the foregoing Discourse. I hope their usefulness will
excuse the repetition of them; and the Answer would not have been so clear
without it.

He tells us ( page 144.) that long before the Reformation, several Kings of
England permitted no Canons, or Constitutions of the Church, or Bulls and
Breves of the Apostolic See, to be executed here [without their Allowance.]
Which I agree to be very true, only the Doctor saying [without their Allowance]
implies (and it appears by the whole drift of his Discourse in this Chapter,
and indeed by the main Scope of his Book, that he would be understood) that
With their Allowance such Canons and Constitutions, Bulls and Breves might
lawfully be Executed. Which I deny: And hope to make it evident, that Our Kings
could not by their own Personal Authority let in upon their Subjects a foreign
Jurisdiction.

He adds ( page 145.) that since the Supremacy has been Established by Act of
Parliament in the Crown, The Kings of England may according to the Laws in
force, not only Exercise all the Powers they could, What Powers those are, no
Man knows but Filmer, Brady, Johnson, Hicks, Sir. Roger L'Estrange, and a very
few others of yesterday.
as Sovereign Princes; but likewise whatever the Pope de jure, if not de facto
could, or did do, in the outward Regiment of Ecclesiastical matters; and
consequently, that whatsoever was done in Visitations by the Authority of the
Popes, Metropolitans, or Diocesan Bishops, may now be done by the Kings of
England, as Supreme Ordinaries.

Which is a very wild Assertion, and without the least Foundation of Truth. He
does not here speak it out roundly, That the King may by the Law do whatever
the Pope de facto did; but minces the matter a little by saying, Whatever the
Pope de jure, [ if not de facto] could, or did do: And, yet with the same
breath, he says positively, that whatever was done in Visitations by Authority
of the Pope, may now be done by the King. So that however the King may be
limited, and tied up in other Parts of his Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to what
the Popes de jure could do, in Visitations, at least he has Authority to do
whatever the Popes, Archbishops, or Bishops actually did.

The Doctor did not consider that the several Branches of the Supremacy, now
restored by Act of Parliament, are guided, directed, and limited by positive
and particular Laws, made about the time of the Reformation: And that the Act
of primo Elizabeth, in that general Clause, which Restores the Supremacy,
Unites and Annexes only such Jurisdiction, and Authority, as had, or might be
lawfully Exercised by any Spiritual Person, etc. Not that the Pope (to speak
strictly) could Exercise any Jurisdiction lawfully within this Realm, for the
Old Laws and Customs of the Realm, and the Statutes of Praemunire and Provisors
were firm Bars to his Right; but a Jurisdiction may be lawful in it self (that
is (for so I would be understood) the Acts of a Person Assuming Jurisdiction,
may be lawful in themselves) considered separate and apart from the Person of
him that Exerts it; though the Person Exercising such Jurisdiction, have no
legal Authority. If an Usurper should possess himself of any Government, and
carry on the Administration of it, in the same Method and Course of Justice,
that the Lawful Prince did, or ought to do, in strictness of Law there might
perhaps be a Nullity in all his Acts; and yet, considered Abstracted from his
Person, his Government would be said to be lawful; that is, according to Law,
and the course of Proceedings, that had been settled, and obtained before his
Usurpation. So, whatever the Pope did in this Nation, as pretending to be Head
of the English Church, which was not in it self contrary to the Law of the
Realm in Church, or State; but might lawfully be done, though not by him, is by
the said Act of primo Elizabeth, United and Annexed, to what? Why, to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm. Whereas by the Act of Supremacy that passed in
King Henry the Eighths time, All such Jurisdiction, Authority, etc. was
personally vested in the King, his Heirs and Successors. But of that
distinction more shall be said, God willing, some other time.

Pursuant to this imagination of the Pope's Power, being Translated to the
King, he tells us, that latter Laws have devolved upon the King even the Power
of the Pope in foro externo, page 145.

He says ( page 145, 146.) that during the Schism (in the Papacy between Urban
and Clement) King William Rufus claimed as other Princes did, a Right to
declare to which Pope he would adhere: And that none should be received, as
Pope, in England, without his License and Election. Here if I understand the
Doctor aright, he takes for granted, that if there should happen a Schism in
the Popedom, the King might declare whether, or which of the Competitors
himself thought fit, to be Pope within this Realm. Which I deny that he could
do, without the Assent of the Clergy and Laity in a General Assembly.

He says ( page 145.) that, if the Archbishop of Canterbury called, and
presided in a General Council of Bishops, King William allowed nothing to be
appointed, or forbidden, unless they were accommodated to his Will, and were
first ordained by him. These are the Words of Eadmerus, out of whom the Doctor
Quotes them: ( Eadm. Lib. 1. Fol. 6.) But if the Doctor would here insinuate,
as he does, and consonantly to his own Hypothesis, must mean, that the King's
Will concurring with the Assent of a General Council of Bishops, could make an
Ecclesiastical Law to bind the whole Kingdom, without the Assent of the Laity,
that is what I deny; and hope to make it very clear in the following Discourse.

Whereas he says ( page 145.) out of the same Author Eadmerus, that King
William suffered not any of his Barons, or Officers to undergo any
Ecclesiastical Censure, but by his precept. I hope it will appear, that this
was not an Arbitrary Power assumed by the King, but that the Law of the Realm
was so.

He says ( page 146, 147.) that the Oath of Fidelity, which Anselme had taken
to King William Rufus, was no ways like the present Oath of Supremacy.

He says ( page 148, 149.) As to the legantine Power, it is apparent by several
Instances, that none Exercised any here without the King's leave. Which is
true, and as true it is, and apparent by as many Instances, that the King
singly could not give any such leave.

He says ( page 154.) that What Visitations were made of the University of
Oxford by the Pope's Legates, do no ways infer that thereby the King's Power of
Visiting is Exauctorated, but that whatever they did was in Subordination to
the King's pleasure, or as ordained by his Laws. The Doctor does well to
disjoin the King's Pleasure and his Laws, for they did not always agree. But
this Paragraph must be altered to make it tolerable Sense; viz. Whatever the
legates did in Visiting the University of Oxford, if it were not contrary to
the King's Laws, was in Subordination to the King's Authority.

Some other passages tending to the same purpose, with those already taken
notice of, will offer themselves as we go along through the several parts of
the Chapter.

Whereas the Doctor says, that several Kings permitted no Canons, or
Constitutions of the Church, or Bulls, etc. to be Executed here [without their
Allowance:] Intimating thereby that those Kings might of their own Personal
Authority give such Allowance, And that [with their Allowance] Foreign Canons
and Constitutions might be Executed here; I take leave to say, That it never
was in the Power of a King of England legally to Subject his People to a
Foreign Jurisdiction, nor to Oblige them to the Observance of any Law, without
their own Assent: And therefore the King's Allowance could not make a Foreign
Canon Obligatory here, unless it were received by the People with their own
Assent: Nor could his giving leave, legally Subject his People to Processes
from Rome, as will abundantly appear by and by.

But before I go on, I desire the Doctor to take notice of an Old Act of
Parliament (for such it was, though the Word Parliament was not then in being
amongst us) made in King Edward the Confessor's Time, if not before, and
Confirmed by King William the First: Debet Rex omnia rite facere in Regno and
[per Judicium Procerum Regni.] Debet enim Jus and Justitia magis regnare in
Regno, quam voluntas prava. Lex est semper quod jus facit: Voluntas autem,
Violentia and Vis non est Jus. And again in the same Chapter; Debet Rex
Judicium Rectum in Regno facere, and Justitiam [per Consilium Procerum Regni
sui tenere.] Ista vero debet omnia Rex in propria persona, inspectis and tactis
Sacrosanctis Evangeliis, and super sacras and sanctas reliquias coram Regno,
Sacerdotio and Clero jurare, antequam ab Archiepiscopis and Episcopis Regni
coronetur. Lambard. de Priscis Anglorum legibus, page 138. and page 142. Hence
we see that Judicium Procerum and Consilium Procerum are Essential to the
English Government: Without which Right and Justice cannot Reign, but a
Perverse Will would Rule the Roast.

Hence it was that King Edward the First, Prynn's Collect. Tom. 3. Page 158.
When Pope Gregory the Tenth sent Reymundus de Nogeriis his Chaplain, as his
Nuntio into England, etc. amongst other things to Demand, and Receive from the
King Eight Years Arrears of the Annual Tribute, and Peter Pence then due to the
Church of Rome, Wrote to him a very remarkable Letter; In which, among other
things, he tells him, That his last Parliament was Dissolved the sooner, by
reason of his own Sickness, so that he could not then Super Petitione census
ejusdem deliberationem habere cum Praelatis and Proceribus Regni sui, sine
Quorum Communicato Consilio Sanctitati Vestrae super praedictis non possumus
respondere, and jure-jurando in Coronatione nostra praestito sumus Astricti,
quod jura Regni nostri servabimus illibata, nec aliquid quod diadema tangit
Regni ejusdem absque ipsorum requisito Concilio faciemus. And therefore he
deferred returning the Pope an Answer, till the next Session of Parliament; Pro
firmo scituri, Pie Pater and Domine, quod in alio Parliamento nostro, quod ad
festum Sancti Michaelis intendimus celebrare, habito and Communicato Consilio
cum Praelatis and Proceribus memoratis, Vobis super praemissis ipsorum consilio
dabimus Responsionem. By this Letter it appears, that whatever did Diadema
Regni tangere, could not, nor ought to be done sine Concilio Prelatorum and
Procerum Regni: By which, as is evident enough by the Letter it self, a
Parliament is meant.

Now that the Bringing in of Bulls and Executing Process from Rome within the
Realm, did Diadema Regni tangere with a Witness, will appear by perusing the
Statutes of Praemunire and Provisors.

Anno 27 Edward the Third, cap. 1. Because it is shown unto Our Lord the the
King, by the Grievous and Clamorous Complaints of the great Men and Commons,
how that diverse of the People be, and have been drawn out of the Realm to
Answer of diverse things, the Cognizance whereof appertains to the King's
Court; and also that the Judgments given in the same Court be impeached in
another Court, [In Prejudice and Disherison of Our Lord the King and of his
Crown] and of all the People of his Realm, and to the Undoing and Destruction
of the Common Law of the said Realm at all times used.

Another Statute mentioning Citations out of the Court of Rome, and Provisions
of Benefices, and Offices in the Church, says, that by means thereof the Good
Ancient Laws, Franchises and Vsages of the Realm have been greatly Impeached,
Blemished and Confounded, [the Crown of Our Lord the King abated] and the great
Men, Commons and Subjects of the Realm in Bodies and Goods damnified 38
Statute. Edwardi tertii, cap. 1, 2, 3, 4.

The Statute of 16 Rich. 2. cap. 5. Entitled Praemunire for purchasing Bulls
from Rome: The Crown of England subject to none; mentions frequently All these
things, as being to the Disherison of the King's Crown, and against his Crown
and Regality.

And therefore in the five and twentieth Year of King Edward the Third, the
Commons prayed the King, that since the Right of the Crown of England and the
Law of the Realm was such, that upon the Mischiefs and Damages, which happened
to his Realm he ought and was bound by his Oath, with the Accord of his People
in his Parliament, thereof to make remedy and Law, That it may please him
thereupon to Ordain remedy: Which he does accordingly by the Assent of the
Great Men and Commonalty of the said Realm; having regard to a Statute made in
the time of his Grandfather, (Anno 25th. Edward the First, against Provisions)
which holds his force and was never Defeated, Repealed or Annulled in any
Point, and by so much he is bounden by his Oath to cause the same to be kept,
as the Law of the Land. The Laws of Praemunire and against Provisions were but
Declaratory Laws of the Vsages of the Realm in opposition to Papal Bulls, etc.
And here we see our Kings did not scruple to own that they were under the
obligation of their Coronation Oath to see to the Execution of them.

Anno Great. 1225. Magister Otto, Domini Papae Nuncius, in Angliam veniens, pro
magnis Ecclesiae Romanae negotiis, Regi litteras praesentavit; sed Rex cognito
litterarum tenore, Respondit, Quod solus non potuit definire, nec debuit,
negotium quod omnes Clericos and Laicos Generaliter totius Regni tangebat.
Matthew. Par. page 325.

It was an Old Rule of Law in this Nation, the very Foundation upon which our
Government is built, and the only thing that differences Freedom from Slavery,
that Quod omnes tangit, ab omnibus tractari debet.

And the Commons tell the King in Statute Twenty fifth of Henry 8. cap. 21.
That his Graces Realm Recognizing no Superior under God, but his Grace has
been, and is free from Subjection to any Man's Laws, but only to such as have
been devised within the same, for the Wealth thereof, or to such other, as by
Sufferance of his Grace and his Progenitors, the People of his Realm had taken
at their free Liberty by their Own Consent to be used amongst them, and had
bound themselves by long Use and Custom to the Observance of the same, as to
Laws Established by the said Sufferance, Consent and Custom, and none otherwise.

And the Judges Resolved in 12 Jacobi primi, that the King could not change the
Ecclesiastical Laws of the Realm. 12 Co. Reports, page But if he could let in
Foreign Canons, and [by his Allowance] give them the force of Laws here, then
he could change the Ecclesiastical Laws of the Realm, and then might the People
be bound to other Laws, than such as by their own Sufferance and Consent they
had submitted to; and then could the King do things Solus, which concern
generally all the Clergy and Laity of England; If the King's Allowance could
Subject his People to Processes from Rome, then he could by Law depart with the
Rights of his Crown, which by his Coronation Oath he is bound to maintain, as
he has so often and so publicly acknowledged.

The Doctor tells us ( page 145.) out of Eadmerus, Lib. primo, page 6. That
King William the Conqueror introduced this here, That none in his Dominions
should own the Pope, but by his Command, Nor receive his Letters, Unless showed
first to him, And if the Archbishop of Canterbury called and presided in a
General Synod of the Bishops, he allowed nothing to be appointed or forbidden,
unless they were accommodated to his Will, and were first Ordained by him, Nor
suffered any of his Barons, or Officers to undergo any Ecclesiastical Censure,
but by his Precepts.

These things he would represent to us, as Arbitrary Constitutions made by the
Sole Authority of that King; whom a few Men of late have endeavored to
represent under a strange Vizor. But these were really Laws made in his time by
the same Authority, that made Laws in this Nation before he was Born, and after
his Death. He caused Leges Episcopales to be amended: But how did he do it? Of
his own Head, or by the Advice of such only, as himself thought fit to consult
with? No; it was done Communi Consilio, and Consilio Archiepiscoporum,
Episcoporum, Abbatum and omnium Procerum Regni sui. V. Seldeni Not. and
Specileg. ad Eadmerum. page 167, 168. And the same Author in his Titles of
Honor, page 580, 581, has these Words; viz. In the Fourth Year of his (King
William the Conqueror's) Reign, or Anno Domini MLXX. (which was the Year,
wherein he first brought the Bishops and Abbots under the Tenure of Barony)
Consilio Baronum suorum (says Hoveden out of a Collection of Laws, written by
Glanvill, as also the Author of the Book of Litchfield) fecit summoneri per
universos Consulatus Angliae, Anglos Nobiles and Sapientes and in sua lege
eruditos, ut eorum Jura and Consuetudines ab ipsis audiret. And Twelve were
returned out of every County who showed what the Customs of the Kingdom were,
which being written by the Hands of Aldred Archbishop of York, and Hugo Bishop
of London, were with the Assent of the same Barons for the most part, confirmed
in that Assembly, which was a Parliament of that time. And so much also is
showed by that Law of King Henry the First; viz. Lagam Regis Edwardi vobis
reddo cum illis Emendationibus, quibus Pater meus illam emendavit [Consilio
Baronum suorum.] He goes on to show other Instances of Parliaments, in King
William the First's Time. And a few pages after ( page 583.) calls one of these
very Constitutions, which Eadmerus blames him for, A Law made by King William
the First.

Indeed the several General Councils held in his Time, of the Clergy and the
Laity, for the making of Laws, and determining Great Controversies; the
Confirming of King Edward the Confessor's Laws, of which one was (as has been
said) that all things were to be done per Judicium and Consilium Procerum
Regni, and the tenor of such Charters of his as are extant, show undeniably
that, what Constitutions are said to have been made by him, must be understood
to have been made by him More Anglico, cum Assensu Ordinum Regni: As Mr. Seldom
expresses himself in his Book de Synedriis.

The First of these Four Constitutions complained of by Eadmerus, as
Innovations, is, That none in his Dominions should own the Pope but by his
Command. And yet afterward, when in King Henry the Second's Time there was a
Schism in the Popedom, between Alexander and Victor; of whom the latter having
been Elected and Declared Pope, by a Council of German and Italian Bishops at
Papia, the Emperor Illustres Francorum and Anglorum Reges omnibus modis
sollicitare curavit, ut ad perpetuandam amicitiam mutuam sibi hac in part
concordes existerent. Illi celebrem ex utroque Regno Episcoporum and Nobilium,
loco and tempore congruo, conventum fecere; where the Matter was debated in
Conspectu Regum and Praesulum, coram Vniversa, quae convenerat, multitudine
Cleri and Populi: And Alexander was admitted as Pope, and the Schismatics
Excommunicated. Nubrig. lib. 2. cap. 9.

And after that, in King Richard the Second's Time, When there was another
Schism betwixt Urban and Clement, This Memorable Act of Parliament passed to
declare Urban the true Pope;

VIZ.

Pur ceo que nostre Seignor le Roy ad entendus, cybien per certains Letters
Patents novelment venus de certain Cardinalx rebels contre nostre Saint Pere
Urban a ore Pape, come auterment per comen fame, que division and discord sont
parenter nostre dit Saint Pere and les dits Cardinals, les queux s'afforcent a
tout lour poar de deposer nostre dit Saint Pere de l'Estate de Pape, and
d'Exciter and commover per lour meyns verrois suggestions les Roys and Princes
and le Peuple Chrestien encounter luy, a grand peril de lour aulms, and a
tresmale ensample; Nostre Seignor le Roy fist monstre ses dites Letters as
Prelates, Seignors and auters Grand Sages de son Royalme esteant a dit
Parliament, Et vewes and entendus les Letters avaunt dits, Et ewe molt
deliberation sur la matter estoit per Les dits Prelates pronunciez and publiez
per plusors grands and notables reasons illeoques monstrez en plein Parliament;
cy bien per matter trove en les dites Letters que autrement, que le dit Urban
etoit duement esleu en Pape, and que ensy est, and doit etre veroy Pape, and
luy come Pape and Chef de Saint Esglise ^^on doit accepter and obeyir. Et a ceo
fair s'accordent touts les Prelates, Seignors, and Commens en la Parliament
avaunt dit, etc. Stat. 2 Rich. 2. cap. 7.

Here the Whole Parliament heard the Reasons debated, and after a full Hearing
agreed to admit Urban. Now whereas the Government, as to the Essential parts of
it, was in King William the Conqueror's Time, the same that it is now, saving
some Inroads that have since been made by the Prerogative; And whereas in times
subsequent to his, the King in Parliament determined who should be received as
Pope, and who not; And since there is nothing more common with the Monks, than
to mention things as done by Our Kings, which were either Judicial Acts of
their Courts, or done by them in their Great Councils, and consequently were
Acts of Parliament (of which some Instances will be given hereafter in this
Discourse) upon what Grounds can any rational Man conceive otherwise, than that
the Constitution aforementioned to be made by King William the Conqueror, was
a Law, or an Act of Parliament made in his Time, And that his Commanding who
should be owned as Pope within his Dominions, was to be a Command by him in
Parliament; since the Law in his Time was such, That the King was to do all
public things no otherwise, than per Judicium and Consilium Procerum Regni.

The Second Complaint of Eadmerus, is, That None should receive the Pope's
Letters, unless they were first showed to him. By which if Letters of Provision
only are meant; I shall have occasion to speak further of them hereafter. If
all Provisions and Process from Rome be meant, then was not this introduced by
King William, for that the bringing in of Bulls, Citations, Exemptions,
Faculties, Dispensations, Provisions, etc. from Rome, was in those Days, and
antecedent to this Constitution, contrary to Law, and in Derogation of the
Rights of the Crown, and the Liberties of the People: Nor could the showing
them to the King and his Personal Approbation, or Allowance, give them any
Legal Authority within this Kingdom, and consequently the Concurrence of the
Great Council must be here understood, though not expressed by the Monk.

The Third is, That If the Archbishop of Canterbury called and presided in a
General Synod of the Bishops, he allowed nothing to be Appointed, or Forbidden,
unless they were accommodated to his Will, and were first Ordained by him.
Which is such another Law, as that of the Twenty fifth of King Henry the
Eighth, cap. 19. That the Clergy shall not presume to Attempt, Allege, Claim,
or put in Ure any Constitutions, or Ordinances, Provincial, or Synodal, or any
other Canons, nor Enact, Promulge, or Execute any such Canons, etc. in their
Convocations, etc. without the King's Assent. This Law of King Henry the
Eighth, was not Introductory of a new Law; for there the King's Humble and
Obedient Subjects of the Clergy of this Realm of England acknowledged
[According to Truth,] that the Convocations of the same Clergy, are, always
have been, and ought to be Assembled by the King's Writ: And that their Promise
in verbo sacerdotii that from thenceforth they would not presume to Attempt,
Allege, Claim, or put in Ure, Enact, Promulge, or Execute any New Canons,
Constitutions, etc. unless the King's most Royal Assent and License may to them
be had, etc. was but in Affirmance of the Old Law of the Realm, even before
King William the Conqueror's Reign, appears abundantly by Sir Henry Spelman's
Councils, where (I think) no Ecclesiastical Laws appear to have been made
without the King's Assent before the Conquest, nor for some Reigns after.

His Fourth Complaint, is, That He would not suffer any of his Barons, or
Officers to Undergo any Ecclesiastical Censure, but by his Precept. This was
afterward One of the Laws of Clarendon. Vid. December Script. page 1387. Matthew.
Par 100. And the reason of it, given by Radulphus de Diceto, is, Ne Rex
ignorantia lapsus Communicet Excommunicato. December Scriptor. page 596. This Mr.
Seldom calls a Law first made by King William the First. Titl. of Honor, page
583.

The Doctor ( page 145, 146, 147.) relates the Controversy betwixt King
William Rufus, and Anselm in such a manner, as If the Episcopi, Abbates and
Principes Regni had had no more to do in it, than to carry Messages betwixt him
and the King. Whereas upon Anselm's desiring to go and fetch his Pall from Pope
Urban, whom the Nation had not then received for Pope, When the King told him
that he could not keep the Faith, which he owed to him, Simul and obedientiam
Apostolicae se dis contra suam voluntatem, Anselmus petivit inducias ad istius
rei examinationem, quatenus Episcopis, Abbatibus, Cunctisque Regni Principibus
una coeuntibus, [commun-Assensu definiretur,] utrum salva reverentia and
obedientia sedis Apostolicae posset fidem terreno Regi servare, annon? For
Anselm, whilst he was Abbot of Bec in Normandy, had submitted to Urban, as
Pope, and (as he told the Parliament afterward) had professed as much, when the
King and they chose him Archbishop. This Question betwixt the King and Himself,
he desired the Parliament might decide. Dantur ergo Induciae, atque ex Regia
sanctione ferme totius Regni Nobilitas quinto Idus Martii pro ventilatione
illius causae in unum apud Rochingham coit. And the Matter was discussed and
debated before them. Vid. Eadmer. page 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, etc.

The Doctor tells us ( page 146.) that When in the same King's Reign, the
Archbishop was Sollicitous to have leave to go to Rome, and Visit the Successor
of St. Peter, for the being better Instructed in the Government of the Church;
he received Answer from the King, That if he went he should for certain know,
that he would seize his whole Archbishopric into his Hands, nor would he
receive him for Archbishop any more, like as now the Writ Ne Exeat Regnum is
used with a Penalty specified. Notwithstanding which the Archbishop went beyond
Sea, and the King was as good as his Word. This the Doctor says, may be a
document to some, not obstinately to oppose their Prince.

But now, if by the Law of the Land, no Archbishop, Bishop, or other Great Man,
might depart the Realm without the King's leave, then did Anselm's contempt
consist in Disobeying the Law, and not the King's Personal and Arbitrary Will
and Pleasure.

If any Man depart the Realm at this Day, after a Writ of Ne Exeat Regnum
served upon him, he becomes a Fugitive, and the King may seize his Estate, as
he did the Archbishops Temporalities. And yet we have no Act of Parliament for
this now upon Record, but Custom Time out of Mind, which we call Common Law.
Yet among the Laws of Clarendon, this is one;

VIZ.

Archiepiscopis, Episcopis and Personis Regni non liceat Exire Regnum, absque
Licentia Domini Regis. December Scriptores. page 1386, 1387. Matthew. Paris. page
100.

And Polydore Virgill, page 171. carries this Law up as high as to the Reign of
King William Rufus; Publico Edicto Vetuit (says he) Vnumquemque sine Licentia
sua, Ex Anglia egredi; qui mos lexve dicitur, Ne Exeas Regnum: Quae adhuc, cum
ita res requirit, usurpatur. And it appears by the Register, Fol. 193, 194.
That Religious Persons purchased Licenses to go beyond the Sea.

And Bracton tells us; Lib. Quinto, Fol. 413. b. That those Writs were de
Communi Consilio totius Regni Concessa and Approbata: Of which more hereafter.
And great Reason there was, that they, who were then struggling with the
Government, to Introduce a Foreign Jurisdiction, should, when they went beyond
Sea, Assecurare Regem, quod nec in eundo, vel redeundo, vel moram faciendo,
perquirerent malum sive damnum Domino Regi. Constitution. Clarend. Suprad. But
(as Mr. Seldom says in his Metamorphosis Anglorum, page 237.) Huc referas
(Scil. ad temp. Henrici Secundi) an cum Polydoro ad Rufum, an ad posteriora
tempora rescriptum, quod in Regesto, NE EXEAS REGNVM, habetur, haud ita multum
interest, nec quaestionem accurare operae pretium est; Quis enim (...) tam
(...) verum potis est elicere? It being almost impossible to find out the
Original of this Law; and it appearing by the Register, that whenever it did
begin, it began by Authority of Parliament; and since nothing is known to the
contrary, but that it might begin in King William Rufus his Time, to whose Time
Polydere Virgill refers it; and, if it did not, since Parliaments were
frequently held then, and One famous one at Rochingham during this very
Controversy betwixt the King and Anselm, ( Eadmer. page 38.) about his going
to Rome, in which he asked leave to depart, and was denied it; Who knows but
there might then be a particular Prohibition to him by the King in that Great
Council? But be that how it will, the Truth in this Matter lies too deep, by
reason of the loss of almost all the Civil Laws made in the Reigns of Our First
Norman Kings, through the Embezelment of Records, and the Carelessness of the
Monks of those times, for the Doctor to draw a good Argument from hence of the
Danger of disobeying the King's Personal Command.

Nay further, if this Instance were never so much for him; First, It was in
King William Rufus his Reign, the Irregularities and Tyranny of whose
Government, was such, and the Matters of Fact so lamely Reported to us, that no
Argument drawn from what he might do, will be very conclusive to the Legality,
or Illegality of any thing. And, Secondly, There is a very good Law made since,

VIZ.

Ann. 14 Edwardi 3. cap. 6. to Protect the Clergy from incurring any such
prejudice for the future, for not doing whatsoever they are bid to do: We Will
and Grant for Us and our Heirs, that from henceforth We, nor our Heirs shall
not take, nor cause to be taken into our Hands the Temporalities of
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, nor other People of Holy Church, of what
Estate or Condition they be, without a Just and True Cause, [according to the
Law of the Land] and Judgment thereupon given.

The Doctor makes account ( page 146, 147.) that the Oath, which he says Anselm
had taken, whereby he promised the King, Eadmer. page 39. lib. 2.
se usus ac leges suas usquequaque deinceps servaturum, and eas sibi contra
omnes homines fideliter defensurum, was no ways like the present Oath of
Supremacy. Whereby he would represent the Supremacy as a quite other thing, and
much more Exorbitant, since the Reformation, than it was in King William Rufus
his Time; Which is a great Error. For the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the
Kings of England, was then almost entire and in puris naturalibus; Foreign
Jurisdiction had not then grown upon our Constitution: The Bishops indeed were
warping Rome-wards, which caused the Government to have a watchful Eye upon
them, and to enjoin Oaths upon them for security, against Usurpations then
feared, because attempted; as after the Reformation they were enjoined to
prevent the return of them. But the Oath of Supremacy, prescribed by primo
Elizabeth, being only to Assist and Defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges,
Preheminencies and Authorities, Granted, or Belonging to the Queen's Highness
her Heirs and Successors, Or United and Annexed to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm, is the same in Substance with Swearing in King William Rufus his Time,
to Keep and Defend the Laws and Vsages of the Realm. For those Jurisdictions,
Privileges; Preheminencies and Authorities, which, having been torn from the
Crown, were restored by the primo Elizabeth; and by the several Acts of King
Henry the Eighth thereby revived, were in being, and actually enjoyed in King
William Rufus his Time, and before and for some time after. He was the Supreme
Governor of the Realm in Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical Things and Causes, as
well as Temporal. Witness that Law of King Edward the Confessor, revived and
confirmed by King William the First: Rex, quia Vicarius summi Regis est, ad hoc
est Constitutus, ut Regnum terrenum and populum Domini, and super omnia Sanctam
Veneretur Ecclesiam ejus and Regat, and ab injuriosis defendat, and maleficos
ab ea evellat, and destruat, and penitus disperdat. Lambard. leg. page 142. And
the several Branches afterward lopped off from the King's Supremacy, were
endeavored to be preserved and secured by the Laws of Clarendon. The Third
Chapter of which provides against the Exemption of Clerks from the King's
Justice: The Eighth against Appeals to Rome: The Twelfth secures the King's
Right and Interest in the Elections of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and
Priors, etc. These Constitutions, then called the Avitae Consuetudines Regni,
Archbishop Becket promisit in verbo sacerdotali de plano se velle custodire.
Similiter Episcopi promiserunt and Juraverunt. Gerv. Dorob. Coll. page 1366.
This was no other than the Modern Oath of Supremacy, without any material
difference. The Archbishop did not pretend that the Laws of Clarendon, as
Wicked and Unjust as he might think them, were any other than Explanations and
Assertions of the Ancient Vsages of the Realm. His Suffragans tell him in a
Letter, That the King desired only dignitates Regibus ante debitas sibi
exhiberi. Hoved. page 292. b. And in another Letter to the Pope on the King's
behalf, they declare the same, ibid. page 292, 293. Our Archbishops indeed used
to fetch their Palls from Rome, but that Entitled the Pope to no Jurisdiction
here. So that the Subject Matters of the Laws of Clarendon, then Enacted into
Statute-Laws, were in King William Rufus his Time the Laws and Vsages of the
Realm, and therefore Anselm's and Becket's Oaths were in Substance the same:
And those Laws and Vsages having been usurped upon since, and the Usurpation
purged by the Laws made about the time of the Reformation, the Oath of
Supremacy is now the same in Substance with those Ancient Oaths aforementioned.
Not but that the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, in some of its Branches may now
be settled in another course of Administration, than it was so long ago. But
those Alterations (which yet are not very considerable) have been made by Acts
of Parliament; by which if Men had been content to stand or fall, many Notions,
that are now too rise amongst us, would never have been hatched.

The Writ from R. de Glanville to the Abbot of Battle (mentioned by the Doctor
page 148.) whereby he Commands him on the King's behalf, by the Faith which he
owed him, not to proceed in the Cause that was depending betwixt the Monks of
Canterbury and the Archbishop, donec inde mecum fueris locutus, was no other
than a Probibition to him to proceed in a Cause depending before him, and the
Abbots of Feversham and St. Augustine, as Judges appointed by the Pope to hear
and determine it. They had cited the Archbishop to appear before them, they had
sent him Comminatoriam Epistolam, eique diem peremptorium praefixerant. They
had no Legal Authority to Exercise Jurisdiction within the Realm; for the Pope
could give them none: And therefore the Chief Justice prohibits them in the
King's Name. The Writ may be Read in Chron. Gervas. Coll. page 1503. from
whence the Doctor Quotes the Story: Though he relates it Knavishly enough. We
find a Writ (says he) to the Abbot of Battle, etc. wherein he Commands him on
the part of the King, by the Faith which he owes him, and by the Oath, which he
made to him, to do what he then enjoined. Never telling us that the thing
enjoined, was the keeping of his Oath, and observing the Law, and that the
Method observed by the King in sending him this Injunction, was according to
the Ordinary course of Justice, and of proceedings at Law in the like Cases.
But the Doctor would raise a little Dust by this, and a few other such pitiful
Scraps, to amuse his Readers, and create an Opinion that the King may enjoin
any thing.

As to the Legantine Power (he says, page 148.) It is apparent by several
Instances, that none Exercised any here without the King's leave, whether by
the Grant of Pope Nicholas to Edward the Confessor, he disputes not.

But the Doctor takes for granted, that with the King's leave a a Legate might
be sent and Exercise his Office here. Though what he Quotes for it out of
Eadmerus page 125, 126. concerning what passed betwixt King Henry the First,
and Pope Calixtus at Gisors, makes nothing for his purpose. Rex a Papa
impetravit, ut omnes Consuetudines, quas Pater suus in Anglia habuerat and in
Normannia, sibi concederet, and maxim ut neminem aliquando legati Officio in
Anglia fungi permitteret, si non ipse, aliqua praecipua querela exigente, and
quae ab Archiepiscopo Cantuariorum, caeterisque Episcopis Regni terminari non
posset, hoc fieri a Papa postularet. The coming in of a Legate at the King's
Request, to determine some great and difficult Controversy in particular,
which could not be decided by all the Bishops of England, is one thing; and the
coming in of a Legate with a General Power to Exercise Jurisdiction over all
the King's Subjects, and to hold a Legantine Court is a quite other thing.

The Doctor says ( page 151.) that Anno Domini 1138, and Tertio Regis Stephan.
Albert or Alberic Cardinal of Hostia, was the Pope's Legate and Consecrated
Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury, and called the Clergy to a Colloquium by
Apostolical Authority, by which it appears, says he, That the Canons of the
Church now obtained, and the King Assented to the Powers the Legate had, so
that what was Decreed had the King's Allowance. It seems, provided what was
Decreed had the King's Allowance, all was well, and there needed no more. But
Gerv. Dorobern. Coll. page 1344. tells us that Praedictus Albericus Apostolica
Legatione functus venit in Angliam, Domini Papae litteras ad Regem deferens;
lectis itaque litteris coram Rege and Primoribus Angliae, licet non in primis,
vix tandem pro Reverentia Domini Papae susceptus est. So that this Legate was
admitted by the Consent of the Primores Angliae, as well as of the King. And
consequently, his Exercising his Office here, with such Assent, as aforesaid,
is no Argument, that the King's Personal Assent to his Powers, without the
Concurrence of his Primores, would have made them ever a whit the better. And
when this Legate Celebrated his Synod at Westminster; there were present
Episcopi diversarum Provinciarum, Numero XVII, Abbates fere XXX, and Cleri and
Populi Multitudo Numerosa. See Spelman's Councils, Volume the Second, page 39.
and Gerv. Dorobern. Collect. page 1347. So that as the Assent of the Primores
was had to his Entry, so the Multitudo Numerosa Cleri and Populi Assented to
the Canons then made. And the King's single Assent to either would not have
been sufficient.

Besides this, I shall take leave to oppose the Judgment and Opinion of King
Henry the First to that of the Doctor, concerning the King's having, or not
having Authority to Admit a Legate hither from Rome. When in his Reign Petrus,
Monachus Cluniacensis came hither from Pope Calixtus, with a Legantine Power,
perductus ad Regem, digne ab eo susceptus est; Et exposita sui adventus causa,
Rex, obtensa expeditione, in qua tunc erat (nam super Walenses ea tempestate
exercitum duxerat) dixit se tanto negotio operam tunc quidem dare non posse,
cum Legationis illius stabilem Authoritatem non nisi per conniventiam
Episcoporum, Abbatum and Procerum ac totius Regni Conventum roborari posse
constaret. Eadmer. Lib. 6. page 137, 138. He tells it him as a known Truth
(constaret) that his Legacy could not be of any validity in this Nation,
without the Consent of the whole Kingdom in Parliament: Which, by reason of his
Wars with the Welsh, he was not then at leisure to call. The Words following
are Remarkable;

VIZ.

Super haec patrias Consuetudines ab Apostolica sede sibi concessas, nunquam se
aequanimiter amissurum fore testabatur (in quibus haec, and de maximis una
erat, quae Regnum Angliae liberum ab omni legati ditione constituerat) donec
ipse vitae praesenti superesset. So that this Patria Consuetudo of the Kingdoms
being free from the Jurisdiction of any Legate, and which had been confirmed by
the Pope, was not a Privilege Granted to the King himself, nor was he the
Object of that Papal pretended Indulgence; but the Kingdom, whom he declares
that himself could not deprive of the Benefit thereof, without their own
Consent. And therefore the King's Assent and the King's Leave, so frequently
mentioned in the Monks upon this occasion, must be understood of his Assent in
a Great Council, or Parliament.

Hence it was, that when Johannes Cremensis came Legate hither Anno Domini
1125. And was permitted so to do by the King, being then in Normandy (for what
private considerations betwixt the Pope and himself, I know not) it was looked
upon by the Wise Men of the Nation, as a notorious breach of the Ancient and
known Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom.

Quam gravi multorum mentes scandalo vulneravit, and inusitata negotii Novitas,
and Antiqui Regni Anglorum detrita libertas satis indicat. Toti enim Regno
Anglorum and circumjacentibus Regionibus cunctis notissimum est, eatenus a
primo Cantuariensi Metropolitano Sanctissimo Augustino, usque ad istum
Wilhelmum (Cantuariensem Archiepiscopum) omnes ipsius Augustini Successores
Monachos, Primates and Patriarchas nominatos, and habitos, nec ullius unquam
Romani legati ditioni addictos. Gervas. Dorob. Collect. page 1663.

And when afterward in King Henry the Third's Time Circa festum Apostolorum
Petri and Pauli Otto sancti Nicholai in carcere Tulliano Diaconus Cardinalis,
nesciebatur ad quid, per Mandatum Regis venit Legatus in Angliam, [Nescientibus
Regni Magnatibus,] plures adversus Regem Magnam conceperunt indignationem,
dicentes; Omnia Rex pervertit, Jura, fidem, promissa in omnibus transgreditur.
Nota bend.
Nunc se matrimonio sine suorum amicorum and hominum naturalium consilio
Alienigenae copulavit; Nunc Legatum, Regni totius immutatorem, [clam] vocavit,
etc. Dictum est autem quod Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis Edmundus Regem talia
facientem increpavit, praecipue de Vocatione Legati, sciens inde in suae
dignitatis praejudicium magnam Regno imminere Jacturam. Matthew. Par. 440. The
Historian blames those that went to meet this Legate, and that made him
Honorable Presents of Scarlet Cloth, etc. In quo facto (says he) nimis a
multis meruerunt reprehendi, tam pro dono, quam pro dandi modo, quia in panno
and ejus color videbatur legationis Officium and Adventum acceptari. Which is
a remarkable testimony, that the King's calling in a Legate did not, in the
judgment of those times, give him any Legal Authority here, if it were done
Nescientibus Regni Magnatibus: i. e. (to speak in Eadmerus his Words) if he
were otherwise admitted than per Conniventiam Episcoporum, Abbatum and Procerum
and totius Regni conventum. The same Historian (Matthew. Par.) speaking afterward
( page 446.) of the same Legate, Rex (says he) spreto naturalium hominum suorum
consilio, magis and magis, ut caepit, deliravit: Et se voluntati Romanorum, and
praecipue Legati, quem inconsultius advocaverat, mancipavit, etc. And again,
His and aliis deliramentis Rex omnium Nobilium suorum corda cruentavit.
Consiliarios quoque habuit suspectos and infames, qui hujus rei fomentum esse
dicebantur, quos idcirco magis habebant Nobiles Angliae exosos.

But the Instance, which the Doctor himself gives ( page 154.) of Henry
Beaufort Bishop of Winchester, and Great Uncle to King Henry the Sixth, is as
full against him, as any thing that he could have pitched upon. For that
Bishop, being Cardinal of St. Eusebius, was sent Legate into England Anno 1429.
Which was Anno Octavo of King Henry the Sixth: And was fain to be beholden to
an Act of Parliament for his Pardon, for having offended against the Laws made
against Provisors, by bringing in and Executing Papal Bulls within the Realm.
For Anno 10. Henr. 6. The King, [by the Common Assent of all the Estates]
pardons to the said Cardinal all Offenses, Punishments, and Pains incurred by
him against the Statutes of Provisors. Vid. Cotton 's Abridgement of Records,
10. Henr. 6. nu. 16. Which would have been needless, if either the King's
giving leave to his Entrance, or Assent to his Decrees, could have justified
his Proceedings, and added any Legal Authority to them.

By what has been said, I conceive it to be very clear, that all Foreign
Jurisdiction being utterly against the Law of the Realm, and an intolerable
Usurpation upon the King's Crown and Regality, and upon the Rights and
Liberties of his Subjects, it was never conceived that the King could by his
own Personal Authority, without the Consent of his People in Parliament,
subject them to it; no more than he could subject himself and his Crown in
Temporal Matters. Which that he could not do, we have these two Remarkable
Authorities.

When after the Death of Alexander the Third, King of Scots, the Succession to
that Crown was in dispute, and Ten several Competitors claimed it; and that
Edward the First, King of England challenged a Jurisdiction of determining to
which of them the Right of Succession appertained; the Pope that then was,
pretended that it belonged to him, in Right of his Apostleship, to decide the
Controversy; and Wrote to the King a Letter, requiring him to desist any
further Proceeding therein: In answer to which Letter of the Pope, the King
wrote a long Letter containing Historical Proofs of his being Supreme Lord of
Scotland, and that the King of Scots was his Homager; and at the same time the
Parliament of England, then Assembled at Lincoln, wrote another Letter to the
Pope upon the same Subject: In which are these Words;

VIZ.

Ad observationem and defensionem Libertatum, Consuetudinum and Legum
Paternarum ex debito praestiti Sacramenti adstringimur, quae manutenebimus toto
posse, totisque viribus cum Dei Auxilio defendemus, nec etiam permittimus, aut
aliquatenus permittemus, sicut nec possumus nec debemus, praemissa tam
insolita, indebita, praejudicialia and alia inaudita Dominum nostrum Regem,
[etiamsi vellet] facere seu quomodolibet attemptare, praecipue cum praemissa
cederent in exhaeredationem juris Coronae Regis Angliae and Regiae Dignitatis,
ac subversionem Status Ejusdem REgni notoriam, necnon in praejudicium
Libertatum, Consuetudinum ac Legum Paternarum. Sealed by One hundred and four
Earls and Barons, and in the Name of all the Commonalty of England. V. Co. 2d.
Inst. page 196. and Fox his Book of Martyrs, Vol. 1. page 387, 388, 389. By
which it appears that the King could not legally, if he would, have given way
to the Pope's determining the Controversy about the Succession in Scotland;
since it belonged to himself in jure Coronae as directus Dominus Scotiae.

The Second Authority shall be that of Rott. Parl. 40 Edw. 3. nu. 7, 8. Where
it was resolved in full Parliament by the Praelates, the Earls and the Commons,
that neither the King, nor any other could put the Realm nor People thereof
into such subjection, [sans Assent d'Eux.] The Occasion was King John's having
surrendered his Crown to the Pope, and received it back again, to hold it as a
Feudatary to the Papal See. And it appeared to them by many Evidences, that he
had done so [sans lour Assent] and contrary to his Coronation Oath. Mr. Seldom,
in his dissertatio ad Fletam, page 552, 553. gives this Account of it. Cum sub
Edwardo Tertio in Ordinum consessu quaestio habebatur de donatione illa
decantatissima Johannis Regis facta Innocentio Papae Tertio and Successoribus
Ejus, unde Vrbanus. Quintus tum annuum inde natum mill Marcarum, Angliae simul
and Hiberniae nomine, Censum sibi tunc solvi petebat, tum Regnum utrumque jure
tantum beneficiario, atque ut sedis Romanae Feudum, a Regibus nostris
contendebat possideri; Ordines Vniversi, idque tam Generis Hieratici (quod
mirere) quam Proceres, seu Senatus Populusque in Comitiis illis, solemni inita
deliberatione, responderunt unanimes, irritam plane fuisse Johannis Donationem
illam, utpote tam [sine Ordinum Assensu,] quam [juramento ejus Inaugurali
Adversam.] Et outre ceo (sic loquuntur Archiva) Les Ducs, Counts, Barons,
Grands and Comens accorderent and Granterent, que en cas que le Pape se
afforceroit ou rien attempteroit per process, ou en autre manner de fair de
constreindre le Roy, ou ses subgitts de perfaire ceo que est dit, qu'il voit
claimer cell party, qu'ils resisterent and Contreesterent ove tout lour
Puissance. And with this agreed the Scottish Laws; Et idem Rex Scotiae dicit,
sicut prius, quod de aliquo Regnum suum contingente, non est Ausus nec Potest
hic Respondere, Inconsultis probis hominibus Regni sui. Plac. Parl. Inter.
Johann. Reg. Scotiae and Magdulph. 21 Edw. 1. page 157.

He mentions (page 155.) the Claims, which our Ancient Kings made to
Investitures, and the Interposing their Authority, even in Allowing or
Disallowing the Persons of Bishops. And it is very true, that till the
beginning of King Henry the First his Reign, they not only Claimed, but
actually did Invest Bishops and Archbishops per Traditionem Annuli and Baculi:
And subjects in ancient time, that Founded Churches, had the same Right of
Collation or Investiture, whereby the Incumbents received full Possession,
without Aid of the Bishop or other Churchman. Vid. Seldom 's History of Tithes,
cap. 6. sect. 3. And the Kings Right of Investing Bishops, because all
Bishoprics were Royal Foundations, was such, as could not be parted with, but
by Act of Parliament. For that the Kings were bound by their Coronation-Oaths
(as has been said) Jura Regni servar illibata, nec aliquid, quod Diadema
tangit Regni, absque Praelatorum and Procerum requisito Concilio facere. And
therefore King Henry the First in a Letter to Pope Paschal upon this Subject of
Investitures, which the Pope then contended hard to gain from him, tells him
plainly; Si Ego (quod absit) in tanta me dejectione ponerem, ( viz. as to
forego them) Optimates mei, imo totius Angliae Populus id nullo modo pateretur.
Collect. p. 999. And therefore, when afterward they were given up, it was done
in Parliament; Postmodum Kalend. Augusti Clero and Populo ad Concilium
Londoniae Congregato, Adstantibus Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, caeteraque
multitudine maxima Procerum and Magnatum, statuit Rex and concessit, ut ab eo
tempore in antea nullus electus per dationem Baculi Pastoralis vel Annuli de
Episcopatu vel Abbathia Investiretur per Regem vel quamcunque aliam persenam
saecularem Collect. page 1000.

And for the King's interposing his Authority in Allowing or Disallowing the
Persons of Bishops; Before the Reign of King William the First, Nulla erat
Electio Prelatorum mere Libera and Canonica, sed omnes Dignitates tam
Episcoporum, quam Abbatum Regis Curia pro sua Complacentia conferebat.
Ingulphus; page 509. And in King William the Conqueror's time, Lanfrank was
chosen Archbishop of Canterbury, Consensu and Consilio omnium Baronum suorum,
omniumque Episcoporum and Abbatum totiusque populi Angliae: Brev. Relat. de
Will. Com. Normann. Auth. Anonym. Eligentibus eum senioribus ejusdem Ecclesiae
cum Episcopis and Principibus, Clero and Populo Angliae, in Curia Regis in
Assumptione sanctae Mariae: Gervas. Dorob. Col. page 1653. In the Reign of his
Successor King William Rufus, Anselm was chosen in like manner. Vid. Eadmer.
lib. 1. And in King Henry the First's time, Radulphus, who succeeded Anselm,
was chosen Archbishop at Windsor, whither Rex instinctu Dei permotus Episcopos
and Principes Angliae in unum fecit venire, little Consilium in Constituendo
Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi volens habere. Vid. Eadmer. Lib. 5. cap. 109, 110.
Many Examples occur of other Bishops and Abbots elected, either in Parliaments,
or, which is all one, in Ecclesiastical Assemblies, consisting of the same
Members, that Parliaments of those times were composed of, betwixt the Conquest
and King John's time. Vid. Spelm. Councils, Tome 2. page 39. ibid. page 119.
But Elections were not uniform in those days: The Clergy strugled hard to gain
them wholly to themselves: And the Kingdom was sometimes disquieted about the
matter, especially in King John's time. Sometimes Elections were by the
Chapter, sometimes by the Clergy and People of the Diocese, sometimes in Great
Councils. King Henry the Second endeavored to have settled them by the Laws of
Clarendon, cap. 12. Vid. Collect. page 1387, 1388. But the Pope broke in upon
them, by forcing him to swear, when he was absolved for Becketi's Death, Quod
Consuetudines, quae suis temporibus contra Libertatem Ecclesiae fuerant
introductae, revocarentur in irritum: Radulph. de Dioeto; Coll. page 560. This
altered no Right; but it gave the Clergy a color to innovate upon him. But in
King John's time the pretended Right of Election was yielded up to the Clergy
by a Law Consensu Baronum. Only a Conge d'eslire was to issue, and Electi post
Electionem celebratam debebant Domino Regi praesentari, and post
confirmationem, ante administrationem in spiritualibus vel temporalibus
faciendam, ei Juramentum fidelitatis praestare. Matthew. Paris. page 635. And so
the Right continued till King Henry the Eighth's Time, that it was altered by
Parliament. Hence it appears that Our Kings had no Personal Inherent Right and
Prerogative in these Elections, since all were of Old to be made in Parliament,
and since the several Legal Alterations, that have been made therein, have been
made in and by Parliaments.

Nor is it to be wondered, that whereas Subjects might Collate in those Days
Churches of their own Foundation to any Clerk in Orders, and give him the
Investiture, even without so much as a Presentation to the Bishop; yet our
Ancient Kings Collated Bishoprics, no otherwise than in Curia sua: For though
Bishoprics were Royal Foundations, yet they were Founded by Acts of
Parliament, as will appear by and by: And one Great Reason, why our Kings at
least in those Days, could not Erect Bishoprics and endow them otherwise, was
because they could not in those Days Alien their Crown Lands without the Assent
of their Barons. Non poterat Rex distrahere Patrimonium Regni.

And though King John told Pandulphus the Legate, Omnes Praedecessores mei
contulerunt Archiepiscopatus, Episcopatus and Abbathias in thalamis suis:
Monast. Burton. page 264. That must be understood to have been done since the
Norman Conquest only, though the contrary was frequently practiced even in
those Days, and especially since the Constitutions of Clarendon: For the
Instance that he there gives of Wolstan's being made Bishop of Worcester in
King Edward the Confessor his Time, was far from a Collation in Thalamo; if we
believe himself, when he resigned his Pastoral Staff at the Confessor's Tomb:
There concurred Electio, Plebis Petitio, Voluntas Episcoporum and Gratia
Procerum (a full Parliament) as well as the Authoritas and Voluntas of the King
himself. Matthew. Paris. page 20, 21.

As for our Kings seizing the Temporalties of Bishops into their Hands, and so
suspending them a beneficio; (which the Doctor speaks of, page 155.) of which
(he says) many Instances may be found in Mr. Prynn 's Historical Collections: I
suppose he would not be understood, as if our Kings either might, or used to
seize them ad Libitum, but by legal process, and for some contempt, for which
by the Law they were liable to Seizure. They were held of the King by Barony;
and though the Bishops pretended to an Exemption, as to their Persons, from the
Laws of the Land, yet their Temporalties, which were held of the King, and for
which they did him Fealty, were no-wise Exempted; but that if they should
commit Offenses, for which the King might by Law capere se ad Baronias suas,
they, as well as the Laity, that held by the same Tenure, were equally liable
to the Course and Rigor of the Law. What use this is of to the Doctor, for the
setting up some Notional Supremacy lodged in the King Personally, I know not as
yet. Irregularities and Oppressions might well be used upon such occasions, and
Seizures made, when there was no cause, but the Statute of the fourteenth of
Edward the Third, cap. 6. aforementioned, was provided to prevent such
Mischiefs for the future.

But the Doctor was very ill advised in quoting ( page 155.) to clear the
point, the Statutes of Provisions. For those Statutes, which every body knows,
and the Doctor will not deny, to be only new Bullwarks to secure Old Rights,
were yet such, as the King could never dispense with: But when the
Circumstances of his Affairs were such, that to gratify the Pope, and tie him
to his Interest, he found it convenient to have some Relaxation, made of those
Laws, then were Parliaments called, and at their first meeting, one cause of
their Convention declared to be, to provide remedy touching the Statutes of
Provisions, for eschewing debate between the Pope and the King, and his Realms.
And then we find leave given to the King, from time to time to dispense with
those Laws, and that but for a time, and this declared to be a Novelty. Vid.
Cotton's Abridgment, page 341. 346. Annis 15. and 16. Rich. 2.

And the Complaints of the English Nation in Matthew. Paris against the Pope's
Provisions, were grounded upon this,

VIZ.

That Patroni Ecclesiarum, ad eas, cum Vacaverint, Clericos idoneos praesentare
non poterant, sed conferebantur Ecclesiae Romany: qui penitus Idioma Regni
ignorabant, and pecuniam extra Regnum asportabant. These Oppressions fell
chiefly upon the Clergy, as appears by most of the Laws against Provisions, of
which hereafter; for the Pope assumed a greater Power over them and Churches,
of which they were Patrons, then he could pretend to over the Laity; and they
sometimes complied with his Provisions, and submitted to collate Italians and
Foreigners, as at other times they did to heavy Exactions, insomuch that in the
year 1240. misit Dominus Papa praecepta sua Domino Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo
Edmundo, and Sarisberiensi, and Lincolniensi Episcopis, ut trecentis Romany in
primis beneficiis Vacantibus providerent; scientes se suspensos a beneficiorum
Collatione, donec tot competenter providerentur. Matthew. Paris, page 532. And it
appears by the same Author, that these, and more were provided of
Ecclesiastical Benefices in England: Praebendas, Ecclesias and varios redditus
opimos plusquam trecentos ad suam vel Papae contulerat (legatus Otto)
voluntatem: id. p. 549. But many grievous Complaints and Petitions in
Parliaments, and in Letters to the Pope, occur in Mr. Prynne's Historical
Collections, and in the Parliament Rolls against these Provisions, as
intolerable Grievances, and contrary to all Law and Reason. If at some times
they were complied with, upon condition, that the Persons recommended by the
Pope, were of good condition, and worthy of Promotion, how does that relate to
its being in the King's power even to admit the persons to the Dignity and
Office, as the Doctor ignorantly and childishly asserts? But his conclusion,

VIZ.

That the Exercise of their Government, was according to the King's Laws, I do
not Quarrel with him about, for it was, or ought to have been so: But not
according to the King's Pleasure.

Nor would any unbyassed Man in Reading King Alfred's Laws, have readily made
such an Inference, as the Doctor does ( page 155, 156,) telling us out of L. l.
Alvredi, that King Alfred reserved to himself the liberty even of Dispensing
with the Marriage of Nuns: Which he would represent, as a thing prohibited by
the Canons only, and that the King reserved to himself a Power of Dispensing
with it, though without his Especial Dispensation he suffered the Canon to take
place: Now the Marriage of Nuns was really prohibited by a Law of the State, by
an Act of Parliament of that Age; For Brompton, giving us an Account of King
Alfred's Laws, says thus; Ego Alfredus West-Saxonum Rex ostendi haec [omnibus
sapientibus meis,] and dixerunt; Placet ea Custodire. And many Temporal Laws
are amongst them, all Enacted by the same Authority. And the same Law or Canon
that prohibits Nuns from Marrying, gives the King, and not only him, but the
Bishop of the Diocese leave to Dispense; so that the Doctor might as well have
argued for the Bishops as the Kings reserving a Power to himself of Dispensing:
The Words are, Si quis Sanctimonialem ab Ecclesia abduxerit, sine Licentia
Regis vel Episcopi, etc.

Then he says, That our Kings Presided sometimes in Councils of the Clergy of
their Kingdom, though the Pope's Legates were present, and Quotes Spelman's
Councils, page 292, 293. Out of which Book it will not be amiss to give an
Account of that Assembly, which the Doctor in this place calls a Council of the
Clergy.

Anno Gratiae 787, Concilium Calchythense Legatinum and Pananglicum a Gregorio
Ostiensi and Theophylacto Tudentino Episcopis, and Legatis Hadriani Papae
Calchythae celebratum est. In quo decernitur de fide primitus suscepta
retinenda, aliisque ad Ecclesiae regimen pertinentibus: Et de Conferenda part
Archiepiscopatus Cantuariae ad Ecclesiam Litchfeldensem, jam in
Archiepiscopatum promovendam. Habebatur in duabus Sessionibus (says Sir Henry
Spelman, rectius forte concilia dicendis) quarum prima fuit in regno
Northanhymbrorum, coram Alfwoldo illic Rege [and Magnatibus suis:] Praesidente
e Legatis Gregorio Ostiensi Episcopo. Secunda Sessio in Regno Merciorum fuit,
coram Offa Rege ibidem [and suis Magnatibus:] Praesidente etiam in eadem
Gregorio ipso Ostiensi. So that here appears the Doctor's First mistake, in
saying that the Kings presided, though the Legates were present. I confess our
Kings frequently did preside in Ecclesiastical Assemblies; nor was the Grandeur
of Popes arrived in those Days to such an Extravagant pitch, as to Usurp
Precedence before Kings and Emperors. But I observe this, to show the Doctor's
carelessness in his Quotations, not to argue any Inferiority of the Kings
Persons, by reason of their not presiding, when they were Present. For we find
Instances of Archbishops of Canterbury presiding, though the Kings were
Present. The Doctor's Second mistake is, in calling this an Assembly of the
Clergy: For, though this Council was Assembled for Ecclesiastical Matters, nor
do we find any Temporal Laws made, or Temporal Affairs transacted in it,
(saving, that in the Twelfth Chapter it is decreed what sort of Persons shall
be chosen to be Kings, and by whom) yet were all Persons present, that in those
Days constituted the General Legislative Assemblies of the Nation, which in
latter Ages we have Christened by the Name of Parliaments. And this appears by
the Letter, which one of the Legates wrote to the Pope, giving him an account
of the Success of their Mission. Pervenimus ad aulam Offae Regis Merciorum; at
ille cum iugenti gaudio ob Reverentiam Beati Petri and vestri Apostolatus,
honor suscepit tam nos, quam sacros apices, a summa sede delatos. Tunc
convenerunt in unum Concilium Offa Rex Merciorum and Chinulphus Rex
West-Saxonum, cui etiam tradidimus vestra Syngrammata Sancta: Ac illi continuo
promiserunt se de his vitiis corrigendos. Tunc [inito concilio cum praedictis
Regibus, Pontificibus, Senioribus terrae,] perpendentes quod angulus ille long
lateque protenditur, permisimus Theophylactum Venerabilem Episcopum, Regem
Merciorum and Britanniae parts adire. Ego autem, assumpto mecum Adjutore, quem
filius vester Excellentissimus Rex Carolus ob reverentiam Vestri Apostolatus
nobiscum misit, Virum probatae fidei Wighodum, Abbatem Presbyterum, perrexi in
regionem Northanhymbrorum, ad Oswaldum Regem, and Archiepiscopum Sanctae
Ecclesiae Eboracae Civitatis Eanbaldum. Sed quia praefatus Rex long in
Borealibus commorabatur, misit jam dictus Archiepiscopus missos suos ad Regem,
qui continuo omni gaudio Statuit diem concilii: Note here the manner of
receiving Foreign Canons in those days.
Ad quem Convenerunt [Omnes Principes Regionis,] tam Ecclesiastici quam
Saeculares. And a little after; Qui omni Humilitatis Subjectione, and clara
voluntate, tam admonitionem Vestram, quam parvitatem nostram amplexantes,
sposponderunt se in omnibus obedire. Then follow the Canons themselves: And
afterward, these Words;

VIZ.

Haec decreta, Beatissime Pater Adriane, in Concilio publico, coram Rege
Aelfwaldo and Archiepiscopo Eanbaldo, [and omnibus Episcopis and Abbatibus
regionis, seu Senatoribus and Ducibus and Populo terrae] proposuimus, and illi,
etc. se in omnibus custodire decreverunt, and signo crucis in vice vestra in
manu nostra confirmaverunt. Then follow the Witnesses Names, of whom part are
Secular, part Ecclesiastical Persons. And afterward; His peractis perreximus,
Assumptis nobiscum Viris illustribus, Legatis Regis and Archiepiscopi, etc. qui
una nobiscum pergentes, and ipsa decreta secum deferentes in Concilium
Merciorum, ubi Gloriosus Rex Offa [cum Senatoribus terrae] una cum
Archiepiscopo Janbrichto sanctae Ecclesiae Dorovernensis and caeteris Episcopis
regionum convenerat, and in Conspectu Concilii Clara voce singula Capitula
perlecta sunt, and tam Latin quam Teutonice, quo [omnes] intelligere possent,
dilucide reserata, qui [omnes] consona voce, alacri animo, gratias referentes,
promiserunt se in omnibus haec Statuta custodire. In this Convention the Canons
of the six first General Councils were received: And several Constitutions made
for the Government of the English Church. All which were Assented to by the
Clergy and the Laity of these two Kingdoms of the Heptarchy: And by Virtue of
that Assent, became incorporated into the Municipal Laws of those Kingdoms. So
that though this, and many other such Councils as this was, show abundantly the
King of England's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs, in opposition to a
Foreign Power, yet no Argument can be drawn from hence to prove any other or
greater power in Ecclesiastical Matters to be lodged in the King, than he has
in Temporals: The Supreme Power in both being in the King, in conjunction with
his Great Council or Parliament, but not in him, separate and apart from them.

Another Example produced by the Doctor, of our Kings having presided in a
Council of the Clergy, though the Pope's Legates were present, is out of Sir
Henry Spelman's Counc. page 189. But in this he has as bad luck, as in the
former; for, as in the former the Kings did not preside, but one of the
Legates, so in this the King indeed presided, but no Legate appears by the Book
to have been present. And the Acts of the Council begin thus;

VIZ.

In Nomine Domini Dei Nostri and Salvatoris Jesu Christi Congregatum est Magnum
Concilium in loco qui vocatur Becancelde, Praesidente in eodem Concilio
Withredo Clementissimo Rege Cantuariorum, nec non Bertualdo Reverendissimo
Archiepiscopo Britanniae, simulque Tobia Episcopo Roffensis Ecclesiae,
caeterisque Abbatibus, Abbatissis, Presbyteris, Diaconibus, Ducibus, Satrapis
in unum glomeratis, pariter tractantes, anxie examinantes de statu Ecclesiarum
Dei, etc. Here the King presides in a General Council of his own People, or in
a Parliament assembled for Matters concerning the State and Government of the
Church. And what use the Doctor can make of all this, I know not.

The Charter of King William the Conqueror, whereby he severed the
Ecclesiastical Courts from the Temporal, and which the Doctor would have us
believe, was an Act of the King's Personal Authority in Ecclesiastical Affairs,
was a Parliamentary Charter, or an Act of Parliament. Willielmus Dei gratia,
etc. Sciatis, etc. quod leges Episcopales, quae non been, nec secundum
sanctorum Canonum praecepta, usque ad mea tempora in Regno Anglorum fuerunt,
Communi Consilio Archiepiscoporum meorum, and caeterorum Episcoporum and
Abbatum and omnium Procerum Regni mei, emendandas Judicavi. Propterea mando and
praecipio, ut nullus Episcopus vel Archidiaconus de legibus Episcopalibus
amplius in Hundret placita teneat, etc. This Mr. Seldom understood to be an Act
of Parliament, for having given an account of his Diaploma to Battle-Abbey, and
recited it at length in his Notes and Specilegium ad Eadmerum; p. 165, 166.
which was granted Assensu Lanfranci Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis, and Stigandi
Episcopi Cicestrensis and Concilio etiam Episcoporum and Baronum meorum: says
he, id genus etiam est sancitum ejus, quo Sacrum a Civili discriminavit Forum.
The same Author speaking in another of his Works of King William the
Conquerour's bringing the Possessions of the Church under Military Service, of
which, though Roger Wendover (out of whom Matthew Paris took the Relation)
says, that Episcopatus and Abbathias omnes, quae Baronias tenebant in pura and
perpetua Eleemosyna, and eatenus ab omni servitute Seculari Libertatem
habuerant, sub servitute statuit Militari, irrotulans singulos Episcopatus and
Abbathias pro Voluntate sua quot milites sibi and successoribus suis,
hostilitatis tempore voluit a singulis exhiberi. Yet (says Mr. Seldom) how it
is likely he brought them to this kind of Tenure, may be conjectured by other
circumstances of the stories of the the same time. And observe especially, That
he held a Parliament the same Year; so that perhaps this Innovation of their
Tenures was done by an Act of that Parliament. Seld. Titles of Honor, p. 578.
Which I mention only to show, that things said to have been done by the
Conqueror, and especially Laws and Constitutions mentioned to have been made
by Him, must not presently be supposed to have proceeded from his own, single,
personal Authority, but to have been made More Anglico, cum assensu Ordinum
Regni, as has been even now observed out of Mr. Seldom.

What follows in the Doctor (p. 156, 157) concerning the King's Temporal
Courts, being Judges, whether a Cause belonged to the Jurisdiction of the
Temporal or Ecclesiastical Courts, is very true: And so is the Account, that he
gives of King William the First, his settling many particulars to belong to the
Jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical Judges, in a Council at Illibon in Normandy,
Anno 1080. But it is an inveterate Error of the Doctor's, to confound the
King's personal Authority with his Authority in his Courts, and his Authority
in, and with the Assent of his Great Councils or Parliaments. That Council of
Illebon, mentioned by the Doctor, is related by Ordericus Vitalis in this
manner; viz. Anno ab Incarnatione Domini MLXXX, Rex Gulielmus in festo
Pentecostes apud Illebonam resedit, ibique Gulielmum Archiepiscopum and [omnes
Episcopos and Abbates, Comitesque cum aliis Proceribus Normanniae] simul adesse
praecepit. Vt Rex jussit, factum est. Igitur Octavo Anno Papatus Domini
Gregorii Papae septimi Concilium apud Jullam -- bonam celebratum est, and de
statu Ecclesiae Dei, totiusque Regni, providentia Regis [cum Baronum suorum
consilio] utiliter tractatum est. And then follow the Canons, all being
concerning matters Ecclesiastical. Now what use the Doctor makes of this
Paragraph, I know not. For the Jurisdiction of the King in his Courts, (where
the Law of the Land is the Judges rule) to restrain All Inferior Courts within
their proper bounds, no man denies: And the King's Authority to limit, erect
and appoint Consilio Baronum suorum, And una cum Episcopis, Comitibus and
Proceribus Regni sui, what Causes shall belong to the cognizance of
Ecclesiastical Judges, and what not, no man, that is a Protestant, questions.
How many Acts of Parliament in every Age might be reckoned of this nature; vid.
Stat. de Circumspecte agatis temp. Edwardi 1. Stat. de Articulis Cleri, tempore
Edward. 2. and Statutum pro Clero, tempore Edw. 3. and innumerable others.

Then the Doctor refers his Readers for farther satisfaction how far the Kings
of England have exercised Jurisdiction in Ecclesiastical matters, to Sir Roger
Twiselen, page 108, 109, etc. who instanceth in eighteen particulars. I will
not stand with the Dr. for the number, but referr him to Mr. Prynn's second
Tome of his Chronological Vindication of the King's Supreme Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, out of the Introduction to which Volume he might have named five
and twenty. But because he has chosen to quote Sir Roger Twisden's eighteen,
let us examine those Particulars, and Sir Roger's Authorities, upon which he
grounds them, and it will presently appear how far they make for his Hypothesis.

1. The first is, that they permitted none to be taken for Pope, but by the
King's appointment. For which he quotes Eadmerus, page 26. But of this matter
having spoken already, I shall say no more of it in this place.

The Second is, That none were to receive Letters from the Pope, without
showing them to the King, who caused all words prejudicial to him or his Crown,
to be renounced. For which he quotes Eadmerus, page 113. In whom are these
words, in a Letter from Pope Paschal to King Henry the First, viz. Sedis eni^
Apostolicae Nuntii vel Literae, praeter jussum sum Regiae Majestatis, nullam in
potestate tua susceptionem aut aditum promerentur. This was but the Law of
England, not to be subject to any Foreign Power; asserted by a Law in King
William the Conquerour's time, and afterward over and over in opposition to
Papal Encroachments and Usurpations; confirmed by the Statutes of Praemunire
and Provisors, and effectually secured by the Laws made at and since the
Reformation, and particularly by that Remarkable Statute of 14 Henr. 8. cap.
12. concerning Appeals. And that the King could not of himself let in a Foreign
Power upon his People, appears sufficiently by what has been said already. The
two Passages quoted by Sir Roger out of Thorn, Collect. page 2151, 2152, and
2194, show that two Persons, to whom the Pope had conferred by Provisions, the
Monastery of St. Austin in Canterbury, were enforced, before their Admittance,
to renounce all such words in their Bulls of Provision, as were prejudicial to
the King and his Crown; i.e. to the Laws of the Realm, in and over which the
King was Supreme Magistrate and Governor. After which renunciation made, they
did fealty to the King, and were by the Escheator put into possession of their
Temporalties. The King might by Law have opposed these Provisions, but the
Monks, who had the Right of Election, being willing to receive the Persons so
collated, and the King to admit them (as any Private Patron might admit a Clerk
to be collated to a Church of his own Gift, by Provision) it was very
reasonable that the King should require a renunciation of such Clauses in their
Bulls of Provision, as interser'd with the Jurisdiction, which the Law gave him
over his Spiritual Subjects. And this appears by Sir Roger Twisden's third
quotation upon this Head, compared with an Act of Parliament in Queen Mary's
time.

The quotation is out of Coke's 3 Instit. page 27. where the Form of the
Renunciation is set down; viz. I renounce all the words comprised in the Pope's
Bull to me made of the Abbey of, etc. the which be contrary or prejudicial to
the King our Sovereign Lord, and to his Crown, etc. A true and Gonuine
Explanation of which, take from an Act of a Popish Parliament, viz. 1 and 2
Phil. and Mar. cap. 8. Be it Enacted by Authority of this present Parliament,
That all Bulls, Dispensations and Privileges obtained before the Twentieth Year
of King Henry the Eighth, or which shall hereafter be obtained of the Sea of
Rome, not containing matter contrary or prejudicial to [the Authority, Dignity,
or Pre-eminence Royal or Imperial of the Realm, or to the Laws of the Realm,]
now being in force, may be put in execution, etc. So that such Bulls, as were
not contrary to the known Laws of the Realm, were allowed to be valid, so long
as the Pope was acknowledged to be the Head of the English Church: But such
Bulls, or clauses in Bulls, as were contrary to the Laws, were to be renounced,
as Prejudicial to our Sovereign Lord the King and his Crown; i. e. as this Law
of Phil. and Mary explains it; to the Pre-eminence Imperial of the Realm, and
the Laws of the same.

Sir Roger's third Particular is, That Our Kings permitted No Councils, but by
their liking, to assemble, which gained the name of Convocations; as that
always had been and ought to be assembled by the King's Writ. For this Sir
Roger quotes Eadmer. page 24, and the statute of 25 Henry the 8. c. 19. Upon
this Head I have no Controversy with the Doctor nor Sir Roger, I only assert,
that such things as are the proper Business of Convocations, cannot be
transacted by the King alone without them.

His fourth particular is, That Our Kings caused some to sit in them (sc. in
his Ecclesiastical Councils) to supervise their Actions and prohibit them, on
the behalf of the King and Kingdom, ne quid ibi contra Regiam Coronam aut
dignitation statuere attentarent. Here the Reader is to observe, that the
Authority quoted for this, is in Anno Dom. 1237. which was about the twentieth
year of King Henry the Third, before which time the Clergy had turned the King
and the Laity out of their Synods. And therefore it stood the King in stead to
prohibit them, who were but a small number of his Subjects, and scarce
half-Subjects, from attempting any thing to the prejudice of the Rights of his
Crown, or the Liberties of his People, and the Laws of the Realm; which they
had already made too great inrodes upon. As no such Prohibitions as these, can
be produced in former times, so they were altogether useless and unnecessary,
when the Kings themselves and all such of their Subjects as were admitted into
Parliaments, sat and had Votes in Ecclesiastical Synods: as is undeniably
evident by almost all the Ancient Councils collected by Sir Henry Spelman, till
within the Reign of King Steven; Who owing his Crown to the Clergy, was fain to
suffer this and other Usurpations, to secure his cracked Title. But after the
Clergy took upon them to meet in Convocations, neither assembled by the Kings
Writ, nor consisting, as the Ancient Synods had done, of the King and all the
Estates of the Realm, Prohibitions to them are frequent, not to attempt any
thing against the Law of the Land. Vid. Patt. 8. Reg. Johan. nu. 1. Rex
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Archidiaconis, and omni Clero apud
sanctum Albanum ad Concilium convocato, salutem. Conquerente Vniversitate
Militum and Baronum and aliorum sidelium nostrorum, audivimus quod non solum in
laicorum grave praejudicium, sed etiam in totius Regni nostri intolerabile
dispendium, super Romescot praeter consuetudinem solvendo, and aliis
perpluribus inconsuctis exactionibus Authoritate summi pontificis Concilium
inire and Concilium celebrare decrevistis: Nos vero etc. Vobis precise mandamus
and express prohibemus, ne super praedictis vel aliquibus aliis Concilium
aliquod in Authoritate aliqua, in fide qua nobis tenemini, teneatis, vel
contrae Regni nostri Consuetudinem aliquid novi statuatis, and a celebratione
hujusmodi Concilii supersedeatis, quousque cum Vniversitate nostra super hoc
Colloquium habuerimus. This Writ appears to have been granted at the Complaint
of the whole Parliament, and Commands the Clergy not to proceed in their
Exactions, nor any other business contra consuetudinem Regni, till the King had
spoken with his Parliament about the matter. But I lay no stress at all upon
the Parliament's being here a party. I produce this Writ only to confirm Sir
Roger's fourth particular of the Kings prohibiting the Clergy to attempt any
thing against the Rights of his Crown or the Law of the Land. It is a known
Rule, that whatever is forbidden by Law, the King may forbid by his
Proclamation; and that whenever any Court assumes an Authority, not warranted
by Law, the King may prohibit them by his Writ. What more natural, then for
the supreme Magistrate, to whom the Law has committed the Execution of it self,
to prohibit all things that are contrary to Law?

As here we see the King, at the complaint of the Vniversitas, prohibits the
Clergy from attempting any thing contrary to the Consuetudo Regni, so in King
Henry the Eighth's time there appears a prohibition to the King himself and the
Clergy, not to do any thing contrariant or repugnant to the King's prerogative
Royal, or the Customs, Laws and Statutes of the Realm. The Statute of 25 Hen.
8. cap. 19. (which all men agree to be but declarative of the Common Law)
enacts that No Canons, Constitutions or Ordinances of the Clergy, shall be
[made] or put in Execution within this Realm by Authority of the Convocation of
the Clergy, which shall be contrariant or repugnant to the Kings prerogative
Royal, or the Customs, Laws, or Statutes of the Realm. This Act had before
provided, that the Clergy should not make, promulge or execute any Canons,
Constitutions or Ordinances in their Convocations without the Kings License and
Assent, under the Penalty of a Praemunire; so that without the Kings Assent
their Canons would be Nullities, and themselves under a praemunire for making or
Executing them. And therefore when the Act provides in an afterclause, that
they shall [make] no Canons, etc. contrary to the Kings prerogative, or the
Laws of the Realm, this is a prohibition to the King and them not to make any
such Canons, Constitutions or Ordinances, as are contrary to Law.

Sir Roger's fifth particular is, That our Kings suffered no synodical decree
to be of force, but by their Allowance and Confirmation. For which he quotes
Florentius Wigornensis, Anno 1127. Where it is said, Rex auditis Concilii
Gestis, consensum praebuit, and authoritate Regia and potestate concessit and
confirmavit statuta Concilii a Gulielmo Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo and sanctae
Romanae Ecclesiae legato apud Westmonasterium celebrati. Now that Council
consisted not of the Clergy only, but as Ecclesiastical Synods did in those
days, of the Clergy and Laity; Confluxerunt quoque illic magnae multitudines
Clericorum and Laicorum, tam divitum quam mediocrium, and fact us est conventus
grandis and inestimabilis. ibidem. And this we have heard before out of
Malmesbury was necessary, quatenus quicquid ejusmodi Concilii Authoritate
decerneretur, utriusque Ordinis cura and sollicitudine ratum servaretur. Now,
that the Acts of such Synods were of no force within the Realm without the
Kings Assent, I agree: as his Assent is necessary to make an Act of Parliament
a binding Law in Temporals, so his Assent is, and till the Clergy had turned
him out of their Synods, always was necessary and Essential to an
Ecclesiastical Law. But what inference can be drawn from hence to prove any
personal Supremacy in the King, separate and distinct from the Assent of his
People in their Synods and Councils, I do not apprehend.

But one Observation I cannot omit upon this Council, compared with that other
held Anno Dom. 1175. and Ann. 21. Hen. 2. For whereas in the former the Laity
were present, as well as the Clergy, we find the King gave his Royal Assent to
their Canons, and so they became Ecclesiastical Laws, binding to the whole
Nation; In the latter the Laity were not present, by any account that I can
find of it, and therefore to make their Canons general Laws the Kings Assent
would not have been sufficient, nor was it singly had; for Gervas. Dorob. Anno
Dom. 1175. page 1429. Collect. tells us in hoc Concilio ad Emendationem
Anglicanae Ecclesiae assensu Domini Regis and primorum Regni haec subscripta
promulgata sunt Capitula.

And that the Clergy in those days, when they took upon them to hold Synods
apart from the Laity, did not imagine that the King alone could give their
Canons any Validity in Law, where they entrenched upon or interser'd with the
Laws of the Land, will appear by observing, that when in King Henry the Third's
Time the Clergy in opposition to the Gravamina Laicorum, had made many
provisional Articles for the enlarging their own Jurisdiction, pro quibus
Episcopi Angliae fuerant pugnaturi, Matthew Paris says thus of them; viz.
Formati sunt Articuli circiter quinquaginta, quos praelati in seripta
redegerunt, ut apto tempore coram Rege and magnatibus and praelatis lecti,
effectum debitum sortirentur. Additamenta ad Math. Paris. page 199, etc. so
that it was the magnates and praelati, as well as the King, and not the King
without them, that could give life to them.

Sir Roger's sixth particular is, That our Kings permitted no Bishops to
Excommunicate or inflict any Ecclesiastical Censure on any Baron or Officer,
nisi praecepto suo; concerning which I have spoken already.

The seventh is, That they caused the Bishops to appear in their Courts, to
give an Account why they Excommunicated the Subject, This makes nothing for any
personal Authority in the King. Whatever he does in his Courts, he does by his
Judges, who have the Law of the Realm for their guide and Rule. And ought to
keep all inferior Courts within their Bounds; and therefore might and do yet
every day grant Prohibitions, when the Bishops and their Officials proceed to
Excommunicate, where the Law does not allow that Censure to be applied. And if
the Writ of Prohibition be not obeyed, but that the Bishop or other
Ecclesiastical Judge proceeds notwithstanding, an Attachment is the next
process. Vid. Fitz. Not. Br. tit. prohibition. For Excommunication, whatever
pretense of Divine Right the Clergy may have for their Jurisdiction, was always
regulated by the Laws of the Realm, but never by the Kings Arbitrary Will and
Pleasure.

The Eighth is, That they caused such as were imprisoned, after forty days
standing Excommunicate, to be freed by Writ, without the assent of the prelate
or satisfaction giving; the King and his Judges communicating with them, tam in
Divinis, quam profanis, and commanding none to shun them, though by the
ordinary denounced Excommunicate. Now the ground of this is no other, then the
Writ de cautione admittenda, by which the Bishops are commanded, quod accepta
ab A. B. (the Person Excommunicate) cautione, ipsum a prisona, qua occasion
praedict. detinetur, deliberari mandent; alioqui quod nostrum est in hac part
exequemur. To which Writ if the Bishop did not yield Obedience, then a Writ
went to the Sheriff to deliver the Prisoner, if the Bishop should persist in
his refusal to accept Caution. v. Regist. fol. 66. a. and Fitz. Not. Brev. Fol.
63. Now these Writs in the Register were made in Parliament, as Bracton tells
us; Lib. 5. Fol. 413. b. and sunt quidem brevia formata de certis casibus, and
[de communi consilio totius Regni] concessa and approbata; And therefore (says
he, and the Lord Coke out of him, 2 Instit. 407.8. Rep. fol. 48, 49.)
nullatenus mutari possunt absque consensu and voluntate eorum. The Acts indeed
by which most of the Writs in the Register are appointed, are lost, as all the
Records of Parliament are before Magna Charta; but by Acts of Parliament yet
upon record many writs are directed, and the forms of them expressed in the
body of the Acts. So that Writs in the Register are the very Law of England;
they are Statute Law, and the oldest Statute Law we have. And consequently the
King's commanding the Bishops to discharge persons, that were in prison upon a
Capias Excommunicatum, and commanding the Sheriff to deliver them in the
Bishop's default, is no Act of Personal Prerogative in them; But the ordinary
course of the Law of the Realm, and warranted by Acts of Parliament, though,
the Records of those Acts being lost, we now call it Common Law.

Sir Roger's ninth Instance is, That our Kings suffered no Legates to come into
England, without their leave. Of which has been discoursed already.

The tenth is, That they determined Matters of Episcopacy Inconsulto Romano
Pontifice. Which is true, they did and had good Right to do, but not
Inconsultis Magnatibus. Witness the Degradation of Stigand Archbishop of
Canterbury, temp. Willielmi primi. And the intended deprivation of Wolstan
Bishop of Worcester. The Controversy betwixt King William Rusus and Anselm,
about Anselm's going to fetch his Pall from Urban: And that betwixt Lanfrank
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Thomas Archbishop of York, concerning the
Profession of Canonical Obedience, which the former required of the Latter: the
Choosing Bishops and Archbishops: the Controversies betwixt King Henry the 2d.
and Thomas Becket; all heard, debated and determined in General Assemblies of
Clergy and Laity, and not by our Kings apart from their Great Councels.

The Eleventh is, That they permitted No appeals to Rome. It Is true; nor did
they ever determine them themselves, either in person or by Commission. And
therefore the Statute of Clarendon, which gives Appeals from the ArchBishop to
the King, was never understood to be to the King in person, but to the King in
his Court. As we may see by what Ger. Dorobern. Anno 1176. Coll. p. 1433: And
Hoveden, fol. 313, 314: tell us of the statute made at Northampton in King
Henry the second's time. Which both of them call a renewing of the Assize of
Clarendon. Now in these Laws made at Northampton there is this close Expression
concerning Appeals; Justiciae faciant quaerere per consuetudinem terrae illos,
qui a Regno recesserunt, and nisi redire voluerint infra terminum nominatum,
and stare ad Rectum [in Curia Domini Regis,] Vtlagentur. So that, though King
Henry, as far as in him lay, had given ways to Appeals to Rome (for when he was
absolved of the Guilt, that he was supposed to have contracted by having
occasioned the death of Thomas Becket, part of the satisfaction enjoined him,
was, quod licebit Appellationes libere fieri; Radulph: de Diceto. p. 560) yet
the Kingdom afterward meeting in Parliament at Northampton, would not quit
their interest; But renewed the Laws of Clarendon against foreign Appeals; And
explain the Appeals ad Regem to be meant of Appeals ad Curiam Regis. But it is
a common error with Men, that are ignorant of our Laws, wherever they find
they King's name in any Acts of Parliament, or Judicial Proceedings, to
imagine, that the King has some Personal Authority out of his Courts; But for
the present, I will give but one Instance, to detect that mistake. The Stat. of
Westminster. 1. Enacts ( cap. 15.) what persons shall be replevisable, and what not.
Amongst others, those that are taken by [Commandement le Roy] are appointed not
to be bayl'd by that Statute. My Lord Coke, in his Commentary upon that Law; 2d
Institut. page 186. says thus, viz. 1. The King, being a body Politic, cannot
command but by matter of Record; for Rex praecipit and lex praecipit, are all
one. For the King must command by matter of Record, according to Law. 2. When
any Judicial Act is by Act of Parliament referred to the King, it is to be
understood to be done in some Court of Justice, according to Law. The words of
the Statute of Rich. 2. cap. 12. are, si non, que il sort per brief, ou auter
maundement del Roy. And yet, it was resolved by all the Judges of England, that
the King cannot do it by any Commandment, but by Writ, or by Order or Rule of
some of his Courts of Justice, where the Cause depends. And Fortescue,
speaking to the Prince, to instruct him against he should be King; Melius (says
he) per alios, quam per teipsum Judicia reddes, quo proprio ore Nullus Regum
Angliae usus est, and tamen sua sunt omnia Judicia Regni; licet per alios ipsa
reddantur; sicut and judicum ^lim sententias Josaphat asseruit esse judicia Dei.

The Great Case in tertio Caroliprimi of Habeas Corpus turned upon this point.
The Judges indeed betrayed the Nation in that cause, as they have done in
others in these Hundred years last past, as far as in them lay: but how that
Judgment was resented in Parliament, the Reader may inform himself out of the
1st Vol. of Rushworth's Collections, and the 1st part of Doctor Nalson. The Law
was declared upon that occasion to be, that Voluntas Regis est secundum legem
et Justiciarios suos, in Guria sua and non in Camera; according to 2 R. 3. f.

The Twelfth particular is, that Our Kings bestowed Bishoprics on such as they
liked: and translated Bishops from one See to another: concerning our Kings
bestowing Bishoprics something has been said already. As for their translating
Bishops from one See to another, I desire to hear any one Instance in any age
of any Bishop translated by the King, against his own will. The Pope pretended
to such a power, and sometimes Exercised it: and that was one of the mischiefs,
which occasioned the making of the Statutes of Provisors. But could never yet
find, that any of our Kings attempted it.

The Thirteenth particular is, Erecting New Bishoprics. The Instances given by
Sir Roger, are 1st, the erecting of the Bishopric of Ely by King Henry the
1st, Anno 1009. taking it out of Lincoln-Diocess. And yet nothing is more
evident, then that this was done by Act of Parliament. The Instrument Runs
thus; viz. In Nomine sanctae and individuae Trinitatis Patris and Filii and
spiritus sancti, Anno ab Incarnatione Domini MCVIII Indictione. Anno
Pontificatus Domini Paschalis Papae 2. decimo, Regni quoque mei similiter
decimo; Ego Henricus Providente Divina Clementia Rex Anglorum and Normannorum
Dux, Wilhelmi Magni Regis Filius, qui Edwardo Regi Haereditario jure successit
in Regnum; videns and Ecclesiae messem in Regno meo multam esse, and Agricolas
quidem paucos, et ab hoc plurimum laborantes in Mess, et in ipsa Lincolniensem
Ecclesiam multa plebe foecundam, ex Authoritate and Consilio predicti Papae
Paschalis, and Assenfu simul and prece Roberti Lincolniensis Episcopi, and
totius Capituli sui, cum ipso annuente Domino Anselmo Beatae memoriae
Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, and Thoma secundo Venerabili Eboracensium
Archiepiscopo, [and Universis Episcopis and Abbattibus totius Angliae, sed and
omnibus Ducibus, Comitibus and Principibus Regni mei] Elyense Monasterium etc.
in Episcopalem sedem, sicut and caeteros Episcopatus Regni mei liberam and
absolutam perenniter statuo and confirmo. vid. Mr. Seldom 's Notas and
Spicilegium ad Eadmer. Et Dugdale's Monasticon.

And what if All the Bishoprics of England, Erected both before and after,
were Erected by Acts of Parliament, and not by the King's Letters Patents only?

In King Edward the Elder's time, upon the Letter of Pope Formosus, Congregata
est synodus Senatorum, Procerum and Populorum, and Nobilium Gentis Angliae, In
qua Presidebat Plegmundus Archiepiscopus. Tum sibi Rex cum suis, et Plegmundus
Archiepiscopus salubre Concilium iniverunt, and Constituted and Elected five
Bishops in the Province of the Gewissi, where there had till then been but two,
dividing those two Bishoprics into five by Act of Parliament. Spelman's Counc.
Volum. 1. page 387, 388. Malmesbury de Gestis Regum Anglorum; Lib. 2. cap. 5.
This Council Matthew Westminster, page 181. Anno Dom. 9051 calls, Concilium
Grande Episcoporum, Abbatum, and fidelium populorum in Provincia Geviseorum. In
the same Council the bounds of their Diocesses were Limited: which the same
Historian describes. He tells us likewise, that in the same Council two other
Bishops were chosen, One to the Bishopric of Dorchester and another to that of
Chichester.

In King Henry the Eighth's time, six New Bishoprics were erected by the
King's Letters Patents; viz. Gloucester, Bristol, Chester, Peterborough, Oxford
and Westminster. But those Letters Patents had the Authority of an Act of
Parliament to warrant them, made in the One and thirtieth year of that King's
Reign, cap. 9. Be it Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, that
his Highness shall have full power and Authority, from time to time, to declare
and nominate by his Letters Patents, etc. such number of Bishops, such number
of Cities, Sees for Bishops, Cathedral Churches and Diocesses, by metes and
bounds, etc. as to his most Excellent Wisdom shall be thought necessary and
convenient. And also shall have power and Authority, to make and devise
Translations, Ordinances, Rules and Statutes concerning them, All and every of
them, etc. And that all and singular such Translations, Nominations of Bishops,
Cities, Sees and limitation of Diocesses for Bishops, Erections,
Establishments, Foundations, Ordinances, Statutes, Rules etc. shall be of as
good strength, force, value and effect, to all Intents and purposes, as if such
things, etc. had been done, made and had by Authority of Parliament. This is
most apparently an Enabling Act; Power is here given to the King by Authority
of Parliament, and it is Enacted, that the Contents of his Letters Patents, to
be made for perfection of the Premises, shall be as valid, as if they had been
Enacted in Parliament. So that, in that King's Judgment, force and validity was
by this Act given to his Letters Patents, which otherwise they would have been
destitute of, and have been invalid for the End to which they were designed.

This was but a Temporary Act, and dyed with that King, for no such Power is
given by the Act to his Successors. And therefore in King Edward the sixth's
time a Bill was brought into the House of Commons, and read the first time, To
authorize that King to make New Bishoprics by Letters Patents: As I find in a
Manuscript Journal of King Edward the Sixth's Parliaments, Anno Regni 7. What
became of it afterward, I know not. It was brought in toward the End of the
Session, and did not pass into a Law. But the bringing of it in shows, that the
King was not conceived to have any such Authority of Common Right. Nor did that
King exercise any such Authority. For the Bishopric of Durham was in his Reign
divided into two by Act of Parliament. And when it was restored to its former
Estate in Queen Mary's time, it was done by Act of Parliament. Vid. Dr.
Burnet's History of the Reform. vol. 2. p. 215. Rastal's Statutes, 1 Mariae,
Parl. 2.

That Act of King Henry the Eighth, by which he was empowered to Erect New
Bishoprics, was Repealed 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. And to the End, that by the
Repeal of the Act, those Bishoprics that had been Erected by virtue of it,
might not be consequentially dissolved, A Clause was inserted into the Act of
Repeal, That all Bishoprics, Cathedral Churches, Hospitals, Colleges,
Schools, and such other Foundations then continuing, made by Authority of
Parliament, or otherwise, according to the Order of the Laws of the Realm,
since the schism, should be confirmed and continued for ever. So that then the
Bishoprics, that had been newly Erected by King Henry the Eighth, stood upon
this Foundation, viz. A Confirmation by Parliament, notwithstanding the Repeal
of 31 Henr. 8. cap. 9. But now, that the Statute of 1 and 2 Phil. et Mar. cap.
8. is Repealed by Primo Eliz. and this clause of Confirmation not excepted out
of the Repeal, I know not upon what bottom they stand at this day.

So far were our Kings from assuming a Power to Erect and divide Bishoprics at
their pleasure (as a late Author, in a Book entitled, A Vindication of the
King's Sovereign Rights, etc. page 12. takes upon him to affirm) That they
never so much as divided Parishes, nor could make Unions and Consolidations of
Parochial Churches without Authority of Parliament. Witness the Statutes of 33
Henr. 8. cap. 32.32 Hen. 8. cap. 44.37 Hen. 8. cap. 21.17 Car. 2. cap. 3.22
Car. 2. cap. 11.22 and 23 Car. 2. cap. 15. etc.

Sir Roger mentions likewise the Bishopric of Carlisle, which was Erected by
King Henry the First, Anno Dom. 1133. The Prior of Hagulstad speaks of this in
General terms ( Coll. page 257.) Consecratus est Adulphus Prior de Nostlia ad
Vrbem Karleol, quam Rex Henricus initiavit ad sedem Episcopalem. Math. Westminster.
in like manner, page 241. Rex Henricus Novum fecit Episcopatum, apud Carleolum,
in Limbo Angliae et Galwalliae, et posuit ibi primum Episcopum, nomine
Ethelulphum sancti Oswaldi Priorem. Abbas Jorvallensis tells us the story in
like terms, Collect. page 1019. Eodem Anno Rex fecit Novum Episcopatum apud
Karliolum, quem Arnulfo, Priori de sancto Bertulpho Contulit. But it appears by
Radulph. de Diceto, Coll. page 505. that in this very year a Parliament was
held, and a very solemn one. Rex Henricus, Convocatis Regni sui Principibus,
filiam suam and haeredes filiae suae sibi successorres instituit. In which
Parliament it is not unlikely that this Bishopric of Carlisle was erected,
notwithstanding these loose Expressions of the Monks. For the same Authors
express themselves in the same terms concerning the Bishopric of Ely: Which
yet was erected by Act of Parliament. Radulphus de Diceto; Collect. page 501.
Rex Henricus Abbathiam Elyensem ad Episcopalem mutavit sedem, and Herveum ibi
praesecit. Math. Westminst. page 238. Rex Henricus Abbbathiam Elyensem in
Episcopalem sedem commutavit. Abbas Jorvallensis; page 1003. Collect. Abbathiam
de Ely ad sedem Episcopalem convertit, and primum Episcopum Herveum Bangorensem
constituit. So that no Argument can be drawn from these Historians mentioning
the King's Founding the Bishopric of Carlisle, without naming the Parliament,
as a party to it, to prove that therefore it was not Erected by Authority of
Parliament. For if the Charter of the Foundation of the Bishopric of Ely had
been lost, the same Argument would have lain against it. And all the
Bishoprics in England, of whose first Foundations there is any particular
Account given by our Historians, appear to have been Founded by Our Kings in
Parliament, or by virtue of an Authority given by Act of Parliament.

I suppose it will not be denied, but whenever any Bishopric in Particular was
Founded, at the same time it was endowed. Now Our Ancient Kings could not out
of Parliament endow Bishoprics, because they could not distrahere patrimonium
Regni. And a further Consideration to this purpose may be drawn from the
Exemptions, which the possessions of the Church enjoyed from all secular
service, Except the Trinoda necessitas; Which Exemptions, were all Granted by
Charters Assented to in Parliament, as appears undeniably by the several
Charters Granted in diverse Kings Reigns successively to the Abbey of Crowland,
All inserted in haec verba into Ingulphus his History of that Monastery; and by
the Monasticon. In which it appears further, that all Exemptions from Episcopal
Jurisdiction, Except of the King's free Chapels, which were of his own
Foundation, were granted in Parliament: I mean all such Exemptions granted by
our Kings. For the Pope used to grant Exemptions by Bulls: and those Papal
Exemptions were confirmed by Parliament, temp. Henr. 8. King William the
Conqueror Founded Battle-Abby in Sussex, in the place where he overcame
Harald; and Exempted it from Episcopal Jurisdiction. But whether he did it in
Parliament, or not, let the Charter it self testify; viz. Willielmus Dei
Gratia Rex Anglorum, etc. Notum sit Vobis me Concessisse and confirmasse, cum
Assensu Lanfranci Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis, and Stigandi Episcopi
Cicestrensis, [ and Consilio etiam Episcoporum and Baronum meorum,] ut Ecclesia
Sancti Martini de Bello, quam Fundavi ex voto, ob Victoriam, quam mihi Deus in
eodem loco concessit, libera sit and quieta in perpetuum ab omni servitute and
omnibus quaecunque humana men's excogitare potest, etc. Nec liceat Episcopo
Cicestrensi, quamvis in illius Dioecesi sit, in Ecclesia illa vel Maneriis ad
illam pertinentibus, ex consuetudine hospitari, contra voluntatem Abbatis, nec
Ordinationes aliquas facere ibidem, nec Abbatiam in aliquo gravare; sed neque
super illam Dominationem aliquam, aut vim aut potestatem exerceat, sed, sicut
mea Dominica Capella, libera sit omnino ab omni ejus Exactione, etc. Hoc etiam
Regali Authoritate and Episcopolum and Baronum meorum Attestatione constituo,
quatenus Abbas Ecclesiae suae and leugae circumjacentis per omnia Judex sit and
Dominus.

The Fourteenth Particular is, that our Kings have by their Writs commanded
Bishops to keep resident. Which, considering that it was their Duty, incumbent
on them by Law, what great Power does it argue in the King, to command his
Subjects to do what the Law enjoins them?

The Sixteenth is, That they have commanded their Bishops, by reason of Schism
or Vacancy in the Popedom, etc. not to seek Confirmation from Rome, but the
Metropolitans to be charged by the King's Writ, to bestow it on the Elected.
For this Sir Roger quotes Rot. Parl. 16. Mart. 3 Hen. 5. nu. 11. Anno Domini
1414. Now that was done by Act of Parliament. Which, because it is observable
to many purposes, shall be transcribed at large.

Our Lord the King, considering the long Vacancy of the Apostolic See, by
reason of the damnable Schism, which has now continued a long time in Holy
Church, and is not known how long it may yet last, And that certain Cathedral
Churches within the Kingdom, which are of the Foundation of his Noble
Progenitors, and belong to his Patronage, have been for some while and are yet
destitute of Parochial Government, because the Persons that are elected into
the same, cannot be confirmed in Parts beyond the Sea, for want of an Apostle,
Although our said Lord the King bath thereunto given his Royal Assent, to the
Great decrease of Divine Service in the said Churches, substraction of
Hospitality, Great peril of many Souls, Devastation and Destruction of the
Lordships and Possessions belonging to the same, and the Impoverishment of such
Bishops Elect; And that by possibility all the Cathedral Churches within the
Realm, may become void in like manner, and so be destitute of Government, and
the King and his Realm of Council, Comfort and Aid, which they ought to have of
the Prelacy; And considering also that in diverse foreign Parts since the
Voidance of the said See, diverse Confirmations have been and are daily made by
the Metropolitans of the places, as he is credibly informed, and Willing for
that cause, for ousting the said Mischiefs, chiefs, to provide such remedy, as
it behooves, By the full and deliberate Advice and Assent of the Lords and
Commons of his Realm in this present Parliament, Wills and Ordains, that the
persons so chosen and to be chosen within his Kingdom during the Vacancy of the
said See Apostolic, shall be comfirmed by the Metropolitans of the Places
without Excuse or further delay in that behalf, And that the King's Writs, if
need be, be directed to the Metropolitans, straightly charging them to make the
said Confirmations, And to perform all that to their Office belongs, As also
to the Bishops Elect, that they on their part Effectually prosecute their
Confirmations, that through default of such Metropolitans or Bishops Elect,
damage or prejudice may not ensue to our Lord King, and his Kingdom, and to
his Realm, and to the said Churches for the Cause aforesaid, which God forbid.

Here it is plain, that what Sir Roger ascribes to the King, was really done
[by the full and deliberate Advice and Assent of the Lords and Commons of his
Kingdom in Parliament.] And therefore that the supreme Jurisdiction in matters
Ecclesiastical, was not, in the notion of that Age, Lodged personally in the
King, but in the King by Law, in the King with his Parliament about him.

Pursuant to this President we find in King Henry the Eighth's time a Notable
Act in the 28th Year of his Reign; cap. 16. In which there is this clause; viz.
And that it may be also Enacted by Authority of this present Parliament, that
all Arch bishops and Bishops of this Realm, or of any the King's Dominions,
Consecrated and at this present time taken and reputed for Archbishops and
Bishops, may [by Authority of this Present Parliament,] and not by virtue of
any Provision, or other Foreign Authority, License, Faculty or Dispensation,
keep, enjoy and retain their Arch-bishopricks, in as large and ample manner, as
if they had been promoted, Elected and consecrated according to the due course
of the Laws of this Realm, And that every Archbishop and Bishop of this Realm,
and of other the King's Dominions, may minister, use and Exercise all and every
thing and things, pertaining to the Office or Order of an Arch bishop and
Bishop, with all Tokens, Ensigns and Ceremonies thereunto Lawfully belonging.
This Act in the 2d paragraph had made void all Bulls, Dispensations, Breves
etc. obtained at Rome, contrary to the statutes of Praemunire and Provisors:
whereby many Bishoprics would have become void. To prevent which the Clause
here recited, makes them legal Bishops notwithstanding, and supplies all the
Ceremonies of Election and Consecration. Which I suppose no man will take upon
him to say, that the King might then have done, notwithstanding his Newly
restored Supremacy.

Sir Roger's 16th Particular is, that Our Kings placed by a Lay hand Clerks in
Prebendary or Parochial Churches, Ordinariis penitus irrequisitis. But, if he
had considered, that Originally all Church livings in England were Donatives,
And that Presentations to Ordinaries, Admissions, Institutions and Inductions
thereupon, obtained in England, in compliance with the Canons many years after
the Conquest, he would not have mentioned that, as a special prerogative in the
King, which was but common to him with All his subjects, that had been Founders
and were Patrons of Benefices. Mr, Seldom tells us in his History of Tithes,
cap. 12. sect. 5. that it was not till about the year MCC that the Decretals
and the Increasing Authority of the Canons had settled the Universal course
here of filling Churches by Presentation to the Bishop, Archdeacon, Vicar of
the Bishop or Guardian of the Spiritualties: and that then the use of
Investitures of Churches and tithes severally or together, practiced by
Laymen, was left off, And a Division of secular and Ecclesiastical Right from
thence been continued in practice. And in the same Section ( page 392.) he
says, that whilst the use of Lay-Investitures was in being all Churches so
given were properly Donatives. For further satisfaction as to that Particular,
I refer to him.

Sir Roger's seventeenth Particular is, that Our Kings prohibited the Laity
from yielding Obedience, or answering by Oath to their Ecclesiastical Superior,
enquiring de peccatis subditorum. This take out of the Additaments to Matthew.
Paris: page 200. number. 9. from whence Sir Roger quotes it. Item, cum Praelati
Ecclesiastici inquirere volunt de peccatis subditorum, prohibentur laici ne de
veritate dicenda, aut de credulitate aliquod juramentum exponant, aut Praelatis
super hujusmodi obediant; propter quod multorum excessus and peccata mortalia
incorrecta and impunita relinquuntur, and sic praestatur audacia delinquendi,
and peccandi facultas. Now this was no other, then protecting the Laity from
being imposed upon by the Oath ex officio. And innumerable Authorities might be
cited, to prove that no kinds nor forms of Oaths can be made or imposed on the
King's Subjects, nor prescribed to them in any new cases, but by Act of
Parliament only; And that no Bishop or Subject whatsoever has any power to
make or enjoin any new Oaths or forms of Oaths, nor any Authority to administer
an Oath to any Man, without some Legal Commission from the King under the Great
Seal, or some Act of Parliament, especially Authorizing him to give or take an
Oath, unless in Courts of Record or other Courts, who have Authority to
administer Oaths by Prescription. But Anno Dom. 1237. Otho the Pope's Legate in
a Council at London made this Constitution touching Oaths in Spiritual Causes
in Ecclesiastical Courts, till that time not known, nor used in England, as
appears by the words of the Constitution: Jusjurandum Calumniae in causis
Ecclesiasticis quibuslibet, and de veritate dicenda in spiritualibus quoque, ut
Veritas aperiatur facilius, and causae celerius terminentur statuimus de
caetero Praestari in Regno Angliae, secundum canonicas and Legitimas
sanctiones, [Obtenta in contrarium Consuetudine Non obstante.] vid. Matthew.
Paris; 454. A clear resolution, that till that time the custom of England, and
the Law of the Land was to the contrary, and that they could not enforce any
Man to his Oath in such cases. After which, Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln, Anno
1246. Upon the suggestion of the Friars Predicant and Minorites, raged more
than was meet or Expedient (they are the words of Matthew Paris) against those
of his Diocese, making strict inquisition in his Bishopric by his Archdeacons
and Deans, concerning the Chastity and manners, as well of noble as ignoble
(upon Oath) to the enormous hurt and scandal of the reputations of many. [Quod
nunquam antea fieri consueverat] The King hearing the Grievous Complaints of
his people, Consilio Curiae suae scripsit Vicecomiti Hertfordiae in haec verba:
Henricus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae etc. Praecipimus tibi, quod sicut teipsum and
omnia tua diligis, non permittas, quod aliqui laici de Balliva tua ad
voluntatem Episcopi Lincolniensis, Achidiaconorum, vel Officialium, seu
Decanorum Ruralium, in aliquo loco Conveniant de caetero, ad cognitiones per
sacramentum eorum vel attestationes aliquas faciendas, nisi in causis
matrimonialibus and Testamentariis. Matthew. Par. p. 716. And the very next year
following, in pursuance hereof, the King by Parliament Enacted and Commanded,
That if any Layman were convented before any Ecclesiastical Judge for breach
of Faith and Perjury, that they should be prohibited by the King: and that the
Ecclesiastical Judge should be prohibited to hold plea for all Causes against
Laymen, unless they were of Matrimony and Testament: All which Matthew. Paris
precisely relates; page 727. Which Prohibition and Statute nullified the
Constitution of Otho, and put a stop to this his innovation. But yet about nine
years after Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury published this peremptory
Constitution in affront to them both; Statuimus quod laici, ubi de subditorum
peccatis and excessibus corrigendis per Praelatos and Ecclesiasticos judices
inquiritur, ad praestandum de Veritate dicenda juramentum, per
Excommunicationis sententias, si opus fuerit, Compellantur; Impedientes vero ne
hujusmodi juramenta praestentur (for the Judges, with many others then
generally oppugned and hindered the ushering in of this Innovation) per
interdicti and excommunicationis sententiam arceantur. To evacuate which
illegal Constitution, trenching both upon the people's Liberties, and the
Courts of Justice too; the Judges frequently Granted out sundry General
Prohibitions to all or most of the Sheriffs of England, as is evident by the
Register of Writs, Pars 2. fol. 36.43.50. Fitzherbert's Not. Brev. fol. 41. A.
Auxy home poit suer prohibition direct al Viscount que le Viscount ne permit ne
suffer les lay subjects del Roy de vener a ascun lieu al citation del Evesque
ad faciend* aliquas recognitiones, vel sacrament prestand. nisi in causis
matrimonialibus and Testamentariis. Rastal's Abridment of the statutes, Title,
Prohibit. nu. 5. Upon which Prohibitions this Attachment followed; The King to
the Sherifs Greeting. Cause such a Bishop to put in sureties to appear before
our Justices etc. to show cause why he made certain Lay persons to be summoned
and distrained by Ecclesiastial censures, to appear before him at his pleasure,
to take an Oath against their Wills, In Grave Praejudicium Coronae and
Dignitatis nostrae Regiae, necnon contra consuetudinem Regni nostri. By all
which and by the Petition of Right it self, it appears evidently that this
Juramentune Calumniae, or Oath ex officio was utterly against Law. For one of
the Grievances complained of in that Petition, was, that the King's Subjects
had had an Oath administered to them, not warrantable by the Laws and Statutes
of the Realm. Now what use the Doctor can make of this Particular; viz. of the
King's prohibiting the Clergy from Oppressing his Lay-Subjects contrary to Law,
I cannot discover.

Sir Roger's eighteenth and last particular, is an observation in Matthew. Paris;
where the Ecclesiastics having enumerated several cases, in which they held
themselves hardly dealt with, add, That in all of them if the Spiritual Judge
proceeded contrary to the King's prohibition, he was attached, and appearing
before the Justices, constrained to produce his proceedings, that they might
determine to which Court the Cause belonged. By which, says he, it is manifest
how the King's Courts had the superintendency over the Ecclesiastic. This
makes nothing for any Extrajudicial, Personal, Arbitrary power in the King in
the Ecclesiastical matters, and is so far from impugning, that it corroborates
my hypothesis.

That the Temporal and Ecclesiastical Courts often quarreled about their
Jurisdiction, and that the Clergy sometimes made and attempted to put in
execution Canons directly contrary to the Laws of the Realm, thereby
endeavoring to usurp and encroach upon many matters, which apparently belonged
to the Common Laws, as, the trial of Limits and Bounds of Parishes, the Right
of Patronage, the trial of right of Tithes by Indicavit, Writs to the Bishop
upon a recovery in a Quare impedit, the trial of Titles to Church Lands,
concerning Distresses and Attachments within their own Fees, and many other
things which belonged to the King's Temporal Courts; That the Temporal Courts
granted Prohibitions in these and other like cases; that the Clergy hereupon
complained not to the King but to the Parliament, Ann. 51 H. 3. twice during
the Reign of Edw. 1. and afterward nono Edw. 2. may be read at large in the
Lord Coke's second Institutes, 599, 600, 601, etc. So that the King determined
to which Court Causes belonged, either in his Courts of Ordinary Justice, or,
if the Clergy remained unsatisfied with the Opinions of the Judges, in his High
Court of Parliament, and no otherwise.

But we need not wonder that such a Prelate as Arch bishop Bancroft, whose
Divinity had taught him that the King may take what causes he shall please to
determine, from the determination of the Judges, and determine them himself,
and that such Authority belonged to Kings by the Word of God in the Scripture,
we need not wonder, I say, to find him in King James the First's time
Exhibiting Articles of Abuses in granting Prohibitions, against the Judges, to
the Lords of the Privy Council; As if the Lords of the Privy Council had any
Authority to direct the Judges in their administration of Justice, or to set
bounds to the Jurisdiction of any Court. Vid. 2 Inst. 601, 602, etc. and 12 Co.
p. 63, 64, 65.

By what has been said I hope it appears sufficiently, that the Ancient
Jurisdiction of our Kings in Ecclesiastical matters was such a Jurisdiction,
and no other than they had in Temporal matters, viz. in their Great Councels,
and in their Ordinary Courts of Justice: And that not only our Mercenary
Doctor, but more learned and wiser men than he, have unwarily confounded that
Jurisdiction with a Fiction of their own brains, by which they have ascribed to
the King a Personal Supremacy, without any warrant from Antiquity, Law, or
History.

Witness these loose Expressions in Sir Roger Twiden's Historical Vindication
etc. It cannot be denied, but the necessity of being in union with the true
Pope (at least in time of schism did wholly depend on the King: page 2. The
English have ever esteemed the Church of Canterbury in Spirituals, that is,
quae sui sunt ordinis, without any intervening Superior omnium nostrum matter
comunis sub sponsi sui Jesu Christi dispositione: in other things, as points of
Government, the Ordering that of Right and Custom ever to have belonged to the
King, assisted with his Council of Bishops, and others of the Clergy, who was
therefore called, Vicarius Christi, etc. page 21. The King and the Arch bishop,
or rather the Archbishop by the King's will and appointment had ever taken
cognizance of all matters of Episcopacy, as the Erection of Bishoprics,
disposing and translating of Bishops etc. p. 24. and innumerable others.

But to go on with Dr. Johnston and draw to a conclusion; he acknowledges (page
157) that he does not find that by immediate Commission the Kings of England
Visited before King Henry the Eighth's time. And if no such thing can be found,
then what authority can our Kings now have to exercise such a Jurisdiction
unless by virtue of some Act of Parliament made in or since his time?

But (says he) we have sufficient grounds to judge, that whatever was done, was
by the King's Power and Authority: which is a wild, extravagant, ignorant
expression, and hardly common sense. And therefore (says he) Sir Edward Coke in
Cawdrie's case, Lays it down for a Rule. That as in Temporal Causes, the King
by the Mouth of the Judges in the Courts of Justice does judge and determine
the same by the Temporal Laws of England, so in causes Ecclesiastical and
spiritual by his Ecclesiastical Judges according to the Ecclesiastical Laws of
the Realm: and that so many of the Ecclesiastical Laws, as were proed, approved
and allowed here, by and with general consent, are aptly and rightly called the
King's Ecclesiastical Laws: and whosoever denies this, denies the King to
have full and plenary power to deliver Justice in all cases to all his
Subjects, etc. page 157. which that he has, he proves by the Preamble of stat.
24 Hen. 8. cap. 12. And what then? May the King therefore erect New Courts
directly contrary to positive Laws, Command things arbitrarily upon pain of
suspension, deprivation, etc. and Command things contrary to Law by virtue of
his Ecclesiastical Laws?

The Doctor concludes this Section with the Act of 26 Hen. 8. cap. 1. commonly
called the Act of Supremacy (which now stands Repealed) And with 1 Eliz. by
which (he says) all the Powers given by the Act of 26 H. 8. are restored to the
Crown under the name of Supreme Governor.

But, the former Discourse was designed to be brought down no lower then to the
end of King Henry the Eighth's Reign: And therefore I shall say nothing in this
place of the Act of 1 Eliz. but perhaps I may have occasion to show hereafter
that the Doctor understands the Act of 1 Eliz. as little, as any thing else
that he pretends to write upon.

FINIS.

