To all Rulers and Magistrates in England, and all men in Authority, from the
highest to the lowest, A few Sober Words tendered to your serious Consideration,
which you are desired to read with Moderation.
OH that you had an eye to see, and an ear to hear, and an heart to perceive
and understand, in this your day, the things that belong to your everlasting
peace, and also the things that make for peace amongst all men; and tend to the
good, welfare, benefit, and prosperity of your selves, and all people that are
under your Rule, Government and Authority, that you might consider your ways
and your doings, and know your work and your duty, in your several places, both
toward God and toward man, that you might know the right way and the equal
path, and walk therein, doing the things which ye ought to do, and which
properly belongs to you, and which the Lord requires of you, in order to the
conscionable discharge of your duty in your several places and capacities,
thereby answering the righteous end of Government and Rule amongst men; and
that you might forbear to intermeddle with those things which belong not to
you, and which have no relation to your trust, nor was ever committed (or
intended of God to be committed) to your management, that you might clearly see
and discern those things which are the cause why the Lord (in all ages) has
turned his Hand against Kingdoms, Nations and People, and overthrown them in
his Wrath, and brought them to desolation, after his long-suffering and
patience has been exercised toward them, in waiting for their repentance, and
that your hands and hearts might be turned against such things wherewith and
whereby the righteous God is provoked at this day, (...) Power and Authority
might be exercised i^ the preventing, suppre^^^ng and removing those gross
Evils and c^ rent Iniquities, which are manifestly evident in your fight, and
concerning which, you cannot doubt, or be mistaken; but that at is the cause of
his Wr^th, and sore Displeasure, and for which his Fury w^ll (...) poured out,
and his Judgments executed, though he suffer long; that so you might be a
blessing in your day, to your selves and all that are under you, and that
Wrath may be removed and turned away from You, and from the Nation, and the
Judgments that have been executed, and the Fury that has been poured-out upon
others, in the Justice of God, because of such things, and which may justly be
expected by you, and which are indeed foreseen to be coming, and are impending,
may be diverted and removed, and that you might in all things answer the end
for which Rule and Government was appointed, and for which Rulers and
Magistrates are ordained.

Is not the Peace, Welfare, Prosperity, Quietness, Happiness and Tranquillity
of all People, the very Cause and End of the Institution of all Rule, Authority
and just Government amongst men, that all men under it might live a peaceable
and quiet life in all Godliness and Honesty? that thereby the unruly might be
ruled, and the disorderly might be ordered and governed; and the injurious
person might be prevented and hindered from doing injuriously, or punished for
the same; and that the peaceable and harmless might be protected in peace and
quietness, and good men defended, countenanced and encouraged in well-doing?

And are not all good and just Laws as so many Pales, Fences or Bounds, to
stand between the Injurious and the Innocent, between the disorderly and the
orderly, between the Oppressor and the Harmless, between the Just and the
Unjust; that the one might not break over upon the other, to hurt, injure or
destroy them in their Lives, Liberties, Persons or Estates, but that all
thereby might live in peace and quietness together? And are not such good Laws
made (or added) because of transgression, and because of a transgressing nature
in mankind, (begotten by the Devil in the Fall) which is not subject to the
just and righteous Law of God, which says, Whatsoever ye would that men should
do unto you, do ye the same unto them; and is it not because of such injurious
men, and for such lawless unrighteous evildoers, who live in that fallen state
and evil nature, and are not subject to the righteous Law of God written in
their hearts, which requires them to love God above all, and their neighbors
as themselves; I say, is it not for such that Laws are made? and is it not
because of such, that Rule and Government amongst men was appointed and
ordained of God? else what use were there of it in the world? for they that are
subject to the Law of God in their hearts, are thereby bound to peace and
quietness, and taught to do to others as they would have others do to them, and
so comes not under man's Law, (as to the condemning power thereof) though they
consent to it to be good and wholesome; neither does the Law become a terror to
them, but rather a protection and a defense, against such as would injure them,
harm them, or destroy them.

And is not this the end for which Rulers and Magistrates are appointed and
ordained of God? and is not this their duty toward God and toward man, to use
all diligence in their several places and capacities, to endeavor to maintain
and keep up those fences and bounds that are made between man and man; and in
case of breach thereof, or any intrenchment thereupon, to endeavor the repair
of such breaches, and to stand with their Sword in the gap, between the
injurious, and the innocent and harmless; turning the edge thereof against the
evil-doer, for defense of the innocent? And is it not for this end that the
Sword of Power and Authority is put into their hand, to terrify and punish all
such unruly, disorderly, injurious, unjust, unrighteous Peace-breakers, who
will not otherwise be reclaimed from injuring and destroying such as desire to
live at peace with all men, and to do to all men as they would be done unto?
And is it not in the doing hereof, that Magistrates are said to Rule for God,
and not to bear the Sword in vain, as they turn the edge thereof (without
respect of persons) against such men, and against such things which are
contrary to his righteous Law? and when they endeavor, as much as in them
lies, the preventing, and also the removing of those things which are
forbidden of him, and because whereof his Wrath comes and abides on mankind,
even until whole Kingdoms and great Nations perish in his Wrath and are
destroyed? And is it not a duty incumbent upon all Magistrates and men in
Authority, in order to the faithful discharge of their Trust committed to them
of God, and concerning which they are accountable unto him? And is it not even
their duty toward God, and toward man, to endeavor as much as in them lies,
to stop and prevent all those floods and streams of ungodliness and
unrighteousness amongst men, which even overflows, and runs down like a mighty
River, whereby the holy Spirit of the Lord is grieved, and wherewith his
righteous Soul is vexed from day to day? And is not this their work, and that
which the Lord requires of them? and if through their negligence or remisness
herein, or their countenancing or tolerating thereof, or winking thereat, the
Lord be so long provoked until his Wrath break forth, and his Fury and
Indignation be poured out upon such who are under their Government, and for
whom they are accountable, and they be destroyed in his Wrath; though they
perish in their sins, yet, will not the Lord in justice require their blood at
the hands of such Rulers and Magistrates, who had power to prevent such things
which was the cause of their destruction, but did it not?

And ought not you seriously to consider these things, and to walk so in your
several places and capacities as that your consciences may be clear in the
sight of God, and that you may be clear from the blood of all men? for surely
you cannot but expect that the righteous God will deal righteously, and reward
every one according to his deeds done in the body, whether they be good or
whether they be evil? And though he be a God long-suffering and of tender
mercy, yet he will in no wise acquit the guilty; and may you not read this at
large in holy Scriptures (which were written afore-time for our learning, upon
whom the ends of the world are come) that though he suffered long the
provocations of the wicked, yet at last (except they turned unto him by
unfeigned repentance) his Wrath brake forth against them, and he overthrew and
destroyed them in his fierce Anger and sore Displeasure, as the Land of Egypt,
the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, and many other Kingdoms and Nations; and are
not the same sins which they were guilty of, and which was the cause of their
overthrow, as great in these days as in theirs, and as abominable in the sight
of the Lord now as then, and cry as loud in the years of the Lord now as then;
and is he not as greatly provoked thereby now as then? and may not his Wrath
break forth, and his Judgments be executed, and his Fury be poured-out (in
Justice) now as then? And is it not then your wisdom to be considerate in these
weighty matters, which are of such great concernment to you, that you may find
a hiding place in the day when his Wrath is poured forth upon his Enemies?

And do you indeed judge that the most heinous crimes and crying sins of these
times, is difference in Judgment about matters of Religion; and that such as
differ from you in Judgment concerning matters of Faith and Worship, are the
only evildoers? Do you believe and judge that People meeting together to wait
upon the Lord, and to worship him according to the persuasion of their
consciences, (though differing from you in judgment) is in it self a sin so
heinous and a crime so great, as that it cries in the ears of the Lord, and
provokes him to Wrath? is this the heinous Abomination of the times? and are
these the great Offenders against God and man, that above all others your eye
is upon them, and your Sword drawn forth, and the edge thereof turned against
them, though you have nothing against them of evil-doing, either against God or
man, but only concerning the Worship of their God, because they differ from
you in judgment concerning the way thereof? and yet must such be looked upon
and accounted the greatest transgressors, and undergo the greatest stroke of
your Power, as the chiefest Disturbers of the Kingdoms peace, and the only
Troublers of Israel? do you believe that this is according to the will of God,
and that hereby you please him, and do that which is accepted of him, and that
which he requires of you in order to the discharge of your Trust and the
clearing of your Consciences? is this ruling for God, to turn your Sword
against such who live in his Fear, and endeavor to keep a Conscience void of
offense toward God and toward all men, only because they cannot bow, nor
conform to a way of your prescribing, contrary to the persuasion of their
consciences, though in all lawful things they submit to you, and are subject to
your Authority, and live honestly and walk peaceably toward all men? Are there
not very heinous crimes and crying sins, yea great abominations against God,
that are evidently and apparently so, and which are not found by secret search,
but are manifestly known, and openly committed throughout the Land, and which
none dare to plead for or justify; which you cannot be ignorant of, neither
can you be mistaken, which doubtless you know is so in the sight of God, and
whereby he is greatly provoked? and should it not be your care to endeavor a
Reformation thereof, and to stop the current thereof? Is this a time to be
striving with people and punishing them, about disputable points of Religion,
which you your selves have not an infallible judgment in, neither indeed does
it belong or appertain to your judgment, or relate to your trust, it being the
prerogative of Christ Jesus, who alone is Judge in these cases, and has
reserved that power to himself, and not given it, or committed it unto any
Ruler or Magistrate upon Earth, so as to force or compel any man, in things
pertaining to the Worship and Service of God, whom we are to hear and obey in
all things, who is both King and Lawgiver to his People; I say, is this a time
to be striving about things which are disputable, and to spend your time and
employ your selves about such matters, when the Land even overflows with
wickedness and abomination, which is evident and apparent, and concerning which
you cannot doubt or question, but that the Lord is provoked therewith, and
which properly does belong to you to look after, and to endeavor a reformation
of? Would you not judge it great imprudence and indiscretion in that
Ship-master, whose Vessel having sprung a leak, whereby himself and all that
are imbarqued with him are in danger to perish in the Sea, that when his
careful Mariners are diligently employed in stopping the same for general
preservation, that even then at that time he should be striving and contending
with them, and punishing of them, because they differ from him in judgment
about some disputable points of Navigation (which he himself has no certain
knowledge of) in order to the bringing of their Ship to its desired port,
though peradventure his judgment be more erroneous than theirs, and so whilst
he is employing his time about that which is then needless, and neglecting that
which is absolutely necessary to be done for their present preservation, his
Vessel in the mean time even sinks under him? And is not this a fit comparison?
and does it not run parallel with the present case and state of things at this
day? and is it not more needful for you to endeavor to prevent those dangers
that are apparent, by endeavoring to stop those floods of wickedness and
unrighteousness, which even overflows the Land, and which may endanger to sink
the whole Bottom (in which all your concernments are imbarqued) under the wrath
of Almighty God? and would not this be more suitable to your Trust, and tend
more to the discharging and clearing of your Consciences, both toward God and
man? And as for such who differ from you in judgment, about Religion, Faith
and Worship, it would be your wisdom to follow wise Gamaliel's Counsel, and let
them alone; for if the things about which you strive with them be not of God,
it will fall of it self, and come to nothing, though you meddle not with it;
but if it be of God (as surely it is) then take heed what you do, for you will
never be able to destroy it, though you oppose it with all your Power, and
therein be found fighters against God? neither will those Laws by which you
proceed against them, justify your proceedings any more, than they were
justified who proceeded against Daniel, the three Children, Christ himself, his
Apostles, Servants and Martyrs in Ages past, who could all of them plead, they
had Laws and Decrees for what they did, and many of them proceeding more
according to those Laws then in being, than is done at this day; yet you your
selves will condemn them for Persecutors and wicked men, and therein you judge
rightly; and you may consider what was their end, and what they brought upon
themselves by so doing, though many of them did it ignorantly, thinking thereby
they did God service: And it would be more acceptable to God, and more honor
to the King and better service to him, by all that are in Authority under him,
to endeavor the stopping and preventing of Wickedness and Profaneness, that it
might be removed out of the Land, that so his Throne might be established in
Righteousness; than the putting of those Laws in execution against peaceable
people about Religion, because they cannot submit to things contrary to the
persuasion of their consciences.

Nevertheless, be this known unto you all, That whatsoever may be in your minds
concerning us, or in the purpose of your hearts to do unto us, or to cause us
to suffer upon this account, as you shall not thereby provoke us to render unto
you evil for evil, or to move a hand against you, or any ways practice or
endeavor your hurt, ruin, overthrow or destruction, (though we are well
assured that if you proceed against us, you will thereby provoke the Lord
against your selves, and bring ruin upon your selves) yet our hand shall not
be upon you, or against you, but rather pity you, and pray for your
conversion, and endeavor your good in what we may; neither shall all your hard
dealing with us, and cruelty toward us, prevail with us to do any thing
contrary to the persuasion of our Consciences, or to bow or conform to any
thing which is against the righteous Law of God, and the Requiring of his
Spirit in our hearts; for we will bow down unto the Lord, but we will not bow
down unto another; neither shall we do any thing which is forbidden by your
Laws, or omit the doing of any thing which is required by your Laws, out of
wilfulness, stubbornness, pride, or contempt against your persons or authority,
but shall submit unto you in all lawful things; only when your Laws come in
competition with the Law of God in our Consciences, then judge you which we
ought rather to obey; for if we sin against the Testimony of our Consciences,
who then can give us peace? and whether it be not better for us in such cases
to trust the Lord, and to fall into his hands than into yours? for if we are
faithful unto him, and obey him in what he requires, he is able to deliver us
out of your hands, and to restrain your wrath; but if we disobey him, by
obeying you, and by submitting to your Commands, you cannot save us from the
stroke of his Hand, nor deliver us from his Wrath; Therefore it is our firm
resolution, and the purpose of our hearts (whatever the Lord may yet suffer you
to do unto us, or inflict upon us) not at all to defile our Consciences by
doing any thing which we are persuaded is contrary to his will; for we have
counted the cost of this work, and are freely given up unto the Lord, to be
disposed of at his pleasure, either in doing or suffering, it being his Cause
and not our own, we being only Instruments in his hand; so that the
controversy is between you and God, and to him do we look, and commit our
selves, and the keeping of our souls in well-doing, and leave it to him to
plead our Innocence, and the Righteousness of this Cause with all that rise up
against us. And this is written and tendered to your serious consideration, in
that Love which would have none to perish in their gainsaying, but rather that
all might turn from their wickedness and live.

By a lover of Peace, Righteousness, and Good-Government. Robert Wastfeild.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1665.


