Thomas Watson sometimes Minister of St. Stephens Walbrooke LONDON
portrait

A Body of Practical Divinity, Consisting of above One Hundred Seventy Six
SERMONS ON THE Lesser CATECHISM Composed by The Reverend Assembly OF Divines at
Westminster: WITH A SUPPLEMENT OF SOME SERMONS on several Texts of SCRIPTURE.

By THOMAS WATSON, Formerly Minister at St. Stephen's Walbrook, London.

Printed from his own Handwriting.

Recommended by several Ministers to Masters of Families and others.

Heb. XI.iv. He being dead yet speaks.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel. 1692.

To the READER.
THESE Catechetical Lectures of the late Reverend Mr. Tho. Watson, all, but one
written with his own hand, I have read over, together with some Sermons annexed
to them; and since my Testimony is desired concerning them, I do hereby
declare, That (though I will not undertake to justify every Expression or
Sentence in them, or in any Humane Writing, yet) I find them in the main
agreeable unto the Doctrinal Articles of the Church of England, and unto the
Westminster Assembly's Confession of Faith and Catechisms: And I believe, that
through the Blessing of God, they may be profitable unto the Edification of all
that read them with an honest desire to know and do the Will of God: for
certainly there are many excellent things in them, which if they meet with a
well-disposed serious Mind, are very apt to have a good Effect upon it; and if
it prove otherwise with any that happen to read this Book, it will be their own
Fault, more than the Books. Most Writers have different Styles, and it is well
known that Mr. Watson had one peculiar to himself, which yet has found good
Acceptance with, and has been useful unto serious People; and I hope this (by
reason of the great Variety of excellent Matter) may be more generally Useful
than any other thing that ever he wrote. I little doubt but every sober
Christian will be of this mind after he has read his Lectures on God's
Attributes, the Ten Commandments, Lord's Prayer, etc. I sincerely profess, I
have no other End in giving this Testimony of this Book, but thereby to serve
the Common Good of Christ's Church, and not the Private Interest of any Person
or Party in the World: if my Conscience did not bear me witness that this Book
may be Useful to that excellent End, no Man should ever have prevailed with me
thus to prefix my Testimony and Name to it. Moreover, I do not doubt, but every
Intelligent and Candid Reader will consider that this is a Posthumous Work, and
on that account will make some Allowance for any small Fault that may be in it,
as also for the Errors of the Press. That it may answer the main End for which
it was first written by the Author (whom I always took to be a grave, serious,
modest, good Man); and for which (I hope) it is now published, to wit, The
Edification of the Church of Christ in Faith, Holiness, and Comfort, is the
hearty Desire of one of the meanest Servants of our most Blessed LORD JESUS,

WILL. LORIMER.

WE whose Names are subscribed, having seen the Testimony of our Worthy
Brother, Mr. William Lorimer, after his Perusal of this Book, doubt not but it
may be of use to many, as the former Writings of Mr. Thomas Watson have been;
and with that Desire and Hope, we Recommend it to Masters of Families, and
others.

William Bates, Matthew. Barker, John How, Matthew. Mead, Edw. Lawrance, Samuel
Slater, Richard Mayo, Richard Adams, Richard Steel, Samuel Stancliff, John
Raynolds, Nath. Vincent, John Hughes, Matthew. Sylvester, Joseph Read, Dan.
Burges, Abraham Hume, Joseph Cawthorne, Rich. Stretton, Daniel Williams,
Richard Wavel, John Shower, Timothy Cruso, Francis Glascock, Timothy Rogers,
Nath. Oldfield.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere are many single Sermons on Variety of Occasions, as at Fasts,
Thanksgivings, Sacrament Discourses, besides several Subjects handled in many
Sermons on each Text of Scripture, left under Mr. Thomas Watson's one
Handwriting, if these find Acceptance, in due time (after their being perused
by some Learned Divine) may be published.

Tho. Parkhurst.
Aug. 28th, 1692.
A Catalogue of what Books Mr. Thomas Watson published.
THree Treatises, 1. The Christian's Charter, showing the Privileges of a
Believer. 2. The Art of Divine Contentment. 3. A Discourse of Meditation: To
which is added, several Sermons preached Occasionally. Quarto. The Beatitudes:
or, a Discourse upon part of Christ's famous Sermon on the Mount. Whereunto is
added, Christ's various Fullness; The Preciousness of the Soul; The Soul's
Malady and Cure; The Beauty of Grace; The Spiritual Watch; The Heavenly Race;
The Sacred Anchor; The Trees of Righteousness; The Perfume of Love; The good
Practitioner. The Godly Man's Character. A Word of Comfort to the Church of
God, in a Sermon. Quarto. The Crown of Righteousness: at the Funeral of Mr.
Hoges, Merchant. Quarto. A Sermon preached July 2, at the Funeral of Mr. John
Wells, late Pastor of Olave-Jury, London. By Thomas Watson. Quarto. The Fight
of Faith Crowned: or, a Sermon preached at the Funeral of the eminently Holy
Man Mr. Henry Stubs. By Thomas Watson. The Doctrine of Repentance, Useful for
these Times. Religion our true Interest: or Practical Notes upon the third
Chapter of Malachy, the sixteen, seventeen, and eighteen Verses. The Mischief
of Sin, it brings a Person Low. A Divine Cordial: or, the Transcendent
Privilege of Those that Love God, and are savingly Called. The Holy Eucharist;
or, the Mystery of the Lord's Supper briefly explained. A Plea for the Godly:
Wherein is shown the Excellency of a Righteous Person. The Duty of Self-denial
briefly Opened and Urged. Heaven taken by Storm.
A Preliminary Discourse TO CATECHIZING.
COL. I.xxiii. If ye continue in the faith grounded and settled --
INtending the next Lord's Day to enter upon the Work of Catechizing, it will
not be amiss to give you this Preliminary Discourse as preparative to it;
showing you how needful it is for Christians to be well instructed in the
Grounds of Religion: If ye continue in the faith grounded and settled -- Two
Propositions, First, It is the Duty of Christians to be settled in the Doctrine
of Faith. Second, The best way for Christians to be settled, is to be well
grounded.


Doct. 1. That it is the Duty of Christians to be settled in the Doctrine of
Faith: It is the Apostle's Prayer, 1 Pet. 5.10. The God of all grace stablish,
strengthen, settle you. That they might not be Meteors in the Air, but fixed
Stars. The Apostle Jude speaks of wandering Stars, Verse 13. They are called
wandering Stars, because as Aristotle says, they do saltare, leap up and down
and wander into several parts of the Heaven; and being but dry Exhalations, not
made of that pure Celestial Matter as the fixed Stars are, they often fall to
the Earth. Now such as are not settled in Religion will at one time or other
prove wandering Stars, they will lose their former Strictness, and wander from
one Opinion to another. Such as are unsettled are of the Tribe of Reuben,
Unstable as water, Genesis 49.4. Like a Ship without a Ballast, overturned with
every Wind of Doctrine. Beza writes of one Bolsectius, whose Religion changed
as the Moon. The Arians had Annuam Fidem, every Year a new Faith. These are not
Pillars in the Temple of God, but Reeds shaken every way. The Apostle calls
them damnable Heresies, 2 Pet. 2.1. A Man may go to Hell as well for Heresy as
Adultery. To be unsettled in Religion argues want of Judgment: if their Heads
were not giddy, they would not reel so fast from one Opinion to another. It
argues Lightness; Feathers will be blown any way; so will feathery Christians:
Triticum non rapit. ventus, inanes paleae jactantur, Cypr. Therefore such are
compared to Children, Ephesians. 4.14. That we be no more children tossed to and fro.
Children are fickle, sometimes of one mind, sometimes of another, nothing
pleases them long: So unsettled Christians are childish, those Truths they
embrace at one time, they reject at another; sometimes they like the Protestant
Religion, and soon after they have a good mind to turn Papists. Now that you
may labor to be settled, (...), (as Ignatius) in the Faith, in unsettled Times
of settled Judgments.

1. It is the great End of the Word preached, to bring us to a Settlement in
Religion: Ephesians. 4.11, 13. And he gave some evangelists, and some pastors and
teachers, for the edifying of the body of CHRIST, that we henceforth be no more
children. The Word is called an Hammer, Ier. 23.29. Every blow of the Hammer is
to fasten the Nails of the Building; the Preacher's Words are but to fasten you
the more to Christ: they weaken themselves to strengthen and settle you. This
is the grand Design of Preaching, not only for the Enlightening but for the
Establishing of Souls; not only to guide them into the right Way, but to keep
them in it; now if you be not settled, you do not answer God's End in giving you
the Ministry.

2. To be settled in Religion is both a Christian's Excellency and Honor; it is
his Excellency, when the Milk is settled it turns to Cream; now he will be
something zealous for Truth, walk in close Communion with God. And his Honor,
Prove. 16.31. The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of
righteousness. It Is one of the best sights to see an old Disciple; to see
Silver Hairs adorned with Golden Virtues.

3. Such as are not settled in the Faith, can never suffer for it: Scepticks in
Religion will hardly ever prove Martyrs; they that are not settled do hang in
aequilibrio, in suspense; when they think of the Joys of Heaven, then they will
espouse the Gospel; but when they think of Persecution, then they desert it.
Unsettled Christians do not consult what is best, but what is safest: The
Apostate ( says Tertullian) seems to put God and Satan in Balance, and having
weighed both their Services, prefers the Devil's Service, and proclaims him to
be the best Master: and in this sense may be said to put Christ to open shame,
Heb. 6.6. They will never suffer for the Truth, but be as a Soldier that
leaves his Colors, and runs over to the Enemy's side; he will fight on the
Devil's side for Pay.

4. Not to be settled in the Faith is highly provoking to God: To espouse the
Truth and then fall away, brings an ill Report on the Gospel, which will not go
unpunished: Psalm. 78.57, 59. They turned back and dealt unfaithfully: When God
heard this he was wrath, and greatly abhorred Israel. The Apostate drops as a
Windfall into the Devil's Mouth.

5. Is ye are not settled in Religion, you will never grow: We are commanded to
grow up into the Head Christ, Ephesians. 4.15. But if we are unsettled no growing:
Planta quae saepe transfertur non coalescit; The Plant which is continually
removing never thrives. He can no more grow in Godliness, which is unsettled,
then a Bone can grow in the Body that is out of joint.

6. What great need there is to be settled, because indeed there are so many
things to unsettle us, and make us fall away gradually from the Truth. Seducers
are abroad whose work is to draw away People from the Principles of Religion, 1 John 2.26. These things have I written concerning them that seduce you.
Seducers are the Devil's Factors, they are of all others the greatest Fellons
that would rob you of the Truth: Seducers are (...), they have Silver Tongues,
a fair Tongue can put off bad Wares; they have a slight to deceive, Ephesians. 4.14.
The Greek word there (...), taken from those that can cog a Dye, and cast it
for the best advantage. So Seducers are Impostors, they can cog a Dye, they can
so dissemble and sophisticate the Truth, that they can deceive others. Now the
Style by which Seducers use to deceive is,

1. By Wisdom of Words, Romans 16.18. By good words and fair speeches they
deceive the hearts of the simple. They have fine elegant Phrases, flattering
Language, whereby they work on the weaker sort; as being Christed with Christ,
and the Light within them.

2. Another Slight is a Pretense of Extraordinary Piety, that so People may
admire them, and suck in their Doctrine. They seem to be Men of Zeal and
Sanctity, and to be divinely inspired: they pretend Revelations, as Munster,
Michel Servetus, and other of the Anabaptists in Germany; though they were
tainted with Pride, Lust and Avarice.

3. A third Slight, or Cheat Seducers have, is a laboring to villifie and
nullify sound orthodox Teachers; they would eclipse those that bring the
Truth; like unto the black Vapors that darken the Light of Heaven: They would
Defame others that themselves may be more admired. Thus the false Teachers
cried down Paul, that they might be received, Gal. 4.17.

4. The fourth Slight or Cheat of Seducers is by preaching Doctrines of
Liberty: As the Antinomian preaches, That Men are freed from the Moral Law,
the Rule as well as the Curse. He preaches that Christ has done all for them,
and they need do nothing. So he makes the Doctrine of Free Grace a Key to open
the Door to all Licentiousness.

5. Another thing to unsettle Christians, is Persecutors, 2 Timothy 3.12. The
Gospel is a Rose cannot be plucked without Prickles. The Legacy Christ has
bequeathed is the CROSS. While there is a Devil and a wicked Man in the World,
never expect a Charter of Exemption from Trouble; And how many fall away in an
Hour of Persecution? Rev. 12.3, 4. There appeared a great red dragon, having
seven heads, and ten horns; and his tail drew the third part of the stars of
heaven: The Red Dragon, the Heathenish Empire, and his Tail, viz. his Power and
Subtilty drew away Stars, viz. Eminent Professors that seemed to shine as Stars
in the Firmament of the Church. Therefore we see what need there is to be
settled in the Truth, for fear the Tail of the Dragon cast us to the Earth.

6. To be unsettled in Good is the Sin of the Devil's, Jude 6. They are called
Morning Stars, Job 38.7. but falling Stars; they were holy but mutable. As the
Vessel is overturned with the Sail, so their Sails being swelled with Pride,
were overturned, 1 Timothy 3.6. By Unsetledness who do thou imitate but lapsed
Angels. The Devil was the first Apostate. So much for the first Proposition,
That it is a great Duty of Christians to be settled. The Sons of Sion should be
like Mount Sion which cannot be removed.

Second, The second Proposition is, That the way for Christians to be settled,
is to be well grounded: If ye continue grounded and settled; the Greek word
(...), grounded, a Metaphor, it alludes to a building that has the Foundation
well laid; so Christians should be grounded in the Essential Points of
Religion, and have their Foundation well laid.

Here let me speak to two things: 1. That we should be grounded in the
Knowledge of Fundamentals. 2. That this grounding is the best way to Settling.

1. That we should be grounded in the Knowledge of Fundamentals: The Apostle
speaks of the first Principles of the Oracles of God, Heb. 5.12. In all Arts
and Sciences, Logic, Physic, Mathematics, there are some Praecognita, some
Rules and Principles that must necessarily be known to the Practice of those
Arts. So in Divinity there must be the first Principles laid down. The
Knowledge of the Grounds and Principles of Religion is exceeding useful:

1. Else we cannot serve God aright; we can never worship God acceptably unless
we worship him regularly: And how can we do that, if we are ignorant of the
Rules and Elements of Religion? We are bid to give God a reasonable Service,
Romans 12.1. If we understand not the Grounds of Religion, how can it be a
reasonable Service.

2. Knowledge of the Grounds of Religion much enricheth the Mind: It is a Lamp
to our Feet, it directs us in the whole Course of Christianity, as the Eye
directs the Body. Knowledge of Fundamentals is the Golden Key that opens the
chief Mysteries of Religion; it gives us a whole System and Body of Divinity
exactly drawn in all its Lineaments and lively Colors, it helps us to
understand many of those (...), those difficult things which do occur in the
reading of the Word; it helps to unty many Scripture-Knots.

3. Armor of Proof; it does furnish us with Weapons to fight against the
Adversaries of the Truth.

4. It is the Holy Seed of which Grace is formed: It Is semen fidei, the Seed of
Faith, Psalm. 9.10. It Is Radix Amoris, the Root of Love, Ephesians. 3.17. Being rooted
and grounded in love. The Knowledge of Principles conduces to the making of a
complete Christian.

2. That this Grounding is the best way to Settling: Grounded and settled, a Tree
that it may be well settled, must be well rooted; so if you would be well settled
in Religion, you must be rooted in the Principles of it. He in Plutarch set up
a dead Man, and he would not stand, O, says he, (...), there must be something
within. So that we may stand in shaking Times, there must be a Principle of
Knowledge within; first grounded and then settled. That the Ship may be kept
from overturning, it must have its Anchor fastened; Knowledge of Principles is
to the Soul as the Anchor to the Ship, that holds it steady in the midst of all
the rolling Waves of Error, or the violent Winds of Persecution. First
grounded and then settled.

Use 1. See the reason why so many People are Unsettled, ready to embrace every
Novel Opinion, and dress themselves in as many Religions as they do Fashions;
it is because they are ungrounded. See how the Apostle joins these two
together, (...), Unlearned and unstable, 2 Pet. 3.16. Such as are unlearned in
the main Points of Divinity, will be unstable; as the Body cannot be strong
that has the Sinews shrunk, so neither can that Christian be strong in
Religion who wants the Grounds of Knowledge, which are the Sinews to strengthen
and stablish him.

Use 2. See then what great Necessity there is of laying down all the main
Grounds of Religion in a way of Catechize, that the weakest Judgment may be
instructed in the Knowledge of the Truth, and strengthened in the Love of it.
Catechizing is the best Expedient for the Grounding and Settling of People. I
fear one reason why there has been no more Good done by Preaching, has been
because the chief Heads and Articles in Religion have not been explained in a
Catechistical Way: Cathechising is the laying the Foundation, Heb. 6.7. To
Preach and not to Catechize, is to build without a Foundation; this way of
Catechizing is not Novel, it is Apostolical; the Primitive Church had their
Forms of Catechism. So much those Phrases imply, a form of sound words, 2 Timothy
1.13. And the first Principles of the Oracles of God, Heb. 6.1. And since the
Church had their Catechumenoi, as Grotius and Erasmus observe. Many of the
Ancient Fathers have written for it, as Fulgentius, Austin, Theodoret,
Lactantius, and others. God has given great Success to it. By this laying down
of Grounds of Religion Catechistically, Christians have been clearly instructed
and wondrously built up in the Christian Faith. Insomuch that Julian the
Apostate seeing the great success of Catechizing, did put down all Schools, and
Places of Public Literature and Instructing of Youth. It Is my Design therefore
(with the Blessing of God,) to begin this Work of Catechizing, the next Sabbath
Day; and I intend every other Sabbath in the Afternoon, to make it my whole
Work to lay down the Grounds and Fundamentals of Religion in a Catechistical
Way. If I am hindered in this Work by Men, or taken away by Death, I hope God
will raise up some other Labourer in the Vineyard among you, that may perfect
this Work which I am now beginning.

Man's Chief End TO GLORIFY GOD.
Quest. I. WHat is the chief End of Man? Q. I


Resp. Man's chief End is to glorify God, and enjoy him for ever.

Here are two Ends of Life specified, 1. The Glorifying of God. 2. The Enjoying
of God.

First, I begin with the first, The Glorifying of God, 1 Pet. 4.11. That God in
all things may be glorified; the Glory of God is a Silver Thread which must run
through all our Actions: 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or
whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. Every thing works to some end in
things natural and artificial; now Man being a rational Creature, must propose
some end to himself, and that is, that he may lift up God in the World, and
better loose his Life, then loose the End of his living: So then the great
Truth asserted is this, That the End of every Man living is to glorify God;
this is the yearly Rent is paid to the Crown of Heaven. Glorifying of God, has
respect to all the Persons in the Trinity; it respects God the Father, who gave
us our Life; it respects God the Son, who lost his Life for us; it respects God
the Holy Ghost, who produces a new Life in us: we must bring Glory to the
whole Trinity.

When we speak of God's Glory, the Question will be moved, What are we to
understand by God's Glory?

Resp. There is a twofold Glory: 1. The Glory that God has in himself; his
intrinsical Glory. Glory is essential to the Godhead, as Light is to the Sun:
he is called the God of Glory, Acts 7.2. Glory is the sparkling of the Deity;
Glory is so co-natural to the Godhead, that God cannot be God without it. The
Creature's Honor is not essential to his Being; a King is a Man without his
Regal Ornaments, when his Crown and Royal Robe are taken away: but God's Glory
is such an essential Part of his Being, that he cannot be God without it; God's
very Life lies in his Glory. His Glory can receive no addition, because it is
Infinite; this Glory is that which God is most tender of, and which he will not
part with, Isa. 42.8. My glory I will not give to another. God will give
Temporal Blessings to his Children, Wisdom, Riches, Honor; he will give them
Spiritual Blessings, he will give them Grace, he will give them his Love, he
will give them Heaven, but his essential Glory he will not give to another.
King Pharaoh parted with a Ring off his Finger to Joseph, and a Gold Chain, but
he would not part with his Throne, Genesis 41.40. Only in the throne will I be
greater then thou. So God will do much for his People, he will give them the
Inheritance; he will put some of Christ's Glory as Mediator upon them, but his
essential Glory he will not part with; in the throne he will be greater.

2. The Glory which is ascribed to God, or which his Creatures labor to bring
to him, 1 Chr. 16.29. Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name. And, 1
Cor. 6.20. Glorify God in your body, and in your spirit. The Glory we give God
is nothing else but our lifting up his Name in the World, and magnifying him in
the eyes of others, Phil. 1.20. Christ shall be magnified in my body.

Quest. What is it to glorify God, or wherein does it consist?

Resp. Glorifying of God consists in four things: 1. Appretiation. 2.
Adoration. 3. Affection. 4. Subjection. This is the yearly Rent we pay to the
Crown of Heaven.

1. Appretiation: To glorify God is to set God highest in our Thoughts, to
have a venerable Esteem of him, Psalm. 92.8. Thou Lord art most high for
evermore. Psalm. 97.9. Thou art exalted far above all gods. There is in God all
that may draw forth both Wonder and Delight; he is (...), there is in him a
Constellation of all Beauties; he is Prima Causa, the Original and Springhead
of Being, who sheds a Glory upon the Creature. This is to glorify God when we
are God-Admirers; we admire God in his Attributes, which are the glistering
Beams by which the Divine Nature shines forth; we admire him in his Promises,
which are the Charter of Free Grace, and the Spiritual Cabinet where the Pearl
of Price is hid; we admire God in the noble Effects of his Power and Wisdom,
viz. the making of the World; this is called the work of his fingers, Ps. 8.3.
such curious Needle Work it was that none but a God could work. This is to
glorify God, to have God-admiring Thoughts; we esteem him most excellent, and
search for Diamonds only in this Rock.

2. Glorifying of God consists in Adoration, or Worship, Psalm. 29.2. Give unto
the Lord the glory due unto his name. Worship the Lord in the Beauty of
Holiness: There is a twofold Worship, 1. A Civil Reverence we give to Persons
of Honor, Genesis 23.7. Abraham stood up and bowed himself to the children of
Heth. Piety is no Enemy to Courtesy. 2. A Divine Worship, which we give to God,
is his Prerogative-royal, Neh. 8.6. They bowed their heads, and worshipped the
Lord with their faces toward the ground. This Divine Worship God is very
jealous of; this is the Apple of his Eye, this is the Pearl of his Crown which
he guards as he did the Tree of Life, with Cherubims and a flaming Sword, that
no man may come near to violate it: Divine Worship must be such as God himself
has appointed, else it is offering strange fire, Levit. 10.2. The Lord would
have Moses make the Tabernacle (...), according to the Pattern in the Mount,
Exodus 25.40. he must not leave out any thing in the Pattern, nor add to it; if
God was so exact and curious about the Place of his Worship, how exact will he
be about the Manner of his Worship; surely here every thing must be according
to the Pattern prescribed in his Word.

3. Affection: This is a part of the Glory we give to God; God counts himself
glorified when he is loved, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, and with all thy soul. There is a twofold Love, 1. Amor
Concupiscentiae, a Love of Concupisence, which is a Self-love, when we love
another because he does us a good Turn: Thus a wicked Man may be said to love
God, because he has given him a good Crop, or filled his Cup with Wine, and to
speak properly, this is rather to love God's Blessings then to love God. 2.
Amor Amicitiae, a Love of Delight, as a Man takes delight in a Friend; this is
indeed to love God, the Heart is set upon God, as a Man's-Heart is set upon his
Treasure. And this Love is, 1. Exuberant, not a few Drops but a Stream. 2. It
is Superlative, we give God the best of our Love, the Cream of it, Cant. 8.2. I
would cause thee to drink of spiced wine of the j^yce of my pomgranat. If the
Spouse had a Cup more juicy and spiced Christ must drink of it. 3. It is
Intense and Ardent; true Saints are Seraphims burning in holy Love to God. The
Spouse was Amore perculsa, in sainting Fits sick of love, Cant. 2.5. Thus to
love God is to glorify him; he who is the chief of our Happiness, has the
chief of our Affections.

4. Subjection: When we dedicate ourselves to God, and stand ready pressed for
his Service. Thus the Angels in Heaven glorify him; they wait on his Throne,
and are ready to take a Commission from him, therefore they are resembled by
the Cherubims with their Wings displaid to show how swift the Angels are in
their Obedience. This is to glorify God when we are devoted to his Service,
our Head studies for God, our Tongue pleads for him, our Hands relieve his
Members: The wise Men that came to Christ, did not only bow the Knee to him,
but presented him with Gold and Myrrh, Mat. 2.11. so we must not only bow the
Knee, give God Worship, but bring Presents, Golden Obedience. This is to
glorify God when we stick at no Service, we will fight under the Banner of his
Gospel against Regiments, and we say to him as David to King Saul, 1 Samuel
17.32. Thy servant will go and fight with this Philistine. Thus you see wherein
the Glorifying of God does consist, in Appretiation, Adoration, Affection,
Subjection.

A good Christian is like the Sun which does not only send forth Heat, but goes
its Circuit round the World; thus he who glorifies God has not only his
Affections heated with love to God, but he goes his Circuit too; he moves
vigorously in the sphere of Obedience.

Quest. Why we must glorify God?

Resp. 1. Because he gives us our Being, Psalm. 100.3. It is he that has made
us. We think it a great kindness in a Man to spare our Life, but what kindness
is it in God to give us our Life; we draw our breath from him, and as Life, so
all the Comforts of Life are from God: he gives us Health, which is the Sauce
to sweeten our Life; he gives us Food, which is the Oil that nourishes the
Lamp of Life: now if all we receive is from the hand of his Bounty, is it not
good reason we should glorify him, and live to him, seeing we live by him,
Romans 11.36. For of him and through him are all things. Of him are all, all we
have is of his Fullness; through him are all, all we have is through his
Free Grace; and therefore to him should be all, so it follows, To him be glory
for ever. God is not only our Benefactor, but our Founder; the Rivers come from
the Sea, and they empty their Silver Streams into the Sea again.

2. Because God has made all things for his own Glory, Prove. 16.4. The Lord
has made all things for himself; that is, for his Glory. As a King has Excise
out of Commodities, God will have his Glory out of every thing; he will have
Glory out of the Wicked, the Glory of his Justice; they will not give him
Glory, but he will get his Glory upon them, Exodus 14.17. I will get me honor
upon Pharaoh. But especially he has made the Godly for his Glory, they are the
living Organs of his Praise, Isa. 43.21. This people have I formed for myself,
and they shall show forth my praise. It is true they cannot add to his Glory,
but they may exalt it; they cannot raise him in Heaven, but they may raise him
in the Esteem of others. God has adopted the Saints into his Family, and made
them a Royal Priesthood that they should show forth the Praises of him who has
called them, 1 Pet. 2.9.

3. Because the Glory of God has so much intrinsic Value and Excellency in
it; it transcends the Thoughts of Men, and the Tongue of Angels. God's Glory is
his Treasure, all his Riches lie here, as Mica said, Judge. 18.24. What have I
more? So of God, what has God more? God's Glory is more worth then Heaven,
More worth then the salvation of all Men's souls: Better Kingdoms be thrown
down, better Men and Angels be annihilated, then God should lose one Jewel of
his Crown, one Beam of his Glory.

4. Creatures below us and above us bring Glory to God, and do we think to sit
Rent-free, shall every thing glorify God but Man? it is pity then that ever
Man was made! 1. Creatures below us glorify God, the inanimate Creatures; the
Heavens glorify God, Ps. 19.1. The heavens declare the glory of God. The
curious Workmanship of Heaven sets forth the Glory of its Maker; the Firmament
is beautified and pensill'd out in Blue and Azure colors, where the Power and
Wisdom of God may be clearly seen. The heavens declare his glory: We may see
the Glory of God blazing in the Sun, twinkling in the Stars. 2. Look into the
Air, the Birds with their chirping Music sing Hymns of Praise to God, says
Anselm. Every Beast does in its kind glorify God, Isa. 43.20. The beasts of
the field shall honor me. 2. Creatures above us glorify God: The angels are
ministering spirits, Heb. 1.14. They are still waiting on God's Throne, and
bring some Revenues of Glory into the Exchequer of Heaven: Then surely Man
should be much more studious of God's Glory then the Angels, for God has
honored him more then the Angels, in that Christ took Man's Nature upon him,
and not the Angels; say though in regard of Creation God has made Man a little
lower then the Angels, Heb. 2.7. yet in regard of Redemption, God has set him
higher than the Angels; he has married Mankind to himself: The Angels are
Christ's Friends, but not his Spouse; he has covered us with the Purple Robe
of his Righteousness, which is a better Righteousness then the Angels have, 2
Cor. 5.20. So that if the Angels bring Glory to God, much more should we, being
dignified with Honor above the Angelical Spirits.

5. Resp. We must bring Glory to God, because all our Hopes hang upon him,
Psalm. 39.7. My hope is in thee. And, Psalm. 62.5. My expectation is from him; I
expect a Kingdom from him. A Child that is good natured will Honor his Parent,
as expecting all that ever he is like to be worth from him, Psalm. 87.8. All my
fresh springs are in thee. The Silver Springs of Grace, the Golden Springs of
Glory.

Quest. How many ways may we glorify God?

Resp. 1. It is a glorifying God when we aim purely at God's Glory; it is one
thing to advance God's Glory, another thing to aim at it; God must be the
Terminus ad quem, the Ultimate End of all our Actions; thus Christ, Joh. 8.50.
I seek not my own glory, but the glory of him that sent me. It Is the Note of an
Hypocrite, he has a squint Eye, he looks more to his own Glory then God's
Glory. Our Savior Deciphers such, and gives a Caveat against them, Matthew. 6.2.
When thou give alms do not sound a trumpet. A Stranger would ask, What means
the noise of this Trumpet? Then it was answered, They are going to give to the
Poor. And so they did not give Alms, but sell them for Honor and Applause,
that they may have Glory of Men: the Breath of Men was the Wind that blew the
Sails of their Charity: Verily, they have their reward. The Hypocrite may make
his Acquittance, and write, Received in full payment. Vainglory Chrysostom
calls one of the Devil's great Nets to catch Men. And Cyprian, Quem non gula
(...) superavit: Whom Satan cannot prevail against by Intemperance, those he
prevails against by Pride and Vainglory. O let us take heed of this (...),
Self-worshipping! Aim purely at God's Glory.

Quest. How shall we know we aim at God's Glory?

Resp. 1. When we prefer God's Glory above all other things; above Credit,
Estate, Relations; when the Glory of God comes in competition with them, we
prefer his Glory before them: if Relations lie in our way to Heaven, we must
either leap over them, or tread upon them: A Child must unchild himself, and
forget he is a Child, he must know neither Father nor Mother in God's Cause,
Deuteronomy. 33.9. Who said unto his father and his mother, I have not seen him;
neither did he acknowledge his Brethren. This is to aim at God's Glory.

2. Then we aim at God's Glory when we can be content that God's Will should
take place though it cross ours: Lord I am content to be a Looser if thou a
Gainer; to have less Health, if I may have more Grace, and thou more Glory;
whether it be Food or bitter Physic thou give me, Lord I desire that which
may be most for thy Glory: Thus our Blessed Savior, Not as I will, but as thou will, Matthew. 26.39. So God might have more Glory by his Sufferings, he was
content to suffer, Joh. 12.28. Father glorify thy name.

3. Then we aim at God's Glory, when we can be content to be out-shined by
others in Gifts and Esteem, so God's Glory may be increased: A Man that has
God in his Heart, and God's Glory in his Eye, desires that God should be
exalted, and if this be effected, let who will be the Instrument, he rejoices.
Phil. 1.15. Some preach Christ of Envy, notwithstanding Christ is preached, and
I therein do rejoice, and will rejoice; they preached Christ of Envy, they
envyed Paul that Concourse of People, and they preached that they might
outshine him in Gifts, and get away some of his Hearers. Well, says Paul,
Christ is preached, and God is like to have Glory, therefore I rejoice; let my
Candle go out, if the Sun of Righteousness may but shine.

2. We Glorify God by an ingenuous Confession of Sin: The Thief of the Cross
had dishonored God in his Life, but at his Death he brings Glory to God by
Confession of Sin, Luke 23.41. We indeed suffer justly. He acknowledged he
deserved not only Crucifixion but Damnation, Josh. 7.19. My son, give, I pray
thee, glory to God, and make confession unto him. An humble Confession exalts
God; how is God's Free Grace magnified in crowning those who deserve to be
condemned; as the excusing and mincing of Sin does cast a Reproach upon God,
Adam denies not he did taste the forbidden Fruit, Ovid.
but instead of a full Confession, he taxes God, Inscripser^ Deos sceleri, Genesis
3.12. The woman whom thou gave me, she gave me of the tree and I did eat. It
is long of thee, if thou had not given me the Woman to be a Tempter, I had
not sinned. So Confession glorifies God, it clears, it acknowledges he is Holy
and Righteous whatever he does. Nehemiah vindicates God's Righteousness, Chap.
9.33. Thou art just in all that is brought upon us. And Confession then is
ingenuous when it is free not forced, Luke 15.18. I have sinned against heaven,
and before thee; he charge himself with Sin before ever his Father charge
him with it.

3. We glorify God by Believing; Romans 4.20. Abraham was strong in faith,
giving glory to God. Unbelief affronts God, it gives him the Lie, He that
believes not, makes God a liar, 1 John 5.10. So Faith brings Glory to God, it
sets to its Seal that God is true, Ioh. 3.33. he that believes flies to God's
Mercy and Truth, as to an Altar of Refuge; he does Ingarrison himself in the
Promises, he trusts all he has with God, Psalm. 31.5. Into thy hands I commit
my spirit; this is a great way of bringing Glory to God, therefore God honors
Faith, because Faith honors God. It is a great Honor we do to a Man when we
trust him with all we have, we put our Lives and Estates into his hand; a sign
we have a good Opinion of him. The three Children glorified God by believing,
The God whom we serve is able to deliver us, and will deliver us, Dan. 3.17.
Faith knows there are no Impossibles with God, and will trust him where it
cannot trace him.

4. We glorify God by being tender of God's Glory; God's Glory is dear to him
as the apple of his Eye; now when we are tender of his Glory by laying to heart
his Dishonours, this is a glorifying of him. An ingenuous Child weeps to see a
Disgrace done to his Father, Psalm. 69.9. The reproaches of them that reproach
thee, are fallen upon me. When we hear God reproached, it is as if we were
reproached; when God's Glory suffers, it is as if we suffered. This is to be
tender of God's Glory.

5. We glorify God by Fruitfulness, Joh. 15.8. Hereby is my Father glorified,
if ye bring forth much fruit. As it is a Dishonor to God to be barren, so
Fruitfulness does honor him: Phil. 1.11. Filled with the fruits of
righteousness, which are to the praise of his glory. We must not be like the
Fig Tree in the Gospel, which had nothing but Leaves, but like the Pomocitron,
that is continually either mellowing or blossoming, it is never without Fruit.
It Is not Profession but Fruit glorifies God, God expects to have his Glory from
us this way, 1 Cor. 9.7. Who plants a vineyard and eats not of the fruit of it?
Trees in the Forest may be barren, but Trees in the Garden are fruitful: We
must bring forth the Fruits of Love and Good Works: Matthew. 5.16. Let your light
so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your
Father which is in heaven. Faith does sanctify our Works, and Works do
testify our Faith: To be doing good to others, to be Eyes to the Blind, Feet
to the Lame, does much glorify God. And thus Christ did glorify his Father,
He went about doing good, Acts 10.38. By being fruitful we are fair in God's
Eyes, Jer. 11.16. The Lord called thy name a green olive tree, fair and of
goodly fruit. And we must bear much Fruit, it is Muchness of Fruit glorifies
God; if ye bear much Fruit. The Spouse's Breasts are compared to Clusters of
Grapes, Cant. 7.7. to show how fertile she was. Though the lowest degree of Grace
may bring Salvation to you, yet not so much Glory to God: it was not a spark of
Love Christ commended in Mary, but much love, (...), she loved much, Luke 7.47.

6. We glorify God by being contented in that State where his Providence has
set us; we give God the Glory of his Wisdom in that we rest satisfied with what
he carves out to us: Thus did holy Paul glorify God, the Lord had cast him
into as great variety of Condition as any Man, in Prisons more frequent, in
Deaths often, 2 Cor. 11.23. yet he had learned to be content: St. Paul could sail
either in a Storm or a Calm; he could be any thing that God would have him; he
could either want or abound, Phil. 4.13. A good Christian argues thus: It is
God has put me in this Condition; he could have raised me higher if he
pleased, but that might have been a Snare to me; God has done it in Wisdom and
Love, therefore I will sit down satisfied with my Condition. Surely this does
much glorify God; God counts himself much honored by such a Christian; says
God, Here is one after my own heart, let me do what I will with him, I hear no
murmuring, he is content. This shows abundance of Grace. When Grace is crowning
it is not so much to be content, but when Grace is conflicting with
Inconveniences, then to be content is a glorious thing indeed: for one to be
content when he is in Heaven, is no wonder, but to be content under the Cross,
is like a Christian: This Man must needs bring Glory to God, for he shows to
all the World that though he has little Meal in Barrel, yet he has enough in
God to make him content; he says as David, Psalm. 16.5. The Lord is the portion
of my inheritance, the lines are fallen to me in pleasant places.

7. We glorify God in working out our own Salvation: God has twisted these
two together, his Glory and our Good; we glorify him by promoting our own
Salvation; it is a Glory to God to have multitude of Converts; now his design of
Free Grace takes, and God has the Glory of his Mercy: So that while we are
endeavoring our Salvation, we are honoring God: What an Encouragement is this
to the Service of God, to think while I am Hearing and Praying, I am glorifying
God, while I am furthering my own Glory in Heaven, I am increasing God's Glory:
Would it not be an Encouragement to a Subject, to hear his Prince say to him,
You will honor and please me very much, if you will go to yonder Mine of Gold,
and dig out as much Gold for yourself as you can carry away? So for God to say,
Go to the Ordinances, get as much Grace as you can, dig out as much Salvation
as you can, and the more Happiness you have, the more I shall count myself
glorified.

8. We glorify God by living to God: 2 Cor. 5.15. That they which live should
not live to themselves, but unto him who died for them. Romans 14.8. Whether we
live we live unto the Lord. The Mammonist lives to his Money, the Epicure lives
to his Belly; the design of a Sinner's Life is to gratify Lust. But then we
glorify God when we live to God.

Quest. What is it to live to God?

Resp. When we live to his Service, and lay out ourselves wholly for God: The
Lord has sent us into the World, as a Merchant sends his Factor beyond the
Seas to trade for him. Then we live to God when we trade for his Interest, and
propagate his Gospel; God has given every Man a Tallent: Now when he does not
hide it in a Napkin, but improves it for God, this is to live to God. When a
Master in a Family, by Counsel and good Example, labors to bring his Servants
to Christ, when a Minister does exhaust himself in the Labors of his Holy
Calling, when he spends himself, and is spent, that he may win Souls to Christ,
and make the Crown flourish upon Christ's Head; when the Magistrate does not
bear the Sword in vain, but labors to cut down Sin, and suppress Vice; this is
to live to God, and this a glorifying of God: Phil. 1.20. That Christ may be
magnified, whether by life or by death. Three Wishes St. Paul had, and they
were all about Christ, That he might be found in Christ, be with Christ, and
that he might magnify Christ.

9. We glorify God by walking cheerfully: It is a Glory to God when the World
sees a Christian has that within him that can make him cheerful in the worst
Times: he can with the Nightingale sing with a Thorn at his Breast. The People
of God have ground of Cheerfulness, they are justified, and instated into
Adoption, and this Creates inward Peace; it makes Music within, whatever
Storms are without, 2 Cor. 1.4. 1 These. 1.6. If we consider what Christ has
wrought for us by his Blood, and wrought in us by his Spirit, it is a ground of
great Cheerfulness, and this Cheerfulness glorifies God: It reflects upon a
Master when the Servant is always drooping and sad, sure he is kept to hard
Commons, his Master does not give him what is fitting. So when God's People
hang their Harpes on Willows, sure they do not serve a good Master, repent of
their Choice, this reflects Dishonor on God; as the gross Sins of the Wicked
bring a Scandal on the Gospel, so do the unchearful Lives of the Godly, Psalm.
100.2. Serve the Lord with gladness. Your serving him does not glorify him,
unless it be with Gladness; a Christian's cheerful looks glorify God; Religion
does not take away our Joy but refine and clarify it, it does not break our
Viol but tunes it, and makes the Music sweeter.

10. We glorify God by standing up for his Truths: Much of God's Glory lies in
his Truth; God has entrusted us with his Truth, as a Master intrusts his
Servant with his Purse to keep: We have not a richer Jewel to trust God with
than our Souls; nor God has not a richer Jewel to trust us with than his
Truth: Truth is a Beam that shines from God, much of his Glory lies in his
Truth; now when we are Advocates for Truth, this is to glorify God, so
Athanasius, (...), the Bulwark of Truth, Jud. 3. That ye should contend
earnestly for the faith; viz. the Doctrine of Faith. The Greek word (...), to
contend, signifies a great contending, as one would contend for his Land, and
not suffer his Right to be taken from him; so we should contend for the Truth:
Were there more of this Holy Contention, God would have more Glory. Some can
contend earnestly for Trifles and Ceremonies, but not for the Truth: we should
count him indiscreet that should contend more for a Picture then for his Land
of Inheritance, a Box of Counters, then for his Box of Evidences.

11. We glorify God by praising of him; Doxology or Praise is a God-exalting
Work, Psalm. 50.23. Whosoever offers praise glorifies me. The Hebrew word Bara to
create, and Barak to praise, are little different, because the End of Creation
is to Praise God: David was called the sweet Singer of Israel, and his praising
God was called a glorifying of God, Psalm. 86.12. I will praise thee, O Lord my
God, and I will glorify thy name. Though nothing can add to God's essential
Glory, yet Praise exalts him in the eyes of others: when we praise God we
spread his Fame and Renown, we display the Trophies of his Excellency: In this
manner the Angels glorify God, they are the Queristers of Heaven, and do
trumpet forth God's Praise; and praising of God is one of the highest and
purest Acts of Religion; in Prayer we act like Men, in Praise we act like
Angels; this is an high degree of glorifying God. Believers are called Temples
of God, 1 Cor. 3.16. when our Tongues praise God, then the Organs in God's
Spiritual Temple are going. How sad is it that God has no more of his Glory
from us this way. Many are full of Murmurings and Discontents, but seldom do
they bring Glory to God by giving him the Praise due to his Name. We read of
the Saints having Harps in their hand, Rev. 5.8. the Emblem of Praise: Many
have Tears in their eyes, and Complaints in their mouth, but few have Harps in
their hand, blessing and glorifying of God; let us Honor God this way. Praise
is the Quit-rent we pay to God; while God renews our Lease, we must renew our
Rent.

12. We glorify God by being zealous for his Name, Numb. 25.11. Phinehas has
turned my wrath away, while he was zealous for my sake. Zeal is a mixed
Affection, a Compound of Love and Anger; it carries forth our Love to God, and
Anger against Sin in a most intense manner: Zeal is impatient of God's
Dishonor; a Christian fired with Zeal takes a Dishonor done to God worse then
an Injury done to himself: Rev. 2.2. Thou can not bear them that are evil.
Our Savior Christ did thus glorify his Father; he being baptized with a
Spirit of Zeal, drove the Money Changers out of the Temple, Job. 2.14 and 17.
The zeal of thine house has eaten me up.

13. We glorify God when we have an eye at God, both in our Natural and in our
Civil Actions: 1. In our Natural Actions, in eating and drinking, 1 Cor. 10.31.
Whether therefore ye eat or drink, do all to the glory of God. A gracious
Person holds the Golden Bridle of Temperance, he takes his Meat as a Medicine
to heal the Decays of Nature, and that he may be the fitter by the strength he
receives for the Service of God; he makes his Food not Fuel for Lust, but Help
to Duty. 2. In buying and selling, we do all to the Glory of God; the Wicked
live upon unjust Gain, either by falsifying the Balance, Hos. 12.7. The
balances of deceit are in his hand: While Men make their Weights lighter, they
make their Sins heavier, or by exacting more then the Commodity is worth, they
do not for fourscore write down fifty, but for fifty fourscore; they exact
double the Price that a thing is worth. But then we buy and sell to the Glory
of God, when in our buying and selling we observe that Golden Maxim, To do to
others as we would have them do to us, Matthew. 7.12. When we so sell our
Commodities that we do not sell our Conscience: Acts 24.16. Herein do I
exercise myself to have always a conscience void of offense toward God, and
toward men. This is to glorify God, when we have an eye at God in all our
Civil and Natural Actions, and will do nothing that may reflect any Blemish on
Religion.

14. We glorify God by laboring to draw others to God; we convert others, and
so make them Instruments of glorifying God. We should be both Diamonds and
Loadstones, Diamonds for the Luster of Grace, and Loadstones for our attractive
Virtue in drawing others to Christ: Gal. 4.19. My little children, of whom I
travel, etc. This is a great way of glorifying God, when we break the Devil's
Prison, and turn Men from the Power of Satan to God.

15. We glorify God in an high manner when we suffer for God, and Seal the
Gospel with our Blood: Joh. 21.18, 19. When thou shall be old, another shall
gird thee and carry thee whither thou would not: This spoke he, signifying by
what death he should glorify God. God's Glory shines in the Ashes of his
Martyrs, Isa. 24.15. Wherefore glorify the Lord in the fires. Micaiah was in
the Prison, Isaiah sawn asunder, Paul beheaded, Luke hanged on an Olive Tree,
thus did they by their Death glorify God. The Sufferings of the Primitive
Saints did Honor God, and make the Gospel famous in the World: What would
others say, See what a good Master they serve, and how they love him, that they
will venture loss of all in his Service. The Glory of Christ's Kingdom does not
stand in Worldly Pomp and Grandeur, as other Kings, but it is seen in the
cheerful Sufferings of his People; The Saints of old loved not their lives to
the Death, Rev. 12.11. They snatched up Torments as so many Crowns. God grant
we may thus glorify him, if he calls us to it: many pray, Let this cup pass
away, but not, Thy will be done.

16. We glorify God when we give God the Glory of all we do: Herod when he had
made an Oration, and the People gave a shout, saying, It is the voice of a God,
and not of a Man; and he took this Glory to himself, the Text says,
Immediately the angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not God the glory;
and he was eaten of worms, Acts 12.23. Then we glorify God when we sacrifice
the Praise and Glory of all to God, 1 Cor. 15.10. I labor more abundantly then
they all. A Speech one would think savoured of Pride; but the Apostle pulls the
Crown from his own Head and sets it upon the Head of Free Grace, Yet not I, but
the grace of God which was with me. As Ioab when he fought against Rabbah, sent
for King David that he might carry away the Crown of the Victory, 2 Samuel 12.28.
so a Christian when he has gotten power over any Corruption or Tentation,
sends for Christ that he may carry away the Crown of the Victory: as the
Silkworm when she weaves her curious Work, she hides herself under the Silk,
and is not seen; so when we have done any thing Praiseworthy, we must hide
ourselves under the Vail of Humility, and transfer the Glory of all we have to
done God. Constantine did use to write the Name of Christ over his Door; so
should we write the Name of Christ over our Duties; let him wear the Garland of
Praise.

17. We glorify God by an holy Life: Christianorum religio ha^c sine macula
vivere lactant; As a bad Life does dishonor God, 1 Pet. 2.9. Ye are an holy
nation, that ye should show forth the praises of him that has called you. Romans
2.24. The name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you. Epiphanius
says, That the Looseness of some Christians in his time, made many of the
Heathen shun the Company of the Christians, and would not be drawn to hear
their Sermons. So by our exact Bible-conversation we glorify God; though the
main Work of Religion lies in the Heart, yet our light must so shine, that
others may behold it; the chief of Building is in Foundation, yet the Glory of
it is in Frontis-piece, so Beauty in the Conversation: When the Saints who are
called Jewels, cast a sparkling Luster of Holiness in the Eyes of the World;
when they walk as Christ walked, 1 Ioh. 2.6. when they live as if they had seen
the Lord with bodily Eyes, and been with him upon the Mount; then they adorn
Religion, and bring Revenues of Glory to the Crown of Heaven.

Use 1. It shows us what should not be our chief End, not to get great Estates,
not to lay up Treasures upon Earth: This is the Degeneracy of Mankind since the
Fall, their great Design is to compass the Earth, and grow Rich, and this they
make their Finis ultimus, their chief End: Cassa and caduca pluris faciunt quam
coelestia Cavidro: These never think of glorifying God, they trade for the
World, but are not Factors for Heaven: Eccles. 9.3. Madness is in their heart
while they live; sometimes they never arrive at an Estate, they do not get the
Venison they hunt for; or though they do, what have they? that which will not
fill the Heart no more then the Marriner's Breath will fix the Sails of a Ship;
like a fair Picture drawn on the Ice, and to spend all one's time as Israel in
gathering Straw, but remember not the End of living to glorify God: Eccles.
5.16. What profit has he that labored for the wind? And these things are soon
gone.

Use 2. It reproves such, 1. as bring no Glory to God: They do not answer the
End of their Creation, their time is not true lived, but time lost; they are
like the Wood of the Vine, Ezekiel. 15.2. Their Lives are as St. Bernard speaks,
Aut peccatum aut sterilitas; Either Sinfulness or Barrenness. Telluris inutile
pondus: -- God will one day ask such a question as King Ahasuerus did, Esther
6.3. What honor and dignity has been done to Mordicai? So will the Lord say,
What honor has been done to me? What Revenues of Glory have you brought into
my Exchequer? There is none here present, but God has put you in some Capacity
of glorifying him; the Health he has given you, the Parts, Estate, Seasons of
Grace, these all are Opportunities put into your hand to glorify him; and be
assured God will call you to account to know what you have done with the
Mercies he has entrusted you with, and what Glory you have brought to him: The
Parable of the Talents, Matthew. 25.15. where the Man with the five Talents, and
the two Talents are brought to a Reckoning, does evidently show that God will
call you to a strict Account to know how you have traded with your Talents, and
what Glory you have brought to him. Now how sad will it be with them that hide
their talent in a napkin, that bring God no Glory at all; Verse 30. Cast ye the
unprofitable servant into outer darkness. It is not enough for you to say, that
you have not dishonored God, you have not lived in gross Sin; but what Good
have you done, what Glory have you brought to God? It is not enough for the
Servant of the Vineyard, that he does no hurt in the Vineyard, he does not
break the Trees, or destroy the Hedges, if he does not do service in the
Vineyard, he loses his Pay: If you do not good in your Place, not glorify
God, you will lose your Pay, miss of Salvation. Oh think of this all you that
live Unserviceably! Christ cursed the barren Fig Tree.

2. It reproves such as are so far from bringing Glory to God, that they rob
God of his Glory, Mal. 3.8. Will a man rob God, yet ye have robbed me. They rob
God who take the Glory due to God to themselves, 1. If they have gotten an
Estate, they ascribe all to their own Wit and Industry, they set the Crown upon
their own Head, not considering that, Deuteronomy. 8.18. Thou shall remember the Lord
thy God, for it is he that gives thee power to get wealth. 2. If they do any
Duty of Religion, they look asquint to their own Glory, Matthew. 6.5. That they
may be seen of men; (...), That they may be set upon a Theater, that others may
admire and canonize them. The Oil of Vainglory feeds their Lamp: how many has
the Wind of Popular Breath blown to Hell? Quos non gula (...) superavit,
Cyprian. Whom the Devil could not destroy by Intemperance, he has by
Vainglory.

3. It reproves them who fight against God's Glory: Acts 5.39. Lest ye be found
to fight against God.

Quest. But who do fight against God's Glory?

Resp. Such as do oppose that whereby God's Glory is promoted. God's Glory is
much promoted in the preaching of the Word, because it is his Engine whereby he
converts Souls. Now, such as would hinder the preaching of the Word, these
fight against God's Glory: 1 Thessalonians. 2.16. Forbidding us to speak to the
Gentiles, that they might be saved. Dioclesian who raised the tenth Persecution
against the Christians, did prohibit Church-meetings, and would have the
Temples of the Christians to be razed down. Such as hinder Preaching, do as the
Philistines that stopped the Wells, they stop the Well of the Water of Life;
they take away the Physicians that should heal Sin-sick Souls: Ministers are
Lights, Matthew. 5.14. and who but Thieves hate the Light? These Persons do
directly strike at God's Glory; and what an Account will they have to give to
God, when he shall charge the Blood of Men's Souls upon them: Luke 11.52. Ye
have taken away the key of knowledge; ye entered not in yourselves, and they
that were entering in ye hindered. If there be either Justice in Heaven, or Fire
in Hell, they shall not go unpunished.

Use 4. Exhortation: Let us every one in our place make this our chief End and
Design, to glorify God: 1. Let me speak to Magistrates; God has put much
Glory upon them, Psalm. 82.6. I have said ye are gods; And will not they glorify
him whom he has put so much Glory upon? Magistrates should be zealous for
God's Worship and Day, they should not let the Sword rust in the Scabbard, but
draw it out for the cutting down of Sin. 2. Ministers, how should they study to
promote God's Glory; God has entrusted them with two the most precious Things,
his Truths and the Souls of his People. Ministers are by virtue of their Office
to glorify God: 1. They must glorify God by laboring in the Word and
Doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.1. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall judge the quick and the dead: Preach the word, be instant in season, out
of season, etc. It was St. Augustine's Wish, That Christ at his coming might
find him, Aut Precantem aut Praedicantem, either Praying or Preaching. 2.
Ministers must glorify God by their Zeal and Sanctity: The Priests under the
Law, before they served at the Altar, did wash in the Lavor. Such as serve in
the Lord's House, must first be washed from gross Sin in the Lavor of
Repentance. It Is matter of Grief and Shame, to think how many who call
themselves Ministers, 2 Chr. 11.15.
do instead of apparently bringing Glory to God, Dishonor God; their Lives as
well as Doctrines are Heterodox, they are not free from the Sins which they
reprove in others. Plutarch's Servant upbraided him, It is not as my Master
Plutarch says, he has written a Book against Wrath, Anger, Et ipse mihi
irascitur, yet he falls into a Passion of Anger with me. So this Minister
preaches against Drunkenness, yet he will be drunk, he preaches against
Swearing, yet he will swear; this reproacheth God, and makes the Offering of
the Lord to be abhorred. 3. Masters of Families do you glorify God, season
your Children and Servants with the Knowledge of the Lord, your Houses should
be little Churches: Genesis 18.19. I know that Abraham will command his children,
that they keep the way of the Lord. You that are Masters, know you have a
Charge of Souls under you; for want of the Bridle of Family-discipline Youth
runs wild: Well, let me lay down some Motives to glorify God:

1 Motive, It will be a great Comfort in a dying hour, to think we have
glorified God in our Lives; it was Christ's Comfort before his Death, Ioh.
17.3. I have glorified thee on earth. At the hour of Death all your earthly
Comforts will vanish, if you think how Rich you have been, what Pleasures you
have had on Earth, this will be so far from comforting you, that it will but
torment you the more: What is one the better for an Estate that is spent? But
now to have Conscience telling you, that you have glorified God on Earth, what
sweet Comfort and Peace will this let into your Soul! how will this make you
long for Death! The Servant that has been all day working in the Vineyard,
longs till Evening comes when he shall receive his Pay. They who have lived and
brought no Glory to God, how can they think of dying with Comfort; they cannot
expect an Harvest that never sowed any Seed: How can they expect Glory from
God, that never brought any Glory to him? O in what Horror will they be at
Death! the Worm of Conscience will gnaw their Souls, before the Worms are
gnawing their Bodies.

2 Mot. If we glorify God, he will glorify our Souls for ever; by raising
God's Glory we increase our own; by glorifying of God we come at last to the
blessed Enjoying of Him, and that brings me to the second, The Enjoying of God.

Secondly, Man's chief End is to Enjoy God for ever, Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I
in heaven but thee? Quasi, What is there in Heaven I desire to enjoy but thee?
Ibi Angeli musculus, There is a twofold Fruition, or enjoying of God; the one
is in this Life, the other in the Life to come:

1st, An enjoying of God here in this Life: The enjoying of God's Presence; it
is a great matter to enjoy God's Ordinances, (a Mercy that some do envy us) but
to enjoy God's Presence in the Ordinances, is that which a gracious Heart
aspires after, Psalm. 63.2. To see thy glory so as I have seen thee in the
sanctuary. This sweet enjoying of God is, when we feel his Spirit cooperating
with the Ordinance, and distilling Grace upon our Hearts: 1. When in word the
Spirit does quicken and raise the Affections, Luke 24.32. Did not our hearts
burn within us? 2. When the Spirit does transform the Heart, leaving an impress
of Holiness upon it, 2 Cor. 3.8. We are changed into the same Image, from glory
to glory. 3. When the Spirit does receive the Heart with Comfort, it comes not
only with its Anointing, but its Seal, it sheds God's Love abroad in the Heart,
Romans 5.5. this is to enjoy God in an Ordinance. 1 John 1.3. Our fellowship is
with the Father and his son Jesus. In the Word we hear God's Voice, and in the
Sacrament we have his Kiss; this is enjoying of God: And what infinite Content
does a gracious Soul find in this? The Heart being warmed and inflamed in a
Duty, this is God's answering by Fire. When a Christian has the sweet Illapses
of God's Spirit, these are the first Fruits of Glory, when God comes down to
the Soul in an Ordinance: Now Christ has pulled off his Veil, and showed his
smiling Face, now he has led a Believer into the Banqueting House, and given
him of the spiced Wine of his Love to drink; he has put in his Finger at the
hole of the Door, he has touched the Heart, and made it leap for Joy: Oh how
sweet is it thus to enjoy God! The Godly have in the use of the Ordinances, had
such Divine Raptures of Joy and Soul-transfigurations, that they have been
carried above the World, and despised all things here below.

Use 1. Is the enjoying God in this Life so sweet, how prodigiously wicked are
they that prefer the enjoying their Lusts before the enjoying of God, 2 Pet.
3.3. The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, the pride of life, is the
Trinity they worship: Lust is an inordinate Desire or Impulse provoking the
Soul to that which is evil; there is the revengeful Lust, and the wanton Lust;
Lust is like a feverish Heat, it puts the Soul into a Flame. Aristotle calls
sensual Lusts brutish, because when any Lust is violent, Reason or Conscience
cannot be heard, the Beast rides the Man. These Lusts when they are enjoyed do
besot and dispirit Persons, Hos. 4.11. Whoredom and wine take away the heart:
They have no heart for any thing that is good; how many make it their chief
end, not to enjoy God, but to enjoy their Lusts? As that Cardinal said, Let him
but keep his Cardinalship of Paris, and he was content to loose his part in
Paradise. Lust first bewitcheth with Pleasure, and then comes the fatal Dart,
Prove. 7.23. Till a dart strike through his liver. This should be as a flaming
Sword to stop Men in the way of their carnal Delights; who would for a Drop of
Pleasure drink a Sea of Wrath?

Use 2. Let it be our great Care to enjoy God's sweet Presence here, which is
the Beauty and Comfort of the Ordinance. Enjoying spiritual Communion with God,
is a Riddle and Mystery to most People: every one that hangs about the Court
does not speak with the King. We may approach to God in Ordinances, and as it
were hang about the Court of Heaven, yet not enjoy Communion with God; we may
have the Letter without Spirit, the visible Sign without the invisible Grace:
it is the enjoying of God in a Duty we should chiefly look at, Psalm. 42.2. My
soul thirsts for God, for the living God. Alas, what are all our worldly
Enjoyments without the enjoying of God? What is it to enjoy a great deal of
Health, a brave Estate, and not to enjoy God: Job 30.28. I went mourning
without the sun. So may thou say in the Enjoyment of all Creatures without
God, I went mourning without the sun; I have the Starlight of outward
Enjoyments, but I cannot enjoy God, I want the Sun of Righteousness, I went
mourning without the sun. This should be our great Design, not only to have the
Ordinances of God, but the God of the Ordinances. The enjoying God's sweet
Presence with us here, is the most contented Life: he is an Hive of Sweetness,
a Magazine of Riches, a Fountain of Delight, Psalm. 36.8, 9. The higher the Lark
flies the sweeter it sings: and the higher we fly by the Wing of Faith, the
more of God we enjoy, the sweeter Delight we feel in our Souls: How is the
Heart inflamed in Prayer and Meditation, what Joy and Peace in believing? Is it
not comfortable being in Heaven? He that enjoys much of God in this Life,
carries Heaven about him: O let this be the thing we are chiefly ambitious of,
the enjoying of God in his Ordinances: remember, the enjoying God's sweet
Presence here, is an Earnest of our enjoying him in Heaven: -- and that brings
me to the second thing, which is,

2d, The enjoying God in the Life to come: Man's chief end is to enjoy God for
ever; before this plenary Fruition of God in Heaven, there must be something
previous and antecedent, and that is, our being in a State of Grace: We must
have Conformity to him in Grace, before we can have Communion with him in
Glory. Grace and Glory are inter se connexae, linked and chained together;
Grace precedes Glory, as the Morning Star ushers in the Sun. God will have us
qualified and fitted for a state of Blessedness: Drunkards and Swearers are not
fit to enjoy God in Glory, the Lord will not lay such Vipers in his Bosom; only
the pure in heart shall see God: We must first be as the King's Daughter,
glorious within, before we are clothed with the Robes of Glory: as King
Ahashuerus first caused the Virgins to be purified and anointed, and they had
their sweet Odours to perfume them, and then they were to stand before the
King, Esth. 2.12. so must we, we must have the anointing of God, and be
perfumed with the Graces of Spirit, those sweet Odours, and then we shall stand
before the King of Heaven: now, being thus divinely qualified by Grace, we
shall be taken up into the Mount of Vision, and enjoy God for ever. This
enjoying God for ever, is nothing else but to be put into a State of Happiness.
As the Body cannot have Life, but by having Communion with the Soul, so the
Soul cannot have Blessedness, but by having immediate Communion with God. God
is the Summum Bonum, the Chief Good; therefore the enjoying of him is the
highest Felicity. He is, I say, the Chief Good.

1. He is an Universal Good; Bonum in quo omnia Bona. The Excellencies of the
Creature are limited. A Man may have Health, not Beauty; Learning, not
Parentage; Riches, not Wisdom: But in God are eminently contained all
Excellencies: He is a Good commensurate fully to the Soul; he is a Sun, a
Portion, an Horn of Salvation; in him dwells (...) all Fullness, Col. 1.19. 2.
God is an Unmixed Good: No Condition in this Life but has its mixture; for
every drop of Honey, there is a drop of Gall. Solomon, who gave himself to find
out this Philosopher's Stone* to search out for an Happiness here below, he
found Vanity and Vexation, Eccles. 1.2. but God is a perfect, quintessential
Good. He is sweetness in the Flower. 3. God is a Satisfying Good. The Soul
cries out, I have enough. Psalm. 17.15. I shall be satisfied with thy likeness;
A Man that is thirsty, bring him to the Ocean, and he has enough. If there be
enough in God to satisfy the Angels, then sure enough to satisfy us. The Soul
is but Finite, but God is an increase Infinite Good. And yet though God be such
a Good as does satisfy, yet not surfeit. Fresh Joys spring continually from
God's Face; and God is as much desired after Millions of Years by Glorified
Souls, as at the first moment. There is so much Fullness in God as satisfies,
yet so much Sweetness that the Soul still desires; it is Satisfaction without
Surfeit. 4. God is a delicious Good. That which is the chief Good must ravish
the Soul with pleasure; there must be in it Spirits of Delight, and
Quintessence of Joy; and this is to be enjoyed only in God. In Deo quadam
dulcedine delectatur anima immo rapitur; the Love of God drops such infinite
suavity into the Soul as is unspeakable and full of glory. If there be so much
delight in God, when we see him only by Faith, 1 Pet. 1.8. what will the joy of
Vision be when we shall see him face to face? If the Saints have found so much
delight in God while they were Suffering, O then what Joy and Delight will they
have when they are Crowning? If Flames are Beds of Roses, O then what will it
be to lean on the Bosom of Jesus, what a Bed of Roses will that be? 5. God is a
Superlative Good. He is better then any thing you can put in competition with
him; he is better then Health, Riches, Honor. Other things maintain Life, he
gives Life. But who would go to put any thing in Balance with the Deity? who
would weigh a Feather with a Mountain of Gold? God excels all other things more
infinitely then the Sun the light of a Taper. 6. God is an Eternal Good. He is
the ancient of Days, Dan. 7.9. yet never decays, or waxes old. The Joy he gives
is eternal, the Crown he gives fades not away, 1 Pet. 5.4. The glorified Soul
shall be ever solacing it self in God; it shall be feasting on his Love, and
sunning it self in the light of his Countenance. We read of the River of
Pleasure at God's right hand, but will not this in time be dried up? No,
there is a Fountain at the bottom which feeds it, Psalm. 36.9. With the Lord is
the fountain of life. Thus God is the Chief Good, and the enjoying God for ever
is the Supreme Felicity the Soul is capable of.

1. Use of Exhortation. Let it be the chief end of our living to enjoy this
Chief Good hereafter; this is that will crown us with Happiness. Austin reckons
up two hundred eighty eight Opinions among the Philosophers about Happiness,
but all did shoot short of the Mark. The highest Elevation of a reasonable
Soul, is to enjoy God for ever. It is the enjoying God, makes Heaven, 1 Thessalonians.
4.17. Then shall we ever be with the Lord. The Soul trembles, as the Needle in
the Compass, and is never at rest till it comes to God. To set out this
excellent State of a Glorified Soul's enjoying God; 1. This enjoying of God
must not be understood in a Sensual Manner; we must not conceive any Carnal
Pleasures in Heaven. The Turks in their Alcoran speak of a Paradise of
Pleasure, where they have Riches in abundance, and red Wine served in Golden
Chalices. Here is an Heaven consisting of Pleasures for the Body; the Epicures
of this Age would like such an Heaven when they die. Though indeed the State of
Glory be compared to a Feast, and is set out by Pearls and precious Stones, yet
these Metaphors are only to be Helps to our Faith, and to show us that there is
Superabundant Joy and Felicity in the Empyraean Heaven; but those are not
carnal, but sacred Delights. As our Employments shall be spiritual, it will
consist in Adoring and Praising of God: so our Enjoyment shall be spiritual, it
shall consist in the having the Perfection of Holiness, in seeing the pure Face
of Christ, in feeling the Love of God, in conversing with Heavenly Spirits;
these Delights will be more adequate and proper for the Soul, and infinitely
exceed all carnal voluptuous Delights. 2. We shall have a Lively Sense of this
glorious Estate. A Man in a Lethargy, though he be alive, yet he is as good as
dead, because he is not sensible, nor does he take any pleasure in his Life; we
shall have a quick and lively sense of the infinite Pleasure which arises from
Enjoyment of God; we shall know our selves to be happy; we shall reflect with
joy upon our Dignity and Felicity; we shall taste every Crumb of that
Sweetness, every Drop of that Pleasure which flows from God. We shall be made
able to bear a sight of that Glory. We could not now bear that Glory, it would
overwhelm us; sensibile forte destruit sensum, as a weak Eye cannot behold the
Sun; but God will capacitate us for Glory; our Souls shall be so heavenly, and
perfected with holiness, that they may be able to enjoy the blessed Vision of
God. Moses in a Clift of the Rock saw the Glory of God passing by, Exodus 33.22.
Through that blessed Rock Christ, we shall behold the Beatifical sight of God.
4. This Enjoyment of God shall be more then a bare Contemplation of him. Some
of the Learned move the Question, Whether the Enjoyment of God shall be only by
way of Contemplation? Answ. That is something, but it is but one half of
Heaven; there shall be a Loving of God, an Acquiescence in him, a Tasting his
Sweetness; not only Inspection, but Possession, Joh. 17.24. That they may
behold my Glory; there is Inspection: Verse. 22. And the Glory thou have given
me, I have given them; there is Possession. Glory shall be revealed in us, Romans
8.18. not only revealed to us, but in us. To behold God's Glory, there is Glory
revealed to us; but to partake of his Glory, there is Glory revealed in us. As
the Sponge sucks in the Wine, so we shall suck in Glory. 5. There Is no
Intermission in this State of Glory. We shall not only have God's glorious
Presence at certain special Seasons, but we shall be continually in his
Presence; continually under Divine Raptures of Joy. There shall not be one
Minute in Heaven, wherein a glorified Soul may say, I do not enjoy Happiness.
The Streams of Glory are not like the Water of a Conduit, often stopped, that
we cannot have one drop of Water; but those heavenly Streams of Joy are
continually running. O how should we despise this Valley of Tears where we now
are, for the Mount of Transfiguration! How should we long for the full
Enjoyment of God in Paradise! Had we a sight of that Land of Promise, we should
need Patience to be content to live here any longer.

2. Let this be a Spur to Duty. How diligent and zealous should we be in
glorifying God, that we come at last to enjoy him. If Tully, Demosthenes,
Plato, who had but the dim Watch-light of Reason to see by, and did but fancy
an Elysium and Happiness after this Life, did take such Herculean Pains to
enjoy it, O then, how should Christians, who have the Light of Scripture to see
by, bestir themselves, that they may arrive at the Eternal Fruition of God and
Glory. If any thing may make us rise off our Bed of Sloth, and serve God with
all our might, it should be this, the hope of our full Enjoyment of God for
ever. What made Paul so active in the Sphere of Religion, 1 Cor. 15.10. I
labored (...) more abdundantly then they all. His Obedience did not move slow,
as the Sun on the Dial, but swift as the Sun in the Firmament. Why was he so
zealous in glorifying God, but that he might at last center and terminate in
him? 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. Then shall we be ever with the Lord.

3. Use of Consolation. Let this comfort the Godly in all the present Miseries
they feel. Thou complainest (Christian) thou do not enjoy thy self, Fears
disquiet thee, Wants perplex thee; in the Day thou can not enjoy Ease, in the
Night thou can not enjoy Sleep. Thou do not enjoy the Comforts of thy Life,
let this revive thee, that shortly thou shall enjoy God, and then thou shall
have more then thou can ask or think; Thou shall have Angels Joy, Glory
without Intermission and Expiration. We shall never enjoy our selves fully,
till we enjoy God Eternally.

Of the SCRIPTVRES.
Quest. II. Q. II.
WHat Rule has God given to direct us how we may glorify and enjoy him?

Answ. The Word of God (which is contained in the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament) is the only Rule to direct us how we may glorify and enjoy him.

2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, etc. By Scripture
is understood the Sacred Book of God. -- It is given by Divine Inspiration;
that is, the Scripture is not the Contrivance of Man's Brain, but of a Divine
Original. The Image of Diana was had in Veneration by the Ephesians, because
they did suppose it fell from Jupiter, Acts 19.35. This Book then of the Holy
Scripture is to be highly reverenced and esteemed, because we are sure it came
from Heaven, 2 Pet. 1.21. The two Testaments are the two Lips by which God has
spoken to us.

Quest. How does it appear that the Scriptures have a Jus Divinum, a Divine
Authority stamped upon them?

Answ. Because the Old and New Testament are the Foundation of all Religion. If
their Divinity cannot be proved, the Foundation is gone on which we build our
Faith. I shall therefore endeavor to evince this great Truth, That the
Scriptures are the very Word of God. I wonder whence the Scripture should come,
if not from God. 1. Bad Men could not be the Authors of Scripture: would their
Minds be employed in indighting such holy Lines? would they declare so fiercely
against Sin? 2. Good Men could not be the Authors of Scripture. Could they
write in such a strain? or could it stand with their Grace to Counterfeit God's
Name, and put, Thus says the Lord, to a Book of their own devising? 3. Nor
could any Angel in Heaven be the Author of Scripture. Because 1. the Angels pry
and search into the Abyss of Gospel Mysteries, 1 Pet. 1.12. which implies their
nescience of some parts of Scripture; and sure they cannot be Authors of that
Book which themselves do not fully understand* besides 2. what Angel in Heaven
durst be so Arrogant as to Personate God, and say, I create, Isa. 65.17. and I
the Lord have said it, Numb. 14.35. So that it is evident, The Pedigree of
Scripture is Sacred, and it could come from none but God himself.

Not to speak of the Harmonious Consent of all the Parts of Scripture, there
are Seven cogent Arguments may Evince it to be the Word of God.

1. By its Antiquity: It is of ancient standing. The gray Hairs of Scripture
make it Venerable. No Humane Histories extant reach further then since Noah's
Flood; but the Holy Scripture relates Matters of Fact that have been from the
beginning of the World; it writes of things before Time. Now that is a sure
Rule of Tertullian, That which is of the greatest Antiquity Id verum quod
primum.
, is to be received as most Sacred and Authentic.

2. We may know the Scripture to be the Word of God by the Miraculous
Preservation of it in all Ages. The Holy Scriptures are the richest Jewel that
Christ has left; and the Church of God has kept these Public Records of
Heaven that they have not been lost. The Word of God has never wanted Enemies
to oppose, and if possible to extirpate it. They have given out a Law
concerning Scripture, as Pharaoh did the Midwives concerning the Hebrew Women's
Children, to strangle it in the Birth, yet God has preserved this blessed Book
inviolable to this Day. The Devil and his Agents have been blowing at
Scripture Light, but could never prevail to blow it out; a clear sign that it
was lighted from Heaven Veritas opprimi patest non supprimi.
. -- Nor has the Church of God in all Revolutions and Changes only kept the
Scripture that it should not be lost, but that it should not be depraved. The
Letter of Scripture has been preserved without any Corruption in the Original
Tongue. The Scriptures were not corrupted before Christ's Time, for then Christ
would never have sent the Jews to the Scriptures; but he sends them to the
Scriptures, John 5.39. Search the Scriptures. Christ knew these Sacred Springs
were not muddied with Humane Fancies.

3. The Scripture appears to be the Word of God, by the Matter contained in it.
1. By its Profundity. The Mystery of Scripture is so abstruse and profound,
that no Man or Angel could have known it, had it not been Divinely revealed.
That Eternity should be born, that he who Thunders in the Heavens, should cry
in the Cradle, that he who Rules the Stars should Suck the Breasts Que regit
Syder a sagit ubera.
; That the Prince of Life should die, that the Lord of Glory should be put to
shame, that Sin should be punished to the full, yet pardoned to the full, who
could ever have conceived of such a Mystery, had not the Scripture been the
Oracle to reveal it to us? So for the Doctrine of the Resurrection, That the
same Body which is crumbled into a thousand pieces, should rise idem numero,
the same individual Body (for else it were a Creation, not a Resurrection) how
could such a Sacred Riddle, above all Humane disquisition, be known, had not
the Scripture made a Discovery of it? 2. By its Purity. It is for the Matter of
it so full of Goodness, Justice, and Sanctity, that it could be breathed from
none but God: The Holiness of it shows it to be of God, it bears his very
Image. The Scripture is compared to Silver refined seven times, Psalm. 12.6.
This Book of God has no Errata's in it: It is a Beam of the Sun of
Righteousness, a Crystal Stream flowing from the Fountain of Life. All Laws
and Edicts of Men have had their Corruptions, but the Word of God has not the
least Tincture, it is of a Meridian Splendor. Psalm. 119.140. Thy Word is very
pure, like wine that comes from the grape, which is not mixed or adulterated.
It is so pure, that it purifies every thing else. John 17.17. Sanctify them
through thy truth. The Scripture presses Holiness so as never any Book did: It
bids us live soberly, righteously, godly, Titus 2.12. Soberly, in Acts of
Temperance; Righteously, in Acts of Justice; Godly, in Acts of Zeal and
Devotion. It commends to us whatever is just, lovely, of good report, Phil.
4.8. This Sword of the Spirit (Ephesians. 6.17.) cuts down Vice. Out of this Tower of
Scripture is thrown down a Millstone upon the Head of Sin. The Scripture is the
Royal Law, which commands not only the Actions, but Affections; it binds the
Heart to its good Behavior. Where is there such Holiness to be found, as is
dig'd out of this Sacred Mine? Who could be the Author of such a Book, but God
himself?

4. That the Scripture is the Word of God, is evident by its Predictions; it
Prophesies of things to come. This shows the Voice of God speaking in it; it
was foretold by the Prophet, A Virgin shall conceive, Isa. 7.14. and the
Messiah shall be cut off, Dan. 9.26. The Scripture foretells things that should
fall out many Ages and Centuries after; as how long Israel should serve in the
Iron Furnace, and the very day of their Deliverance: Exodus 12.41. At the end of
the four hundred and thirty years, even the self same day, it came to pass, the
Hoasts of the Lord went out of Egypt. This Prediction of Future Things, merely
contingent, and not depending upon Natural Causes, is a clear Demonstration of
its Divine Original.

5. The Impartiality of those Men of God who wrote the Scriptures; they do not
spare to set down their own Failings. What Man that writes an History would
black his own face, viz. record those things of himself that might stain his
Reputation? Moses records his own Impatience when he struck the Rock, and tells
us therefore he could not enter into the Land of Promise. David writes of his
own Adultery and Bloodshed, which stands as a Blot in his Scutchion to
succeeding Ages. Peter relates his own Pusillanimity in denying Christ. Jonah
sets down his own Passions, I do well to be angry to the death. Surely had not
their Pen been guided by God's own Hand, they would never have written that
which did reflect dishonor upon themselves. Men do usually rather hide their
Blemishes, then publish them to the World: But these Penmen of Holy Scripture
eclipse their own Name; they take away all the Glory from themselves, and give
the Glory, to God.

6 Arg. The mighty power and efficacy the Word has had upon the Souls and
Consciences of Men. 1. It has changed their heart. 1. Some by reading of
Scripture have been turned into other Men, they have been made holy and
gracious. By reading other Books the Heart may be warmed, but by reading this
Book it is transformed. 2 Cor. 3.3. Ye are manifestly declared to be the
Epistle of Christ, written not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the living God.
The Word was copied out into their Hearts, and they were become Christ's
Epistle, so that others might read Christ in them. If you should set a Seal
upon Marble, and it should make an Impression upon the Marble, and leave a
Print behind, there were a strange Virtue in that Seal: So when the Seal of the
Word leaves an heavenly print of Grace upon the Heart, there must needs be a
Power going along with that Word no less than Divine. 2. It has comforted
their Heart. When Christians have sat by the Rivers weeping, the Word has
dropped as Honey, and sweetly revived them. A Christians chief Comfort is drawn
out of these Wells of Salvation; Romans 15.4. That we through Comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope. When a poor Soul has been ready to faint, he has
had nothing to Comfort him but a Scripture Cordial. When he has been sick, the
Word has revived him; 2 Cor. 4.17. Our light affliction which is but for a
moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. When
he has been deserted, the Word has dropped in the golden Oil of Joy into his
Heart; Cant. 3.31. The Lord will not cast off for ever. He may change his
Providence, not his Purpose: he may have the Look of an Enemy, but the Heart of
a Father. Thus the Word has a Power in it to comfort the heart; Psalm. 119.50.
This is my comfort in my affliction, for thy Word has quickened me. As the
Spirits are conveyed through the Arteries of the Body: So Divine Comforts are
conveyed through the Promises of the Word. Now the Scriptures having such an
exhilarating Heart-comforting Power in them, it shows clearly that they are of
God, and it is he that has put this Milk of Consolation into these Breasts.

7. The great Miracles wherewith the Lord has confirmed Scripture. Miracles
were used by Moses, Elijah, Christ, and continued many years after by the
Apostles, to confirm the verity of the Holy Scriptures. As Props are set under
weak Vines, so these Miracles were set under the weak Faith of Men, that if
they would not believe the Writings of the Word, yet they might believe the
Miracles. We read of God's dividing the Waters, making a Cawsey in the Sea for
his People to go over, the Iron swimming, the Oil increasing by pouring out,
Christ's making Wine of Water, his curing the Blind, and raising the Dead: Thus
God has set Seal to the Truth and Divinity of Scripture by Miracles.

Object. The Papists indeed cannot deny but that the Scripture is Divine and
Sacred, but they affirm that quoad nos, with respect to us, it receives its
Divine Authority from the Church; and they bring that Scripture 1 Timothy 3.15.
where the Church is said to be the Ground and Pillar of Truth.

Answ. It is true the Church is the Pillar of Truth, but it does not therefore
follow that the Scripture has its Authority from the Church. The King's
Proclamation is fixed on the Pillar, the Pillar holds it out that all may read,
but the Proclamation does not receive its Authority from the Pillar but from
the King: So the Church holds forth the Scriptures, but they do not receive
their Authority from the Church, but from God. If the Word of God should be
Divine because the Church holds it forth, then it will follow that our Faith is
to be built upon the Church, and not upon the Word; contrary to that Ephesians. 2.20.
Built upon the Foundation (that is, the Doctrine) of the Apostles and Prophets.

Quest. Are all the Books in the Bible of the same Divine Authority?

Answ. Those which we call Canonical.

Quest. Why are the Scriptures called Canonical?

Answ. Because the Word is a Rule of Faith, a Canon to direct our Lives. The
Word is the Judge of Controversies, the Rock of Infallibility; that only is to
be received for Truth, which is consonant to, and agrees with Scripture, as the
Transcript with the Original. All Maxims in Divinity are to be brought to the
Touchstone of Scripture, as all Measures are brought to the Standard.

Quest. Are the Scriptures a complete Rule?

Answ. The Scripture is a full and perfect Canon, containing in it all things
necessary to Salvation: 2 Timothy 3.15. Thou have from a Child known the Holy
Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise to salvation. It shows the
credenda, what we are to believe, and agenda, what we are to practice. It gives
us an exact Model of Religion, and perfectly Instructs us in the deep Things of
God. The Papists therefore make themselves guilty, who go to seek out Scripture
with their Traditions, which they equalize it: The Council of Trent says, That
the Traditions of the Church of Rome are to be received pari pietatis affectu,
with the same Devotion that Scripture is to be received with: So bring
themselves under that Curse Rev. 22.18. If any Man shall add unto these things,
God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this Book.

Quest. What is the main Scope and End of Scripture?

Answ. To Chalk out a Way to Salvation: It makes a clear Discovery of Christ.
John 20.31. These things are written that ye might believe that Jesus is the
Christ, and that believing ye might have Life through his Name. The Design of
the Word is to be an Examen whereby our Grace is to be tried; a Sea-mark to
show us what Rocks we are to avoid. The Word is to sublimate and quicken our
Affections; it is to be our Directory and Consolatory; it is to waft us over to
the Land of Promise.

Quest. Who shall have the Power of interpreting Scriptures?

The Papists do assert that it is in the Power of the Church. If you ask who
they mean by the Church? They say the Pope, who is Head of it, and he is
Infallible; so Bellarmine. But that Assertion is false, because many of the
Popes have been ignorant and vicious, as Platina affirms, who writes of the
Lives of the Popes: Pope Liberius was an Arian, and Pope John XXII. denied the
Immortality of the Soul; therefore Popes are no fit Interpreters of Scripture:
Who then?

Ans. The Scripture is to be its own Interpreter, or rather the Spirit speaking
in it: nothing can cut the Diamond but the Diamond; nothing can interpret
Scripture but Scripture; the Sun best discovers its self by its own Beams; the
Scripture interprets itself in easy places to the Understanding. But the
Question is concerning hard places of Scripture, where the weak Christian is
ready to wade beyond his depth, who shall interpret here?

Resp. In the Church God has appointed, Ordo docentium and discentium, some to
Expound and Interpret Scripture; therefore he has given Gifts to Men; the
several Pastors of Churches like bright Constellations give light to dark
Scriptures, Mal. 2.7. The priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they
should seek the law at his mouth.

Quest. But this is to pin our Faith upon Men?

Resp. We are to receive nothing for current but what is agreeable to the Word;
as God has given to his Ministers Gifts for the interpreting obscure places,
so he has given to his People so much of the Spirit of Discerning, that they
can tell (at least in things necessary to Salvation) what is consonant to
Scripture, and what is not, 1 Cor. 12.10. To one is given a spirit of
prophecy, to another discerning of spirits: God has endued his People* with
such a measure of Wisdom and Discretion that they can discern between Truth and
Error, and judge what is sound and what spurious, Acts 17.11. The Bereans
searched the scriptures daily, whether those things were so: They weighed the
Doctrine they heard, whether it was agreeable to Scripture, though Paul and Silas
were their Teachers, 2 Timothy 3.16.

Use 1. See the wonderful goodness of God, who besides the Light of Nature,
has committed to us the Sacred Scriptures. The Heathens are inveloped with
Ignorance; Psalm. 147.20. As for his judgments, they have not known them. They
have the Oracles of the Sybils, but not the Writings of Moses and the Apostles.
How many live in the Region of Death, where this bright Star of Scripture never
appeared. We have this blessed Book of God to resolve all our Cases, to chalk
out a Way of Life to us. John 14.22. Lord! How is it thou will show thy self to
us, and not unto the World?

2. Seeing God has given us his written Word to be our Directory, this takes
away all Excuses from Men. No Man can say I went wrong for want of a Light; no,
God has given thee his Word, as a Lamp to thy feet; therefore now if thou
go wrong, thou do it wilfully. No Man can say, If I had known the Will of
God, I would have obeyed; no, thou art inexcusable, O Man, God has given thee
a Rule to go by, he has written his Law with his own finger, Therefore now if
thou obeyest not, thou have no Apology left. If a Master leaves his Mind in
writing with his Servant, and tells him what Work he will have done, yet the
Servant neglects the Work, that Servant is left without Excuse. John 15.22. Now
ye have no Cloak for your sin.

Use 2. Is all Scripture of Divine Inspiration, is it a Book made by GOD
himself? Then this reproves, 1. The Papists who take away part of Scripture,
and so clip the King of Heaven's Coin; they expunge the second Commandment out
of their Catechisms, because it makes against Images; it is usual with them if
they meet with any thing in Scripture which they dislike, either they put a
false Gloss upon it, or if that will not do, pretend it is corrupted; these are
like Ananias who kept back part of the Money, Acts 5.2. so they keep back part
of Scripture from the People. This is an high Affront to God, to deface and
obliterate any part of his Word: by this they bring themselves under that
Praemunire, Rev. 22.19. If any man shall take away from the words of the book
this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life. Is all
Scripture of Divine Inspiration? 2. It condemns the Antinomians that lay aside
the Old Testament as useless and out of date; they call them Old Testament
Christians: God has stamped a Divine Majesty upon both Testaments, and till
they can show me where God has given a Repeal to the Old it stands in force.
The two Testaments are the two Wells of Salvation; the Antinomians would stop
up one of these Wells, they would dry up one of the Breasts of Scripture. There
is much Gospel in the Old Testament; The Comforts of the Gospel in the New
Testament have their rise from the Old. The great Promise of the Messiah is in
the Old Testament, A Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son: -- Nay, I say more,
the Moral Law in some part of it speaks Gospel, I am the Lord thy God; here is
the pure Wine of the Gospel. The Saints great Charter where God promises to
pour clean water on them, and put his spirit within them, is to be found
primarily in the Old Testament, Ezekiel. 36.26. So that they who go to take away
the Old Testament, do as Sampson, Pull down the pillars; they would take away
the Pillars of a Christian's Comfort. 3. It condemns the Enthusiasts who
pretending the Spirit, lay aside the whole Bible, they say the Scripture is a
Dead Letter, and they live above it. What Impudency is this? till we are above
Sin we shall not be above Scripture; let not Men talk of a Revelation from the
Spirit, suspect it to be an Imposture; the Spirit of God acts regularly, it
works in and by the Word; and he that pretends a new Light, which is either
above the Word, or contrary to it, abuses both himself and the Spirit; his
Light is borrowed from him who transforms himself into an Angel of Light. 4. It
condemns the Slighters of Scripture; such are they who can go whole Weeks and
Months and never read the Word; they lay it aside as rusty Armor; they prefer
a Play or Romance before Scripture, the Magnalia legis are to them Minutula. O
how many can be looking their Faces in a Glass all the Morning, but their Eyes
begin to be sore when they look upon a Bible: Heathens die in the want of
Scripture, and these in the contempt of it. They surely must needs go wrong who
slite their Guide; such as lay the reins upon the neck of their Lusts, and
never use the curbing Bit of Scripture to check them, are carried to Hell and
never stop. 5. It condemns the Abusers of Scripture: 1. Who do mud and poison
this pure Crystal Fountain with their corrupt Glosses, who rest Scripture, 2
Pet. 3.16. The Greek word is (...), they set it upon the Rack; they give wrong
Interpretations of it, not comparing Scripture with Scripture; as the
Antinomians pervert that Scripture, Numb. 23.21. He has not beheld iniquity in
Jacob. Hence they infer, God's People may take liberty in sin, because God sees
no sin in them. It Is true, God sees not sin in his People with an Eye of
Revenge, but he sees it with an Eye of Observation. He sees not sin in them, so
as to damn them, but he sees it so as to be angry, and severely to punish them.
Did not David find it so when he cried out of his broken bones? In like manner
the Arminians wrest Scripture: John 5.40. Ye will not come to me: here they
bring in Free Will. This Text shows 1. how willing God is that we should have
Life; 2. that sinners may do more than they do; they may improve the Talents
God has given them: but it does not prove the Power of Free Will, for it is
contrary to that Scripture, John 6.44. No man can come to me, except the Father
which has sent me draw him. These therefore wring the Text so hard as they
make the Blood come; they do not compare Scripture with Scripture. 2. Who do
jest with Scripture. When they are sad they take the Scripture as their Lute or
Minstrel to play with, and so drive away the sad Spirit; as that Drunkard I
have read of, who having drunk off his Cups, called to some of his Fellows,
Give us of your Oil for our Lamps are gone out. In the fear of God take heed of
this. Eusebius tells us of one who took a piece of Scripture to make a Jest of,
who was presently struck with Frenzy, and run mad. And it is a saying of Luther,
Quos Deus vult perdere, etc. whom God intends to destroy, he gives them leave
to play with Scripturre.

Use 3. of Exhortation. If the Scripture be of Divine Inspiration, then be
exhorted 1. to study the Scripture; it is a Copy of God's Will: be Scripture
Men, Bible Christians. I adore the fullness of Scripture, says Tertullian. In
the Book of God are scattered many Truths as so many Pearls. John 5.39. Search
the Scriptures: Search as for a Vein of Silver. This blessed Book will fill
your Head with Knowledge, and your Heart with Grace. God wrote the two Tables
with his own Fingers, and if God took pains to write, well may we take pains ^o
read. Apollos was mighty in the Scriptures, Acts 18.24. The Word is our Magna
Charta for Heaven, shall we be ignorant of our Charter? Col. 3.16. Let the word
of God dwell in you richly. The Memory must be a Table Book where the Word is
written. To make us read the Word, consider 1. There is Majesty sparkling in
every Line of Scripture. Take but one Instance, Isa. 63.1. Who is this that
comes from Edom, with died garments from Bozrah? this that is glorious in his
apparel, traveling in the greatness of his strength? I that speak in
righteousness, mighty to save. Behold here a lofty magnificent style! what
Angel could speak after this manner. Iunius was converted by reading one Verse
of John; he beheld a Majesty in it beyond all Humane Rhetoric. 2. There is
Melody in Scripture. This is that blessed Harp which drives away sadness of
Spirit. Hear the sounding of this Harp a little, 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the
World to save sinners; he took not only our Flesh upon him, but our Sins. And
Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will
give you rest. How sweetly does this Harp of Scripture sound? what heavenly
Music does it make in the Ears of a distressed sinner, especially when the
Finger of God's Spirit touches upon this Instrument. 3. There is Divinity in
Scripture. It contains the Marrow and Quintessence of Religion. The Scripture
is a Rock of Diamonds, a Mystery of Piety; the Lips of Scripture have Grace
poured into them. The Scripture speaks of Faith, Self-denial, and all the
Graces, which as a Chain of Pearl adore a Christian. The Scripture excites to
Holiness, it treats of another World, it gives a prospect of Eternity. Oh then
search the Scriptures! Make the Word familiar to you. Had I the Tongue of
Angels, I could not sufficiently set forth the Excellency of Scripture. It is a
spiritual Optic Glass in which we behold God's Glory; it is the Tree of Life,
the Oracle of Wisdom, the Rule of Manners, the heavenly Seed of which the New
Creature is formed, James 1.18. The two Testaments (says Austin) are the two
Breasts which every Christian must suck, that he may get spiritual Nourishment.
The Leaves of the Tree of Life were for Healing, Rev. 22.2. so these Holy
Leaves of Scripture, like those Leaves, are for the healing of our Souls. The
Scripture is profitable for all things: If we are deserted, here is the spiced
Wine that cheers the heavy heart: If we are pursued by Satan, here is the Sword
of the Spirit to resist him: If we are diseased with Sins leprosy, here are the
Waters of the Sanctuary, both to Cleanse and Cure. Oh, then search the
Scriptures! There is no danger in tasting this Tree of Knowledge. There was a
Penalty laid at first, that we might not taste of the Tree of Knowledge, Genesis
3.17. In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die. But there is
no danger of plucking this Tree of Holy Scripture; if we do not eat of this
Tree of Knowledge, we shall surely die: Oh then read the Scriptures! -- Time
may come when the Scriptures may be kept from us.

Quest. How should we so search the Scriptures as to find Life?

Answ. 1. Read the Bible with Reverence; think every Line you read God is
speaking to you. The Ark wherein the Law was put was over-laid with pure Gold,
and was carried on Bars that the Levites might not touch it, Exodus 25.14. And
why was this? but to breed in the People Reverence to the Law. 2. Read with
Seriousness. It Is Matter of Life and Death: By this Word you must be tried;
Conscience and Scripture are the Jury God will proceed by in Judging of you. 3.
Read the Word with Affection. Get your Hearts quickened with the Word; go to it
to fetch fire. Luke 24.31. Did not our hearts burn within us. Labor that the
Word may not only be a Lamp to direct, but a Fire to warm. Read the Scripture
not only as an History, but as a Love-Letter sent to you from God, which may
affect your Hearts. 4. Pray that the same Spirit that wrote the Word may assist
you in the reading of it; that God's Spirit would show you the wonderful Things
of his Law. Go near, says God to Philip, join thy self to this Chariot, Acts
8.29. So when God's Spirit joins himself with this Chariot of the Word, then it
becomes effectual.

2. Be exhorted to prize the Word written, Job 23.12. David valued the Word
more precious than Gold. What would the Martyrs have given for a Leaf of the
Bible.! The Word is the Field where Christ the Pearl of price is hid. In this
Sacred Mine we dig, not for a Wedge of Gold, but a Weight of Glory. 1. The
Scripture is a Sacred Collyrium, or Eye Salve to illuminate us. Prove. 6.23. The
Commandment is a Lamp, and the Law is Light. (...), Clem Alexandrinus. The
Scripture is the Card and Compass by which we Sail to the New Jerusalem. 2. The
Scripture is a Sovereign Cordial in all Distresses. What are the Promises but
the Water of Life to renew fainting Spirits? Is it sin troubles? there is a
Scripture Cordial Psalm. 65.3. Iniquities prevail against me; as for our
Transgressions thou shall purge them away; or as it is in Hebrew Te eapperem,
Thou shall cover them. Is it outward Affliction disquiets? there is a Scripture
Cordial Psalm. 91.15. I will be with him in trouble; not only to behold, but to
uphold. Thus, as in the Ark was laid up Manna, Promises are laid up as Manna in
the Ark of Scripture. 3. The Scripture will make us wise: Wisdom is above
Troubles. Psalm. 119.104. By thy Precepts I get understanding. What made Eve so
desire the Tree of Knowledge, Genesis 3.6. It was a Tree to make one wise. The
Scriptures teach a Man to know himself; they discover Satan's (...) snares and
stratagems, 2 Cor. 2.11. They make one wise to Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. O then
highly prize the Scriptures! I read of Queen Elizabeth, at her Coronation she
received the Bible presented to her, with both her Hands, and kissing it, laid
it to her Breast, saying, That that Book had ever been her chiefest delight.

3. If the Scripture is of Divine Inspiration, Believe the Word. The Romans,
that they might gain Credit to their Laws, reported that they were inspired by
the Gods at Rome. O give credence to the Word! it is breathed from God's own
Mouth. Hence arises all the profaneness of Men, they do not believe
Scripture. Isa. 53.1. Who has believed our Report? Did you believe the
glorious Rewards the Scripture speaks of, would you not give diligence to make
your Elections sure? Did you believe the Infernal Torments the Scripture speaks
of, would not this put you into a cold sweat, and cause a trembling at heart
for sin? But People are in part Atheists, they give but little credit to the
Word, therefore they are so impious, and draw such dark shadows in their Lives.
Learn to realize Scripture, get your hearts wrought to a firm belief of it.
Some think, if God should send an Angel from Heaven, and declare his Mind, then
they should rather believe him; or if he should send one from the damned, and
preach the Torments of Hell all in Flames, then they would believe. But Luke
16.31. If they believe not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded though one arose from the dead. God is wise, and he thinks this way
fittest to make his Mind known to us by writing; and such as will not be
Convinced by the Word, shall be Judged by the Word. The belief of the Scripture
is of high importance: It is the belief of Scripture that will enable us to
resist Temptation: 1 John 2.14. The Word of God abides in you, and ye have
overcome the wicked one. It Is the belief of Scripture conduces much to our
Sanctification; therefore these two are put together, Sanctification of the
Spirit, and Belief of the Truth. ^ Thessalonians. ^.13. If the Word written be not
believed, it is like writing on the Wate^, which takes no impression.

4. Love the Word written. Psalm. 119.97. O how love I thy Law. Sint (...)
deliciae meae Scripturae sanctae: Lord (says Augustine) let the holy
Scriptures be my chaste delight. Chrysostom compares the Scripture to a Garden,
every Truth is a fragrant Flower, which we should wear, not in our Bosom, but
our Heart. David tasted the Word sweeter than the Honey and the Honeycomb,
Psalm. 19.10. There is that in Scripture may breed delight: It shows us the way
to Riches, Deuteronomy. 28.5. Prove. 3.16. to long Life, Psalm. 34.12. to a Kingdom,
Hebr. 12.28. Well then may we count those the sweetest hours which are spent in
reading the holy Scriptures: Well may we say with the Prophet, Ier. 15.16. Thy
words were sound, and I did eat them, and they were the joy and rejoicing of my
heart.

5. Conform to Scripture. Let us lead Scripture Lives: O that the Bible might
be seen printed in our Lives! Do what the Word commands. Obedience is an
excellent way of Commenting upon the Bible. Psalm. 86.11. I will walk in thy
Truth. Let the Word be the Sun-Dial by which you set your Life. What are we the
better for having the Scripture, if we do not direct all our Speeches and
Actions according to it? What is a Carpenter the better to have his Rule about
him, if he sticks it at his back, and never makes use of it for the measuring
and squaring his work? So what are we the better for the Rule of the Word, if
we do not make use of it, and regulate our Lives by it? How many swerve and
deviate from the Rule. The Word teaches to be sober and temperate, but they
are drunk; to be chaste and holy, but they are profane; they go quite from the
Rule. The Scriptures are Canonical, but their Lives are Apocryphal: What a
dishonor is this to Religion, for Men to live in a Contradiction to Scripture?
The Word is called a Light to our feet, Psalm. 119.105. It is not only a Light
to our Eyes to mend our sight, but to our Feet to mend our walk. O let us lead
Bible Conversations!

6. Contend for Scripture. Though we should not be of contentious Spirits, yet
we ought to contend for the Word of God; this Jewel is too precious to be
parted with; Prove. 4.13. Keep her, for she is thy Life. The Castle of Scripture
is beset with Enemies, Heretics fight against it, we must therefore (...),
contend for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, Jude 3. The Scripture is
our Book of Evidences for Heaven; shall we part with our Evidences? The Saints
of old were both Advocates and Martyrs for Truth; they would hold fast
Scripture, though it were with the loss of their Lives.

7. Be thankful to God for the Scriptures. What a Mercy is it that God has not
only acquainted us what his Will is, but that he has made it known to us by
writing. In the old Times God did reveal his Mind by Revelations, but the Word
written is a surer way of knowing God's Mind than by Revelation. 2 Pet. 1.19.
This Voice which came from heaven we heard, we have also a more sure word of
prophecy. The Devil is God's Ape, and he can transform himself into an Angel of
Light; he can deceive with false Revelations: As I have heard of one who had
(as he thought) a Revelation from God to Sacrifice his Child, as Abraham had,
whereupon he following this Impulsion of the Devil, did kill his Child. Thus
Satan often deceives People with Delusions instead of Divine Revelations;
therefore we are to be thankful to God for revealing his Mind to us by Writing:
We have a more sure word of prophecy. We are not left under a doubtful
Suspense that we should not know what to believe, but we have an Infallible
Rule to go by. The Scripture is our Pole Star to direct us to Heaven, it shows
us every step we are to take: when we go wrong it instructs us, when we go
right it comforts us. And it is matter of Thankfulness, that the Scriptures are
made intelligible by being translated.

8. Adore God's distinguishing Grace, if you have felt the Authority and Power
of the Word upon your Conscience; if you can say as David, Psalm. 119.50. Thy
word has quickened me. Christian, bless God that he has not only given thee
his Word to be a Rule of Holiness, but his Grace to be a Principle of Holiness:
Bless God that he has not only written his Word, but sealed it upon thy Heart,
and made it effectual: Can thou say it is of Divine Inspiration, because thou
have felt it to be of lively Operation. O Free Grace! that God should send out
this Word and heal thee; that he should heal thee and not others; that the same
Scripture which is to them a dead Letter, should be to thee a Savior of Life.

That there is a GOD.
Q. III.
Quest. III. WHat do the Scriptures principally Teach?

Resp. The Scriptures principally teach what Man is to believe concerning GOD,
and what Duty GOD requires of Man.

Quest. What is God?

Resp. God is a Spirit, Infinite, Eternal, and Unchangeable in his Being,
Wisdom, Power, Holiness, Justice, Goodness, and Truth. Here is 1. something
implied, That there is a God. 2. Expressed, that he is a Spirit. 3. What kind
of Spirit.

1. Implied, that there is a God: The question, What is God? takes it for
granted that there is a God: the belief of God's Essence is the Foundation of
all Religious Worship, Heb. 11.6. He that comes to God must believe that he is
(...); there must be a first Cause which gives a Being and Existence to all
things besides. We come to know that there is a God, 1. By the Book of Nature,
the Notion of a Deity is engraven in Man's Heart, it is demonstrable by the
Light of Nature; I think it hard for a Man to be a natural Atheist, he may wish
there were no God, he may dispute against a Deity, but he cannot in his
Judgment believe there is no God, unless by accumulated Sin his Conscience be
seared, and he has such a Lethargy upon him, that he has sinned away his very
Sense and Reason. 2. We come to know that there is a God by his Works; and this
is so evident a Demonstration of a Godhead, that the most Atheistical Spirits
when they have considered these Works of God, have been forced to acknowledge
some Wise and Supreme Power the Maker of these Things; as it is reported of
Galen and others. 1. We will begin with the greater World, 1. The Creation of
the glorious Fabric of Heaven and Earth; sure there must be some Architect or
first Cause, the World could not make itself: Who could hang the Earth on
Nothing, but the Great God? Who could provide such rich Furniture for the
Heavens, the glorious Constellations, the Firmament bespangled with such
glittering Lights? all this speaks a Deity. We may see God's Glory blazing in
the Sun, twinkling in the Stars. Who could give the Earth its Clothing, cover
it with Grass and Corn, adorn it with Flowers, enrich it with Gold, only God,
Job 28.4. Who but God could make the sweet Music in the Heavens, cause the
Angels to join in consort, and sound forth the Praises of their Maker? Job
38.7. When the morning-stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for
joy. If a Man should go into a far Country, and see stately Edifices there, he
would never imagine that these could build themselves, but that some greater
Power built them: To imagine that the Work of the Creation was not framed by
God, is as if we should conceive a curious Landscape to be drawn by a Pensil
without the Hand of a Limner: Acts 17.24. God that made the world, and all
things therein. To Create is proper to a Deity. 2. The wise Gubernation of all
things evince there is a God: God is the great Superintendent of the World, he
holds the Golden Reins of Government in his Hand, guiding all things most
regularly and harmoniously to their proper end; who that eyes Providence, but
must be forced to acknowledge there is a God? Providence is the Queen and
Governness of the World: it is the Hand that turns the Wheel of the whole
Creation; Providence sets the Sun its Race, the Sea its Bounds. If God should
not guide the World, things would run into an Ataxy and Confusion. When one
looks on a Clock, and sees the motion of the Wheels, the striking of the
Hammar, the hanging of the Plummets, he would say there were some Artificer did
make it, and put it into that Order: So when we see the excellent Order and
Harmony in the Universe, the Sun that great Luminary dispensing its Light and
Heat to the World, without which the World were but a Grave or Prison, the
Rivers sending forth their silver Streams to refresh the Bodies of Men, and
prevent a Drought, and every Creature acting within its Sphere, and keeping its
due Bounds, we must needs acknowledge there is a God who wisely orders and
governs all these things. Who could set this great Army of the Creatures in
their several Ranks and Squadrons, and keep them in their constant March, but
he whose Name is, The LORD of Hosts? And as God does wisely dispose all things
in the whole Regiment of the Creatures, so by his Power he does support them:
Did God suspend and withdraw his Influence never so little, the Wheels of the
Creation would unpin, and the Axle-tree break asunder. 3. The Motion of the
Creatures: All Motion (as the Philosophers say) is from something that is
unmovable. As for Example: The Elements are moved by the Influence and Motion
of the heavenly Bodies: The Sun and Moon, and these Planets, are moved by the
highest Orb, called Primum Mobile; now if one should ask, Who moves that
highest Orb, or the first Mover of the Planets? Sure it can be no other hand
but God himself.

2. Let us speak of Man who is a Microcosm, or lesser World: The excellent
Contexture and Frame of his Body who is wrought curiously as with Needle Work,
Psalm. 139.15. I was curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth. And the
Endowment of this Body with a noble Soul; who but God could make such an Union
of different Substances, Flesh and Spirit? In him we live, and move, and have
our being. The quick acute Motion of every Part of the Body, shows that there
is a God; we may see something of him in the sparkling of the Eye: And if the
Cabinet of the Body be so curiously wrought, what is the Jewel? The Soul has a
Celestial Brightness in it, as Damascen says. It Is a Diamond set in a Ring of
Clay: What noble Faculties is the Soul endowed with? Understanding, Will,
Affections, which are a Glass of the Trinity, as Plato speaks. The Matter of
the Soul is Spiritual; it is a Divine Sparkle lighted from Heaven: and being
spiritual is immortal, as Scaliger notes. Anima non senescit; the Soul does not
wax old, it lives for ever. And who could create a Soul enobled with such rare
Angelical Properties, but God? We must needs say as the Psalmist, It is he that
has made us, and not we our selves, Psalm 100.3.

2. We may prove a Deity by our own Conscience. Conscience is God's Deputy or
Vicegerent. Conscience is a Witness of a Deity. If there were no Bible to tell
us there is a God, yet Conscience might. Conscience, as the Apostle says,
either accuses or excuses, Romans 2.15. Conscience acts in order to an higher
Judicatory. 1. Natural Conscience being kept free from gross sin, excuses.
When a Man does Virtuous Actions, lives soberly and righteously, obeserves the
golden Maxim, Doing to others as he would have them do to him, then Conscience
approves, and says, well done. Conscience, like a Be, gives Honey. 2. Natural
Conscience in the Wicked does accuse. When Men go against the Light of
Conscience, then they feel the Worm of Conscience. Eheu quis intus scorpio?
Sen. Conscience being sinned against, spits fire in Men's faces, fills them with
shame and horror. When the Sinner sees an Handwriting on the Wall of
Conscience, his Countenance is changed. Many have hanged themselves to quiet
their Conscience. Tiberius the Emperor, a bloody Man, felt the Lashes of his
Conscience, he was so haunted with that Fury, that he told the Senate, he
suffered Death daily. And what is it should put a Man's Conscience into such an
Agony, but the Impression of a Deity, and the Thoughts of coming before God's
Tribunal. Those who are above all Humane Laws, yet are subject to the Checks of
their own Conscience. And it is observable, the nearer the Wicked approach to
Death, the more they are terrified, and Conscience gives a louder Alarm to
them; And whence is this, but from the apprehension of Judgment approaching.
The Soul being sensible of its Immortal Nature, trembles at him who never
cease to Live, and therefore will never cease to Punish.

3. That there is a God, appears by the Consent of Nations, by the Universal
Vote and Suffrage of all. Nulla gens tam barbara cui non insideat haec
persuasio Deum esset, Tully; No Nation so barbarous (says Tully) as not to
believe there is a God. Though the Heathen did mistake in their Devotion, they
did not worship the true God, yet they worshipped a God. They set up an Altar
(...), to the unknown God, Acts 17.22. They knew a God should be worshipped,
though they knew not the God whom they worshipped. Some did worship Jupiter,
some Neptune, some Mars: rather than not worship something, they would worship
any thing.

4. That there is a God, appears by his Prediction of Future Things. He who can
foretell things which shall surely come to pass, is the True God. God foretold
that a Virgin should conceive, he prefixed the time when the Messiah should be
cut off, Dan. 9.76. he foretold the Captivity of the Jews in Babylon, and who
should be their Deliverer, Isa. 45.1. This is such a strong Argument to prove a
Deity, as God himself uses it to prove he is the True God, and that all the
Gods of the Heathens were Fictions and Nullities, Isa. 41.22. Testimonium
Divinitatis est Veritas Divinationis, Tertul. To foretell Things contingent, and
which depend upon no natural Causes, is proper to a Deity.

5. That there is a God, appears by God's unlimited Power and Sovereignty. He
who can work, and none hinder him, is the True God; but God can do so, Isa.
43.13. I will work, and who shall let it. Nothing can hinder Action but some
Superior Power; but there is no Power above God; all Power that is, is by him,
therefore all Power is under him: he has a mighty Arm, Psalm. 89.13. He sees
the Designs Men drive on against him, and plucks off their Chariot Wheels; he
makes Diviners mad, Isa. 44.25. he cutteth off the Spirit of Princes: He
bridleth the Sea, gives check to the Leviathan, binds the Devils in Cains; he
acts pro arbitrio, he does what he will, I will work, and who shall let it.

6. There are Devils, therefore there is a God. Atheists cannot deny but there
are Devils, and then they must grant there is a God. We read of diverse
possessed with the Devil. The Devils are called in Scripture, Cashegnirini,
Hairy ones, because they often appeared in the form of Goats or Satyrs. Gerson in
his Book De probatione Spirituum, tells us how Satan on a time appeared to an
holy Man in a most glorious manner, professing himself to be Christ; the old
Man answered, I desire not to see my Savior here in this Desert, it shall
suffice me to see him in Heaven. Now if there be a Devil, then there is a God.
Socrates an Heathen, when he was accused at his Death, confessed that, as he
thought there was a malus genius, an Evil Spirit, so he thought there was a
Good.

Use 1. Seeing there is a God, this reproves such Atheistical Fools as deny it.
Epicurus denied that there was a Providence, saying, That all things fell out
by Chance, Diagoras. He that says there is no God, is the wickedest Creature
that is, he is worse then a Thief, who does but take away our Goods from us,
but the Atheist would take away our God from us: Joh. 20. They have taken away
my Lord. So we may say of Atheists, they would take away our God from us, in
whom all our Hope and Comfort is laid up: Psalm. 14.1. The fool has said in his
heart, There is no God. He durst not speak it with his Tongue, but said it in
his Heart; he wished it. Sure none can be Speculative Atheists: The devils
believe and tremble, Jam. 2. I have read of one Arthur a professed Atheist, who
when he came to die, cried out, he was damned. But though there are few found
who say, There is no God, yet many deny him in their Practices: Tit. 1.16. In
works they deny him. Cicero said of Epicurus, Verbis reliquit Deos resustulit.
The World is full of Practical Atheism: most People live as if they did not
believe there was a God. Durst they lie, defraud, be unclean, if they believed
there were a God, who would call them to account? If an Indian, who never heard
of a God, should come among us, and have no other means to convince him of a
Deity, but the Lives of Men in our Age, sure he would be of Protagoras his
mind, who did hang in a doubtful suspense, and did question, Whether there were
a God; Utrum Dii sint non ausim affirmare.

Use 2. Seeing there is a God, he will deal righteously, and give just Rewards
to Men. Things seem to be carried in the World very unequally; The wicked
flourish, Psalm. 73. they who tempt God are delivered, Mal. 3.15. The ripe
Clusters of Grapes are squeezed into their Cup, and in the mean while, the
godly who wept for sin, and served God, are afflicted; Psalm. 102.9. I have
eaten Ashes like Bread, and mingled my drink with weeping. Evil Men enjoy all
the Good, and Good Men endure all the Evil. But seeing there is a God, he will
deal righteously with Men: Genesis 18.25. Shall not the Judge of all the World do
right? Offenders must come to punishment. The Sinners Deaths-day and Doomsday
is a coming; Psalm. 37.13. The Lord sees that his day is coming. While there is
an Hell the wicked shall be scourged enough; and while there is Eternity, they
shall lie there long enough; and God will abundantly compensate the faithful
Service of his People. They shall have their white Robes and Crown; Psalm.
58.11. Verily there is a Reward for the Righteous; verily he is a God that
judges in the Earth. Because God is God, therefore he will give forth glorious
Rewards to his People.

Use 3. Seeing there is a God, woe to all such as engage this God against them,
he lives for ever to be avenged upon them: Ezekiel. 22.14. Can thine heart endure,
or can thine hands be strong in the day that I shall deal with thee? Such as
pollute God's Sabbath, oppose his Saints, trampling these Jewels in the dust;
such as live in a contradiction to God's Word; these do engage the infinite
Majesty of Heaven against them, and how dismal will their Case be? Deuteronomy. 32.41.
If I whet my glittering Sword, and mine Hand take hold of Judgment, I will
render Vengeance to mine Enemies; I will make mine Arrows drunk with Blood,
etc. If it be so terrible to hear the Lion roar, what is it when he begins to
tear his Prey? Psalm. 50.22. Consider this ye that forget God, least I tear you
in pieces. O that Men would think of this, who go on in Sin! shall we engage
the great God against us? God strikes slow, but heavy: Job 40.9. Have thou an
arm like God? Can thou strike such a blow? God is the best Friend, but the
worst Enemy. If he can look Men into their Grave, how far can he throw them?
Who knows the power of his wrath? Psalm. 90.11. What Fools are they who for a
Drop of Pleasure drink a Sea of Wrath. Paracelsus speaks of a Frenzy some
have which will make them die Dancing: Sinners go Dancing to Hell.

Use 4. Seeing there is a God, let us firmly believe this great Article of our
Creed. What Religion can there be in Men, if they do not believe a Deity? He
that comes to God must believe that he is. To worship God, and pray to him, and
not believe there is a God, Irrisio Dei est, it is to put a high Scorn and
Contempt upon God. Believe that God is the only true God, such a God as he has
revealed himself in his Word, A lover of righteousness, and hater of
wickedness, Psalm. 45.7. The real belief of a Deity gives life to all Religious
Worship: the more we believe the Truth and Infiniteness of God, the more Holy
and Angelical we are in our Lives. Whether we are alone or in Company God sees
us; he is (...), the Heart-searcher; the belief of this would make us live
always as under God's eye, Psalm. 16.8. I have set the Lord always before me.
The belief of a Deity would be a Bridle to Sin, a Spur to Duty; it would add
Wings to Prayer, and Oil to the Lamp of our Devotion: the belief of a Deity
would cause dependence upon God in all our Streights and Exigencies: Genesis 17.1.
I am God all-sufficient; a God that can supply all your Wants, scatter all your
Fears, resolve all your Doubts, conquer all your Temptations: The Arm of God's
Power can never be shrunk, he can create Mercy for us, and therefore can help
and not be beholding to the Creature. Did we believe there is a God; we should
so depend on his Providence as not to use any indirect Means; we would not run
ourselves into Sin to rid ourselves out of Trouble: 2 Kings 1.3. Is it not
because there is not a God in Israel, that ye go to enquire of Baal-zebub the
God of Ekron? When Men run to sinful Shifts, is it not because they do not
believe there is a God, or that he is All-sufficient?

2. Seeing there is a God, let us labor to get an interest in him, Psalm.
48.14. This God is our God. Two things will comfort us, Deity and Propriety:
since the Fall we have lost Likeness to God, and Communion with God; let us
labor to recover this lost Interest, and pronounce this Shibboleth my God,
Psalm. 43.5. It Is little Comfort to know there is a God, unless he be ours; God
offers himself to be our God, Jer. 31.33. I will be their God. And Faith
catches hold of the Offer, it appropriates God, and makes all that is in him
over to us to be ours, his Wisdom ours to teach us, his Holiness ours to
sanctify us* his Spirit ours to comfort us, his Mercy ours to save us. To be
able to say God is mine, is more then to have all the Mines of Gold and Silver.

3. Seeing there is a God, let us Serve and Worship him as God: It was an
Indictment brought in against them, Romans 1.21. They glorified him not as God.
1. Let us pray to him as to a God, Pray with fervency, Jam. 5.16. An effectual
fervent Prayer prevails much; this is both the Fire and the Incense, without
Fervency it is no Prayer. 2. Love him as a God, Deuteronomy. 5.6. Thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart. To love him with all the heart, is to give him
a Precedence in our Love, desire to let him have the Cream of our Affections;
to love him not only appretiatively but intensively, as much as we can. As the
Sunbeams united in a Burning-glass burn the hotter, so all our Affections
should be united, that our love to God may be more ardent. 3. Obey him as a
God: All Creatures obey him, the Stars fight his Battles, the Wind and Sea obey
him, Mark 4.41. much more should Man whom God has endu'd with a Principle of
Reason: He is God, and has a Sovereignty over us, therefore as we received
Life from him, so we must receive a Law from him, and submit to his Will in all
things: This is to kiss him with a Kiss of Loyalty, and it is to glorify him
as God.

GOD is a SPIRIT.
Q. IV.
Quest. IV. WHat is God?

Resp. God is a Spirit. 2. The Thing expressed. Ioh. 4.24. God is a Spirit. God
is essentia spiritualissima, Zanchy.

Quest. What do you mean when you say God is a Spirit?

Resp. By Spirit, I mean, God is an Immaterial Substance, of a pure, subtle,
unmixed Essence, not compounded of Body and Soul, without all Extension of
Parts. The Body is a dreggish Thing; The more Spiritual God's Essence is, the
more Noble and Excellent. The Spirits are the more refined part of the Wine.

Quest. Wherein does God differ from other Spirits?

1. The Angels are Spirits.

Resp. We must distinguish of Spirits. 1. The Angels are created, God is a
Spirit uncreate. 2. The Angels are Spirits, but are finate, and capable of
being annihilated. The same Power which made them is able to reduce them to
their first Nothing: but God is an infinite Spirit. 3. The Angels are confined
Spirits, they cannot be in duobus locis simul, they are confined to a place:
but God is an immense Spirit, and cannot be confined, being in all places at
once. 4. The Angels, though they are Spirits, yet they are but ministering
Spirits, Hebr. 1.14. Though they are Spirits, yet they are Servants. God is
(...), a Super-excellent Spirit, the Father of Spirits, Hebr. 12.9.

2. The Soul is a Spirit. Eccles. 12.7. The Spirit shall return unto God that
gave it.

Quest. How does God, being a Spirit, differ from the Soul?

Servetus and Osiander thought, That the Soul being infused, did convey into
Man the very Spirit and Substance of God; an absurd Opinion: for the Essence of
God is incommunicable.

Resp. Therefore, when it is said the Soul is a Spirit, it is meant, God has
made it intelligible, and has stamped upon it his Likeness, not his Essence.

Quest. But is it not said, That we are made Partakers of the Divine Nature?

Resp. By Divine Nature there, is meant Divine Qualities, 2 Pet. 1.4. We are
made Partakers of the Divine Nature, not by Identity or Union with the Divine
Essence, but by a transformation into the Divine Likeness. Thus you see how God
differs from other Spirits, Angels, and Souls of Men. He is a Spirit of
transcendent Excellency, the Father of Spirits.

Object. Against this Vorstius and the Anthropomorthites object, That in
Scripture an Humane Shape and Figure is given to God; he is said to have Eyes
and Hands?

Resp. It is contrary to the Nature of a Spirit to have a Corporeal Substance;
Luke 24.^9. Handle me, and see me, for a Spirit has not Flesh and Bones as ye
see me have. Bodily Members are ascribed to God, not properly, but
metaphorically, and in a borrowed sense; he is only set out to our Capacity: By
the right Hand of the Lord is meant his Power; by the Eyes of the Lord are
meant his Wisdom. Now that God is a Spirit, and is not capable of Bodily Shape
or Substance, probatur. 1. A Body is visible, but God is invisible, Therefore
he is a Spirit, 1 Timothy 6.16. whom no man has seen, nor can see, not by an Eye
of sense. 2. A Body is terminated, can be but in one place at once; but God is
ubique, in all places at once, Therefore he is a Spirit, Psalm. 139.7, 8. God's
Center is every where, and his Circumference is no where Iovis omnia pl^na --
. 3. A Body being compounded of integral Parts, may be dissolved; Quicquid
divisibile est corruptibile, but the Godhead is not capable of dissolution; he
can have no End from whom all things have their Beginning. So that it clearly
appears God is a Spirit, which adds to the Perfection of his Nature.

Use 1. If God be a Spirit, then he is impassible; he is not capable of being
hurt. Wicked Men may set up their Banners, and bend their Forces against God,
they are said (...), to fight against God, Acts 5.39. But what will this
fighting avail? what hurt can they do to the Deity? God is a Spirit, and
therefore cannot receive any hurtful impression: wicked Men may imagine Evil
against the Lord; Nahum. 1.9. What do ye imagine against the Lord? But God
being a Spirit, is impenetrable. The wicked may Eclipse his Glory, but cannot
touch his Essence. God can hurt his Enemies, but they cannot hurt him. Julian
might throw up his Dagger into the Air against Heaven, but could not touch the
Deity. God is a Spirit, invisible, how can the Wicked with all their Forces
hurt him, when they cannot see him? Hence all the Attempts of the Wicked
against God are foolish, and prove Abortive; Psalm. 2.3, 4. The Kings of the
Earth set themselves against the Lord, and against his Anointed. He that sits
in the Heavens shall laugh. He is a Spirit, he can wound them, but they cannot
touch him.

Use 2. If God be a Spirit, then it shows the folly of the Papists, who worship
him by Pictures and Images. Being a Spirit, we cannot make any Image to
represent him by; Deuteronomy. 4.12. The Lord spoke to you out of the midst of the
fire, ye heard the voice of the words, but saw no similitude.

1. God being a Spirit, is imperceptible, cannot be discerned, how then can
there be any Resemblance made of him? Isa. 40.18. To whom then will ye liken
God, or what likeness will ye compare unto him? How can you paint the Deity?
can we make an Image of that which we never saw? Ye saw no similitude. God is a
Spirit. It were a folly to go to make the Picture of the Soul, because it is a
Spiritual Thing, or to Paint the Angels, because they are Spirits.

Object. Are not the Angels in Scripture represented by the Cherubims?

Resp. There is Imago Personae and Officii, there is the Image of the Person,
and the Image that represents the Office. The Cherubims did not represent the
Persons of the Angels, but their Office. The Cherubims were made with Wings, to
show the swiftness of the Angels in discharge of their Office: and if we cannot
Picture the Soul, nor the Persons of the Angels, because they are Spirits, much
less can we make an Image or Picture of God, who is Infinite, and the Father of
Spirits.

2. God being a Spirit is Omnipresent; he is present in all places, Ier. 23.24.
Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, says the Lord? Therefore being every where
present, it is absurd to worship him by an Image. Were it not a foolish thing
to bow down to the King's Picture, when the King is present? So to go to
worship God's Image when God himself is present.

Quest. But how then shall we conceive of God being a Spirit, if we may make no
Image or Resemblance of him?

Resp. We must conceive of him Spiritually, viz. 1. In his Attributes; his
Holiness, Justice, Goodness, which are the Beams by which his Divine Nature
shines forth. 2. We must conceive of him as he is in Christ; Christ is the
Image of the invisible God, Col. 1.15. Set the Eyes of your Faith on Christ,
God-man. In Christ we see some Sparklings of the Divine Glory; in him there is
the exact Resemblance of all his Fathers Excellencies. The Wisdom, Love, and
Holiness of God the Father shine forth in Christ; John 14.9. He that has seen
me has seen the Father.

3. Infer. If God be a Spirit, it shows us, that the more spiritual we grow,
the more we grow like to God. To be earthly is to be unlike God. How do Earth
and Spirit agree? Phil. 3.19. Earthly ones may give for their Crest, the Mole
or Tortoise, that live in the Earth. What Resemblance is there between an
Earthly Heart, and him who is a Spirit? The more Spiritual any one is, the more
like God.

Quest. What is it to be Spiritual?

Resp. To be Refined and Sublimated, to have the Heart still in Heaven, to be
thinking of God and Glory, and to be carried up in a fiery Chariot of Love to
God, this is to be Spiritual; Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee: on
which Beza paraphraseth thus, Apage Terra, utinam tecum in Coelo essem! O that
I were in Heaven with thee! A Christian, who is taken off from these Earthly
Things, as the Spirits are taken off from the Lees, has a noble Spiritual
Soul, and does most resemble him who is a Spirit.

4 Infer. It shows us what that Worship is God requires of us, and is most
acceptable to him, viz. such a Worship as is suitable to his Nature, Spiritual
Worship; John 4.24. They which worship him, must worship him in Spirit and
Truth. Spiritual worship is the Virgin-worship. Though God will have the
Service of our Bodies, our Eyes and Hands lifted up, to testify to others that
Reverence we have of God's Glory and Majesty, yet chiefly he will have the
worship of the Soul: 1 Cor. 6.20. Glorify God in your body and in your spirit.
Spirit-worship God prizeth because it comes so near to his own Nature who is a
Spirit.

Quest. What is it to Worship God in the Spirit?

Resp. 1. To worship him without Ceremonies. The Ceremonies of the Law which
God himself ordained, are now abrogated and out of date; Christ the Substance
being come, the Shadows fly away; and therefore the Apostle calls the Legal
Ceremonies Carnal Rites, Heb. 9.10. and if not use those Jewish Ceremonies
which God did once appoint, then not those which he did never appoint.

Resp. 2. To worship God in Spirit, is to worship him, 1. With Faith in the
Blood of the Messiah, Heb. 11.9. And, 2. to worship him with the utmost Zeal
and Intensness of Soul: Acts 26.7. Our twelve tribes instantly serving God day
and night, (...), with Intensness of Spirit, not only constantly but instantly.
This is to worship God in the Spirit. The more Spiritual any Service is, the
nearer it comes to God who is a Spirit, and the more excellent it is; the
spiritual part of Duty is the Fat of the Sacrifice, it is the Soul and
Quintessence of Religion. The richest Cordials are made of Spirits, and the
best Duties are such as are of a Spiritual Nature. God is a Spirit, and will be
worshipped in Spirit: It is not Pomp of Worship but Purity which God accepts.
Repentance is not in the outward Severities used to the Body, Penance,
Fasting, and Chastising the Body, but it consists in the Sacrifice of a broken
Heart; Thanksgiving does not stand in Church-Musick, the Melody of an Organ,
but rather making Melody in the Heart to the Lord, Ephesians. 5.19. Prayer is not the
Tuning of the Voice into an heartless Confession, or telling over a few Beads,
but it consists in Sighs and Groans, Romans 8.26. When the Fire of Fervency is
put to the Incense of Prayer, now it ascends as a sweet Odor, that is, the
true Holy Water, not which the Pope sprinkles, but what is distilled from the
Limbeck of a Penitent Eye. Spirit-worship best pleases that God who is a
Spirit, Ioh. 4.23. The Father seeks such to worship him; to show the great
acceptance of such, and how God is delighted with Spiritual-worship. This is
the savoury Meat God loves. How few mind this, worshipping him who is a Spirit
in the Spirit; they give him more Dreggs then Spirits; they think it enough to
bring their Duties, but not their Hearts, which has made God disclaim those
very Services he himself appointed, Isa. 1.12. Ezekiel. 33.31. Let us then give
God Spirit-worship, this best suits with his Nature; a Sovereign Elixar full of
Virtue, may be given in a few drops: a little Prayer, if it be with the Heart
and Spirit, may have much Virtue and Efficacy in it. The Publican made but a
short Prayer, God be merciful to me a sinner, Luke 18.13. but it was full of
life and spirit, it came from the Heart, therefore was accepted.

Use 2. of Exhortation. Pray to God, that as he is a Spirit, so he will give us
of his Spirit. The Essence of God is incommunicable, but the Motions, the
Presence and Influences of his Spirit. When the Sun shines in a Room, not the
Body of the Sun is there, but the Light, Heat, and Influence of the Sun. God
has made a Promise of his Spirit, Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my Spirit within
you. Turn Promises into Prayers. O Lord, thou who art a Spirit, give me of thy
Spirit; I Flesh beg thy Spirit; thy enlightening, ^anctifying, quickening Spirit.
Melancthon's Prayer, Domine accende animam meam Spiritu tuo, Lord inflame my
Soul with thy Holy Spirit. How needful is his Spirit; we cannot do any Duty
without it in a lively manner: when this Wind blows upon our Sails, then we
move swiftly toward Heaven. Pray therefore that God will give us of the
Residue of his Spirit, Mal. 2.15. that we may move more vigorously in the
Sphere of Religion.

Use 3. of Comfort. As God is a Spirit, so the Reward that he gives is
Spiritual; that is the Excellency of it; as the chief Blessings he gives us in
this Life are Spiritual Blessings, Ephesians. 1.3. not Gold and Silver; he gives
Christ, his Love; he fills us with Grace; so the main Rewards he gives after
this Life are Spiritual, a Crown of Glory that fades not away, 1 Pet. 5.4.
Earthly Crowns fade, but the Believer's Crown being Spiritual is Immortal, a
never-fading Crown. It is impossible (says Julius Scaliger) for that which is
Spiritual to be subject to Change or Corruption. This may comfort a Christian
in all his Labors and Sufferings; he lays out himself for God, and has little
or no Reward here, but remember God, who is a Spirit, will give Spiritual
Rewards, a sight of his Face in Heaven, white Robes, a weight of Glory. Be not
then weary of God's Service, think of the Spiritual Reward, a Crown of Glory
which fades not away.

GOD is INFINITE.
Quest. WHat kind of Spirit is God?

Resp. He is Infinite; so he differs from all created Beings which are Finite.
Though Infinite may be applied to all God's Attributes, he is infinitely
Merciful, infinitely Wise, infinitely Holy, yet if we take Infiniteness
properly so, implies,

1. God's Omnipresency; the Greek word for Infinite (...) from (...), signifies
without Bounds or Limits: God is not confined to any place, he is Infinite, and
so is present in all places at once. His Center is everywhere, Divina essentia
nusquam inclusa aut exclusa, Aug. 1 Kings 8.27. Behold, the heaven, and heaven
of heavens cannot contain thee. This the Turks have a Notion of, they build
their Temples open on the top to show, that God cannot be confined to their
Temples or circumscribed, but is in all places by his Presence. God's Essence
is not limited either to the Regions above, or to the Terrestrial Globe, but
his whole Essence is everywhere. This is to be Infinite. As Philosophers say
of the Soul, it is. Tota in toto and tota in qualibet part: The Soul is in
every part of the Body, in the Eye, Heart, Foot; so we may say of God, he is
Ubique, his Essence is everywhere; his Circuit is in Heaven, and Earth, and
Sea, and he is in all places of his Circuit at once. This is to be Infinite.
God who bounds every thing else, is himself without Bounds: He sets Bounds to
the Sea, Huc usque, Hitherto shall thou come and no further. He sets Bounds to
the Angels, they like the Cherubims move and stand at his appointment, Ezekiel.
10.16. but he is Infinite, without Bounds. He who can span the Heavens, and
weigh the Earth in a pair of Scales, must needs be Infinite, Isa. 40.12.

Object. Vorstius, That God is in all places at once, but not in regard of his
Essence, but, Virtute and potentia, by his Virtue and Influence; as the Body of
the Sun is in Heaven, it only sends forth its Beams and Influences to the
Earth, or as a King who is in all places of his Kingdom Authoritative, by his
Power and Authority, but he is personally in his Throne.

Resp. But to answer, God who is Infinite is in all places at once, not only by
his Influence, but his Essence; for if his Essence fills all places, then he
must needs be there in Person. But, Ergo, Minor in Ier. 23.24. Do not I fill
heaven and earth?

Object. But does not God say Heaven is his Throne? Isa. 66.1.

Resp. It is also said, that an humble Heart is his Throne, Isa. 57.15. The
humble Heart is his Throne in regard of his gracious Presence, and Heaven is
his Throne in regard of his glorious Presence; and yet neither of these Thrones
will hold him, for the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him.

Object. But if God be Infinite in all places, then he is in places impure, and
he mingles with that Impurity?

Resp. Though God be in all places, in the Heart of a Sinner by his Inspection,
and in Hell by his Justice, yet he does not mingle with that Impurity, or
receive the least tincture of Evil: Divina natura non est immista rebus aut
sordibus inquinata, Aug. No more then the Sun shining on a Dunghill is defiled,
or its Beauty spotted; or then Christ going among Sinners was defiled, his
Godhead was a sufficient Antidote against Infection.

Reason why God must needs be Infinite in all places at once, not only in
regard of the Simplicity and Purity of his Nature, but in regard of his Power,
which being so glorious who can set him Bounds? or prescribe him a Circuit to
walk in? It Is as if the Drop should go to limit the Ocean, or the Star to set
the Sun its Bounds.

Use 1. It condemns the Papists who would make more things Infinite then the
Godhead, they hold that Christ's Body is in many places at once, that it is in
Heaven and in the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament: Though Christ as he is God
is Infinite, and in all places at once, yet as Man he is not; Christ when he
was on Earth his Manhood was not in Heaven, though his Godhead was; and now he
is in Heaven his Manhood is not on Earth though his Godhead be: Heb. 10.5. it is
spoken of Christ, A body have thou prepared me. This Body cannot be in all
places at once, for then it is no more a Body, but a Spirit; Christ's Body in
Heaven though it be Glorified, it is not Deified; it is not Infinite, for so it
must be if it be both in Heaven and in the Bread and Wine by Transubstantiation.

If God be Infinite, present in all places at once, then it is certain he
governs all things in his own Person; he needs no Proxies or Deputies to help
him carry on his Government. He is in all places at an instant, and manageth
all Affairs both in the World and Heaven. A King cannot be in all places of his
Kingdom in his own Person, therefore he is fain to govern by Deputies and
Vicegerents, and they often pervert Justice: but God being Infinite, needs no
Deputies, he is present in all places; he sees all with his own Eyes, and hears
all with his own Ears; he is everywhere in his own Person, therefore is fit to
be the Judge of the World, he will do every one Right.

If God be Infinite by his Omnipresency, then see the Greatness and Immensness
of the Divine Majesty* What a Great God do we serve? 1 Chr. 29.11. Thine, O
Lord, is the greatness, and the glory, and the majesty, and thou art exalted as
head above all. Well may the Scripture display the Greatness of his Glory, who
is Infinite in all places. He transcends our weak Conceptions, how can our
finite Understanding comprehend him who is Infinite? He is infinitely above all
our Praises, Neh. 9.5. Blessed be thy glorious name, which is exalted above all
blessing and praise. O what a poor Nothing is Man, when we think of God's
Infiniteness, as the Stars disappear at the rising of the Sun! O how does Man
shrink into nothing when Infinite Majesty shines forth in his Glory, Isa.
40.15. The nations are as a drop of the bucket, or the small dust of the
balance. O what a little of that Drop are we! The Heathens thought they had
sufficiently praised Jupiter, when they called him Great Jupiter. Of what
Immense Majesty is God who fills all places at once, his is excellent
Greatness, Psalm. 150.2.

If God be Infinite, filling Heaven and Earth, see what a full Portion the
Saints have, they have him for their Portion who is Infinite. His Fullness is an
Infinite Fullness; and he is infinitely sweet as well as infinitely full: If a
Conduit be filled with Wine, here is a sweet Fullness, but still it is Finite;
but God's is a sweet Fullness, and it is an Infinite. He is infinitely full of
Beauty, of Love, his Riches are called unsearchable, Ephesians. 3.8. because they are
Infinite. Stretch your Thoughts as much as you can, there is that in God
exceeds, it is an Infinite Fullness. He is said to do abundantly for us, above
all that we can ask, Ephesians. 3.20. What cannot an ambitious Spirit ask? he can
ask Crowns and Kingdoms, Millions of Worlds; but God can give more then we can
ask, because he is Infinite, nay, or think: We can think, what if all the Dust
were turned to Silver, if every Flower were a Ruby, every Sand in the Sea a
Diamond: yet God can give more then we can think, because he is Infinite! O how
rich are they who have the Infinite God for their Portion! Well might David
say, The Lord is the portion of my inheritance, the lines are fallen unto me in
pleasant places, and I have a goodly heritage, Ps. 16.5. We may go with the Be
from Flower to Flower, but we shall never have full Satisfaction till we come
to the Infinite God. Jacob said, I have enough, in Hebrew, Li col, I have all,
Genesis 33.11. because he had the Infinite God for his Portion. God being an
Infinite Fullness, there is no fear of Want for any of the Heirs of Heaven,
though there be Millions of Saints and Angels which have a share in God's
Riches, yet he has enough for them all, because he is Infinite. Though a
thousand Men behold the Sun, there is Light enough in the Sun for them all. Put
never so many Buckets into the Sea, there is Water enough in the Sea to fill
them. Though an innumerable Company of Saints and Angels are to be filled out
of God's Fullness, yet God being Infinite, he has abundantly enough to satisfy
them. God has Land enough to give to all his Heirs, there can be no want in
that which is Infinite.

If God be Infinite, he fills all places, is everywhere present; this is sad
to the Wicked, God is their Enemy and they cannot escape him, nor fly from
him, for he is every where present: they are never out of his Eye, nor out of
his Reach, Psalm. 21.8. Thy hand shall find out all thy enemies. What Caves or
Thickets can Men hide in that God cannot find them: go where they will he is
present, Psalm. 139.7. Whither shall I fly from thy presence? If a Man owes a
Debt to another, he may make some Escape, and fly into another Land where the
Creditor cannot find him; But whither shall I fly from thy presence? God is
Infinite, he is in all places, so that he will find out his Enemies and punish
them.

Object. But is it not said, Cain went out from the presence of the Lord, Genesis
4.16.

Resp. The meaning is, he went out from the Church of God, where were the
visible Signs of God's Presence, and where God did in a special manner manifest
his sweet Presence to his People. But Cain could not go out of God's sight, for
God being Infinite, is everywhere present. Sinners can neither go from an
Accusing Conscience, nor a Revenging God.

If God be everywhere present, then for a Christian to walk with God is not
impossible. God is not only in Heaven, but he is on Earth too, Isa. 66.1.
Heaven is his Throne, there he sits, the Earth is his Footstool, there he
stands. He is everywhere present, therefore we may come to walk with God:
Enoch walked with God, Genesis 5.21. If God were confined to Heaven, a trembling
Soul might think how can I Converse with God, how can I walk with him who lives
in Excelsis, above the upper Region; but God is not confined to Heaven, he is
Omnipresent, he is above us, yet he is about us, he is near to us, Acts 17.27.
Though he be not far from the Assembly of his Saints. He stands in the
Congregation of the Mighty, Psalm. 82.1. He is present with us, God is in every
one of us: so that here on Earth we may walk with God. In Heaven the Saints
rest with him, on Earth they walk with him. To walk with God is to walk by
Faith; we are said to draw nigh to God, Heb. 10.22. and to see him, Heb. 11.27.
as seeing him who is invisible, and to have Fellowship with him, Hos. 1.3. Or
(...), our Fellowship is with the Father. Thus we may take a turn with him
every day by Faith: ['Tis a slighting of God not to walk with him; if a King be
in presence, it is a slighting him to neglect him and walk with the Page]
there is no Walk in the World so sweet as to walk with God: Psalm. 89.15. They
shall walk in the light of thy countenance. Psalm. 138.5. Yea, they shall sing
in ways of the Lord; it is like walking among beds of spices which send forth a
fragrant perfume.

Use 2. If God be Infinite in his glorious Essence, learn to admire where you
cannot fadom. The Angels wear a Veil, they cover their Faces, as adoring this
Infinite Majesty, Isa. 6.3. Elias wraped himself in a Mantle when God's Glory
passed by; admire where you cannot fadom, Job 11.7. Can thou by searching
find out God? Here we see some Beams of his Glory, we see him in the Glass of
the Creation, we see him in his Picture, his Image shines in the Saints; but
who can search out all his Essential Glory, what Angel can measure these
Pyramids? Can thou by searching find out God? He is Infinite. We can no more
search out his Infinite Perfections, then a Man upon the top of the highest
Mountain can reach the Firmament, or take a Star in his hand. O have
God-admiring Thoughts! adore where you cannot fathom. There are many Mysteries
in Nature which we cannot fathom; Why the Sea should be higher then the Earth,
yet not drown it. Why Nilus should overflow in Summer, when by the Course of
Nature the Waters are lowest. How the Bones grow in the Womb, Eccles. 11.5. If
these things pose us, how may the Infinite Mystery of the Deity transcend our
most raised Intellectuals. Ask the Geometrician, if he can with a pair of
Compasses measure the breadth of the Earth. So unable are we to measure the
Infinite Perfections of God. In Heaven we shall see God clearly, but not fully,
for he is Infinite; he will communicate himself to us according to the bigness
of our Vessel, but not the Immensness of his Nature. Adore then where you
cannot Fathom.

If God be Infinite in all places, then let us not go to limit God, Psalm.
78.41. They limited the holy one of Israel. It Is a limiting God to confine him
within the narrow compass of our Reason. Reason thinks God must go such a way
to work, or the business will never be effected. This is to limit God to our
Reason, whereas he is Infinite, and his ways are past finding out, Romans 11.33.
In the Deliverance of the Church it is a limiting God either to set him a Time,
or prescribe him a Method for Deliverance. God will deliver Sion, but he will
be left to his own Liberty, he will not be tied to a Place, to a time, to an
Instrument: this were to limit him, and then he should not be Infinite. God
will go his own way, he will pose and nonplus Reason, he will work by
Improbabilities, he will save in such a way as we think he will destroy; now he
acts like himself, like an Infinite Wonder-working God.

Of the Knowledge of GOD.
FOr the Lord is a God of Knowledge, and by him Actions are weighed, 1 Samuel
2.3. Glorious things are spoken of God; he transcends our Thoughts and the
Angels Praises. God's Glory lies chiefly in his Attributes, which are the
several Beams by which the Divine Nature shines forth. Among other of his
Orient Excellencies, this is not the least, The Lord is a God of Knowledge; or
as the Hebrew word is, el Degnoth, a God of Knowledges. Through the bright
Mirror of his own Essence he has a full Idaea and Cognizance of all things;
the World is to him Corpus diaphanum, a transparent Body. He makes an
Heart-Anatomy; he is (...), Rev. 2.23. I am he which searches the Reins and
the Heart. The Clouds are no Canopy, the Night is no Curtain to draw between us
and his sight, Psalm. 139.12. The Darkness h^deth not from thee. There is not a
word we whisper but God hears it, Psalm. 139.4. There is not a word in my
Tongue, but lo, O Lord, thou know it altogether. There is not the most
subtle Thought comes into our Mind, but God perceives it, Isa. 66.18. I kn^w
their thoughts. Thoughts speak as loud in Gods Ears as Words do in ours. All
our Actions, though never so subtly contrived, and secretly conveyed, are
visible to the Eye of Omnisciency, Isa. 66.18. I know their works. Achan hid
the Babylonish Garment in the Earth, but God brought it to light, Josh. 7.21.
Minerva was drawn in such curious Colors, and so lively pensil'd, that which
way soever one turned, Minerva's Eye was upon him: so which way soever we turn
our selves, still God's Eye is upon us, Job 37.16. Do thou know the balancing
of the Clouds, the Works of him who is perfect in knowledge? God knows whatever
is knowable; he knows Future Contingencies: (...), Chrysostom. He foretold Isreal's
coming out of Babylon, and the Virgins conceiving. By this the Lord proves the
Truth of his Godhead against Idol-Gods, Isa. 41.23. Indicate Futura -- Show
the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know ye are gods. The
Perfection of God's Knowledge is that it cannot be searched out to perfection,
Job 11.7. What Angel can reach the top of these Pyramids? But 1. God's
Knowledge is Primary. He is the Original, the Pattern and Prototype of all
Knowledge; others borrow their Kowledge of him; the Angels light their Lamps at
this glorious Sun. 2. God's Knowledge is Pure. It is not contaminated with the
Object. Divina Natura non est immista r^bus aut sordibus inquinata, Aug. Though
God knows sin, yet it is to hate and punish it. No Evil can mix or incorporate
with his Knowledge, no more than the Sun can be defiled with the Vapors which
arise from the Earth. 3. God's Knowledge is Facil; it is without any
difficulty. We study and search for Knowledge, Prove. 2.4. If thou seek for
her as Silver. But the Lamp of God's Knowledge is so infinitely bright, that
all things are easily intelligible to him. 4. God's Knowledge is infallible;
there is no mistake in his Knowledge. Humane Knowledge is subject to error and
misprision. A Physician may mistake the Cause of a Disease; but God's Knowledge
is un-erring; he can neither deceive, nor be deceived. He cannot deceive,
because he is Truth; nor be deceived, because he is Wisdom. 5. God's Knowledge
is Instantanious. Our Knowledge is successive; one thing after another. We
argue from the Effect to the Cause. God knows Things past, present, and to
come, uno intuitu, at once. They are all before him in one entire prospect. 6.
God's Knowledge is Retentive; he never loses any of his Knowledge; he has
reminiscentia as well as intelligentia; he remembers as well as understands.
Many things elapse out of our Mind, but God's Knowledge is eternized. Things
transacted a thousand years ago, are as fresh to him as if they were done but
the last minute. Thus he is Perfect in Knowledge.

Object. But is it not said, Genesis 18.21. I will go down and see whether they
have done according to the cry which is come up unto me, and I will know?

Resp. It could not be a nesciency that God was ignorant, because there is
mention made of a Cry; but the Lord speaks there (...), after the manner of a
Judge, who will first examine the Cause before he passes the Sentence. God
when he is upon a work of Justice, is not in a Riot, as if he did not care
where he hits; but he goes in the way of a Circuit against Offenders; he lays
Judgment to the Line, and Righteousness to the Plummet, Isa. 28.17.

Object. Hos. 13.12. The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up, his sin is hid?

Resp. Not that his sin was hid from God, but his sin is hid, that is, it is
recorded, it is laid up against a Day of Reckoning. That this is the meaning,
is clear by the foregoing words, His iniquity is bound up; as the Clerk of the
Assizes binds up the Indictments of Malefactors in a Bundle, and at the Assizes
brings out the Indictments and reads them in Court, so God binds up Men's sins
in a Bundle, and at the Day of Judgment this Bundle shall be opened, and all
their sins brought to light before Men and Angels.

That God is thus infinite in his Knowledge, 1. It cannot but be so: For he who
is the Original Cause, and gives a Being to things, must needs have a clear
inspection into them; Psalm. 94 9. He that planted the Ear, shall not he hear;
he that formed the Eye, shall not he see? He who makes a Watch or Engine, knows
all the Workmanship in it. God that made the Heart, knows all the Motions and
Fallacies of it. He is like Ezekiel's Wheels, full of Eyes; and as Austin
says, Totus oculis, all eye. 2. It ought to be so: for, he is to be Judge of
all the World, Genesis 18.25. There are so many Causes to be brought before him,
and so many Persons to be tried, that he must have a most exquisite perfect
Knowledge, or he could not do Justice. An ordinary Judge cannot proceed without
a Jury; the Jury must search the Cause, and give in their Verdict; but God can
judge without a Jury. He knows all things in and of himself, and needs no
Witness to inform him. A Judge judges only Matters of Fact, but God judges
the Heart. He not only judges wicked Actions, but wicked Designs. He sees the
Treason of the Heart, and punishes it.

Use 1. Is God infinite in Knowledge, 1 John 1.5. He is Light, and in him is no
Darkness; then how unlike are they to God, who are Darkness, and in them is no
Light, who are destitute of Knowledge, such as the Indians, who never heard of
God. And are there not many among us, who are no better than baptized Heathens?
who are to seek in the first Principles of the Oracles of God. It is sad, that
after the Sun of the Gospel has shined so long in our Horison, yet, to this
day the Veil should be upon their Heart. Such as are inveloped with Ignorance,
cannot give God a reasonable Service, Romans 12.1. Ignorance is the Nurse of
Impiety: the Schoolmen say, Omne peccatum fundatur in ignorantia; Jer. 9.3.
They proceed from evil to evil, and know not me, says the Lord. Where
Ignorance reigns in the Understanding, Lust rages in the Affections: Prove.
19.2. That the Mind be without Knowledge, it is not good; neither Faith nor
Fear: no Faith, for Knowledge carries the Torch before Faith: Psalm. 9.10. They
that know thy Name will put their trust in thee. A Man can no more believe
without Knowledge, than the Eye can see without Light. Nor Fear of God; How can
they fear him whom they do not know? The Covering of Haman's Face was a sad
Presage of Death. When Peoples Minds are covered with Ignorance, this Covering
of the Face is a fatal forerunner of Destruction.

2. If God be a God of Knowledge, then see the folly of Hypocrisy. Hypocrites
do not virtutem facere, but fingere, Melanct. they carry it fair with Men, but
care not how bad their Hearts are; they live in secret sin: Psalm. 73.11. They
say how does God know? Psalm. 10.11. God has forgotten, he ^ideth his face, he
will never see it. But Psalm. 147.5. His Understanding is infinite. He has a
Grate ( Crates) that looks into Men's Breasts: he has a Key for the Heart, he
beholds all the sinful workings of Men's Spirits: As in a Glass-Hive we can see
the Bees working in their Combs, Matthew. 6.4. he sees in secret; (...), in
impios habet, Rivet. As a Merchant enters down Debts in his Book, so God has
his Diary or Day-Book, and he enters down every sin into the Book. He makes a
Critical Discant upon Men's Actions. Ieroboam's Wife disguised her self that the
Prophet should not know her, but he discerned her, 1 Kings 14.6. Why feignest
thou thy self to be another. The Hppocrite thinks to prevaricate and juggle
with God, but God will unmask him; Eccles. 12.14. God shall bring every work
into Judgment with every secret thing. Jer. 29.23. They have committed Villainy
in Israel, even I know and am a witness, says the Lord. I, but the Hypocrite
hopes he shall color over his sin, and make it look very specious. Absalom
masks over his Treason with the pretense of a Religious Vow. Judas dissembles
his Envy at Christ, and Covetousness, with a pretense of Charity to the Poor,
John 12.5. Iehu makes Religion a stirrup to his Ambitious Design, 1 Kings
10.16. but God sees through these Figleaves. You may see a Jade under his gilt
Trappings. Ier. 16.17. Their Iniquities is not hid from my eyes. And he that
has an Eye to see, will find an Hand to punish.

Use 2. of Exhortation. Is God so infinite in his Knowledge, then we should
always set our selves as under his Omniscient Eye. Sic vivendum est tanquam in
conspectu, Seneca. Let us set David's Prospect before our Eye, Psalm. 16.8. I
have set the Lord always before me. Seneca counseled Lucilius, that whatever
he was doing, he should imagine some of the Roman Worthies beheld him, and then
he would do nothing dishonorable. The consideration of God's Omnisciency
would, 1. Be preventive of much sin. The Eye of Man will restrain from sin, and
will not God's Eyes much more? Esther 7.8. Will he force the Queen before me,
when I stand and look on? Will we sin when our Judge looks on. Would Men speak
so vainly if they considered God overheard them? Latimer took heed to every
word in his Examination, when he heard the Pen go behind the Hangings. So what
care would Persons have of their words, if they remembered God heard, and the
Pen is going in Heaven. Would Men go after strange Flesh, if they believed God
were a Spectator of their wickedness, and would make them do Penance in Hell
for it? would they defraud in their Dealings, and use false Weights, if they
thought God saw them? and for making their Weights lighter, would make their
damnation heavier. 2. The setting our selves, as under the Eye of God's
Omnisciency, would cause Reverence in the Worship of God. God sees the frame
and carriage of our Hearts when we come before him: How would this call in our
straggling thoughts? how would this animate and spirit Duty? it would make us
put fire to the Incense. Acts 26.7. The Tribes instantly served God day and
night, (...), omnibus venibus, with the utmost zeal and intensness of Spirit.
To think God is in this place, he beholds us, would add Wings to Prayer, and
Oil to the flame of our Devotion.

2. Is God's Knowledge infinite, study sincerity, be what you seem; 1 Samuel
16.7. The Lord looks upon the heart. Men judge of the Heart by the Actions,
God judges of the Actions by the Heart. If the Heart be sincere, God will see
the Faith, and wink at the failing. Asa had his (...), his Blemishes, but his
Heart was right with God, 2 Chronicles. 15.17. God saw his Sincerity, and pardoned
his Infirmity. Sincerity in a Christian is like Chastity in a Wise, which does
excuse many Failings. Sincerity makes our Duties acceptable, like Musk among
Linen, that perfumes it. As Iehu said to Iehonadab, 2 Kings 10.15. Is thy heart
right with me? and he said it is: if it be (says he) give me thy hand; and he
took him up into the Chariot. So if God sees our heart is right, that we love
him, and design his glory, now, says he, give me your Prayers and Tears, now
you shall come up with me into the triumphant Chariot of Glory. Sincerity makes
our Services to be golden, and God will not cast away this Gold, though it may
want some weight. Is God Omniscient, and his Eye chiefly upon the Heart, wear
this Girdle of Truth about you, and never leave it off.

Use 3. of Comfort. Is God a God of infinite Knowledge, then there is Comfort,
1. To the Saints in particular, 2. To the Church in general, in three Respects.

1. In case of Private Devotion. Christian, thou set hours apart for God,
thy Thoughts run upon him as thy Treasure, God takes notice of every good
Thought; Mal. 3.17. He had a Book of Remembrance written for them that thought
upon his Name. Thou enterest into thy Closet, and prayest to thy Father in
secret; he hears every sigh and groan; Psalm. 38.9. My groaning is not hid from
thee. Thou waterest the Seed of thy Prayer with Tears, God bottles every Tear;
Psalm. 56.8. Put thou my Tears into thy bottle. When the Secrets of all Hearts
shall be opened, God will make an honorable mention of the Zeal and Devotion
of his People, and he himself will be the Herald of their Praises, 1 Cor. 4.5.
Then shall every man have praise of God.

2. The Infiniteness of God's Knowledge is a Comfort, in case the Saints have
not so clear a Knowledge of themselves. They find so much Corruption, that they
judge they have no Grace; Genesis 25.22. If it be so, why am I thus? If I have
Grace, why is my Heart in so dead and earthly a frame? O remember, God is of
infinite Knowledge, he can spy Grace where thou can not; he can see Grace hid
under Corruption, as the Stars may be hid under a Cloud. God can see that
Holiness in thee, which thou can not discern in thy self. He can spy the
flower of Grace in thee, though overtop'd with weeds; 1 Kings 14.13. Because
there is in him some good thing, (...). God sees some good thing in his People,
when they can see no Good in themselves; and though they judge themselves, he
will give them an Absolution.

3. It is Comfort in respect of Personal Injuries. It is the Saints lot to
suffer. The Head being crowned with Thorns, the Feet must not tread upon Roses;
if Saints find a real Purgatory, it is in this Life, but this is the Comfort,
God sees what wrong is done to them; The Apple of his Eye is touched, and is
not he sensible? St. Paul was scourged by cruel Hands, 1 Cor. 11.35. Thrice was
I beaten with Rods; as if you should see a Scullion whip the King's Son. God
beholds it; Exodus 3.7. I know their sorrows. The Wicked make wounds in the
backs of the Saints, and then pour in Vinegar: God writes down their Cruelty.
Believers art part of Christ's Mystical Body, and for every drop of a Saint's
Blood spilt, God puts a drop of Wrath in his Vial.

2. Comfort to the Church of God in General. If God be a God of Knowledge, he
sees all the Plots of the Enemies against Sion, and can make them prove
Abortive. The wicked are subtle, having borrowed their skill of the old
Serpent; they dig deep to hide their Counsels from God, but he sees them, and
can easily counterwork them. The Dragon is described with seven Heads, Rev.
12.3. to show how he plots against the Church. But God is described with seven
Eyes, Zach. 3.9. to show, that he sees all the Plots and Stratagems of the
Enemies, and when they deal proudly, he can be above them. Come, says Pharaoh,
let us deal wisely, Exodus 1.10. and he never played the Fool more, then when he
thought to deal wisely. Exodus 14.24. In the morning watch the Lord looked to
the Host of the Egyptians, by the Pillar of fire, and troubled their Host.
How may this be as Sap in the Vine, and may comfort the Church of God in her
Militant State, the Lord has an Eye in all the Counsels and Combinations of
the Enemy, he sees them lay their Train, and can blow them up in their own Mine.

Of the Eternity of GOD.
THE next Attribute is, God is Eternal, Psalm. 90.2. From everlasting to
everlasting thou art God. The Schoolmen distinguish between Aevum and Eternum,
to Explain the Notion of Eternity. There is a threefold Being, 1. Such a Being
as had a Beginning, and shall have an End. So all Sensitive Creatures, the
Beasts, Fowls, Fishes; these at Death are destroyed, and return to Dust, their
Being ends with their Life. 2. Such a Being as had a Beginning, but shall have
no End; as the Angels and Souls of Men; they are Eternal, a part post, they
abide for ever. 3. Such a Being as is without Beginning and without Ending, and
that is proper only to God. He is semper existens, viz. from everlasting to
everlasting; it is God's Title, a Jewel of his Crown. 1. He is called, The King
Eternal, 1 Timothy 1.17. 2. Jehovah, a word that properly sets out God's Eternity;
a word so dreadful, that the Jews trembled to name or read it, therefore used
another word Adonai, Lord. Jehovah contains in it Time past, present, and to
come, Rev. 1.4. (...), which is, and which was, and which is to come; it
interprets the word Jehovah. Which is] He subsists of himself, having a pure
independent Being. Which was] God only was before Time. There is no searching
into the Records of Eternity. Which is to come] His Kingdom has no End. His
Crown has no Successors; Hebr. 1.8. Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever.
The doubling of the word ratifies the certainty of it, as the doubling of
Pharaohs Dreams did. I shall prove that God only could be Eternal, without
Beginning. Angels could not, they are but Creatures, though Spirits; they were
made, and therefore there beginning may be known; their Antiquity may be
searched into. If you ask, When they were created? Some think before the World
was; but not so. For what was before time was Eternal: the Angels first Rice
and Original reaches no higher than the beginning of the World. It Is thought
by the Learned, that the Angels were made that day on which the Heavens were
made; Job 38.7. When the Morning-stars sang together, and all the Sons of God
shouted for joy; St. Hierom, Gregory, venerable Bede, understand it of the
Angels. When God laid the Foundation Stone of the World, the Angels being then
Created, did sing the Anthems of Joy and Praise. The Angels could not be before
time; for what was before Time was Eternal. It Is only proper to God to be
Eternal, without Beginning. He is Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last, Rev.
1.8. No Creature can write it self Alpha, that is only a Flower of the Crown of
Heaven, Exodus 3.14. I am that I am; viz. he who Exists from and to Eternity.

Use 1. Here is Thunder and Lightning to the Wicked; God is Eternal, therefore
the Torments of the Wicked are Eternal. God lives for ever, and as long as God
lives, he will be punishing the damned. -- This methinks, should be as that
Handwriting on the Wall, Dan. 5.5. it should make their joints to be loosed,
etc. The sinner takes liberty to sin, he breaks God's Laws, like a Wild beast
that breaks over the Hedge, and leaps into forbidden Pasture: he sins (...),
with greediness, Ephesians. 4.19. as if he thought he could not sin fast enough. But
remember, this is one of God's Names, Eternal, and as long as God is Eternal,
he has time enough to reckon with all his Enemies. To make Sinners tremble,
let them think of these three things: The Torments of the the Damned are
without Intermission, without Mixture, and Eternal.

1. Without Intermission; their Pains shall be acute and sharp, and no
relaxation; the fire shall not be slackned, or abated; Rev. 4.11. They have no
rest day nor night: like one that has his Joints stretched continually on the
Rack, and has no ease; therefore the Wrath of God is compared to a Stream of
Brimstone, Isa. 30.33. Why to a Stream? Because a Stream runs without
intermission; it runs and does not stop: so God's Wrath runs like a stream, and
pours out without any intermission. In the Pains of this Life there is some
abatement and intermission; the Fever abates, after a fit of the Stone the
Patient has some ease: but the Pains of Hell are intense and violent, in summo
gradu, the damned Soul never says, I am now more at ease.

2. Without Mixture. Hell is a place of pure Justice. In this Life God in Anger
remembers Mercy, he mixeth Compassion with Suffering. Deuteronomy. 33.25. Asher's shoe
was of Iron, but his foot was dipped in Oil. Affliction is the Iron shoe, but
Mercy is mixed with it; here is the foot dipped in Oil. But the Torments of the
Damned have no mixture, Rev. 14.10. They shall drink of the Wine of the wrath
of God, which is poured out without mixture. No mixture of Mercy. How is the
Cup of Wrath said to be full of mixture, Psalm. 75.8. The Wine is red, it is
full of mixture: yet in the Revelation it is said to be without mixture? It is
full of mixture, that is, it is full of all the Ingredients that may make it
bitter. The Worm, the Fire, the Curse of God, all these are bitter Ingredients.
It is a Cup mixed; yet it is without mixture, viz. there shall be nothing to
afford the least Comfort, no mixture of Mercy; so it is a Cup without mixture.
In the Sacrifice of Jealousy, Numb. 5.15. there was no Oil put to it. So in the
Torments of the Damned their is no Oil of Mercy to abate their Sufferings.

3. Without Cessation, Eternal. The Pleasures of sin are but for a season, but
the Torments of the wicked are for ever. Sinners have a short Feast, but a long
Reckoning. Origin erroniously thought that after a thousand years the damned
should be released out of their Misery: But the Worm, the Fire, the Prison are
all Eternal, Rev. 14.11. The smoke of their Torment ascends up for ever and
ever. Poenae Gehennales puniunt, non finiunt, Prosper. Eternity is a Sea
without Bottom and Banks. After Millions of years there is not one Minute in
eternity wasted; and the Damned must be ever burning, but never consuming,
always dying, but never dead, Rev. 9.6. They shall seek death, but shall not
find it. The Fire of Hell is such as multitude of Tears will not quench it,
Length of Time will not finish it; the Vial of God's Wrath will be always
dropping upon a sinner. As long as God is Eternal, he lives for Ever to be
avenged upon the wicked. O Eternity, Eternity, who can Fathom it? Mariners have
their Plummets to measure the Depth of the Sea; but what Line or Plummets shall
we use to Fathom the Depth of Eternity? The Breath of the Lord kindles the
Infernal Lake, Isa. 30.33. and where shall we have Engines or Buckets to quench
that Fire? O Eternity! If all the Body of the Earth and Sea were turned to
Sand, and all the Air up to the starry Heaven were nothing but Sand, and a
little Bird should come every 1000th year, and fetch away in her Bill but the
Tenth part of a grain of all that heap of Sand, what a numberless number of
years would be spent before that vast heap of Sand would be fetched away; yet,
if at the end of all that time the sinner might come out of Hell (though long)
yet there would be some hope: But this word ever breaks the heart, The smoke of
their Torment ascends up for ever and ever. What a Terror is this to the
wicked, enough to put them into a cold Sweat, to think as long as God is
Eternal, he lives for ever to be avenged upon sinners.

Quest. Here a Question may be moved, Why sin that is committed in a short
time, should be punished eternally?

Resp. We must hold with St. Augustine, that God's Judgment on the wicked,
Occulta esse possunt injusta esse non possunt, may be secret, but never unjust.
The reason why sin committed in a short time is eternally punished, is because
every sin is committed against an Infinite Essence, and no less than Eternity
of Punishment can satisfy. Why is Treason punished with Confiscation and
Death, but because it is against the King's Person, which is Sacred; much more
that Offense which is against God's Crown and Dignity, is of an heinous and
infinite Nature, and cannot be satisfied with less than Eternal Punishment.

Use 2. Of Comfort to the Godly, God is Eternal, therefore lives for ever to
Reward the Godly, Romans 2.7. To them who seek for glory and honor eternal life.
The People of God here are in a suffering Condition, Acts 20.23. Bonds and
Afflictions abide me. The Head being crowned with Thorns, the Feet must not
tread upon Roses. The Wicked are clad in Purple, and fare deliciously, while
the Godly suffer. Goats climb upon the high Mountains, while Christ's Sheep are
in the Valley of Slaughter. But here is the Comfort, God is Eternal, and he
has appointed Eternal Recompenses for the Saints. In Heaven are fresh
Delights, Sweetness without Surfeit. And that which is the Crown and Zenith of
Heavens happiness is, it is Eternal, 1 John 2.25. Were there but the least
suspicion that this Glory must cease, it would much eclipse, yea imbitter it;
but it is Eternal. What Angel can span Eternity? 2 Cor. 4.17. An eternal weight
of glory. The Saints shall bathe themselves in the Rivers of Divine Pleasure;
and these Rivers can never be dried up: Psalm. 16.11. At thy right hand are
pleasures for evermore. This is the Elah, the highest strain in the Apostles
Rhetoric, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. Ever with the Lord. There is Peace without Trouble,
Ease without Pain, Glory without End, ever with the Lord. Let this comfort the
Saints in all their Troubles, their Sufferings are but short, but their Reward
is eternal. Eternity makes Heaven to be Heaven; it is the Diamond in the Ring: O
blessed Day that shall have no Night! The Sun-light of Glory shall rise upon
the Soul, and never set! O blessed Spring that shall have no Autumn, or Fall of
the Leaf! The Roman Emperors have three Crowns set upon their Heads, the first
of Iron, the second of Silver, the third of Gold. So the Lord sets three Crowns
on his Children, Grace, Comfort and Glory; and this Crown is Eternal: 1 Pet.
5.4. Ye shall receive a Crown of Glory that fades not away. The Wicked have a
never-dying Worm, and the Godly a never-fading Crown. O how should this be a
Spur to Virtue! how willing should we be to work for God? though we had nothing
here, God has time enough to reward his People; the Crown of Eternity shall be
set upon their Head.

Use 3. Of Exhortation. 1. In General, study Eternity. Our Thoughts should
chiefly run upon Eternity. We are all for the present, something that may
delight the Senses. If we could have lived (as Augustine) A cunabulis Mundi,
from the Infancy of the World to the Worlds old Age, what were this? What is
Time measured with Eternity? As the Earth is but a small Point to the Heaven,
so Time is but, nay scarce a Minute to Eternity; and then, what is this poor
Life, which crumbles away so fast! O think of Eternity! Annos aeternos in mente
habe: Brethren, we are every day traveling to Eternity, and whether we wake or
sleep, we are going our Journey; some of us are upon the Borders of Eternity. O
study the shortness of Life, and the length of Eternity!

2. More Particularly: Think of God's Eternity and the Soul's Eternity. 1.
Think of God's Eternity. He is the Ancient of Days, who was before all Time.
(...), Thales. There is a figurative Description of God, Dan. 7.9. The Ancient
of Days did sit, whose Garment was white as snow, and the hair of his Head like
the pure Wool. His white Garment wherewith he was clothed signified his
Majesty, his Hair like the pure Wool, his Holiness, and the Ancient of Days his
Eternity. The thoughts of God's Eternity would make us have high adoring
thoughts of God. We are apt to have mean irreverent thoughts of him, Psalm.
50.21. Thou thoughtest I was such a one as thy self; weak and mortal. But if we
would think of God's Eternity, when all Power cease, he is King Eternal, his
Crown flourishes for ever, who can make us happy or miserable for ever, this
would make us have adoring thoughts of God; Rev. 4.10. The four and twenty
Elders fell down before him that sat on the Throne and worship him that lives
for ever and ever, and cast their Crowns before the Throne. The Saints fall
down, to signify by that humble posture, that they are not worthy to sit in
God's Presence. They fall down, and they worship him that lives for ever, they
do as it were kiss his feet. And they cast their Crowns before the Throne, they
lay all their Honor at his Feet. Thus they show humble Adoration to the Eteral
Essence. Study God's Eternity, it will make us adore where we cannot Fathom. 2.
Think of the Soul's Eternity. As God is Eternal, so he has made us Eternal. We
are never-dying Creatures; we are shortly entering upon an Eternal State, either
of Happiness or Misery. Have serious thoughts of this: Say, O my Soul, which of
these two Eternities is like to be thy Portion? I must shortly depart hence,
and whither then shall I go, to which of these Eternities, either of Glory or
Misery? The serious Meditation of the Eternal State we are to pass into, would
work strongly with us.

1. Thoughts of Eternal Torment, a good Antidote against Sin: Sin tempts with
its Pleasure, but when we think of Eternity it may cool the intemperate Heat of
Lust: Shall I for the Pleasure of Sin for a Season, endure eternal Pain? Sin
like those Locusts, Rev. 9.7. seems to have on its Head a Crown like Gold, but
it has in it a Tail like a Scorpion. Verse 10. And a Sting in its Tail, and
this Sting can never be plucked out. Shall I venture eternal Wrath? is Sin
committed so sweet, as lying in Hell for ever is bitter? This would make us
fly from Sin as Moses from the Serpent.

2. The serious Thoughts of Eternal Happiness would very much take us off from
these Worldly Things, we should not esteem much of them: What are these
Sublunary Things to Eternity? they are quickly gone, they salute us and take
their Farewell. But I am to enter upon an Everlasting Estate: I hope to live
with Him who is Eternal; what is the World to me? They who stand upon the top
of the Alps, the great Cities of Campania seem as small things in their eyes;
so he who has his Thoughts fixed on his Eternal Estate after this Life, all
these things seem as nothing in his eye. What is the Glory of this World? how
poor and contemptible compared with an Eternal Weight of Glory? Aeternis
inhianti in fastidio suns transito, Bern.

3. To conclude, The serious Thoughts of an Eternal Estate, either of Happiness
or Misery, would have a powerful Influence upon whatsoever we take in hand:
Every Work we do promotes either a blessed or cursed Eternity; every good
Action sets us a step nearer to an Eternity of Happiness, every bad Action sets
us a step nearer to an Eternity of Misery. O what Influence would the Thoughts
of Eternity have upon our Religious Duties! it would make us do them with all
our Might* A Duty well performed lifts a Christian higher toward Heaven, and
sets a Christian a step nearer to a blessed Eternity.

GOD's Unchangeableness.
THE next Attribute is God's Unchangeableness, Mal. 3.6. I am Jehovah, I change
not. 1. God is unchangeable in his Nature. 2. In his Decree.

1st, Unchangeable in his Nature: 1. There is no Eclipse of his Brightness. 2.
No Period put to his Being.

1. No Eclipse of his Brightness: His Essence shines with a fixed Luster, Iam.
1.17. With whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning. Psalm. 102.27.
Thou art the same. All created Things are full of Vicissitude, 1. Princes and
Emperors are subject to Mutation. Sehostris, an Egyptian Prince, having
subdued diverse Kings in War, made them draw like Horses in his Chariot, as if
he intended to turn them to Grass, as God did King Nebuchadnezzar. The Crown
has many Successors. 2. Kingdoms have their Ecclipses and Convulsions: What is
become of the Glory of Athens? the Pomp of Troy? Iam seges est ubi Troja fuit.
Kingdoms though they have a Head of Gold, yet Feet of Clay. 3. The Heavens
change, Psalm. 102.25, 26. As a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall
be changed. The Matter of the Elements as it is more pure, so more firm and
sollid; the Heavens are the most ancient Records where God has written his
Glory with a Sunbeam; yet these shall change, though I do not think they shall
be destroyed as to their substance, yet they shall be changed as to their
qualities: They shall me^t with fervent heat, 2 Pet. 3.12. and so be more
refined and purified. Thus the Heavens shall be changed, but not He who dwells
in Heaven: With him is no Variableness or Shadow of Turning. 4. The best Saints
have their Eclipses and Changes: look upon a Christian in his Spiritual Estate,
and he is full of Variation: though the Seed of Grace does not dye, yet the
Beauty and Activity of it does often wither. A Christian has his Aguish Fits
in Religion, sometimes his Faith is at an high Tide, sometime^ low Eb^,
sometimes his Love flames, and at another time like Fire hid in the Embers, and
he has lost his first Love. How strong was David's Grace at one time, 2 Samuel
22.3. The God of my rock, in him will I trust. At another time, I shall one day
perish by the hand of Saul. What Christian can say he does not find a Change in
his Graces: that the Bow of his Faith does never unbend, the Strings of his
Viol do never slacken. Sure we shall never meet with such Christians till we
meet them in Heaven. But God is without any Shadow of Turning. 5. The Angels
were subject to Change, they were created Holy, but Mutable, Jud. 6. The angels
which kept not their first estate. Those Morning-stars of Heaven were falling
Stars. But God's Glory shines with a fixed Brightness: In God there is nothing
looks like a Change, no better or worse, no better in him, because then he were
not perfect, nor worse in him, for then he should cease to be perfect: He is
immutably Holy, immutably Good; There is no Shadow of Change in him.

Object. Christ who is God, assumed the Humane Nature, here was a Change.

Resp. If indeed the Divine Nature had been converted into the Humane, or the
Humane into the Divine, here had been a Change; but not so. The Humane Nature
was distinct from the Divine, therefore there was no Change. As suppose a Cloud
cover the Sun, this makes no Change in the Body of the Sun; so though the
Divine Nature be covered with the Humane, this makes no Change in the Divine
Nature.

2d, There is no Period put to his Being: 1 Timothy 1.16. Who only has
immortality. The Godhead cannot die: 1. An Infinite Essence cannot be changed
into a Finite, but God is Infinite. 2. He is Eternal, Ergo, he is not Mortal to
be Eternal, and Mortal is a Contradiction.

Use 1. See here the Excellency of the Divine Nature in its Immutability: this
is the Glory of Godhead. Mutableness denotes Weakness; it is not so in God, he
is the same Yesterday and to Day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8. Men are fickle and
mutable, like Rueben, Unstable as water, Genesis 49.4. They go in changeable
Colors:

1. They are changeable in their Principles, [sometimes Protestant, sometimes
Papist,] if their Faces altered as fast as their Opinions, we should not know
them.

2. Changeable in their Resolutions; like the Wind that blows strongly in the
East, presently turns about to the West; they resolve to be virtuous, but
quickly repent of their Resolutions: Their Minds are like a sick Man's Pulse,
alters every half Hour; these the Apostle compares to Waves of the Sea, and
wandering Stars, Iud. 13. They are not Pillars in God's Temple, but Reeds.

3. Others are changeable in their Friendship, quickly love and quickly hate;
sometimes will put you in their Bosom, then excommunicate you out of their
Favor: thus they change as the Camelion into several Colors. But God is
Immutable.

Use 2. See the Vanity of the Creature; there are Changes in every thing but in
God, Ps. 62.9. Men of high degree are vanity, and men of low degree are a lie.
O quantum est in rebus inane: We look for more from the Creature, then God has
put into it. The World rings Changes; the Creature has two Evils in it, it
promises more then we find, and it fails us when we most need it: There is a
Failure in Omni. A Man desires to have his Corn ground, the Water fails and
then his Mill cannot go. The Mariner is for a Voyage, the Wind either does not
blow, or it is contrary, and he cannot sail. One depends upon another for the
payment of a Promise, and he fails, and is like a Foot out of joint. Who would
look for a fixed Stability in the vain Creature! As if one should build Houses
on the Sand, where the Sea comes in and overflows. The Creature is true to
nothing but Deceit, and is constant only in its Disappointments. It Is no more
wonder to see Changes fall out here below, then to see the Moon dressing itself
in a new shape and figure; look to meet with Changes in every thing but in God.

Use 3. Comfort to the Godly, 1. In case of Losses, if an Estate be almost
boyld away to nothing; if lose dear Friends by Death, here is a double Eclipse;
but this is the Comfort, God is Unchangeable; I may loose these things, but I
cannot lose my God, he never dies. When the Fig Tree and Olive failed, yet God
did not fail, Hab. 3.17. I will joy in the God of my salvation. The Flowers in
the Garden dye, but a Man's Portion remains: So outward things dye and change,
but, Psalm. 73.26. Thou art the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.

2. In case of Sadness of Spirit, when God seems to cast off the Soul in
Dejection, Cant. 5.6. My beloved had withdrawn himself; yet God is
Unchangeable. He is Immutable in his Love, he may change his Countenance but
not his Heart* Ier. 31.4. I have loved thee with an everlasting love; Hebrew
Gnolam, A Love of Eternity. If once God's Electing Love rises upon the Soul,
it never sets, Isa. 54.10. The mountains shall be removed, but my loving
kindness shall not depart from thee, nor the covenant of my peace be removed.
God's Love stands faster then the Mountains; God's Love to Christ is
Unchangeable, and he will no more cease loving Believers then he will cease
loving Christ.

Use 4. of Exhortation: Get an Interest in this Unchangeable God, then thou art
as a Rock in the Sea, immovable in midst of all Changes.

Quest. How shall I get a part in this Unchangeable God?

Resp. By having a Change wrought in thee, 1 Cor. 6.11. But ye are washed, but
ye are sanctified. When we are changed, A tenebris ad lucem, so changed as if
another Soul did live in the same Body, by this Change we are interested in the
Unchangeable God.

Trust to this God only who is Unchangeable, Isa. 2.22. Cease from man, leave
trusting to the reed, but trust to the rock of ages. He that is by Faith in
garrisoned in God, is safe in all Changes; he is like a Boat that is tied to an
immovable Rock. He that trusts in God, trusts in that which cannot fail him, he
is Unchangeable, Heb. 13.5. I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. Health
may leave us, Riches, Friends may leave us, but says God, I Will not leave thee;
my Power shall support thee, my Spirit shall sanctify thee, my Mercy shall
save thee: I will never leave thee. O trust in this Unchangeable God. God is
jealous of two things, Of our Love, and of our Trust: He is jealous of our
Love, least we love the Creature more then him, therefore he makes it prove
bitter: And of our Trust, least we should place more Confidence in it then him,
therefore he makes it prove unfaithful. Outward Comforts are given us as Baits
by the way to refresh us, but not as Crutches to lean on: If we make the
Creature an Idol, what we make our Trust God makes our Shame. O trust in Deo
Immutabili: We like Noah's Dove have no footing for our Souls, till we get into
the Ark of God's Unchangeableness, Psalm. 125.1. They that trust in the Lord
shall be as mount Sion, which cannot be removed.

God is Unchangeable in his Decree, what he has decreed from Eternity is
unalterable, Isa. 46.11. My counsel shall stand. Argument, That God's eternal
Counsel or Decree is Immutable. If God changes his Decree, it must be from
some Defect of Wisdom or Foresight in God: for that is the reason why Men do
change their Purposes, through a want of Foresight they see something after
which they did not see before: But this cannot be the cause why God should
alter his Decree, because his Knowledge is perfect, he sees all things in one
entire Prospect before him.

Object. But is not God said to Repent, there seems to be a Change in his
Decree, Io^. 3.10. The Lord repented of the evil that he said he would do unto
them.

Resp. Repentance is attributed to God figuratively and improperly, Number. 23.19.
He is not man that he should repent. There may be a Change in God's Work, but
not in his Will: God may will a Change, but not change his Will. Mutat
sententiam non decretum: God may change his Sentence, but not his Decree. As
suppose a King shall cause the Sentence to be passed upon a Malefactor whom he
intends to save, notwithstanding this Sentence, the King does not alter his
Decree. So God threatened Destruction to Nineveh, Chap. 3.4. but the People of
Nineveh repenting, God spared them; here God changed his Sentence, but not his
Decree; it was what had la^n in the Womb of his Purpose from Eternity.

Object. But if God's Decree be Unchangeable, and cannot be Reversed, then to
what purpose should we use the Means, our Endeavors toward Salvation cannot
alter his Decree?

Resp. This Decree of God does not take off my Endeavor, for he that has
decreed my Salvation, has decreed it in the use of Means, and if I neglect the
Means I go about to Reprobate myself; no Man argues thus. God has decreed how
long I shall live; Ergo, I will not use Means to preserve Life, not eat and
drink: God has decreed the time of my Life in the use of Means; so God has
decreed my Salvation in the use of Word, Prayer, Sacraments: And as a Man that
refuses his ^ood murders himself, so he that refuses to work out his
Salvation does destroy himself. The Vessels of Mercy are said to be prepared
unto Glory, Romans 9.23. How are they prepared, but by being sanctified* and that
cannot be but in the use of Means: therefore let not God's Decree take thee off
from Holy Endeavor. A good Saying of Dr. Preston, Have thou an Heart to pray
to God, it is a sign no Decree of Wrath is passed against thee.

Use 1. If God's Decree be Eternal and Unchangeable, then God does not Elect
our Faith foreseen, as the Arminians. Romans 9.11. The children being not yet
born, that the purpose of God according to election might stand. It was said,
Jacob have I loved, Esau have I hated. We are not elected for Holiness, but to
Holiness, Ephesians. 1.3. If we are not justified for our Faith, much less elected
for our Faith; but we are not justified for it: We are said to be justified,
(...), through Faith as an Instrument, Ephesians. 2.8. but not for Faith as a Cause:
and if not justified for Faith, then much less elected. God's Decree of
Election is Eternal and Unchangeable, therefore depends not upon Faith
foreseen, Acts 13.48. As many as were ordained to eternal life believed. They
were not elected because they believed, but they believed because they were
elected.

Use 2. If God's Decree be Unchangeable, it is Comfort in two Cases, 1.
Concerning God's Providence toward his Church: We are ready to quarrel with
Providence if every thing does not jump with our Desire: Remember God's Work
goes on, and nothing falls out but what he has decreed from Eternity. 2. God
has decreed Troubles for the Churches good; the troubling of God's Church is
like the Angel's troubling the Water, Ioh. 5.4. which made way for healing his
People. He has decreed Troubles in the Church, His fire is in Sion, and his
furnace in Jerusalem, Isa. 31.9. The Wheels in a Watch move cross one to
another, but they all carry on the Motion of the Watch: So the Wheels of
Providence often move cross to our Desires, but still they carry on God's
unchangeable Decree: Dan. 12.10. Many shall be made white. God lets the Waters
of Affliction be poured on his People, he does but lay them a Whitening.
Therefore murmur not at God's Dealings; His Work goes on, nothing falls out but
what he has wisely decreed from Eternity; every thing shall promote God's
Design, and fulfill his Decree.

2. Comfort to the Godly in regard of their Salvation, 2 Timothy 2.19. The
foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, the Lord knows who are his:
God's Counsel of Election is Unchangeable: once elected and for ever elected,
Rev. 3.5. I will not blot his name out of the book of life. The Book of God's
Decree has no Errata's in it, no blottings out: once justified never
unjustified, Hos. 13.14. Repentance shall be hid from mine eyes. God never
repents of his electing Love, ^ Joh. 13.1. He loved them to the end. Therefore
if thou art a Believer, comfort thy self with this, the Immutability of God's
Decree.

Use 3. To conclude, a word to the Wicked, who march furiously against God and
his People, let them know God's Decree is Unchangeable, God will not alter it,
nor can they break it, and while they resist God's Will they fulfill it. There Is
a twofold Will of God, Voluntas praecepti and decreti; The Will of God's
Precept, and of his Decree. While the Wicked resist the Will of God's Precept,
they fulfill the Will of his Permissive Decree. Judas betrays Christ, Pilate
condemns him, the Soldiers crucify him; while they resisted the Will of God's
Precept, they fulfilled the Will of his Permissive Decree, Acts 4.28. Such as
are wicked, God commands one thing they do the quite contrary; to keep Sabbath,
they profane it; while they disobey his Command they fulfill his Permissive
Decree. If a Man set up two Nets, one of Silk, the other of Iron, the Silken
Net may be broken, not the Iron: God's Commands are the Silken Net; while Men
break the Silken Net of God's Command, they are taken in the Iron Net of his
Decree; while they sit backward to God's Precepts, they row forward to his
Decree; his Decree to permit their Sin, and to punish them for their Sin
permitted.

Of the Wisdom of GOD.
THE next Attribute is Gods' Wisdom, which is one of the brightest Beams of the
Godhead, Job 9.4. He is wise in heart. Kacham lavau: The Heart is the Seat of
Wisdom; Cor in Hebraeo sumitur pro Iudicio, Pineda. Among the Hebrews the Heart
is put for Wisdom. Job 34.32. Let Men of Understanding tell me: In the Hebrew,
-- Let Men of Heart tell me. God is wise in heart, that is, he is most wise. 1.
God is only wise; he does monopolize and ingross all Wisdom; Ergo, he is called
(...), the only wise God, 1 Timothy 1.17. All the Treasures of Wisdom are locked
up in him, and no Creature can have any Wisdom, but as God is pleased to give
it out of his Treasury. 2. God is perfectly wise; there is no defect in his
Wisdom. Men may be wise in some things, but in other things may betray
imprudence and weakness. But God is the Exemplar and Pattern of Wisdom, and the
Pattern must be perfect, Matthew. 5.48. God's Wisdom appears in two things: 1.
His Infinite Intelligence, 2. His Exact Working.

1. His Infinite Intelligence. He knows the most profound, obstruse Secrets,
Dan. 2.28. He knows the Thoughts, which are the most intricate subtle things.
Amos 4.13. He declares to Man what is his thought. Let Sin be contrived never
so politickly, God will pull off all Masks and Disguises, and make an
Heart-Anatomy. He knows all future Contingencies, and ante intuitu, all things
are before him in one clear Prospect.

2. His exact curious Working. He is wise in heart; his wisdom lies in his
works. These Works of God are bound up in three great Volumes, where we may
read his Wisdom.

1. The Work of Creation. The Creation, as it is a Monument of God's Power, so
a Looking-glass in which we may see his Wisdom. None but a wise God could so
curiously contrive the World. Behold the Earth decked with variety of Flowers,
which are both for Beauty and Fragrancy; the Heaven bespangled with Lights, we
may see the glorious Wisdom of God blazing in the Sun, twinkling in the Stars.
His Wisdom is seen in the marshalling and ordering every thing in its proper
Place and Sphere. If the Sun had been set lower, it would have burnt us; if
higher, it would not have warmed us with its Beams. God's Wisdom is seen in
appointing the Seasons of the Year; Psalm. 74.17. Thou have made Summer and
Winter. If it had been all Summer, the Heat would have scorched us; if all
Winter, the Cold would have killed us. The Wisdom of God is seen in chekoring
the Dark and the Light. If it had been all Night, there had been no Labor; if
all Day, there had been no Rest. Wisdom is seen in mixing the Elements, the
Earth with the Sea. If it had been all Sea, then we had wanted Bread; if it had
been all Earth, then we had wanted Water. The Wisdom of God is seen in
preparing and ripening the Fruits of the Earth: the Wind and Frosts prepare the
Fruits, the Sun and Rain ripen the Fruits. God's Wisdom is seen in setting
Bounds to the Sea, and so wisely contriving it, that though the Sea be higher
than the Earth, yet it should not overflow the Earth: so that we may cry out
with the Psalmist, Psalm. 104.24. O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom
have thou made them all: there is nothing to be seen but Miracles of Wisdom.
God's Wisdom is seen in ordering things in the Body Politic, that one shall
have need of another: the Poor need the Rich Man's Money, and the Rich need the
Poor Man's Labor. God makes one Trade depend upon another, that one may be
helpful to another, and that mutual Love may be preserved.

2. The second Work wherein God's Wisdom shines forth, is the Work of
Redemption. 1. Here was the Masterpiece of Divine Wisdom, to contrive a way to
Happiness between the Sin of Man, and the Justice of God. We may cry out with
the Apostle, Romans 11.33. (...), O the depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom
and Knowledge of God! This posed Men and Angels. If God had put us to find out
a way of Salvation when we were lost, we could neither have had an Head to
devise, nor an Heart to desire what God's infinite Wisdom has found out for
us. Mercy had a mind to save Sinners, yet loath that the Justice of God should
be wronged: It Is pity, says Mercy, that such a noble Creature as Man should be
made to be undone, and yet no reason that God's Justice should be a loser. What
way then shall be found out? Angels cannot satisfy for the wrong done to God's
Justice; nor is it fit that one Nature should sin, and another Nature suffer.
What then, shall Man be for ever lost? Now, while Mercy was thus debating with
it self what to do for the recovery of fallen Man, here the Wisdom of God
stepped in, and thus the Oracle spoke; Let God become Man, let the second Person
in the Trinity be Incarnate, and Suffer, and so for fitness he shall be Man,
and for ability he shall be God. Thus Justice may be satisfied, and Man saved.
O the depth of the riches of the wisdom of God, thus to make Justice and Mercy
to kiss each other! Great is this Mystey, God manifest in the flesh, 1 Timothy
3.16. What wisdom was this, that Christ should be made sin, yet know no sin;
that God should condemn the sin, yet save the sinner. Here was wisdom to find
out the way of Salvation. 2. The means by which Salvation is applied sets forth
God's wisdom. That Salvation should be by Faith, not by Works. Faith is an
humble Grace, it gives all to Christ, it is an adorer of Free Grace; and
Free Grace being advanced here, God has his glory, and it is his highest
wisdom to exalt his own glory. 3. The way of working Faith declares God's
wisdom; it is wrought by the Word preached, Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing.
What is the weak Breath of a Man to convert a Soul? it is like whispering in the
Ears of a dead Man; this is foolishness in the eye of the world: but the Lord
loves to show his wisdom by that which seems folly, 1 Cor. 1.27. He has chosen
the foolish things of the World to confound the wise. Why so? Verse 29. That no
flesh should glory in his presence. Should God convert by the Ministry of
Angels, then we should have been ready to have gloried in Angels, and have
given that honor to them which is due to God. But when God works by weak
Tools, makes use of Men who are of like Passions with our selves, and by them
Converts, now the Power is plainly seen to be of God: 2 Cor. 4.7. We have this
Treasure in earthen Vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God,
and not of us. Herein is God's wisdom seen, that no flesh may glory in his
presence.

3. The Wisdom of God wonderfully appears in the Works of his Providence. Every
Providence has either a mercy or a wonder wrapped up in it. The wisdom of God
in his Works of Providence, appears 1. By effecting great things by small
contemptible Means. He cured the stung Israelite by a brazen Serpent. If some
Sovereign Antidote had been used, if the Balm of Gilead had been brought, there
had been some likelihood that this should have healed: But what was there in a
brazen Serpent? it was a mere Image, and not applied to him that was wounded,
only he was to look upon it; yet this wrought a Cure. The less probability in
the Instrument, the more is God's wisdom seen. 2. The wisdom of God is seen in
doing his work by that which to the Eye of Flesh seems quite contrary. God
intended to advance Joseph, and make all his Brethrens sheaves bow to his
sheaf. Now, what way does he take? First Joseph is thrown into the Pit, then
sold into Egypt, then after that put in Prison, Genesis 39.20. and by his
Imprisonment God made way for his Advancement. For God to save in an ordinary
way, wisdom would not be so much taken notice of; but when he goes strangely to
work, and saves in that very way in which we think he will destroy, now his
wisdom shines forth in a most glorious conspicuous manner. God would make
Israel victorious, and what way does he go in? He lessens Gideon's Army, Judge.
7.2. The people that are with thee are too many: he reduces the Army of two
and thirty thousand to three hundred, and by taking away the means of Victory,
makes Israel victorious. God had a design to bring his People out of Egypt, and
a strange course he takes to effect it: he stirred up the Hearts of the
Egyptians to hate them, Psalm. 105.25. He turned their heart to hate his people.
The more they hated and oppressed Israel, the more God plagued the Egyptians,
and the gladder they were to let Israel go, Exodus 12.33. The Egyptians were
urgent upon Israel that they might send them out of the Land in haste, God had
a mind to save Jonah when he was cast into the Sea, and he lets the Fish
swallow him up, and so bring him to the shore. God would save Paul, and all
that were in the Ship with him, and there was no way to save them but the Ship
must break, and they all came safe to Land upon the broken pieces of the Ship,
Acts 27.44. In reference to the Church God often goes by contrary means, makes
the Enemy do his work; he can strike a strait stroke by crooked sticks. God
has often made his Church grow and flourish by persecution. The showrs of Blood
have made her more fruitful, Julian. Exodus 1.10. Come let us deal wisely with
them, least they multiply. And that way they took to suppress them, made them
multiply, Verse. 12. The more the afflicted them, the more they multiplied: Like
Ground, the more it is harrowed, it bears the better Crop. The Apostles were
scattered by reason of Persecution* and their scattering was like the
scattering of Seed, they went up and down and preached the Gospel, and brought
in daily Converts. Paul was put in Prison, and his Bonds were a Means to
enlarge the Gospel, Phil. 1.12.

3. The wisdom of God is seen in making the most desperate Evils turn to the
good of his Children. As several poisonful Ingredients, wisely tempered by the
skill of the Artist make a Sovereign Medicine, so God makes the most deadly
Afflictions cooperate for the good of his Children. He purifies them, and
prepares them for Heaven, 2 Cor. 4.17. These hard Frosts hasten the
Spring-flowers of Glory. The wise God, by a Divine Chemistry, turns Afflictions
into Cordials. God makes his People gainers by losses, and turns their Crosses
into Blessings.

4. The wisdom of God is seen in this, that the sins of Men shall carry on
God's work, yet that he should have no hand in their sins. The Lord permits
sin, but does not approve it. He has an Hand in the Action in which sin is,
but not in the sin of the Action. As in the crucifying of Christ, so far as it
was a Natural Action, God did concur; if he had not given the Jews Life and
Breath, they could not have done it: but as it was a sinful Action, so God
abhorred it. A Musician plays upon a Viol out of tune, the Musician is the
Cause of the sound, but the jarring and discord is from the Viol it se^f; so
Men's natural Motion is from God, but their sinful Motion is from themselves. A
Man that rides on a lame Horse, his riding is the Cause why the Horse goes, but
the lameness is from the Horse it self. Herein is God's wisdom, the sins of Men
shall carry on his Work, yet he has no hand in them.

5. The wisdom of God is seen in helping in the desperate Cases. God loves to
show his wisdom when Humane Help and Wit fail. Exquisite Lawyers love to
wrestle with Nicities and Difficulties in the Law, to show their skill the more.
God's wisdom is never at a loss, but when Providence are darkest, now appears
the Morninst-star of Deliverance, Psalm. 136.23. Who remembered us in our low
condition. Sometimes God melts away the Spirits of his Enemies, Josh. 2.24.
Sometimes he finds them other work to do, and sounds a Retreat to them, as he
did to Saul when he was pursuing David, The Philistines are in the Land. In the
Mount will God be seen. When the Church seems to be upon the Altar, her Peace
and Liberty ready to be Sacrificed, now comes the Angel.

6. God's wisdom is seen in befooling wise men, and making their wisdom a means
of their overthrow. Achitophel had deep Policy, 2 Samuel 16.23. The counsel of
Achitophel which he counseled, was as if a man had enquired at the Oracle of
God: but he consulted his own shame, The Lord turned his counsel into
foolishness, 2 Samuel 17.23. Job 5.13. God takes the wise in their own
craftiness; that is, when they think to deal wisely, he not only disappoints
them, but insnares them. The Snares they lay for others catch themselves. Psalm.
9.16. In the Net which they hid is their own foot taken. God loves to
counter-plot Politicians; he makes use of their own Wit to undo them, and hangs
Haman upon his own Gallows.

Use 1. Adore the wisdom of God, it is an infinite Deep, the Angels cannot
search into: Romans 11.33. His ways are past finding out. And as we should Adore,
so we should Rest in the wisdom of God: God sees what Condition is best for us.
Did we believe the wisdom of God, it would keep us from murmuring. Rest in
God's wisdom, in several Cases: 1. In want of Spiritual Comfort: God is wise,
he sees it good sometimes we should be without Comfort. Perhaps we should be
lifted up with Spiritual Enlargements, as Paul with his Revelations, 2 Cor.
12.7. It Is hard to have the Heart low when Comfort is high. God sees Humility
is better for us then Joy. It Is better to want Comfort and be humble, then to
have it and be proud. 2. In want of bodily strength rest in God's wisdom; he
sees what is best. Perhaps the less Health the more Grace. Weaker in Body, the
stronger we are in Faith, 2 Cor. 4.16. Though our outward man perish, yet the
inward man is renewed day by day. At Rome there were two Laurel Trees, when the
one withered the other flourished. The inward Man is renewed. When God shakes
the Tree of the Body, he is now gathering the Fruits of Righteousness, Hebr.
12.11. Sickness is God's Lance to let out the Impostbume of sin, Isa. 27.9. 3.
In case of God's Providence to his Church: we wonder what God is doing with
us, and are ready to kill our selves with Care; Rest in God's wisdom, he knows
best what he has to do, Psalm. 77.19. His footsteps are not known. Trust him
where you cannot trace him. God is most in his way, when we think he is most
out of the way. When we think God's Church is as it were in the Grave, and
there is a Tombstone laid upon her, God's wisdom can roll away the Stone from
the Sepulcher. Christ comes leaping over Mountains, Cant. 2.8. Either his
power can remove the Mountain, or his wisdom knows how to leap over it. 4. In
case we are low in the World, or have but little Oil in our Cruise, Rest in
God's wisdom, he sees it best; it is to cure Pride and Wantonness. God knew, if
thy Estate had not been lost, thy Soul had been lost. God he saw Riches would
be a Snare to thee, 1 Timothy 6.9. Art thou troubled that God has prevented a
Snare? God will make thee rich in Faith; what thou lackest in Temporals, shall
be made up in Spirituals; God will give thee more of his love. Thou art weak in
Estate, yet God will make thee strong in Assurance. O rest in God's wisdom! he
will Carve the best piece for thee. 5. In case of the loss of dear Friends, a
Wife, or Child, or Husband, rest satisfied in God's Wisdom. God has taken away
these, because he would have more of your Love. He breaks these Crutches, that
we may live more upon him by Faith. God would have us learn to go without
Crutches.

Use 2. If God be infinitely wise, then let us go to him for Wisdom; as
Solomon* 1 Kings 3.9. Give thy servant an understanding heart, and the speech
pleased the Lord; and there is encouragement for us. If any one lack wisdom,
let him ask of God who gives liberally and upbraideth not, Jam. 1.5. Wisdom is
in God, tanquam in font, as in the Fountain; his wisdom is imparted, not
impaired; his Stock is not spent by giving. Go then to God, Lord do thou light
my Lamp; in thy Light 'I shall see Light; give me wisdom to know the fallacies
of my heart, the subtilties of the old Serpent, to walk jealously toward my
self, religiously toward thee, prudently toward others; guide me by thy
Counsel, and afterward receive me to Glory.

Of GOD's Power.
THE next Attribute is God's Power, Job 9.19. If I speak of strength, lo he is
strong. In this Chapter is a magnificent Description of God's Power. So he is
strong] The Hebrew word for strong, ammytz, signifies a conquering, prevailing
strength. He is strong; the Superlative Degree is intended here, viz. He is
most strong. He is called Elshaddai, God Almighty, Genesis 17.1. His Almightiness
lies in this, he can do whatever is feasible. Divines distinguish between (...)
and (...), Authority and Power. God has both.

1. He has a Sovereign Right and Authority over Man. He may do with his
Creature as he please. Who shall Dispute with God? who shall ask him a Reason
of his doings? Dan. 4.35. He does according to his Will in the Army of Heaven,
and among the Inhabitants of the Earth, and none can stay his Hand, or say unto
him, what do thou? God sits Judge in the highest Court, he calls the Monarchs
of the Earth to the Bar, and is not bound to give a reason of his proceedings;
Psalm. 75.5, 7. He puts down one, and raises up another. He has Salvation
and Damnation in his power. He has the Key of Justice in his hand, to lock up
whom he will in the fiery Prison of Hell; and he has the Key of Mercy in his
hand, to open Heaven's Gate to whom he please. This is the Name engraven upon
his Vesture, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev. 19.16. he sits Lord
paramount, and who can call him to account? Isa. 46.10. I will do all my
pleasure. The World is God's Diocese, and shall not he do what he will in his
own Diocese? He it was that turned King Nebuchadnezzar to grass, and threw the
Angels to Hell when they sinned, that broke the head of the Babylonish Empire,
Isa. 14.12. How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer! thy pomp is brought
down to the grave: Who sets bounds to the Sea, and bridles the proud Waves, Job
38.11. God is the Supreme Monarch, all Power is seated originally in him; and
the powers that be are of God, Romans 13.1. Kings hold their Crowns from him,
Prove. 8.15. By me Kings reign.

2. As God has Authority, so he has Infinite Power. What is Authority without
Power? He is mighty in strength, Job 9.4. This Power of God is seen,

1. In the Creation. To Create requires an Infinite Power; all the World cannot
make a Fly. God's Power in Creating is evident, 1. Because he needs no
Instruments to work with; it is proper to God to work without Tools. 2. He needs
no Matter to work upon; first he creates Matter, and then works upon it. 3. He
works without labor, Psalm. 33.9. He spoke and it was done.

2. The Power of God is seen in the Conversion of Souls. Surely a mighty Power
went to raise Christ from the Grave, (...), Ephesians. 1.20. The same power goes to
draw a Sinner to God, as drew Christ out of the Grave to Heaven. Greater Power
is put forth in Conversion, than in Creation. 1. When God made the World he met
with no opposition; as he had nothing to help him, so he had nothing to hinder
him: But when he comes to convert a Sinner, here he meets with opposition;
Satan opposes him, and the Heart opposes him: a Sinner is angry with
Converting Grace. 2. The World was the work of God's Fingers, Psalm. 8.3.
Conversion is the work of God's Arm, Luke 1.5. 3. In the Creation God wrought
but one Miracle, he Spoke the word; but in Conversion he works many Miracles:
The Blind is made to see, the Dead is raised, the Deaf hears the Voice of the
Son of God. O the infinite Power of Jehovah! Before his Scepter Angels vail,
and prostrate themselves, Kings cast their Crowns at his Feet, Amos 9.5. He
touches the Mountains and they melt. Job 9.6. He removes the Earth out of her
place. An Earthquake makes the Earth tremble upon her Pillars, but God shakes
it out of its place; he can remove the Earth from its Center. God can do what
he will, his Power is as large as his Will. Were Men's power as large as their
will, what work would they make in the World! God's Power is of equal extent
with his Will. God can with a word un-pin the wheels, and break the Axle-tree
of the Creation. He can do (...), more then we can think, Ephesians. 3.20. He can
suspend natural Agents: he sealed up the Lions mouth, made the Fire not burn;
he made the waters stand upon an heap, he caused the Sun to go ten Degrees
backward in Ahaz his Dial, Isa. 38.8. What can pose Omnipotency? The Lord cuts
off the Spirit of Princes, Psalm. 76.12. He Counter-works his Enemies, he pulls
down their Flags and Banners of Pride, infatuates their Counsels, breaks their
Forces; and he does it with ease: with the turning of his hand, Psalm. 81.14.
with his breath, Isa. 40.24. with a look. That is all it needs cost God to
destroy his Enemies, a look, a cast of his eye, Exodus 14.24. The Lord looked
into the host of the Egyptians, through the pillar of fire, and troubled their
host. Who shall stop him in his March? God commands, and all Creatures in
Heaven and Earth obey him. Xerxes the Persian Monarch threw Fetters into the
Sea when its Waves swelled, as if he would have chained up the Waters: but when
God speaks, the Wind and Sea obey him; if he say but the word, the Stars fight
in their course against Sisera, if he stamp with his Foot, an Army of Angels
shall presently be in a Battalia. What cannot Omnipotent Power do? The Lord is
a Man of War, Exodus 15.3. He has a mighty Arm, Psalm. 89.13. God's Power is a
glorious power, Col. 1.11. 1. It is an irresistible power, Romans 9.19. Who has
resisted his will. To contest with him, is as if the Thorns should set
themselves in Battle array against the fire; or as if an infirm Child should
fight with an Archangel. If the Sinner be once taken in God's Iron Net, there
is no escaping, Isa. 43.13. There is none that can deliver out of my hand. 2.
God's Power is an inexhaustible power, it is never spent or wasted. Men, while
they exercise their strength weaken it: but God has an everlasting spring of
strength in him, Isa. 26.4. though he spends his Arrows upon his Enemies, Deuteronomy.
32.23. yet he does not spend his strength, Isa. 40.28. He faints not, neither
is weary.

Object. Can God do all things, he cannot deny himself?

Answ. Though God can do all things, he cannot do that which stains the glory
of his Godhead: he cannot sin; he cannot do that which implies a Contradiction.
To be a God of Truth, and yet deny himself, is a Contradiction.

Use 1. If God be so infinite in Power, Fear this great God. We are apt to fear
such as are in power; Ier. 5.22. Fear ye not me, says the Lord? will ye not
tremble at my presence? He has power to cast our Souls and Bodies into Hell;
Psalm. 90.11. Who knows the power of his wrath? God can with the same Breath
that made us, dissolve us; his Eyes are as a flame of fire; the Rocks are
thrown down by him, Nah. 1.6. Solomon says, Where the word of a King is, there
is power, Eccles 8.4. much more where the word of a God is. O let us fear this
mighty God! The fear of God would drive out all other base Fear.

Use 2. See the deplorable Condition of wicked Men: 1. This Power of God is not
for them; 2. It is against them.

1. This Power of God is not for them: they have no Union with God, therefore
have no warrant to lay claim to his Power. His Power is no relief to them. He
has power to forgive sins, but he will not put forth his power toward an
impenitent sinner. God's Power is an Eagles wing to carry the Saints to Heaven.
But what Privilege is that to the wicked? Though a Man will carry his Child in
his Arms over a dangerous water, yet he will not carry an Enemy in his Arms.
God's Power is not engaged to help those that fight against him. Let Miseries
come upon the Wicked, they have none to help them; they are like a Ship in a
storm without a Pilot, driven upon the Rocks.

2. This Power of God is against the Wicked. God's Power will not be the
Sinner's Shield to defend him, but a Sword to wound him. God's Power will bind
the the Sinner in Chains. God's Power serves to revenge the wrong done to his
Mercy. God will be Almighty to damn the Sinner. Now in what a condition is
every Unbeliever; God's Power is engaged against him, and it is a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the living God, Hebr. 10.31.

Use 3. It reproves such as do not believe this Power of God. We say we do not
doubt of God's Power, but his Will Not the posse, but velle.
. But indeed it is God's Power that we question. Is any thing too hard for God?
Jer. 32.27. yet we stagger through Unbelief, as if the Arm of God's Power were
shrunk, and he could not help in desperate Cases. Take away a King's Power and
we un-king him; take away the Lord's Power and we un-God him: yet how guilty of
this are we. Did not Israel question God's Power? Can he prepare a Table in the
Wilderness? Psalm. 78.19. they thought the Wilderness was a fitter place for
making of Graves, then spreading of a Table. Did not Martha doubt of Christ's
Power? John 11.39. He has been dead four days. If Christ had been there while
Lazarus was sick, or when he had been newly dead, Martha did not question but
Christ could have raised him, but he had laid in the Grave four days, and now
she seemed to question his Power. Christ had as much ado to raise her Faith, as
to raise her dead Brother. And Moses, though an holy Man, yet limits God's
Power through Unbelief, Numb. 11.21. The People amongst whom I am, are six
hundred thousand footmen, and thou have said I will give them flesh for a whole
month; shall the flocks and the herds be slain for them to suffice them? or
shall all the Fish of the Sea be gathered for them to suffice them? And the
Lord said unto Moses, is the Lord's hand waxed short? This is a great Affront
to God, to go to deny his Power. That Men doubt of God's Power, appears 1. By
their taking indirect Courses. Would they defraud in their Dealings, use false
Weights, if they believed the Power of God; that he could provide for them? 2.
By their depending more upon second Causes then upon God, 2 Chronicles. 16.12. In
his disease he sought not to the Lord but to the Physician.

Use 4. If God be infinite in Power, then let us take heed of hardening our
hearts against God, Job 9.4. Who has hardened himself against him and
prospered? Job sends a Challenge to all Creatures in Heaven and Earth, Who is
he did ever take up the Bucklers against God, and came of Conqueror? For a
Person to go on daringly in any sin, is to harden his heart against God, and as
it were to raise a War against Heaven; and let him remember, God is Elshaddai,
Almighty; he will be too hard for them that oppose him, Job 40.9. Have thou an
arm like God? Such as will not bow to his golden Scepter, shall be broken with
his iron Rod. Julian hardened his heart against God, he opposed him to his Face;
but what got he at last? did he prosper? Being wounded in Battle, he threw up
his Blood into the Air, and said to Christ, Vicisti Galilaee, O Galilean, thou
have overcome; I acknowledge thy Power, whose Name and Truth I have opposed.
Will Folly contend with Wisdom? Weakness with Power? Finite with Infinite? O
take heed of hardening your heart against God! he can send Legions of Angels to
avenge his Quarrel. It Is better to meet God with Tears in your Eyes, then
Weapons in your Hand. You may overcome God sooner by Repentance then by
Resistance.

Use 5. Get an Interest in God, and then this glorious Power is engaged for
you. God gives it under his hand, that he will put forth the whole Power of his
Godhead for the good of his People, 1 Chronicles. 17.24. The Lord of hoasts is the
God of Israel, even a God to Israel. This Almightiness of God's Power is a
wonderful Support and Comfort to every Believer. It was Sampson's Riddle, Judge.
14.14. Out of the strong came forth sweetness: So out of the Attribute of God's
Power, out of this strong comes forth sweetness. It Is Comfort in several Cases:

1. In case of strong Corruption: My sins (says a Child of God) are potent. I
have no power against this Army that comes against me. I pray and humble my
Soul by Fasting, but my sins return upon me. I, but do thou believe the Power
of God; the strong God can conquer thy strong Corruption; though sin be too
hard for thee, yet not for him; he can soften hard hearts, quicken the dead. Is
any thing too hard for the Lord? Genesis 18.14. Set God's Power on work. By Faith
and Prayer, say, Lord! it is not for thy honor that the Devil should have so
strong a Party within me; O break the head of this Leviathan, Abba, Father, all
things are possible to thee.

2. In case of strong Temptation: Satan is called (...), The strong Man; O but
remember the Power of God, Christ is called, The Lion of the Tribe of Judah; he
has broken the Serpent's head upon the Cross. Satan is a chained Enemy, and a
conquered Enemy: Michael is stronger then the Dragon.

3. Comfort in case of Weakness of Grace, and Fear of falling Away: I pray, but
I cannot send out strong Cries; I believe, but the hand of my Faith does shake
and tremble: Cannot God strengthen weak Grace? 2 Cor. 12.9. My strength is made
perfect in weakness: Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my
infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me. I fear I shall not hold
out. Christian, Do thou believe the Power of God? Has not God preserved thy
Grace thus far? May not thou set up thy Eben-ezer? God has kept thy Grace
hitherto as a Spark in the main Ocean, and is not he able still to keep thy
Grace, 1 Pet. 1.5. We are kept by the power of God, etc. God's Mercy pardons
us, but his Power preserves us. He who by his Power keeps the Stars that they
do not fall out of their Orb, keeps our Grace that it does not fail or
annihilate.

4. Comfort in case of the Deficiency in thy Estate: God can multiply the Oil
in the Cruise; miraculously he can raise up Supplies. God that provides for the
Birds of the Air, cannot he provide for his Children? He that clothes the
Lilies, cannot he cloth his Lambs?

5. Comfort in regard of the Resurrection: This seems difficult to believe,
that the Bodies of Men when eaten up by Worms, devoured by Beasts and Fishes,
or consumed to Ashes, should be raised the same Numerical Bodies; but if we
believe the Power of God, it is no great Wonder: Which is hardest to create or
raise the Dead? He that can make a Body of nothing, can restore it to its
parts, when mingled and confounded with other Substances, Matthew. 19.26. With
God all things are possible. If we believe the first Article of the Creed, That
God is Almighty; we may quickly believe the other Article, The Resurrection of
the Body. God can raise the Dead because of his Power, and he cannot but raise
them because of his Truth.

6. It is Comfort in reference to the Church of God: He can save and deliver it
when it is brought low. The Enemies have power in their hand, but the remainder
of Wrath God will restrain, Psalm. 76.10. God can either confine the Enemies
Power, or confound it: If God be for us, who can be against us? God can create
Jerusalem a praise, Isa. 65.18. The Church in Ezekiel was compared to dry
Bones, but God made breath to enter into them, and they lived, Ezekiel. 37.10. The
Ship of the Church may be tossed, because Sin is in it, but it shall not be
overwhelmed, because Christ is in it, Psalm. 46.5. Deus in medio. All the
Churches Pangs shall help forward her Deliverance.

Of the Holiness of GOD.
THE next Attribute is God's Holiness, Exodus 15.11. Glorious in holiness, Nedar
Bakkodesh] Holiness is the most sparkling Jewel of his Crown, it is the Name by
which God is known, Psalm. 111.9. Holy and reverend is his name. He is the holy
one, Job 6.10. Seraphims cry, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts, the whole
earth is full of his glory, Isa. 6.3. His Power makes him Mighty, his Holiness
makes him Glorious: God's Holiness consists in his perfect loving of
Righteousness, and abhorrency of Evil, Hab. 1.13. Of purer eyes then to behold
evil, and can not look on iniquity.

1 st, God is holy intrinsically: 1. He is holy in his Nature; his very Being
is made up of Holiness, as Light is of the Essence of the Sun. 2. He his holy
in his Word; the Word bears a Stamp of his Holiness upon it, as the Wax bears
an Impression of the Seal, Psalm. 119, 140. Thy word is very pure; it is
compared to Silver refined seven times, Psalm. 12.6. Every Line of the Word
breaths Sanctity; it encourages nothing but Holiness. 3. God is holy in his
Operations, all God does is holy: He cannot act but like himself; he can no
more do an Unrighteous Action, then the Sun can darken, Psalm. 145.17. The Lord
is holy in all his works.

2 dly, God is holy primarily: He is the Original and Pattern of Holiness;
Holiness began at him who is the Ancient of Days.

3 dly, God is holy efficiently: He is the Cause of all that Holiness in
others, Iam. 1.17. Every good and perfect gift comes from above. He made the
Angels holy; he infused all that Holiness into Christ's Humane Nature: All the
Holiness we have is but a Crystal Stream from this Fountain. We borrow all our
Holiness from God, as the Lights of the Sanctuary were lighted from the middle
Lamp; so all the Holiness of others is a Lamp lighted from Heaven. Lev. 20.8. I
am the Lord which sanctify you: God is not only a Pattern of Holiness, but he
is a Principle of Holiness. His Spring feeds all our Cisterns; he drops his
holy Oil of Grace upon us.

4 hly, God is holy transcendantly: 1 Samuel 2.2. There is none holy as the Lord:
No Angel in Heaven can take the just Dimensions of God's Holiness. The highest
Seraphim is too low of Stature to measure these Pyramids: the Holiness in God
is far above the Holiness in the Saints or Angels:

1. It is above the Holiness in the Saints, 1. It is a purer Holiness: The
Saints Holiness is like Gold in the Oar, imperfect; their Humility is stained
with Pride; he that has most Faith, had need pray, Lord help my unbelief. But
the Holiness of God is pure, like Wine from the Grape, it has not the least
dash or tincture of Impurity mixed with it. 2. A more unchangeable Holiness:
The Saints though they cannot lose the habit of Holiness, (for the Seed of God
remains,) yet they may lose some degrees of their Holiness, Rev. 2.4. Thou have
left thy first love. Grace cannot dye, yet the Flaim of it may go out: Holiness
in the Saints is subject to Ebbing, but Holiness in God is Unchangeable, he
never lost a drop of his Holiness. As he cannot have more Holiness because he
is perfectly Holy, so he cannot have less Holiness, because he is unchangeably
Holy.

2. The Holiness, in God is above the Holiness in the Angels: Holiness in the
Angels is only a Quality, which may be lost, as we see in the fallen Angels;
but Holiness in God is his Essence, he is all over Holy, and he can as well
lose his Godhead as his Holiness.

Object. But is not he privy to all the Sins of Men, he behods their
Impurities, how can this be, and he not be defiled?

Resp. God sees all the Sins of Men, but is no more defiled with them, then the
Sun is defiled with the Vapors that arise out of the Earth: God sees Sin not
as a Patron to approve it, but as a Judge to punish it.

Use 1. Is God so infinitely Holy, then see how unlike to God Sin is: Sin is an
unclean thing, it is (...), Hyperbolically Evil, Romans 1.13. it is called (...),
an Abomination, Deuteronomy. 7.25. God has no mixture of Evil in him, Sin has no
mixture of Good; it is the Spirits and Quintissence of Evil; it turns Good into
Evil; it has deflowered the Virgin-Soul, made it red with Guilt, and black with
Filth: it is called the accursed thing, Jos. 7.11. No wonder, ergo, that God
does so hate Sin, being so unlike to him, nay, so contrary: it strikes at his
Holiness, Sin does all it can to spite God; Sin would not only Unthrone God,
but Ungod him; if Sin could help it, God should be God no longer.

Use 2. Is God the Holy One, and is his Holiness his Glory? Then how impious
are they, 1. That are Haters of Holiness, as the Vulture hates Perfumes: so
they hate this sweet Perfume of Holiness in the Saints; their Hearts rise
against Holiness as a Man's Stomach at a Dish he has an Antipathy against.
There is not a greater sign of a Person devoted to Hell, then to hate one for
that thing wherein he is most like God, his Holiness. 2. That are Despisers of
Holiness; they despise the Glory of the Godhead, Glorious in holiness; the
despising of Holiness is seen in the deriding of it; Is it not sad Men should
deride that which should save them? Sure that Patient will dye that derides the
Physic? The deriding the Grace of the Spirit comes near to the despighting the
Spirit of Grace: Scoffing Ishmael was cast out of Abraham's House, Genesis 21.9.
Such as scoff at Holiness shall be cast out of Heaven.

Use 2. of Exhortation: Is God so infinitely holy, then let us endeavor to
imitate God in Holiness, 1 Pet. 1.16. Be ye holy for I am holy. There Is a
twofold Holiness, An Holiness of Equality, and an Holiness of Similitude: An
Holiness of Equality no Man or Angel can reach to: Who can be equally Holy with
God? Who can parallel him in Sanctity? But, 2. there is an Holiness of
Similitude, and that we must aspire after, to have some Analogy and Resemblance
of God's Holiness in us; be as like him in Holiness as we can: though a Taper
does not give so much Light as the Sun, yet it does resemble it. We must
Imitate God in Holiness.

Quest. Must we be like God in Holiness, wherein does our Holiness consist?

Resp. In two things, 1st, In our Suitableness to God's Nature. 2dly, Our
Subjection to his Will:

1. Our Holiness stands in our Suitableness to the Nature of God: Hence the
Saints are said to partake of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. which is not a
partaking of his Essence, but his Image. Herein is the Saints Holiness, when
they are the lively Pictures of God: they bear the Image of God's Meekness,
Mercifulness, Heavenliness; they are of the same Judgment with God, of the same
Disposition, they love what he loves, and hate what he hates.

2. Our Holiness consists in our Subjection to the Will of God: As God's Nature
is the Pattern of Holiness, so his Will is the Rule of Holiness. This is our
Holiness, 1. When we do his Will, Acts 13.22. 2. When we bear his Will, Mich.
7.9. What he inflicts wisely, we suffer willingly. This is our Holiness, when
we are suitable to God's Nature, and submissive to his Will; this should be our
great Care to be like God in Holiness. Our Holiness should be so qualified as
God's; God's is a real Holiness, such should ours be, Ephesians. 4.24.
Righteousness and true holiness; it should not be only the Paint of Holiness,
but the Life of Holiness; it should not only be like the Egyptian Temples,
beautiful without, but like Solomon's Temple, Gold within, Psalm. 45.13. The
King's Daughter is glorious within. That I may press you to resemble God in
Holiness.

1. How Illustrious every holy Person is; he is (...), he is a fair Glass in
which some of the Beams of God's Holiness shines forth. We read Aaron put on
Garments for Glory and Beauty, Exodus 28.2. When we wear the embroidered Garment
of Holiness, it is for Glory and Beauty. A good Christian is ruddy, being
sprinkled with Christ's Blood, and white, being adorned with Holiness. As the
Diamond to a Ring, so is Holiness to the Soul. So beautiful a thing is
Holiness, that as Chrysostom says, 'They that oppose it, cannot but admire it.

2. It is the great Design God carries on in the World, to make a People like
himself in Holiness: What are all the Showers of the Ordinances for, but to
rain down Righteousness upon us, and make us Holy? What are the Promises for,
but to encourage Holiness? What is the sending of the Spirit into the World
for, but to anoint us with the Holy Unction, 1 Ioh. 2.20. What are all
Afflictions for, but to make us Partakers of God's Holiness, Heb. 12.10* What
are Mercies for, but Loadstones to draw us to Holiness? What is the end of
Christ's dying, but that his Blood might wash away our Unholiness, Tit. 2.14.
Who gave himself for us, to purify unto himself a peculiar People. So that if
we are not holy, we cross God's great Design in the World.

3. It Is our Holiness draws God's Heart to us: Holiness is God's Image: God
cannot choose but love his Image where he sees it. A King loves to see his
Effigies upon a piece of Coin: Psalm. 45.7. Thou love righteousness. And where
does Righteousness grow, but in an holy Heart? Isa. 6^.4. Thou shall be called
Hepbsiba, for the Lord delights in thee: It was her Holiness drew God's Love
to her, Verse 12. They shall call them the holy people. God values not any by
their high Birth, but their Holiness.

4. Holiness is the (...), the only thing that differenceth us from the
Reprobate Part of the World: God's People have his Seal upon them, 2 Timothy 2.19.
The foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, The Lord knows them that
are his. And, let all that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity. The
People of God are sealed with a double Seal, 1. Election, The Lord knows who
are his. 2. Sanctification, Let every one depart from iniquity. As a Nobleman
is distinguished from another by his Silver Star; as a virtuous Woman is
distinguished from an Harlot by her Chastity; so Holiness distinguishes
between the two Seeds. All that are of God as they have Christ for their
Captain, Heb. 2.10. so Holiness is the white Color they wear.

5. Holiness is our Honor, Holiness and Honor put together, 1 These. 4.4.
Dignity goes along with Sanctity, Rev. 1.6. He has washed us from our sins ^n
his blood, and has made us kings unto God. When we are washed and made holy,
then we are Kings and Priests to God. The Saints are called Vessels of Honor,
they are called Jewels for the sparkling of their Holiness, because filled with
Wine of the Spirit; this makes them Earthly Angels.

6. Holiness gives us Boldness with God, Job 22.23, 26. Thou shall put away
iniquity far from thy tabernacle, and shall lift up thy face unto God. Lifting
up the Face is an Emblem of Boldness. Nothing makes us so ashamed to go to God
as Sin: a wicked Man in Prayer may lift up his Hands, but he cannot lift up his
Face. When Adam had lost his Holiness, he lost his Confidence; he hid himself.
But the holy Person goes to God as a Child to his Father, his Conscience does
not upbraid him with allowing any Sin, therefore he can go boldly to the Throne
of Grace, and have Mercy to help in time of need, Heb. 4.16.

7. Holiness gives Peace: Sin raises a Storm in the Conscience, Ubi peccatum
ibi procella: Isa. 57.21. There Is no peace to the wicked; Righteousness and
Peace are put together. Holiness is the Root which bears this sweet Fruit of
Peace: Righteousness and peace kiss each other.

8. Holiness leads to Heaven: Holiness is the King of Heaven's Highway, Isa.
35.8. An highway shall be there, and it shall be called the way of holiness.
At Rome there was the Temple of Virtue and Honor, and they were to go through
the Temple of Virtue to the Temple of Honor: So we must go through the Temple
of Holiness to the Temple of Heaven. Glory begins in Virtue, 2 Pet. 1.3. Who
has called us to glory and virtue? Happiness is nothing else but the
Quintessence of Holiness. Holiness is Glory militant, and Happiness Holiness
triumphant.

Quest. What shall we do to resemble God in Holiness?

Resp. Have recourse to Christ's Blood by Faith; it is Lavacrum animae, Legal
Purifications, Types and Emblems of it, 1 Ioh. 1.7. The Word is a Glass to show
us our Spots, and Christ's Blood is a Fountain to wash them away.

2. Pray for an holy Heart, Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a clean heart, O God. Lay
thy Heart before the Lord, and say, Lord, my heart is full of Leprosy; it
defiles all it touches: Lord I am not fit to live with such an heart, for I
cannot honor thee, nor die with such an heart, for I cannot see thee. O create
in me a clean heart; send thy Spirit into me to refine and purify me, that I
may be a Temple fit for the holy God to inhabit.

3. Walk with them that are holy, Prove. 13.20. He that walks with the wise
shall be wise. Be among the Spices and you will smell of them. Association
begets Assimilation: nothing has a greater Power and Energy to effect
Holiness, then the Communion of Saints.

Of GOD's Justice.
THE next Attribute is God's Justice: All God's Attributes are identical, and
are the same with his Essence. Though he has several Attributes whereby he is
made known to us, yet he has but one Essence. A Cedar Tree may have several
Branches, yet it is but one Cedar. So there are several Attributes of God,
whereby we conceive of him, but one entire Essence. Well, then concerning God's
Justice, Deuteronomy. 32.4. Just and right is he. Job 37.23. Touching the Almighty, we
cannot find him out, he is excellent in plenty of Justice. God is said to dwell
in Justice, Psalm. 89.14. Justice and Judgment are the habitation of thy Throne.
In God Power and Justice meet. Power holds the Scepter, and Justice holds the
Balance.

Question. What is God's Justice?

Resp. Iustitia est jus suum cuique tribuere; Justice is to give every one his
due. God's Justice is the Rectitude of his Nature, whereby he is carried to the
doing of that which is righteous and equal; Prove. 24.12. Shall not he render to
every Man according to his Works? God is an Impartial Judge; he judges the
Cause. Men often judge the Person, and not the Cause, which is not Justice, but
Malice. God judges the Cause, Genesis 18.21. I will go down and see if they have
done according to the cry which is come up unto me. When the Lord is upon a
punitive act, he weighs things in the Balance, he does not punish rashly; he
does not go in the way of a Riot, but a Circuit against Offenders. Concerning
God's Justice, I shall lay down these six Positions.

1. God cannot but be Just. His Holiness is the Cause of his Justice. Holiness
will not suffer him to do any thing but what is Righteous. He can no more be
unjust, then he can be unholy.

2. God's Will is the Supreme Rule of Justice: It is the Standard of Equity.
His Will is wise and good. God wills nothing but what is just, and therefore it
is just, because he wills it.

3. God does Justice voluntarily: Justice flows from his Nature. Men may act
unjustly, because they are bribed or forced: God will not be bribed, because of
his Justice, he cannot be forced because of his Power. He does Justice out of
Love to Justice, Hebr. 1.8. Thou love righteousness.

4. Justice is the perfection of the Divine Nature. Aristotle says, Justice
(...), comprehends in it all Virtues. To say God is just, is to say he is all
that is Excellent: Perfection meets in him as Lines in a Center. He is not only
Just, but Justice it self.

5. God never did, nor can do the least wrong to his Creature. God's Justice
has been wronged, but never did any wrong. God does not go according to the
summum jus, or rigor of the Law; he abates something of his Severity. He might
inflict heavier Penalties than he does, Ezra 9.14. Thou have punished us less
then our iniquities deserve; our Mercies are more then we deserve, our
Punishments less.

6. God's Justice is such, that it is not fit for any Man or Angel to
expostulate with God, or demand a Reason of his Actions. God has not only
Authority on his side, but Equity: He lays Judgment to the Line, and
Righteousness to the Plummet, Isa. 28.17. and it is below him to give an
Account to us of his Proceedings. Which of these two is fittest to take place,
God's Justice or Man's Reason? Romans 9.20. Who art thou, O man, that disputest
against God? The Plumb-Line of our Reason is too short to fathom the depth of
God's Justice, Romans 11.33. How unsearchable are his Judgments! we are to adore
God's Justice, where we cannot see a reason of it.

Now God's Justice runs in two Channels: It Is seen in two Things, the
distribution of Rewards and Punishments.

1. In rewarding the Virtuous; Psalm. 58.11. Doubtless there is a reward for the
righteous. The Saints shall not serve him for naught, he will reward praeces
and lachrymas, (...), though they may be losers for him, they shall not be
losers by him, Hebr. 6.10. God is not unrighteous to forget your work and
labor of love which ye have showed to his Name. He gives a Reward, not that we
have deserved it, but because he has promised it.

2. He is just in punishing Offenders. And he is just, 1. Because he punishes
Sinners by a Law. Where there is no Law there is no transgression, Romans 4.15.
But God has given Men a Law, and they brake it, therefore he punishes them
justly. 2. God is just in punishing the Wicked, because he never punishes
them, but upon full Proof and Evidence. What greater Evidence then for a Man's
own Conscience to be Witness against him? There is nothing God charge upon a
Sinner, but Conscience does set Seal to the Truth of it.

Use 1. See here another Flower of God's Crown the is just and righteous. He is
the Exemplar and Pattern of Justice.

Object. But how does it seem to stand with God's Justice, that the Wicked
should prosper in the World, Prove. 12.1. Wherefore does the way of the wicked
prosper? This has been a great stumbling, and been ready to make many question
God's Justice. Such as are highest in sin are highest in power. Diogenes seeing
Harpalus a Thief go on prosperously, said, Sure God had cast off the Government
of the World, and minded not how things went here below.

Resp. 1. The wicked may be sometimes Instruments to do God's work; though they
do not design his glory, yet they may promote it. Cyrus (Ezra. 1.7.) was
instrumental for the building God's Temple in Jerusalem. There is some kind of
Justice, that they should have a Temporal Reward: God lets them prosper, under
whose Wing his People are sheltred. God will not be in any Man's debt; Mal.
1.10. Who has kindled a fire on my Altar for naught?

2. God lets Men go on in sin and prosper, that he may leave them more
inexcusable, Rev. 2.21. I gave her space to repent of her Fornication. God
adjourns the Sessions, spins out his Mercies toward Sinners, and if they
repent not, his Patience will be a Witness against them, and his Justice will
be more cleared in their Condemnation, Psalm. 51.4. That thou might be
justified when thou speak, and be clear when thou judge.

3. God does not always let the wicked prosper in their sin, some he does
punish openly, that his Justice may be taken notice of, Psalm. 9.16. The Lord is
known by the judgment which he executes: that is, his Justice is seen by
striking Men dead in the very act of sin. Thus he struck Zimri and Cozbi in the
Act of Uncleanness.

4. If God do let Men prosper a while in sin, his Vial of Wrath is all this
while filling; his Sword is all this while whetting: and though God may forbear
Men a while, yet long forbearance is no forgiveness. The longer God is taking
his blow, the heavier it will be at last; as long as there is Eternity, God
has time enough to reckon with his Enemies. Justice may be as a Lion asleep,
but at last this Lion will awake, and roar upon the Sinner. Does not Nero, and
Julian, and Cain now meet with God's Justice?

Object. But God's own People suffer great Afflictions, they are injured and
persecuted, Psalm. 73.14. All the day long have I been plagued and chastned
every morning. How does this stand with God's Justice?

Resp. 1. That is a true Rule of St. Austin, Iudicia Dei possunt esse occulta,
non injusta; Gods ways of Judgment are sometimes secret, but never unjust. The
Lord never Afflicts his People without a Cause; so that he cannot be unjust.
There is some good in the godly, therefore the wicked afflict them; there is
some evil in them, therefore God afflicts them. God's own Children have their
(...), their blemishes, 2 Chronicles. 28.10. Are there not with you, even with you,
sins against the Lord? These Spiritual Diamonds, have they no flaws? Do not we
read of the Spots of God's Children, Deuteronomy. 32.10. Are not they guilty of much
Pride, Censoriousness, Passion, Worldliness? though by their Profession they
seem to resemble the Birds of Paradise, to fly above, and feed upon the Dew of
Heaven, yet as the Serpent, they lick the dust. And these sins of God's People
do more provoke God than others, Deuteronomy. 32.19. Because of the provoking of his
sons and daughters. The sins of others pierce Christ's side, these wound his
heart: therefore is not God just in all the Evils that befall them, Amos 3.2.
You only have I known of all the Families of the Earth, therefore I will punish
you for your Iniquities. I will punish you sooner, surer, sorer then others.

2. The Trials and Sufferings of the godly are to refine and purify them.
God's Furnace is in Sion, Isa. 31.9. Is it any Injustice in God to put his Gold
into the Furnace to purify it? Is it any Injustice in God by afflicting his
People, to make them partakers of his Holiness? Hebr. 12.10. What does more
proclaim God's Faithfulness, than to take such a course with them as may make
them better, Psalm. 119.75. In faithfulness thou have corrected me.

3. What Injustice is it in God to inflict a lesser Punishment, and prevent a
greater? The best of God's Children have that in them which is meritorious of
Hell: Now I pray, does God do them any wrong, if he uses only the Rod, where
they have deserved the Scorpion? Is the Father unjust if he only corrects his
Child, who has deserved to be disinherited? If God deals so favorably with
his Children, he only puts Wormwood in their Cup, whereas he might put Fire and
Brimstone, they are rather to admire his Mercy, than complain of his Injustice.

Object. How can it stand with God's Justice, that all Men, being equally
guilty by Nature, God should pass by one, and save another? why does not he
deal with all alike?

Resp. Romans 9.14. Is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid. Job. 8.3. Does
the Almighty pervert justice? 1. God is not bound to give an account of his
Actions to his Creatures. If none may say to a King, what do thou? Eccles.
8.4. much less to God. It is sufficient, God is Lord paramount, he has a
Sovereign Power over his Creatures, therefore can do no Injustice, Romans 9.21.
Has not the Potter power over the Clay, of the same Lump to make one Vessel to
honor, and another unto dishonor? God has a liberty ^e^t in his own Breast
to save one, and not another, and his Justice is not at a^l impeached or
blemished. If two Men owe you Money, you may without any Inju^tice remit the
Debt to one, and exact it of the other. If two Male-factors be condemned to
die, the King may pardon one, and not the other. He is not unjust if he ^ets
one suffer, because he offended the Law, nor if he save the other, because he
will make use of his Prerogative as he is King. 2. Though some are saved, and
others perish, yet there is no unrighteousness in God, because whoever
peri^heth, his destruction is of himself, Hos. 13.9. O Israel, thou have
destroyed thy self. God offers Grace, the Sinner refuses it, Is God bound to
give Grace? If a Chyrurgion comes to heal a Man's wound, he will not be healed,
but bolts out his Chyrurgion, is the Chyrurgion bound to heal him? Prove. 1.24.
I have called, and ye refused. Psalm. 81.11. Israel would none of me. God is not
bound to force his Mercies upon Men: If they wilfully oppose the offer of
Grace, there sin is to be taxed as the cause of their perishing, and not God's
justice.

2. See the difference between God and a great part of the World, they are
unjust, 1. In their Courts of Judicature; they pervert Justice: Isa. 10.1. They
decree unrighteous decrees. The Hebrew word for a Judges Robe, Magnil,
signifies Prevarication, Deceit, or Injustice. It is often truer of the Judge
then the Robe. The Judge deserves rather to have that Name than the Robe. What
is a good Law, without a good Judge? Injustice lies in two things, either not
to punish where there is a Fault, or to punish where there is no Fault; how
frequent! Again, 2. Unjust in their Dealings. This is 1. either in using false
weights, Hos. 12.7. The Balances of deceit are in his hand. It Is sad to have
the Bible in one hand, and false Weights in the other. Or 2. in adulterating
Commodities; Isa. 1.22. Thy wine is mixed with water; when they mix bad grain
with good, yet sell it for pure grain. I can never believe he is good in the
first Table, who is not good in the second. He cannot be godly who is not just.
Though God does not bid you be Omnipotent, as he is, yet be Just as he is.

Use 2. Imitate God in Justice. Let Christ's golden Maxim be observed, Matthew.
7.12. What you would have men do to you, do ye even so to them. You would not
have them wrong you, neither do you them; rather suffer wrong than do wrong, 1
Cor. 6.7. Why do ye not rather take wrong? O be exemplary for Justice! Let
Justice be your Ornament, Job 29.14. I put on Righteousness (viz. Justice) as a
Robe and a Diadem. A Robe for its graceful Beauty; and I put it on, and
induebam justitiam. A Judge puts on his Robe, and puts it off again at Night;
but Job did so put on Justice, as he did not put it off till Death, semper
vestiti. We must not lay off this Robe of Justice, till we lay down our
Tabernacle. If you have any thing of God in you, you will be like him. By every
unjust Action you do deny your selves to be Christians; you stain the glory of
your Profession; Heathens will rise up in Judgment against you. The Sun might
sooner alter its Course, than he could be turned from doing Justice.

Use 3. If God be just, there will be a Day of Judgment. Now things are out of
Course. Sin is rampant, Saints are wronged, they are often cast in a righteous
Cause, they can meet with no Justice here, Justice is turned into Wormwood; but
there is a day coming, when God will set things right; he will do every Man
Justice; he will crown the righteous, and condemn the wicked; Acts 17.31. He
has appointed a day, etc. If God be a just God, he will take vengeance. God
has given Men a Law to live by, they break it, there must be a day for the
Execution of Offenders: a Law not executed is but like a Wooden Dagger, for a
show. At the last Day God's Sword shall be drawn out against Offenders; then
his Justice shall be revealed before all the World, -- God will judge in
righteousness, Acts 17.31. Shall not the Judge of all the world do right? Genesis
18.25. The Wicked shall drink a Sea of Wrath, but not sip one Drop of
Injustice. At that day shall all Mouths be stopped, and God's Justice shall be
fully vindicated from all the Cavils and Clamors of unjust Men.

Use 4. Comfort to the true Penitent: As God is a just God he will pardon him,
Homo agnoscit, Deus ignoscit: 1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins (i. e. confess
and forsake) he is just to forgive us our sins. Not only merciful, but just,
Why just? because he has promised to forgive such, Prove. 28.13. If thy heart
has been broken for and from Sin, thou may not only plead God's Mercy, but
his Justice for the pardoning thy sin. Show him his Hand and Seal, he cannot
deny himself.

The Mercy of GOD.
THE next Attribute is God's Goodness or Mercy: Mercy is the Result and Effect
of God's Goodness, Psalm. 33.5. Psalm. 119.64. So then this is the next
Attribute, God's Goodness or Mercy. The most Learned of the Heathens thought
they gave their God Jupiter two Golden Characters, when they styled him, (...),
Good and Great: both these meet in God, Greatness and Goodness, Majesty and
Mercy.

God is, 1. Essentially good in himself. And, 2. Relative good to us. They are
both put together, Psalm. 119.68. Thou art good, and do good. This Relative
goodness is nothing else but his Mercy, which is an innate Propensness in God
to pity and succor such as are in Misery. Concerning God's Mercy,

1 st, I shall lay down these Twelve Positions: 1. It is the great Design of
the Scripture to represent God as Merciful. This is a Loadstone to draw Sinners
to him, Exodus 34.6. The Lord merciful, gracious, long-suffering, abundant in
goodness, etc. Here are six Expressions to set forth God's Mercy, and but one
to set forth his Justice; who will by no means clear the Guilty. Psalm. 57.10.
God's mercy is great above the heavens. Psalm. 108.4. God is represented as a
King, and a Rainbow was about his Throne, Rev. 4.2, 3. The Rainbow was an
Emblem of Mercy. The Scripture does oftener represent God in his white Robes of
Mercy, then with his Garments rolled in Blood; oftener with his Golden Scepter
then his Iron Rod.

Position 2. God is more inclinable to Mercy then Wrath: Pronior est Deus ad
parcendum quam ad puniendum. Mercy is his darling Attribute which he most
delights in, Mic. 7.18. Mercy pleases him. It Is delightful to the Mother,
says Chryso'stom, to have her Breasts drawn. So it is to God to have the
Breasts of his Mercy drawn. Isa. 27.4. Fury is not in me: That is, I do not
delight in it. Acts of Severity are rather forced from God, he does not afflict
willingly, Lam. 3.33. The Be naturally gives Honey, it stings only when it is
provoked. God does not punish till he can bear no longer, Jer. 44.22. So that
the Lord could bear no longer, because of the evil of your doings. Mercy is
God's right Hand, that he is most used to. Inflicting of Punishment is called
God's strange Work, Isa. 28.21. he is not used to it. And when the Lord would
shave off the Pride of a Nation, he is said to hire a Rasor, as if he had none
of his own, Isa. 7.20. He shall shave with a rasor that is hired. He is slow to
anger, Psalm. 103.8. But ready to forgive, Psalm. 86.5.

Position 3. There is no Condition but we may spy Mercy in it: When the Church
was in Captivity, she cries out, It is of the Lord's mercies that we are not
consumed, Lam. 3.22. Geographers write of Syracuse in Sicily, it is so
situated that the Sun is never out of sight. In all Afflictions we may see
some Sunshine of Mercy. That outward and inward Troubles do not come together,
is Mercy.

Position 4. Mercy sweetens all God's other Attributes: God's Holiness without
Mercy, and his Justice without Mercy were Terrible. When the Water was bitter,
and Israel could not drink, Moses cast a Tree into the Water, and then they
were made sweet. How bitter and dreadful were the other Attributes of God, did
not Mercy sweeten them; Mercy sets God's Power on work to help us; it makes his
Justice become our Friend; it shall avenge our Quarrels.

Position 5. God's Mercy is one of the most Orient Pearls of his Crown; it
makes his Godhead appear amiable and lovely. When Moses said to God, I beseech
thee show me thy glory. The Lord answered him, I will make all my goodness pass
before thee, and I will show mercy, Exodus 33.19. God's Mercy is his Glory: his
Holiness makes him Illustrious, his Mercy makes him Propitious.

Position 6. Even the Worst taste of God's Mercy, such as fight against God's
Mercy taste of it: The Wicked have some Crumbs from Mercy's Table; The Lord is
good to all, Psalm. 145.^. The sweet Dew drops on the Thistle as well as the
Rose. The Diocese where Mercy visits is very large. Pharaoh's Head was crowned,
though his Heart was hardened.

Position 7. Mercy coming to us in a Covenant is sweetest: It was Mercy that
God would give Israel Rain, and Bread to the full, and Peace, and Victory over
their Enemies, Levit. 26.4, 5, 6. But it was a greater Mercy, that God would be
their God, Verse 12. To have Health is a Mercy, but to have Christ and
Salvation is a greater Mercy; this is like the Diamond in the Ring, it casts a
more sparkling Luster.

Position 8. One Act of Mercy engages God to another: Men argue thus, I have
shown you Kindness already, therefore trouble me no more. But because God has
shown Mercy, he is more ready still to show Mercy: his Mercy in Election makes
him Justify, Adopt, Glorify; one Act of Mercy engages God to more. A
Parent's love to his Child, makes him always giving.

Position 9. All the Mercy in the Creature is derived from God, and is but a
drop of this Ocean: The Mercy and Pity a Mother has to her Child, is from God;
he that puts the Milk in her Breast, puts the Compassion in her Heart:
therefore God is called the Father of Mercies, 2 Cor. 1.3. because he begets
all the Mercies in the World. If God has put any Kindness into the Creature,
how much Kindness is in him who is the Father of Mercy.

Position 10. God's Mercy as it makes the Saints Happy, so it should make them
Humble: Mercy is not the Fruit of our Goodness, but the Fruit of God's
Goodness. Mercy is an Alms that God bestows; they have no cause to be Proud
that live upon the Alms of God's Mercy, Job 10.15. If I be righteous yet will I
not lift up my head: All my Righteousness is the Effect of God's Mercy,
therefore I will be humble, I will not lift up my Head.

Position 11. It is Mercy stays the speedy Execution of God's Justice: Sinners
continually provoke God, and make the fury come up in his face, Ezekiel. 38.18.
Whence is it God does not presently Arrest and Condemn them, it is not that God
cannot do it, for he is armed with Omnipotency, but it is from God's Mercy:
Mercy gets a Reprieve for the Sinner, and stops the speedy Process of Justice.
God would by his Goodness lead Sinners to Repentance.

Position 12. It Is dreadful to have Mercy witness against one: How sad was it
with Haman when the Queen herself accused him, Esth. 7.6. so when this Queen of
Mercy shall stand up against a Person, and accuse him. It is only Mercy that
saves a Sinner, now how sad to have Mercy become an Enemy; If Mercy be an
Accuser, who shall be our Advocate? The Sinner never scapes Hell, when Mercy
draws up the Indictment.

I might show you several Species or Kinds of Mercy, Preventing Mercy, Spareing
Mercy, Supplying Mercy, Guiding Mercy, Accepting Mercy, Healing Mercy,
Quickening Mercy, Supporting Mercy, Forgiving Mercy, Correcting Mercy,
Comforting Mercy, Delivering Mercy, Crowning Mercy; but I shall speak of the
Qualifications or Properties of God's Mercy,

1. God's Mercy is free: To set up Merit is to destroy Mercy; nothing can
deserve Mercy, because we are polluted in our Blood, nor force it. We may force
God to punish us, not to love us, Hos. 14.4. I will love them freely. Every
Link in the Chain of Salvation, is wrought and interwoven with Free Grace.
Election is free, Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us in him (...), according to the
good pleasure of his will. Justification is free, Romans 3.24. Being justified
freely by his grace. Salvation is free, Tit. 3.5. According to his mercy he
saved us. Say not then I am Unworthy, for Mercy is free: If God should show
Mercy only to such as are Worthy, he should show Mercy to none at all.

2. God's Mercy is an Overflowing Mercy, it is Infinite, Psalm. 86.5. Plenteous
in mercy. Ephesians. 2.4. Rich in mercy. Psalm. 51.1. Multitude of mercies. The Viol
of Wrath does but drop, but the Fountain of Mercy runs. The Sun is not so full
of Light, as God is of Mercy: God has Morning-mercies, Lam. 3.23. His mercies
are new every morning; and Night-mercies, Psalm. 42.8. In the night his song
shall be with me. God has Mercies under Heaven, those we taste of, and in
Heaven, and those we hope for.

3. God's Mercy is Eternal, Psalm. 103.17. The mercy of the Lord is from
everlasting to everlasting. It is repeated six and twenty times in one Psalm,
His mercy endures for ever, Psalm. 136. The Souls of the Blessed shall be ever
bathing themselves in this sweet and pleasant Ocean of God's Mercy. God's Anger
to his Children lasts but a while, Psalm. 103.9. But his mercy lasts for ever.
As long as he is God, he will be showing Mercy: As his Mercy is overflowing, so
ever-flowing.

Use 1. of Information, It shows us how we are to look upon God in Prayer, not
in his Judge's Robes, but cloth with a Rainbow, full of Mercy and Clemency;
add Wings to Prayer. When Jesus Christ ascended up to Heaven, that which made
him go up thither with Joy, was, I go to my Father; so that which should make
our Hearts ascend with Joy in Prayer, is, We are going to the Father of Mercy,
who sits upon a Throne of Grace. Go with Confidence in this Mercy; as when one
goes to a Fire, it is not doubtingly, perhaps it will warm me, perhaps not.

Use 2. Believe in this Mercy, Psalm. 52.8. I trust in the mercy of God for
ever. God's Mercy is a Fountain opened, let down the Bucket of Faith, and you
may drink of this Fountain of Salvation, what greater Encouragement to believe
then God's Mercy. God counts it his glory to be scattering Pardons; he is
desirous that sinners should touch the golden Scepter of his Mercy, and live.
And this willingness to show Mercy appears two ways:

1. By his entreating of sinners to come and lay hold on his Mercy; Rev. 22.17.
Whosoever will, come and take the water of life freely. Mercy woes sinners, it
even kneels down to them. It were strange for a Prince to entreat a condemned
Man to accept a Pardon. God says, poor sinner, suffer me to love thee, be
willing to let me save thee.

2. By his joyfulness when sinners do lay hold on his Mercy. What is God the
better, whether we receive his Mercy or no? What is the Fountain profited that
others drink of it? Yet such is God's goodness, that he rejoices at the
Salvation of sinners, and is glad when his Mercy is accepted off. When the
Prodigal Son came home, how glad was the Father? and he makes a Feast to
express his joy. This was but a Type or Emblem, to show how God rejoices when
a poor sinner comes in, and lays hold of his Mercy. What an Encouragement is
here to believe in God, he is a God of Pardons, Nehem. 9.17. Mercy pleases
him, Micha 7.18. Nothing does prejudice us but Unbelief. Unbelief stops the
current of God's Mercy from running: It shuts up God's Bowels, closes the
Orifice of Christ's Wounds, that no healing Virtue will come out, Matthew. 13.58.
He could do no mighty works there because of their unbelief. Why do thou not
believe in God's Mercy? Is it thy sins discourage? God's Mercy can pardon great
sins, nay, because they are great, Psalm. 25.11. The Sea covers great Rocks as
well as lesser Sands; some that had an hand in crucifying Christ, found Mercy.
As far as the Heavens are above the Earth so far is God's Mercy above our sins,
Isa. 55.9. What will tempt us to believe, if not the Mercy of God?

Use 3. of Caution. Take heed of Abusing of this Mercy of God. Suck not Poison
out of the sweet Flower of God's Mercy; Do not think, that because God is
merciful, you may go on in sin; this is to make Mercy become your Enemy. None
might touch the Ark but the Priests, who by their Office were more holy. None
may touch this Ark of God's Mercy, but such as are resolved to be holy. To sin
because Mercy abounds, is the Devil's Logic. He that sins because of Mercy, is
like one that wounds his Head because he has a Plaster: He that sins because
of God's Mercy, shall have Judgment without Mercy. Mercy abused turns to Fury.
Deuteronomy. 29.19. If he bless himself, saying, I shall have peace though I walk
after the imaginations of my heart, to add drunkenness to thirst, the Lord will
not spare him, but the anger of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against
that man. Nothing sweeter then Mercy when it is improved, nothing fiercer when
it is abused. Nothing colder than Lead when it is taken out of the Mine,
nothing more scalding than Lead when it is heated. Nothing blunter than Iron,
nothing sharper when it is whetted. Psalm. 103.17. The mercy of the Lord is upon
them that fear him. Mercy is not for them that sin and fear not, but for them
that fear and sin not. God's Mercy is an holy Mercy, where it pardons it heals.

Quest. What shall we do to be interested in God's Mercy?

Answ. 1. Be sensible of your wants. See how you stand in need of Mercy,
pardoning, saving Mercy. See your selves Orphans; Hos. 14.3. In thee the
fatherless finds Mercy. God bestows the Alms of Mercy only on such as are
indigent. Be emptied of all Opinion of Self-worthiness. God pours the golden
Oil of Mercy into empty Vessels.

2. Go to God for Mercy, Psalm. 51.1. Have Mercy upon me, O God! Put me not off
with common Mercy that Reprobates may have: Give me not only Acorns, but
Pearls: Give me not only Mercy to feed and clothe me, but Mercy to save me;
give me the Cream of thy Mercies; Lord! let me have Mercy and Loving kindness:
Psalm. 103.4. Who crowned thee with loving kindness and tender mercies. Give me
such Mercy as speaks thy electing love to my soul. O pray for Mercy! God has
Treasures of Mercy; Prayer is the Key that opens these Treasures: and in Prayer
be sure to carry Christ in your Arms; all Mercy comes through Christ; 1 Samuel
7.9. Samuel took a sucking Lamb. Carry the Lamb Christ in your Arms, go in his
Name, present his Merits, say, Lord! here is Christ's Blood, which is the price
of my pardon: Lord, show me Mercy, because Christ has purchased it. Though God
may refuse us when we come for Mercy in our own Name, yet not when we come in
Christ's Name: Plead Christ's Satisfaction, and this is such an Argument as God
cannot deny.

Use 4. It exhorts such as have found Mercy to three Things: 1. To be upon
Mount Gerizim, the Mount of Blessing and Praising. They have not only heard the
King of Heaven is merciful, but they have found it so: the Honeycomb of God's
Mercy has dropped upon them; when in wants, Mercy supplied them; when they were
nigh unto Death, Mercy raised them from the Sickbed; when covered with guilt,
Mercy pardoned them. Psalm. 103.1. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is
within me bless his holy Name. O! how should the Vessels of Mercy run over with
Praise: 1 Timothy 1.13. Who was before a Persecutor, and injurious, but (...) I
obtained Mercy. I was bemiracled with Mercy: as the Sea overflows and breaks
down the Banks, so the Mercy of God did break down the Banks of my Sin, and
Mercy did sweetly flow into my Soul. You that have been Monuments of God's
Mercy, should be Trumpets of Praise: You that have tasted the Lord is gracious,
tell others what Experiences you have had of God's Mercy, that you may
encourage them to seek to him for Mercy; Psalm. 66.16. I will tell you what God
has done for my Soul. When I found my heart dead, God's Spirit did come upon
me mightily, and the blowing of that wind made the withering flowers of my
Grace revive. O! tell others of God's goodness, that you may set others a
blessing him, and that you may make God's Praises live when you are dead.

2. To love God. Mercy should be the Attractive of Love; Psalm. 18.1. I will
love thee, O Lord my strength. The Hebrew word for Love, ercameca, signifies
Love out of the inward Bowels. God's Justice may make us fear him, his Mercy
may make us love him. If Mercy will not produce Love, what will? We are to love
God for giving us Food, much more for giving us Grace; for sparing Mercy, much
more for saving Mercy. Sure that Heart is made of Marble, which the Mercy of
God will not dissolve into Love. I would hate my own Soul (says St. Austin) if
I did not find it loving God.

3. To imitate God in showing Mercy. God is the Father of Mercy: show your
selves to be his Children, by being like him. St. Ambrose, The sum and
definition of Religion is, Be rich in works of Mercy, be helpful to the Bodies
and Souls of others. Scatter your golden Seeds; let the Lamp of your profession
be filled with the Oil of Charity. Be merciful in giving and forgiving. Be ye
merciful as your heavenly Father is merciful.

Of the Truth of GOD,
THE next Attribute is God's Truth; Deuteronomy. 32.4. -- A God of Truth, and without
Iniquity, just and right is he. Psalm. 57.10. For thy Mercy is great unto the
Heavens, and thy Truth unto the Clouds. A God of Truth; Psalm. 86.15. --
Plenteous in Truth. God is (...), the Truth. He is true, 1. in a Physical
sense; True in his Being: he has a real Subsistence, and gives a Being to
others. 2. He is true in a Moral sense; he is true, sine errore, without
Errors, and sine fallacia, without Deceit. God is prima veritas, the Pattern
and Prototype of Truth. There is nothing true but what is in God, or comes from
God. I shall now speak of God's Truth as it is taken for his Veracity, in
making good of his Promises: 1 Kings 8.56. There has not failed one word of
all his good promise: The Promise is God's Bond, God's Truth is the Seal set to
his Bond. This is the thing to be explicated and discussed, God's Truth in
fulfilling his Promises.

There are two things to be observed in the Promises of God to Comfort us: 1.
The Power of God, whereby he is able to fulfill the Promise. God has promised
to subdue our Corruption, Micha 7.19. He will subdue our iniquities. O! says a
Believer, my Corruption is so strong, that sure I shall never get the mastery
of it: but the power of God can fulfill his Promise. Thus Abraham looked at
God's Power, Romans 4.21. Being fully persuaded that what God had promised, he
was able to perform. He believed that that God, who could make a World, could
make dry Breasts give suck. This is Faith's support, there is nothing too hard
for God. He that could bring water out of a Rock, is able to bring to pass his
Promises.

2. The Truth of God in the Promises: God's Truth is the Seal set to the
Promise. Titus 1.2. In hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie has
promised. Eternal Life, there is the sweetness of the Promise: God which cannot
lie, there is the certainty of it. Mercy makes the Promise, Truth fulfils it.
God's Providence are uncertain, but his Promises are the sure Mercies of
David. Acts 13.34. God is not a man that he should repent, 1 Samuel 15.29. The
word of a Prince cannot always be taken, but God's Promise is inviolable. God's
Truth is one of the richest Jewels of his Crown, and he has pawned this Jewel
in a Promise; 2 Samuel 23.5. Although my House be not so with God, yet he has
made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure. Although
my House be not so] That is, though I fail much of that exact Purity the Lord
requires, yet he has made with me an everlasting Covenant, that he will
pardon, adopt, and glorify me; and this Covenant is ordered in all things
sure: The Elements shall melt with fervent heat, but this Covenant abides firm
and inviolable, being sealed with the Truth of God: nay, God has added to his
Word, his Oath, Hebr. 6.17. wherein God pawns his Being, Life, Righteousness,
to make good the Promise. If as often as we break our Vows with God, he should
break Promise with us, it would be very sad; but his Truth is engaged in his
Promise, therefore it is like the Law of the Medes and Persians, which cannot
be altered. We are not (says Chrysostom) to believe our Senses so much, as we
are to believe the Promises; (...), etc. Our Senses may fail us, but the
Promise cannot, being built upon the Truth of God; God will not deceive the
Faith of his People, nay he cannot; God which cannot lie has promised: He can
as well part with his Deity, as his Verity. God is said to be abundant in
Truth, Exodus 34.6. What is that? viz. if God has made a Promise of Mercy to
his People, he will be so far from coming short of his word, that he will be
better than his word. God often does more then he has said, never less. He is
abundant in Truth.

1. The Lord may sometimes delay a Promise, but he will not deny. He may delay
a Promise. God's Promise may lie a good while, as Seed under ground, but at
last it will spring up into a Crop. God promised to deliver Israel from the
Iron Furnace, but this Promise was above four hundred years in travail before
it brought forth. Simeon had a Promise, that he should not depart hence till he
had seen the Lords Christ, Luke 2.26. but it was a long time first, but a
little before his Death, that he did see Christ. But though God delay the
Promise, he will not deny. Having given his Bond, in due time the Money will be
paid in.

2. God may change his Promise, but he will not break his Promise. Sometimes
God does change a Temporal Promise into a Spiritual. Psalm. 85.12. The Lord
shall give that which is good: Perhaps this may not be fulfilled in a Temporal
Sense, but a Spiritual. God may let a Christian be cut short in Temporals, but
God makes it up in Spirituals. If he does not increase the Basket and the
Store, he gives increase of Faith, and inward Peace; here he changes his
Promise, but he does not break it, he gives that which is better. If a Man
promises to pay me in Farthings, and he pays me in a better Coin, in Gold, he
does not break his Promise; Psalm. 89.33. I will not suffer my faithfulness to
fail: in the Hebrew it is ve lo ashakka, to lie.

Object. 1. But how does this consist with the Truth of God? he says he will
have all to be saved, 1 Timothy 2.4. yet some perish.

Resp. St. Austin understands it not of every Judicial Person, but some of all
sorts shall be saved: As in the Ark, God saved all the living Creatures; not
every Bird or Fish were saved, for many perished in the Flood; but all, that
is, some of every kind were saved; so God will have all to be saved, that is,
some of all Nations.

Object. It is said, Christ died for all; He is the Lamb of God that takes away
the sins of the World, Joh. 1.29. How does this consist with God's Truth, when
some are vessels of wrath? Romans 9.22.

Answ. 1. We must distinguish of World. The World is taken either in a limited
sense, for the World of the Elect, or in a larger sense, for both Elect and
Reprobates. Christ takes away the sins of the world, that is, the world of the
Elect.

2. We must distinguish of Christ's dying for the World. Christ died
sufficiently for all, not effectually. There is the value of Christ's Blood,
and the Virtue: Christ's Blood has value enough to Redeem the whole World, but
the virtue of it is applied only to such as believe; Christ's Blood is
meritorious for all, not efficacious. All are not saved, because some put away
Salvation from them, Acts 13.46. and vilify Christ's Blood, counting it an
unholy thing, Hebr. 10.29.

Use 1. Here is a great Pillar for our Faith, the Truth of God. Were not he a
God of Truth, how could we believe in him? our Faith were Fancy. But he is
Truth it self, and not a word he has spoken shall fall to the ground: Truth is
the object of Trust. The Truth of God is an unmovable Rock, we may venture our
Salvation here. Isa. 59.15. Truth fails; Truth on Earth does, but not Truth
in Heaven: God can as well cease to be God, as cease to be True. Has God said
he will be good to the Soul that seeks him, Lam. 3.25. he will give rest to the
weary, Matthew. 11.28. Here is a safe Anchor hold, he will not alter the thing
which is gone forth of his Lips. The Public Faith of Heaven is engaged for
Believers, can we have better Security? The whole Earth hangs upon the word of
God's Power, and shall not our Faith hang upon the Word of God's Truth? where
can we rest our Faith but upon God's faithfulness? There is nothing else we can
believe in, but the Truth of God; we cannot trust in an Arm of Flesh, we cannot
trust in our own Hearts; this is to build upon the Quicksands; but the Truth of
God is a golden Pillar for Faith to stay upon: God cannot deny himself; 2 Timothy
2.13. If we believe not, yet he abides faithful; he cannot deny himself. Not
to believe God's Veracity, is to affront God; 1 John 5.10. He that believes
not has made God a liar. A Person of Honor cannot be more affronted or
provoaked, then when he is not believed. He that denies God's Truth, makes the
Promise no better than a forged Deed; and can there be a greater affront
offered to God.

Use 2. of Terror to the Wicked. God is a God of Truth, and he is true in his
Threatenings; the Threatenings are a flying Roll against sinners. God has
threatened to wound the hairy scalp of every one that goes on still in his
Trespasses, Psalm. 68.21. He has threatened to judge Adulterers, Hebr. 13.3. to
be avenged upon the malicious; Psalm. 10.14. Thou beholdest mischief and spite,
to requite it with thy own hand: To rain fire and brimstone upon the sinner,
Psalm. 11.6. And God is as true in his Threatenings as his Promises; God has often
(to show his Truth) executed his Threatenings, and let his Thunderbolts of
Judgment fall upon Sinners in this Life: He struck Herod in the act of his
Pride: He has punished Blasphemers; Olympius, an Arrian Bishop, reproached and
blasphemed the blessed Trinity, immediately Lightning fell down from Heaven
upon him, and consumed him. God is as true in his Threatenings, as in his
Promises. Let us fear the Threatening, that we may not feel it.

Use 3. Is God a God of Truth, let us be like God in Truth. 1. We must be true
in our Words. Pythagoras being asked what made Men like God? answered, Cum vera
loquuntur, when they speak Truth. It is the note of a Man that shall go to
Heaven, Psalm. 15.2. He speaks the Truth from his heart. Truth in words is
opposed, 1. to Lying, Ephesians. 4.25. Putting away lying, speak every one truth to
his neighbor. Lying is when one speaks that for a truth, which he knows to be
false. A Lier is most opposite to the God of Truth. There is, as Austin says,
two sorts of Lies, 1. Mendacium Officiosum, an Officious Lie, when a Man tells
a Lie for his Profit, as when a Tradesman says his Commodity cost him so
much, when perhaps it did not cost him half so much. He that will lie in his
Trade, shall lie in Hell. 2. Mendacium Iocosum, a jesting Lie, when a Man tells
a Lie in sport to make others merry: he goes laughing to Hell. When you tell a
Lie, you make your selves like the Devil; John 8.44. The Devil is a lier, and
the Father of it. He deceived our first Parents by a Lie. Some are so wicked,
that they will not only speak an Untruth, but will Swear to it; nay, they will
wish a Curse upon themselves, if that Untruth be not true. As I have read of a
Woman (one Anne Averies) 1575. who being in a Shop, wished that she might sink
if she had not paid for the Wares she took; she fell down speechless
immeditately, and died in the place. A Lier is not fit to live in a
Commonwealth. Lying takes away all Society and Converse with Men. How can you
Converse with him whom you cannot believe what he says? Lying shuts Men out of
Heaven, Rev. 22.25. Without are Dogs, and whosoever loves and makes a lie.
And as it is a great sin to tell a lie, so it is a worse sin to teach a lie,
Isa. 9.15. The Prophet that teaches lies. He who broacheth Error, teaches
Lies; he spreads the Plague; he not only damns himself, but helps to damn
others. 2. Truth in words is opposed to Dissembling. The Heart and Tongue
should go together, as the Dial goes exactly with the Sun. To speak fair to
ones Face, and not to mean what one speaks, is no better then a lie; Psalm.
55.21. His words were smoother than oil, but war was in his heart. Some have an
Art at this, they can flatter and hate. Hierom speaking of the Arrians, says,
They pretended friendship, they kissed my hands, but plotted mischief against
me. Psalm. 29.5. A man that flattereth his neighbor, spreads a net for his
feet. Impia sub dulci melle venena latent -- Falsehood in Friendship is a lie.
Counterfeiting of Friendship is worse then counterfeiting of Money. This is
contrary to God, who is a God of Truth.

2. We must be true in our Profession of Religion. Let Practice go along with
Profession; Ephesians. 4.24. Righteousness and true Holiness. Hypocrisy in Religion
is a Lie. The Hypocrite is like a Face in a Glass, there is the show of a Face,
but no true Face: So he makes a show of Holiness, but has no Truth of it; it is
but the Face in the Glass. Ephraim pretended to be that which he was not, and
what says God of him? Hos. 11.12. Ephraim compasses me about with lies. By a
lie in our words we deny the Truth, by a lie in our profession we disgrace it.
Not to be what we profess to God, is telling a lie; and the Scripture makes it
little better than Blasphemy, Rev. 2.9. I know the blasphemy of them that say
they are Jews, and are not. O! I beseech you labor in this to be like God, he
is a God of Truth, he can as well part with his Deity as his Verity; be (I say)
like God, be true in your Words, be true in your Profession; God's Children are
Children that will not lie, Isa. 63.9. When God sees Truth in the inward parts,
and lips in which is no guile, now he sees his own Image in you: This draws
God's Heart toward you; Likeness draws Love.

But One GOD.
Quest. V. THE fifth Question is, Are there more Gods then one?

Answ. There is but one, only the living and true God.

That there is a God has been proved, and those that will not believe the
Verity of his Essence, shall feel the Severity of his Wrath, Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear, O
Israel, the Lord our God is One Lord. He is the only God, Deuteronomy. 4.39. Know
therefore this day, and consider it in thy heart, that the Lord he is God in
Heaven above, and upon the Earth beneath there is none else. Isa. 45.21. A just
God and a Savior, There is none beside me. There are many titular Gods; Kings
represent God; their Regal Scepter is an Emblem of his Power and Authority.
Judges are called Gods, Psalm. 82.5. I have said ye are Gods, (viz.) set in
God's place to do Justice; but dying Gods, verse. 7. Ye shall dye like men, 1
Cor. 8.5, 6. There be that are called Gods, but to us there is but One God.

Argument 1. There is but one first Cause, that has its Being of it self, and
on which all other Beings depend. As in the Heavens the primum Mobile moves all
the other Orbs, so God gives Life and Motion to every thing existent. There can
be but one God, because there is but one first Cause.

2. There is but one infinite Being, therefore there is but one God. There
cannot be two Infinites, Ier. 23.24. Do not I fill heaven and earth, says the
Lord? If there be one Infinite, filling all places at once, how can there be
any room for another Infinite to subsist.

3. There is but one Omnipotent Power; if there be two Omnipotents, then we
must always suppose a Contest between these two, that which one would do, the
other Power being Equal, would oppose, and so all things would be brought into
a Confusion. If a Ship should have two Pilots of equal Power, one would be ever
crossing the other; when one would Sail the other would cast Anchor; here were
a Confusion, and the Ship must needs perish. The Order and Harmony in the
World, the constant and uniform Government of all things, is a clear Argument
that there is but one Omnipotent, one God that rules all. Isa. 44.6. I am the
first, and I am the last, and beside me there is no God.

Use 1. of Information. If there be but one God, then it excludes all other
Gods. Some have fained that there were two Gods, so the Valentinians; others,
that there were many Gods, so the Polytheites; the Persians worshipped the Sun,
the Egyptians the Lion and Elephant, the Grecians worshipped Jupiter; These, I
may say err, not knowing the Scriptures, Matthew. 22.29. Their Faith is a Fable.
God has given them up to strong delusions, to believe a lie, that they may be
damned, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.

2. If there be but one God, then there can be but One true Religion in the
World, Ephesians. 4.5. (...), one Lord, one Faith. If there were many Gods, then
there might be many Religions, every God would be worshipped in his way; but if
there be but one God, there is but one Religion; one Lord, one Faith. Some say
we may be saved in any Religion; it is absurd to imagine, that God, who is one
in Essence, should appoint several Religions in which he will be worshipped.
It Is as dangerous to set up a false Religion, as to set up a false God. There
are many ways to Hell; Men may go thither which way their Fancy leads them; but
there is but one direct Road to Heaven, viz. Faith and Holiness. There is no
way to be saved in but this: as there is but one God, so there is but one True
Religion.

3. If there be but one God, then you have but One that you need chiefly study
to please, and that is God. If there were diverse Gods, we should be hard put to
it how to please them all; one would command one thing, another the quite
contrary, and to please two contrary Masters is impossible: but there is but
one God, therefore you have but one to please. As in a Kingdom there is but one
King, therefore every one seeks to ingratiate himself into his favor, Prove.
19.6. so there is but one true God; therefore here lies our main work, to
please him. Be sure to please God, whoever else you displease. This was Enoch's
Wisdom, Hebr. 11.5. he had this Testimony before he died, that he pleased God.

Quest. What does this pleasing God imply?

Answ. 1. We please God when we comport with his Will. 'Twas Christ's meat and
drink to do his Father's will, John 4.34. and so he pleased him, Matthew. 3 17. A
voice came from heaven, saying, this is my beloved son in whom I am well
pleased. It is the will of God that we should be holy, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3^. Now when
we are bespangled with Holiness, our Lives are walking Bibles: this is
according to God's will, and it pleases him.

2. We please God when we do the Work that he sets us about, John 17.4. I have
finished the work which thou gave me to do, viz. my mediatory work. Many
finish their lives, but do not finish their work. Our work God has cut out for
us, is to observe the first and second Table. In the first is set down our duty
toward God; in the second our duty toward Man. Such as make Morality the
chief and sole part of Religion, set the second Table above the first; nay,
they take away the first Table: for if Prudence, Justice, Temparance, be enough
to save, then what needs the first Table? and so our worship toward God shall
be quite left out. But those two Tables which God has joined together, let no
Man put asunder.

3. We please God when we dedicate our Heart to give him the best of every
thing. Abel gave God the fat of the Offering, Genesis 4.4. Domitian would not have
his Image carved in Wood or Iron, but in Gold. Then we please God, when we
serve him with love, fervency, alacrity, we give him golden Services; herein
lies our Wisdom and Piety, to please God; there is but one God, therefore there
is but one whom we have chiefly to please, namely God.

4. If there be but one God, then we must pray to none but God. The Papists
pray to Saints and Angels: 1. To Saints; a Popish Writer says, When we pray to
the Saints departed, they being touched with compassion, say the like to God
for us, as the Disciples did to Christ for the Canaanitish Woman, Matthew. 15.23.
Send her away, for she cries after us. The Saints above know not our Wants,
Isa. 63.16. Abraham is ignorant of us; or if they did, we have no warrant to
pray to them. Prayer is (...), a part of Divine Worship which must be given
only to God. 2. They pray to Angels. Angel-worship is forbidden, Col. 2.18, 19.
and that we may not pray to Angels, is clear from Romans 10.14. How shall they
call upon him in whom they have not believed? We may not pray to any, but whom
we may believe in; but we may not believe in an Angel, ergo, we may not pray to
him. There is but one God, and it is a sin to invocate any but only God.

5. If there be but one God, who is above all, Ephesians. 4.6. then he must be
loved above all. 1. We must love him with a love of Appreciation; set the
highest estimate on him who is the only Fountain of Being and Bliss. 2. We must
love him with a love of Complacency. Amor est complacentia amantis in amato,
Aquin. Our love to other things must be more indifferent; some drops of love
may run beside to the Creature, but the full stream must run toward God; the
Creature may have the Milk of our love, but we must keep the Cream of our love
for God. God who is above all, must be loved above all; Psalm. 73.25. There is
none on earth whom I desire in comparison of thee.

Use 2. of Caution. If there be but one God, then let us take heed of setting
up more Gods then one. Psalm. 16.4. Their sorrows shall be multiplied, that
hasten after another God: their Drink Offerings of Blood will I not offer, nor
take up their Names into my lips. God is a jealous God, and he will not endure
that we should have other Gods. It Is easy to commit Idolatry with the
Creature. 1. Some make a God of Pleasure, 2. Tim. 3.4. (...), Lovers of
pleasure more then lovers of God. Whatever we love more then God, we make a
God. 2. Others make Money their God. The Covetous Man worships the Image of
Gold, therefore is called an Idolater, Ephesians. 5.5. that which a Man trusts to, he
makes his God, but he makes the wedge of Gold his Hope. He makes Money his
Creator, Redeemer, Comforter. It Is his Creator; if he has Money, then he
thinks he is made. It is his Redeemer; if he be in danger, he trusts in his
Money to redeem him out. It is his Comforter; if at any time he be sad, the
golden Harp drives away the Evil Spirit. So that Money is his God; God made Man
of the Dust of the Earth, and Man makes a God of the Dust of the Earth. 3.
Another makes a God of his Child, sets his Child in God's room, and so provokes
God to take it away. If you lean too hard upon a Glass, it will break; many
break their Children, by leaning too hard upon them. 4. Others make a God of
their Belly, Phil. 3.19. Whose God is their Belly. Clemens Alexandrinus writes
of a Fish that has its heart in its Belly; an Emblem of Epicures, their Heart
is in their Belly; they mind nothing but indulging the Sensual Appetite; they
do sacrificare lari, their Belly is their God, and to this they pour
Drink Offerings: Thus Men make many Gods. The Apostle names the wicked Man's
Trinity, 1 John 2.16. The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, the pride of
life. The lust of the flesh, Pleasure; the lust of the eye, Money; Pride of
Life, Honor. O take heed of this! whatever you Deifie besides God, will prove
a Bramble, and Fire will come out of this Bramble, and devour you, Judges 9.15.

Use 3. of Reproof. If the Lord Jehovah be the ^^ly true God, then it reproves
those who renounce the true God; I mean such as seek to familiar Spirits: this
is too much practiced among them that call themselves Christians. It Is a sin
condemned by the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 18.11. There shall not be found among you
any that consults with familiar Spirits. How ordinary is this? If People have
lost any of their Goods, they send to Wizards to know how they may come by
their Goods again. What is this but consulting with the Devil? and so you
renounce God and your Baptism. What? because you have lost your Goods, will you
lose your Souls too? 2 Kings 1.6. Thus says the Lord, Is it not because there
is not a God in Israel that thou sendest to enquire of Baal-zebub? so is it not
because you think there is not a God in Heaven, that you ask Counsel of the
Devil? If any here be guilty, be deeply humbled, you have renounced the true
God; better be without the Goods you have lost, then have the Devil help you to
them again.

Use 4. of Exhortation. If there be but one God, as God is O^^, so let them
that serve him be One. This is that Christ prayed so heartily for, John 17.21.
That they all may be One. Christians should be One, 1. in Judgment; the Apostle
exhorts to be all of one mind, 1 Cor. 1.10. How sad is it to see Religion
wearing a Coat of diverse Colors, to see Christians of so many Opinions, and
going so many different ways. It is Satan has sown these Tares of Division,
Matthew. 13.39. he first divided Men from God, and now divides one Man from
another. 2. One in Affection. They should have one Heart; Acts 4.32. The
multitude of them that believed were of one heart, and of one soul. As in
Music, though there be several strings of a Viol, yet all make one sweet
harmony, so though there are several Christians, yet there should be one sweet
harmony of Affection among them. There is but one God, and they that serve him
should be one. There is nothing would render the true Religion more lovely, or
make more Proselytes to it, than to see the Professors of it tied together with
the heart strings of love, Psalm. 133.1. Behold how good and pleasant a thing it
is to see brethren live together in unity! It is as the sweet Dew on Hermon,
and the fragrant Ointment poured on Aaron's Head. If God be one, let all that
profess him be One, of one mind, and one heart; this fulfils Christ's Prayer,
that they al^ may be one.

2. If there be but one God, let us labor to clear the Title that this God is
ours, Psalm. 48.14. This God is our God. What Comfort can it be to hear that
there is a God, and that he is the only God, unless he be our God. What is
Deity without Propriety? O let us labor to clear the Title; beg the Holy
Spirit; the Spirit works faith, by faith we are one with Christ, and through
Christ we come to have God for our God, and so all his glorious fullness is made
over to us by a Deed of Gift.

Use 5. What Cause have we to be thankful that we have the knowledge of the
only true God. How many are brought up in blindness? some worship Mahomet,
diverse of the Indians worship the Devil, they light a Candle to him, that he
should not hurt them. Such as know not the true God, must needs stumble into
Hell in the dark. O be thankful that we are born in such a Climate where the
Light of the Gospel has shined! To have the knowledge of the true God, is more
then if we had Mines of Gold, Rocks of Diamonds, Islands of Spices, especially
if God has savingly revealed himself to us, if he has given us eyes to see
the light, if we so know God, as to be known of him, as to love him, and
believe in him, Matthew. 11.25. We can never be enough thankful to God, that he
has hid the knowledge of himself from the wise and prudent of the World, and
has revealed it unto us.

The TRINITY
Quest. VI. HOw many Persons are there in the Godhead? Resp. Three Persons, yet
but one God, 1 John 5.7. There are three that bear Record in Heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one.

God is but One, yet there are three distinct Persons subsisting in one
Godhead. This is a sacred Mystery, which the Light within could never have
discovered. As the two Natures in Christ, yet but one Person, is a wonder, so
three Persons, yet but one Godhead. I am in a great deep, the Father God, the
Son God, the Holy Ghost God, yet not three Gods, but one God. The three Persons
in the blessed Trinity are distinguished, but not divided; three Subsistances,
but one Essence. This is a Divine Riddle, where one makes three, and three make
but one. Our narrow Thoughts can no more comprehend the Trinity in Unity, then
a little Nutshel will hold all the Water in the Sea. Let me shadow it out by
this similitude: In the Body of the Sun, there is the Substance of the Sun, the
Beams, and the Heat; the Beams are begotten of the Sun, the Heat proceeds both
from the Sun and the Beams; but these three, though different, are not divided;
they all three make but one Sun. So in the blessed Trinity, the Son is begotten
of the Father, the Holy Ghost proceeds from both, yet though they are three
distinct Persons, yet but one God. First let me speak of the Unity in Trinity,
then of the Trinity in Unity.

1. Of the Unity in Trinity. The Unity of the Persons in the Godhead consists
in two things.

1. The identity of Essence. In the Trinity there is an Oneness of Essence: the
three Persons are of the same Divine Nature and Substance: so that in Deo non
est magis and minus, there are no degrees in the Godhead; one Person is not God
more then another.

2. The Unity of the Persons in the Godhead, consists in the mutual in-being of
them, or their being in one another. The three Persons are so united, that one
Person is in another, and with another, John 17.21. Thou Father art in me, and
I in thee.

2. Let me speak of the Trinity in Unity. 1. The first Person in the Trinity is
God the Father. H^ is called the first Person in respect of Order not Dignity;
for God the Father has no essential Perfection which the other Persons have
not. He is not more wise, more holy, more powerful then the other Persons are;
a Priority, not Superiority.

2. The second Person in the Trinity is Jesus Christ, who is begotten of the
Father before all Time, Prove. 8.23, 24, 25. I was set up from everlasting, from
the beginning, or ever the earth was. When there were no depths, I was brought
fortth: when there were no fountains abounding with water. Before the mountains
were set led: before the hills, was I brought forth. Which Scripture declares
the Eternal Generation of the the Son of God. This second Person in the
Trinity, who is Jehovah, is become our Jesus. The Scripture calls him the
Branch of David, Jer. 23.5. and I may call him the Flower of the Virgin, having
assumed our Nature. By him all that believe are justified, Acts 13.39.

3. The third Person in the Trinity is the Holy Ghost, who proceeds from the
Father and the Son. His work it is to illuminate the Mind, and inkindle sacred
Motions. The Essence of the Spirit is in Heaven, and every where, but the
Influence of it is in the Hearts of Believers. This is that blessed Spirit who
gives us the holy Unction, 1 John 2.20. Though Christ merits Grace for us, it
is the Holy Ghost works it in us. Though Christ makes the Purchase, it is the
Holy Ghost makes the Assurance, and Seals us up to the Day of Redemption. Thus
I have spoken of all the three Persons. -- The Trinity of Persons may be proved
out of Matthew. 3.16. Jesus when he was baptized went up straitway out of the
water, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a Dove, and lighting upon
him, and lo a voice from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son. Here are three
Names given to the three Persons. He who spoke with a Voice from Heaven was God
the Father; He who was baptized in Jordan, was God the Son; He who descended in
the likeness of a Dove, was God the Holy Ghost. Thus I have shown you the Unity
of Essence, and the Trinity of Persons.

Use 1. It confutes the Jews and the Turks, who believe only the first Person
in the Godhead: this cuts assunder the Sinews of our Comfort. Take away the
distinction of the Persons in the Trinity, and you overthrow Man's Redemption:
for, God the Father being offended with Man for sin, how shall he be pacified
without a Mediator. This Mediator is Christ, he makes our Peace! and Christ
having died, and shed his Blood, how shall this Blood be applied, but by the
Holy Ghost? Therefore if there be not three Persons in the Godhead, Man's
Salvation cannot be wrought out. If there be no second Person in the Trinity,
then there is no Redeemer. If no third Person, then there is no Comforter. And
so the Plank is taken away by which we should get to Heaven.

2. It confutes the execrable Opinion of the Socinians, who deny the Divinity
of the Lord Jesus; they make him only to be a Creature of an higher Rank. As
the Papists blot out the Second Commandment, so the Socinians would the Second
Person in the Trinity. If to oppose Christ's Members be such a sin, what is it
to oppose Christ himself? 1. Jesus Christ is coequal with God the Father, Phil.
2.6. He thought it no robbery to be equal with God. 2. He is coeternal with God
the Father, Prove. 8.23. I was from the beginning; for else there was a time
when God was without a Son, and so he should be no Father: nay, else there was
a time when God was without his glory, for Christ is the brightness of his
Fathers glory, Hebr. 1.3. 3. He is coessential with God the Father. The Godhead
subsists in Christ, Col. 2.9. In whom dwells all the fullness of the Godhead
bodily. It Is said, not only Christ was with God before the beginning, but he
was God, John 1.1. and 1 Timothy 3.16. God manifest in the flesh. The Title of
Lord so often given to Christ in the New Testament, does answer to the Title of
Jehovah in the Old Testament, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Matthew. 22.37. so that Christ has a
Coeternity and Consubstantiality with his Father, John 10.30. I and my Father
are One. It were a Blasphemy for any Angel to speak thus! Yet further to prove
Christ's Godhead, consider 1. the glorious incommunicable Attributes belonging
to God the Father, are ascribed to Christ. 1. Is God the Father Omnipotent, so
is Jesus Christ. He is (...), the Almighty, Rev. 1.8. he Creates, Col. 1.16. 2.
Is God the Father infinitely Immense, filling all places, Ier. 23.24. so is
Jesus Christ. While Christ was on the Earth by his bodily presence, he was at
the same time in the bosom of his Father, John 3.13. in regard of his Divine
presence. 2. The same Iura Regalia, or Prerogatives Royal which belong to God
the Father, belong also to Christ. (1.) Does God the Father seal Pardons, this
is a Flower of Christ's Crown, Matthew. 9.2. Thy sins be forgiven thee. Nor does
Christ only remit sin organice, as Ministers do, by virtue of a Power delegated
to them from God; but Christ does it by his own Power and Authority. (2.) Is
God the Father the adequate Object of Faith, is he to be believed in, so is the
Son, John 14.1. (3.) Does Adoration belong to God the Father, so it does to the
Son, Hebr. 1.6. Let all the Angels of God worship him. How Sacrilegious
therefore is the Socinian, who would rob Christ of the best Flower of his
Crown, his Godhead; they that deny Christ to be God, must greatly wrest, or
else deny the Scripture to be the Word of God.

3. It confutes the Arrians, who deny the Holy Ghost to be God. The Eternal
Godhead subsists in the Holy Ghost, John 16.13. He shall guide you into all
Truth. Christ speaks not there of an Attribute, but a Person. And that the
Godhead subsists in the Person of the Holy Ghost, appears thus: The Spirit, who
gives diversity of Gifts, is said to be the same Lord, and the same God, 1 Cor.
12.5, 6. The black and unpardonable sin is said, in a special manner, to be
committed against the Godhead, subsisting in the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 12.32. The
mighty power of God is made manifest by the Holy Ghost. He changes the Hearts
of Men. The Devil would have Christ prove himself to be God, by turning Stones
into Bread; but thus the Holy Ghost shows his Godhead, by turning Stones into
Flesh, Ezekiel. 36.26. I will take away the stony heart, and give you an heart of
flesh. Yet further, the power and Godhead of the Holy Ghost appeared in the
effecting the glorious Conception of our Lord Jesus Christ; the very Shadow of
the Holy Ghost made a Virgin conceive, Luke 1.35. The Holy Ghost works
Miracles, which transcend the sphere of Nature; as raising the Dead, Romans 8.11.
to him belongs (...), Divine Worship; our Souls and Bodies are the Temples of
the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19. in which Temples he is to be worshipped, verse. 20.
We are baptized in the Name of the Holy Ghost, therefore either we must believe
his Godhead, or renounce our Baptism in his Name. Methinks it were enough for
such Men, as have not so much as heard whether there be an Holy Ghost, or no,
Acts 19.2. to deny his Deity; but that any who go for Christians, should deny
this Article of their Creed, seems to me very strange. They who would wittingly
and willingly blot out the third Person, shall have their Names blotted out of
the Book of Life.

Use 2. of Exhortation. 1. Believe this Doctrine, the Trinity of Persons in the
Unity of Essence. The Trinity is purely an Object of Faith: The Plumb-line of
Reason is too short to fathom this Mystery, but where Reason cannot wade, there
Faith must swim. There are some Truths in Religion may be demonstrated by
Reason, as that there is a God; but the Trinity of Persons in Unity of Essence
is wholly Supernatural, and must be believed by Faith. This Sacred Doctrine,
though it be not against Reason, yet it is above Reason. Those illuminated
Philosophers that could find out the Causes of things, and discourse of the
Magnitude and Influence of the Stars, the Nature of Minerals, could never by
their deepest Search find out the Mystery of the Trinity. This is of Divine
Revelation, and must be adored with humble believing: we can be no good
Christians, without the firm belief of the Trinity. How can we pray to God the
Father, but in the Name of Christ, and through the help of the Spirit. Believe
the glorious Trinity. How are the Quakers to be abhorred, who go under the Name
of Christians, yet undervalue and renounce Jesus Christ. I have read of some of
the Quakers, who speak thus; We deny the Person of him whom you call Christ,
and affirm, That they who expect to be saved by that Christ without, will be
damned in that Faith. Could the Devil himself speak worse Blasphemy? they would
pull up all Religion by the Roots, and take away that Cornerstone, on which
the Hope of our Salvation is built.

2. If there be one God subsisting in three Persons, then let us give 1. Equal
Reverence to all the Persons in the Trinity. There is not more or less in the
Trinity, the Father is not more God then the Son and Holy Ghost. There is an
Order in the Godhead, but no Degrees; one Person has not a Majority or
Supereminency above another, therefore we must give equal Worship to all the
Persons, John 5.23. That all Men should honor the Son as they honor the
Father. Adore Unity in Trinity.

2. Obey all the Persons in the blessed Trinity, for all of them are God. 1.
Obey God the Father. His words, either preceptive or minatory, must be
observed. Christ himself, as Man, obeyed God the Father, John 4.34. much more
then must we, Deuteronomy. 27.10.

2. Obey God the Son, Psalm 2.12. Kiss the Son lest he be angry. Kiss him with
a kiss of Obedience. Christ's Commands are not grievous, 1 John 5.3. Nothing he
commands but is for our interest and benefit: O then kiss the Son! Why do the
Elders throw down their Crowns at the feet of Christ, and fall down before the
Lamb, Rev. 4.10, 11. but to testify their Subjection, and to profess their
Readiness to serve and obey him.

3. Obey God the Holy Ghost: our Souls are breathed into us by the glorious
Spirit, Job 33.4. The Spirit of God has made me. Our Souls are adorned by the
blessed Spirit. Every Grace is a Divine Sparkle lighted in the Soul by the Holy
Ghost. Nay more, the Spirit of God sanctified Christ's Humane Nature, he united
it with the Divine, and fitted the Man Christ to be our Mediator. Well then
does this third Person in the Trinity, the Holy Ghost, deserve to be obeyed; he
is God, and this Tribute of Homage and Obedience is to be paid him by us.

Of the CREATION.
Quest. VII. WHat are the Decrees of God?

The Decrees of God are his eternal purpose, according to the counsel of his
own will, whereby for his own glory he has foreordained whatsoever shall come
to pass.

I should come now to speak concerning the Decrees of God, but I have already
spoken something to this under the Attribute of God's Immutability, God is
unchangeable in his Essence, and he is unchangeable in his Decrees, his Counsel
shall stand, he has decreed the Issue of all things, and carries them on to
their Period by his Providence; and therefore I shall proceed to the Execution
of his Decrees.

Quest. VIII. The next Question is, What is the Work of Creation?

Resp. It is God's making all things of nothing by the word of his power, etc.
Genesis 1.1. In the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth.

The Creation is glorious to behold; it is a pleasant and fruitful study. Some
think that Isaac, when he went abroad into the Fields to meditate, it was in
the Book of the Creatures. The Creation is the Heathen Man's Bible, the
Ploughman's Primmer, the Travelers Perspective Glass, through which he
receives the Species and Representation of those infinite Excellencies which
are in God. The Creation is a large Volume, in which God's Works are bound up;
and this Volume has three great Leaves in it, Heaven, Earth, Sea.

The Author of the Creation is God, so it is in the Text, (...) God created.
The World was created in time, and could not be from Eternity, as Aristotle
thought. The World must have a Maker, it could not make it self. If one should
go into a far Country, and see stately Edifices there, he would never imagine
that these could build themselves, but that there had been some Artificer there
to raise such goodly Structures; so this great Fabric of the World could not
create it self, it must have some Builder and Maker, and that is God. In the
beginning God created: To imagine that the Work of the Creation was not framed
by the Lord Jehovah, is as if we should conceive a curious Lanskip to be drawn
without the Hand of a Limner, Acts 17.24. God that made the World, and all
things therein.

In the work of the Creation there are two things to be considered: The making
of it The adorning of it.


I. The making of the World. Here consider, 1. God made the World without any
praeexistent Matter. This is the difference between Generation and Creation. In
Generation there is materia habilis and disposita, some Matter to work upon.
But in Creation there is no praeexistent Matter. God brought all this glorious
Fabric of the World out of the Womb of Nothing. We see our Beginning, it was
of Nothing. Some brag of their Birth and Ancestry, you see how little cause
they have to boast, they came of Nothing.

2. God made the World with a Word. When Solomon was to build a Temple he
needed many Workmen, and they all had Tools to work with, but God wrought
without Tools, Psalm. 33.6. By the word of the Lord were the Heavens made. The
Disciples wondered that Christ could with a word calm the Sea, Matthew. 8.26, 27.
But it was more with a word to make the Sea.

3. God made all things at first very good, Genesis 1.31. no defect or deformity.
The Creation came out of God's hands a curious Piece; it was a fair Copy,
without any Blot, written with God's own fingers, Psalm. 8.3. So perfect was
God's Work.

II. The adorning of the World. First God made this great Lump and Mass, Rudis
indigestaque moles, and then beautified it, and put it into a dress. He divided
the Sea and the Earth, he decked the Earth with Flowers, the Trees with Fruit,
but what is Beauty when it is masked over? Therefore that we might behold this
glory, God made the Light. The Heavens were bespangled with Sun, Moon, and
Stars, that so the Worlds Beauty might be beheld and admired. God in the
Creation began with things less noble and excellent, Vegetables and Sensitives,
and then the Rational Creatures, Angels and Men. Man was the most exquisite
Piece in the Creation: he is a Microcosme, or little World. Man was made with
deliberation and counsel, Genesis 1.26. Let us make Man. It is the manner of
Artificers to be more then ordinary accurate, when they are about their
Masterpieces. Man was to be a Masterpiece of this visible World, therefore
God did consult about the making of so rare a Piece. A Solemn Council of the
Sacred Persons in the Trinity was called, Let us make Man; and let us make him
in our own Image. On the King's Coin his Image or Effigies is stamped, so God
stamped his Image on Man, and made him partake of many Divine qualities.

I shall speak 1. of the Parts of Man's Body: 1. The Head, the most excellent
Architectonical Part, it is the Fountain of Spirits, and the Seat of Reason. In
Nature the Head is the best Piece, but in Grace the Heart excels. 2. The Eye.
It is the Beauty of the Face; it shines and sparkles like a lesser Sun in the
Body. The Eye occasions much sin, and therefore well may it have Tears in it.
3. The Ear; which is the Conduit-pipe through which Knowledge is conveyed.
Better lose our seeing than our hearing, for faith comes by hearing, Romans
10.17. To have an Ear open to God, is the best Jewel on the Ear. 4. The Tongue.
David calls the Tongue his glory, Psalm. 16.9. because it is an Instrument to
set forth the Glory of God: The Soul at first was a Viol in tune to praise God,
and the Tongue did make the Music. God has given us two Ears, but one Tongue,
to show that we should be swift to hear, but slow to speak. God has set a
double fence before the Tongue, the Teeth and the Lips, to teach us to be wary
that we offend not with our Tongue. 5. The Heart. This is a noble part and Seat
of Life:

2. The Soul of Man: This is the Man of the Man. Man, in regard of his Soul,
partakes with the Angels; nay, as Plato says, the Understanding, Will, and
Conscience are a Glass that resemble the Trinity. The Soul is the Diamond in
the Ring, (...), the Soul is a Vessel of Honor; God himself is served in this
Vessel. It is a Sparkle of Celestial Brightness, says Damascene. If David did
so admire the rare Contexture and Workmanship of his Body, Psalm. 139.13. I am
wonderfully made, I was curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the Earth. If
the Cabinet be so curiously wrought, what is the Jewel? How richly is the Soul
embroidered! Thus you see how glorious a Work the Creation is, and Man
especially, who is the Epitome of the World.

Quest. But why did God make the World?

Resp. 1. Negatively; Not for himself; he did not need it, being infinite. He
was happy before the World was, in reflecting upon his own sublime Excellencies
and Perfections. 2. God did not make the World to be a place of Mansion for us,
we are not to abide here for ever. Heaven is the Mansion House, John 14.2. the
World is only a Passage-room to Eternity; the World is to us as the Wilderness
was to Israel, not to rest in, but to travel through to the glorious Canaan.
The World is a Tyring-room to dress our Souls in, not a place where we are to
stay for ever. The Apostle tells us of the Worlds Funerals, 2 Pet. 3.10. The
Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth also and the Works that are
therein shall be burnt up.

2. Positively; God made the World to demonstrate his own glory. The World is a
Looking-glass, in which we may see the Power and Goodness of God shine forth:
The Heavens declare the glory of God, Psalm. 19.1. The World is like a curious
Piece of Arras or Tapestry, in which we may see the Skill and Wisdom of him
that made it.

Use 1. Did God create the World? This convinces us of the Truth of his
Godhead: to create is proper to a Deity, Acts 17.24. This convinced Plato of a
Deity, when he saw all the World could not make a Fly. Thus God proves himself
to be the true God, and distinguishes himself from Idols, Ier. 10.11. It is
written in Chalde, Thus shall ye say to them, the gods that have not made the
Heavens and the Earth, even they shall perish. Who but God can create? The
Creation is enough to Convince the Heathen that there is a God. There are two
Books, out of which God will judge and condemn the Heathen, viz. the Book of
Conscience, Romans 2.15. Who have the Law written in their heart: and the Book of
the Creation, Romans 1.20. The invisible things of him are clearly seen by the
things that are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead. The World is full of
Emblems and Hyeroglyphicks; every Star in the Sky, every Bird that flies in the
Air, is a Witness against the Heathen. A Creature could not make it self.

2. Here is a mighty support for Faith, God Creates. He that made all things
with a word, what cannot he do? He can create strength in weakness; he can
create a supply of our wants. What a foolish question was that, Psalm. 78.19.
Can he prepare a table in the wilderness? Cannot he that made the World do much
more? Psalm. 124.8. Our help stands in the Name of the Lord, who made Heaven
and Earth. Rest on this God for help, who made Heaven and Earth. The work of
Creation, as it is a Monument of God's Power, so it is a stay to Faith. Is thy
Heart hard, he can with a word create softness. Is it unclean, he can create
purity; Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a clean heart, O God. Is the Church of God
low, he can create Jerusalem a Praise, Isa. 65.18. No such golden Pillar for
Faith to stay upon as a creating Power.

3. Did God make this World full of Beauty and Glory, every thing very good,
then what an evil thing is sin, that has put out of frame the whole Creation.
Sin has much eclipsed the beauty, sowrd the sweetness, and marred the harmony
of the World. How bitter is that Gall, a drop whereof can imbitter a whole Sea.
Sin has brought Vanity and Vexation into the World, yea, a Curse. God cursed
the ground for Man's sake, Genesis 3. There were several Fruits of the Curse:

1. In sorrow shall thou eat of it, verse. 17. By that word sorrow, is to be
understood all the Troubles and Cares of this Life. 2. In the sweat of thy face
shall thou eat bread, verse. 19. In Innocence Adam did till the ground, (he must
not live idly) but it was rather a delight then a labor; that tilling was
without toiling. The eating in sorrow, and the sweat of the brow, came in after
sin. 3. Thorns also and Thistles shall the ground bring forth, verse. 18.

Quest. Whether in Innocence did not the Earth bear Thorns, because it is
threatened as a punishment?

Answ. It is likely it did bear Thorns; for when God had done creating, he made
no new Species, or Kinds of things: but the meaning is, now after Sin the Earth
should bring forth more plenty of Thorns, and now those Thorns should be
hurtful, and choke the Corn, which hurtful quality was not in them before. Ever
since the Fall, all the Comforts of this Life have a Thorn and a Thistle in
them. 4. The fourth fruit of the Curse was the driving Man out of Paradise,
verse. 24. So he drove out the Man. God at first brought Adam into Paradise, as
into an House ready furnished, or as a King into his Throne, Genesis 1.28. have
dominion over every living thing that moves. Now God's driving Adam out of
Paradise, signified his dethroning and banishing him, that he might look after
an heavenly and a better Paradise. 5. A fifth fruit of the Curse was Death,
verse 19. To dust thou shall return. Death was not natural to Adam, it came in
after sin. Josephus is of opinion, Man should have died though he had continued
in Innocence, only he should have had a longer term of years added to his life;
but out of question, Death grew out of the Root of Sin: the Apostle says, Romans
5.12. By sin came death. See then how cursed a thing Sin is, that has brought
so many Curses upon the Creation. If we will not hate Sin for its Deformity,
let us hate it for the Curse it brings.

4. Did God make this glorious World, did he make every thing good, was there
in the Creature so much beauty and sweetness? Oh! then what sweetness is there
in God? Quicquid efficit tale, illud est magis tale, the Cause is always more
noble than the Effect. Think with your selves, is there so much excellence in
House and Lands, then how much more is there in God that made these? Is there
beauty in a Rose? what beauty then is there in Christ the Rose of Sharon? Does
Oil make the face shine? Psalm. 104.15. How will the Light of God's Countenance
make it shine? Does Wine cheer the heart? O what Virtue is in the true Vine!
How does the Blood of this Grape cheer the Heart? Is the fruit of the Garden
sweet? how delicious are the Fruits of the Spirit? Is a Gold Mine so precious?
how precious is he who founded this Mine? What is Christ in whom are hid all
Treasures? Coloss. 2.3. We should ascend from the Creature to the Creator. If
there be any Comfort here below, how much more is there in God, who made all
these things? How unreasonable is it that we should delight in the World, and
not much more in him that made it? How should our Hearts be set on God, and how
should we long to be with God, who has infinitely more sweetness in him than
any Creature?

Use 2. of Exhortation. 1. Did God create the World, let us wisely observe
these Works of Creation? God has given us, not only the Book of the Scriptures
to read in, but the Book of the Creation: Look up to the Heavens, they show
much of God's glory; the Sun gilds the World with its bright Beams: behold the
Stars, their regular motion in their Orbs, their Magnitude, their Light, their
Influence. We may see God's glory blazing in the Sun, twinkling in the Stars.
Look into the Sea, and see the wonders of God in the Deep, Psalm. 107.24. Look
into the Air, there the Birds make Melody, and sing forth the Praises of their
Creator. Look into the Earth, there we may wonder at the Nature of Minerals,
the Power of the Loadstone, the Virtue of Herbs. See the Earth decked as a
Bride with Flowers, all these are the glorious Effects of God's Power. God has
wrought the Creation as with curious Needle Work, that we may observe his
Wisdom and Goodness, and give him the Praise due to him, Psalm. 104.24. O Lord,
how manifold are thy works, in wisdom have thou made them all.

2. Did God create all things, let us obey our Maker. We are his Iure
Creationis, we owe our selves to him: If another gives us our Maintenance, we
think our selves bound to serve him, much more should we serve and obey God,
who gives us our Life, Acts 17.28. In him we live and move. God has made every
thing for Man's Service, the Corn for nourishment, the Beasts for usefulness,
the Birds for Music, that Man should be for God's Service. The Rivers come
from the Sea, and they run into the Sea again. All we have is from God, let us
honor our Creator, and live to him that made us.

3. Did God make our Bodies out of the Dust, and that Dust out of Nothing? let
this keep down pride. When God would humble Adam, he uses this Expression, Out
of the dust was thou taken, Genesis 3.19. Why art thou proud, O Dust and Ashes!
thou art made but of course Metal; cum sis humi limus, cur non humilimus.
Bernard. David says, I was curiously wrought, Psalm. 139. Thy being curiously
wrought may make thee thankful, but being made of the Dust, may keep thee
humble. If thou have Beauty, it is but well-colour'd Earth. Thy Body is but Air
and Dust mingled together, and this Dust will drop into the Dust. When the Lord
had said of the Judges they were Gods, Psalm. 82.6 lest they should grow proud,
he tells them, they were dying gods, verse. 7. Ye shall die like men.

4. Did God create our Souls after his Image, but we lost it, let us never
leave till we are restored to God's Image again. We have now got the Devils
Image in Pride, Malice, Envy; let us get God's Image restored, which consists
in Knowledge and Righteousness, Col. 3.10. Grace is our best Beauty, it makes
us like God and Angels: As the Sun to the World, so is Holiness to the Soul.
Let us go to God to repair his Image in us: Lord! thou have once made me, make
me anew, Sin has defaced thy Image in me, O draw it again by the Pencil of the
Holy Ghost.

The Providence of GOD.
GOD's Works of Providence are his most holy, wise, and powerful Preserving and
Governing all his Creatures, and all their Actions.

The Work of God's Providence, Joh. 5.17. My Father works hitherto, and I
work. The great God has rested from the Works of Creation, he does not create
any new Species of Things, Genesis 2.7. He rested from all his Works, and
therefore the Scripture must needs be meant of God's Works of Providence, My
Father works and I work. Psalm. 103.19. His kingdom rules over all; i. e. his
Providencial Kingdom. Now for the clearing of this Point, I shall, 1. Show you
that there is a Providence. 2. What that Providence is. 3. Lay down some Maxims
or Propositions concerning the Providence of God.


1. That there is a Providence: There is no such thing as blind Fate, but there
is a Providence that guides and governs in the World, Prove. 16.33. The lot is
cast into the lap, but the whole dispose thereof is of the Lord.

2. What this Providence is? I answer, Providence is God's ordering all Issues
and Events of things after the Council of his Will to his own Glory, 1. I call
Providence God's ordering of things, to distinguish it from his Decrees, God's
Decree ordains things that shall fall out, God's Providence orders them.

2. I call Providence the ordering of Things after the Council of God's Will,
that I may free it from all Rashness and Precipitancy, and to show you that
it is a high Act of Prudence done after the Council of his own Will.

3. God orders all Events of things after the Council of his Will to his own
Glory, the Glory of God being the Ultimate End of all God's Actings, and the
Center where all the Lines of Providence do meet. The Providence of God is
Regina Mundi, the Queen and Governess of the World; it is the Eye that sees,
and the Hand that turns all the Wheels in the Universe. God is not like an
Artificer that builds a House and then leaves it and is gone, but like a Pilot
that does with a great deal of Care steer on the Ship of the whole Creation.

3. I shall lay down some Positions about the Providence of God.

1. God's Providence reaches to all Places, Persons and Occurrences, 1. To all
Places, Jer. 23. Am I a God at hand, and not a God afar off? The Diocese where
Providence visits is very large, it reaches to Heaven, to Earth and Sea, Ps.
107.23, 24. They that go down to sea see the wonders of God in the deep. Now
that the Sea which is higher then the Earth, should not drown the Earth, is a
Wonder of Providence: and the Prophet Jonah he saw the Wonders of God in the
Deep, when the very Fish which did devour him and swallow him, did bring him
safe to Shore. 2. God's Providence reaches to all Persons, especially the
Persons of the Godly, they are in a special manner taken notice of; God takes
care of every Saint in particular, as if he had none else to take care for, 1
Pet. 5.7. He cares for you, (i. e.) Elect in a special manner. Psalm. 33.18,
19. The eye of the Lord is over them that fear him; to preserve them from
death, and to keep them alive in famine. God by his Providential Care shields
off Dangers from his People, he sets a Lifeguard of Angels about them, Psalm.
19.11. God's Providence keeps the very Bones of the Saints, Psalm. 34.10. It
bottles their Tears, Psalm. 56.8. It strengthens the Saints in their Weaknesses,
Heb. 11.34. It supplies all their Wants out of its Alms-basket, Psalm. 23.5.
Thus Providence does wonderfully supply the Wants of the Elect. When the
Protestants in Rochel were besieged by the French King, God by his Providence
sent in a great number of small Fishes that fed them, such as were never seen
before in that Haven. So the Raven, that unnatural Creature, (that will hardly
feed its own Young, yet) providentially brought Sustenance to the Prophet
Elijah, 1 Kings 17.6. The Virgin Mary, though by bearing and bringing forth the
Messiah she helped to make the World rich, yet she herself was very poor; and
now being warned of the Angel to go into Egypt, Matthew. 2.13. the Virgin had
scarce enough to bear her Charges thither, see now how God provides for her
beforehand, he by his Providence sends the Wisemen from the East, and they
bring costly Gifts, Gold, Myrrh, and Franckincence and present there to Christ:
And now the Virgin had enough to defray her Charges unto to Egypt. God's
Children sometimes scarce know how they are fed, and yet Providence feeds them,
Psalm. 37.3. Verily thou shall be fed. If God will give his People a Kingdom
when they dye, he will not deny them daily Bread while they live. 3. God's
Providence reaches to all Affairs and Occurrences in the World, there is
nothing that stirs in the World but God has by his Providence the overruling
of it. The raising of a Man to Honor, whence is this? but through Divine
Providence: Psalm. 75.7. He puts down one, and sets up another. Success and
Victory in Battle is the result of Providence; Saul had the Victory, but God
wrought the Salvation, 1 Samuel 11.13. That among all Virgins that were brought
before the King, that Esther should find Favor in the Eyes of the King, was
not without God's special Providence; for by this means the Lord saved the Jews
alive that were destinat'd to Destrustion. Providence reaches to the least of
things, to the Birds and Pismire; Providence feeds the young Raven when the Dam
forsakes it, and will give it no Food, Psalm. 147.9. Providence reaches to the
very Hairs of our Head, Matthew. 10.30. The hairs of your head are numbered; and
surely if Providence reaches to our Hairs, then much more to our Souls. And
thus you have seen that the Providence of God reaches to all Places, to all
Persons, to all Occurrences and Affairs. Now there are two Objections against
this Doctrine,

Object. 1. But may some say, There are many things done in the World which are
Excentrecal* they are very disorderly and irregular, and surely the Providence
of God does not ^each to these things?

Answ. Yes, these things that seem to us irregular, God makes use of to his own
Glory. For Instance: Suppose you were in a Smith's Shop, and there should see
several sorts of Tools, some crooked, some bowed, others hooked, would you
condemn all these things for naught because they do not look handsome; the
Smith makes use of them all for the doing of his Work. Thus it is with the
Providence of God, they seem to us to be very crooked and strange, yet they all
carry on God's Work. I shall clear this to you in two particular Cases:

1 st, God's People are low; why this seems to be very much out of order, that
these that are best should be in the lowest Condition: but there is much Wisdom
to be seen in this Providence, as appears thus: 1. Perhaps the hearts of the
Godly were lifted up with Riches, or with Success, now God comes with an
humbling Providence to Afflict them and Fleece them; better is the Loss that
makes them Humble, then the Success that makes them Proud. Again, 2. if the
Godly were not sometimes afflicted, and suffered an Eclipse in their outward
Comforts, how could their Graces be seen, their Faith and Patience. If it were
always Sunshine, we should see no Stars; if we should have always Prosperity,
it would be hard to see the Actings of Men's Faith. Thus you see God's
Providence are wise and regular, though to us they seem very strange and
crooked.

2 dly, Here Is another Case, the Wicked flourish; this seems to be very much
out of order: ay, but God in his Providence sees good sometimes that the worst
of Men should be exalted, they may do some work to God, though against their
will, Isa. 10.7. God will be in no Man's debt. God makes use of the Wicked
sometimes to protect and shield his Church: he makes use of them to refine and
purify his People, Hab. 1.12. Thou have ordained them for correction. As if
the Prophet had said. Thou have ordained the Wicked to correct thy Children.
(And indeed as Austin says well, We are beholding to wicked Men, who against
their wills do do us good.) As the Corn is beholding to the Flayl to thresh off
its Husks, or as the Iron is beholding to the File to brighten it; so the Godly
are beholding to the Wicked, though it be against their will, to brighten and
refine their Graces. Now then if the Wicked do God's own Work, though against
their will, God will not let them be Loosers by it, he will raise them in the
World, exalt them and wring out the Waters of a full Cup to them. Thus you see
these Providence are wise and regular, which to us seem strange and crooked.

Object. 2. But may some say, if God has a hand in ordering all things that
fall out, why then he has a hand in the Sins of Men?

I answer, No, by no means, he has no hand in any Man's sin. God cannot go
contrary to his own Nature, he cannot do any unholy Action, no more then the
Sun can be said to be darkened. Here you must take heed of two things, as you
must take heed of making God ignorant of Men's sins, so you must take heed of
making God to have a hand in Men's sins: Is it a thing likely that God is the
Author of Sin, that is an Avenger of it? Is it a likely thing that God should
make a Law against Sin, and then have a hand in breaking his own Law, is that
likely? And therefore to answer the Objection, God in his Providence does
permit Men's sins, Acts 14.16. He suffered all nations to walk in their own
ways. God permitted their sin, and he would never permit their sin, if he could
not bring good out of it; as the Apothecary can make a Treakle of Poison. Had
not Sin been at all permitted, God's Justice in punishing Sin, and his Mercy in
pardoning Sin had never been so well known. The Lord is pleased to permit it,
but he had no hand in it.

Object. But is it not said, that God hardened Pharoah's Heart, here is more then
God's bear permitting of Sin?

Answ. God does not infuse Evil into Men, only he withdraws the Influence of
his Graces, and then the Heart hardens of itself, even as Light being
withdrawn, Darkness presently follows in the Air; but it were absurd to say,
that therefore the Light darkens the Air: and therefore you shall observe that
Pharaoh is said to harden his own Heart, Exodus 8.15. God is the cause of no
Man's Sin; it is true God has a hand in the Action where Sin-is, but no hand in
the Sin of the Action: He that plays upon a jarring Instrument, he is the cause
of the sounding of the Instrument, but the jarring is from itself: so it is
here, the Actions of Men so far as they are natural are from God, but so far as
they are sinful, they are from Men themselves, and God has no hand at all in
them. And so much for the first Position, That God's Providence reaches to all
Places, to all Persons, and to all Occurrences.

2. A second Position is this: There are Providence that are casual and
accidental to us, are predetermin'd by the Lord: the falling of a Tyle upon
one's head, the breaking out of a Fire to us, is casual, but it is ordered by a
Providence of God. You have a clear Instance of this, 1 Kings 22.34. A certain
man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the king of Israel between the joints of
the harness. This Accident was casual as to the Man who drew the Bow, but 'twas
divinely ordered by the Providence of God; God's Providence directed the Arrow
to hit the Mark. Things that seem to fall out casual and by chance, they are
the Issues of God's Decrees, and the Interpretation of his Will.

3. God's Providence is greatly to be observed, but we are not to make it the
Rule of our Actions, Psalm. 107.43. Whosoever is wise, will observe these things.
It Is good to observe Providence, but we must not make it our Rule to walk by;
Providence is a Christian's Diurnal but not his Bible. Sometimes a bad Cause
prevails and gets ground, it is not to be liked because it does prevail; we
must not think the better of what is sinful because it is successful, here is no
Rule of our Actions to be directed by.

4. Divine Providence is irresistible, there is no standing in the way of God's
Providence to hinder it: When God's time was come for Ioseph's Release, the
Prison could hold him no longer, The king sent and loosed him, Psalm. 105.20.
When God would indulge the Jews with Liberty in their Religion, Cyrus, by a
Providence, puts forth a Proclamation to encourage the Jews to go and build
their Temple at Jerusalem, and worship God, Ezra 1.2, 3. If God will shield and
protect Ieremiah's Person in Captivity: the very King of Babylon shall nurse up
the Prophet, and give charge concerning him that he want nothing, Ier. 39.11,
12.

5. God is to be trusted when his Providence seem to run contrary to his
Promises. God promised David to give him the Crown, to make him King, but
Providence runs contrary to his Promise: David was pursued by Saul, was in
danger of his Life, but all this while it was David's Duty to trust God. Pray
observe, the Lord does oftentimes by cross Providence bring to pass his
Promises. God promised Paul the Lives of all that were with him in the Ship;
but now the Providence of God seems to run quite contrary to his Promise, the
Winds blew, the Ship splits and breaks in pieces, and thus God fulfilled his
Promise upon the broken pieces of the Ship, they all come safe to shore. Trust
God when Providence seem to run quite contrary to Promises.

6. The Providence of God are Checquer-work, they are intermingled: In the
Life to come there shall be no more Mixture; in Hell there is nothing but
Bitter, in Heaven there is nothing but Sweet: but in this Life the Providence
of God are mixed, there is something of the sweet in them, and something of the
bitter. Providence are just like Israel's Pillar or Cloud that conducted them
in their March, it was dark on one side and light on the other, so the
Providence of God are a dark part and a light part. In the Ark there was laid
up the Rod and Manna, so are God's Providence to his Children, there is
something of the Rod and something of the Manna: so that we may say with David,
I will sing of mercy and judgment. Joseph: was in Prison, there was the dark
side of the Cloud, but God was with Joseph, there was the light side of the
Cloud. Ashur's Shoes were of Brass, but his Feet were dipped in Oil, Deuteronomy.
33.24. So Affliction is the Shoe of Brass that pinches; ay, but there is Mercy
mingled with the Affliction, there is the Foot dipped in Oil.

7. The very same Action as it comes from God's Providence may be good, which
as it comes from Men may be evil. For Instance: Joseph being sold into Egypt,
as he was sold by his Brethren it was evil, very wicked, for it was the Fruit
of their Envy; but as it was an Act of God's Providence, so it was good, for by
this means Jacob and all his Family were preserved alive in Egypt. Another
Instance is in Shimei's cursing David, now as Shimei cursed David, 'twas wicked
and sinful, for 'twas the Fruit of his Malice; but as his cursing was ordered
by God's Providence, so 'twas an Act of God's Justice to punish David, and to
Humble him for his Adultery and Murder. The Crucifying of Christ as it came
from the Jews it is an Act of Hatred and Malice to Christ: So Judas betraying
him was an Act of Covetuousness; but as it was an Act of God's Providence, so
there was good in it; for, see, it was an Act of God's Love in giving Christ to
dye for the World. Thus I have cleared to you the Doctrine of God's Providence,
in these several Positions: let me now speak something by way of Application.

Use 1. By way of Exhortation, in these particulars, 1st, Admire God's
Providence: The Providence of God keeps the whole Creation upon the Whee^s, or
else it would soon be dissolved, and the very Axle-tree would break in pieces:
If God's Providence should be withdrawn but for a while, Creatures would be
dissolved, and run into their first Nothing. Without this wise Providence of
God there would be an Anxiety and Confusion in the whole World; just like an
Army when it is routed and scattered. The Providence of God infuses Comfort and
Virtue into every thing we enjoy; our Clothes would not warm us, our Food would
not nourish us without the special Providence of God. And does not all this
deserve your Admiration of Providence?

2. Learn quietly to submit to Divine Providence; do not murmur at things that
are ordered by Divine Wisdom. We may no more find fault with the Works of
Providence, then we may with the Works of Creation: It is a Sin as well to
quarrel with God's Providence, as to deny God's Providence. If Men do not act
as we would have them, they shall act as God would have them. His Providence it
is his Master-wheel that turns these lesser Wheels, and God will bring his
Glory out of all at last: Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb and opened not my mouth,
because thou, Lord, did it. It may be we think sometimes we could order
things better if we had the Government of the World in our hands; but, alas!
should we be left to our own Choice, we should choose those things that are
hurtful for us. David did earnestly desire the Life of his Child which was the
Fruit of his Sin; now had the Child lived it had been a perpetual Monument of
his Shame. Let us be content God should Rule the World; learn to acquiesce in
his Will, and submit to his Providence: Does any Affliction befall you, remember
God sees it is that which is fit for you, or it should not come; your Clothes
cannot be so fit for you as your Crosses. God's Providence may sometimes be
secret, but it is always wise: Though we may not be silent under God's Dishonor,
yet we should learn to be silent under his Displeasure.

3. You that are Christians, believe that all God's Providence shall conspire
for the good of his People, and shall promote their Salvation at last. The
Providence of God are sometimes dark, and our eyes dim, and we can hardly tell
what to make of them: but when we cannot unriddle Providence, believe it shall
work together for the good of the Elect, Romans 8.28. The Wheels in a Watch seem
to move cross one to another, but they help forward the Motion of the Watch,
and make the Larum strike; so the Providence of God seem to be cross Wheels,
but for all that they shall carry on the Good of the Elect. The pricking of a
Vein is in itse^f evil and hurtful, but as it prevents a Fevor, and tends to
the Health of the Patient, so it is good: So Affliction in itself is not
glorious but grievous, but the Lord turns this to the good of his Saints.
Poverty shall starve their Sins, Affliction shall prepare them for a Kingdom.
Therefore, Christians, believe that God loves us, that he will make the most
cross Providence to promote his Glory, and our Good.

4. Let this be an Antidote against Immoderate Fear; for nothing comes to pass
but what is ordained by God's Decree, and ordered by his Providence. We
sometimes fear what the Issue of things will be; Men grow high in their
Actings; let us not make things worse by our Fear. Men are limited in their
Power, and shall not go one Hair's breadth further then God's Providence will
permit: He might let Sennacherib's Army march toward Jerusalem, but he shall
not shoot one Arrow against it, Isa. 38.36. Then the angel of the Lord went
forth and smote in the camp of the Assyrians an hundred and fourscore and five
thousand. When Israel was compassed in between Pharaoh and the Red Sea, no
question some of their hearts did begin to tremble, and they looked upon
themselves as dead Men, but Providence so ordered it, that the Sea was a safe
Passage to Israel, and a Sepulcher to Pharaoh and all his Host.

Use 2. Comfort in respect of the Church of God: God's Providence reaches in a
more special manner to his Church, Isa. 27.2. Sing ye unto her, A vineyard of
red wine. God waters this Vineyard with his Blessings, and watches over it by
his Providence, I the Lord keep it night and day. Such as think totally to ruin
the Church, must do it in a time when it is neither Day nor Night, for the Lord
keeps it by his Providence Night and Day. What a miraculous Conduct of
Providence had Israel, God led them by a Pillar of Fire, gave them Manna from
Heaven, set the Rock abroach. God by his Providence preserves his Church in the
midst of Enemies; which is as to see a Spark kept alive in the Ocean, or a
Flock of Sheep among Wolves. God saves his Church strangely, 1. By giving
Unexpected Mercies to his Church, when she looked for nothing but Ruin, Psalm.
126.1. When the Lord turned the captivity of Sion, we were like them that
dream. How strangely did God raise up Queen Esther to preserve alive the Jews,
when Haman had got a bloody Warrant signed for their Execution? 2. Strangely by
saving in that very way in which we think he will destroy: God works sometimes
by Contraries. He raises his Church by bringing it low. The Blood of the
Martyrs has watered the Church, and made it more fruitful, Exodus 1.12. The
more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied: The Church is like that
Plant Gregory Nazianzen speaks of, (...), it lives by dying, and grows by
cutting. 3. Strangely in that he makes the Enemy do his Work: When the People
of Amon, and Moab, and Mount Seir came against Judah, God set the Enemy one
against another, 2 Chr. 20.23. The children of Amon and Moab, stood up against
them of Mount Seir, to slay them; and when they had made an end of the
inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to destroy another. In the Powder Treason
he made the Traitors to be their own Betrayers: God can do his work by the
Enemies hand. God made the Egyptians send away the People of Israel laden with
Jewels, Exodus 12.36. The Church is the Apple of God's Eye, and the Eyelid of
his Providence does daily cover and defend it.

5. Let the merciful Providence of God cause Thankfulness: We are kept alive
by a Wonder-working Providence. Providence makes our Clothes warm us, our Meat
nourish us. We are fed every day out of the Alms-basket of God's Providence.
That in Health, that we have an Estate, it is not our Diligence but God's
Providence, Deuteronomy. 8.18. Thou shall remember the Lord thy God, for he it is that
gives thee power to get wealth. Especially if we go a st^p higher, we may see
cause of Thankfulness: That we should be born and bred in a Gospel Climate;
that we should live in such a place where the Sun of Righteousness shines; this
is a signal Providence: Why might not we have been born in such places where
Paganism prevails? That Christ should make himself known to us, and touch our
hearts with his Spirit, when he passes by others: Whence is this but from the
miraculous Providence of God, which is the Effect of his Free Grace?

Use 3. See here that which may make us long for that time when the great
Mystery of God's Providence shall be fully unfolded to us. Now we scarce know
what to make of God's Providence; therefore are ready to Censure what we do
not understand, but in Heaven we shall see how all God's Providence (Sickness,
Losses, Sufferings,) carried on our Salvation. Here we see but some dark pieces
of God's Providence, and it is impossible to judge of God's Works by Pieces,
but when we come to Heaven, and see the full Body and Pourtraicture of God's
Providence drawn out in its lively Colors, it will be a glorious Sight to
behold: Then we shall see how all God's Providence helped to fulfill his
Promises. Never a Providence but we shall see had either a Wonder or a Mercy in
it.

The Covenant of Works.
Quest. IX. I Proceed to the next Question, What special Providence did God
exercise toward Man in the Estate wherein he was created?

Answ. When God created Man he entered into a Covenant of Life with him, upon
Condition of perfect Obedience, forbidding him to eat of the Tree of Knowledge,
upon pain of death.

For this, consult with Genesis 2.16, 17. And the Lord commanded the man, saying,
of every Tree of the Garden thou may freely eat, but of the Tree of the
Knowledge of Good and Evil, thou shall not eat; for in the day thou eatest of
it, thou shall surely die. The Subject then of our next Discourse is, the
Covenant of Works. This Covenant was made with Adam, and all Mankind; for Adam
was a public Person, and the Representative of the World.

Quest. For what Reason did God make a Covenant with Adam and his Posterity in
Innocence?

Resp. 1. To show his Sovereignty over us, we were his Creatures; and as God
was the great Monarch of Heaven and Earth, God might impose upon us terms of a
Covenant. 2. God made a Covenant with Adam to bind him fast to God; as God
bound himself to Adam, so Adam was bound to God by the Covenant.

Quest. What was the Covenant?

Resp. God commanded Adam not to eat of the Tree of Knowledge; God gave Adam
leave to eat of all the other Trees of the Garden. God did not envy him any
Happiness, only, meddle not with this Tree of Knowledge, because God would try
Adam's Obedience: As King Pharaoh made Joseph chief Ruler in his Kingdom, and
gave him a Ring off his Finger, and a Chain of Gold, only he must not touch his
Throne, Genesis 41.40. in like manner God dealt with Adam, he gave him a sparkling
Jewel, Knowledge, and araid him with a fine Vesture, put upon him the Garment
of Original Righteousness, only says God, Touch not the Tree of Knowledge, for
that is aspiring after Omnisciency. Adam had power to have kept this Law; Adam
had the Copy of God's Law written in his heart. This Covenant of Works, had a
Promise annexed to it, and a Threatening. 1. The Promise, Do this and live. In
case Man had stood, it is probable he had not died, but had been translated to
a better Paradise. 2. The Threatening, Thou shall die the death; Hebr. in dying
thou shall die; that is, thou shall die both a natural Death and an Eternal,
unless some other Expedient be found out for thy Restoration.

Quest. But why did God give Adam this Law, seeing God did foresee that Adam
would transgress?

Resp. 1. It was Adam's fault he did not keep the Law; God gave him a stock of
Grace to trade with, but he of himself broke. 2. Though God foresaw Adam would
transgress, yet that was not a sufficient reason that Adam should have no Law
given him: for by the same reason, God should not have given his written Word
to Men, to be a Rule of Faith and Manners, because he foresaw that some would
not believe, and others would be profane. Shall not Laws be made in the Land
because some break them? 3. God, though he foresaw Adam would break the Law, he
knew how to turn it to a greater good, in sending Christ. The first Covenant
being broken, he knew how to establish a second, and a better. Well, concerning
the First Covenant, consider these four Things.

1. The Form of the first Covenant in Innocence, was working; Do this and live.
Working was the Ground and Condition of our Justification, Gal. 3.12. Not but
that working is required in the Covenant of Grace: we are bid to work out
salvation, and be rich in good works. But works in the Covenant of Grace are
not required under the same Notion, as in the first Covenant with Adam. Works
are not required to the Justification of our Persons, but as a Testification of
our Love to God, not as a Cause of our Salvation, but as an Evidence of our
Adoption. Works are required in the Covenant of Grace, not so much in our own
strength, as in the strength of another. It is God which works in you, Phil.
2.13. As the Scrivener guides the Child's hand, and helps him to form his
Letters, so that it is not so much the Child's writing, as the Scriveners that
guides his hand; so not our working, as the Spirit's co-working.

2. The Covenant of Works was very strict. God required of Adam, and all
Mankind, 1. Perfect Obedience. Adam must do all things written in the Book of
the Law, Gal. 3.10. and not fail, either in the matter or manner. Adam was to
live up to the whole breadth of the Moral Law, and go exactly according to it,
as a well made Dial goes with the Sun: a sinful thought had forfeited the
Covenant. 2. Personal Obedience. Adam must not do his work by a Proxy, or have
any Surety bound for him; no, it must be done in his own Person. 3. Perpetual
Obedience. He must continue in all things written in the Book of the Law, Gal.
3.10. Thus it was very strict. There was no Mercy in case of failure.

3. The Covenant of Works was not built upon a very firm Basis; therefore it
must needs leave Men full of Fears and Doubts. The Covenant of Works rested
upon the strength of Man's inherent Righteousness; which though in Innocence
was perfect, yet was subject to a change. Adam was created holy, but mutable.
He had a power to stand, but not a power not to fall. Adam had a stock of
Original Righteousness to begin the World with, but he was not sure he should
not break. Adam was his own Pilot, and could steer right in the time of
Innocence; but he was not so secured, but that he might dash against the Rock
of a Temptation, and he and his Posterity suffer Shipwreck. So that the
Covenant of Works must needs leave Jealousies and Doubtings in Adam's heart, he
having no Security given him, that he should not fall from that glorious state.

4. The Covenant of Works being broken by Sin, Man's Condition was very
deplorable and desperate. He was left in himself helpless; there was no place
for Repentance: the Justice of God being offended, sets all the other
Attributes against Mandkind When Adam lost his Righteousness, he lost his
Anchor of Hope, and his Crown: there was no way for Man's relief, unless God
would find out such a way that neither Man nor Angels could devise.

Use 1. See the Condescension of God, who was pleased to stoop so low, as to
make a Covenant with us. For the God of Glory to make a Covenant with Dust and
Ashes; for God to bind himself to us, to give us Life in case of Obedience:
Entering into Covenant was a sign of God's Friendship with us, and a Royal Act
of his Favor.

2. See what a glorious Condition Man was in, when God entered into Covenant
with him: 1. He was placed in the Garden of God, which for the pleasure of it,
was called Paradise, Genesis 2.8. he had his choice of all the Trees, (one only
excepted) he had all kind of precious Stones, pure Metals, rich Cedars; he was
a King upon the Throne, and all the Creation did obeisance to him, as in
Ioseph's Dream, all his Brethrens sheaves did bow to his sheaf. Man in
Innocence had all kind of Pleasure that might ravish his Senses with delight,
and be as Baits to allure him to serve and worship his Maker. 2. Besides, he
was full of Holiness; Paradise was not more adorned with Fruit, then Adam's
Soul was with Grace. He was the Coin on which God had stamped his lively Image;
Light sparkled in his Understanding, he was like an Earthly Angel, his Will and
Affections were full of order, tuning harmoniously to the Will of God. Adam was
(...), a perfect Pattern of Sanctity. 3. Adam had intimacy of Communion with
God, and conversed with him, as a Favorite with his Prince. Adam knew God's
Mind, and had his Heart. He not only enjoyed the Light of the Sun in Paradise,
but the Light of God's Countenance. This Condition was Adam in when God entered
into Covenant with him. But this did not long continue; Man being in honor
abides not, Psalm. 49. ult. lodged not for a night; his Teeth watered at the
Apple, and ever since it has made our Eyes water.

3. Learn from Adam's Fall, how unable we are to stand in our own strength. If
Adam in the state of Integrity did not stand, how unable are we now, when the
Lock of our original Righteousness is cut? If purified Nature did not stand,
how then shall corrupt Nature? we need more strength to uphold us then our own.

4. See in what a sad Condition all Unbelievers and Impenitent Persons are: so
long as they continue in their sins, they continue under the Curse of the first
Covenant. Faith intitles us to the Mercy of the second Covenant: but while Men
are under the power of their sins, they are under the Curse of the first
Covenant, and if they die in this Condition, they are damned to Eternity.

5. See the wonderful goodness of God, who was pleased, when we had forfeited
the first Covenant, to enter into a new Covenant with us. Well may it be called
Foedus Gratiae, a Covenant of Grace; it is bespangled with Promises, as the
Heaven with Stars. When the Angels, those glorious Spirits fell, God did not
enter into a new Covenant with them to be their God, but let those golden
Vessels lie broken; but has entered into a second Covenant with us, better then
the first, Hebr. 8.6. It is better, because it is surer; it is made in Christ,
and cannot be reversed; Christ has engaged his strength to keep every
Believer. In the first Covenant we had a posse stare, a power of standing: in
the second we have a non posse cadere, an impossibility of Falling finally, 1
Pet. 1.5.

6. Whoever they are that look for Righteousness and Salvation by the power of
their Free Will, or the inherent goodness of their Nature, or by Virtue of
their Merit, as the Socinians and Papists, these are all under the Covenant of
Works; they do not submit to the Righteousness of Faith, therefore they are
bound to keep the whole Law, and in case of failure they are condemned. The
Covenant of Grace is like a Court of Chancery, to relieve the Sinner, and help
him who is Cast by the first Covenant. It says, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and
be saved; but such as will stand upon their own inherent Righteousness,
Free Will, and Merit, they fall under the first Covenant of Works, and are in a
perishing Estate.

Use 2. Let us labor by Faith to get into the second Covenant of Grace, and
then the Curse of the first Covenant is taken away by Christ. If once we get to
be Heirs of the Covenant of Grace, we are in a better state than before. Adam
stood on his own Legs, therefore fell; we stand in the strength of Christ.
Under the first Covenant the Justice of God, as an Avenger of Blood, pursues
you; but if ye get into the second Covenant, you are got into the City of
Refuge you are safe, and the Justice of God is pacified toward you.

Concerning SIN.
Quest. X. What is Sin?

Answ. Sin is any want of conformity unto, or transgression of the Law of God.

1 John 3.4. Sin is a Transgression of the Law. Of Sin in general.

1. Sin is (...), a Violation or Transgression. The Latin word transgredior, to
transgress, signifies to go beyond ones Bounds. The Moral Law is to keep us
within the bounds of our Duty; Sin is a going beyond our bounds.

2. The Law of God; it is not the Law of an Inferior Prince is broken, but of
Jehovah, who gives Laws as well to Angels as Men; it is a Law that is just, and
holy, and good, Romans 7.12. It is just, there is nothing in it unequal; holy,
nothing in it impure; good, nothing in it prejudicial. So that there is no
reason to break this Law, no more than for a Beast that is in a fat Pasture to
break over the Hedge to leap into a barren Heath or Quagmire.

I shall show what an heinous and execrable thing Sin is. It is malorum
colluvies, the complication of all Evil; it is the Spirits of Mischief
distilled: The Scripture calls it (...) the accursed thing, Josh. 7.13. it is
compared to the venom of Serpents, the stench of Sepulchers. The Apostle uses
this expression of sin, out of measure sinful, Romans 7.13. or as in the Greek,
(...), hyperbolically sinful. The Devil would paint over sin with the Vermilion
color of Pleasure and Profit, that he may make it look fair. But I shall pull
off the Paint from Sin, that you may see the ugly face of it. We are apt to
have slight thoughts of Sin, and to say of it as Lot of Zoar, Genesis 19.20. Is it
not a little one? But that you may see how great an Evil Sin is, consider these
four things.

I. The Original of Sin, whence it comes: It fetches its Pedigree from Hell;
Sin is of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. He that commits sin is of the Devil. Satan
was the first Actor of sin, and the first Tempter to sin. Sin is the Devils
Firstborn.

II. Sin is evil in the Nature of it.

1. It is a defiling thing. Sin is not only a Defection, but a Pollution. It is
to the Soul as Rust is to Gold, as a Stain is to Beauty. It makes the Soul red
with guilt, and black with filth. Sin in Scripture is compared to a menstruous
cloth, Isa. 30.22. to a plague sore, 1 Kings 8.38. Joshua's filthy Garments,
in which he stood before the Angel, Zach. 3.3. were nothing but a Type and
Hieroglyphick of Sin. Sin has blotted God's Image, and stained the orient
brightness of the Soul. Sin makes God loath a sinner, Zach. 11.8. and when a
sinner sees his sin, he loathes himself, Ezekiel. 20.42. Sin drops poison on our
holy things, it infects our Prayers. The High Priest was to make Atonement for
sin on the Altar, Exodus 29.36. to typifie that our holiest Services need Christ
to make Atonement for them. Duties of Religion in themselves are good, but sin
corrupts them, as the purest Water is polluted, running through muddy ground.
The Leper under the Law, if he had touched the Altar, the Altar had not
cleansed him, but he had defiled the Altar. The Apostle calls Sin (...),
filthiness of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. Sin stamps the Devil's Image on a
Man. Malice is the Devil's Eye, Hypocrisy his Clovenfoot It turns a Man into a
Devil, John 6.20. Have not I chosen twelve, and one of you is a Devil.

2. Sin is a grieving of God's Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the holy Spirit of
God. To grieve is more than to anger.

Quest. How can the Spirit be said to be grieved? for seeing he is God, he
cannot be subject to any passion.

Resp. This is spoken Metaphorically; Sin is said to grieve the Spirit, because
it is an injury offered to the Spirit, and he takes it unkindly, and as it were
lays it to heart. And is it not much thus to grieve the Spirit? The Holy Ghost
descended in the likeness of a Dove; Sin makes this blessed Dove mourn. Were it
only an Angel, we should not grieve him, but much less the Spirit of God. Is it
not sad to grieve our Comforter?

3. Sin is an act of Contumacy against God; a walking Antipodes to Heaven, Lev.
26.27. If ye will walk contrary to me. A sinner tramples upon God's Law,
crosses his Will, does all he can to affront, yea to spite God. The Hebrew
word for sin Pashang, signifies Rebellion; there is the heart of a Rebel in
every sin; Ier. 44.16. We will do whatsoever proceeds out of our mouth, to
burn Incense to the Queen of Heaven. Sin strikes at the very Deity; Peccatum
est Dei-cidium, Sin would not only unthrone God, but un-God him. If the sinner
could help it, God should no longer be God.

4. Sin is an act of disingenuity and unkindness; God feeds the sinner, keeps
off evils from him, be miracles him with Mercy, but the sinner not only forgets
God's Mercies, but abuses them: he is the worse for Mercy; like Absalom, who
as soon as David had kissed him, and took him into favor, plotted Treason
against him, 2 Samuel 15.10. Like the Mule, who kicks the Damn after she has
given it Milk. Vas pertusum, (...), 2 Samuel 16.17. is this thy kindness to thy
Friend? God may upbraid the sinner: I have given thee (may God say) thy Health,
Strength, and Estate, thou requirest me evil for good, thou woundest me with my
own Mercies; Is this thy kindness to thy Friend? did I give thee life to sin?
did I give thee wages to serve the Devil?

5. Sin is a Disease, Isa. 1.5. The whole head is sick. Some are sick of Pride,
others of Lust, others of Envy. Sin has distempered the (...), the
intellectual part, it is a leprosy in the Head, it has poisoned the Vitals,
Tit. 2.16. Their Conscience is defiled. It Is with a sinner as with a sick
Patient, his Pallat is distempered, the sweetest things taste bitter to him.
The Word, which is sweeter then the Honycomb, tastes bitter to him, Isa. 5.20.
they put sweet for bitter. Thus, a Disease, and nothing can cure this Disease
but the Blood of the Physician.

6. Sin is an irrational thing; it makes a Man act not only wickedly, but
foolishly. It is absurd and irrational to prefer the lesser before the greater,
the Pleasures of Life, before the Rivers of Pleasures at God's right hand for
evermore? Is it not irrational to lose Heaven for the satisfying or indulging
the Lust? as Lysimachus, who for a draught of Water lost a Kingdom. Is it not
irrational to gratify an Enemy? in sin we do so. When Lust, or rash Anger burn
in the Soul, Satan warms himself at this fire. Mortalium errores epulae sunt
daemonum, Men's sins feast the Devil.

7. Sin is a painful thing; it costs Men much labor in pursuing their sins.
How do Men tire themselves in doing the Devil's drudgery, Ier. 9.5. They weary
themselves to commit iniquity. Peccatum est sui ipsius poena. What pains did
Judas take to bring about his Treason? He goes to the High Priest, and then
after to the Band of Soldiers, and then back again to the Garden. St.
Chrysostom says, Virtue is easier than Vice. It Is more pains to some to follow
their sins, than to others to worship their God. While the sinner travails with
his sin, in sorrow he brings forth; it is called serving diverse Lusts, Tit.
3.3. not enjoy, but serve: why so, because not only of the slavery in sin, but
the hard labor; it is serving diverse Lusts. Many a Man goes to Hell in the
sweat of his brows.

8. Sin is the only thing God has an antipathy against: God does not hate a
Man because he is poor, or despised in the World; you do not hate your Friend
because he is sick; but that which draws forth the keens of God's hatred, is
sin, Ier. 44.4. O do not this abominable thing which I hate. And sure, if the
sinner dies under God's hatred, he cannot be admitted into the Celestial
Mansions; will God let him live with him whom he hates; God will never lay a
Viper in his bosom; the Feathers of the Eagle will not mix with the Feathers of
other ^owls. God will not mix and incorporate with a sinner. Till sin be
removed, there is no coming where God is.

III. See the evil of Sin in the Price paid for it; it cost the Blood of God to
expiate it. O Man (says St. Austin) consider the greatness of thy sin by the
greatness of the price paid for sin. All the Princes on Earth, or Angels in
Heaven, could not satisfy for sin, only Christ. Nay, Christ's active Obedience
was not enough to make atonement for sin, but he must suffer upon the Cross;
for without blood is no remission, Hebr. 9.22. O what an accursed thing is sin,
that Christ should die for it! The evil of sin is not so much seen in that one
thousand are damned for it, as that Christ died for it.

IV. Sin is evil in the Effects of it.

1. Sin has degraded us of our Honor. Reuben by Incest lost his Dignity, and
though he were the firstborn, he could not excel, Genesis 49.4. God made us in
his own Image, a little lower than the Angels, but sin has debased us. Before
Adam sinned he was like an Herald that has his Coat of Arms upon him, all
reverence him because he carries the King's Coat of Arms; but let this Coat be
pulled off, and he is despised, no Man regards him. Sin has done this, it has
plucked off our Coat of Innocence, and now it has debased us, and turned our
glory into shame, Dan. 11.21. And there shall stand up a vile person. This was
spoken of Antiochus Epiphanes, who was a King, and his name signifies
illustrious, yet sin had degraded him, he was a vile person.

2. Sin disquiets the Peace of the Soul: whatever defiles, disturbs; as Poison
tortures the Bowels, corrupts the Blood, so does Sin the Soul. Isa. 57.21. Sin
breeds a trembling at the heart; it creates fears, and there is torment in
fear, 1 John 4.18. Sin makes sad Convulsions in the Conscience. Judas was so
terrified with guilt and horror, that he hangs himself to quiet his
Conscience. And is not he like to to be well cured, that throws himself into
Hell for ease?

3. Sin produces all Temporal Evil. Lam. 1.8. Jerusalem has grievously
sinned, ergo she is removed. It is the Trogan Horse, it has Sword, and Famine,
and Pestilence in the Belly of it. Sin is a Coal, that not only blacks but
burns. Sin creates all our Troubles; it puts Gravel into our Bread, Wormword in
our Cup. Sin rots the Name, consumes the Estate, buries Relations. Sin shoots
the flying Roll of God's Curses into a Family and Kingdom, Zach. 5.4. It is
reported of Phocas, having built a Wall of mighty strength about his City,
there was a voice heard, (...), Sin is within the City, and that will throw
down the Wall.

4. Sin unrepented of brings final damnation. The canker that breeds in the
Rose is the cause of its perishing; and corruptions that breed in Men's Souls,
are the cause of their damning. Sin without Repentance brings the second death,
Rev. 20.14. that is, mors sine morte, Bern. a death always dying. Sins pleasure
will turn to sorrow at last; like the Book the Prophet did eat, Ezekiel. 3.3.
sweet in the mouth, but bitter in the belly. Sin brings the wrath of God, and
what Buckets or Engines can quench that Fire? Mark 9.44. Where the worm never
dies, and the fire is not quenched.

Use 1. See how deadly an evil sin is; how strange is it that any one should
love it, Psalm. 4.3. How long will ye love vanity? Hos. 3.1. Who look to other
Gods, and love Flagons and Wine. Sin is a Dish Men cannot forbear, though it
make them sick; who would pour Rose Water into a Kennel? what pity is it so
sweet an affection as Love should be poured upon so filthy a thing as sin. Sin
brings a sting in the Conscience, a curse in the Estate, yet Men love it. A
sinner is the greatest Self-denier for his sin, he will deny himself a part in
Heaven.

Use 2. Do any thing rather then sin. O hate sin! there is more evil in the
least sin, then in the greatest bodily Evils that can befall us. The Ermyn
rather chooses to die, then defiles her beautiful skin. There is more evil in
a drop of sin, then in a Sea of Affliction: Affliction is but like a rent in a
Coat, Sin a prick at the Heart. In Affliction there is aliquid boni, some good.
In this Lion there is some Honey to be found; Psalm. 119.71. It is good for me
that I was afflicted. Utile est animae si in hac area mundi flagellis
trituretur corpus, Aug. Affliction is God's Flail to thrash off our Husks; not
to consume, but refine. There is no good in sin; it is the spirit and
quintissence of Evil. Sin is worse then Hell; for the pains of Hell only are a
burden to the Creature, but sin is a burden to God, Amos 2.13. I am pressed
under your iniquities, as a Cart is pressed under the sheaves.

Use ult. Is Sin so great an Evil, then how thankful should you be to God, if
he has taken away your sin; Zach. 3.3. I have caused thy iniquity to pass from
thee. If you had a Disease on your Body, Plague or Dropsy, how thankful would
you be to have it taken away, much more to have sin taken away. God takes away
the guilt of sin by pardoning grace, and the power of sin by mortifying grace.
O be thankful that this sickness is not unto death. That God has changed your
Nature, and by grafting you into Christ, made you partake of the sweetness of
that Olive; that sin, though it live, does not reign, but the elder serves the
younger, the elder of sin serves the younger of grace.

ADAM's SIN.
Quest. XI. WHat was the Sin whereby our first Parents fell from the Estate
wherein they were created?

Resp. The Sin was their eating of the forbidden Fruit, Genesis 3.6. -- She took
of the fruit thereof and did eat, and gave also to her husband.

Here is implied, 1. That our first Parents fell from their State of Innocence.
2. The Sin by which they fell, Eating the forbidden Fruit.

1. Our first Parents fell from their glorious State of Innocence, Eccles.
7.29. God made man upright, but they have sought out many inventions. Adam was
perfectly Holy, he had Rectitude of Mind, and Liberty of Will to good, but his
head aked till he had invented his own and our Death, he sought out many
Inventions, 1. Adam's Fall was voluntary; he had a Posse non Peccare, a Power
not to Fall. Free Will was a sufficient Shield to repel Temptation: the Devil
could not have forced him, unless he had given his Consent; Satan was only a
Suitor to woe, not a King to compel, but Adam gave away his own Power, and
suffered himself to be decoyed into Sin. Like a young Gallant who at one throw
loses a fair Lordship. Adam had a fair Lordship, he was Lord of the World,
Genesis 1.28. Have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the
air, and over every living thing that moves. But he lost all at one throw. As
soon as he had sinned he forfeited Paradise. 2. Adam's Fall was sudden; he did
not long continue in his Royal Majesty.

Quest. How long did Adam continue in Paradise before he fell?

Resp. Tostatus says he fell the next day. Pererius says he fell the eighth
day after his Creation. But the most probable and received Opinion is, That
Adam fell the very same day in which he was created. So Irenaeus, Cyril,
Epiphanius, and many others. The Reasons which incline me to believe so are,

1. It is said, Satan was a murderer, ab initio, from the beginning, Joh. 8.44.
Now whom did he murder? Not the blessed Angel, he could not reach them; nor the
cursed Angels, for they had before destroyed themselves. How then was Satan a
Murderer from the beginning? As soon as Satan fell, he began to tempt Mankind
to Sin, this was a Murdering Temptation. By which it appears Adam did not stay
long in Paradise: soon after his Creation the Devil set upon him, and murdered
him by his Temptation.

2 Argument to prove that Adam fell the same day he was created: Adam had not
yet eaten of the Tree of Life, Ver. 22, 23. And now least he put forth his
hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat; the Lord sent him forth of
the garden. This Tree of Life being one of the choicest Fruits in the Garden,
and being placed in the midst of Paradise, it is very like Adam would have
eaten of this Tree of Life one of the first, had not the Serpent beguiled him
with the Tree of Knowledge. So that hence I conclude* Adam fell the very day of
his Creation, because he had not yet tasted the Tree of Life, that Tree that
was most in his Eye, and had such delicious Fruit growing upon it.

3 Argument from Psalm. 49.12. Man being in honor, abides not. The Rabbis
read it thus, Adam being in Honor, lodged not one night. The Hebrew word for
abide, bal-jalin, signifies to stay or lodge all night. Adam then it seems did
not take up one night's lodging in Paradise.

1 Inference, From Adam's sudden Fall, he fell the same day in which he was
created, Learn, 1. The Weakness of Humane Nature; Adam in a State of Integrity
quickly made a Defection from God, He soon lost the Robe of Innocence, and the
Glory of Paradise. And was our Nature thus weak when it was at the best? what
is it now when it is at the worst? If Adam did not stand when he was perfectly
righteous, how unable are we to stand when Sin has cut the Lock of our
Original Righteousness? If purified Nature did not stand, how then shall
corrupt Nature? If Adam in a few hours sinned himself out of Paradise, O how
quickly should we sin ourselves into Hell, if we were not kept by a greater
Power then our own? but God puts underneath his Everlasting Arms, Deuteronomy. 32.27.

2. From Adam's sudden Fall, he fell the same day, Learn how sad it is for a
Man to be left to himself, 1. Adam being left to himself fell: O then what will
become of us, how soon fall, if God leave us to ourselves? A Man left to
himself will choose his own Death: he will be a Prey to every Temptation. A Man
without God's Grace, left to himself, is like a Ship in a Storm without Pilot
or Anchor, and is ready to dash upon every Rock. Make this Prayer to God, Lord
do not leave me to myself: If Adam fell so soon who had strength, how soon
shall I fall who have no strength? O urge God with his Hand and Seal, 2 Cor.
12.9. My strength shall be made perfect in weakness.

2. The Sin by which our first Parents fell was, Eating the forbidden Fruit;
Where consider two things: 1. The Occasion of it. 2. The Sin itself.

I. The Occasion of it: The Serpent's Temptation; the Devil did creep into the
Serpent, and speak in the Serpent, as the Angel in Balaam's Ass; where
consider, 1. The Subtilty of Satan's Temptation; his Wiles are worse then his
Darts. Satan's Subtilty in Tempting, 1. He dealt all along as an Impostor, he
ushered in his Tentation by a Lie: He heaps up many Lies, 1. That though our
first Parents did eat of that Tree, they should not die, Genesis 3.4. Ye shall not
surely die. 2. Lie, that God did envy our first Parents their Happiness, Verse
5. God knows that in the day ye eat, your eyes shall be opened; q. d. It Is
God's envying your Felicity that he forbids you this Tree. 3. Lie, that they
should be thereby made like unto God, Verse 5. Ye shall be as gods. Here was
his Subtilty in Tempting; the Devil was first a Liar then a Murderer.

2. In that he set upon our first Parents so quickly, before they were
confirmed in their Obedience. The Angels in Heaven are fully confirmed in
Holiness; they are called Stars of the Morning, Job 38.7. and they are fixed
Stars. But our first Parents were not confirmed in their Obedience, they were
not fixed in their Orb of Holiness; Though they had a possibility of standing,
they had not an impossibility of falling; they were Holy but Mutable; here was
Satan's Subtilty in tempting our first Parents before they were confirmed in
their Obedience.

3. His Subtilty in tempting was, that he sets upon Eve first, 1. Because he
thought she was less able to resist. Satan did break over the Hedge where it
was weakest: he knew he could more easily insinuate and wind himself into her
by a Temptation. An expert Soulder when he is to Storm or enter a Castle,
observes warily where there is a Breach, or how he may enter with more
Facility: so did Satan the weaker Vessel. 2. He tempted Eve first, because he
knew if once he could prevail with her, she would easily draw her Husband. Thus
the Devil handed over a Temptation to Job by his Wife, Job 2.9. Curse God and
die. Agrippina poisoned the Emperor Commodus with Wine in a perfumed Cup; the
Cup being perfumed and given him by his Wife, it was the less suspected. Satan
knew a Temptation coming to Adam from his Wife, would be more prevailing, and
would be less suspected: O bitter! sometimes Relations prove Temptations: A
Wife may be a Snare, when she disswades her Husband from doing his Duty, or
enticeth him to Evil: Ahab sold himself to work wickedness, whom his wife
Iezebel stired up, 1 Kin. 21.25. She blew the Coals and made his Sin flame out
the more. Satan's Subtilty was in tempting Adam by his Wife, he thought she
would draw him to sin.

4. Satan's Subtilty in tempting was in his assaulting Eve's Faith; he would
persuade her that God had not spoken truth, Ye shall not surely die, Genesis 3.4.
This was Satan's Masterpiece, to weaken her Faith, when he had shaken that,
and wrought her once to Distrust, then victa fuit, she presently put forth her
hand to Evil.

2. Satan's Cruelty in Tempting: As soon as Adam was invested in all his Glory,
the Devil cruelly, as it were on the Day of Adam's Coronation, would Dethrone
him, and bring both him and all his Posterity under a Curse: We see how little
love Satan has to Mankind; he has an implacable Antipathy against us, and
Antipathies can never be reconciled. So much for the Occasion of Adam's Sin,
tempted by the Serpent.

II. The Sin itself, Eating the forbidden Fruit: This was very heinous, and
that appears three ways: 1. In respect of the Person that committed it. 2. The
Aggravation of the Sin. 3. The Dreadfulness of the Effect.

1. Very Heinous in respect of the Person that committed it: Adam had Excellent
and Noble Endowments; he was illuminated with Knowledge, embellished with
Holiness, he knew his Duty, and it was as easy to him to obey God's Command as
to know it; he might have chosen whether he would sin or no, yet he wilfully
did eat of the Tree which was forbidden.

2. The Aggravation of Adam's Sin.

Quest. Wherein did it appear to be so great? 'Twas but raptus Pomi; Was this
such a great matter to pluck an Apple?

Resp. Besides that, 'twas against an infinite God, it was Malum complexum, a
voluminous Sin, there were many Sins twisted together in it: As Cicero says of
Parricide, He who is guilty of it, Plurima committit peccata in uno, he commits
many Sins in one. So there were many Sins in this one Sin of Adam. A
big-bellied Sin, a Chain with many Links, ten Sins in it, 1. Incredulity; our
first Parents did not believe what God had spoken was truth. God said, They
should die the death in the day they eat of that tree. They believed not that
they should die; they could no^ be persuaded that such fair Fruit had Death at
the Core. Thus by Unbelief they made God a Liar; nay, which was worse, they
believed the Devil rather then God.

2. Unthankfulness, which is the Epitome of all Sin. Adam's Sin was committed
in the midst of Paradise: God had enriched him with Variety of Mercies; he had
stamped his own Image upon him; he had made him Lord of the World, gave him of
all the Trees of the Garden to eat (one only excepted) and now to take of that
Tree! This was high Ingratitude; this was like the Dye to the Wool, which made
it Crimson. When Adam's Eyes were opened, and he saw what he had done, well
might he be ashamed, and hide himself, to sin in the midst of Paradise: How
could he look God in the Face without Blushing?

3. In Adam's Sin was Discontent: Had not he been discontented, he would never
have sought to have altered his Condition. Adam one would think had enough, he
differed but little from the Angels, he had the Robe of Innocence to cloth
him, and the Glory of Paradise to crown him: yet he was not content, he would
have more; he would be above the ordinary Rank of Creatures. How wide was
Adam's Heart, that a whole World could not fill it.

4. Pride, in that he would be like God: This Worm that was but newly crept out
of the Dust, now aspires after a Deity; Ye shall be as gods, (says Satan.) And
Adam hoped to have been so indeed: he supposed the Tree of Knowledge would have
anointed his Eyes and made him Omniscient. But by climbing too high he got a
Fall.

5. Disobedience: God said, Thou shall not eat of the Tree; he would eat of it
though it cost him his Life. Disobedience is a Sin against Equity; it is equal we
should serve him from whom we have our Subsistence. God gave Adam his
Allowance, therefore it was but equal he should give God his Allegiance:
therefore Disobedience was against Equity. How could God endure to see his Laws
trampled on before his Face? This made God place a flaming Sword at the end of
the Garden.

6. Curiosity, to meddle with that which was out of his Sphere, and did not
belong to him. God smote the Men of Bethshemesh but for looking into the Ark, 1 Samuel 6.19. Adam would be prying into God's Secrets, and tasting what was
forbidden.

7. Wantonness: Though Adam had choice of all the other Trees, yet his Palate
grew wanton, and he must have this Tree. Like Israel, God sent them Manna,
Angels Food, aye, but they had an hankering after Quails; it was not enough God
did supply their Wants, unless he would satisfy their Lusts. Adam had not only
for Necessity, but for Delight, yet his wanton Palate lusted after forbidden
Fruit.

8. Sacrilege: The Tree of Knowledge was none of Adam's, yet he took of it,
and did sacrilegiously rob God of his Due. It was counted a great Crime in
Harpalus to rob the Temple, and steal the Silver Vessels. So in Adam to steal
Fruit from that Tree which God had peculiarly enclosed for himself. Sacrilege
is double Theft.

9. Murder. Adam was a public Person, and all his Posterity were involved and
wrapped up in him, and he sinning, did at one destroy all his Posterity, if
Free Grace did not interpose. If Abel's Blood did cry so loud in God's Ears,
Genesis 4.10. The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from the ground; then
how loud did the Blood of all Adam's Posterity cry against him for Vengeance.

10. Presumption. Adam presumed of God's Mercy; he blessed himself, saying, he
should have Peace; he thought though he did transgress, he should not die; God
would sooner reverse his Decree then punish him; high Presumption! What an
heinous sin then was Adam's breach of Covenant?

Use. One sin may have many sins in it. We are apt to have slight thoughts of
sin, it is but a little one; How many sins were in Adam's sin? O take heed of
any sin! As in one Volume there may be many Works bound up, so there may be
many sins in one sin.

3. The dreadfulness of the Effect. It has corrupted Man's Nature. How rank is
that Poison, a drop whereof should poison a whole Sea? And how deadly is that
sin of Adam, that should poison all Mankind, and bring a Curse upon them, till
it be taken away by him, who was made a Curse for us.

Original SIN.
Quest. XII. DID all Mankind fall in Adam's Transgression?

Answ. The Covenant being made with Adam, not only for himself, but for his
Posterity, all Mankind descending from him by ordinary Generation, sinned in
him, and fell within his first Transgression.

Romans 5.12. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, etc.

Adam being a Representative Person, he standing, we stood, and he falling, we
fell: we sinned in Adam; so it is in the Text, (...), in whom all have sinned.

Adam was the Head of Mankind, and he being guilty, we are guilty, as the
Children of a Traitor have their Blood stained: Omnes unus ille Adam fuerunt,
Aug. All of us, says Austin, sinned in Adam, because we were part of Adam.

Object. If when Adam fell, all Mankind fell with him, why then when one Angel
fell, did not all Fall?

Resp. The Case is not the same. The Angels had no relation to one another;
they are called Morning Stars; the Stars have no dependence one upon another.
But it is otherwise with us, we are in Adam's loins; as a Child is a Branch of
the Parent, we were part of Adam, therefore he sinning, we sinned.

Quest. How is Adam's sin made ours?

Resp. 1. By Imputation. The Pelagians of old held that Adam's Transgression is
hurtful to Posterity by Imitation only, not by Imputation. But the Text
confutes that, (...)* in whom all have sinned.

2. Adam's sin is ours by Propagation. Not only is the guilt of Adam's sin
imputed to us, but the pravity and corruption of his Nature is derived to us,
as Poison is carried from the Fountain to the Cistern. This is that which we
call Original Sin; Psalm. 51.5. In sin did my mother conceive me. Adam's Leprosy
cleaves to us, as Naaman's Leprosy did cleave to Gehazi, 2 Kings 5.27. This
Original Concupiscence is called,

1. The Old Man, Ephesians. 4.22. It is said to be the Old man, not that it is weak,
as Old men are, but for its long standing, and because of its deformity. In old
age the fair blossoms of Beuty fall; so Original sin is the Old man, because it
has withered our Beauty, and made us deformed in God's Eye.

2. Original Concupiscence is called the Law of sin, Romans 7.25. Original sin
has vim coactivam, the power of a Law. A Law binds the Subject to Allegiance.
Men must needs do what sin will have them, when they have both the love of sin
to draw them, and the law of sin to force them. In Original sin there is
something privative, and something positive.

1. Something privative. Carentia justitiae debitae, we have lost that
excellent quintissential frame of Soul which once we had. Sin has cut the lock
of original purity where our strength lay.

2. Something positive. Original sin has contaminated and defiled our
Virgin-nature 'Twas Death among the Romans to poison the Springs. Original sin
has poisoned the Spring of our Nature; it has turned Beauty into Leprosy; it
has turned the azure brightness of our Souls into a midnight darkness.

Original sin is become connatural to us. A Man by Nature cannot but sin;
though there were no Devil to tempt, no bad Examples to imitate, yet there is
such an innate principle in him, that he cannot forbear sinning, 2 Pet. 2.14. A
peccato cessare nesciunt, who cannot cease to sin, as an Horse that is lame
cannot go without halting. -- In Original sin is,

1. An aversion from Good: Man has a desire to be happy, yet opposes that
which should promote his happiness; he has a disgust of holiness, he hates to
be reformed. Since we fell from God, we have no mind to return to him.

2. A propension to Evil. If as the Pelagians say, there were so much goodness
in us since the Fall, then why is there not as much natural proneness to Good,
as there is to Evil. Our own experience tells us, that the natural biass of the
Soul has a tendency to that which is bad. The very Heathens by the Light of
Nature saw this; Heriocles the Philosopher said, (...), it is grafted in us by
Nature to sin: Men roll sin as honey under their Tongue. -- They drink iniquity
as water, Job 15.16. Like an hydropical person, that thirsts for drink and is
not satisfied, so they have a kind of drought on them, they thirst for sin.
They sin (...), Ephesians. 4.19. Though they are tired out in committing sin, yet
they sin; Ier. 9.5. They weary themselves to commit iniquity; as a Man that
follows his game while he is weary, yet he delights in it, and cannot leave
off. Though God has set so many flaming Swords in the way to stop Men in their
sin, yet they go on in sin, which all shows what a strong Appetite they have to
the forbidden Fruit.

That we may further see the Nature of Original sin, consider 1. The
Universality of it; it has, as a Poison, diffused it self into all the parts
and powers of our Soul, Isa. 1.5. The whole Head is sick, the whole heart is
faint. Like a sick Patient that has no part sound, his Liver swelled, his
Lungs perished, his Feet gangrened; such infected gangrened Souls have we, till
Christ (who has made a Medicine of his Blood) do Cure us,

1. Original sin has depraved the (...), the intellectual part; as in the
Creation Darkness was upon the face of the deep, Genesis 1.2. so the
Understanding; darkness is upon the face of this Deep. As there is Salt in
every drop of the Sea, bitterness in every branch of Wormwood, so there is Sin
in every Faculty; the Mind is obnubilated, we know little of God. Ever since
Adam did eat of the Tree of Knowledge, and his Eyes were opened, we lost our
Eyesight. Besides Ignorance in the Mind, there is Error and Mistake, we do not
judge rightly of things, we put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter, Isa.
5.20. Besides this, there is much pride, superciliousness, and prejudice, many
fleshly reasonings against the Truth, and swarms of vain Thoughts, Ier. 4.14.
How long shall vain thoughts lodge in thee.

2. Original sin has defiled the heart: the heart is mortiferum junius, deadly
wicked, Ier. 17.9. It is a lesser Hell: in the heart are Legions of Lusts,
obdurateness, infidelity, hypocrisy, sinful aestuations, it boils as the Sea
with Passion and Revenge. Madness is in their heart while they live, Eccles.
9.3. the heart is Officina Diaboli, the Devil's Shop or Workhouse, where all
Mischief is framed.

3. The Will. Contumacy, it is the Seat of Rebellion: the sinner crosses God's
will to fulfill his own, Ier. 44.17. We will burn Incense to the Queen of
Heaven. There is a rooted enmity in the will against Holiness; it is like an
Iron sinew, it refuses to bend to God. Where is then the freedom of the will?
when it is so full, not only of indisposition, but opposition to what is
Spiritual.

4. The Affections. These, as the strings of a Viol, are out of tune. These are
the lesser Wheels, which are strongly carried by the will, the Master-wheel.
Our Affections are misplaced, set on wrong Objects: our Love is set on Sin, our
Joy on the Creature. Our Affections are naturally as a sick man's Appetite, he
desires things which are noxious and hurtful for him; he calls for Wine in a
Fever; so we have impure Lustings instead of holy Longings.

2. The adherency of Original sin. It cleaves to us as blackness to the skin of
the Ethiopian, we cannot get rid of it. Paul shook off the Viper on his hand,
but we cannot shake off this inbred Corruption: it may be compared to a wild
Fig Tree growing on a Wall, though the Roots of it are pulled up, yet there are
some strings of it in the joints of the Stone-work, which will not be
eradicated, but will sprout forth till the Wall be pulled in pieces. Original
Concupiscence comes not as a Lodger, for a Night, but is an in-dweller, Romans
7.17. Sin which dwells in me. It is a malus genius, and evil spirit that
haunts us wheresoever we go, Josh. 7.12. The Canaanite would dwell in the Land.

3. Original sin retards and hinders us in the exercises of God's Worship.
Whence is all that dullness and deadness in Religion? it is the Fruit of
Original sin: it is this rocks us asleep in Duty, Romans 7.19. The good that I
would I do not. Sin is compared to a weight, Hebr. 12.1. A Man that has
weights tied to his Legs, cannot run so fast: it is like that Fish Pliny speaks
of, a Sea-Lamprey, that cleaves to the Keel of the Ship, and hinders its
progress when it us under Sail.

4. Original sin, though it lies latent in the Soul, and be as a Spring which
runs under ground, yet often it breaks forth unexpectedly. Christian, thou can
not believe that evil which is in thy heart, and which will break forth
suddenly if God leave thee; 2 Kings 8.13, 15. Is thy servant a dog, that he
should do this great thing? Hazael could not believe he had such a root of
bitterness in his heart, that he should rip up the Women with Child, Is thy
servant a dog? yes, and worse then a dog, when that Original Corruption within
was stirred up. If one had come to Peter, and said, Peter within a few hours
thou will deny Christ; he would have said, Is thy servant a dog? But alas Peter
did not know his own heart, nor how far that Corruption within would prevail
upon them. The Sea may be calm, and look clear, but when the Wind blows, how
does it rage and foam? so, though now thy heart seems good, yet when a
Temptation blows, how may Original Sin discover it self, making thee foam with
Lust and Passion. Who would have thought to have found Adultery in David, and
Drunkenness in Noah, and Cursing in Job? If God leave a Man to himself, how
suddenly and scandalously may Original sin break forth in the holiest Men alive.

5. Original sin does mix and incorporate it self with our Duties and Graces.

(1.) With out Duties; as the hand which is paralitical or palsy, cannot move
without shaking, as wanting some inward strength, so we cannot do any holy
action without sinning, as wanting a Principle of Original Righteousness. As
the Leper, whatever he touched became unclen; if he touched the Altar, the
Altar did not sanctify him, but he polluted the Altar: such a Leprosy is
Original sin, it defiles our Prayers and Tears; we cannot write without
blotting. Though I do not say that the holy Duties and good Works of the
Regenerate are sins, for that were to reproach the Spirit of Christ, by which
they are wrought; yet this I say, that the best works of the godly have sin
cleaving to them; only Christ's Blood makes atonement for our holy things.

(2.) With our Graces. There is some Unbelief mixed with Faith, Lukewarmness
with Zeal, Pride with Humility. As bad Lungs cause an Astmah, or shortness of
breath, so Original Corruption having infected our heart, our Greaces breath
now very faintly.

6. Original sin is a vigorous active Principle within us; it does not lie
still, but is ever exciting and stirring us up to evil; it is an Inmate, very
unquiet; Romans 7.15. What I hate, that do I. How came Paul to do so? Original
sin did irritate and stir him up to it. Original sin is like Quicksilver,
always in motion; when we are asleep, sin is awake in the Fancy. Original sin
sets the Head a plotting evil, and the Hands a working it; it has in it
principium motus, not quiet is, it is like the Pulse ever beating.

7. Original sin is the cause of all Actual; it is fomes peccati, it is the
Womb in which all actual sins are conceived. Hence come Murders, Adulteries,
Rapines; it is the Trojan Horse, out of which a whole Army of Impieties come.
Though Actual sins may be more scandalous, yet Original sin is more heinous;
the Cause is more then the Effect.

8. It is not perfectly cured in this Life. Grace, though it does subdue sin,
yet not wholly remove it. Though we are like Christ, having the first fruits of
the Spirit, yet we are unlike him, having the remainders of the Flesh. There
are two Nations in the Womb. Original sin is like that Tree, Dan. 4.23. though
the Branches of it were hewn down, and the main body of it, yet the stumps and
root of the Tree were left: Though the Spirit be still weakening and hewing down
sin in the godly, yet the stump of Original sin is still left: it is a Sea,
that will not in this Life be dried up.

Quest. But why does God leave Original Corruption in us after Regeneration, he
could quite free us from it if he pleased?

Resp. 1. He does it to show the power of his Grace in the weakest Believer.
Grace shall prevail against a Torrent of Corruption. Whence is this? the
Corrupion is ours, but the Grace is Gods.

2. God leaves Original Corruption to make us long after Heaven; when there
shall be no Sin to defile, no Devil to tempt. When Elias was taken up to
Heaven, his Mantle dropped off; so when the Angels shall carry us up to Heaven,
this Mantle of sin shall drop off: we shall never complain more of an aching
head, or an unbelieving heart.

Use 1. If Original sin be propagated to us, and will be inherent in us while
we live here, then it Confutes the Libertines and Quakers, who say they are
(...), without sin; they hold Perfection; they show much Pride and Ignorance,
(...): but we see the Seeds of Original sin remain in the best; Eccles. 7.20.
There is not a just man lives, and sins not. And St. Paul complained of a body
of death, Romans 7.24. Grace though it does purify Nature, it does not perfect
it.

Object. But does not the Apostle say of Believers, that their old man is
crucified, Romans 6.6. and they are dead to sin, Romans 7.11.

Resp. They are dead 1. Spiritually; they are dead as to the Reatus, the guilt
of it, and as to the Regnum, the power of it; the love of sin is crucified.

2. They are dead to sin Legally; as a Man that is Sentenced to Death is dead
in Law, so they are legally dead to Sin; there is a Sentence of Death gone out
against sin, it shall die and drop into the Crave; but at the present sin has
its Life lengthened out; nothing but Death of the Body can quite free us from
the Body of Death.

Use 2. Let us lay to heart Original sin, and be deeply humbled for it; it
cleaves to us as a Disease, it is an active Principle in us, stirring us up to
Evil. Original sin is worse then all Actual sin; the Fountain is more then the
Stream. Some think as long as they are civil, they are well enough; I, but thy
Nature is poisoned, thou have a proud, lustful, envious Nature; a River may
have fair Streams, but Vermin at bottom. Thou carriest an Hell about thee, thou
can do nothing, but thou defilest it; thy Heart, like muddy ground, defiles
the purest Water that runs through it. Nay, though thou art Regenerate, there is
much of the Old Man in the New Man. O how should Original sin humble us! This
is one reason God has left Original sin in us, because he would have it as a
Thorn in our side to humble us; as the Bishop of Alexandria, after the People
had embraced Cristianity, destroyed all their Idols but one, that the sight of
that Idol might make them loath themselves for their former Idolatry; So God
leaves Original sin to pull down the Plumes of Pride. Under our silver Wings of
Grace are black feet.

2. Let the sense of this make us daily look up to Heaven for help; beg
Christ's Blood to wash away the guilt of sin, and his Spirit to mortify the
power of it; beg further degrees of Grace; Gratiam Christi eo obnixius
ambiamus, though Grace cannot make sin to be, yet not to reign; though Grace
cannot expel sin, it can repel it: and for our Comfort, where Grace makes a
Combat with sin, Death shall make a Conquest.

3. Let Original sin make us walk with continual Jealousy and Watchfulness
over our Hearts. The Sin of our Nature is like a sleeping Lion, the least thing
that awakens it makes it rage. The Sin of our Nature, though it seem quiet, and
lies as Fire hid under the Embers, yet if it be a little stirred and blown up
by a Temptation, how quickly may it flame forth into scandalous Evils;
therefore we had need always walk watchfully, Mark 13.37. I say to you all,
watch. A wandering heart needs a watchful Eye.

MAN's Misery by the FALL.
Quest. XIII. WHat is the Misery of that Estate whereinto Man fell?

Resp. All Mankind by their Fall lost Communion with God, are under his Wrath
and Curse, and so made liable to all Miseries in this Life, to Death itself,
and to the Pains of Hell for ever.

Ephesians. 2.3. And were by nature the children of wrath. Adam left an unhappy
Portion to his Posterity, Sin and Misery. We have already considered the first
of these, Original Sin, now the Misery of that Estate; in the first we have
seen Mankind Offending, in the second we shall see him Suffering. The Misery
ensuing Original Sin, is twofold:

I. Privative: By this first Hereditary Sin we have lost Communion with God.
Adam was God's Familiar, his Favorite, but Sin has put us all out of Favor:
When we lost God's Image, we lost his Acquaintance. God's banishing Adam out of
Paradise, Hierogliphical, it showed how Sin has banished us out of God's Love
and Favor.

II. Positive: In four things, 1. Under the Power of Satan. 2. Heirs of God's
Wrath. 3. Subject to all Miseries in this Life. 4. Obnoxious to Hell and
Damnation.

1. The first Misery is, By Nature we are under the Power of Satan,] who is
called, The Prince of the Power of the Air, Ephesians. 2.2. Before the Fall Man was a
free Denison, now a Slave; before a King on the Throne, now in Fetters. And who
is Man inslaved too? To one that is an Hater of him. This was an Aggravation of
Israel's Servitude, Psalm. 106.41. They that hated them ruled over them. By Sin
we are enslaved to Satan, who is an Hater of Mankind, and writes all his Laws
in Blood. Sinners before Conversion are under Satan's Command, as the Ass at
the command of the Driver, he does all the Devil's Drudgery. No sooner Satan
tempts but he obeys; as the Ship is at the command of the Pilot, he steers it
which way he will; so is the Sinner at the command of Satan, he may steer him
which way he will; and he never steers the Ship but into Hell's Mouth. The
Devil rules all the Powers and Faculties of a Sinner:

1. He rules the Understanding: He blinds Men with Ignorance, and then rules
them. As the Philistines first put out Sampson's Eyes, and then bound him.
Satan can do what he will with an ignorant Man: he does not see the Error of
his way, therefore the Devil can lead him into any Sin; you may lead a blind
Man any whither: Omne peccatum fundatur in ignorantia.

2. Satan rules the Will: Though he cannot force the Will, yet he can by a
Tentation draw it, Joh. 8.44. The lusts of your father ye will do. He has got
your hearts, and him you will obey, Jer. 44.17. We will burn incense to the
Queen of Heaven. When the Devil spurs a Sinner by a Tentation, he will over
Hedge and Ditch, break all God's Laws that he may obey Satan: Where then is
Free Will? When Satan has such power over the Will, his lusts ye will do.
There Is not any Member of the Body but is at the Devil's Service; the Head to
plot Sin, the Hands to work it, the Feet to run on the Devil's Errand: Grave
jugum servitutis, Cicero. Slavery is hateful to a Noble Spirit. Satan is the
Worst Tyrant, the Cruelty of Cannibal or Nero is nothing to his; other Tyrants
do but rule over the Bodies, he over the Conscience; other Tyrants have some
Pity on their Slaves, though they work in the Gally, they give them Meat, let
them have Hours for Rest: but Satan is a Merciless Tyrant, he ^ets Men have no
Rest. What pains did Judas take, the Devil would let him have no rest till he
had betrayed Christ, and afterward embrued his Hands in his own Blood.

Use 1. See here our Misery by Original Sin, enslaved to Satan, Ephesians. 2.2.
Satan is said to work effectually in the Children of Disobedience: What a sad
Plague is this for a Sinner to be at the will of the Devil. Just like a Slave,
if the Turk bids him dig in the Mine, hew in the Quarres, tug at the Oar, the
Slave must do it, he dares not refuse. If the Devil bids a Man Lie or Cozen, he
does not refuse; and which is worst, Men are enslaved, and they willingly obey
this Tyrant; other Slaves are forced against their will. Israel sighed by
reason of their bondage, Exodus 2.23. But Sinners are willing to be Slaves, they
will not take their Freedom; they kiss their Fetters.

Use 2. Let us labor to get out of this deplorable Condition Sin has plunged
us into; get from under the Power of Satan: If any of your Children were
Slaves, you would give great sums of Money to purchase their Freedom; your
Souls are enslaved, and will you not labor to be set free. Improve the Gospel;
the Gospel proclaims a Jubilee to Captives. Sin binds Men, the Gospel loses
them: Paul's preaching was to turn Men from the Power of Satan to God, Acts
26.18. The Gospel-Star that leads you to Christ, and if you get Christ, then
you are made free, though not from the Being of Sin, yet from Satan's Tyranny,
Joh. 8.36. If the Son make you free, ye shall be free indeed. You hope to be
Kings to Reign in Heaven, and will you let Satan Reign in you now? Never think
to be Kings when you die, and Slaves while you live: The Crown of Glory is for
Conquerours, not for Captives. Oh get out of Satan's Jurisdiction; get your
Fetters of Sin filed off by Repentance.

2 Misery.] We are Heirs of God's Wrath.] In the Text, And were by nature the
children of wrath. Tertullian's Exposition here is wrong, Chrildren of Wrath he
understands subjective, that is, subject to Wrath and Passion; offending often
in the Irascible Faculty of a wrathful Spirit. But by Children of Wrath, the
Apostle passively means Heirs of Wrath, exposed to God's Displeasure. God was
once a Friend, but Sin broke the Knot of Friendship; now God's Smile is turned
into a Frown; we are now bound over to the Sessions, and become Children of
Wrath; And who knows the power of God^s wrath? Psalm. 90.11. The Wrath of a King
is as the roaring of a Lion, Prove. 19.12. How did Haman's Heart tremble when
the King rose up from the Banquet in wrath, Esth. 7.7. But God's Wrath is
Infinite, all other is but as a Spark to a Flame: Wrath in God is not a Passion
as in us; but it is an Act of God's Holy Will, whereby he abhors Sin, and
decrees to punish it. This Wrath is very dismal, it is this Wrath of God that
imbitters Afflictions in this Life: When Sickness comes attended with God's
Wrath, it puts Conscience into an Agony. The mingling the Fire with the Hail
made it so terrible, Exodus 9.24. so mingling God's Wrath with Affliction makes
it torturing. It is the Nail in the Yoke; God's Wrath when but in a Threatening,
(as a Shower hanging in the Cloud) made Ely's ears to tingle; What is it then
when this Wrath is executed? It is terrible when the King rates and chides a
Traitor, but it is more dreadful when he causes him to be set upon the Rack,
or to be broke upon the Wheel: Who knows the power of God's wath? While we are
Children of Wrath, 1. We have nothing to do with any of the Promises; they are
as the Tree of Life, bearing several sorts of Fruit, but no right to pluck one
Leaf, Ephesians. 2.3. Children of wrath. Verse 12. Strangers to the covenants of
promise. The Promises are as a Fountain sealed. While we are in the State of
Nature, we see nothing but the flaming Sword; and as the Apostle, Heb. 10.27.
there remains nothing but (...), a fearful looking for of fiery Indignation* 2.
While Children of Wrath, we are Heirs to all God's Curses, Gal. 3.10. How can
the Sinner eat and drink in that Condition? Like Damari^'s Banquet, he sat at
Meat, and there was a Sword hanging over his Head by a small Thread; one would
think he should have little stomach to eat: So the Sword of God's Wrath and
Curse hangs every moment over a Sinner's head. We read of a flying Roll written
with Curses, Zach. 5.3. There Is a Roll written with Curses goes out against
every Person that Lives and Dies in Sin: God's Curse blasts wherever it
comes. A Curse on the Sinner's Name, a Curse on his Soul, a Curse on his
Estate, Posterity, a Curse on the Ordinances. Sad if all a Man did eat should
turn to Poison: The Sinner eats and drinks his own Damnation at God's Table.
Thus it is before Conversion. As the Love of God makes every bitter thing
sweet, so the Curse of God makes every sweet thing bitter.

Use. See our Misery by the Fall, Heirs of Wrath: And is this Estate to be
rested in? If a Man be fallen under the King's Displeasure, will he not labor
to Re-ingratiate himself into his Favor. O let us fly from the Wrath of God!
And whither should we fly, but to Jesus Christ? there is none else to shield
off the Wrath of God from us, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. Jesus has delivered us from wrath
to come.

3. Subject to all outward Miseries: All the Troubles incident to Man's Life
are the bitter Fruits of Original Sin; The sin of Adam has subjected the
Creature to Vanity, Romans 8.20. Is it not a part of the Creature's Vanity, that
all the Comforts here below will not fill the Heart, no more then the Mariner's
breath can fill the Sails of a Ship: Job 2^.22. In the midst of his sufficiency
he shall be in straits. There is still something wanting, and a Man would have
more: the Heart is always Hydropical, it thirsts and is not satisfied. Solomon
put all the Creatures into a Lembick, and when he came to extract the Spirits
and Quintissence, there was nothing but Froth, all was Vanity, Eccles. 1.2.
Nay, it is vexing Vanity, not only Emptiness but Bitterness. Our Life is Labor
and Sorrow, we come into the World with a Cry, go out with a Groan, Ps. 90.10.
Some have said that they would not be to live the Life they have lived over
again, because their Life has had more Water in it than Wine. More Water of
Tears then Wine of Joy: Quid est diu vivere nisi diu torqueri, Aug. Man is born
to trouble, Job 5.7. Every one is not born Heir to Land, but he is born Heir to
Trouble; as well separate Weight from Lead. We do not finish our Troubles in
this Life, but change them. Trouble is the Vermin bred out of the putred
matter of Sin. Whence are all our Fears, but from Sin? 1 Ioh. 4.18. There is
torment in fear. Fear is the Ague of the Soul, sets it a shaking: some fear
Want, others Alarms, others fear loss of Relations: If we rejoice it is with
Trembling. Whence are all our Disappointment of Hopes, but from Sin? Where we
look for Comfort, there a Cross: where we expect Honey there we taste Wormwood:
Whence is it that the Earth is filled with Violence, that the Wicked oppresses
the Man which is more righteous then he? Hab. 1.13. Whence is it that so much
Fraudulency in Dealing, so much Falseness in Friendship, such Crosses in
Relations; whence is it Children prove Undutiful, they that should be as the
Staff of the Parents Age, are a Sword to pierce their Hearts: Whence is it
Servants are Unfaithful to their Masters. The Apostle speaks of some who have
entertained Angels into their Houses, Heb. 13.2. But how often instead of
entertaining Angels into their Houses, do some entertain Devils? Whence are all
the Mutinees and Divisions in a Kingdom? 2 Chr. 15.5. In those days there was
no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in. All this is but the
sour Core in that Apple our first Parents eat, viz. Fruit of Original Sin.
Besides, all the Deformities and Diseases of the Body, Fevers, Convulsions,
Catarrhs, Macies and nova febrium terris incubu^t cohors -- These are from Sin.
There had never been a Stone in the Kidneys, if it had not been first a Stone
in the Heart. Yea, the death of the Body, is the Fruit and Result of Original
Sin, Romans 5.12. Sin entered into the world, and death by sin. Adam was made
Immortal, conditionally, if he had not sinned; Sin dig'd Adam's Grave. Death is
terrible to Nature: Lewis King of France forbad all that came into his Court to
mention the name of Death in his Ears. The Socinians say, That Death comes only
from the Infirmness of the Constitution. But the Apostle says, Sin ushered
Death into the World: By sin came death. Certainly had not Adam eat of the Tree
of Knowledge, he had not died, Genesis 2.17. In the day thou eatest, thou shall
surely (die,) implying, if Adam had not eat he should not have died. O then see
the Misery ensuing upon Original Sin! Sin dissolves the (...), the Harmony and
good Temperature of the Body, it pulls this Frame in pieces.

4. Original Sin without Repentance exposes to Hell and Damnation. This is the
second Death, Rev. 20.14. Two things in it:

1. Poena Damni: Punishment of Loss; the Soul is banished from the Beatifical
Presence of God, in whose Presence is Fullness of Joy.

2. Poena Sensus: Punishment of Sense; the Sinner feels the scalding Viols of
God's Wrath: It is penetrating, abiding, Joh. 3.36. Reserved, 2 Pet. 2.17. If
when God's Anger be kindled but a little, and a Spark or two of it flies into a
Man's Conscience here in this life, it be so terrible, what then will it be
when God stirs up all his Anger? In Hell there is the Worm and the Fire, Mark
9.44. Hell is the very Accent and Emphasis of Misery: There Is Judgment without
Mercy. O what Flames of Wrath, what Seas of Vengeance, what Rivers of
Brimstone, are poured out there upon the Damned! Bellarmi^e is of Opinion, That
one Glimpse of Hellfire were enough to make the most fla^itious Sinner turn
Christian; nay, live as an Hermit, a most strict mortified Life. What is all
other Fire to this, but painted Fire? Ejus adesse intolerabile, ejus abesse
impossible: To bear it will be intolerable, to avoid it will be impossible.
And these Hell Torments are for ever; have no Period put to them, Rev. 9.6.
They shall seek death and shall not find it. Origin fancied a Fiery Stream in
which the Souls of sinful Men were to be purged after this Life, and then to
pass into Heaven: but it is for ever. The Breath of the Lord kindles that Fire;
and where shall we find Engines or Buckets to quench it? Rev. 14.11. And the
smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever, and they have no rest
night nor day. Thank Original Sin for all.

Use. 1. What sad thoughts should we have of this Primitive Original Sin, that
has created so many Miseries. What Honey can be got out of this Lion, what
Grapes can we gather off this Thorn? It sets Heaven and Earth against us: While
we choose this Bramble to Rule, Fire comes out of the Bramble to devour us.

2. How are all Believers bound to Jesus Christ, who has freed them from that
Misery to which Sin has exposed them, Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have Redemption
through his Blood. Sin has brought Trouble and a Curse into the World. Christ
has sanctified the Trouble, and removed the Curse. Nay, he has not only freed
Believers from Misery, but purchased for them a Crown of Glory and Immortality,
1 Pet. 5.4. When the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown of
Glory that fades not away.

Of the Covenant of Grace.
Quest. XIV. DID God leave Mankind to perish in this state of Sin and Misery?

Resp. No; He entered into a Covenant of Grace to deliver the Elect out of that
estate, and bring them into a state of Grace by a Redeemer.

Isa. 55.3. I Will make an Everlasting Covenant with you. Man being by his Fall
plunged into a Labyrinth of Misery, and having no way left to recover himself,
God was pleased to enter into a New Covenant with him, and so restore him to
Life by a Redeemer.

The great Proposition I shall go upon is, That there is a New Covenant
ratified between God and the Elect.

Quest. What the New Covenant is?

Resp. It is a solemn Compact and Agreement made between God and fallen Man,
wherein the Lord undertakes to be our God, and to make us his People.

Quest. What Names are given to the Covenant?

Resp. 1. It is called a Covenant of Peace, Ezekiel. 37.26. because it Seals up
Reconciliation between God and humble Sinners. Before this Covenant there was
nothing but Enmity; God did not love us. A Creature that offends cannot be
loved by an holy God; and we did not love him; a God that condemns, cannot be
loved by a guilty Creature: so that there was War on both sides. But God has
found out a way in the new Covenant to reconcile differing Parties, so that it
is fitly called a Covenant of Peace.

2. It is called a Covenant of Grace, and well it may; for 1. it was with
Grace, that when we had forfeited the first Covenant, God should enter into a
new Covenant, after we had cast away our selves. The Covenant of Grace is
Tabula post naufragium, as a Plank after shipwreck. O the Free Grace of God,
that he should parley with Sinners, and set his Wisdom and Mercy awork to bring
Rebels into the Bond of the Covenant.

2. It is a Covenant of Grace, because it is a Royal Charter, all made up of
Terms of Grace; That God will cast our sins behind his back; that he will love
us freely, Hos. 14.4. that he will give us a will to accept of the Mercy of the
Covenant, and strength to perform the Conditions of the Covenant, Ezekiel. 37.26.
All this is pure Grace.

Quest. Why would God make a Covenant with us?

Resp. 1. It is out of Induldgence, Favor, and Respect to us. A Tyrant will
not enter into a Covenant with Slaves, he will not show them such Respect.
God's entering into Covenant with us to be our God, is a Dignity he puts upon
us. A Covenant is Insigne honoris, a Note of Distinction between God's People
and Heathens, Ezekiel. 16.22. I will establish my Covenant with thee. When the
Lorld told Abraham that he would enter into Covenant with him, Abraham fell
upon his face, Genesis 17.2. as being amazed that the God of Glory should bestow
such a Favor upon him.

2. God makes a Covenant with us to tie us fast to him; it is called in Ezekiel
the Bond of the Covenant. God knows we have slippery hearts, therefore he will
have a Covenant to bind us. It Is horrid Impiety to go away from God after
Covenant. If one of the Vestal Nuns, who had vowed her self to Religion, was
defloured, the Romans caused her to be burnt alive. It Is Perjury to depart from
God after solemn Covenant.

Quest. How does the Covenant of Grace differ from the first Covenant made with
Adam?

Resp. 1 st Difference. The Terms of the first Covenant were more strict and
severe. For 1. The least failing would have made the Covenant with Adam null
and void, but many Failings do not null the Covenant of Grace: I grant the
least sin is a Trespass upon the Covenant, but it does not make it null and
void. There may be many Failings in the Conjugal Relation, but every Failing
does not break the Marriage-Bond. It would be sad, if as often as we break
Covenant with God, he should break Covenant with us; but God will not take
advantage of every Failing, but in anger remember Mercy.

2. The first Covenant being broken, allowed the Sinner no remedy, all Doors of
Hope were shut: but the New Covenant allows the Sinner a remedy; it leaves room
for Repentance, it provides a Mediator, Hebr. 12.24. Jesus the Mediator of the
New Covenant.

2 d Difference. The first Covenant did run all upon working, the second upon
believing, Romans 4.5.

Quest. But are not Works required in the Covenant of Grace?

Answ. Yes; Tit. 3.8. This is a faithful saying, that they which believe in God
be careful to maintain Good Works. But the Covenant of Grace does not require
Works in the same manner as the Covenant of Works did. In the first Covenant,
Works were required as the Condition of Life; in the second, they are required
only as the Signs of a Man that is alive. In the first Covenant, Works were
required as Grounds of Salvation; in the New Covenant, they are required as
Evidences of our Love to God. In the first they were required to the
Justification of our Persons, in the New, to the Testification of our Grace.

Quest. What is the Condition of the Covenant of Grace?

Answ. The main Condition is Faith.

Quest. But why is Faith more the Condition of the New Covenant, then any other
Grace?

Answ. To exclude all glorying in the Creature. Faith is an humble Grace. If
Repentance or Works were the Condition of the Covenant, a Man would say, It is
my Righteousness has saved me: But if it be of Faith, where is boasting? Faith
fetches all from Christ, and gives all the glory to Christ; it is most humble
Grace. Hence it is God has singled out this Grace to be the Condition of the
Covenant.

And if Faith be the Condition of the Covenant of Grace, it excludes desperate
presumptuous Sinners from the Covenant. They say there is a Covenant of Grace,
and they shall be saved; but did you ever know a Bond without a Condition? The
Condition of the Covenant is Faith, and if thou have no Faith, thou have no
more to do with the Covenant than a Foreigner, or a Country Farmer with the
City Charter.

Use 1. of Information. See the amazing Goodness of God to enter into Covenant
with us. He never entered into Covenant with the Angels when they fell. It was
much Condescension in God to enter into Covenant with us in a state of
Innocence, but it was more to enter into Covenant with us in a state of Enmity.
In this Covenant of Grace we may see the Cream of God's Love, and the working
of his Bowels to sinners. This is a Marriage-Covenant, Ier. 3.14. I am married
to you, says the Lord. In the New Covenant God makes himself over to us, and
what can he give more? And he makes over his Promises to us, and what better
Bond can we have?

Use 2. of Trial. Whether we are in Covenant with God. There are three
Characters.

1. God's Covenant People are an humble People, 1 Pet. 5.5. (...), be ye
clothed with humility. God's People esteem of others better then themselves;
they shrink into nothing in their own thoughts, Phil. 2.3. David cries out, I
am a worm, and no man, Psalm. 22.6. though a Saint, though a King, yet a Worm.
When Moses's Face shined, he covered it with a Vail: God's People, when they
shine most in Grace, are covered with the Vail of Humility. Pride excludes from
the Covenant. God resists the proud, 1 Pet. 5.5. and sure such are not in
Covenant with God, whom he resists.

2. A People in Covenant with God are a willing People; though they cannot
serve God perfectly, they serve him willingly. They do not grudge God a little
time spent in his Worship, they do not hesitate or murmur at Sufferings, they
will go through a Sea and a Wilderness if God calls; Psalm. 110.3. Thy people
shall be a willing people: Hebr. gnam nedabot, a people of willingness. This
spontanity and willingness is from the attractive Power of God's Spirit: the
Spirit does not impellere, force, but trahere, sweetly draw the Will; and this
willingness in Religion makes all our Services accepted. God does sometimes
accept of willingness without the work, but never the work without willingness.

3. God's Covenant People are a consecrated People, they have holiness to the
Lord written upon them; Cast a placent superis -- Deuteronomy. 7.6. Thou art an holy
people to the Lord thy God. God's Covenant People are separated from the World,
and sanctified by the Spirit. The Priests under the Law were not only to wash
in the great Laver, but were araied with glorious Apparel, Exodus 28.2. This was
Typical, to show God's People are not only washed from gross sin, but adorned
with holiness of heart: they bear not only God's Name, but Image. Tamerlain
refused a Pot of Gold, when he saw it had not his Fathers stamp upon it, but
the Roman stamp. Holiness is God's stamp, if he does not see this stamp upon
us, he will not own us for his Covenant People.

Use 3. of Exhort. To such as are out of Covenant, labor to get into Covenant
and have God for your God. How glad would the old World have been of an Ark?
How industrious should we be to get within the Arc of the Covenant.

Consider 1. the Misery of such as live and die out of Covenant with God. 1.
Such have none to go to in an hour of distress. When Conscience accuses, when
Sickness approaches (which is but an Harbinger to bespeak a Loding for Death)
then what will you do? whither will you fly? will you look to Christ for help?
He is a Mediator only for such as are in Covenant. O! how will you be filled
with horror and despair, and be as Saul, 1 Samuel 15.28. The Philistines make
war against me, and the Lord is departed. 2. Till you are in Covenant with God,
there is no Mercy. The Mercy-Seat was placed upon the Ark, and the Mercy-Seat
was no larger then the Ark; to show, that the Mercy of God reaches no further
then the Covenant.

2. The Excellency of the Covenant of Grace; it is a better Covenant then the
first made with Adam. 1. Because it is more friendly and propitious. Those
Services which would have been rejected in the first Covenant, are accepted in
the second. Here God accepts of the Will for the Deed, 2 Cor. 8.10. here
sincerity is crowned. In the Covenant of Grace, wherein we are weak, God will
give strength, and wherein we come short, God will accept of a Surety. 2. It is
a better Covenant, because it is surer. 2 Samuel 23.5. Thou have made with me an
everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure. The first Covenant was
not sure, it stood upon a tottering foundation, Works; Adam had no sooner a
stock of Righteousness to trade with, but he broke; but the Covenant of Grace
is sure, it is confirmed with God's Decree, and it rests upon two mighty
Pillars, the Oath of God, and the Blood of God. 3. It has better Privileges.
The Covenant of Grace brings preferment. Our Nature is now more enobled, we are
raised to higher Glory then in Innocence, we are advanced to sit upon Christ's
Throne, Rev. 3.21. we are by virtue of the Covenant of Grace nearer to Christ
then the Angels. They are his Friends, we his Spouse.

3. God is willing to be in Covenant with you. Why does God woe and beseech you
by his Ambassadors to be reconciled, if he were not willing to be in Covenant?

Object. I would fain be in Covenant with God, but I have been a great sinner,
and I fear God will not admit me into Covenant.

Resp. If thou see thy sins, and loathest thy self for them, yet God will
take thee into Covenant, Isa. 43.24. Thou have wearied me with thy iniquities;
I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions. As the Sea covers great
Rocks, so God's Covenant-Mercy covers great Sins. Some of the Jews that
crucified Christ, yet had their sins washed away in his Blood.

Object. But I am not worthy that ever God should admit me into Covenant.

Answ. It never came into God's thoughts to make a New Covenant upon Terms of
Worthiness. If God should show Mercy to none but such as are worthy, then he
must show Mercy to none at all. But, it is God's design in the New Covenant to
advance the riches of Grace, to love us freely, and when we have no worthiness
of our own, to accept us through Christ's worthiness. Therefore let not
unworthiness discourage you; it is not unworthiness excludes any from the
Covenant, but unwillingness.

Quest. What shall we do that we may be in Covenant with God?

Answ. 1. Seek to God by Prayer. Exige a Domino misericordiam, Aug. Lord be my
God in Covenant. The Lord has made an express Promise, that upon our Prayer to
him, the Covenant shall be ratified, he will be our God, and we shall be his
People; Zach. 13.9. They shall call upon my Name, and I will hear them; I will
say it is my people, and they shall say, The Lord is my God. Only it must be an
importunate Prayer. Come as earnest Suitors, resolve to take no denial.

2. If you would be in Covenant with God, break off the Covenant with Sin;
before the Marriage-Covenant, there must be a Divorce, 1 Samuel 7.3. If ye return
to the Lord with all your hearts, put away the strange gods; and they put away
Ashtaroth; viz. their Female Gods. Will any King enter into Covenant with that
Man who is in League with his Enemies?

3. If you would enter into the Bond of the Covenant, get Faith in the Blood of
the Covenant. Christ's Blood is the Blood of Atonement; believe in this Blood
and you are safely arked in God's Mercy; Ephesians. 2.13. Ye are made nigh to the
blood of Christ.

Use 4. Of Comfort to such as can make out their Covenant Interest in God: 1.
You that are in Covenant with God, all your sins are pardoned. Pardon is the
crowning Mercy, Psalm. 103.3. Who forgiveth thy iniquity, who crowns thee,
etc. This is a branch of the Covenant, Ier. 31.33. I will be their God, and I
will forgive their iniquity. Sin being pardoned, all wrath cease. How
terrible is it when but a Spark of God's Wrath flies into a Man's Conscience;
but sin being forgiven, no more wrath. God does not appear now in the Fire, or
Earthquake, but covered with a Rainbow full of Mercy.

2. All your Temporal Mercies are Fruits of the Covenant. Wicked Men have
Mercies by Providence, not by virtue of a Covenant; with Gods leave, not with
his Love. But such as are in Covenant have their Mercies sweetened with God's
Love, and they swim to them in the Blood of Christ. As Naaman said to Gehazi, 2
Kings 5.23. Take two Talents, so says God to such as are in Covenant, Take two
Talents; take Health, and take Christ with it; take Riches, and take my Love
with them; take the Venison, and take the Blessing with it: Take two Talents.

3. You may upon all Occasions plead the Covenant. If you are haunted with
Temptation, plead the Covenant; Lord, thou have promised to bruise Satan under
my feet shortly; will thou suffer thy Child to be thus worried? take off the
roaring Lion. If in want, plead the Covenant; Lord, thou have said, I shall
want no good thing, will thou save me from Hell, and not from Want? will thou
give me a Kingdom, and deny me daily Bread?

4. If in Covenant with God, all things shall cooperate for your Good: Etiam
mala cedunt in bonum. Psalm. 25.10. Not only golden paths, but his bloody paths.
Every wind of Providence shall blow them nearer Heaven. Affliction shall humble
and purify, Hebr. 12.10. Out of the bitterest Drug, God distills your
Salvation. Afflictions add to the Saints Glory. The more the Diamond is cut,
the more it sparkles; the heavier the Saints Cross, the heavier shall be their
Crown.

5. If thou art in Covenant once, then for ever in Covenant. The Text calls it
Berith Gnolam, an everlasting Covenant. Such as are in Covenant are elected;
God's electing Love is unchangeable, Ier. 32.40. I will make an everlasting
Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, but I will put my fear
in there heart, that they shall not depart from me. God will so love the Saints,
that he will not forsake them: and the Saints shall so fear God, that they
shall not forsake him. It Is Berith Gnolam, a Covenant of Eternity; it must be
so; for who is this Covenant made with? is it not with Believers? and have not
they Coalition and Union with Christ; Christ is the Head, they are the Body,
Ephesians. 1.23. This is a near Union, much like that Union between God the Father
and Christ, John 17.21. As thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also
may be one in us. Now the Union between Christ and the Saints being so
inseparable, it can never be dissolved, or the Covenant made void; you may die
with Comfort.

6. Thou art in Covenant with God, and thou art going to thy God, behold a
Deathbed Cordial; Death breaks the Union between the Body and the Soul, but
perfects the Union between Christ and the Soul. This has made the Saints
desire Death, as the Bride the Wedding Day, Phil. 1.23. Cupio dissolvi, Lead me
Lord to that Glory ( said one) a glympse whereof I have seen, as in a Glass,
darkly.

Use 5. of Direct. To show you how you should walk who have tasted of
Covenant-Mercy, Live as a People in Covenant with God. As you differ from
others in respect of Dignity, so you must in point of Carriage.

1. You must love this God. God's Love to you calls for Love. 1. It is Amor
Gratiatus, a free Love. Why should God pass by others and take you into a
League of Friendship with himself? In the Law God passed by the Lion and Eagle,
and chose the Dove; so he passes by the Noble and Mighty. 2. It is Amor plenns,
a full Love. When God takes you into Covenant, you are his Hephsibah, Isa.
62.3. his delight is in you; he gives you the Key of all his Treasure, he heaps
Pearls upon you, he settles Heaven and Earth upon you; he gives you a Bunch of
Grapes by the way, and says, Son, all I have is thine. And does not all this
call for Love? Who can tread upon these hot Coals, and his heart not burn in
love to God?

2. Walk Holily. The Covenant has made you a Royal Nation, therefore be an
holy People. Shine as Lights in the World; live as Earthly Angels. God has
taken you into Covenant, that you and he may have Communion together: and what
is it keeps up your Communion with God, but Holiness.

3. Walk thankfully, Psalm. 103.1. God is your God in Covenant; he has done
more for you, then if he had made you ride upon the high Places of the Earth,
and given you Crowns and Scepters. O! Take the Cup of Salvation, and bless the
Lord. Eternity will be little enough to praise him. Musicians love to play on
their Music where there is the loudest sound; and God loves to bestow his
Mercies where he may have the loudest Praises. You that have Angels Reward, do
Angels Work. Begin that Work of Praise here, which you hope to be always doing
in Heaven.

CHRIST the Mediator of the Covenant.
HEB. 12.24. Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, etc.


JEsus Christ is the Sum and Quintessence of the Gospel; the Wonder of Angels;
the Joy and Triumph of Saints. The Name of Christ is sweet, it is as Music in
the Ear, Honey in the Mouth, and a Cordial at the Heart.

I shall wave the Context, and only speak of that which concerns our present
Purpose: Having discoursed of the Covenant of Grace, I shall speak now of the
Mediator of the Covenant, and the Restorer of lapsed Sinners, JESUS the
Mediator of the Covenant.

There are several Names and Titles in Scripture given to Christ, as the Great
Restorer of Mankind: 1. Sometimes he is called a Savior, Matthew. 1.21. His name
shall be called Jesus. The Hebrew word for Jesus Ioshuang, signifies a Savior;
and whom he saves from Hell he saves from Sin: where Christ is a Savior he is
a Sanctifier, Matthew. 1.21. He shall save his people from their sins. There is
no other Savior, Acts 4.12. (...), Neither is there salvation in any other. As
there was but one Ark to save the World from drowning, so there is but one
Jesus to save Sinners from damning. As Naomi said to her Daughters-in-law, Ruth
1.11. Are there yet any more sons in my womb? So has God any other Sons in the
Womb of his Eternal Decree, to be Saviors to us, besides Christ? Job 28.13.
Where shall wisdom be found? the deep says it is not in me, and the sea says
it is not with me. Let me allude, Where shall Salvation be found? The Angel
says it is not in me; Morality says it is not in me; the Ordinance says it
is not in me: Christ alone is the Wellspring of Life, the Ordinance is the
Conduit-pipe that conveys Salvation, but Christ is the Spring that feeds it,
Neither is there salvation in any other.

2. Sometimes Christ is called a Redeemer, Isa. 59.20. The redeemer shall come
to Sion. Some understand it of Cyrus, others of an Angel, but the most ancient
Jewish Doctors understand it of Christ the Redeemer of the Elect: Job 19.25. My
redeemer lives. The Hebrew word for Redeemer, Goel, signifies such an one as
is near a Kin, and has Right to redeem a Mortgage. So Christ is near a kin to
us, being our Elder Brother, therefore has the best right to redeem us.

3. Christ is called a Mediator in the Text, Jesus the mediator of the new
covenant. The Greek word for Mediator (...), signifies a middle Person, one
that does make up the breach between two disagreeing Parties. God and we were
at Variance by Sin, now Christ does Mediate and Umpire between us; he
reconciles us to God through his Blood, therefore is called the Mediator of the
New Covenant. There is no way of Communion and Intercourse between God and Man,
but in and through a Mediator: Christ takes away the Enmity in us, and the
Wrath in God, and so makes Peace; nor is Christ only a Mediator of
Reconciliation, but Intercession, Heb. 9.24. Christ is entered not into the holy
place made with hands, but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of
God for us. The Priest when he had slain the Sacrifice was to go with the Blood
before the Altar and Mercy-seat, and show it to the Lord. Now in Christ our
Blessed Mediator consider two things, 1. His Person. 2. His Graces.


1. His Person: His Person is amiable, he is (...), all made up of Love and
Beauty. He is the Effigies of his Father, Heb. 1.3. The express image of his
person. Consider, 1. Christ's Person in two Natures. 2. His two Natures in one
Person.


1. Christ's Person in two Natures: 1. Look upon his Humane Nature as
Incarnate. The Valentinians deny his Humane Nature; but Joh. 1.14. The Word was
made Flesh; (...). It Is spoken of Christ, the promised Messiah. Christ took our
Flesh that the same Nature which sinned might suffer; and (...), The word made
flesh, that through the Glass of his Humane Nature we might look upon God.

Quest. Why is Christ called (...), the Word?

Resp. Because as a Word is the Interpreter of the Mind, and reveals what is in
a Man's breast, so Jesus Christ reveals his Father's Mind to us, concerning the
great Matters of our Salvation, John 1.18. Were it not for CHRIST's Manhood,
the sight of the Godhead would be formidable to us: but through Christ's Flesh
we may look upon God without Terror. And Christ took our Flesh that he might
know how to pity us; he knows what it is to be faint, sorrowful, tempted, Psalm.
103.14. He knows our frame. And he took our Flesh that he might (as Austin
says,) Ennoble our Humane Nature with Honor. Christ having married our Flesh,
has exalted it above the Angelical Nature.

2. Look upon Christ's Divine Nature: Christ may fitly be compared to Jacob's
Ladder, Genesis 28.12. which reached from Earth to Heaven; Christ's Humane Nature
was the foot of the Ladder which stood upon Earth, his Divine Nature the top of
the Ladder, which reached to Heaven. This being a grand Article of our Faith, I
shall amplify: I know the Arians, Socinians, Ebionites would rob Christ of the
best Jewel of his Crown, his Godhead; but the Apostolical, Nicene, Athanasian
Creed, affirm Christ's Deity, to this the Churches of Helvetia, Bohemia,
Wittembergh, Transylvania, etc. give their full Consent; and the Scripture is
clear for it. He is called the Mighty God, Isa. 9.6. El Gibber; and in him
dwells the fullness of the Godhead, Col. 2.9. He is not only (...), but (...),
of the same Nature and Essence with the Father. So Athanasius, Basil,
Chrysostom, 1. Is God the Father called Almighty, so is Christ, Rev. 1.8.
(...), the Almighty. 2. Is God the Father the Heart-searcher, so is Christ,
Ioh. 2.25. He knew their thoughts. 3. Is God the Father Omnipresent, so is
Christ, Joh. 3.13. The Son of man which is in heaven. Christ as God was then in
Heaven, when as Man he was upon the Earth.

Quest. Is God Eternal?

Resp. Christ is the Everlasting Father, Isa. 9.6. which Scripture may be urged
against the Cerinthian Heretics who denied the Pre-existency of Christ's
Godhead, and held that Christ had no being till he derived it from the Virgin
Mary.

4. Does (...), Divine Worship belong to the first Person in the Trinity? so it
does to Christ, Ioh. 5.23. Heb. 1.6. Let all the angels of God worship him. 5.
Is Creation proper to the Deity? This is a Flower of Christ's Crown, Col. 1.16.
By him were all things created. 6. Is Invocation proper to the Deity? This is
given to Christ, Acts 7. Lord Jesus receive my spirit. 7. Is Recumbency and
Trust peculiar to God the Father? This is given to Christ, Joh. 14.1. Ye
believe in God, believe also in me. Christ must needs be God, not only that the
Divine Nature might support the Humane from sinking under God's Wrath, but also
to give Value and Weight to his Sufferings.

Christ being God, his Death and Passion is Meritorious; Christ's Blood is
called Sanguis Dei, The Blood of God, Acts 20.28. because the Person who was
offered in Sacrifice was God as well as Man. This is an invincible Support to
Believers; it was God who was offended, and it was God who satisfied. Thus
Christ's Person in two Natures.

2. Consider Christ's two Natures in one Person: (...), God-Man; 1 Timothy 3.16.
God manifest in the flesh. Christ had a twofold Substance, Divine and Humane,
yet not a twofold Subsistence, both Natures make but one Christ: A Siens may be
grafted into another Tree, a Pear Tree into an Apple, which though it bear
different Fruits is but one Tree: So Christ's Manhood is united to the Godhead
in an ineffable manner; yet though here are two Natures, yet but one Person.
This Union of the two Natures in Christ was not by Transmutation, the Divine
Nature changed into the Humane, or the Humane into the Divine; nor by Mixture,
the two Natures mingled together, as Wine and Water are mixed: Both the Natures
of Christ remain distinct, yet make not two distinct Persons, but one Person,
the Humane Nature not God, yet one with God.

3. Consider Christ our Mediator in his Graces: These are the sweet Savor of
his Ointments that make the Virgins love him. Christ our Blessed Mediator is
said to be full of grace and truth, Joh. 1.14. He had the anointing of the
Spirit without measure, Joh. 3.34. Grace in Christ is after a more eminent and
glorious manner then it is in any of the Saints.

1. Jesus Christ our Mediator has Perfection in every Grace: Col. 1.19. (...);
He is a Panoply, Magazine and Storehouse of all Heavenly Treasure, all
Fullness: This no Saint on Earth has, he may excel in one Grace, but not in
all; as Abraham was eminent for Faith; Moses for Meekness, but Christ excells
in every Grace.

2. There is a never-failing Fullness of Grace in Christ: Grace in the Saints is
Ebbing and Flowing, it is not always in the same degree and proportion: At one
time David's Faith was strong, at another time so faint and weak, that you
could hardly feel any Pulse, Psalm. 31.22. I said I am cut off from before thine
eyes; but Grace in Christ is a never-failing Fullness, it did never abate in the
least degree; he never lost a drop of his Holiness. What was said of Joseph,
may more truly be applied to Christ, Genesis 49.23. The archers shot at him, but
his bow abode in strength. Men and Devils shot at him, but his Grace remained
in its full vigor and strength; His bow abode in strength.

3. Grace in Christ is Communicative: His Grace is for us; the holy Oil of the
Spirit was poured on the head of this Blessed Aaron, that it might run down
upon us. The Saints have not Grace to bestow on others: when the foolish
Virgins would have bought Oil of their Neighbour-Virgins, Matthew. 25.9. Give us
of your oil, for our lamps are gone out. The wise Virgins answered, Not so,
least there be not enough for us and you. The Saints have no Grace to spare to
others; but Christ diffuseth his Grace to others. Grace in the Saints is as
Water in the Vessel, Grace in Christ is as Water in the Spring, Joh. 1.16. Of
his fullness have we received grace for grace. Set a Glass under a Still or
Limbeck, and it receives Water from the Limbeck drop by drop: So the Saints
have the Drops and Influences of Christ's Grace distilling upon them. What a
rich Consolation is this to those who either have no Grace, or their Stock is
but low; they may go to Christ the Mediator, as to a Treasury of Grace; Lord, I
am indigent, but whether should I carry my empty Vessel but to a full Fountain,
Psalm. 87.7. all my fresh Springs are in thee; I am guilty, thou have Blood to
pardon me; I am polluted, thou have Grace to cleanse me; I am sick unto death,
thou have the Balm of Gilead to heal me, Genesis 41.56. Joseph opened all the
Storehouses of Corn: Christ is our Joseph that opens all the Treasuries and
Storehouses of Grace, and communicates to us. He is not only sweet as the
Honeycomb, but drops as the Honeycomb. This is a great comfort, in Christ our
Mediator there is a Cornucopia, and fullness of all Grace, and Christ is
desirous that we should come to him for Grace, like the full Breast that aches
till it be drawn.

Use 1. Admire the Glory of this Mediator, he is God-Man, he is co-essentially
glorious with the Father. All the Jews that saw Christ in the Flesh, did not
see his Godhead: all that saw the Man, did not see the Messiah. The Temple of
Solomon within was embellished with Gold: Travelers, as they passed along,
might see the outside of the Temple, but only the Priests saw the Glory which
sparkled within the Temple; only Believers, who are made Priests unto God, Rev.
1.6. see Christ's glorious inside, the Godhead shining through the Manhood.

Use 2. If Christ be (...), God Man in one Person, then look unto Jesus Christ
alone for Salvation. There must be something of the Godhead to fasten our Hope
upon; in Christ there is Godhead and Manhood Hypostatically united. If we could
weep Rivers of Tears, out-fast Moses on the Mount, if we were exact Moralists,
touching the Law blameless, if we could arrive at the highest degree of
Sanctification in this Life, all this would not save us without looking to the
Merits of him who is God: our perfect Holiness in Heaven is not the cause of
our Salvation, but the Righteousness of Jesus Christ. To this therefore did
Paul fly, as to the Horns of the Altar, Phil. 3.9. That I may be found in him,
not having my own righteousness. It Is true we may look to our Graces as
Evidences of Salvation, but Christ's Blood only as the Cause. In the time of
Noah's Flood, all that trusted to the high Hills and Trees, and not to the Ark,
were drowned: Heb. 12.2. Looking unto Jesus; and so look unto him as to believe
in him, that so Christ may not only be united to our Nature, but to our
Persons, Joh. 20.31. That believing you may have life through his name.

Use 3. Is Jesus Christ God and Man in one Person? This as it shows the Dignity
of Believers, that they are nearly related to one of the greatest Persons that
is, Col. 2.9. In him dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily; so it is of
unspeakable Comfort, Christ's two Natures being married together, the Divine
and Humane; all that Christ in either of his Natures can do for Believers, he
will do: In his Humane Nature he Prays for them, in his Divine Nature he Merits
for them. This for the Person of our Mediator.

Use 4. Admire the Love of Christ our Mediator; that he should humble himself,
and take our Flesh, that he might redeem us. Believers should put Christ in
their bosom, as the Spouse did Cant. 1.13. lie betwixt my Breasts. What was
said of Ignatius, that the Name of Jesus was found written in his heart, should
be verified of every Saint, he should have Jesus Christ written in his heart.

CHRIST a Prophet.
DEUTERONOMY. 18.15 The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet, etc.


HAving spoken of the Person of Christ, we are next to speak of the Offices of
Christ, Prophetical, Priestly, Regal.

1. Prophetical, The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet. Enunciatur
hic locus de Christo, it is spoken of Christ. There are several Names given to
Christ as a Prophet: He is called the Counselor, Isa. 6.9. In uno Christo
Angelus faederis completur, Fagius. The Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. a
Lamp, 2 Samuel 22.29. the bright Morning Star, Rev. 22.16. Jesus Christ is the
great Prophet of his Church; the Woman of Samaria gave a shrewd guess, John
4.19. He is the best Teacher; he makes all other teaching effectual, Luke
24.45. Then opened he their Understanding. He did not only open the Scriptures,
but opened their Understanding. He teaches to profit, Isa. 48.17. I am the
Lord thy God who teaches thee to profit.

Quest. How Christ teaches?

Resp. 1. Externally, By his Word, Psalm. 119.105. Thy Word is a Lamp unto my
feet. Such as pretend to have a Light or Revelation above the Word, or contrary
to it, never had their Teaching from Christ, Isa. 8.20.

2. Christ teaches these sacred Mysteries, Inwardly, by the Spirit, John
16.13. The World knows not what it is, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man receives
not the things of God, neither can ye know them. He knows not what it is to be
Transformed by the renewing of the mind, Romans 12.2. or what the inward workings
of the Spirit means; these are Riddles and Paradoxes to him. He may have more
insight into the things of the World then a Believer, but he does not see the
deep things of God. A Swine may see an Acorn under the Tree, but he cannot see
a Star: he who is taught of Christ sees the Arcana imperii, the Secrets of the
Kingdom of Heaven.

Quest. What are the Lessons Christ teaches?

Answ. 1. He teaches us to see into our own Hearts. Take the most Mercurial
Wits, the greatest Politicians, that understand the Mysteries of State, yet
they know not the Mysteries of their own Hearts, they cannot believe there is
that Evil in them as is, 2 Kings 8.13. Is thy servant a dog? Grande profundum
est homo, Aug. The Heart is a great deep which is not easily fathomed. But
Christ, when he teaches, removes the Vail of Ignorance, and lights a Man into
his own Heart. And now he sees swarms of vain Thoughts, he blusheth to see how
Sin mingles with his Duties, his Stars are mixed with Clouds; he prays, as
Austin, that God would deliver him from himself.

2. The second Lesson Christ teaches, is the Vanity of the Creature. A Natural
Man sets up his Happiness here, worships the golden Image; but he that Christ
has anointed with his Eye Salve has a Spirit of Discerning, he looks upon the
Creature in its night dress, sees it to be empty and unsatisfying, not
commensurate to an Heaven-born Soul. Solomon had put all the Creatures into a
Limbeck, and when he came to extract the Spirits and Quintissence, all was
Vanity, Eccl. 2.11. The Apostle calls it (...), a Show or Apparition* 1 Cor.
7.31. having no intrinsical Goodness.

3. The third Lesson is the Excellency of Things unseen. Christ gives the Soul
a sight of Glory, a prospect of Eternity, 2 Cor. 4.18. We look not at things
which are seen, but (...), things which are not seen. Moses saw him who is
invisible, Hebr. 11.27. And the Patriarks saw a better Country, viz. an
heavenly, Hebr. 11.16. where Delights of Angels, Rivers of Pleasure, the Flower
of Joy fully ripe and blown.

Quest. How does Christ's Teaching differ from other Teaching?

Resp. Several ways.

1. Christ teaches the Heart. Others may teach the Ear, Christ the Heart, Acts
16.14. Whose heart the Lord opened. All that the Dispensers of the Word can do,
is but to work Knowledge, Christ works Grace. They can but give you the light
of the Truth, Christ gives you the love of the Truth. They can only teach you
what to believe, Christ teaches how to believe.

2 Christ gives us a Taste of the Word; Ministers may set the Food of the Word
before you, and carve it out to you, but it is only Christ causes you to taste
it, 1 Pet. 2.3. If so be ye have tasted, the Lord is gracious. Psalm. 34.8.
Taste and see that the Lord is good. It is one thing to hear a Truth preached,
another thing to taste it; one thing to read a Promise, another thing to taste
it. David had got a taste of the Word, Psalm. 119.102, 103. Thou have taught me.
How sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter then honey to my mouth. The
Apostle calls it (...), the savor of Knowledge, 2 Cor. 2.14. The light of
Knowledge is one thing, the savor another. Christ makes us taste a savoriness
in the Word.

3. Christ when he teaches makes us obey. Others may instruct, but cannot
command obedience. They teach to be humble, but Men remain proud. The Prophet
had been denouncing Judgments against the People of Judah, but they would not
hear, Ier. 44.17. We will do whatsoever goes out of our own mouth, to bake
cakes to the Queen of Heaven. Men come quasi armed in Coat of Male, that the
Sword of the Word will not enter; but when Christ comes to teach, he removes
this obstinacy, he not only informs the Judgment, but inclines the Will. He
does not only come with the Light of his Word, but the Rod of his Strength, and
makes the stubborn sinner yield to him. His Grace is irresistible.

4. Christ teaches easily. Others teach with difficulty. Difficulty in finding
out a Truth, and in inculcating it, Isa. 28.10. Precept must be upon precept,
line upon line; some may Teach all their lives, and the Word take no
impression. They complain as Isa. 49.4. I have spent my labor in vain. Plough
on Rocks. But Christ the great Prophet teaches with ease. He can with the
least touch of his Spirit convert. He can say, Let there be light; with a word
he conveys Grace.

5. Christ when he teaches, makes Men willing to learn. Men may teach others,
but they have no mind to learn, Prove. 1.7. Fools despise instruction; they rage
at the Word, as if a Patient should rage at the Physician when he brings him a
Cordial: thus backward are Men to their own Salvation. But Christ makes his
People a willing people, Psalm. 110.3. they prize Knowledge, and hang it as a
Jewel upon their Ear. Those that Christ teaches, say as Isa. 2.3. Come let us
go up to the Mountain of the Lord, and he will teach us of his ways, and we
will walk in them: and as Acts 10.33. We are all here present before God, to
hear all things commanded.

6. Christ when he Teaches, does not only illuminate, but animate. He does so
teach, as he does quicken; John 8.12. I am the light of the world, he that
follows me shall have lumen vitae, the light of life. By Nature we are dead,
therefore unfit for teaching; who will make an Oration to the Dead? But Christ
teaches them that are dead, he gives the light of life; as when Lazarus was
dead, Christ said, Come forth, and he made the dead to hear, Lazarus came
forth. So when Christ says to the dead Soul, Come forth of the Grave of
Unbelief, he hears Christ's voice, and comes forth; it is the Light of Life.
The Philosophers says, Calor and lux concrescunt, Light and Heat increase
together. It Is true here; where Christ comes with his Light, there is the heat
of Spiritual Life going along with it.

Use 1. of Information. Branch 1. See here an Argument of Christ's Divinity.
Had he not been God, he could never have known the Mind of God, or revealed to
us those Arcana Caeli, those deep Mysteries which no Man or Angel could find
out. Who but God can anoint the eyes of the blind? and give not only light, but
sight? who but he who has the Key of David can open the Heart? who but God can
bow the iron sinew of the Will? He only who is God can enlighten the
Conscience, and make the stoney Heart bleed.

Branch 2. See what a Cornucopia, or Plenty of Wisdom is in Christ, who is the
Great Doctor of his Church, and gives saving knowledge to all the Elect. The
Body of the Sun must needs be full of Charity and Brightness, which enlightens
the whole World. Christ is the great Luminary. In him are hid all Treasures of
Knowledge, Col. 2.3. The middle Lamp of the Sanctuary gave light to all the
other Lamps. Christ duffuseth his glorious Light to others. We are apt to
admire the Learning of Aristotle and Plato; alas! what is this poor Spa^k of
Light to that which is in Christ, from whose infinite Wisdom both Men and
Angels light their Lamp.

Branch 3. See the Misery of Men in the state of Nature, before Christ came to
be their Prophet, they are inveloped with Ignorance and Da^kness. Men know
nothing in a salvifical, sanctified manner; they know nothing as they ought to
know* 1 Cor. 8.2. This is sad: 1. Men in the dark cannot discern Colors; so in
the state of Nature, they cannot discern between Morality and Grace; they take
one for the other, pro dea nubem. 2. In the dark the greatest Beauty is hid.
Let there be rare Flowers in the Garden, and Pictures in the Room, yet in the
dark their Beauty is veiled over; so, though there be such transcendent Beauty
in Christ as amazeth the Angels, a Man in the state of Nature, sees none of
this Beauty. What is Christ to him? or Heaven to him? the vail is upon his
heart? 3. A Man in the dark is in danger every step he goes; so a Man in the
state of Nature is in danger every step, of falling into Hell. Thus it is
before Christ teaches us; nay, the darkness in which a Sinner is, while in an
unregenerate state, is worse then natural darkness; for, natural darkness
affrights, Genesis 15.12. An horror of great darkness fell upon Abraham. But the
Spiritual Darkness is not accompanied with horror, Men tremble not at their
condition; nay, they like their condition well enough, John 3.19. Men loved
darkness. This is their sad condition, till Jesus Christ comes as a Prophet to
teach them, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan to God.

Branch 4. See the happy condition of the Children of God, they have Christ to
be their Prophet, Isa. 54.13. All thy children shall be taught of the Lord. 1
Cor. 1.30. He is made to us wisdom. One Man cannot see by another eye; but
Believers see with Christ's eyes, in his light they see light: Christ gives
them the light of Grace and light of Glory.

Use 2. Labor to have Christ for your Prophet, he teaches savingly, he is an
interpreter of a thousand, he can untie those Knots which puzzle the very
Angels; till Christ teach, never learn any Lesson; till Christ is made to us
wisdom, we shall never be wise to Salvation.

Quest. What shall we do to have Christ for our Teacher?

Resp. 1. See your need of Christ's Teaching; you cannot see your way without
this Morning Star. Some speak much of the Light of Reason improved: Alas! the
Plumb-line of Reason is too short to Fathom the deep things of God; the Light
of Reason will no more help a Man to believe, then the light of a Candle will
help him to understand. A Man can no more by the power of Nature reach Christ,
then an Infant can reach the top of the Pyramids, or the Ostridge fly up to the
Stars. See your need of Christ's Anointing and Teaching, Rev. 3.18.

2. Go to Christ to teach you, Psalm. 25.5. Lead me in thy truth, and teach me.
As one of the Disciples said, Lord teach us to pray, Luke 11.1. so, Lord teach
me to profit. Do thou light my Lamp, O thou great Prophet of thy Church, give
me a Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, that I may see things in another manner
then ever I saw them before. Teach me in the Word to hear thy Voice, and in the
Sacrament to discern thy Body, Psalm. 13.3. Lighten mine eyes, etc. Cathedram
habet in coelo qui corda docet in terra, Aug. He has his Pulpit in Heaven who
converts Souls. And that we may be encouraged to go to Christ our great Prophet.

1. Jesus Christ is very willing to teach us. Why else did he enter into the
Calling of the Ministry? but to teach the Mysteries of Heaven, Matthew. 4.23.
Jesus went about teaching and preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, and healing
all manner of sickness, and all manner of diseases among the people. Why did he
take the Office Prophetical upon him? why was Christ so angry with them that
kept away the Key of Knowledge? Luke 11.52. why was Christ anointed with the
Spirit without measure, but that he might anoint us with Knowledge. Knowledge
is in Christ, as Milk in the Breast for the Child. O then go to Christ to
Teach! None in the Gospel came to Christ for sight, but he restored their
eyesight. And sure Christ is more willing to work a cure upon a blind Soul,
than ever he was upon a blind Body.

2. There are none so dull and ignorant, but Christ can teach them. Every one
is not fit to make a Philosophers Scholar of, Ex omni ligno non fit Mercurius;
but there is none so dull but Christ can make a good Scholar of such as are
ignorant, and of low parts. Christ teaches them in such a manner, that they
know more then the great Sages and Wisemen of the World. Hence that saying of
St. Augustine, Surgunt indocti and rapiunt coelum, the unlearned Men rise up
and take Heaven; they know the Truths of Christ more savingly then the great
admired Rabbis. The duller the Scholar, the more is his skill seen that
teaches. Hence it is, Christ delights in teaching the Ignorant, to get himself
more Glory, Isa. 35.5. The eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of
the deaf shall be unstopped. Who would go to teach a blind, or a deaf Man? yet
such dull Scholars Christ teaches. Such as are blinded with Ignorance, they
shall see the Mysteries of the Gospel, and the deaf Ears shall be unstopped.

3. Wait upon the Means of Grace which Christ has appointed. Though Christ
teaches by his Spirit, yet he teaches in the use of Ordinances. Wait at the
Gates of Wisdoms door; Ministers are Teachers under Christ, Ephesians. 4.11. Pastors
and Teachers. We read of Pitchers, and Lamps within the Pitchers, Judges 7.16.
Ministers are Earthen Vessels, but these Pitchers have Lamps within them to
light Souls to Heaven. Christ is said to speak to us from Heaven now, Hebr.
12.25. viz. by his Ministers, as the King speaks by his Ambassador. Such as
wean themselves from the Breast of Ordinances, seldom thrive; either they grow
light in their Head, or lame in their Feet. The Word preached is Christ's Voice
in the Mouth of the Minister; and they that refuse to hear Christ speaking in
the Ministry, Christ will refuse to hear them speaking on their Deathbed.

4. If you would have the Teachings of Christ, walk according to that Knowledge
which you have already. Use your little knowledge well, and Christ will teach
you more, John 7.17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of my Doctrine,
whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self. A Master seeing his
Servant improve a little Stock well, gives him more to trade with.

Use 3. If you have been taught by Christ savingly, be thankful: It is your
Honor to have GOD for your Teacher; and that he should teach you, and not
others, is matter of admiration and gratulation. O how many knowing men are
ignorant! They are not taught of God; they have CHRIST's Word to enlighten
them, but not his Spirit to sanctify them. But, that you should have the
Inward, as well as the Outward Teaching, that Christ should anoint you with the
Heavenly Unction of his Spirit, that you can say, as he John 9.25. One thing I
know, that whereas I was blind, I now see; O! how thankful should you be to
Christ, who has revealed his Father's Bosom Secrets unto you, John 1.18. No
man has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of
the Father, he has declared him. If Alexander thought himself so much obliged
to Aristotle, for the Philosophical Instructions he learned from him: O how are
we bound to Jesus Christ, this great Prophet, for opening to us the Eternal
Purposes of his Love, and revealing to us the Mysteries of the Kingdom of
Heaven.

CHRIST's Priestly Office.
Quest. XV. HOw does Christ execute the Office of a Priest?

Resp. In his once offering up of himself a Sacrifice to satisfy Divine
Justice, and reconcile us to GOD, and in making continual Intercession for us.

Heb. 9.26. Now once in the end of the world has he appeared to put away sin;
by the Sacrifice of himself.

Quest. What are the parts of Christ's Priestly Office?

Resp. Christ's Priestly Office has two Parts, his Satisfaction and
Intercession.

1. His SATISFACTION, and this consists of two Branches: 1. His Active
Obedience, Matthew. 3.15. He fulfill^d all righteousness. Christ did every thing
which the Law required; his holy Life was a Perfect Commentary upon the Law of
God; and he obeyed the Law for us.

2. His Passive Obedience: Our Guilt being transferred and imputed to him, he
did undergo the Penalty which was due to us: He appeared to put away sin by the
sacrifice of himself. The Paschal Lamb slain, was a Type of Christ who was
offered up in Sacrifice for us. Sin could not be done away without Blood, Heb.
9.22. Without blood is no remission. Christ was not only a Lamb without spot,
but a Lamb slain.

Quest. Why was it require there should be a Priest?

Resp. There needed a Priest to be an Umpire, to mediate between a Guilty
Creature, and an Holy God.

Quest. How could Christ suffer being God?

Resp. Christ suffered only in the Humane Nature.

Quest. But if only Christ's Humanity suffered, how could his suffering
satisfy for Sin?

Resp. The Humane Nature being united to the Divine, the Humane Nature did
suffer, the Divine did satisfy: Christ's Godhead as it did support the Humane
Nature that it did not faint, so it did give Virtue to his Sufferings. The
Altar sanctifies the thing offered on it, Matthew. 23.19. so the Altar of
Christ's Divine Nature sanctified the Sacrifice of his Death, and made it of
infinite value.

Quest. Wherein does the Greatness of Christ's sufferings appear?

Resp. In the Sufferings of his Body, he suffered truly, not only a (...), an
Appearance; the Apostle calls it Mors Crucis, The Death of the Cross, Phil.
2.8. Tully when he speaks of this kind of Death, Quid dicam in crucem toilere?
though he were a great Orator, he wanted words to express it. The thoughts of
this made Christ sweat drops of Blood in the Garden, Luke 22.44. It was an
ignominious, painful, cursed Death; Christ suffered in all his Senses, 1. In
his Eyes, they beheld two sad Objects, he saw his Enemies insulting, and his
Mother weeping. 2. In his Ears, his Ears were filled with the Revilings of the
People, Matthew. 27.42. He saved others, himself he cannot save. 3. In his Smell,
when their Drivel fell upon his Face. 4. In his Taste, when they gave him Gall
and Vinegar to drink, Bitterness and Sharpness. 5. In his Feeling, his Head
suffered with Thorns, his Hands and Feet with the Nails, -- Totum pro vulnere
Corpus; Now was this white Lily dyed of a Purple color. 2. In the Sufferings
of his Soul, he was pressed in the Wine Press of his Father's Wrath. This
caused that Vociferation and Outcry on the Cross, My God, my God; Cur
deseruisti? Christ suffered a double Eclipse upon the Cross, an Eclipse of the
Sun, and an Eclipse of the Light of God's Countenance. How bitter was this
Agony? The Evangelist uses three words to express it, (...), He began to be
amazed, Mark 14.33. (...), He began to faint. (...), To be exceeding sorrowful,
Matthew. 26.37. Christ felt the Pains of Hell in his Soul, though not locally,
yet equivalently.

Quest. Why did Christ suffer?

Resp. Surely not for any desert of his own, Dan. 9.26. The Messiah shall be
cut off, but not for himself; it was for us, Isa. 53.6. Unus peccat alius
plectitor; He suffered that he might satisfy God's Justice for us. We by our
Sins had infinitely wronged God, and could we have shed Rivers of Tears,
offered up Millions of Holocausts and Burnt-Offerings, we could never have
pacified an angry Deity; therefore Christ must dye that God's Justice might be
satisfied.

It is hotly debated among Divines, Whether God could not have forgiven Sin
freely without a Sacrifice? Not to dispute what God could have done, but when
we consider God was resolved to have the Law satisfied, and to have Man in a
way of Justice as well as Mercy; then, I say, it was necessary that Christ
should lay down his Life as a Sacrifice:

1. To fulfill the Predictions of Scripture, Luke 24.46. Thus it behoved Christ
to suffer.

2. To bring us into Favor with God: It Is one thing for a Traitor to be
pardoned, and another thing to be made a Favorite. Christ's Blood is not only
called (...), a Sacrifice whereby God is appeased, but (...), a Propitiation
whereby God becomes gracious and friendly to us. Christ is our Mercy-seat from
which God gives Answers of Peace to us.

3. Christ dyed that he might make good his last Will and Testament with his
Blood: There were many Legacies which Christ bequeathed to Believers, which had
been all null and void had not he dyed, and by his Death confirmed the Will,
Heb. 9.17. A Testament is in force after Men are dead: The Mission of Spirit,
the Promises, those Legacies, were not in force till Christ's Death; but Christ
by his Blood has sealed them, and Believers may lay claim to them.

4. He died that he might purchase for us Glorious Mansions: Therefore Heaven
is called not only a promised, but a purchased Possession, Ephesians. 1.14. Christ
dyed for our Preferment; He suffered that we might reign; he hung upon the
Cross, that we might fit upon the Throne; Heaven was shut, etc. Crux Christi
clavis Paradisi: The Cross of Christ is the Ladder by which we ascend to
Heaven. His Crucifixion is our Coronation.

Use 1. In the Bloody Sacrifice of Christ, see the horrid Nature of Sin: Sin
(it is true) is odious as it banished Adam out of Paradise, and threw the
Angels into Hell, but that which does most of all make it appear Horrid, is
this, it made Christ vail his Glory and loose his Blood. We should look upon
Sin with Indignation, and pursue it with an Holy Malice, and shed the Blood of
those Sins shed Christ's Blood. The sight of Caesar's Bloody Robe incensed the
Romans against them that slew him: The sight of Christ's bleeding Body should
incense us against Sin; let us not parley with it, let not that be our Joy which
made Christ a Man of Sorrow.

Use 2. Is Christ our Priest sacrificed, see God's Mercy and Justice displayed:
I may say as the Apostle, Romans 11.27. Behold the goodness and severity of God:
1. The Goodness of God in providing a Sacrifice. Had not Christ suffered on the
Cross, we must have lain in Hell for ever satisfying God's Justice.

2. The Severity of God: Though it were his own Son, the Son of his Love, and
our Sins were but imputed to him, yet God did not spare him, Romans 8.32. but his
Wrath did flame against him. And if God were thus severe to his own Son, how
dreadful will he be one day to his Enemies? Such as dye in wilful Impenitency
must feel the same Wrath as Christ did; and because they cannot bear it at
once, therefore they must be enduring it for ever.

Use 3. Is Christ our Priest who was sacrificed for us, then see the endeared
Affection of Christ to us Sinners: The Cross (says Austin) was a Pulpit in
which Christ preached his Love to the World. That Christ should dye was more
then if all the Angels had been turned to Dust: And that Christ should dye as a
Malefactor, having the weight of all Men's Sins laid upon him: That he should
dye for his Enemies, Romans 5.10. The Balm-tree weeps out its precious Balm to
heal those that cut and mangle it; Christ shed his Blood to heal those that
crucified him. And that he should dye freely; it is called the Offering of the
Body of Jesus, Heb. 10.10. And though his Sufferings were so great that they
made him sigh, and weep, and bleed, yet they could not make him Repent, Isa.
53.11. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and be satisfied. Christ had
hard travel upon the Cross, yet he does not repent of it, but thinks his Sweat
and Blood well bestowed, because he sees Redemption brought forth to the World.
O infinite amazing Love of Christ! a Love that passes Knowledge! Ephesians. 3.19.
That neither Man or Angel can parallel. How should we be affected with this
Love, if Saul was so affected with David's Kindness in sparing his Life? How
should we be affected with Christ's Kindness in parting with his Life for us?
At Christ's Death and Passion the very Stones did cleave asunder, Matthew. 27.5.
The rocks rent. Not to be affected with Christ's Love in dying, is to have
Hearts harder then the Rocks.

Use 4. Is Christ our Sacrifice? then see the Excellency of this Sacrifice: 1.
It is perfect, Heb. 10.14. By one offering he has perfected them that are
sanctified. Therefore how impious are the Papists in joining their Merits, and
the Prayers of Saints with Christ's Sacrifice. They offer him up daily in the
Mass, as if Christ's Sacrifice on the Cross were imperfect; this is a Blasphemy
against Christ's Priestly Office.

2. Christ's Sacrifice is meritorious, he not only died for our Example, but to
merit Salvation: The Person who suffered being God as well as Man, did put
Virtue into his Sufferings; and now our sins are expiated, and God appeased. No
sooner did the Messengers say, Uriah is dead; but David's Anger was pacified, 2 Samuel 11.21. No sooner did Christ dye but God's Anger is pacified.

3. This Sacrifice is beneficial; out of the dead Lion Sampson had Honey; it
procures Justification of our Persons, Acceptance of our Services, Access to
God with Boldness, Entrance into the Holy Place of Heaven, Heb. 10.19. Per
latus Christi pa^escit nobis in coelum. Israel passed through the Red Sea to
Canaan; so through the Red Sea of Christ's Blood we enter into the Heavenly
Canaan.

2. Use of Exhortation: Branch 1. Let us fiducially apply this Blood of Christ:
All the Virtue of a Medicine is in the applying; though the Medicine be made of
the Blood of God, it will not heal unless by Faith applied. As Fire is to the
Chemist, so is Faith to a Christian; the Chemist can do nothing without Fire,
so there is nothing done without Faith. Faith makes Christ's Sacrifice ours,
Phil. 3.8 Christ Jesus my Lord. It is not Gold in the Mine enricheth, but Gold
in the Hand: Faith is the Hand receives Christ's Golden Merits. It is not a
Cordial in the Glass refreshes the Spirits, but a Cordial drunk down. Per
fidem Christi sanguinem sugimus, Cypr. Faith opens the Orifice of Christ's
Wound^, and drinks the precious Cordial of his Blood. Without Faith Christ
himself will not avail us.

Branch 2. Let us love a Bleeding Savior, and let us show our Love to Christ
by being ready to suffer for him: Many rejoice at Christ's Suffering for them,
but dream not of their Suffering for him: Joseph dreamed of his Preferment, but
not of his Imprisonment. Was Christ a Sacrifice? Did he bear God's Wrath for
us? we should bear Man's Wrath for him. Christ's Death was voluntary, Psalm.
40.7. Lo, I come to do thy will, O God. Luke 12.50. I have a baptism to be
baptized with, and how am I straightened till it be accomplished. Christ calls his
Sufferings a Baptism: he was to be (as it were) baptized in his own Blood; And
how did he thirst for that time* How am I straightened! Oh then let us be willing
to suffer for Christ! Christ has taken away the Venom and Sting of the Saint's
Sufferings: there is no Wrath in their Cup. Our Sufferings Christ can make
sweet. As there was Oil mixed in the Peace Offering: So* God can mix the Oil of
Gladness with our Sufferings. The ringing of my Chain is sweet Music in my
Ears, Landgrave of Hesse. Life must be parted with shortly, what is it to part
with it a little sooner, as a Sacrifice to Christ, as a Seal of our Sincerity,
and a Pledge of Thankfulness.

3. Use of Consolation: This Sacrifice of Christ's Blood may infinitely comfort
us. This is the Blood of Atonement; Christ's Cross is, Cardo salutis, Calv. The
Hing and Foundation of our Comfort. 1. This Blood comforts in case of Guilt: O
says the Soul, my sins trouble me; why, Christ's Blood was shed for the
Remission of Sin, Mat. 26.28. Let us see our sins laid on Christ, and then they
are no more ours but his.

2. In case of Pollution: Christ's Blood is an healing and cleansing Blood: 1.
It is healing, Isa. 53.5. With his stripes we are healed. It is the best
Weapon-Salve, it heals at a distance: though Christ be in Heaven, we may feel
the Virtue of his Blood healing our bloody Issue. 2. And it is cleansing: It Is
therefore compared to Fountain Water, Zec. 13.1. The Word is a Glass to show us
our Spots, and Christ's Blood is a Fountain to wash them away; it turns Leprosy
into Purity: 1 John 1.7. The blood of Jesus cleanses us from all our sin.
There is indeed one Spot so black that Christ's Blood does not wash away, viz.
The Sin against the Holy Ghost. -- Not but that there is Virtue enough in
Christ's Blood to wash it away; but he who has sinned that Sin, will not be
washed, he contemns Christ's Blood, and tramples it under foot, Heb. 10.29.
Thus we see what a strong Cordial Christ's Blood is, it is the Anchor-hold of
our Faith, the Spring of our Joy, the Crown of our Desires, and the only
Support both in Life and Death. In all our Fears let us comfort our selves with
the Propitiatory Sacrifice of Christ's Blood: Christ dyed both as a Purchaser
and as a Conqueror: 1. As a Purchaser in regard of God, having by his Blood
obtained our Salvation. 2. And as a Conqueror in regard of Satan, the Cross
being his Triumphant Chariot, whe^ein he has led Hell and Death captive.

Use ult. Bless God for this precious Sacrifice of Christ's Death, Psalm. 103.1.
Bless the Lord, O my soul. And for what does David bless him? Who redeemeth thy
life from destruction. Christ gave himself a Sin-offering for us, let us give
ourselves a Thank-offering to him. If a Man redeem another out of Debt, will
not he be grateful? How deeply do we stand obliged to Christ, who has redeemed
us from Hell and Damnation, Rev. 5.9. And they sung a new Song, saying, Thou
art worthy to take the Book, and open the Seals, for thou wast slain, and have
redeemed us to God by thy Blood. Let our Hearts and Tongues join in consort to
bless God, and let us show our Thankfulness to Christ by Fruitfulness; let us
bring forth (as Spice-Trees) the Fruits of Humility, Zeal, Good-works. This is
to live unto him, who has died for us, 2 Cor. 5.15. The Wisemen did not only
worship Christ, but presented him with Gifts, Gold, and Frankincense, and
Myrrh, Matthew. 2.11. Let us present Christ with the Fruits of Righteousness,
which are unto the Glory and Praise of God.

CHRIST's Intercession.
ROMANS 8.34. Who also makes Intercession for us.


WHen Aaron entered into the Holy Place, his Bells gave a Sound; so Christ
having entered into Heaven, his Intercession makes a melodious sound in the Ears
of God. Christ, though he be exalted to Glory, has not laid aside his Bowels
of Compassion, but is still mindful of his Body Mystical; as Joseph was mindful
of his Father and Brethren, when he was exalted to the Court. Who also makes
Intercession for us. -- To Intercede is to make Request in the behalf of
another. Christ is the great Master of Requests in Heaven; Christus est
Catholicus Patris Sacerdos, Tertul.

Quest. What are the Qualifications of our Intercessor?

Resp. 1. He is holy, Hebr. 7.26. For such an High Priest became us, who is
holy, undefiled, separate from sinners. Christ knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5.21. he
knew sin in the weight, not in the act. It was requisite that he who was to do
away the sins of others, should himself be without sin. Holiness is one of the
precious Stones which shines on the Breast Plate of our High Priest.

2. He is faithful, Hebr. 2.17. It behoved him to be like unto his brethren,
that he might be a faithful High Priest. Moses was faithful as a Servant,
Christ as a Son, Hebr. 3.5. he does not forget any Cause he has to plead, nor
does he use any deceit in pleading. An ordinary Attorney may either leave out
some word which might make for the Client, or put in a word against him, having
received a Fee on both sides; but Christ is true to the Cause he pleads; we may
leave our Matters with him, we may trust our Lives and Souls in his hand.

3. He never dies. The Priests under the Law, while their Office lived, they
themselves died, Hebr. 7.23. They were not suffered to continue by reason of
death: but Christ ever lives to make Intercession, Hebr. 7.25. He has no
Succession in his Priesthood.

Quest. Who Christ intercedes for?

Resp. Not for all promiscuously, John 17.9. but for the Elect. The efficacy of
Christ's Prayer reaches no further then the efficacy of his Blood; but his
Blood was shed only for the Elect, therefore his Prayers only reach them. The
High Priest went into the Sanctuary with the Names only of the Twelve Tribes
upon his Breast; so Christ goes into Heaven only with the Names of the Elect
upon his Breast. Christ interceeds for the weakest Believers, John 17.20. and
for all the sins of Believers. In the Law there were some sins the High Priest
was neither to offer Sacrifice for, nor yet to offer Prayer, Numb. 15.30. The
Soul that does ought presumptuously shall be cut off. The Priest might offer up
Prayer for sins of Ignorance, but not of Presumption: but Christ's Intercession
extends to all the sins of the Elect. Of what a bloody color was David's sin,
yet it did not exclude Christ's Intercession.

Quest. What does Christ in the Work of Intercession?

Resp. Three things.

1. He presents the Merit of his Blood to his Father, and in the Virtue of that
Price paid, pleads for Mercy. The High Priest was herein a lively Type of
Christ; Aaron was to do four things: 1. Kill the Beast; 2. to enter with the
Blood into the Holy of Holies; 3. to sprinkle the Mercy Seat with the Blood; 4.
to kindle the Incense, and with the smoke of it cause a Cloud to arise over the
Mercy Seat, and so the Atonement was made, Lev. 16.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Christ our High Priest did exactly answer to this Type; He was offered up in
Sacrifice, that Answers to the Priests killing the Bullock: And Christ is gone
up into Heaven, that Answers to to the Priests going into the Holy of Holies:
And he spreads his Blood before his Father, that Answers to the Priests
sprinkling the Blood upon the Mercy Seat. And he prays to his Father, that for
his Blood sake he would be propitious to Sinners, that Answers to the Cloud of
Incense going up: And through his Intercession God is pacified, that Answers to
the Priests making Atonement.

2. Christ by his Intercession answers all Bills of Indictment brought in
against the Elect. Believers do what they can; Sin, and then Satan accuses
them to God, and Conscience accuses them to themselves, now, Christ by his
Intercession answers all these Accusations, Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any thing
to the charge of God's Elect? it is Christ who makes Intercession for us. When
Aesculus was accused for some Impiety, his Brother stood up for him, and showed
the Magistrates how he had lost his hand in the Service of the State, and so
obtained his pardon. Thus when Satan accuses the Saints, or the Justice of God
lays any thing to their charge, Christ shows his own wounds, and by Virtue of
his bloody Sufferings, he answers all the Demands and Challenges of the Law,
and counter-works Satan's Accusations.

3. Christ by his Intercession calls for an Acquittance; Lord, let the sinner
be absolved from guilt; and in this sense Christ is called an Advocate, 1 John
2.1. He requires that the Sinner be set free in the Court. An Advocate differs
much from an Orator; an Orator uses Rhetoric to persuade and entreat the
Judge to show Mercy to another: but an Advocate tells the Judge what is Law:
thus Christ appears in Heaven as an Advocate, he represents what is Law. When
God's Justice opens the Debt-Book, Christ opens the Law-Book: Lord, says he,
thou art a just God, and will not be pacified without Blood, lo here, the Blood
is shed, therefore in Justice give me a Discharge for these distressed
Creatures. It Is equal that the Law being satisfied, the Sinner should be
acquitted. And upon Christ's Plea, God sets his hand to the Sinner's Pardon.

Quest. In what manner Christ interceeds?

Answ. 1. Freely; he pleads our Cause in Heaven, and takes no Fee. An ordinary
Lawyer will have his Fee, and sometimes a Bribe too; but Christ is not
Mercenary: How many Causes does he plead every day in Heaven, and will take
nothing. As Christ laid down his Life freely, John 10.15, 18. so he interceeds
freely.

2. Feelingly; He is sensible of our condition as his own; Hebr. 4.15. We have
not an High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our Infirmity.
As a tender hearted Mother would plead with a Judge for a Child ready to be
condemned; O how would her Bowels work, how would her Tears trickle down, what
weeping Rhetoric would she use to the Judge for Mercy. Thus the Lord Jesus is
full of Sympathy and Tenderness, Hebr. 2.17. that he might be a merciful High
Priest. Though he has left his Passion, yet not his Compassion. An ordinary
Lawyer is not affected with the Cause he pleads, nor does he care which way it
goes. It is Profit makes him plead, not Affection. But Christ interceeds
feelingly; and that which makes him interceed with Affection, is, it is his own
Cause which he pleads. He has shed his Blood to purchase Life and Salvation
for the Elect, and if they should not be saved, he would lose his purchase.

3. Efficaciously. It is a prevailing Intercession. Christ never lost any Cause
he pleaded, he was never Nonsuited. Christ's Intercession must needs be
effectual, if you consider,

(1.) The Excellency of his Person; if the Prayer of a Saint be so prevalent
with God: Moses's Prayer did bind God's hands, Exodus 32.10. Let me alone: and
Jacob as a Prince prevailed with God, Genesis 32.28. and Eliah did by Prayer open
and shut Heaven, Iam. 5.17. Then what is Christ's Prayer? He is the Son of God,
the Son in whom he is well pleased, Matthew. 3.17. What will not a Father grant
his Son? John 11.42. I know that thou always hear me. If God could forget,
that Christ were a Priest, yet he cannot forget that he is a Son.

(2.) Christ prays for nothing but what his Father has a mind to grant. There
is but One Will between Christ and his Father: Christ prays, Sanctify them
through thy Truth; and this is the will of God, even your sanctification, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. so then, if Christ prays for nothing, but what God the Father has
a mind to grant, then he is like to speed.

(3.) Christ prays for nothing but what he has power to give. What he prays
for as he is Man, that he has power to give as he is God, John 17.24. Father,
I will -- Father, there he prays as Man; I will, there he gives as God. This is
a great comfort to a Believer, when his Prayer is weak, and he can hardly pray
for himself, Christ's Prayer in Heaven is mighty and powerful* Though God may
refuse Prayer as it comes from us, yet not as it comes from Christ.

4. Christ's Intercession is always ready at hand. The People of God have sins
of daily incursion; and besides these, sometimes they lapse into great sins,
and God is provoked, and his Justice is ready to break forth upon them; but
Christ's Intercession is ready at hand, he daily makes up the Breaches between
God and them; he presents the Merit of his Blood to his Father to pacify him.
When the Wrath of God began to break out upon Israel, Aaron presently stepped in
with his Censer, and offered Incense, and so the Plague was staid, Numb. 16.47.
so no sooner does a Child of God offend, and God begins to be angry, but
immediately Christ steps in and intercedes; Father, it is my Child has
offended, though he has forgotten his Duty, thou have not lost thy Bowels: O
pity him, and let thy Anger be turned away from him. Christ's Intercession is
ready at hand, and upon the least failings of the Godly, he stands up and makes
Request for them in Heaven.

Quest. What are the Fruits of Christ's Intercession?

Resp. 1. Justification. In Justification there is two things; 1. Guilt is
remitted, 2. Righteousness is imputed, Ier. 23.6. The Lord our Righteousness.
We are reputed not only Righteous, as the Angels, but as Christ, having his
Robes put upon us, 2 Cor. 5.21. But whence is it that we are justified? It Is
from Christ's Intercession, Romans 8.33, 34. Lord, says Christ, these are the
Persons I have died for, look upon them as if they had not sinned, and repute
them Righteous.

2 d Fruit. The Unction of the Spirit, 1 John 2.20. Ye have an Unction from the
holy one. This Unction or Anointing is nothing else but the Work of
Sanctification in the heart, whereby the Spirit makes us partake of the Divine
Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Such as speak of the Philosophers Stone, suppose it to have
such a Property that when it touches the Metal, it turns it into Gold; such a
Property has the Spirit of God upon the Soul, when it touches the Soul, it
puts into it a Divine Nature, it makes it to be holy, and to resemble God. This
sanctifying work of the Spirit, is the fruit of Christ's Intercession, John
7.39. The Holy Ghost was not yet given, because Jesus was not yet glorified.
Christ being glorified and in Heaven, now* he prays the Father* and the Father
sends the Spirit, who pours out the holy Anointing upon the Elect.

3 d Fruit. The Purification of our holy Things. It is Christ's work in Heaven,
not only to present his own Prayers to his Father, but he prays over our
Prayers again, Rev. 8.3. Another Angel came, having a golden Censer, and there
was given to him much Incense, that he should offer it with the Prayers of all
Saints upon the golden Altar. This Angel was Christ; he takes the golden Censer
of his Merits, and puts our Prayers into this Censer, and with the Incense of
his Intercession makes our Prayers go up as a sweet perfume in Heaven. It is
observable, Lev. 16.16. Aaron shall make Atonement for the holy Place: this was
Typical, to show that our holy Duties need to have Atonement made for them. Our
best Services, as they come from us, are mixed with Corruption, as Wine that
tastes of the Cask, Isa. 64.6. they are filthy rags: But Christ purifies and
sweetens these Services, mixing the sweet odours of his Intercession with them,
and now God accepts and Crowns them. What would become of our Duties without an
High Priest? Christ's Intercession does, to our Prayers, as the Fan to the
Chaff, it winnows it from the Corn; so Christ winnows out the Chaff which
intermixeth with our Prayers.

4 th Fruit. Access with boldness unto the Throne of Grace, Hebr. 4.16. We have
a great High Priest that is passed into the Heavens, let us go. Come boldly to
the Throne of Grace, we have a Friend at Court that speaks a good word for us,
and is following our Cause in Heaven, therefore let this animate and encourage
us in Prayer. We think it too much boldness; what? such Sinners as we to come
for pardon, we shall be denied: this is a sinful modesty. Did we indeed come in
our own Name in Prayer, it were presumption, but Christ intercedes for us in
the forc^ and efficacy of his Blood, now, to be afraid to come to God in
Prayer, is a dishonor to Christ's Intercession.

5 th Fruit. The sending the Comforter, John 14.16. I will pray the Father, and
^e will give you another Comforter. The Comfort of the Spirit is distinct from
the Anointing; this Comfort is very sweet, sweeter than the Honey drops from
the Comb; it is the Manna in the Golden Pot, it is Vinum in pectore; a drop of
this heavenly Comfort, is enough to sweeten a Sea of worldly Sorrow. It is
called arrhabo* the earnest of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 1.22. an Earnest assures one
of the whole Sum. The Spirit gives an Earnest of Heaven in our Hand, whence is
this comforting work of the Spirit? Thank Christ's Intercession for it. I will
pray the Father, and he shall send the Comforter.

6 th Fruit. Perseverance in Grace, John 17.11. Keep through thy own Name those
which thou have given me. It is not our prayer, or watchfulness, or grace that
keeps us, but it is God's care and manu-tenancy, he holds us that we do not
fall away; and, whence is it God preserves us? it is from Christ's
Intercession, Father, keep them. That Prayer of Christ for Peter, is the Copy
of his Prayer now in Heaven, Luke 22.32. I have prayed for thee, that thy faith
fail not. Peter's Faith did fail in some degree, when he denied Christ, but
Christ prayed that it might not totally fail. The Saints persevere in
believing, because Christ perseveres in praying.

7 th Fruit. Absolution at the Day of Judgment. Christ shall judge the World,
John 5.22. God has committed all Judgment to the Son. Now sure, those that
Christ has so prayed for, he will Absolve when he sits upon the Bench of
Judicature. Will Christ condemn those he prays for? Believers are his Spouse,
will he condemn his Spouse?

Use 1. Branch 1. See here the Constancy of Christ's Love to the Elect. He did
not only die for them, but intercedes for them in Heaven: when Christ has done
dying, he has not done loving; he is now at work in Heaven for the Saints; he
carries their names on his breast, and will never leave praying till that
Prayer be granted, John 17.24. Father, I will that those whom thou have given
me, be with me where I am.

Branch 2. See whence it is that the Prayers of the Saints are so powerful with
God. Jacob, as an Angel, prevailed with God; Moses's Prayer tied God's hands;
Precibus suis tanquam vinculis ligatum tenuit Deum; Let me alone, Exodus 32.10.
Whence is this? It is Christ's Prayer in Heaven makes the Saints Prayers so
available. Christ's Divine Nature is the Altar on which he offers up our
Prayers, and so they prevail. Prayer, as it comes from the Saints, is but weak
and languid; but when the Arrow of a Saint's Prayer is put into the Bow of
Christ's Intercession, now it pierces the Throne of Grace.

Branch 3. It shows where a Christian must chiefly fix his Eye when he comes to
prayer, viz. on Christ's Intercession. We are to look up to the Mercy-seat, but
to hope for Mercy through Christ's Intercession. We read Levit. 6. That Aaron
made the Atonement as well by the Incense as the Blood. We must look to the
Cloud of Incense, viz. the Intercession of Christ. Christian, Look up to thy
Advocate, one that God can deny nothing to: A word from Christ's Mouth is more
then if all the Angels in Heaven were interceding for thee. If a Man had a Suit
depending in the Court of Chancery, and had a skilful Lawyer to plead, this
would much encourage him. Christ is now at the Court appearing for us, Heb.
9.24. and he has great Potency in Heaven; this should much encourage us to
look up to him, and hope for Audience in Prayer. We might indeed be afraid to
present our Petitions, if we had not Christ to deliver them.

Branch 4. The sad Condition of an Unbeliever, he has none in Heaven to speak
a word for him, Joh. 17.9. I pray not for the world. As good be shut out of
Heaven, as be shut out of Christ's Prayer. Christ pleads for the Saints, as
Queen Esther did for the Jews, when they should have been destroyed, Let my
people be given me at my request, Esth. 7.3. When the Devil shows the Blackness
of their Sins, Christ shows the Redness of his Wounds. But how sad is the
Condition of that Man Christ will not pray for? Nay, that he will pray against?
As Queen Esther petitioned against Haman, and then his Face was covered, Esth.
7.6. and he was led away to Execution. It Is sad when the Law shall be against
the Sinner, and Conscience, and Judge, and no Friend to speak a word for him:
There Is no way then but Jailer take the Prisoner.

Branch 5. If Christ makes Intercession, then we have nothing to do with other
Intercessors. The Church of Rome distinguishes between Mediators of Redemption
and Intercession, and say, The Angels do not redeem us, but intercede for us,
and pray to them. But Christ only can intercede for us Ex Officio. God has
consecrated him an High Priest, Heb. 5.6. Thou art a priest for ever. Christ
intercedes Vi pretii, in the Virtue of his Blood, he pleads his Merits to his
Father; the Angels have no Merits to bring to God, therefore can be no
Intercessors for us: Whoever is our Advocate, must be our Propitiation to
pacify God, 1 John 2.1. We have an advocate with the Father. Verse 2. And he
is our propitiation. The Angels cannot be our Propitiation, ergo, not our
Advocates.

2. Use of Trial: How shall we know that Christ intercedes for us? They have
little ground to think Christ prays for them, who never pray for themselves.
Well, but how shall we know?

Resp. 1. If Christ be praying for us, then his Spirit is praying in us, Gal.
4.6. He has sent forth his spirit into your heart, crying, Abba Father. And,
Romans 8.26. the Spirit helps us with Sighs and Groans; not only with Gifts but
Groans. We need not climb up into the Firmament to see if the Sun be there, we
may see the Beauty of it upon the Earth: so we need not go up into Heaven to
see if Christ be there interceding for us; let us look into our Hearts, if they
are quickened and inflamed in Prayer, and we can cry, Abba Father, by this
interceding of the Spirit within us, we may know Christ is interceding above
for us.

Resp. 2. If we are given to Christ, then he intercedes for us, Joh. 17.9. I
pray for them whom thou have given me. It Is one thing for Christ to be given to
us, another for us to be given to Christ.

Quest. How know you that?

Resp. 3. If thou art a Believer, then thou art one given to Christ, and he
prays for thee. Faith is an Act of Recumbency, we do (...), rest on Christ, as
the Stones in the Building rest upon the Cornerstone. Faith throws itself into
Christ's Arms; it says, Christ is my Priest, his Blood is my Sacrifice, his
Divine Nature is my Altar, and here I rest. This Faith is seen by the Effects
of it, a refining Work and a resigning Work; it purifies the Heart, there is
the refining Work; it makes a Deed of Gift to Christ, it gives up its Use, its
Love to him, 1 Cor. 6.19. There is the resigning Work of Faith. These that
believe are given to Christ, and have a part in his Prayer, Joh. 17.20. Nor do
I pray for these alone, but for all them that shall believe on me.

3. Use of Exhortation. Branch 1. It stirs us up to several Duties, 1. If
Christ appears for us in Heaven, then we must appear for him upon Earth: Christ
is not ashamed to carry our Names on his Breast, and shall we be ashamed of his
Truth? Does he plead our Cause, and shall not we stand up in his Cause? What a
mighty Argument is this to stand up for the Honor of Christ in Times of
Apostasy; Christ is interceding for us. Does he present our Names in Heaven,
and shall not we profess his Name on Earth?

Branch 2. If Christ lays out all his Interest for us at the Throne of Grace,
we must lay out all our Interest for him: Phil. 1.20. That Christ may be
magnified. Trade your Talents for Christ's Glory, there is no Man but has some
Talent to trade, one parts another Estate; Oh trade for Christ's Glory! spend
and be spent for him. Let your Head study for Christ, your Hands work for
Christ, your Tongue speak for him: If Christ be an Advocate for us in Heaven,
we must be Factors for him on Earth; every one in his Sphere must act
vigorously for Christ.

Branch 3. Believe in this glorious Intercession of Christ! that he now
intercedes for us, and that for his sake God will accept us. In the Text, Who
makes Intercession for us. If we believe not, we dishonor Christ's
Intercession. If a poor Sinner may not go to Christ as his High Priest,
believing in his Intercession, then are we Christians in a worse Condition
under the Gospel, then the Jews were under the Law: they when they had sinned
had their High Priest to make Atonement, and shall not we have our High Priest?
Is not Christ our Aaron, who presents his Blood and Incense before the
Mercy-seat? O look up by Faith to Christ's Intercession! Christ did not only
pray for his Disciples and Apostles, but for the weakest Believer.

Branch 4. Love your Intercessor, 1 Cor. 16.22. If any man love not the Lord
Jesus Christ, let him be Anathama. Kindness invites Love; had you a Friend at
Court, who when you were questioned for Delinquency or Debt, should plead with
the Judge for you, and bring you off your Troubles, would not you love that
Friend? So it is here; how often does Satan put in his Bills against us in the
Court, now Christ is at the Judge's hand, he sits at his Father's right hand
ever to plead for us, and to make our Peace with God: O how should our Hearts
be fired with Love to Christ! Love him with a sincere and superlative Love,
above Estate, Relations; Bern. Plusquam tua, tuos; and our Fire of Love should
be as the Fire on the Altar, never to go out, Lev. 6.13.

4. Use of Comfort to Believers: Christ is at work for you in Heaven, he makes
Intercession for you. Oh but I am afraid Christ does not intercede for me?

Quest. I am a Sinner; who does Christ intercede for?

Resp. Isa. 53.12. He made intercession for the transgressors. Did Christ open
his sides for thee, and will he not open his mouth to plead for thee?

Quest. But I have offended my High Priest by distrusting his Blood, abusing
his Love, grieving his Spirit, and will he ever pray for me?

Resp. Which of us may not say so? But, Christian, do thou mourn for
Unbelief? be not discouraged, thou may have a part in Christ's Prayer: Numb.
16. The congregation murmured against Aaron; yet though they had sinned against
their High Priest, Verse 46. Aaron run in with his censer, and stood between
the dead and the living. If so much Bowels in Aaron who was but a Type of
Christ, how much more Bowels is in Christ, who will pray for them who have
sinned against their High Priest? Did not he pray for them that crucified him,
Father forgive them?

Quest. But I am unworthy, what am I that Christ should intercede for me?

Resp. The Work of Christ's Intercession is a Work of Free Grace; Christ's
praying for us is from his pitying of us. Christ looks not at our Worthiness,
but our Wants.

Quest. But I am followed with sad Temptations?

Resp. But though Satan tempts, Christ prays, and Satan shall be vanquished:
though thou may loose a single Battle, yet not the Victory. Christ prays that
thy Faith fail not; therefore Christian say, Why art thou cast down, O my Soul?
Christ intercedes, it is Man that sins, it is God that prays: The Greek word for
Advocate, (...), Comforter. This is a Sovereign Comfort, Christ makes
Intercession.

CHRIST's Kingly Office.
Quest. XVI. HOw does Christ execute the Office of a King?

Resp. In subduing us to himself, and in restraining and conquering his and our
Enemies.

Now of CHRIST's Regal Office, Revel. 19.16. And he has on his vesture, and on
his thigh a name written, King of kings, and Lord of lords.

Jesus Christ is of mighty Renown, he is a King; he has a Kingly Title, High
and mighty, Isa. 57.15. 2. He has his Insignia Regalia, his Ensigns of
Royalty, Corona est insigne Regiae potestatis; His Crown, Rev. 6.2. His Sword,
Psalm. 45.3. Gird thy sword upon thy thigh. His Scepter, Heb. 1.8. A scepter of
righteousness is the scepter of thy kingdom. 3. His Escotcheon, or Coat Armor,
he gives the Lion in his Arms, Rev. 5.5. The lion of the tribe of Judah. And he
is, the Text says, (...), King of Kings. He has a Pre-eminence of all other
Kings, he is called the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 1.5. (...) -- He
must needs be so, for by him Kings reign, Prove. 8.15. They hold their Crowns by
immediate Tenure from this Great King. Christ infinitely out-vyes all others
Princes, he has the highest Throne, the largest Dominions, and the longest
Possession, Heb. 1.8. Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever. Christ has many
Heirs, but no Successors. Well may he be called King of Kings, for he has an
Unlimited Power; other Kings their Power is limited, but Christ's Power is
unlimited, Psalm. 135.6. Whatsoever he pleased, that did he in heaven and earth,
and in the seas. Christ's Power is as large as his Will. The Angels take the
Oath of Allegiance to him, Heb. 1.6. Let all the angels of God worship him.

Quest. How Christ comes to be King?

Resp. Not by Usurpation, but Legally: Christ holds his Crown by immediate
Tenure from Heaven. God the Father has decreed him to be King, Psalm. 2.5, 6. I
have set my king upon my holy hill; I will declare the decree. God has
anointed and sealed him to his Regal Office, Joh. 6.27. Him has God the Father
sealed. God has set the Crown upon his Head.

Quest. In what sense is Christ King?

Resp. Two ways, 1. In reference to his People. And, 2. In reference to his
Enemies.

1. In reference to his People: 1. To govern them, it was prophesied of Christ
before he was born, Matthew. 2.6. And thou Bethlehem art not the least among the
princes of Judah, for out of thee shall come a governor that shall rule my
people Israel. It Is a vain thing for a King to have a Crown on his Head, unless
he have a Scepter in his Hand to rule.

Quest. Where does Christ Rule?

Resp. His Kingdom is Spiritual: he rules in the Hearts of Men. He sets up his
Throne where no other King does, he rules the Will and Affections, His Power
binds the Conscience: he subdues Men's Lusts, Mic. 7.19. He will subdue our
iniquities.

Quest. What does Christ rule by?

Resp. By Law, and by Love: 1. He rules by Law. It Is one of the Iura Regalia,
the Flowers of the Crown, to Enact Laws, Christ as King makes Laws, and by his
Laws he Rules: The Law of Faith, Believe in the Lord Jesus; the Law of
Sanctity, 1 Pet. 1.15. Be ye holy in all manner of conversation. Many would
admit Christ to be their Advocate to plead for them, but not their King to rule
them.

2. He rules by Love: He is a King full of Mercy and Clemency; as he has a
Scepter in his Hand, so an Olive Branch of Peace in his Mouth. Though he be the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah for Majesty, yet the Lamb of God for Meekness. His
Regal Rod has Honey at the end of it. He sheds abroad his Love into the Hearts
of his Subjects; he rules them with Promises as well as Precepts. This makes
all his Subjects become Volunteers; they are willing to pay their Allegiance to
him, Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall be a willing people; Plur. Gnam nedabot.

2. Christ is a King to defend his People, as Christ has a Scepter to rule
them, so a Shield to defend them, Psalm. 3.3. Thou O Lord art a shield for me.
When Antiochus did rage furiously against the Jews, he took away the Vessels of
the Lord's House, set up an Idol in the Temple; then this Great King, called
Michael, did stand up for them to defend them, Dan. 12.1. Christ preserves his
Church as a Spark in the Ocean, as a Flock of Sheep among Wolves. That the Sea
should be higher then the Earth, and yet not drown it, is a Wonder: so that the
Wicked should be so much higher than the Church in Power, and not devour it, is
because Christ has this Inscription on his Vesture and his Thigh, King of
Kings: Ps. 124.2. If it had not been the Lord who was on our side; they had
swallowed us up. They say Lions are Insomnes, they have little or no sleep;
it is true of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, he never slumbers nor sleeps, but
watches over his Church to defend it: Isa. 27.2, 3. Sing ye unto her a
vineyard of red wine; I the Lord do keep it least any hurt it, I will keep it
night and day. If the Enemies destroy the Church, it must be at a time when it
is neither Night nor Day, for Christ keeps it Day and Night. Christ is said to
carry his Church as the Eagle her young Ones upon her Wings, Exodus 19.4. The
Arrow must first hit the Eagle before it can hurt the young Ones, and shoot
through her Wings: the Enemies must first strike through Christ, before they
can destroy his Church. Let the Wind and Storms be up, and the Church almost
covered with Waves, yet Christ, is in the Ship of the Church, and so long
there is no danger of Shipwreck. Nor will Christ only defend his Church as he is
King, but deliver it, 2 Timothy 4.17. He delivered me out of the mouth of the
lion; viz. Nero. 2. Chr. 11.14. The Lord saved them by a great deliverance.
Sometimes Christ is said to command Deliverance, Psalm. 44.4. Sometimes to
create Deliverance, Isa. 65.18. Christ as a King commands Deliverance, and as a
God creates it. And deliverance shall come in his time: Isa. 60.22. I the LORD
will hasten it in his time.

Quest. When is the time that this King will deliver his People?

Resp. When the Hearts of his People are humblest, when their Prayers are
ferventest, when their Faith is strongest, when their Forces are weakest, when
their Enemies are highest; now is the usual time that Christ puts forth his
Kingly Power in their Deliverance, Isa. 33.2, 8, 9.

3. Christ is a King to Reward his People, there is nothing lost by serving this
King, 1. He Rewards his Subjects in this Life: 1. He gives them Inward Peace
and Joy; a Bunch of Grapes by the way; and oftentimes Riches and Honor.
Godliness has the promise of this life, 1 Timothy 4.8. These are as it were the
Saints Vails; but besides, the great Reward is to come, An eternal weight of
Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. Christ makes all his Subjects Kings, Rev. 2.10. I Will give
thee a crown of life. This Crown will be full of Jewels, and it will never
fade, 1 Pet. 5.5.

2. Christ is a King in reference to his Enemies, in subduing and conquering
them: He pulls down their Pride, befools their Policy, restrains their Malice.
That Stone cut out of the Mountains without Hands, which smote the Image, Dan.
2.34. was was an Emblem, says Austin, of Christ's Monarchical Power,
conquering and triumphing over his Enemies. Christ will make his Enemies his
Footstool, Psalm. 110.1 He can destroy them with ease, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. It is
nothing for thee Lord to help. He can do it with weak means, without means. He
can make the Enemies destroy themselves; he set the Persians against the
Grecians: and 2 Chronicles. 20.23. the Children of Ammon helped to destroy one
another. Thus Christ is King in vanquishing the Enemies of his Church.

This is a great ground of Comfort to the Church of God in the midst of all the
Combinations of the Enemy, Christ is King, and he can not only bound the
Enemies power, but break it. The Church has more with her then against her,
she has Emanuel on her side, even that Great King to whom all Knees must bend.

Christ is called a Man of War, Exodus 15.3. he understands all the Policies of
Chivalry; he is described with seven Eyes, and seven Horns, Rev. 5.6. The seven
Eyes are to discern the Conspiracies of his Enemies, and the seven Horns are to
push and vex his Enemies.

Christ is described with a Crown and a Bow, Rev. 6.2. He that sat on the white
Horse had a Bow, and a Crown was given unto him, and he went forth conquering
and to conquer. A Crown is an Ensign of his Kingly Office, and the Bow is to
shoot his Enemies to Death.

Christ is described with a Vesture dipped in Blood, Rev. 19.13. He has a
golden Scepter to Rule his People, but an Iron Rod to break his Enemies. Rev.
17.12, 14. The ten Horns thou saw are ten Kings, these shall make War with
the Lamb, but the Lamb shall overcome them; for he is King of Kings. The
Enemies may set up their Standard, but Christ will set up his Trophies at last.
Rev. 14.18, 19. And the Angel gathered the Vine of the Earth, and cast it into
the great Wine Press of the Wrath of God, and the Wine Press was trodden, and
blood came out of the Wine Press. The Enemies of Christ shall be but as so many
Clusters of ripe Grapes to be cast into the great Wine Press of the Wrath of
God, and to be trodden by Christ till their Blood comes out. Christ will at
last come off Victor, and all his Enemies shall be put under his Feet: Gaudeo
quod Christus dominus est, alioqui desperassem, said Miconius in an Epistle to
Calvin. I am glad Christ Reigns, else I should have despaired. --

Use 1. Branch 1. See hence it is no Disparagement to serve Christ, he is a
King, and its no Dishonor to be employed in a King's Service. Some are apt to
reproach the Saints for their Piety, they serve the Lord Christ, he who has
this Inscription upon his Vesture, KING of KINGS. Theodosius thought it a
greater Honor to be a Servant of CHRIST, then the Head of an Empire. Servire
est Regnare -- Christ's Servants are called Vessels of Honor, 2 Timothy 2.21. And
a Royal Nation, 1 Pet. 2.9. Serving of Christ Ennobles us with Dignity: It Is a
greater Honor to serve Christ, then to have Kings serve us.

Branch 2. If Christ be King, it informs us, that all Matters of Fact must one
day be brought before him. Christ has Ius vitae and necis, the Power of Life
and Death in his hand, Joh. 5.22. The Father has committed all judgment to the
Son. He who once hung upon the Cross, shall sit upon the Bench of Judicature:
Kings must come before him to be judged; they who once sat upon the Throne,
must appear at the Bar. God has committed all Judgment to the Son, and
Christ's is the highest Court of Judicature: if this King once condemns Men,
there is no Appeal to any other Court.

Branch 3. See whither we are to go when we are foiled by Corruption, go to
Christ, he is King, desire him by his Kingly Power, to subdue thy Corruptions,
to bind these Kings with Chains, Psalm. 149.8. We are apt to say of our Sins,
These sons of Zerviah will be too strong for us; we shall never overcome this
Pride and Infidelity: Aye, but go to Christ, he is King, though our Lusts are
too strong for us, yet not for Christ to conquer: he can by his Spirit break
the Power of Sin. Joshua when he had conquered five Kings, caused his Servants
to set their Feet on the Necks of those Kings; so Christ can and will set his
Feet on the Necks of our Lusts.

2. Use of Caution: Is Christ King of Kings? Let all Great Ones take heed how
they employ their Power against Christ: Christ gives them their Power, and if
this Power shall be made use of for the suppressing of his Kingdom and
Ordinances, their account will be heavy. God has laid the Key of Government
upon Christ's shoulders, Isa. 9.7. and to go to oppose Christ in his Kingly
Office, it is as if the Thorns should set themselves in Battalia against the
Fire, or a Child fight with an Archangel. Christ's Sword on his Thigh is able
to avenge all his Quarrels: It is not good to stir a Lion; Let not Men provoke
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, whose Eyes are as a Lamp of fire, and the Rocks
are thrown down by him, Nahum 1.6. He shall cut off the spirit of Princes,
Psalm. 76.12.

Use 3. If Christ be a great King, submit to him. Say not as those Jews, We
have no King but Caesar, no King but our Lusts. This is to choose the Bramble
to rule over you, and out of the Bramble will come forth a fire, Judge. 9.
Submit to Christ willingly; all the Devils in Hell submit to Christ, but it is
against their will, they are his Slaves, Not his Subjects. Submit cheerfully to
Christ's Person and his Laws. Many would have Christ their Savior, but not
their Prince; such as will not have Christ to be their King to rule them, shall
never have his Blood to save them. Obey all Christ's Princely Commands; if he
commands Love, Humility, Good Works, be as the Needle which points which way
soever the Lodestone draws.

Branch 2. Let such admire God's Free Grace, who were once under the Power and
Tyranny of Satan, and now Christ has made them of Slaves, to become the
Subjects of his Kingdom. Christ did not need Subjects, he has Legions of
Angels ministering to him; but in his Love, he has honored you, to make you
his Subjects. O! how long was it e're Christ could prevail with you to come
under his Banner? How much opposition did he meet with, e're you would wear
this Prince's Colors? but at last Omnipotent Grace overcame you. When Peter
was sleeping between two Soldiers, an Angel came and beat off his Chains, Acts
12.7. So when thou were sleeping in the Devil's Arms, that Christ should by his
Spirit smite thy heart, and cause the Chains of Sin to fall off, and make thee
a Subject of his Kingdom: O admire Free Grace! Thou who art a Subject of
Christ, art sure to Reign with Christ for ever.

Christ's Humiliation in his Incarnation.
1 TIMOTHY 3.16. Great is the Mystery of Godliness, God manifest in the flesh.


Quest. XVII. WHerein did Christ's Humiliation consist?

Resp. In his being born, and that in a low condition, undergoing the Miseries
of this Life, the Wrath of God, and the cursed Death of the Cross.

Christ's Humiliation consisted in his Incarnation, his taking Flesh and being
Born. It was real Flesh Christ took. Not the Image of a Body, (as the Manichees
erroniously held) but a true Body; therefore Christ is said to be made of a
woman, Gal. 4.4. As the Bread is made of the Wheat, and the Wine is made of the
Grape; so Christ was made of a Woman; his Body was part of the Flesh and
Substance of the Virgin. This is a glorious Mystery, God manifest in the flesh.
In the Creation Man was made in God's Image; in the Incarnation God was made in
Man's Image.

Quest. How it came about that Christ was made flesh?

Resp. It was by his Fathers special designation, Gal. 4.4. God sent forth his
Son made of a Woman. God the Father did in a special manner appoint Christ to
be Incarnate; which shows us how needful a Call is to any business of weight
and importance: to act without a Call, is to act without a Blessing. Christ
himself would not be Incarnate, and take upon him the work of a Mediator, till
he had a Call. God sent forth his Son made of a Woman.

Quest. But was there no other way for the restoring of fallen Man but this,
that God should take flesh?

Answ. We must not ask a Reason of God's Will, it is dangerous to pry into
God's Ark; we are not to dispute, but adore. The wise God saw this the best way
for our Redemption, that Christ should be Incarnate; it was not fit for any to
satisfy God's Justice, but Man, none could do it but God; therefore Christ
being both God and Man, he is the fittest to undertake this Work of Redemption.

Quest. Why Christ was born of a Woman?

Resp. 1. That God might fulfill that promise, Genesis 3.15. The Seed of the Woman
shall break the Serpents head.

2. Christ was born of a Woman, that he might roll away that reproach from the
Woman which she had contracted, by being seduced by the Serpent. Christ in
taking his flesh from the Woman, has honored her Sex, that as at the first
the Woman had made Man a Sinner, so now to make him amends, she should bring
him a Savior.

Quest. Why Christ was born of a Virgin?

Resp. 1. For Decency. It became not God to have any Mother but a Maid, and it
became not a Maid to have any Son but a God.

2. For Necessity. Christ was to be an High Priest, most pure and holy. Had he
been born after the ordinary course of Nature, he had been defiled; (all that
spring out of Adam's Loins have a tincture of sin) but that Christ's Substance
might remain pure and immaculate, he was born of a Virgin.

3. To answer the Type. Melchisedeck was a Type of Christ, he is said to be
without Father, and without Mother. Christ being born of a Virgin, answered the
Type, he was without Father, and without Mother: without Mother as he was God,
without Father as he was Man.

Quest. How could Christ be made of the flesh and blood of a Virgin, yet
without sin? The purest Virgin that is, her Soul is stained with Original sin?

Answ. This Knot the Scripture unties. Luke 1.35. The Holy Ghost shall come
upon thee, and overshadow thee, therefore that holy Thing which shall be born
of thee shall be caled the Son of God. The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee,
that is, the Holy Ghost did consecrate and purify that part of the Virgins
flesh whereof Christ was made. As the Alchymist extracts and draws away the
dross from the Gold, so the Holy Ghost did refine and claritie that part of the
Virgins flesh, separating it from sin. Though the Virgin Mary her self had sin,
yet that part of the flesh whereof Christ was made, was without sin; otherwise
it must have been an impure Conception.

Quest. What is meant by the power of the Holy Ghost overshadowing the Virgin?

Answ. St. Basil says, It was the Holy Ghost's blessing the flesh of that
Virgin whereof Christ was formed. But there is a further Mystery in it, the
Holy Ghost having framed Christ in the Virgins Womb, did in a wonderful manner
unite Christ's Humane Nature to his Divine, and so of both made one person.
This is a Mystery which the Angels pry into with Adoration.

Quest. When was Christ incarnate?

Answ. In the fullness of time. Gal. 4.4. When the fullness of time was come, God
sent forth his Son made of a Woman. By the fullness of time we must understand
Tempus a Patre praefinitum, so Ambrose, Luther, Corn^a Lap. the determinate
Time that God had set. More particularly, this fullness of time was, when all
the Prophesies of the coming of the Messiah were accomplished; and all Legal
Shadows and Figures, whereby he was tipified, were abrogated, in the fullness of
time God sent his Son. And by the way observe, this may comfort us in regard of
the Church of God, though at present we do not see that Peace and Purity in the
Church as we could desire, yet in the fullness of time, when God's time is come,
and Mercy is ripe, then shall Deliverance spring up, and God will come riding
upon the Chariots of Salvation: When the fullness of time was come, then God
sent forth his Son made of a Woman.

Quest. Why was Jesus Christ made flesh?

Resp. 1. The Causa prime and impulsive Cause, was Free Grace; Causa (...), it
was Love in God the Father to send Christ, and Love in Christ that he came to
be Incarnate. Love was the intrinsical Motive. Christ is (...), because he is
(...), God-man, because he is a lover of Man. Christ came out of Pity and
Indulgence to us: Non merita nostra, sed miseria nostra, Aug. not our Deserts,
but our Misery made Christ take flesh. Christ's taking flesh was a Plot of
Free Grace, a pure Design of Love. God himself, though Almighty, was overcome
with Love. Christ Incarnate, is nothing but Love covered with Flesh. Christ's
assuming our Humane Nature, as it was a Masterpiece of Wisdom, so a Monument
of Free Grace.

2. Christ took our flesh upon him, that he might take our sins upon him. He
was, says Luther, maximus peccator, the greatest Sinner, having the weight of
the sins of the whole World lying upon him. He took our flesh, that he might
take our sins, and so appease God's wrath.

3. Christ took our flesh, that he might make the Humane Nature appear lovely
to God, and the Divine Nature appear lovely to Man.

(1.) That he might make the Humane Nature lovely to God. Upon our Fall from
God, our Nature became odious to him; no Vermin is so odious to us, as the
Humane Nature was to God. When once our Virgin-Nature was become sinful, it was
like flesh imposthumated, or running into Sores loathsome to behold. Such was
our Nature when corrupt, odious to God, he could not endure to look upon us.
Now, Christ taking our flesh, makes the Humane Nature appear lovely to God. As
when the Sun shines on the Glass, it casts a bright luster, so Christ being
clad with our flesh, makes the Humane Nature shine, and appear amiable in God's
Eyes.

(2.) As Christ being clothed with ou^ flesh makes the Humane Nature appear
lovely to God, so he makes the Divine Nature appear lovely to Man. The pure
Godhead is terrible to behold, we could not see it and live. But Christ's
clothing himself with our flesh, makes the Divine Nature more amiable and
delightful to us. Now we need not be afraid to look upon God, seeing him
through Christ's Humane Nature. It was a custom of old among the Shepherds,
they were wont to clothe themselves with Sheepskins, to be more pleasing to
the Sheep; so Christ clothed himself with our flesh, that the Divine Nature
may be more pleasing to us. The Humane Nature is a Glass, through which we may
see the Love, and Wisdom, and Glory of God clearly represented to us. Through
the Lanthorn of Christ's Humanity, we may behold the Light of the Deity
shining. Christ being Incarnate, he makes the sight of the Deity not
formidable, but delightful to us.

4. Jesus Christ united himself to Man, that Man might be drawn nearer to God.
God was before an Enemy to us by reason of sin, but Christ taking our flesh,
does mediate for us, and bring us into Favor with God. As when a King is angry
with a Subject, the King's Son marries the Daughter of this Subject, and so
mediates for this Subject, and brings him into favor with the King again; so
when God the Father was angry with us, Christ marries himself to our Nature,
and now mediates for us with his Father, and brings us to be Friends again, and
now God looks upon us with a favorable aspect. As Ioab pleaded for Absalom,
and brought him to King David, and David kissed him, so does Jesus Christ
ingratiate us into the favor and love of God. Therefore he may well be called
a Peacemaker, having taken our flesh upon him, and so made Peace between us
and his angry Father.

Use 1. Branch 1. See here, as in a Glass, the infinite love of God the Father,
that when we had lost our selves by sin, then God in the riches of his Grace
did send forth his Son made of a Woman to redeem us. And behold the infinite
love of Christ, that he was willing thus to condescend to take our flesh.
Surely, the Angels would have disdained to have taken our flesh, it would have
been a disparagement to them. What King would be willing to wear Sackcloth over
his Cloth of Gold? but Christ did not disdain to take our flesh. O the love of
Christ! Had not Christ been made flesh, we had been made a Curse; had not he
been incarnate, we had been incarcerate, and had been for ever in Prison. Well
might an Angel be the Herald to proclaim this joyful News of Christ's
Incarnation, Luke 2.10. Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, for unto
you is born this day a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. The Love of Christ in
being Incarnate, will the more appear, if we consider,

1. Whence Christ came. He came from Heaven, and from the richest place in
Heaven, his Father's Bosom, that Hive of Sweetness.

2. To whom Christ came. Was it to his Friends? no; he came to sinful Man. Man
that had defaced his Image, abused his Love; Man, who was turned Rebel. Yet he
came to Man, resolving to conquer Obstinacy with Kindness. If he would come to
any, why not to the Angels that fell? Hebr. 2.16. He in no wise took upon him
the Nature of Angels. The Angels are of a more noble Extract, more intelligible
Creatures, more able for Service; I, but behold the Love of Christ, he came not
to the fallen Angels, but to Mankind. Among the several Wonders of the
Loadstone, this is not the least, That it will not draw Gold or Pearl, but
despising these, it draws the Iron to it, one of the most inferior Metals.
Thus Christ leaves the Angels, those Noble Spirits, the Gold and the Pearl, and
he comes to poor sinful Man, and draws him into his Embraces.

3. In what manner he came. He came not in the Majesty of a King, attended with
his Lifeguard* but he came poor. Not like the Heir of Heaven, but like one of
an inferior Descent. The Place he was born in was poor, not the Royal City
Jerusalem, but Bethlehem, a poor obscure place. He was born in an Inn, and a
Manger was his Cradle, the Cobwebs his Curtains, the Beasts his Companions; he
descended of poor Parents. One would have thought, if Christ would have come
into the World, he would have made choice of some Queen or Personage of Honor
to have descended from; but he comes of mean obscure Parents. That they were
poor appears, by their Offering, Luke 2.24. A pair of Turtle Doves, which was
the usual Offering of the Poor, Lev. 12.8. Christ was so poor, that when he
wanted Money, he was fain to work a Miracle for it, Matthew. 17.27. He when he
died, made no Will. He came into the World poor.

4. Why he came? That he might take our flesh, and redeem us; that he might
instate us into a Kingdom. He was poor, that he might make us rich. 2 Cor. 8.9.
He was born of a Virgin, that he might be born of God; he took our Flesh, that
he might give us his Spirit. He lay in the Manger, that we might lie in
Paradise. He came down from Heaven, that he might bring us to Heaven. And what
was all this but Love? If our Hearts be not Rocks, this Love of Christ should
affect us. Behold Love that passes Knowledge, Ephesians. 3.19.

Branch 2. See here the wonderful Humility of Christ: Christ was made flesh. O
Sancta Humilitas, Tu filium Dei descendere fecisti in uterum Mariae Virginis,
A^st. That Christ should clothe himself with our flesh, a piece of that Earth
which we tread upon, O infinite Humility! Christ's taking our flesh was one of
the lowest Steps of his Humiliation. Christ did humble himself more in lying in
the Virgins Womb, then in hanging upon the Cross. It was not so much for Man to
die, but for God to become Man, that was the wonder of Humility, Phil. 2.7. He
was made in the likeness of Men. For Christ to be made flesh, was more
Humility, then for the Angels to be made Worms. Christ's flesh is called a
Vail, Hebr. 10.20. Through the Vail that is his Flesh. Christ's wearing our
Flesh, veiled his Glory. For him to be made flesh, who was equal with God, O
Humility! Phil. 2.6. Who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be
equal with God. He stood upon even Ground with God, he was (...), Patri
co-essential and con-substantial with his Father, as Austin and Cyril, and the
Council of Nice expresses it; yet for all this he takes flesh. Christ stripped
himself of the Robes of his Glory, and covered himself with the Rags of our
Humanity. If Solomon did so wonder that God should dwell in the Temple, which
was enriched and hung with Gold, how may we wonder that God should dwell in
Man's weak and frail Nature. Nay, which is yet more Humility, Christ not only
took our flesh, but took it when it was at the worst, under Disgrace; as if a
Servant should wear a Noble-man's Livery, when he is impeached of High Treason.
Nay, besides, Christ took all the Infirmities of our flesh. There are two sorts
of Infirmities: Such as are sinful without pain, or such as are painful without
sin. The first of these Infirmities Christ did not take upon him, sinful
Infirmities, to be covetous or ambitious, Christ never took these upon him: but
Christ took upon him painful Infirmities; as, 1. Hunger, Matthew. 21.18. He came
to the Fig Tree, and would have eaten. 2. Weariness: as when he sat on Jacob's
Well to rest him, John 4.6. 3. Sorrow; Matthew. 26.38. (...), My soul is
sorrowful, even unto death. It was a Sorrow guided with Reason, not disturbed
with Passion. 4. Fear; Hebr. 5.7. He was heard in that he feared. Nay, yet a
further Degree of Christ's Humility, he not only was made flesh, but in the
likeness of sinful flesh. He knew no sin, yet he was made sin, 2 Cor. 5.21. He
was like a sinner, he had all sin laid upon him, but no sin lived in him. Isa.
53.12. He was numbered among Transgressors. He who was numbered among the Persons
of the Trinity, he is said to bear the sins of many, Hebr. 9.28. Now, this was
the lowest degree of Christ's Humiliation: For Christ to be reputed as a
sinner, never such a Pattern of Humility. That Christ, who would not endure sin
in the Angels, should himself endure to have sin imputed to him, it is the most
amazing Humility that ever was.

From all this learn to be humble. Do thou see Christ humbling himself, and
art thou proud? It Is the humble Saint is Christ's Picture. Christian, be not
proud of your fine Feathers: 1. Have thou an Estate, be not proud, the Earth
thou treadest on is richer then thou; it has Mines of Gold and Silver in the
Bowels of it. 2. Have thou Beauty, be not proud, it is but Air and Dust
mingled. 3. Have thou Skill and Parts, be humble, Lucifer has more knowledge
than thou. 4. Have thou Grace, be humble; thou have it not of thy own growth,
it is borrowed. Were it not a folly to be proud of a Ring that is lent. 1 Cor.
4.7. Thou have more Sin then Grace, Spots, then Beauty. O look on Christ, this
rare Pattern, and be humble! It is an unseemly sight to see God humbling
himself, and Man exalting himself; to see an humble Savior, and a proud
Sinner. God hates the very resemblance of Pride, Lev. 2.11. He would have no
Honey in the Sacrifice. Indeed Leaven is sour, but why no Honey? because when
Honey is mingled with Meal, or Flour, it makes the Meal to rise and swell,
ergo, no Honey. God hates the resemblance of the Sin of Pride: better want
Parts, Comforts of Spirit, then Humility. Si Deus superbientibus Angelis non
pepercit: If God, says Austin, spared not the Angels, when they grew proud,
will he spare thee, who art but Dust and Rottenness?

Branch 3. Behold here a Sacred Riddle or Paradox; God manifest in the flesh.
The Text calls it a Mystery. That Man should be made in God's Image, was a
wonder; but that God should be made in Man's Image, is a greater wonder. That
the Ancient of Days should be born, that he who Thunders in the Heaven should
cry in the Cradle: Qui tonitruat in Coelis, clamat in cunabulis; qui regit
sidera sugit ubera; that he who rules the Stars should suck the Breasts; that a
Virgin should conceive; that Christ should be made of a Woman, and of that
Woman which himself made; that the Branch should bear the Vine; that the Mother
should be younger than the Child she bare, and the Child in the Womb bigger
than the Mother; that the Humane Nature should not be God, yet one with God.
This was not only mirum, but miraculum: Christ taking flesh is a Mystery we
shall never fully understand till we come to Heaven, when our Light shall be
clear, as well as our Love perfect.

Branch 4. From hence, God manifest in the flesh, Christ born of a Virgin, a
thing not only strange in nature, but impossible, learn, That there are no
impossibilities with God: God can bring about Things which are not within the
sphere of Nature to produce: That Iron should swim, that the Rock should gush
out with water, that the Fire should lick up the water in the Trenches, 1 Kings
18.38. It Is natural for the water to quench the fire, but for the fire to
consume the water, this is impossible in the course of Nature: But God can
bring about all this, Ier. 32.27. There is nothing too hard for thee. Zach.
8.6. If it be mavelous in your Eyes, should it be mavelous in my eyes,
says the Lord? How should God be united to our flesh? It is impossible to us,
but not with God. He can do that which transcends Reason, and exceeds Faith. He
should not be God, if he could not do more than we can think, Ephesians. 3.20. He can
reconcile Contraries. How apt are we to be discouraged with seeming
impossibilities: how do our hearts die within us when things go cross to our
Sense and Reason. We are apt to say as that Prince, 2 Kings 7.1, 2. If the Lord
would make windows in Heaven, might this thing be? It was a time of Famine, and
now that a measure of Wheat, which was a good part of a Bushel, should be sold
for a Shekel, viz. half an Ounce of Silver; how can this be? So when things are
cross, or strange, God's own People are apt to question, how they should be
brought about with success. Moses, who was a Man of God, and one of the
brightest Stars that ever shined in the firmament of God's Church, yet he was
apt to be discouraged with seeming Impossibilities, Numb. 11.21. And Moses
said, the People among whom I am are six hundred thousand footmen; and thou
have said I will give them flesh, that they may eat for a whole month, shall
the flocks and herds be slain for them to suffice them? or shall all the fish
of the Sea be gathered for them to suffice them? As if he had said in plain
English, he did not see how the People of Israel, being so numerous, could be
fed for a month. Verse. 23. And the Lord said, is the Lord's hand waxed short?
Surely that God who brought Isaac out of a dead Womb, and the Messiah out of a
Virgins Womb, what cannot he do? O let us rest upon the Arm of God's Power, and
believe in him in the midst of seeming Impossibilities. Remember, there are no
impossibilities with God. He can subdue a proud heart, he can raise a dying
Church. Christ born of a Virgin, that wonder-working God that wrought this, can
bring to pass the greatest seeming Impossibilities.

Use 2. of Exhortation. Branch 1. Seeing Christ took our Flesh, and was born of
a Virgin, let us labor that he may be spiritually born in our hearts. What
will it profit us, that Christ was born into the World, unless he be born in
our hearts? that he was united to our Nature, unless he be united to our
Persons? Marvel not that I say unto you, Christ must be born again, viz. in our
hearts, Gal. 4.19. till Christ be formed in you. Now then try if Christ be born
in your hearts.

Quest. How shall we know that?

Resp. 1. There are Pangs before the Birth; so before Christ be born in the
Heart, there are Spiritual Pangs. Some Pangs of Conscience, Deep convictions,
Acts 2.37. (...), they were pricked at their heart. I grant, the New Birth does
Recipere magis and minus -- all have not the same Pangs of Sorrow and
Humiliation, yet all have Pangs. If Christ be born in thy heart, thou have been
deeply afflicted for sin. Christ is never born in the heart without Pangs --
Many thank God they never had any Trouble of Spirit, they were always quiet; a
sign Christ is not yet formed in them.

2. As when Christ was born into the World he was made flesh, so if he be born
into thy heart, he makes thy heart an heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 36.26. Is thy heart
Incarnate? Before it was a rocky heart, and would not yield to God, or take the
Impressions of the Word; Durum est quod non cedit tactui, now it is fle^hy and
tender, like melting Wax, to take any stamp of the Spirit. This is a sign
Christ is born in our hearts, when they are hearts of flesh, they melt in Tears
and in Love. What is it the better Christ was made flesh, unless he has given
thee an heart of flesh.

3. Christ was conceived in the Womb of a Virgin, so if he be born in thee, thy
heart is a Virgin-heart, in respect of Sincerity and Sanctity. Art thou
purified from the love of sin? If Christ be born in the heart, it is a Sanctum
Sanctorum, an Holy of Holies. If thy heart be polluted with the predominant
love of sin, never think Christ is born there Christ will never lie any more in
a Stable. If he be born in thy heart, it is consecrated by the Holy Ghost.

4. If Christ be born in thy heart, then it is with thee as in a birth. 1.
There is Life. Faith is principium vivens, it is the vital Artery of the Soul,
Gal. 2.20. The life that I live in the flesh, is by the faith of the Son of
God. 2. There is Appetite, 1 Pet. 2.7. As new born babes, desire (...), the
sincere milk of the word. The Word is like Breast-milk, pure, sweet,
nourishing; the Soul in which Christ is formed, desires this Breast-milk. St.
Bernard, in one of his Soliquies, comforts himself with this, That sure he had
the New Birth in him, because he found in his heart such strong Anhelations and
Thirstings after God. 3. Motion. After Christ is born in the heart, there is a
violent Motion; there is striving to enter in at the strait gate, and offering
violence to the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 12.11. By this we may know Christ is
formed in us. This is the only comfort, that as Christ was born into the World,
so he is born in our hearts; as he was united to our flesh, so he is united to
our Persons.

Branch 2. As Christ was made in our Image, let us labor to be made in his
Image. Christ being Incarnate was made like us, let us labor to ^e made like
him. There are three things in which we should labor to be like Christ.

1. In Disposition. He was of a most sweet Disposition, Delitiae humani generis
Tit. Vespasian. he invites sinners to come to him. He has Bowels to pity us,
Breasts to feed us, Wings to cover us. He would not break our hearts, but with
Mercy. Was Christ made in our Likeness, let us labor to be made in his
Likeness. Let us be like him in this, sweetness of Disposition. Be not of a
morose Spirit. It was said of Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.18. He is such a son of Belial,
that a man cannot speak to him. Some are so barbarous, as if they were a kin to
the Ostrich, they are fired with Rage, and breathe forth nothing but Revenge,
like those two Men in the Gospel possessed with Devils, coming out of the
Tombs, exceeding fierce, Matthew. 8.28. Let us be like Christ in mildness and
sweetness. Let us pray for our Enemies, and conquer them by love. David's
kindness melted Readiness heart, 1 Samuel 24.16. A frozen heart will be thawed with
the fire of Love.

2. Be like Christ in Grace. He was like us in having our Flesh, let us be like
him in having his Grace. In three Graces we should labor to be like Christ. 1.
In Humility. Phil. 2.8. (...), he humbled himself; he left the bright Robes of
his Glory to be clothed with the Rags of our Humanity. A wonder of Humility!
Let us be like Christ in this Grace. Humility, says St. Bernard, is contemptus
propriae excellentiae, a contempt of Self-excellency, a kind of
Self-annihilation. This is the glory of a Christian. We are never so comely in
God's Eyes, as when we are black in our own. In this let us be like Christ.
True Religion is (...), Greg. to imitate Christ. And indeed, what cause have we
to be humble, if we look within us, about us, below us, above us.

(1.) If we look intra nos, within us: Here we see our sins represented to us
in the Glass of Conscience, Lust, Envy, Passion. Our sins are like Vermin
crawling in our Souls, Job 13.23. How many are my iniquities? Our sins are as
the Sands of the Sea for number, as the Rocks of the Sea for weight. Austin
cries out, Vae mihi, faecibus peccatorum polluitur Templum Domini -- my Heart,
which is God's Temple, is polluted with sin.

2. If we look juxta nos, about us; here is that may humble us. We may see other
Christians out-shining us in Gifts and Grace, as the Sun out-shines the lesser
Planets. Others are laden with Fruit, perhaps we have but here and there an
Olive-berry growing, to show that we are of the right kind, Isa. 17.6.

3. If we look infra nos, below us, here is that may humble us. We see the
Mother Earth, out of which we came. The Earth is the most ignoble Element, Job
30.8. Thou art viler than the Earth. Thou that do set up thy Scutcheon and
Blaze thy Coat of Arms, behold thy Pedigree, thou art but pulvis animatus,
walking Ashes, and will thou be proud? What is Adam? He is the Son of Dust; and
what is Dust? The Son of Nothing.

4. If we look supra nos, above us, here is that may humble. If we look up to
Heaven, there we see God resisting the proud. Superbos sequitur ultor a Tergo
Deus -- The proud Man is the Mark which God shoots at, and he never misseth the
Mark. He threw proud Lucifer out of Heaven; he thrust proud Nebuchadnezzar out
of his Throne, and turned him to Grass, Dan. 4.29. O then be like Christ in
Humility.

2. Did Christ take our flesh, was he made like to us, let us be made like to
him in Zeal, John 2.16. The Zeal of thy House has eaten me up. He was zealous
when his Father was dishonored. In this let us be like Christ, zealous for
God's Truth and Glory, which are the two Orient Pearls of the Crown of Heaven.
Zeal is as needful for a Christian, as Salt for the Sacrifice, or Fire on the
Altar. Zeal without Prudence, is Rashness, Prudence without Zeal, is
Cowardliness. Without Zeal our Duties are not acceptable to God. Zeal is like
Rosin to the Bow-strings, without which the Lute makes no Music.

3. Be like Christ in the Contempt of the World. When Christ took our flesh, he
came not in the pride of flesh; he did not descend immediately from Kings and
Nobles, but was of mean Parentage. Christ was not ambitious of Titles of
Honor. Christ did as much decline the worldly Dignity and Greatness, as others
seek it. When they would have made him King, he refused it; he chose rather to
ride upon the Fool of an Ass, then to be drawn in a Chariot; and to hang upon a
wodden Cross, then to wear a golden Crown. Christ scorned the Pomp and Glory of
the World: he waved Secular Affairs, Luke 12.13. Who made me a Judge? His Work
was not to arbitrate Matters of Law; he came not into the World to be a
Magistrate, but a Redeemer. Christ was like a Star in an higher Orb, he minded
nothing but Heaven. Was Christ made like us, let us be made like him, in
heavenliness and contempt of the World. Let not us be ambitious of the Honors
and Preferments of the World; let us not purchase the World with the loss of a
good Conscience. What wise Man would damn himself to grow Rich? or pull down
his Soul to build up an Estate? Be like Christ in an holy contempt of the World.

3. Be like Christ in Conversation. Was Christ Incarnate, was he made like us,
let us be made like him in Holiness of Life. No Temptation could fasten upon
Christ, John 14.30. The Prince of this World comes, and has nothing in me.
Temptation to Christ was like a Spark of Fire upon a Marble Pillar, which
glides off. Christ's Life, says Chrysostom, was brighter than the Sunbeams.
Let us be like him in this, 1 Pet. 1.16. Be ye holy in all manner of
conversation. We are not, says Austin, to be like Christ in working Miracles,
but in an holy Life. A Christian should be both a Loadstone and a Diamond: a
Loadstone in drawing others to Christ; a Diamond, casting a sparkling luster of
Holiness in his Life. O let us be so just in our Dealings, so true in our
Promises, so devout in our Worship, so unblamable in our Lives, that we may be
the walking Pictures of Christ. Thus as Christ was made in our likeness, let us
labor to be made in his likeness.

Branch 3. If Jesus Christ was so abased for us, he took our flesh, which was a
disparagement to him, 'twas mingling Dust with Gold; if he, I say, abased
himself so for us, let us be willing to be abased for him. If the World
reproach us for Christ's sake, and cast Dust on our Name, let us bear it with
patience. The Apostles, Acts 5.41. departed from the Council, rejoicing that
they were counted worthy to endure shame for Christ's Name: Gr. (...), that
they were graced to be disgraced for Christ. That is a good saying of St.
Austin, Quid suis detrahit famae meae addet mercedi meae; they who take away
from a Saints Name, shall add to his Reward, and while they make his Credit
weigh lighter, they make his Crown weigh heavier. O! was Christ content to be
humbled and abased for us, to take our flesh, and to take it when it was in
disgrace, let us not think much to be abased for Christ. Say as David, 2 Samuel
6.22. If this be to be vile, I will yet be more vile. If to serve my Lord
Christ, if to keep my Conscience pure, if this be to be vile, I will yet be
more vile.

Use 3. of Comfort. Jesus Christ having taken our flesh, has enobled our
Nature; Naturam nostram nobilitavit, our Nature now is invested with greater
Royalties and Privileges then in time of Innocence. Before, in Innocence, we
were made in the Image of God, but now Christ having assumed our Nature, we are
made one with God; our Nature is enobled above the Angelical Nature. Christ
taking our flesh, has made us nearer to himself than the Angels. The Angels
are his Friends, Believers are flesh of his flesh; his Members, Ephesians. 5.30. and
cap. 1.23. And the same Glory which is put upon Christ's Humane Nature, shall
be put upon Believers.

CHRIST's EXALTATION.
Phil. 2.9. Wherefore GOD also has highly exalted him, and given him a Name
above every name, etc.


BEfore we have spoken of Christ's Humiliation, now of his Exaltation: Before
you saw the Sun of Righteousness in the Eclipse, now you shall see it coming
out of the Eclipse, and shining in its full Splendor and Glory; Wherefore God
has highly exalted him; (...), Super-exaltavit, Ambr. Above all Exaltation.

Quest. XVIII. Wherein consists Christ's Exaltation?

Resp. In his rising from the Dead, his ascending into Heaven, and sitting at
the right Hand of God the Father, etc.

Quest. In what sense God has exalted Christ?

Resp. Not in respect of Christ's Godhead, for that cannot be exalted higher
then it is; as in Christ's Humiliation, the Godhead was not lower, so in his
Exaltation the Godhead is not higher: But Christ is exalted as a Mediator, his
Humane Nature is exalted.

Quest. How many ways is Christ exalted?

Resp. Five ways: God has exalted Christ, 1. In his Titles. 2. In his Office.
3. In his Ascension. 4. In his Session at God's right Hand. 5. In constituting
him Judge of the World.

First Title, 1. God has exalted Christ in his Titles: 1. He is exalted to be
a Lord, Act. 19.17. The name of the Lord Jesus was magnified. He is a Lord in
respect of his Sovereignty; he is Lord over Angels and Men, Matthew. 28.18. All
power is given to him. Christ has three Keys in his Hand, the Key of the
Grave, to open the Graves of Men at the Resurrection; the Key of Heaven, to
open the Kingdom of Heaven to whom he will; the Key of Hell, Rev. 1.18. to lock
up the Damned in that fiery Prison.

To this LORD all Knees must bow, Phil. 2.10. That at the name of Jesus every
knee should bow. Name is put here for Person; To that holy thing JESUS, to the
Scepter of that Divine Person every knee shall bow. Bowing is put for
Subjection; all must be subdued to him as Sons or Captives, submit to him as to
their Lord or Judge: Kiss the Son, Psalm. 2.12. With a Kiss of Love and Loyalty.
We must not only cast ourselves into Christ's Arms to be saved by him, but we
must cast ourselves at his Feet to serve him.

Second Title, Christ is exalted to be a Prince, Dan. 12.1. There shall stand
up Michael the great prince. Some think it was a created Angel, but it was
Angelus Foederis, Christ the Angel of the Covenant. He is a great Prince, Rev.
1.5. The prince of the kings of the earth. They hold their Crowns by immediate
Tenure from him. His Throne is above the Stars; he has Angels and Archangels
for his Attendance. Thus he is exalted in his Titles of Honor.

2. God has exalted Christ in his Office: He has honored him to be Salvator
Mundi, The Savior of the World, Act. 5.31. Him has God exalted with his right
hand to be a prince and a savior. It was a great Honor to Moses to be a
Temporal Savior; but what is it to be the Savior of Souls? Christ is called
the Horn of Salvation, Luke 1.69. He saves from sin, Matthew. 1.21. From Wrath, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. To save is a Flower belongs only to his Crown, Acts 4.12. (...),
Neither is there salvation in any other. What an Honor is this to Christ! How
does this make Heaven ring of the Saints Praises? they sing Halelujahs to
Christ their Savior, Rev. 5.9. They sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy
to take the book, and to open the seals; for thou wast slain, and have redeemed
us to God by thy blood.

3. God has exalted Christ in his Ascension: If he be ascended, then he is
exalted. Austin says, Some were of Opinion, that Christ's Body ascended into
the Orb and Circle of the Sun. So the Hermians. But the Scripture is plain he
ascended into Heaven, Luke 24.51. And Ephesians. 4.10. Far above all heavens: Ergo,
above the Firmament. He is ascended into the highest part of the Empyraean
Heaven, which Paul calls the third Heaven. Concerning Christ's Ascension, two
things,

1. The manner of Christ's Ascension: 1. Christ being to ascend blessed his
Disciples, Luke 24.50. He lift up his hands and blessed them; and while he
blessed them, he was parted from them, and carried up into heaven. Christ did
not leave his Disciples Houses and Lands, but he left them his Blessing.

2. Christ ascended as a Conqueror, in a way of Triumph, Psalm. 68.18. Thou have
led captivity captive, etc. He triumphed over Sin, Hell, and Death; and
Christ's Triumph is a Believer's Triumph: Christ has conquered Sin and Hell
for every Believer.

3. The Fruit of Christ's Ascension: Christ's Ascension to Heaven causes the
Descention of the Holy Spirit into our Hearts, Ephesians. 4.8. When he ascended up on
high he gave gifts to men. Christ having ascended up in the Clouds as his
Triumphant Chariot, gives the Gift of his Spirit to us: As a King at his
Coronation bestows Gifts liberally to his Favorites.

4. God has exalted Christ in his Session at God's right hand, Mark 16.19.
After the Lord had spoken to them, he was received up into heaven, and sat on
the right hand of God. Ephesians. 1.20. He raised him from the dead, and set him at
his own right hand, far above all principality, and power, and every name that
is named.

Quest. What is meant by Christ's sitting at God's right hand?

Resp. To speak properly, God has no right Hand or left, for being a Spirit,
he is void of all bodily parts; but it is a borrowed Speech, a Metaphor taken
from the manner of Kings, who were wont to advance their Favorites next to
their own Persons, and set them at their right Hand: Solomon caused a Seat to
be set for the Queen his Mother, and placed her at his right hand, 2 Kin. 2.19.
So for Christ to sit at the right Hand of God, is to be in the next place to
God the Father in Dignity and Honor. The Humane Nature of Christ being
personally united to the Divine, is now set down in a Royal Throne in Heaven,
and adored even of Angels.

By Virtue of the Personal Union of Christ's Humane Nature with the Divine,
there is a Communication of all that Glory from the Deity to Christ as his
Humane Nature is capable of. Not that the Manhood of Christ is advanced to an
Equality with the Godhead, but the Divine Nature being joined with the Humane,
the Humane Nature is wonderfully Glorified, though not Deified. Christ as
Mediator is filled with all Majesty and Honor, beyond the Comprehension of the
highest Order of Angels: Descendit Christus quo inferius non decuit, ideo
ascendit quo altius non potuit; Christ in his Humiliation descended so low,
that it was not fit to go lower, and in his Exaltation he ascended so high,
that it is not possible to go higher. In his Resurrection he was exalted above
the Grave, in his Ascension he was exalted above the Aerie and Starry Heaven, in
his sitting at God's right Hand: he is exalted above the highest Heavens far,
Ephesians. 4.10. Far above all heavens.

5. God has exalted Christ in constituting him Judge of the whole World, Ioh.
5.22. The Father has committed all judgment to the Son. At that day of
Judgment shall Christ be exalted super-eminently, He shall come in the glory of
his Father, Mark 8.38. He shall wear the same embroydered Robes of Majesty, as
the Father; And he shall come with all his holy Angels, Matthew. 25.31. He who
was led to the Bar with a Band of Soldiers, shall be attended to the Bench
with a Guard of Angels: Christ shall judge his Judges, he shall judge Pilate
that condemned him: Kings must leave their Throne and come to his Bar. And this
is the highest Court of Judicature, from whence is no Appeal.

1. Use of Information. Branch 1. See Christ's different State on Earth, and
now in Heaven; O how is the Scene altered! When he was on Earth he lay in the
Manger, now he sits in the Throne; then he was hated and scorned of Men, now he
is adored of Angels; then his Name was reproached, now God has given him a
Name above every name, Phil. 2.9. Then he came in the Form of a Servant, and as
a Servant stood with his Basin and Towel, and washed his Disciples Feet, Ioh.
13.4, 5. now he is clad in his Prince's Robes, and the Kings of the Earth cast
their Crowns before him; on Earth he was a Man of Sorrow, now he is anointed
with the Oil of Gladness; on Earth was his Crucifixion, now his Coronation;
then his Father frowned upon him in Desertion, now he has set him at his right
Hand; before he seemed to have no Form or Beauty in him, Isa. 53.2. now he is
the Brightness of his Father's Glory, Heb. 1.3. O what a change is here, Him
has GOD highly exalted!

Branch 2. Was Christ first Humble and then Exalted, hence learn the way to
true Honor is Humility, Luke 14.11. He that humbles himself shall be exalted.
The World looks upon Humility as that which will make one contemptible, but it
is the ready way to Honor: The way to rise is to fall, the way to ascend is to
descend. Humility exalts us in the Esteem of Men, and it exalts us to an higher
Throne in Heaven, Matthew. 18.4. Whosoever shall humble himself as this little
child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven. Viz. He shall have a
greater degree of Glory in Heaven.

Branch 3. Christ first suffered and then was exalted: see hence that
Sufferings must go before Glory. Many desire to be glorified with Christ, but
they are not content to suffer for Christ, 2 Timothy 2.12. If we suffer with him,
we shall reign with him. The Wicked first reign and then suffer, the Godly
first suffer and then reign. There Is no way to Constantinople but through the
Straits, no way to Heaven but through Sufferings: No way to the Crown but by
the way of the Cross. Jerusalem above is a pleasant City, Streets of Gold,
Gates of Pearl, but we must travel through a dirty Road to this City, through
many Reproaches and Sufferings, Acts 14.22. We must enter into Glory as Christ
did; first he suffered Shame and Death, and now is exalted to sit at God's
right Hand.

2. Use of Comfort: Branch 1. Christ being so highly exalted, has Ennobled our
Nature, he has crowned it with Glory, and lifted it up above Angels and
Archangels: Though Christ as he was Man, was made a little lower than the
Angels, Heb. 2.9. yet as the Humane Nature is united to the Divine, and is at
God's right Hand, so the Humane Nature is above the Angels. And if God has so
Dignified our Humane Nature, what a shame is it that we should debase it. God
has exalted the Humane Nature above the Angels, and the Drunkard abaseth the
Humane Nature below the Beasts.

Branch 2. Christ being exalted at God's right hand, the Key of Government is
laid upon his shoulders; he governs all the Affairs of the World for his own
Glory. Do you think when Christ is so highly advanced, and has all Power in
Heaven and Earth in his hand, he will not take care of his Elect? and turn the
most astonishing Providence to the good of his Church? In a Clock the Wheels
move cross one to another, but all make the Clock strike: so Christ being at
his Father's right hand, he will make the most cross Providence tend to the
Salvation of his Church.

Branch 3. Christ being at God's right hand, we may be assured he has now
finished the Work of Man's Redemption, Heb. 10.12. This man after he had
offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God. If
Christ had not fully expiated Sin, and satisfied God's Law, he had not sat
down at God's right hand, but had still lain in the Grave; but now he is
exalted to Glory. This is an evident Token he has done and suffered all that
was required of him for the working out our Redemption.

Branch 4. Though Jesus Christ is so highly exalted in Glory, yet he is not
forgetful of us on Earth: some when they are raised to Places of Honor, forget
their Friends; when the Chief Butler was restored to his Place at Court, then
he forgot poor Joseph in Prison: But it is not so with Christ; though he be
exalted to such Glory in Heaven, yet he is not unmindful of his Saints on
Earth. Our High Priest has all the Names and Wants of his People written upon
his Breast Plate: Art thou tempted? though Christ be in Glory he knows how to
pity and succor thee, Heb. 4.15. We have not a high priest that cannot be
touched with the feeling of our infirmity. Do thou mourn for sin? Christ
though in a glorified State, he hears thy Sighs, bottles thy Tears.

Branch 5. Christ being exalted at God's right hand, this is for the Comfort of
Believers, that they shall one day be exalted to that Place of Glory where he
is: Christ's Exaltation is our Exaltation. Christ has prayed for this, Joh.
17.24. Father, I will that all those whom thou have given me, be with me where
I am. And he is said to go before to prepare a place for Believers, Ioh. 14.2.
Christ is called the Head, and the Church is called his Body, Ephesians. 1.22, 23.
The Head being exalted to Honor, the Body Mystical shall be exalted too; as
sure as Christ is exalted far above all Heavens, so sure will he instate
Believers in all that Glory which his Humane Nature is adorned with, Ioh.
17.22. As here he puts his Grace upon the Saints, so shortly he will put his
Glory upon them. This is Comfort to the poorest Christian, perhaps thou have
scarce an House to put thy head in, yet thou may look up to Heaven and say,
There is my House, there is my Country; and I have already taken Possession of
Heaven in my Head Christ; he sits there, and it will not be long before I shall
sit there with him; he is upon the Throne of Glory, and I have his word for it,
I shall sit upon the Throne with him, Rev. 3.21.

3. Use of Exhortation: Has God highly exalted Christ, let us labor to exalt
him. Let us exalt, 1. His Person. 2. His Truths.

1. Let us exalt Christ in our Hearts; Believe, O Adore and Love him. We cannot
lift Christ up higher in Heaven, but we may in our Hearts. 2. Let us exalt him
in our Lips: Let us praise him; our Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost,
our Tongues must be the Organs in these Temples; by praising and commending
Christ, we exalt him in the Esteem of others. 3. Let us exalt him in our Lives:
By living holy Lives, Vera religio haec, sine macula vivere lactant. It is not
all the Doxologies and Prayers in the World, do so exalt Christ as an holy
Life: this makes Christ renowned, and lifts him up indeed when his Followers
walk worthy of Christ.

2. Let us exalt Christ's Truths: Bucholcerus in his Chronology, reports of the
Nobles of Polonia, That ever when the Gospel is read they lay their Hands upon
their Swords, by that intimating they are ready to maintain the Gospel with the
hazard of their Lives. Let us exalt Christ's Truths; maintain the Truths of
Christ against Error; maintain the Doctrine of Free Grace against Merit; the
Deity of Christ against Socinianism.

Truth is the most Orient Pearl of CHRIST's Crown, Contend for the truth, as
one would for a Sum of Money, that it should not be wrested out of his hand:
This Christ takes to be an Exalting of him, when we exalt his Truths, wherein
his Glory is so much concerned.

CHRIST the Redeemer.
Quest. XIX. HOw does the Spirit apply to us the Redemption purchased by Christ?

Resp. The Spirit applys to us the Redemption purchased by Christ, by working
Faith in us, and uniting us thereby to Christ in our effectual Calling.

Here are in this Answer two things,

1. Something employed, viz. That Christ is the Glorious Purchaser of our
Redemption, in these words, The Redemption purchased by Christ.

2. Something expressed, viz. That the Spirit applys to us this Redemption
purchased, By working Faith in us, etc.

1. The thing here employed, That Jesus Christ is the Glorious Purchaser of our
Redemption: The Doctrine of Redemption by Jesus Christ is a glorious Doctrine;
it is the Marrow and Quintessence of the Gospel. In this all a Christian's
Comfort lies. Great was the Work of Creation, but greater the Work of
Redemption: it cost more to redeem us than to make us; in the one there was but
the speaking a Word, in the other shedding of Blood, Luke 1.51. The Creation
was but the Work of God's Fingers, Psalm. 8.3. Redemption the Work of his Arm:
Heb. 9.12. Having obtained eternal redemption for us. Christ's purchasing
Redemption for us, implies that our sins did Mortgage and Sell us: had there
not been some kind of Mortgaging, there had been no need of Redemption:
Redimere, q. rursus emere, Hierom. Now Christ when we were thus mortgaged and
sold by Sin, did purchase our Redemption: Christ has the best right to redeem
us, for he is our Kinsman: the Hebrew word for Redeemer, Goel, signifies a
Kinsman, one that is near in Blood: in the Old Law the nearest Kinsman was to
reedem his Brother's Land, Ruth 4.4. Thus Christ being near akin to us, Flesh
of our flesh, is the fittest to redeem us.

Quest. How does Christ redeem us?

Resp. By his own precious Blood, Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have redemption
through his blood. Among the Romans he was said to redeem another, that laid
down a Price equivalent for the Ransom of the Prisoner. In this sense Christ is
a Redeemer, (...), he has paid a Price. Never such a Price paid to ransom
Prisoners, 1 Cor. 6.20. Ye are, Pretio Empti, bought with a price; and this
Price was his own Blood. So in the Text, By his own blood he entered in once
into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us. This Blood
being the Blood of that Person who was God as well as Man, is a Price
sufficient for the Ransom of Millions.

Quest. From what does Christ redeem us?

Resp. From Sin. To be redeemed from Turkish Slavery is a great Mercy, but it
is infinitely more to be redeemed from Sin. There is nothing can hurt the Soul
but Sin; it is not Affliction hurts it, it often makes it better, as the
Furnace makes Gold the purer; but it is Sin that does damnify. Now Christ
redeems us from Sin, Heb. 9.26. Now once in the end of the world has he
appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself.

Quest. But how are we redeemed from Sin? Do we not see Corruption stirring in
the Regenerate? Much Pride and Unmortified Passion?

Resp. We must distinguish of Redemption: Redemption is either Inchoata or
Plena; a Redemption but begun and perfect: Sin cannot stand with a Perfect
Redemption, but here it is but Begun; Sin may stand with an Imperfect
Redemption. There may be some Darkness in the Air at the Sun's first rising,
but not when the Sun is at the full Meridian: While our Redemption is but
begun, there may be Sin; but not when it is perfected in Glory.

Quest. But in what sense has Christ redeemed justified Persons from Sin?

Resp. A Reatu, from the Guilt of Sin, though not the Stain: Guilt is the
binding a Person over to Punishment. Now, Christ has redeemed a justified
Person from the Guilt of Sin; he has discharged his Debts. Christ says to
God's Justice, as Paul to Philemon, If he has wronged thee any thing, or owes
thee ought, put that on my account, Verse 18.

2. A justified Person is redeemed a Dominio, from the Power and Regency of
Sin, though not the presence. Sin may furere, but not regnare, it may rage in a
Child of God, but not reign: Lust did rage in David, Fear in Peter, but it did
not reign; they recovered themselves by Repentance, Romans 6.14. Sin shall not
have dominion over you. Sin lives in a Child of God, but it is deposed from the
Throne, it lives not as a King but a Captive.

3. A Believer is redeemed a Maledictione, from the Curse due to Sin, Gal.
3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for
us. Christ said to his Father, as Rebecca to Jacob, Upon me, upon me, be the
curse, let the blessing be upon them, but upon me be the curse. And now there is
no Condemnation to Believers, Romans 8.1. An Unbeliever has a double
Condemnation; one from the Law which he has transgressed, the other from the
Gospel, which he has despised. But Christ has redeemed a Believer from this
Malediction, he has set him out of the Power of Hell and Damnation.

Quest. To what has Christ redeemed us?

Resp. He has redeemed us to a glorious Inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.4. To an
inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in
heaven for you.

1. To an Inheritance.] Christ has not only redeemed us out of Prison, but he
has redeemed us to a State of Happiness, to an Inheritance: Heaven is not a
Lease which soon expires, but an Inheritance; and a glorious Inheritance, Col.
1.12. An Inheritance, (...), in Light. Lumen actuat colores: Light adorns and
gilds the World: What were the World without Light, but a Prison? The Heavenly
Inheritance is irradiated with Light: Christ as a continual Sun enlightens it
with his Beams, Rev. 21.23.

2. To an Inheritance incorruptible: It does not moulder away, or suffer
Dissolution. Earthly Comforts are shadowed out by the Tabernacle, which was
transient, but Heaven is set out by the Temple, which was fixed and permanent,
built with Stone, overlaid with Gold. This is the Glory of the Celestial
Inheritance; it is incorruptible, (...), etc. Chrysostom. Eternity is written
upon the Frontis-piece of it.

3. Undefiled: The Greek word (...), for Undefiled, alludes to a precious Stone
called Amiantus, which cannot be blemished: Such a Place is Heaven, undefiled,
nothing can stain it; there is no Sin there to Eclipse its Purity. For the
Holiness and Undefiledness of it, it is compared to pure Gold, and to the
Saphir, and Emerald, Rev. 21. The Saphir has a Virtue, says Pliny, to
preserve Chastness; the Emerald to expel Poison. These are the lively Emblems
of Heaven, to show the Sanctity of it; no Fever of Lust, no Venom of Malice,
there are none but pure Virgin spirits inhabit.

4. It fades not away: The Greek word (...), is the name of a Flower
Amarantus, which keeps a long time fresh and green, as Clem. Alexandrinus
writes. Such is the Heavenly Inheritance, it does not lose its Orient Color,
but keeps its Freshness and Greenness to Eternity; the Beauty of it fades not
away. To this glorious Inherit^nce has Christ redeemed the Saints: an
Inheritance which cannot be fully described, or set forth by all the Lights of
Heaven, though every Star were a Sun: and that which is the Diamond in the
Ring, the Glory of this Inheritance, is, the Eternal Sight and Fruition of the
blessed God: the sight of God will be most alluring, heart-ravishing Object:
Kings Presence makes the Court, Ioh. 3.2. We shall see him as he is. It is
comfortable to see God showing himself through the Lettuce of an Ordinance, to
see him in the Word and Sacrament: The Martyrs thought it comfortable to see
him in a Prison: O then, what will it be to see him in Glory, shining ten
thousand times brighter then the Sun! and not only see him, but enjoy him for
ever: Proemium quod fide non attingitur, Aug. Faith itself is not able fully to
comprehend this Reward. And all this Blessedness has Christ purchased through
the Redemption of his Blood.

Use 1. Branch 1. See into what a wretched deplorable Condition we had brought
ourselves by sin; we had sinned ourselves into Slavery; Slavery, so that we
needed Christ to purchase our Redemption: Nihil durius servitute, Cicero.
Slavery is the worst Condition. Such as are now Prisoners in Algiers think so.
But by Sin we were in a worse Slavery, Slaves to Satan, a Merciless Tyrant, who
sports in the Damnation of Souls. In this Condition were we when Christ came to
redeem us.

Branch 2. See in this as in a transparent Glass, the Love of Christ to the
Elect, he came to redeem them: these he dyed Intentionally for. Were it not
great Love for a King's Son to pay a great Sum of Money to redeem a Captive,
but that he should be content to be a Prisoner in his stead, and dye for his
Ransom; this were Matter of Wonder. Jesus Christ has done all this, he has
written his Love in Characters of Blood: -- It had been much for Christ to
speak a good word to his Father for us, but he knew that was not enough to
redeem us: Though a Word speaking made a World, yet it would not redeem a
Sinner, Heb. 9.22. Without shedding of blood is no remission.

2. Use of Trial: If Christ came to purchase our Redemption, then let us try
whether we are the Persons whom Christ has redeemed from the Guilt and Curse
due to Sin. This is a needful Trial, for, let me tell you, there is but a
certain Number whom Christ has redeemed. O say, Sinners, Christ is a Redeemer,
and we shall be saved by him! Beloved, Christ came not to redeem all; then we
overthrow the Decrees of God. Redemption is not as large as Creation. I grant,
there is a Sufficiency of Merit in Christ's Blood to save all; but, there is
difference between Sufficiency and Efficiency. Christ's Blood is a sufficient
Price for all, but it is effectual only to them that believe: A Plaster may
have a sovereign Virtue in it to heal any Wound, but it does not heal unless
applied to the Wound. And if it be so that all have not the Benefit of Christ's
Redemption, only some, then it is a necessary Question to ask our Souls,
Whether we are in the Number of them that are redeemed by Christ, or no?

Quest. How shall we know that?

Resp. Such as are redeemed are reconciled to God; the Enmity is taken away*
their Judgments approve, their Wills incline ad bonum, Col. 1.21. Are they
redeemed that are unreconciled to God? who hate God and his People, (as the
Vine and Laurel) have an Antipathy, who do all they can to disparage Holiness,
are these redeemed who are unreconciled? Christ has purchased a Reprieval for
these, but a Sinner may have a Reprieve and yet go to Hell, Ioh. 5.6.

2. Such as are redeemed by Christ, are redeemed from the World, Gal. 1.4. Who
gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver (or redeem) us from this
present evil world. Such as are redeemed by Christ, are risen with Christ, Col.
3.1. As the Birds though they light upon the Ground to pick up a little Seed,
yet immediately they take their Wings and fly up to Heaven again: so the
Redeemed of the Lord, though they use the World, and take the lawful Comforts
of it, yet their Hearts are presently off these things, and they ascend to
Heaven; live here, trade above. Such as Christ has dyed for, are dead to the
World, Gal. 6.14. I am crucified to the world; to the Honors, Profits, and
Preferments of it. What shall we think of them who say they are the Redeemed of
the Lord, yet are Lovers of the World? like the Tribes who desired to have
their Portion on this side Canaan: Phil. 3.19. Who mind earthly things. They
pull down their Souls to build up an Estate: they are not redeemed by Christ,
who not from the World.

3. Use of Comfort, to such as are redeemed: You are happy, the lot of free
grace is fallen upon you; you who were once in the Devil's Prison, you have
broke this Prison; you that were once bound in the Chains of Sin, God has
begun to beat off your Chains, and has freed you from the Power of Sin, and
Curse due to it. What a Comfort is this? And is there any Consolation in
Christ, it is thine; is there any sweet Fruit growing upon the Promise, thou
may gather it; are there any glorious Privileges in the Gospel, they are thy
Jointure, Justification, Adoption, Coronation; is there any Glory in Heaven,
thou shall shortly drink of that River of Pleasure; have thou any Temporal
Comforts, these are but a Pledge and Earnest of more: Thy Meal in thy Barrel is
but a Bait by the way, and an Earnest of that Angels Food which God has
prepared for thee. How may thou be comforted in all Worldly Afflictions,
though the Fig Tree flourish not? nay, in case of Death, Death has lost its
Sting: Mors obiit morte Christi. Death shall carry thee to thy Redeemer: fear
not dying, not happy but by dying.

Use ult. of Exhortation: Long for the time when you shall have a full and
perfect Redemption in Heaven, an eternal Jubilee; when you shall be freed not
only from the Power but from the Presence of Sin. Here a Believer is as a
Prisoner that has broke Prison, but walks with a Fetter on his Leg. When the
Banner of Glory shall be displayed over you, you shall be as the Angels of God;
you shall never have a sinful Thought more. When no Pain or Grief, no aching
Head or unbelieving Heart, you shall see Christ's Face, and lie for ever in his
Arms. You shall be as Joseph, Genesis 41.14. They brought him hastily out of the
dungeon; and he shaved himself, and changed his raiment, and came in unto
Pharaoh. Long for that time when you shall put off your Prison-Garments, and
change your Raiment, and put on the Embroidered Garment of Glory. O long, yet
be content to wait for this full and glorious Redemption, when you shall be
more Happy than you can desire, when you shall have that which eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, nor can it enter into man's heart to conceive.

Of FAITH.
Gal. 2.20. The life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the
Son of GOD.


THE Spirit applys to us the Redemption purchased by Christ, by working Faith
in us. Christ is the Glory, and Faith in Christ the Comfort of the Gospel.

Quest. What are the kinds of Faith?

Resp. Fourfold, 1. An Historical or Dogmatical Faith, which is the believing
the Truths revealed in the Word, because of Divine Authority.

2. There is a Temporal Faith, which lasts but for a time, and vanishes,
Matthew. 13.21. Yet has he not root in himself, but dureth for a while. A
Temporary Faith is like Ionah's Gourd, which came up in a night and withered,
Cap. 4.10.

3. A Miraculous Faith, which was granted to the Apostles, to work Miracles for
the Confirmation of the Gospel: This Judas had, he cast out Devils, yet was
cast out to the Devil.

4. A true justifying Faith, which is called, A faith of the operation of God,
Col. 2.12. And is a Jewel hung only upon the Elect.

Quest. What is justifying Faith?

Resp. I shall show, 1. What it is not; It is not a bear Acknowledgment that
Christ is a Savior; indeed there must be an Acknowledgment, but that is not
sufficient to justify. The Devils acknowledged Christ's Godhead, Matthew. 8.29.
Jesus thou Son of God. There may be an Assent to Divine Truths, yet no Work of
Grace on the Heart: many assent in their Judgments, that Sin is an evil thing,
but they go on in Sin, their Corruptions are stronger than their Convictions;
and that Christ is excellent, cheapen the Pearl, but do not buy.

2. What justifying Faith is? I answer, True justifying Faith consists in three
things,

1. Self-renunciation: Faith is a going out of one's self, a Man is taken off
from his own bottom, he sees he has no Righteousness of his own to save him,
Phil. 3.9. Not having my own righteousness. Self-righteousness is a broken
Reed, the Soul dares not lean on. Repentance and Faith are both Humbling
Graces; by Repentance a Man abhors himself; by Faith he goes out of himself. Is
is with a Sinner in the first Act of Believing, as with Israel in their
Wilderness-march, behind them they saw Pharaoh and his Chariots pursuing them,
before them the Red Sea ready to devour them: so the Soul behind sees God's
Justice pursuing him for Sin, before Hell ready to devour him; and in this
forlorn Condition, he sees nothing in himself to help him, but he must perish
unless he can find help in another.

2. Recumbency: The Soul casts itself upon Jesus Christ: (...); Faith rests on
Christ's Person. Faith believes the Promise, but that which Faith rests upon in
the Promise, is the Person of Christ: Therefore the Spouse is said to lean upon
her Beloved, Cant. 8.5. And Faith is described to be a believing on the Name of
the Son of God, Ioh. 3.23. viz. On his Person, the Promise is but the Cabinet,
Christ is the Jewel in it. Faith embraces; the Promise is but the Dish, Christ
is the Food in it which Faith feeds on. And as Faith rests on Christ's Person,
so on his Person under this Notion, as he was crucified. Faith glories in the
Cross of Christ, Gal. 6.14. To consider Christ as he is crowned with all manner
of Excellencies, does rather stir up Admiration and Wonder; but Christ looked
upon as Bleeding and Dying is the proper Object of our Faith: therefore it is
called Faith in his blood, Romans 3.25.

3. Appropriation, or the applying Christ to ourselves: A Medicine though it be
never so sovereign, yet if it be not applied to the Wound, will do no good;
though the Plaster be made of Christ's own Blood, yet it will not heal unless it
be applied by Faith: the Blood of God without Faith in God will not save; this
applying of Christ is called a receiving of him, Joh. 1.12. The hand receiving
of Gold enricheth, so the hand of Faith receiving Christ's Golden Merits with
Salvation, enricheth us.

Quest. How is Faith wrought?

Resp. By the Blessed Spirit it is called the Spirit of Grace, Zec. 12.10.
because it is the Spring and Efficient of all Grace. Faith is the chief Work
which the Spirit of God works in a Man's heart. In making the World God did but
speak a Word, but in working Faith he puts forth his Arm, Luke 1.51. The
Spirits working Faith is called, The exceeding Greatness of God's Power. What a
Power was put forth in raising Christ from the Grave, when such a Tombstone lay
upon him, the Sins of all the World; yet he was raised up by the Spirit: The
same Power the Spirit of God puts forth in working Faith; the Spirit irradiates
the Mind, subdues the Will; the Will naturally is like a Garrison, which holds
out against God; the Spirit with a sweet Violence conquers, or rather changes
the Will, making the Sinner willing to have Christ upon any Terms, to be ruled
by him as well as saved by him.

Quest. Wherein lies the Preciousness of Faith?

Resp. As Faith is the chief Gospel Grace; the Head of the Graces, as Gold
among Metals, so is Faith among the Graces. Clem. Alexandrinus calls the other
Graces the Daughters of Faith. Indeed in Heaven Love will be the chief Grace,
but while we are here Militant Love must give place to Faith; Love takes
Possession of Glory, but Faith gives a Title to it; Love is the Crowning Grace
in Heaven, but Faith is the Conquering Grace upon Earth, 1 John 5.4. This is
the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith.

2. As Faith has influence upon all the Graces, and sets them awork, not a
Grace stirs till Faith set it awork. As the Clothier sets the Poor awork, he
sets their Wheel a going; Faith sets Hope awork. The Heir must believe his
Title to an Estate in Reversion, before he can hope for it: Faith believes its
Title to Glory, and then Hope waits for it. Did not Faith feed the Lamp of Hope
with Oil, it would soon dye. Faith sets Love awork, Gal. 5.6. Faith which
works by love; believing the Mercy and Merit of Christ causes a flame of
Love to ascend. Faith sets Patience a work, Heb. 6.12. Be followers of them who
through faith and patience inherit the promises. Faith believes the glorious
Rewards given to Suffering; this makes the Soul patient in suffering. Thus
Faith is the Master-wheel, it sets all the other Graces a running.

3. As Faith is the Grace which God honors to Justify and Save: thus, indeed,
it is precious Faith, as the Apostle calls it, 2 Pet. 1.1. The other Graces
help to sanctify, but it is Faith that justifies, Romans 5.1. Being justified,
(...), by faith. Repentance or Love do not justify, but Faith.

Quest. How does Faith justify?

Resp. Faith does not justify, 1. As it is a Work that were to make a Christ of
our Faith, but Faith justifies as it lays hold of the Object, viz. Christ's
Merits. If a Man had a precious Stone in a Ring that could heal, we say the
Ring heals, but properly it is not the Ring, but the precious Stone in the Ring
heals. Thus Faith saves and justifies, but it is not any inherent Virtue in
Faith, but as it lays hold on Christ, so it justifies.

2. Faith does not justify as it exercises Grace: It cannot be denied, Faith
does Invigorate all the Graces, it puts strength and liveliness into them, but
it does not justify under this Notion. Faith works by Love, but it does not
justify as it works by Love, but as it applys Christ's Merits.

Quest. Why should Faith save and justify more then any other Grace?

Resp. 1. Because of God's Sanction: He has appointed this Grace to be
justifying, and he does it because Faith is a Grace that takes a Man off
himself, and gives all the Honor to Christ and Free Grace, Romans 4.20. Strong
in faith giving glory to God. Therefore God has put this Honor on Faith, to
make it saving and justifying. The King's Stamp makes the Coin pass for
Current; if he would put his Stamp upon Leather, as well as Silver, it would
make it Current. So God having put his Sanction, the Stamp of his Authority and
Institution upon Faith, this makes it to be justifying and saving.

2. Because Faith makes us one with Christ, Ephesians. 3.17. It is the espousing
incorporating Grace, it gives us Coalition and Union with Christ's Person;
other Graces make us like Christ, Faith makes us Members of Christ.

1. Use of Exhortation: Let us above all things labor for Faith: Fides est
sanctissimum humani pectoris bonum. Ephesians. 6.16. Above all taking the shield of
faith. Faith will be of more use to us then any Grace: as an Eye though dim,
was of more use to an Isra^lite then all the other Members of his Body, not a
strong Arm or a nimble Foot, it was his Eye looking on the Brazen Serpent that
cured him. It is not Knowledge though Angelical, not Repentance though we could
shed Rivers of Tears could justify us, only Faith whereby we look on Christ.
Without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. and if we do not
please him by believing, he will not please us in saving of us. Faith is the
Condition of the Covenant of Grace, without Faith without Covenant, and without
Covenant without Hope, Ephesians. 2.12.

2. Use of Trial: Let us try whether we have Faith: There is something looks
like Faith, and is not; a Bristol-stone looks like Diamond. Some Plants have
the same Leaf with others, but the Herbalist can distinguish them by the Root
and Taste. Something may look like true Faith, but it may be distinguished by
the Fruits. Let us be serious in the Trial of our Faith; there is much depends
upon our Faith: If our Faith be not good, there is nothing good comes from us;
our Duties and Graces are adulterate.

Quest. Well then, how shall we know it is a true Faith?

Resp. By the Noble Effects: 1. Faith is a Christ-prizing Grace, it puts an
high Valuation upon Christ, 1 Pet. 2.7. To you that believe he is precious. St.
Paul did best know Christ, 1 Cor. 9.1. Have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord?
Paul saw Christ with his bodily Eyes in a Vision when he was wrapped up into
the third Heaven; and he saw him with the Eye of his Faith in the Holy Supper,
ergo, he best knew Christ. And see how he styles all things in comparison of
him, Phil. 3.8. I count all things but (...), dung, that I may win Christ. Do
we set an high Estimate on Christ? could we be willing to part with our Wedg of
Gold, for the Pearl of Price? Greg. Nazianzen blessed God he had any thing to
lose for Christ's sake.

2. Faith is a refining Grace, 1 Timothy 3.9. Mystery of faith in a pure
conscience. Faith is in the Soul as Fire among Metals, it refines and purifies:
Morality may wash the outside, Faith washes the inside, Acts 15.9. Having
purified their hearts by faith. Faith makes the Heart a Sacrary, or Holy of
Holies. Faith is a Virgin-Grace: though it does not take away the Life of Sin,
yet love of Sin. Examine, if your Heart be an Unclean Fountain sending out Mud
and Dirt, Pride, Envy; if there be Legions of Lusts in thy Soul, there is no
Faith. Faith is an Heavenly Plant which will not grow in an impure Soil.

3. Faith is an Obediential Grace, Romans 16.26. The obedience of faith. Faith
melts our Will into Gods: Faith runs at God's Call, if God commands Duty
(though cross to Flesh and Blood) Faith obeys, Heb. 11.8. By faith Abraham
obeyed. Faith is not an Idle Grace; as it has an Eye to see Christ, so it has
an Hand to work for him. Faith does not only believe God's Promise, but obey
his Command. It is not your having Knowledge will evidence you to be Believers;
the Devil has Knowledge, but wants Obedience, and that makes him a Devil. And
the true Obedience of Faith is a cheerful Obedience; God's Commands do not seem
grievous. Have you the Obedience, and obey cheerfully? What say you to this? do
you look on God's Command as your Burden or Privilege, as an Iron Fetter about
your Leg, or a gold Chain about your Neck.

4. Faith is an assimulating Grace; it changes the Soul into the Image of the
Object, it makes it like Christ. Never did any look on Christ with a believing
Eye, but he was made like Christ. A deformed Person may look on a beautiful
Object, but not be made beautiful; but Faith looking on Christ, transforms a
Man, and turns him into his Similitude. Faith looking on a bleeding Christ,
causes a soft bleeding heart. Looking on an holy Christ, causes sanctity of
Heart; looking on an humble Christ, makes the Soul humble. As the Camelion is
changed into the Color of that which it looks upon, so Faith looking on
Christ, changes a Christian into the similitude of Christ.

2. By the growth of it; if it be a true Faith, it grows: living things grow.
Romans 1.17. From faith to faith; (...).

Quest. How may we judge of the growth of Faith?

Answ. Growth of Faith is judged, 1. By strength. We can do that now which we
could not do before. When one is Man-grown, he can do that he could not do when
he was a Child; he can carry a heavier burden: so thou can bear crosses with
more patience.

2. Growth of Faith is seen by doing Duties in a more spiritual manner, viz.
with fervency, we put coals to the Incence, from a principle of love to God.
When an Apple has done growing in bigness, it grows in sweetness: thou do
Duties in love, and now are sweeter, and come off with a better relish.

Object. But I fear I have no Faith.

Resp. We must distinguish between weakness of Faith and nullity; a weak Faith
is true. The bruised Reed is but weak, yet it is such as Christ will not bruise
Though thy Faith be but weak, yet be not discouraged:

1. A weak Faith may receive a strong Christ. A weak hand can tie the Knot in
Marriage, as well as a strong; a weak Eye might have seen the brazen Serpent.
The Woman in the Gospel, that but touched Christ, received Virtue from him. The
Touch of Faith.

2. The Promise is not made to strong Faith, but to true. The Promise does not
say, Whosoever has a Giant-faith, that can remove Mountains, that can stop the
mouth of Lions, shall be saved; but whosoever believes, be his Faith never so
small. Though Christ sometimes chides a weak Faith, yet that it may not be
discouraged, he makes a Promise to it, Matthew. 5.3. Beati qui esuriunt.

3. A weak Faith may be fruitful. Weakest things multiply most: the Vine is a
weak Plant, but it is fruitful. Weak Christians may have strong Affections. How
strong is the first love which is after the first planting of Faith.

4. Weak Faith may be growing. The Seed springs up by degrees; first the Blade,
then the Ear, then the full Corn in the Ear. Therefore be not discouraged; God,
who would have us receive them that are weak in Faith, Romans 14.1. will not
himself refuse them. A weak Believer is a Member of Christ, and though Christ
will cut off rotten Members from his Body, yet not weak Members.

Effectual Calling.
ROMANS 8.30. Them he also called.


Quest. XX. WHat is effectual Calling?

Answ. It is a gracious work of the Spirit, whereby he causes us to embrace
Christ freely offered to us in the Gospel.

In this Verse is a golden Chain of Salvation, made up of four Links; this is
one Vocation, Them he also called. Calling is nova Creatio, a new Creation, the
first Resurrection. -- There is a twofold Call: 1. An extrinsick or outward
Call; 2. An intrinsic or inward effectual Call.

1. An extrinsick or outward Call, which is God's offer of Grace to sinners,
inviting them to come in and accept of Christ and Salvation, Matthew. 20.16. Many
are called, but few chosen. This outward Call shows Men what they ought to do
in order to Salvation, and renders them inexcusable in case of Disobedience.

2. There is an intrinsic or effectual Call, when God with the offer of Grace
works Grace; by this Call the Heart is renewed, and the Will effectually drawn
to embrace Christ. The outward Call brings Men to a profession of Christ, the
inward to a possession of Christ.

Quest. What is the means of this effectual Call?

Resp. Every Creature has a Voice to call to us. The Heavens call to us to
behold God's glory, Psalm. 19.1. Conscience calls to us, God's Judgments call to
us Repent, Mic. 6.9. Hear ye the Rod. But every Voice does not convert. There
are two means of our effectual Call:

1. The preaching of the Word, which is the sounding God's silver Trumpet in
Men's Fears; God does not speak by an Oracle, he calls by his Ministers. Samuel
thought it had been only the Voice of Eli, that called to him, but it was God's
voice, 1 Samuel 3.6. So perhaps you think it is only the Minister speaks to you
in the Word, but it is God himself speaks. Therefore Christ is said, ( Now) to
speak to us from Heaven, Hebr. 12.25. How does he speak but by his Ministers?
as a King speaks by his Ambassadors. Know, that in every Sermon preached, God
calls to you, and to refuse the Message we bring, is to refuse God himself.

2. The other means of our effectual Call, is the Holy Spirit. The Ministry of
the Word is the Pipe or Organ, the Spirit of God blowing in it, does
effectually change Men's hearts, Acts 10.44. While Peter spoke, the Holy Ghost
fell on all them that heard the Word of God. Ministers knock at the door of
Men's hearts, the Spirit comes with a Key and opens the door, Acts 16.14. A
certain woman named Lydia, whose heart the Lord opened.

Quest. From what does God call Men?

Resp. 1. From sin; He calls them from their Ignorance and Unbelief, 1 Pet.
1.14. By Nature the Understanding is inveloped with Darkness, God calls Men
from darkness to light, Ephesians. 5.8. as if one should be called out of a Dungeon
to behold the Light of the Sun.

2. From Danger. As the Angel called Lot out of Sodom, when it was ready to
rain fire; so God calls his People from the Fire and Brimstone of Hell, and
from all those Curses they were exposed to.

3. He calls them out of the World, as Christ called Matthew from the Receipt
of Custom, John 17.16. Ye are not of the world. Such as are Divinely called,
are not Natives here, but Pilgrims, they do not conform to the world, or follow
its sinful fashions. They are not of the world, though they live here, yet,
they trade in the heavenly Country. The World is a place where Satan's Throne
is, Rev. 2.13. a Stage on which sin every day acts its part; now such as are
called are in, but not of the World.

Quest. To what God calls Men?

Resp. 1. He calls them to Holiness, 1 Thessalonians. 4.7. God has not called us unto
uncleanness, but unto holiness. Holiness is the livery, or silver star the
Godly wear, Isa. 63.18. Knam kodsheca, The people of thy holiness. The called
of God are anointed with the consecrating Oil of the Spirit, 1 John 2.20. Ye
have an Unction from the holy One.

2. God calls them to Glory, as if a Man were called out of a Prison to sit
upon a Throne, 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. Who has called you to his Kingdom and Glory.
Whom God calls, he crowns. It is a weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. The Hebrew
word for Glory ( Kauod) signifies pondus, a weight: The weight of Glory adds to
the worth. The weightier Gold is, the more it is worth. And this Glory is not
transient, but permanent, an eternal weight: it is better felt then expressed.

Quest. What is the cause of the effectual Call?

Resp. God's electing Love; Romans 8.30. Whom he predestined, them he also
called. Election is the Fountain-cause of our Vocation. It is not because some
are more worthy to partake of the heavenly Calling then others, (as the
Arminians) we were all in our blood, Ezekiel. 16.6. and what worthiness in us?
What worthiness was there in Mary Magdalen, out of whom seven Devils were cast?
What worthiness in the Corinthians, when God began to call them by his Gospel?
they were Fornicators, Effeminate, Idolaters, 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were some of
you, but ye are washed, etc. Before effectual Calling, we are not only without
strength, Romans 5.6. but Enemies, Col. 1.21. So that the Foundation of Vocation
is Election.

Quest. What are the Epithites or Qualifications of this Call?

Resp. 1. It is a powerful Call. Verba Dei sunt opera, Luther: God puts forth
infinite power in calling home a sinner to himself: He does not only put forth
his Voice, but his Arm. The Apostle speaks of the (...), the exceeding
greatness of his power he exercises toward them that believe, Ephesians. 1.19.
God rides forth conquering in the Chariot of his Gospel, he conquers the Pride
of the Heart, and makes the Wiil, which stood out as a Fort-Royal, to yield and
stoop to his Grace; he makes the stony heart bleed: It is a mighty powerful
Call. Why then do the Arminians seem to talk of a Moral Persuasion? That God in
the Conversion of a Sinner, does only morally persuade, and no more. He sets
his Promises before them, to allure them to Good, and his Threatenings to deter
them from Evil; and here is all he does. But sure Moral Persuasions alone are
insufficient to the effectual Call. How can the bare Proposal of Promises and
Threatenings convert a Soul? This amounts not to a new Creation? or that Power
which raised Christ from the dead. God does not only persuade, but enable,
Ezekiel. 36.27. If God in Conversion should only morally persuade, that is, set
Good and Evil before Men, then God does not put forth so much power in saving
Men, as the Devil does in destroying them. Satan does not only propound
tempting Objects to Men, but does concur with his Temptations, therefore he is
said to work in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. The Greek word (...),
to work, signifies imperii vim, Cameron, the power Satan has in carrying Men
to sin. And shall not God's Power in converting be greater then Satan's Power
in seducing? The effectual Call is mighty and powerful; God puts forth a Divine
Energy, nay, a kind of Omnipotency. It is such a powerful Call, that the will
of Man has no power to resist.

2. It is an high Calling. Phil. 3.14. I press toward the mark for the price of
the high calling of God. It is an high Calling, 1. Because we are called to
high Exercises of Religion. To be crucified to the World, to live by Faith, to
do Angels Work, to love God, to be living Organs of his Praise, to hold
communion with the Father and the Son, 1 John 1.3.

2. It is an high Calling, because we are called to high Privileges; to
Justification and Adoption, to be Kings and Priests unto God; We are called to
the fellowship of Angels, to be coheirs with Christ, Romans 8.17. They who are
effectually called, are Candidates of Heaven, they are Princes in all Lands,
Psalm. 45.16. though Princes in disguise.

3. It is an immutable Call, Romans 11.9. The gifts and calling of God are
without repentance; that is, those gifts which flow from Election, (as Vocation
and Justification) these are without Repentance. God repented he called Saul to
be King; but he never repents that he calls a Sinner to be a Saint.

Use 1. See the necessity of the effectual Call, a Man cannot go to Heaven
without it. First we must be called before glorified, Romans 8.30. A Man uncalled
can lay claim to nothing in the Bible but Threatenings; a Man in the state of
Nature is not fit for Heaven, no more then a Man in his filth and rags is fit
to come into a Kings presence: a Man in his pure Naturals, is (...), a
God-hater, Romans 1.30. and is he fit for Heaven? will God lay his Enemy in his
bosom?

Use 2. of Trial. Whether we are effectually called? We may know it by the
Antecedent, and Consequent of it.

1. By the Antecedent. Before this effectual Call, an humbling work passes
upon the Soul. A Man is convinced of sin, he sees he is a sinner, and nothing
but a sinner; the fallow-ground of his heart is broken up, Ier. 4.3. As the
Husbandman breaks the Clods, then casts in the Seed; so God by the convincing
work of the Law breaks a sinners heart, and makes it fit to receive the Seeds
of Grace. Such as were never convinced, were never called, John 16.8. He shall
convince the world of sin. Conviction is the first step to Conversion.

2. By the Consequents: Two. 1. He who is savingly called, Answers to God's
Call. When God called Samuel, he answered, Speak Lord, thy servent hears, 1 Samuel 3.10. When God calls thee to any Act of Religion, thou do run at God's
Call, Acts 26.19. I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision. If God calls to
Duties contrary to flesh and blood, we obey his voice in every thing. True
Obedience is like the Needle which points that way which the Loadstone draws.
Such as are deaf to God's Call, a sign they are not called by Grace. 2. He who
is effectually called does stop his Ear to all other Calls, which would call
him off from God: as God has his Call, so there are other contrary Calls;
Satan calls by a Temptation, Lust calls, evil company calls: But as the Adder
stops its Ear against the Voice of the Charmer; so he who is effectually called
stops his Ear against all the Charms of Flesh and Devil

Use 3. Of Comfort to them who are the called of God; This Call evidenceth
Election, Romans 8.30. Whom he predestined, them he also called. Election is
the cause of our Vocation, and Vocation is the sign of our Election. Election
is the first Link of the golden Chain of Salvation, Vocation is the second; he
who has the second Link of the Chain, is sure of the first Link. As by the
Stream we are led to the Fountain, so by Vocation we ascend to Election;
Calling is an earnest and pledge of Glory. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. God has chosen you
to salvation through sanctification. We may read God's predestinating love in
the work of Grace in our heart.

Branch 2. To such as are called, to be thankful to God for this unspeakable
Blessing; be thankful to all the Persons in the Trinity, to the Father's Mercy,
to the Son's Merit, to the Spirit's Efficacy. To make you thankful, consider,
when you had offended God that he should call you, that when God needed you
not, he had Millions of glorified Saints and Angels to praise him, yet he
called you. Again, consider what you were before God called you, you were in
your sins; when God called Paul, he found him persecuting; when he called
Matthew, he found him at the Receipt of Custom; when he called Zacheus, he
found him using Extorsion. When God calls a Man by his Grace, he finds him
seeking after his Lusts, as when Saul was called to the Kingdom, he was seeking
the Asses. That God should call thee when thou were in the hot pursuit of sin,
admire God's Love, exalt his Praise. Again, that God should call you, and pass
by others, what Mercy is this? Matthew. 11.26. Even so Father for so it seemed
good in thy sight. That God should pass by the wise and noble Persons of
sweeter disposition, acuter parts, guilty of less Vice, and that the Lot of
Free Grace should fall on you, O astonishing Love of God. It was a great favor
of God to Samuel, that God called to him, and revealed his Mind to him, and
passed by Eli, though a Priest and a Judge in Israel, 1 Samuel 3.9. so that God
should call to thee, a flagitious sinner, and pass by others of higher birth,
and better morals, here is that calls aloud for Praise. As God so governs the
Clouds, that he makes them rain upon one place, and not upon another, so does
he dispense his Grace, it shall drop its sweet dew upon one, and not another.
Two at a Sermon, one his heart the Lord opens, the other is no more affected
with it, than a deaf Man with the sound of Music. Here is the Banner of
Free Grace displayed, and here should be the Trophies of Praise erected. Eliah
and Elisha were walking together, on a sudden there came a Chariot of Fire, and
carried Eliah up to Heaven, but left Elisha behind; so when two are walking
together, Husband and Wife, Father and Child, that God should call one by his
Grace, but leave the other, carry one up in a triumphant Chariot to Heaven, but
let the other perish eternally: O infinite rich Grace! how should they that are
called be affected with God's discriminating Love; how should the Vessels of
Mercy run over with Thankfulness; how should they stand upon Mount Gerizim,
blessing and praising God: O begin the work of Heaven here! Such as are
Patterns of Mercy, should be Trumpets of Praise: Thus S. Paul being called of
God, and seeing what a Debtor he was to Free Grace, breaks forth into
Admiration and Gratulation, 1 Timothy 1.13.

Use 4. To the Called, walk worthy of your high Calling, Ephesians. 4.1. I beseech
you that you walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called; in two things:

1. Walk compassionately, pity such as are yet uncalled: Have thou a Child that
God has not yet called, a Wife, a Servant? Weep over their dying Souls. They
are in their Blood, under the Power of Satan; O pity them! Let their sins more
trouble you then your own Sufferings: If you pity an Ox or Ass going astray,
will you not pity a Soul going astray. Show your Piety by your Pity.

2. Walk holily; yours is an holy Calling, 2 Timothy 1.9. You are called to be
Saints, Romans 1.7. Show your Vocation by a Bible-conversation. Shall not Flowers
smell sweeter than Weeds? Shall not they who are ennobled with Grace, have more
Fragrancy in their Lives than Sinners? 1 Pet. 1.15. As he who has called you
is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation. O dishonor not your high
Calling by any sordid Carriage. When Antigonus going to defile himself with
Women, one told him, He was a King's Son: O remember your Dignity, Called of
God! of the Bloud-Royal of Heaven; do nothing unworthy of your Honorable
Calling. Scipio refused the Embraces of an Harlot, because he was General of an
Army. Abhor all Motions to sin, because of your high Calling. It Is not fit for
them who are the Called of God, to do as others: though others of the Jews did
drink Wine, it was not fit for the Nazarite, because he had a Vow of Separation
upon him, and had promised Abstinence. Though Pagans and loose Christians take
liberty to sin, yet it is not fit for them who are called out of the World, and
have the Mark of Election upon them, to do so: You are consecrated Persons,
your Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, and your Souls must be a
Sacrary, or Holy of Holies.

OF JUSTIFICATION.
Romans 3.24. Being justified freely by his grace.


Quest. XXI. WHat is Justification?

Resp. It is an Act of God's Free Grace, whereby he pardons all our sins, and
accepts us as righteous in his sight, only for the Righteousness of CHRIST
imputed to us, and received by Faith.

Justification is the very Hinge and Pillar of CHRISTIANITY; and an Error
about Justification is dangerous, like a Crack in the Foundation, or an Error
in the first Concoction. Justification by Christ is a Spring of the Water of
Life, and to have the Poison of corrupt Doctrine cast into this Spring, is
damnable. It was a Saying of Luther, That after his Death the Doctrine of
Justification would be corrupted. As it has been in these latter Times, the
Arminians and Socinians have cast a dead Fly into this Box of precious Ointment.

I shall endeavor to follow the Star of Scripture to light me through this
Mysterious Point.

Quest. What is meant by Justification?

Resp. It is verbum forense, a word borrowed from Law-courts, wherein a Person
arraigned is pronounced Righteous, and is openly absolved in the Court. Thus
God in justifying a Person, pronounces him to be Righteous, and looks upon him
as if he had not sinned.

Quest. What is the Ground of Justification?

Resp. The Causa, (...), the inward impellent Motive or Ground of Justification
is the Free Grace of God. So in the Text, Justified freely by his grace. Which
Ambrose expounds, Not of the Grace wrought within us, but the Free Grace of
God. The first Wheel that sets all the rest a running, is the Love and Favor
of God. Being justified by his Grace; as a King freely Pardons a Delinquent.
Justification is a Mercy spun out of the Bowels of Free Grace. God does not
justify us because we are worthy, but by justifying us makes us worthy.

Quest. What is the material Cause, or that by which a Sinner is justified?

Resp. The Matter of our Justification is Christ's Satisfaction made to his
Father. If it be asked, How can it stand with God's Justice and Holiness to
pronounce us Innocent, when we are Guilty? This answers it, Christ having made
Satisfaction for our Fault, now God may in Equity and Justice pronounce us
Righteous. It is a just thing for a Creditor to discharge a Debtor of the Debt,
when a Satisfaction is made by the Surety.

Quest. But how was Christ's Satisfaction meritorious, and so sufficient to
Justify?

Resp. In respect of the Divine Nature: As he was Man he suffered, as God he
satisfied; by Christ's Death and Merits God's Justice is more abundantly
satisfied then if we had suffered the Pains of Hell for ever.

Quest. Wherein lies the Formality or Essence of our Justification?

Resp. In the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us, Jer. 23.6. This is
the name whereby ye shall be called, Jehovah Tzidkennu, THE LORD OUR
RIGHTEOUSNESS. 1 Cor. 1.30. He is made to us righteousness. This Righteousness
of Christ which does justify us, is a better Righteousness then the Angels,
theirs is the Righteousness of Creatures, this of God.

Quest. What is the Means or Instrument of our Justification?

Resp. Faith, Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith. The Dignity is not in Faith
as a Grace, but relatively, as it lays hold on Christ's Merits.

Quest. What is the Efficient Cause of our Justification?

Resp. The whole Trinity, all the Persons in the Blessed Trinity have an Hand
in the Justification of a Sinner: Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa. God
the Father is said to justify, Romans 8.33. It is God that justifies. God the
Son is said to justify, Acts 13.39. By him all that believe are justified. God
the Holy Ghost is said to justify, 1 Cor. 6.11. But ye are justified by the
spirit of our God. God the Father justifies as he pronounces us Righteous; God
the Son justifies as he imputes his Righteousness to us; and God the Holy Ghost
justifies as he clears up our Justification, and seals us up to the Day of
Redemption.

Quest. What is the End of our Justification?

Resp. The End is, 1. That God may inherit Praise, Ephesians. 1.6. To the praise of
the glory of his grace. Hereby God raises the everlasting Trophies of his own
Honor: How will the justified Sinner proclaim the Love of God, and make Heaven
ring of his Praises.

2. That the justified Person may inherit Glory, Romans 8.30. Whom he justified
them he also glorified. God in justifying does not only absolve a Soul from
Guilt, but advance him to Dignity: as Joseph was not only loosed from Prison,
but made Lord of the Kingdom. Justification is crowned with Glorification.

Quest. Whether are we justified from Eternity?

Resp. No; for first, by Nature we are under a Sentence of Condemnation, Joh.
3.18. But we could not be at all condemned, if we were justified from Eternity.

2. The Scripture confines Justification to those who believe and repent, Acts
3.19. Repent, that your sins may be blotted out. Therefore their sins were
uncanciled and their Persons unjustified, till they did repent: though God does
not justify us for our Repentance, yet not without it. The Antinomians
erroniously hold, That we are justified from Eternity. This Doctrine is a Key
which opens the Door to all Licentiousness; what sins do they care they commit,
so long as they hold they are ab Aeterno, justified whether they repent or no.

Before I come to the Uses, I shall lay down four Maxims or Positions about
Justification:

Position 1. That Justification confers a real benefit upon the Person
justified. The acquitting and discharging the Debtor by Virtue of the
Satisfaction made by the Surety, is a real Benefit to the Debtor: A Robe of
Righteousness, and a Crown of Righteousness are real Benefits.

Position 2. All Believers are alike justified: Iustificatio non recipit magis
and minus: Though there are Degrees in Grace, yet not in Justification; one is
not justified more than another. The weakest Believer is as perfectly
justified, as the strongest: Mary Magdalen is as much justified as the Virgin
Mary. This may be Cordial-water to a weak Believer. Though thou have but a Dram
of Faith, thou art as truly justified as he who is of the highest stature in
Christ.

Position 3. Whomsoever God justifies he sanctifies: 1 Cor. 6.11. But ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified. The Papists calumniate the Protestants, they
report we hold that Men continuing in sin are justified; whereas all our
Protestant Writers affirm, That Righteousness imputed, viz. Justification, and
Righteousness inherent, viz. Sanctification must be inseparably united.
Holiness indeed is not the cause of our Justification, but it is the
concomitant: the Heat in the Sun is not the cause of its Light, but it is the
concomitant. It is absurd to imagine that God should justify a People, and
they go on Sin. If God should justify a People and not sanctify them, he
should justify a People whom he could not glorify. God as he is an Holy God,
cannot lay a Sinner in his Bosom. The Metal is first refined before the King's
Stamp is put upon it: First the Soul is refined with Holiness before God puts
the Royal Stamp of Justification upon it.

Position 4. Justification is inamissibilis, it is a fixed permanent Thing, it
can never be lost. The Arminians hold an Apostasy from Justification: To day
justified, to morrow unjustified; to day a Peter, to morrow a Judas; to day a
Member of Christ, to morrow a Limb of Satan; a most uncomfortable Doctrine.
Indeed justified Persons may fall from degrees of Grace, they may leave their
first Love, they may lose God's Favor for a time, but not lose their
Justification. If they are justified then they are elected; they can no more
fall from their Justification, then from their Election. If they are justified
then they have Union with Christ, and can a Member of Christ be broken off? If
one justified Person may fall away from Christ, then all may, and so Christ
should be an Head without a Body.

Use 1. See from hence, that there is nothing within us could justify us, but
something without us, not any Righteousness inherent but imputed: We may as
well look for a Star in the Earth, as for Justification in our own
Righteousness. The Papists say we are justified by Works. But the Apostle
confutes it, Not of works least any man should boast, Ephesians. 2.9. But the Papists
say, The Works done by an unregenerate Man indeed cannot justify him, but works
done by a regenerate Man may justify. This is most false, as may be proved both
by Example and Reason:

1. By Example Abraham was a regenerate Man, but Abraham was not justified by
Works but by Faith, Romans 4.3. Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him
for righteousness.

2. By Reason: How can those Works justify us which defiles us? Isa. 64.6. Our
righteousnesses are as filthy rags. Bona opera non praecedunt justificationem,
sed sequuntur justificatum: Good Works are not an Usher to go before
Justification, but an Handmaid to follow it.

Object. But does not the Apostle James say, Abraham was justified by works?

Resp. The answer is easy, Works declare us to be righteous before Men, but
they do not make us righteous before God. Works are Evidences of our
Justification, not Causes. This Name only must be graven upon the Golden Plate
of our High Priest Christ, The LORD our righteousness.

2. Use of Exhortation. Branch 1. Adore the infinite Wisdom and Goodness of God
to find out such a way to justify us, by rich Grace and precious Blood. We were
all involved in Guilt, none of us could plead, Not Guilty; and being Guilty we
lay under a Sentence of Death; now that the Judge himself should find out a way
to justify us, and the Creditor himself contrive a way to have the Debt paid,
and not distress the Debtor; this may fill us with Wonder and Love. The Angels
admire the Mystery of Free Grace in this new way of Justifying and Saving lost
Man, 1 Pet. 1.12. and should not we who are nearly concerned in it, and on whom
the Benefit is devolved, cry out with the Apostle, (...), O the depth of the
riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! etc.

Branch 2. Labor for this high Privilege of Justification: There is Balm in
Gilead, Christ has laid down the Price of our Justification, viz. His Blood,
and he offers himself and all his Merits to us, to justify; he invites us to
come to him, he has promised to give his Spirit, to enable us to do what is
required. Why then Sinners will ye not look after this great Privilege of
Justification? Do not starve in the midst of Plenty; do not perish when there
is a Remedy to save you. Would not he be thought to be distracted, if having a
Pardon offered him only upon the Acknowledgment of his Fault, and promising
Amendment, he should bid the Prince keep his Pardon to himself, for his part he
was in love with his Chains and Fetters, and would dye? Thou who neglectest
Justification offered thee freely by Christ in the Gospel, art this distracted
Person. Is the Love of Christ to be slighted? Is thy Soul and Heaven worth
nothing? O then look after Justification through Christ's Blood!

Consider, 1. The necessity of being justified: If we are not justified, we
cannot be glorified, Romans 8.30. Whom he justified them he also glorified. He
who is Outlawed, and all his Goods confiscated, must be brought into Favor
with his Prince, before he can be restored to his former Rights and Liberties.
So we must first have our Sins forgiven, and be brought into God's Favor by
Justification, before we can be restored to the Liberty of the Sons of God, and
have Right to that Happiness we forfeited in Adam.

2. The Utility and Benefit: By Justification we enjoy Peace in our Conscience,
a richer Jewel then any Prince wears in his Crown, Romans 5.1. Being justified by
faith, we have peace with God. Peace can sweeten all Afflictions, it turns our
Water into Wine: How happy is a justified Person, who has the Power of God to
guard him, and the Peace of God to comfort him. Peace flowing from
Justification, is an Antidote against the Fear of Death and Hell, Romans 8.34. It
is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? Therefore labor for this
Justification by Christ; this Privilege is obtained by believing in Christ,
Acts 13.39. By him all that believe are justified. And, Romans 3.25. Whom God
has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood. Faith unites us
to Christ, and having Union with his Person, we partake of his Merits, and the
glorious Salvation which comes by him.

Use 3. Comfort to the Justified, 1. It is Comfort in case of Failings: Alas,
how defective are the Godly, they come short in every Duty! But though
Believers should be humbled under their Defects, yet not despond, they are not
to be justified by their Duties or Graces, but the Righteousness of Christ.
Their Duties are mixed with Sin, but that Righteousness which justifies them,
is a perfect Righteousness.

2. Comfort in case of hard Censures: The World censures the People of God for
Proud and Hypocritical, and the Troublers of Israel, but though Men censure and
condemn the Godly, yet God has justified them: And as he has now, justified
them, so at the Day of Judgment he will openly justify them, and pronounce
them Righteous before Men and Angels. And God is so just and holy a Judge, that
having once justified his People, he will never condemn them. Pilate justified
Christ, I find no fault in him; yet after this he condemned him. But God having
publicly justified his Saints, he will never condemn them: Whom he justified,
them he also glorified.

Of ADOPTION.
Joh. 1.12. To them he gave power to become the sons of GOD.


HAving spoken of the great Points of Faith and Justification, the next is
Adoption:

1. The Qualification of the Persons: As many as received him. Receiving is put
for Believing, as is clear by the last words, To them that believe in his name.

2. The Specification of the Privilege: To them he gave power to become the
sons of God. The Greek word for Power, (...), signifies Dignity and
Prerogative; he dignified them to become the Sons of God.

Our Sonship differs from Christ's Sonship: Christ was the Son of God by
Eternal Generation, a Son before time; but our Sonship is, 1. By Creation, Acts
17.28. (...), we are his Offspring. This is no Privilege, Men may have God
for their Father by Creation, yet have the Devil for their Father.

2. Our Sonship is by Adoption: So in the Text, He gave them power to become
the sons of God. Adoption is twofold,

1. External and Federal: So those who live in a visible Church, and make a
Profession of God, are Sons, Matthew. 8.12. The children of the kingdom shall be
cast out.

2. Real and Gracious: So they are Sons who are GOD's Favorites, and are Heirs
of Glory. Before I proceed to the Questions, I shall lay down three Positions:

1. Adoption takes in all Nations: At first Adoption was confined to the People
of the Jews, they only were grafted in to the true Olive, and were dignified
with glorious Privileges, Romans 9.4. Who are Israelites; to whom pertains the
adoption, and the glory? But now in the time of Gospel, the Chartar is
enlarged, and the believing Gentiles are within the Line of Communication, and
have a Right to the Privilege of Adoption as well as the Jews, Acts 10.35. In
every nation he that fears God, and works righteousness, is accepted with
him.

Position 2. Adoption takes in both Sexes, Females as well as Males: 2 Cor.
6.18. I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters. I
have read in some Countries, Females are excluded from the Supreme Dignity; as
by the Salique Law in France, no Woman can inherit a Crown: But if we speak of
Spiritual Privileges, Females are as capable as Males. Every gracious Soul (of
whatever Sex) lays claim to Adoption, and has an Interest in God as a Father:
Ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty.

Position 3. Adoption is an Act of pure Grace, Ephesians. 1.5. Having predestined
us to the adoption of children, according to the good pleasure of his will.
Adoption is a Mercy spun out of the Bowels of Free Grace: all by Nature are
Strangers, therefore have no Right to Sonship, only God is pleased to adopt one
and not another, to make one a Vessel of Glory, another a Vessel of Wrath. The
adopted Heir may cry out, Lord, how is it thou will show thyself to me, and not
unto the World?

Quest. What this (...), this Filiation or Adoption is?

Resp. Adoption is the taking a Stranger into the Relation of a Son and Heir:
So Moses was the adopted Son of King Pharoah's Daughter, Exodus 2.10. And Esther
was the adopted Child of her Cousin Mordecai, Esth. 2.7. Thus God adopts us
into the Family of Heaven; and God in adopting us does two things:

1. He Ennobles us with his Name, he who is adopted bears his Name who adopts
him, Rev. 3.12. I will write on him the name of my God.

2. God consecrates us with his Spirit: Whom he Adopts he Anoints; whom he
makes Sons, he makes Saints: When a Man adopts another for his Son and Heir, he
may put his Name upon him, but he cannot put his Disposition into him; if he be
of a morose rugged Nature, he cannot alter it. But whom God adopts he
sanctifies: He does not only give them a new Name, but a new Nature, 2 Pet.
1.4. God turns the Wolf into a Lamb; he makes the Heart humble and gracious, he
works such a Change as if another Soul did dwell in the same Body.

Quest. From what State does God take us when he adopts us?

Resp. From a State of Sin and Misery. King Pharoah's Daughter took Moses out
of the Ark of Bulrushes in the Water, and adopted him for her Son. God did not
take us out of the Water, but out of our Blood, and adopted us, Ezekiel. 16. God
adopted us from Slavery: It is a Mercy to redeem a Slave, but it is more to
adopt him.

Quest. To what God adopts us?

Resp. He adopts us to a State of Excellency; it were much for God to take a
Clod of Dust and make it a Star: it is more for God to take a Piece of Clay and
Sin and adopt it for his Heir:

1. God adopts us to a State of Liberty, Adoption is a State of Freedom. A
Slave being adopted is made a free Man, Gal. 4.7. Thou art no more a servant,
but a son.

Quest. How is an adopted Son free?

Resp. 1. Not to do what he list: he is freed from the Dominion of Sin, the
Tyranny of Satan, the Curse of the Law.

2. He is free in the manner of Worship; he has God's free Spirit which makes
him free and cheerful in his Service of God; he is joyful in the house of
prayer, Isa. 56.7.

2. God adopts us to a State of Dignity: God makes us Heirs of Promise; God
Instals us into Honor, Isa. 43.4. Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou
have been honorable. The Adopted are God's Treasure, Exodus 19.5. His Jewels,
Mal. 3.17. His first Born, Heb. 12.23. They have Angels for their Lifeguard,
Heb. 1.14. They are of the Bloud-Royal of Heaven, 1 Job. 3.9. The Scripture
has set forth their Spiritual Heraldry; they have their Escutcheon or
Coat Armor: Sometimes they give the Lion for their Courage, Prove. 28.1.
Sometimes the Dove for their Meekness, Cant. 2.14. Sometimes the Eagle for
their Sublimeness, Isa. 40.31. Thus you see their Coat of Arms displayed; but
what is Honor without Inheritance? God adopts all his Sons to an Inheritance,
Luke 12.32. It is your Father's good pleasure to give you a kingdom. It Is no
Disparagment to be the Sons of God. To reproach the Saints, is as if Shimei had
reproached David when he was going to be made King; Adoption ends in
Coronation. The Kingdom God gives his adopted Sons and Heirs excels all Earthly
Monarchies:

1. In Riches, Rev. 21.21. the Gates of Pearl, and the Streets of pure Gold,
and as it were transparent Glass.

2. In Tranquillity; it is peaceable, the white Lily of Peace is the best Flower
of a Prince's Crown: Pax una triumphis innumeris melior -- No Divisions at
Home, or Invasions Abroad; no more the Noise of the Drum or Canon, but the
Voice of Harpers harping the Hieroglyphick of Peace, Rev. 14.2.

3. In Stability; other Kingdoms are corruptible, though they have Heads of
Gold, yet Feet of Clay: but this Kingdom into which the Saints are adopted runs
parallel with Eternity; it is a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, Heb. 12.28. The
Heirs of Heaven reign for ever and ever, Rev. 22.5.

Quest. What is the Organical or Instrumental Cause of Adoption?

Resp. Faith interests us in the Privilege of Adoption, Gal. 3.26. Ye are all
the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. Before Faith be wrought we are
Spiritually Illegitimate, we have no relation to God as a Father: an Unbeliever
may call God Judge but not Father; Faith is the filiating Grace, it confers
upon us the Title of Sonship, and gives us right to inherit.

Quest. Why Faith is the Instrument of Adoption, more then any other Grace?

Resp. 1. Faith is a quickening Grace, it is the Vital Artery of the Soul, Hab.
2.4. The just shall live by faith. Life makes us capable of Adoption, dead
Children are never adopted.

2. Faith makes us CHRIST's Brethren, and so GOD comes to be our Father.

Use 1. Branch 1. See the amazing Love of God in making us his Sons. Plato gave
God Thanks, that he had made him a Man, and not only a Man, but a Philosopher:
but it is infinitely more, that he should invest us with the Prerogative of
Sons. It is Love in God to feed us, but more to adopt us, 1 John 3.1. Behold,
what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called
the sons of God! It is an Ecce Admirantis, a Behold of Wonder.

The Wonder of God's Love in adopting us, will appear the more, if we consider
these six things,

1. That God should adopt us when he had a Son of his own. Men adopt because
they want Children, and desire to have some to bear their Name; but that God
should adopt us when he had a Son of his own, the Lord Jesus, here is the
Wonder of Love. Christ is called God's dear Son, Col. 1.13. A Son more worthy
then the angels. Heb. 1.4. Being made so much better then the angels. Now when
God had a Son of his own, such a Son, here is the Wonder of God's Love in
adopting us. We needed a Father, but he did not need Sons.

2. Consider what we were before God did adopt us: We were very deformed; a Man
will scarce adopt him for his Heir that is crooked and ill-favored, but that
has some Beauty. Mordecai adopted Esther because she was fair. But we were in
our Blood, and then God adopted us: Ezekiel. 16.6. When I saw thee polluted in thy
blood, it was the time of love. God did not adopt us when we were bespangled
with the Jewels of Holiness, and had the Angels Glory upon us, but when we were
black as Aethiopians, diseased as Leapers, then it was the time of Love.

3. That God should be at so great Expense in adopting us: When Men adopt they
have only some Deed sealed, and the thing is effected; but when God adopts, it
puts him to a far greater Expense, it se^s his Wisdom a work to find out a way
to adopt us: It was no easy thing to make the Heirs of Wrath, Heirs of the
Promise. And when God had found out a way to adopt, it was no easy way; our
Adoption is purchased at a dear Rate: When God was about to make us Sons and
Heirs, he could not Seal the Deed but by the Blood of his own Son. Here is the
Wonder of God's Love in adopting us, that he should be at all this Expense to
bring this work about.

4. That God should adopt his Enemies: If a Man adopts another for his Heir, he
will not adopt his mortal Enemy; but that God should adopt us when we were not
only Strangers but Enemies. Here is the Wonder of Love, for God to have
pardoned his Enemies had been much, but to adopt them for his Heirs, this sets
the Angels in Heaven a wondering.

5. That God should take great Numbers out of the Devil's Family and adopt them
into the Family of Heaven. Christ is said to bring many sons to glory, Heb.
2.10. Men adopt usually but one Heir, but God is resolved to increase his
Family, he brings many Sons to Glory. God's adopting Millions, is the Wonder of
Love. Had but one been adopted, all of us might have despaired, but he brings
many Sons to Glory; this opens a Door of Hope to us.

6. That God should confer so great Honor upon us in adopting us: David
thought it no small Honor, that he should be a King's Son-in-law, 1 Samuel
18.18. But what Honor to be the Sons of the High God? And the more Honor God
has put upon us in adopting us the more he has magnified his Love toward us.
What Honor that God has made us so near in Alliance to him, Sons of God the
Father, Members of God the Son, Temples of God the Holy Ghost, that he has
made us (...), as the Angels, Matthew. 22.30. Nay, in some sense superior to the
Angels, all proclaims the Wonder of God's Love in adopting us.

Branch 2. See the sad Condition of such as live and dye in Unbelief, they are
not the Sons of God: To as many as received him, he gave power to become the
sons of God, even to them that believe in his name. No Faith, no Sonship;
Unbelievers have no Sign on Sonship, they know not God; all God's Children know
their Father, but the Wicked do not know him, Jer. 9.3. They proceed from evil
to evil, and know not me, says the Lord. Unbelievers are dead in Trespasses,
Ephesians. 2.1. God has no dead Children; and not being Children, they have no Right
to inherit.

2. Use of Trial: Try whether we are adopted, all the World is divided into
these two Ranks, either the Sons of God, or the Heirs of Hell, Joh. 1.12. To
them he gave power to become the sons of God. Let us put ourselves on a Trial;
it is no sign we are adopted Sons, because we are Sons of Godly Parents: The
Jews boasted that they were Abraham's Seed, Ioh. 8.33. they thought they must
needs be good, because they came of such an Holy Line. But Adoption does not
come by Blood: we see many godly Parents have wicked Sons: Abraham had an
Ishmael; Isaac an Esau. The Corn that is sown pure yet brings forth Grain with
an Husk. He who himself is Holy, yet the Child that springs from his Loins is
Unholy. So that as Hierom, Non nascimur filii; We are not God's Sons as we are
born of godly Parents, but by Adoption and Grace. Well then, let us try if we
are the adopted Sons and Daughters of God.

First Sign of Adoption, Obedience; a Son obeys his Father, Jer. 35.5. I set
before the sons of the house of the Rechabites pots full of wine, and cups, and
said unto them, Drink ye Wine. But they said, We will drink no wine: for
Ionadab the son of Rechab our father commanded us, saying, Ye shall drink no
wine. So when God says, Drink not in Sin's enchanted Cup, an adopted Child
says, My Heavenly Father has commanded me, I dare not Drink. A gracious Soul
does not only believe God's Promise, but obey his Command. And true Child-like
Obedience must be Regular, which implies three things:

1. It must be done by a right Rule: Obedience must have the Word for its Rule;
Lydius Lapis: Isa. 8.20. To the law, to the testimony. If our Obedience be not
according to the Word, it is offering up strange Fire; it is (...),
Will Worship; and God will say, Who has required this at your hand? The
Apostle condemns worshipping of Angels, which had a show of Humility, Col.
2.18. The Jews might say, they were loath to be so bold as to go to God in
their own Persons, they would be more humble, and prostrate themselves before
the Angels, desiring them to be their Mediators to God. Here was a show of
Humility in their Angel-worship, but it was abominable, because they had no
Word of God to warrant it: It was not Obedience but Idolatry. Child-like
Obedience is that which is consonant to our Father's revealed Will.

2. It must be done from a right Principle; i. e. The noble Principle of Faith,
Romans 16.26. The obedience of faith. -- Quicquid decorum est ex fide
proficiscitur, Aug. A Crab-tree may bear Fruit fair to the Eye, but it is sour
because it does not come from a good Root. A Moral Person may give God outward
Obedience, and to the Eyes of others it seems glorious, but his Obedience is
sour because it comes not from that sweet and pleasant Root of Faith. A Child
of God gives him the Obedience of Faith, and that meliorates and sweetens his
Services, and makes them come off with a better relish, Heb. 11.4. By faith
Abel offered to God a better sacrifice then Cain.

3. It must be done to a right End: Finis specificat actionem; The end of
Obedience is glorifying God. That which has spoiled many glorious Services, is
when the end has been wrong: Matthew. 6.2. When thou do thine alms do not
sound a trumpet as the hypocrites do, that they may have glory of men. Good
Works should shine, but not blaze. If I give my body to be burned, and have not
charity, it profits me nothing, 1 Cor. 13.3. The same I may say of a sincere
aim; if I obey never so much, and have not a sincere Aim, it profits me
nothing. True Obedience looks at God in all, Phil. 1.20. That Christ may be
magnified. Though a Child of God shoots short, yet he takes a right Aim.

2. True Child-like Obedience is Uniform: A Child of God makes Conscience of
one Command as well as another: Quicquid propter Deum fit aequaliter fit. --
All God's Commands have the same Stamp of Divine Authority upon them; and if I
obey one Precept because my Heavenly Father commands me, then by the same Rule
I must obey all: As the Blood runs through all the Veins of the Body; and the
Sun in the Firmament runs through all the Signs of the Zodiac; so true
Child-like Obedience runs through the First and Second Table, Psalm. 119.6. When
I have respect to all thy commandments. To obey God in some things of Religion,
and not in others, shows an unsound Heart: Like Esau who obeyed his Father in
bringing him Venison, but not in a greater matter, viz. the Choice of his Wife.
Child-like Obedience moves toward every Command of God; as the Needle points
that way which the Lodestone draws. If God call to Duties which are cross to
Flesh and Blood, if we are Children we obey our Father.

Quest. But who can obey God in all things?

Ans. An adopted Heir of Heaven, though he cannot obey every Precept perfectly,
yet he does evangelically: 1. He approves of every Command, Romans 7.16. I
consent to the law that it (...) good. 2. A Child of God delights in every
Command, Psalm. 119.97. O how I love thy precepts. 3. His desire is to obey
every Command, Psalm. 119.5. O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes.
4. Wherein he comes short, he looks up to Christ's Blood to make supply for his
Defects. This is Evangelical Obedience, which though it be not to Satisfaction,
it is to Acceptance.

3. True Child-like Obedience is constant, Psalm. 106.3. Blessed is he that does
righteousness at all times. Child-like Obedience is not like an high Cholor in
a Fit, which is soon over, but like a right Sanguine Complexion it abides; it
is like the Fire on the Altar, which was kept always burning, Lev. 6.13.

Second Sign of Adoption, To love to be in our Father's Presence; the Child who
loves his Father, is never so well as when he is near his Father. Are we
Children, we love the Presence of God in his Ordinances? In Prayer we speak to
God, in the preaching of his Word he speaks to us: And how does every Child of
God delight to hear his Father's Voice? Psalm. 63.1, 2. My soul thirsts for
thee, to see thy glory so as I have seen thee in the sanctuary. Such as
disregard Ordinances are not God's Children, because they care not to be in
God's Presence: Genesis 4.17. Cain went out from the presence of the Lord. Not
that he could go out of God's Sight, but the me^ning is, Cain went from the
Church and People of God, where the Lord gave vissible Tokens of his Presence.

Third Sign of Adoption, To have the Conduct of God's Spirit, Romans 8.^4. As
many as are led by the spirit of God, are the sons of God. It is not enough
that the Child have Life, but it must be led every step by the Nurse: so the
adopted Child must not only be born of God, but have the Manuduction of the
Spirit to lead him in a Course of Holiness: Hos. 11.3. I taught Ephraim also to
go, taking them by their arms. As Israel were led by the Pillar of Fire, so
God's Children are led by the Conduct of his Spirit: the adopted Ones need
God's Spirit to lead them, they are apt to go wrong. The fleshy Part inclines
to sin, the Understanding and Conscience are to guide the Will, but the Will is
imperious and rebels, therefore God's Children need the Spirit to check
Corruption, and lead them in the right way; as the wicked Men are led by the
Evil Spirit: The Spirit of Satan led Herod to Incest, Ahab to Murder, Judas to
Treason; so the good Spirit leads God's Children into Virtuous Actions.

Object. But Enthusiasts pretend to be led by the Spirit, when it is an Ignis
Fatuus, a Delusion?

Ans. The Spirit's Conduct is agreeable to the Word: Enthusiasts leave the
Word, The word is truth, Joh. 17.17. And the spirit guides in all truth, Joh.
16.13. The Word's Teaching, and the Spirit's Leading agree together.

Fourth Sign, If we are adopted we have an entire love to all God's Children, 1
Pet. 2.17. Love the brotherhood. We bear Affection to God's Children, though
they have some Infirmities: There are the spots of God's Children, Deuteronomy. 32.5.
But we must love the beautiful Face of Holiness, though it has a Scar in it.
If we are adopted we love the Good we see in God's Children, we admire their
Graces, we pass by their Imprudencies: if we cannot love them because they have
some Failings, how do we think God can love us? can we plead Exemption? By
these Signs we may know our Adoption.

Quest. What are the benefits which accrue to God's Children?

Ans. They have great Immunities: King's Children have great Privileges and
Freedoms; they do not pay Custom, Mat. 17.6. God's Children are privileged
Persons; they are privileged from the hurt of every thing, Luke 10.19. Nothing
shall by any means hurt you. Hit you it may, not hurt you: Psalm. 91.10. There
shall no evil befall thee. God says not, no Affliction shall befall his
Children, but no Evil; the Hurt and Poison of it is taken away. Affliction to a
wicked Man has Evil in it, it makes him worse; it makes him curse and
blaspheme, Rev. 16.9. Men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the
name of God. But no Evil befalls a Child of God, he is bettered by Affliction,
Heb. 12.10. The Furnace makes Gold purer. Again, no Evil befalls the Adopted,
because no Condemnation, Romans 8.33. It is God that justifies, who is he that
condemns? What a blessed Privilege is this, to be freed from the Sting of
Affliction, and the Curse of the Law; to be in such a Condition that nothing
can hurt one. When the Dragon has poisoned the Water, the Unicorn with his
Horn does extract and draw out the Poison; so Jesus Christ has drawn out the
Poison of every Affliction, that it cannot prejudice the Saints.

Second Benefit, If we are adopted, then we have an Interest in all the
Promises: The Promises are Childrens Bread: Believers are heirs of the Promise,
Heb. 6.17. The Promises are sure; God's Truth which is the brightest Pearl in
his Crown is laid to pawn in a Promise. The Promises are suitable; like a
P^^sick-garden, there is no Disease but there is some Herb in the
Physick-garden to cure it. In the Dark of Desertion God has promised to be a
Sun; in Temptation to tread down Satan, Romans 16.20. Does Sin prevail? he has
promised to take away its Kingly Power, Romans 6.14. O the Heavenly Comforts
which are distilled from the Limbeck of the Promises; But who has a Right to
these? Believers only are Heirs of the Promise. There is never a Promise in the
Bible, but a Believer may say, This is mine.

Use ult. Extol and magnify God's Mercy who has adopted you into his Family,
who of Slaves has made you Sons, of Heirs of Hell, Heirs of the Promise.
Adoption is a free Gift, He gave them power, or dignity, to become the sons of
God. As a Thread of Silver runs through the whole Piece of Work, so Free Grace
runs through this whole privilege of Adoption: Adoption is a greater Mercy
then Adam had in Paradise; he was a Son by Creation, but here is a further
Sonship by Adoption, to make us thankful. Consider, in Civil Adoption there is
some worth or excellency in the Person to be adopted, but there was no worth in
us, neither Beauty, nor Parentage, nor Virtue, nothing in us to move God to
bestow the Prerogative of Sonship upon us. We have enough in us to move God to
correct us, but nothing to move him to adopt us; therefore exalt Free Grace,
begin the work of Angels here: Bless him with your Praises, who has blessed
you in making you his Sons and Daughters.

SANTIFICATION.
1 THESSALONIANS. 4.3. For this is the Will of God, even your Sanctification.


THe Notion of the word Sanctification, signifies to consecrate and set apart
to an holy use. Thus they are sanctified Persons who are separate from the
World, and set apart for God's Service. Sanctification has a privative and
positive part.

1. A privative part, Mortification, which lies in the purging out of sin. Sin
is compared to Leven, which sowrs, and to Leprosy, which defiles:
Sanctification does purge out the old leven, 1 Cor. 5.7. Though it takes not
away the life, yet the love of sin.

2. A positive part, Vivification, which is the spiritual refining of the Soul,
which in Scripture is called a renewing of our mind, Romans 12.2. and a partaking
of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. The Priests in the Law not only were washed
in the great Lavor, but adorned with glorious Apparel, Exodus 28.2. so in
Sanctification, not only washed from sin, but adorned with purity.

Quest. What is Sanctification?

Answ. It is a Principle of Grace savingly wrought, whereby the Heart becomes
holy, and is made after God's own heart. A sanctified Person bears not only
God's Name, but Image. For the opening the nature of Sanctification, I shall
lay down these Seven Positions.

1. Sanctification is a supernatural thing; it is divinely infused; we are
naturally polluted, and to cleanse God takes to be his Prerogative, Lev. 21.8.
I am the Lord that sanctifies you. Weeds grow of themselves, Flowers are
planted. Sanctification is a Flower of the Spirit's planting, therefore it is
called, The Sanctification of the Spirit, 1 Pet. 1.2.

2. Sanctification is an intrinsical thing; it lies chiefly in the heart. It is
called the adorning the hidden man of the heart, 1 Pet. 3.4. The Dew wets the
Leaf, the Sap is hid in the Root; the Religion of some consists only in
externals, but Sanctification is deeply rooted in the Soul, Psalm. 51.6. In the
hidden part thou shall make me to know wisdom.

3. Sanctification is an extensive thing; it spreads into the whole Man: 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. The God of peace sanctify you wholly. As Original Corruption has
depraved all the Faculties, the whole head is sick, the whole heart faint, no
Part sound, as if the whole mass of blood were corrupted; so Sanctification
goes over the whole Soul. After the Fall there was Ignorance in the Mind, now
in Sanctification we are light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5.8. After the Fall the Will
was depraved, there was not only impotency to Good, but obstinacy; now in
Sanctification there is a blessed pliableness in the Will, it does symbolize
and comport with the Will of God. After the Fall the Affections were misplaced
on wrong Objects, in Sanctification they are tuned into a sweet order and
harmony, the Grief placed on Sin, the Love on God, the Joy on Heaven. Thus
Sanctification spreads it self as far as Original Corruption. It goes over the
whole Soul: The God of peace sanctify you wholly. He is not a consecrated
Person who is good only in some part, but who is all over sanctified. Therefore
in Scripture Grace is called a New Man, Col. 3.10. not a new Eye, or a new
Tongue, but a new Man. A good Christian, though he be sanctified but in part,
yet in every part.

4. Sanctification is an intense ardent thing. Qualitates sunt in subjecto
intensive, Romans 12.11. (...), fervent in spirit. Sanctification is not a dead
Form, but is inflamed into Zeal. We call Water hot, when it is so in the third
or fourth degree. He is holy whose Religion is heated to some degree, and his
heart boils over in love to God.

5. Sanctification is a beautiful thing, it makes God and Angels fall in love
with us, Psalm. 110.3. The beauties of holiness. As the Sun is to the World, so
is Sanctification to the Soul, beautifying and bespangling it in God's Eyes.
(...), Chrysostom. That which makes God glorious, must needs make us so. Holiness
is the most sparkling Jewel in the Godhead; Exodus 15.11. Glorious in holiness.
Sanctification is the First fruit of the Spirit; it is Heaven begun in the
Soul. Sanctification and Glory differ only in degree; Sanctification is Glory
in the Seed, and Glory is Sanctification in the Flower. Happiness is the
quintissence of Holiness.

6. Sanctification is an abiding thing. 1 John 3.9. His seed remains in him.
He who is truly sanctified, cannot fall from that state. Indeed seeming
Holiness may be lost, Colors may wash off, Sanctification may suffer an
Eclipse, Rev. 2.4. Thou have left thy first love; but true Sanctification is a
blossom of Eternity, 1 John 2.27. The anointing which ye have received abides
in you. He who is truly sanctified, can no more fail away then the Angels which
are fixed in their heavenly Orb.

7. Sanctification is a progressive thing, it is growing; it is compared to Seed
which grows. First the Bladesprings up, then the Ear, then the ripe Corn in the
Ear. Such as are already sanctified may be more sanctified, 2 Cor. 7.1.
Justification does not admit of degrees, a Believer cannot be more elected or
justified then he is, but he may be more sanctified than he is. Sanctification
is still increasing, like the Morning Sun which grows brighter to the full
Meridian. Knowledge is said to increase, Col. 1.10. and Faith to increase, 2
Cor. 10.15. a Christian is continually adding a Cubit to his spiritual Stature.
It is not with us as it was with Christ, who received the Spirit without
measure. Christ would not be more holy then he was. But we have the Spirit only
in measure, and may be still augmenting our Grace; as Appelles, when he had
drawn a Picture, he would be still mending it with his Pencil. The Image of God
is drawn but imperfectly in us, therefore we must be still mending it, and
drawing it in more lively Colors: Sanctification is progressive; if it does
not grow, it is because it does not live. Thus you see the Nature of
Sanctification.

Quest. What are the Counterfeits of Sanctification?

Resp. There is something looks like Sanctification, which is not.

1. The first Counterfeit of Sanctification is Moral Virtue. To be just,
temperate, to be of a fair deportment, not having ones Scocheon blotted with
ignominious scandal, this is good, but not enough: this is not Sanctification.
A field flower differs from a garden flower. 1. Heathens have attained to
Morality; Cato, Socrates, Aristides: Civility is but Nature refined; there is
nothing of Christ there: the heart may be foul and impure, under these fair
Leaves of Civility, the worm of Unbelief may be hid. 2. A Moral Person has a
secret antipathy against Grace: he hates Vice, and he hates Grace as much as
Vice. The Snake has a fine color, but a sting. A Person adorned and
cultivated with Moral Virtue, has a secret spleen against Sanctity: Those
Stoics which were the chief of the moralized Heathens, were the bitterest
Enemies St. Paul had, Acts 17.18.

2. The second Counterfeit of Sanctification is superstitious Devotion; this
abounds in Popery: Adorations, Images, Altars, Vestments, Holy Water, which I
look upon as a religious frenzy: This is far from Sanctification. 1. It does
not put any intrinsical goodness into a Man, it does not make a Man better. If
the legal Purifications and Washings, which were of God's own appointing, did
not make them that used them more holy; the Priests, who wore holy Garments,
and had holy Oil poured on them, were never the more holy without the anointing
of the Spirit? then surely those superstitious Innovations in Religion which
God never appointed, cannot contribute any holiness to Men. 2. A superstitious
Holiness costs no great labor; there is nothing of the Heart in it: If to tell
over a few Beads, or bow to an Image, to sprinkle themselves with Holy Water,
if this were Sanctification, and were all that were required of them that
should be saved, then Hell would be empty, none would come there.

3. The third Counterfeit of Sanctification is Hypocrisy; when men make a
pretense of that Holiness which they have not. A Cemet may shine like a Star;
such a Luster shines from their Profession as dazleth the eyes of the
beholders, 2 Timothy 3.5. Having a form of godliness, but denying the power. These
are Lamps without Oil, whited Sepulchers, like the Egyptian Temples, which had
fair Outsides, but within Spiders and Apes. The Apostle speaks of true
holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. implying, there is an Holiness which is spurious and
feigned, Rev. 3.1. Thou have a name to live, but art dead; like Pictures and
Statutes which are destitute of a vital principle, Jude 12. Clouds without
water. They pretend to be full of the Spirit, but empty Clouds. This show of
Sanctification (when it is nothing else) is Self-delusion. He who takes Copper
instead of Gold wrongs himself most; the Counterfeit Saint deceives others
while he lives, but deceives himself when he dies. To pretend Holiness when
there is none, is a vain thing. What were the foolish Virgins better for their
blazing Lamps, when they wanted Oil? What is the Lamp of Profession without the
Oil of Saving Grace? what Comfort will a show of Holiness yield at last? will
painted Gold enrich? painted Wine refresh him that is thirsty? will painted
Holiness be a Cordial at the hour of Death? A pretense of Sanctification is not
to be rested in. Many Ships that have had the name of the Hope, the Safeguard,
the Triumph, yet have been cast away upon the Rocks; so many who have had the
name of Saintship, have been cast into Hell.

4. The fourth Counterfeit of Sanctification is restraining Grace. When Men
forbear Vice, though they do not hate it: This may be the sinners Motto, Fain I
would, but I dare not. The Dog has a mind to the Bone, but is afraid of the
Cudgel. Men have a mind to Lust, but Conscience stands as the Angel with a
flaming Sword and affrights. They have a mind to Revenge, but the fear of Hell
is a Curb-bit to check them. Here is no change of heart; sin is curbed, but not
cured; a Lion may be in Chains, but is a Lion still.

5. The fifth Counterfeit of Sanctification is common Grace, which is a slight
transient work of the Spirit, but does not amount to Conversion. There is some
light in the Judgment, but it is not humbling; some Checks in the Conscience,
but they are not awakening. This looks like Sanctification, but is not. Men
have Convictions wrought in them, but they break loose from them again, like
the Deer which being shot, shakes out the Arrow: After Conviction Men go into
the House of Mirth, take the Harp to drive away the Spirit of Sadness, and so
all dies and comes to nothing.

Quest. Wherein appears the necessity of Sanctification?

Resp. In six things. 1. God has called us to it; 2 Pet. 1.4. Who has called
us to glory and virtue; to Virtue as well as Glory. God has not called us unto
uncleanness, but unto holiness, 1 Thessalonians. 4.7. We have no call to sin; we may
have a temptation, but no call; no call to be proud, or unclean, but we have a
call to be holy.

2. The necessity appears in this, without Sanctification there is no
evidencing our Justification; Justification and Sanctification go together, 1
Cor. 6.11. But ye are sanctified, but ye are justified. Mic. 7.18. Pardoning
iniquity, there is Justification; ver. 19. He will subdue our iniquities, there
is Sanctification. Out of Christ's sides came water and blood, 1 John 5.6.
Blood, viz. Justification, Water, viz. Sanctification. Such as have not the
Water out of Christ's sides to cleanse them, shall never have the Blood out of
his sides to save them.

3. Without Sanctification we have no title to the New Covenant. The Covenant
of Grace is our Charter for Heaven. The Tenure of the Covenant is, that God
will be our God, (the crowning Blessing) But who are interessed in the
Covenant, and may plead the benefit of it, only sanctified Persons; Ezekiel.
36.26. A new heart will I give you, and I will put my spirit within you, and I
will be your God. If a Man make a Will, and settles his Estate upon such
Persons as he names in the Will, none else but they can lay claim to the Will;
so God makes a Will and Testament, but it is restrained and limited to such as
are sanctified, and it is high presumption for any else to lay claim to the
Will.

4. There is no going to Heaven without Sanctification; Hebr. 12.14. Without
holiness no man shall see the Lord. God is an holy God, and he will suffer no
unholy Creature to come near him. A King will not suffer a Man with
Plague-sores to approach into his Presence. Heaven is not like Noah's Ark,
where the clean Beasts and the unclean entered: no unclean Beast comes into the
Heavenly Ark. Though God suffer the Wicked to live a while on the Earth, he
will never suffer Heaven to be pestered with such Vermin. Are they fit to see
God who wallow in wickedness? will God ever lay such Vipers in his bosom?
Without holiness no man shall see the Lord. It must be a clear Eye that sees a
bright Object; only an holy Heart can see God in his Glory. Sinners may see God
as an Enemy, not as a Friend; may have an affrighting Vision of God, but not a
beatifical Vision. They may see the flameing Sword, but not the Mercy Seat. O
then what need is there of Sanctification.

5. Without Sanctification all our holy things are defiled, 1 Tit. 1.15. Unto
them that are defiled is nothing pure. Under the Law, if a Man who was Unclean
by a dead Body, had carried a piece of holy Flesh in his Skirt, the holy Flesh
had not cleansed him, but he had polluted that, Hag. 1.12, 13. An Emblem of a
Sinners polluting his holy Offering. A foul Stomach turns the best Food into
ill Humors: An unsanctified Heart pollutes Prayers, Alms, Sacraments; this
evinceth the necessity of Sanctification. Sanctification makes our holy things
accepted; an holy Heart is the Altar which sanctifies the Offering; his Duties
though they are not to Satisfaction, yet to Acceptance.

6. Without Sanctification we can show no sign of our Election, 2 These. 2.13.
Election is the cause of our Salvation, Sanctification is our Evidence;
Sanctification is the Ear-mark of Christ's Elect Sheep.

Quest. What are the Signs of Sanctification?

Resp. 1. Such as are sanctified can remember a time when they were
unsanctified, Tit. 3.3. We were in our Blood, and then God washed us with
Water, and anointed us with Oil, Ezekiel. 16.9. Those Trees of Righteousness that
blossom and bear Almonds, can remember when they were like Aaron's dry Rod, not
one Blossom of Holiness growing: A sanctified Soul can remember when he was
estranged from God through Ignorance and Vanity, and then Free Grace planted this
Flower of Holiness in him.

Second Sign of Sanctification, is the in-dwelling of the Spirit, 2 Timothy 1.14.
The Holy Ghost which dwells in us. As the Unclean Spirit dwells in the
Wicked, and carries them to Pride, Lust, Revenge; the Devil has entered into
these Swine, Acts 5.3. So the Spirit of God dwells in the Elect as their Guide
and Comforter. The Spirit possesses the Saints; God's Spirit sanctifies the
Fancy, causing it to mint holy Thoughts; it sanctifies the Will, putting a new
Bias upon it, whereby it is inclined to Good. He who is sanctified, has the
Influence of the Spirit, though not the Essence.

Third Sign of Sanctification is, an Antipathy against Sin, Ps. 119.104. An
Hypocrite may leave Sin, yet love it; as a Serpent casts its Coat but keeps its
Sting: but a sanctified Person can say, he not only leaves Sin, but loathes it.
As there are Antipathies in Nature, between the Vine and Laurel, so in a
sanctified Soul there is an holy Antipathy against Sin; and Antipathies can
never be reconciled. Because he has an Antipathy against Sin, he cannot but
oppose it, and seek the Destruction of it.

Fourth Sign of Sanctification is, the Spiritual Performance of Duties, viz.
with the Heart, and from a Principle of Love. The sanctified Soul prays out of
love to Prayer, he calls the Sabbath a Delight, Isa. 58.13. A Man may have
Gifts to Admiration, he may speak as an Angel dropped out of Heaven, yet may be
carnal in spiritual things, his Services do not come from a renewed Principle,
nor is he carried upon the Wings of Delight in Duty. A sanctified Soul worships
God in the Spirit, 1 Pet. 2.5. God does not judge of our Duties by the length,
but by the love.

Fifth Sign, A well-ordered Life, 1 Pet. 1.15. Be ye holy in all manner of
conversation. Where the Heart is sanctified, the Life will be so too: the
Temple had Gold without as well as within. As in a Piece of Coin, there is not
only the King's Image within the Ring, but his Superscription too without. So
where there is Sanctification there is not only God's Image in the Heart, but a
Superscription of Holiness written in the Life. Some say they have good Hearts,
but their Lives are Vicious, Prove. 30.12. There is a generation that are pure
in their own eyes, yet is not washed from their filthiness. If the Water be
foul in the Bucket, it cannot be clean in the Well: Psalm. 45.13: The king's
daughter is all glorious within. There is Holiness of Heart, her Garments are
wrought of wrought Gold, Holiness of Life. Grace is most beautiful when its
Light does so shine that others may see it; this adorns Religion, and makes
Proselites to the Faith.

Sixth Sign, Steadfast Resolution; he is resolved never to part with his
Holiness: let others reproach it, he loves it the more; let Water be sprinkled
on the Fire, it burns the more. He says as David when Micol reproached him for
Dancing before the Ark, 2 Samuel 6.22. If this be to be vile, I will yet be more
vile. Let others persecute him for his Holiness, he says as Paul, Acts 20.24.
None of these things move me. He prefers Sanctity before Safety, and had rather
keep his Conscience pure than his Skin whole. He says as Job, My integrity I
will hold fast, and not let it go, Cap. 27.6. He will rather part with his Life
then his Conscience.

Use 1. See what is the main thing a Christian should look after, (viz.)
Sanctification; this is the Unum necessarium. Sanctification is our purest
Complexion, it makes us as the Heaven bespangled with Stars: it is our
Nobility, by it we are born of God, and partake of the Divine Nature; it is our
Riches, therefore compared to rows of Jewels, and Chains of Gold, Cant. 1.10.
It is our best Certificate for Heaven; what Evidence have we else to show? have
we Knowledge, so has the Devil? Do we profess Religion? Satan often appears in
Samuel's Mantle, and transforms himself into an Angel of Light: But here is our
Certificat to show for Heaven, Sanctification. Sanctification is the first
Fruits of the Spirit; the only Coin will pass current in the other World.
Sanctification is the Evidence of God's Love; we cannot guess at God's Love by
giving us Health, Riches, Success, but by drawing his Image of Sanctification
on us by the Pensil of the Holy Ghost.

Branch 2. It shows the Misery of such as are destitute of a Principle of
Sanctification; they are spiritually dead, Ephesians. 2.1. Though they breathe yet
they do not live. The greatest part of the World remain Unsanctified, 1. Ioh.
5.19. The World lies in Wickedness, that is, the major Part of the World. Many
call themselves Christians, yet blot out the word Saints; you may as well call
him a Man, who wants Reason, as him a Christian who wants Grace: Nay, which is
worse, some are boy'd up to such an height of Wickedness, that they hate and
deride Sanctification: 1. They hate it; it is bad to want it, it is worse to
hate it; they embrace the Form of Religion, but hate the Power. The Vulter
hates sweet smells, so do they the Perfume of Holiness. 2. Deride it; these are
your Holy Ones. To deride Sanctification argues an high Degree of Atheism, and
is a black Brand of Reprobation: Scoffing Ishmael was cast out of Abraham's
Family, Genesis 21.9. Such as scoff at Holiness shall be cast out of Heaven.

2. Use of Exhortation: Above all things pursue after Sanctification; seek
Grace more then Gold, Prove. 4.13. Keep her, for she is thy life.

Quest. What are the chief Inducements to Sanctification?

Resp. First, it is the Will of God that we should be Holy: In the Text, This
is the will of God, your sanctification. As God's Word must be the Rule, so his
Will the Reason of our Actions; This is the Will of God, our Sanctification.
Perhaps it is not the Will of God we should be rich, but it is his Will that we
should be holy. God's Will is our Warrant.

2. Jesus Christ has died for our Sanctification. Christ shed his blood to
wash off our impurity. The Cross was both an Altar and a Lavor. Tit. 2.14. Who
gave himself for us, to redeem us from all iniquity. If we could be saved
without holiness, Christ needed not have died. Christ died not only to save us
from wrath, but from sin.

3. Sanctification makes us resemble God. It was Adam's sin that he aspired to
be like God in Omnisciency, but we must endeavor to be like him in Sanctity.
It is only a clear Glass in which you can see a face; it is only an holy Heart
in which something of God can be seen; there is nothing of God to be seen in an
unsanctified Man, you may see Satan's Picture in him, Envy is the Devil's Eye,,
Hypocrisy his cloven Foot, but nothing of God's Image can be seen in him. You
can see no more of God in him, then you can see a Man's face in a Glass that is
dusty and foul.

4. Sanctification is that God bears a great love to. Not any outward
Ornaments, high blood, or worldly grandeur, draws God's love, but an heart
embellished with holiness. Christ never admired any thing, but the beauty of
holiness; he slighted the glorious buildings of the Temple, but admired the
Woman's Faith, O woman, great is thy faith! Amor fundatur similitudine. A King
delights to see his Image upon a piece of Coin: where God sees his likeness,
there he gives his love. The Lord has two Heavens he dwells in, and the holy
Heart is one of them.

5. Sanctification is the only thing does difference us from the wicked; God's
People have his Seal upon them, 2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation of God stands
sure, having this Seal, the Lord knows them that are his; and let every one
that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity. The Godly are sealed with
a double Seal; 1. a Seal of Election, The Lord knows who are his; 2. a Seal
of Sanctification, Let every one that names the name of Christ depart from
iniquity. This is the name by which God's People are known, Isa. 63.18. Gnam
Kodsheca, the people of thy holiness. As Chastity distinguishes a virtuous
Woman from an Harlot, so Sanctification distinguishes God's People from
others; 1 Ioh. 2.27. Ye have received an unction from the holy one.

6. It is a shame to have the Name of a Christian, yet want Sanctity, as to
have the Name of a Steward, yet want Fidelity; the Name of a Virgin, yet want
Chastity. It exposes Religion to reproach to be baptized into the Name of
Christ, yet unholy; to have Eyes full of Tears on a Sabbath, and on a Weekday
Eyes full of Adultery, 2 Pet. 2.14. To be so devout at the Lord's Table, as if
Men were stepping into Heaven, and so profane the Week after, as if they came
out of Hell. To have the Name of Christians, yet unholy, is a Scandal to
Religion, and make the ways of God evil spoken of.

7. Sanctification fits for Heaven. 2 Pet. 1.3. Who has called us to glory and
virtue, Glory is the Throne, and Sanctification is the Step by which we ascend
to it. First you cleanse the Vessel, and then you pour in the Wine. First God
cleanses us by Sanctification, and then pours in the Wine of Glory. Solomon
was first anointed with Oil, and then he was King, 1 Kings 1.39. First God
anoints us with the holy Oil of his Spirit, and then he sets the Crown of
Happiness upon our Head; Pureness of Heart, and seeing God are linked together,
Matthew. 5.8.

Quest. How may Sanctification be attained to?

Resp. 1. Be conversant in the Word of God. John 17.17. Sanctify them through
thy truth. The Word is both a Glass to show us the Spots of our Soul, and a
Lavor to wash them away; the Word has a transforming virtue in it, it
irradiates the mind, and consecrates the heart.

2. Get Faith in Christ's Blood, Acts 15.9. Having purified their hearts by
faith. She in the Gospel that touched the hem of Christ's Garment, was healed;
a touch of Faith purifies; nothing can have a greater force upon the heart to
sanctify it then Faith. If I believe Christ and his Merits are mine, how can I
sin against him? Justifying Faith does that in a Spiritual sense which
miraculous Faith does, it removes Mountains, the Mountain of Pride, Lust, Envy.
Faith and the love of sin are inconsistent.

3. Breathe after the Spirit; it is called the sanctification of the Spirit, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. The Spirit sanctifies the Heart, as Lightning purifies the Air, as
Fire refines Metals. Omne agens generat sibi simile: The Spirit stamps the
impress of its own Sanctity upon the Heart, as the Seal prints its Effigies and
Likeness upon the Wax. The Spirit of God in a Man perfumes him with Holiness,
and makes his Heart a Map of Heaven.

4. Associate with sanctified Persons. They may by their Counsel, Prayers, holy
Example, be a means to make you holy: As the communion of Saints is in our
Creed, so it should be in our Company, Prove. 13.20. He that walks with the
wise shall be wise. Association begets Assimilation.

5. Pray for Sanctification. Job propounds a Question, Who can bring a clean
thing out of an unclean? Job 15.14. God can do it. Out of an unholy Heart he
can produce Grace. O! make David's Prayer, Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a clean
heart, O God. Lay thy Heart before the Lord, and say, Lord, my unsanctified
Heart pollutes all it touches. I am not fit to live with such an Heart, for I
cannot honor thee; nor to die with such an Heart, for I cannot see thee. O
create in me a clean heart; Lord consecrate my heart, and make it thy Temple,
and thy Praises shall be sung there for ever.

Use 3. of Thankfulness. Has God brought a clean thing out of an unclean? has
he sanctified you? wear this Jewel of Sanctification with thankfulness, Col.
1.12. Giving thanks to the Father, (...), who has made us meet for the
Inheritance, etc. Christian, Thou could defile thy self, but not sanctify
thy self. But God has done it; he has not only chained up sin, but changed
thy Nature, and made thee as a King's Daughter, all glorious within. He has
put upon thee the Breast-place of Holiness, which though it may be shot at, can
never be shot through. Are there any here that are sanctified? God has done
more for you then millions. They may be illuminated, but not sanctified. He
has done more for you, then if he had made you the Sons of Princes, and caused
you to ride upon the high places of the Earth. Are you sanctified? Heaven is
begun in you; Happiness is nothing but the quintissence of Holiness. O how
thankful should you be to God? Do as that blind Man in the Gospel, after he had
received his sight, He followed Christ glorifying God, Luke 18.43. Make Heaven
ring of God's Praises.

Of ASSVRANCE.
Quest. WHat are the Benefits flow from Sanctification?

Resp. Assurance of God's Love, Peace of Conscience, Joy in the Holy Ghost,
Increase of Grace, and Perseverance therein to the end.

1. Benefit flowing from Sanctification is assurance of God's Love.

2 Pet. 1.10. Give Diligence to make your Calling and Election sure.
Sanctification is the Seed, Assurance is the Flower which grows out of it:
Assurance is a consequent of Sanctification, the Saints of old had it, 1 John
2.3. We know that we know him. 2 Timothy 1.12. I know whom I have believed; here
was Sensus Fidei, the reflex act of Faith; and Gal. 2.20. Christ has loved me.
Here was Faith flourishing into Assurance. Aecolampadias when he was Sick,
pointed to his Heart, Hic sat Lucis, Here I have Light enough, meaning Comfort
and Assurance.

Quest. 1. Have all Sanctified Persons Assurance?

Resp. They have a right to it, and I do incline to believe that all have it in
some degree before their last expiring; though their Comfort may be so strong,
and their Vital Spirits so weak, that they cannot express what they feel. But I
dare not positively affirm that all have Assurance in the first moment of their
Sanctification: A Letter may be written when it is not Sealed; so Grace may be
written in the heart, yet the Spirit may not set the Seal of Assurance to it.
God is a free Agent, and may give or suspend Assurance pro libito as he please.
Where there is the Sanctifying work of the Spirit, he may withhold the Sealing
work, partly to keep the Soul Humble; partly to punish our careless walking: We
neglect our Spiritual watch, grow remiss in duty, and then walk under a Cloud:
We quench the Graces of the Spirit, and God withholds the Comforts, and partly
to put a difference between Earth and Heaven. This I the rather speak, to bear
up the Hearts of Gods People, who are dejected because they have not Assurance:
You may have the Water of the Spirit poured on you in Sanctification, though
not the Oil of Gladness in Assurance; there may be Faith of Adherence and not
of Evidence; there may be Life in the Root, when there is no Fruit in the
Branches to be seen; so Faith in the Heart, when no Fruit of Assurance.

Quest 2. What is Assurance?

Resp. It is not Vocal, any audible Voice, or brought to us by the help of an
Angel, or Revelation; Assurance consists of a Practical Sylogism, where the
Word of God makes the major, Conscience the minor, the Spirit of God the
Conclusion. The Word says, He that fears and loves God, is loved of God; there
is the major Proposition; then Conscience makes the minor; but I fear and love
God; then the Spirit makes the Conclusion, therefore thou art loved of God: And
this is that which the Apostle calls, The Witnessing of the Spirit with our
Spirits, that we are his Children, Romans 8.16.

Quest. 3. Whether has a Sanctified Soul such an Assurance as excludes all
doubting?

Resp. He has that which bears up his Heart from sinking; he has such an
Earnest of the Spirit that he would not part with for the Richest Prize; but
his Assurance though it be infallible, it is not perfect. There will be
sometimes a Trepidation or Trembling; he is safe, yet not without fears and
doubts, as a Ship lies safe at Anchor, yet may be a little shaken by the Wind.
If a Christian had no Doubtings, there should be no unbelief in him; had he no
Doubtings, there would be no difference between Grace Militant and Triumphant.
Had not David his Ebbings sometimes as well as his Flowings, like the Mariner,
who sometimes cries out Stellam Video, I see a Star, sometimes the Star is out
of Sight. Sometimes we hear David say, Thy Loving Kindness is before mine Eyes,
Psalm. 26.3. But at another time he was at a loss, Psalm. 89.49. Lord where are
thy former Loving Kindnesses? And there may fall out an Eclipse in a Christians
Assurance, to put him upon longing after Heaven: Then there shall not be the
least doubting; then the Banner of Gods Love shall be always displayed upon the
Soul; then the light of God's Face shall be without Clouds, and have no
Sunsetting; then the Saints shall have an uninterrupted Assurance, and be ever
with the Lord.

Quest. 4. What are the differences between true Assurance and Presumption?

Resp. 1. They differ in the method or manner of working: Divine Assurance
flows from Humiliation for Sin; (I speak not of the measure of Humiliation, but
the Truth.) There are in Palermo Reeds growing in which there is a Sugared
Juice: A Soul humbled for Sin is the Bruised Reed in which grows this sweet
Assurance. God's Spirit is a Spirit of Bondage, before it be a Spirit of
Adoption; but Presumption arises without any humbling work of the Spirit. How
came thou by thy Venison so soon? The Plow goes before the Seed be sown; the
Heart must be plowed up by Humiliation and Repentance, before God sows the Seed
of Assurance.

2. He who has a real Assurance, will take heed of that which will weaken and
darken his Assurance; he is fearful of the Forbidden Fruit; he knows though he
cannot sin away his Soul, yet he may sin away his Assurance: But he who has
the Ignis Fatuus of Presumption, does not fear defiling his Garments; he is
bold in sin, Ier. 3.4, 5. Will thou not cry unto me my Father, behold thou have
done evil things as thou could. Balaam said, My God, yet a Sorcerer. A Sign
he has no Money about him, who fears not to Travel all Hours in the Night; a
sign he has not the Jewel of Assurance, who fears not the works of Darkness.

3. True Assurance is built upon a Scripture-basis; the Word says, The effect
of Righteousness shall be Quietness and Assurance for ever, Isa. 32.17. A
Christians Assurance is built upon this Scripture; God has sown the Seed of
Righteousness in his Soul, and this Seed has brought forth the Harvest of
Assurance* But Presumption is a spurious thing, it has no Scripture to show
for its Warrant; it is like a Will without Seal and Witnesses, which is null
and void in Law; Presumption wants both the Witness of the Word, and the Seal
of the Spirit.

4. Assurance flowing from Sanctification always keeps the Heart in a lowly
posture: Lord, says the Soul, what am I, that passing by so many, the Golden
Beams of thy Love should shine upon me? St. Paul had Assurance; is he proud of
this Jewel? No. Ephesians. 3.8. To me who am less than the least of all Saints. The
more love a Christian receives from God, the more he sees himself a Debtor to
free Grace, and the sense of his Debt, keeps his Heart Humble, but Presumption
is bred of Pride. He who Presumes, Disdains; he think himself better than
others, Luke 18.11. God I thank thee, I am not as other Men are, nor as this
Publican. Feathers fly up, but Gold descends; he who has this Golden
Assurance, his Heart descends in Humility.

Quest. 5. What is it may excite us to look after Assurance?

Resp. To consider how sweet it is, and the noble and excellent effects it
produces.

Effect 1. How sweet it is. This is the Manna in the Golden Pot; the white
Stone; the Wine of Paradise which chears the Heart. How comfortable is God's
Smile! The Sun is more refreshing when it shines out, that when it is hid in a
Cloud; it is a praelibation and fore-tast of Glory, it puts a Man in Heaven
before his time; none can know how delicious and ravishing it is, but such as
have felt it, as none can know how sweet Honey is but they who have tasted it.

2. The noble and excellent Effects it produces. 1. Assurance will make us
love God and Praise him. (1.) Love him: Love is the Soul of Religion, the Fat
of the Sacrifice; and who can love God so as he who has Assurance? The Sun
reflecting its Beams on a burning Glass, makes the Glass burn that that is near
to it. So Assurance (which is the reflection of Gods love upon the Soul) makes
it burn in love to God. St. Paul was assured of Christ's love to him, Gal.
2.20. who has loved me; and how was his Heart fired with love? he valued and
admired nothing but Christ, Phil. 3.8. as Christ was fastened to the Cross, so
he was fastened to Paul's Heart. (2.) Praise him. Praise is the Quit-rent we pay
to the Crown of Heaven; who but he who has Assurance of his Justification Man
in a Swoon or Apoplexy Praise God that he is alive? Can a Christian staggering
with Fears about his Spiritual Condition, praise God that he is elected and
justified? No, The living, the living, he shall praise thee, Isa. 38.19. Such
as are enlivened with Assurance, they are the fittest Persons to sound forth
Gods Praise.

Effect 2. Assurance would drop Sweetness into all our Creature-Enjoyments; it
would be as Sugar to Wine, an earnest of more; it gives a Blessing with the
Venison; As Guilt imbitters our Comforts, it is like drinking out of a Wormwood
Cup; So Assurance would indulcorate and sweeten all. Health, and the Assurance
of Gods Love are sweet Riches, with the Assurance of a Kingdom are delectable:
Nay, a Dinner of Green Herbs, with the Assurance of Gods Love, is Princely Fare.

Effect 3. Assurance would make us Active and Lively in Gods Service; it would
excite Prayer, quicken Obedience; as Diligence begets Assurance, so Assurance
begets Diligence. Assurance will not (as the Papists say) breed Security in the
Soul, but Industry. Doubting does discourage us in Gods Service, but the
Assurance of his Favor breeds Joy, And the Joy of the Lord is our strength,
Nehem. 8.10. Assurance makes us mount up to Heaven as Eagles in Holy Duties; it
is like the Spirit in Ezekiel's Wheels, that moved them and lifted them up.
Faith would make us Walk, but Assurance would make us Run: We should never
think we could do enough for God. Assurance would be as Wings to the Bird, as
Weights to the Clock, to set all the Wheels of Obedience a running.

Effect 4. Assurance would be a Golden Shield to beat back Temptation:
Assurance Triumphs over Temptation: There are two sorts of Temptation Satan
uses. 1. He tempts to draw us to Sin: Now the being assured of our
Justification would make this Temptation vanish. What Satan, shall I Sin
against him who has loved me, and washed me in his Blood? Shall I return to
Folly after God has spoken Peace? Shall I weaken my Assurance, wound my
Conscience, grieve my Comforter? Avoid Satan, Tempt no more. 2. Satan would
make us question our Interest in God, he tells us we are Hypocrites, and God
does not love us. Now there is no such Shield against this Temptation as
Assurance. What Satan, have I a real Work of Grace in my Heart, and the Seal of
the Spirit to witness it, and do thou tell me God does not love me? Now I
know thou art an Impostor, who go about to disprove what I sensibly feel. If
Faith resists the Devil, Assurance would put him to flight.

Effect 5. Assurance would make us contented, though we have but a little in
the World: He who has Enough is Content: He who has Sun-light is Content,
though he wants Torch-light. A Man that has Assurance has enough: In uno
salvatore omnes florent gemmae ad salutem. He has the Riches of Christ's Merit,
of his Love, an Earnest of his Glory, he is filled with the Fullness of God,
here is enough, and having enough he is Content, Psalm. 16.5. The Lord is the
portion of my Inheritance: The Lanes are fallen unto me in a pleasant place,
and I have a goodly Heritage. Assurance will rock the Heart quiet; the reason
of Discontent, is either because Men have no Interest in God, or do not know
their Interest: St. Paul, I know whom I have believed, 2 Timothy 1.12. There was
the Assurance of his Interest; and 2 Cor. 6.10. As sorrowful, yet always
rejoicing, etc. There was his Contentment: Get but Assurance, and you will be
out of the weekly Bill of Murmurers, you will be discontented no more. What can
come amiss to him that has Assurance God is his; Has he lost a Friend? His
Father lives; Has he lost his only Child? God has given him his only Son:
Has he Scarcity of Bread? God has given him the finest of the Wheat, the
Bread of Life. Are his Comforts gone? He has the Comforter. Does he meet with
Storms on the Sea? He knows where to put in for Harbor. God is his Portion,
and Heaven is his Haven. Thus Assurance gives sweet Contentment in every
Condition.

Effect 6. Assurance would bear up the Heart in Sufferings, it would make a
Christian endure Troubles with Patience and Cheerfulness (with Patience) Heb.
10.36. Ye have need of Patience. There are some Meats (we say) are hard of
Digestion, and only a good Stomach will concoct them: Affliction is a Meat hard
of Digestion, but Patience (like a good Stomach) will be able to digest it; and
whence comes Patience but from Assurance? Romans 5.5. Tribulation works
Patience, because the Love of God is shed abroad in our Hearts, with
cheerfulness. Assurance is like the Mariners Lanthorn on the Deck, which gives
light in a dark night. Assurance gives the light of Comfort in Affliction, Heb.
10.34. ye took joyfully the spoiling of your Goods, knowing in your selves,
etc. there was Assurance. He that has Assurance can rejoice in Tribulation, he
can gather Grapes of Thorns, and Honey out of the Lions Carcass. Latimer, When I
sit alone, and can have a settled Assurance of the State of my Soul, and know
that God is mine, I can Laugh at all Troubles, and nothing can daunt me.

Effect 7. Assurance would pacify a troubled Conscience: He who has a
disturbed vexatious Conscience, carries an Hell about him, Eheu quis intus
Scorpio! but Assurance cures the Agony, and allays the Fury of Conscience:
Conscience that before was turned into a Serpent, now is like a Be that has
Honey in its Mouth, it speaks Peace; Tranquillus Deus tranquillat omnia,
Tertull. When God is pacified toward us, then Conscience is pacified. If the
Heavens are quiet, and there are no Winds stirring thence, the Sea is quiet and
calm. So if there be no Anger in Gods Heart, if the Tempest of his Wrath does
not blow, Conscience is quiet and serene.

Effect. 8. Assurance would strengthen us against the Fear of Death; such as
want it, cannot dye with Comfort, they are in aequilibrio, they hang in a
doubtful Suspense, what shall become of them after Death: But he who has
Assurance, has an (...), an happy and joyful Passage out of the World; he
knows he is passed from Death to Life; he is carried full sail to Heaven;
though he cannot resist Death, yet (...) overcomes it.

Quest. 6. What shall they do that want Assurance?

Resp. 1. Such as want Assurance, let them labor to find Grace; when the Sun
denies light to the Earth, it may give forth its Influence: When God denies the
light of his Countenance, he may give the Influence of his Grace.

Quest. How shall we know we have a real Work of Grace, and so have a right to
Assurance?

Resp. If we can resolve two Queries: 1. Have we high Appretiations of Jesus
Christ? 1 Pet. 2.7. To you that believe he is precious, Christ is (...), all
made up of Beauties and Delights; our Praises fall short of his Worth, and is
like spreading Canvass upon Cloth of Gold. How precious is his Blood and
Incense? The one pacifies our Conscience, the other Perfumes our Prayers: Can
we say we have endearing Thoughts of Christ? Do we esteem him our Pearl of
Price? Our bright Morning Star? Do we count all earthly Enjoyments but as
((...)) Dung in comparison of Christ? Phil. 3.8. do we prefer the worst things
of Christ, before the best things of the World; the Reproaches of Christ,
before the Worlds Embraces, Heb. 11.26. Quer. 2. Have we the indwelling of the
Spirit? 2 Timothy 1.14. The Holy Ghost, which dwells in us.

Quest. How may we know we have the indwelling presence of the Spirit?

Resp. Not by having sometimes good Motions stirred up in us by the Spirit; it
may work in us, yet not dwell; but by the Sanctifying Power of the Spirit on
our Heart, the Spirit infuseth Divinam Indolem, a Divine Nature; it stamps its
own impress and Effigies on the Soul, making the Complexion of it Holy. The
Spirit ennobles and raises the Heart above the World; when Nebuchadnezzar had
his Understanding given him, he grazed no longer amongst the Beasts, but
returned to his Throne, and minded the Affairs of his Kingdom; when the Spirit
of God dwells in a Man, it carries his Heart above the visible Orbs; it makes
him Superna anhelare, thirst after Christ and Glory; if we can find this, then
we have Grace, and so have a right to Assurance.

2. If you want Assurance wait for it; if the Figures are graven on the Dial,
it is but waiting a while and the Sun shines: When Grace is engraven in the
Heart, it is but waiting a while and we shall have the Sunshine of Assurance.
He that believes makes not haste, Isa. 28.16. He will stay Gods leisure; say
not God has forsaken you, he will never lift up the light of his Countenance,
but rather say as the Church, Isa. 8.17. I will wait upon the Lord which hides
his face from the House of Jacob. 1. Has God waited for your Conversion, and
will not you wait for his Consolation? How (...) did he come a woing to you by
his Spirit? He waited till his Head was filled with Dew: He cried as Ier.
13.27. Will thou not be made clean, when shall it once be? O Christian! did God
wait for thy Love, and can not thou wait for his? 2. Assurance is so sweet
and precious, that it is worth waiting for, the price of it is above Rubies, it
cannot be valued with the Gold of Ophir. Assurance of Gods Love is a Pledge of
Election, it is the Angels Banquet; what other Joy have they? As Micah said,
Judges 18.24. What have I more? So when God assures the Soul of his eternal
purposes of Love, what has he more to give? Whom God kisseth he Crowns.
Assurance is (...), The first Fruits of Paradise, one Smile of Gods Face, one
Glance of his Eye, one Crumb of the hidden Manna, is so sweet a Delicious, that
it deserves our waiting. 3. God has given a Promise, that we shall not wait in
vain, Isa. 49.23. They shall not be ashamed that wait for me. Perhaps God
reserves this Cordial of Assurance for a fainting time; He keeps sometimes his
best Wine till last. Assurance shall be reserved as an Ingredient to sweeten
the bitter Cup of Death.

Quest. 7. How may deserted Souls be comforted, who are cast down for want of
Assurance? They have the Day Star of Grace risen in their Souls; but as Job
complains, I went Mourning without the Sun, Job 30.28. They go mourning for
want of the Sun-light of Gods Face: Their Joy is eclipsed, They walk in
darkness and see no light, Isa. 50.10. How shall we comfort such as lie
Bleeding in Desertion, and are cast down for want of Assurance?

Resp. 1. Want of Assurance shall not hinder the Success of the Saints Prayers.
Sin lived in, does ponere obicem, put a Bar to our Prayer; but want of
Assurance does not hinder Prayer; we may go to God still in an humble fiducial
manner: A Christian perhaps may think, because he does not see Gods smiling
Face, therefore God will not hear him. This is a mistake, Psalm. 31.22. I said
in my have, I am cut off from before thine eyes, nevertheless thou heardest the
voice of my Supplication* If we pour out Sighs to Heaven, God hears every
Groan; though he does not show us his Face, he may lend us his Ear.

2. Faith may be strongest when Assurance is weakest; the Woman of Canaan had
no Assurance, but a Glorious Faith, O Woman, Great is thy Faith, Mat. 15.28.
Rachel was more Fair, but Leah was more Fruitful. Assurance is more fair and
lovely to look upon, but a fruitful Faith God sees is better for us, John
20.28. Blessed are they that Believe and feel not.

3. When God is out of sight, yet he is not out of Covenant, Psalm 89.28. My
Covenant shall stand fast. Though a Wife does not see her Husbands Face in many
Years, yet the Marriage Relation holds, and he will come again to her after a
long Voyage. God may be gone from the Soul in Desertion, but the Covenant
stands fast, Isa. 54.10. The Covenant of my Peace shall not be removed. Quer.
But this Promise was made to the Jews, and does not belong to us. Yes, Verse
17. This is the Heritage of the Servants of the Lord. This is made to all the
Servants of God, them that are now living, as well as those who lived in the
time of the Jews.

Quest. 8. What should we do to get Assurance?

Resp. 1. Keep a pure Conscience, let no Guilt lie upon the Conscience
unrepented of; God Seals no Pardons before Repentance; God will not pour in the
Wine of Assurance into a foul Vessel, Heb. 10.22. Let us draw near in full
Assurance of Faith, having our Hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience. Guilt
clips the Wings of Comfort; he who is conscious to himself of Secret Sins,
cannot draw near to God in full Assurance; he cannot call God Father but Judge;
keep Conscience as clear as your Eye, that no dust of sin fall into it.

2. If you would have Assurance, be much in the Actings of Grace, 1 Timothy 4.7.
Exercise thy self unto Godliness. Men grow rich by Trading; by Trading in Grace
we grow rich in Assurance, 2 Pet. 1.10. Make your Election sure. How? Add to
your Faith Virtue, and to Virtue Knowledge. Keep Grace upon the Wing, it is the
lively Faith flourishes into Assurance; no Man will set up a great Sail in a
small Boat, but in a large Vessel: God sets up the Sail of Assurance in an
Heart enlarged in Grace.

3. If you would have Assurance, cherish the Holy Spirit of God. When David
would have Assurance, he Prays, Take not away thy Spirit from me, Psalm. 51.11.
He knew it was the Spirit only that could make him hear the Voice of Joy: The
Spirit is (...), the Comforter, he seals up Assurance, 2 Cor. 1.22. therefore
make much of the Spirit, do not grieve it: As Noah opened the Ark to receive
the Dove, so should we open our Hearts to receive the Spirit. This is the
Blessed Dove which brings an Olive branch of Assurance in its Mouth.

4. Let us lie at the Pool of the Ordinances, frequent the Word and Sacrament,
Cant. 2. He brought me to the Banqueting House, and his Banner over me was
Love. The blessed Ordinances are the Banqueting House, where God displays the
Banner of Assurance. The Sacrament is a Sealing Ordinance, Christ made himself
known to his Disciples in the breaking of Bread: So in the Holy Supper in the
breaking of Bread, God makes himself known to us to be our God and Portion.

Quest. 9. How should they carry themselves who have Assurance?

Resp. 1. If you have Assurance of your Justification, do not abuse Assurance.
1. It Is an abusing of Assurance, when we grow more remiss in Duty; as the
Musician having Money thrown him, leaves off playing. By Remisness or
intermitting the Exercises of Religion, we grieve the Spirit, and that is the
way to have an Imbargo laid upon our Spiritual Comforts. 2. We abuse Assurance
when we grow Presumptuous and less fearful of sin. What? because a Father gives
his Son an Assurance of his Love, and tells him he will entail his Land upon
him, shall the Son therefore be Wanton and Dissolute? This were the way to lose
his Fathers Affection, and make him cut off the Entail; it was an Aggravation
of Solomon's Sin, His Heart was turned away from the Lord, after he had
appeared to him twice, 1 Kings 11.9. It Is bad to sin when one wants Assurance,
but it is worse to sin when one has it. Has the Lord sealed his Love with a
Kiss? Has he left a Pawn of Heaven in your Hands, and do you thus requite the
Lord? Will you sin with Manna in your Mouth? Does God give you the sweet
Clusters of Assurance to feed on, and will you return him wild Grapes? It much
pleases Satan, either to see us want Assurance, or abuse it. This is to abuse
Assurance, when the Pulse of our Soul beats faster in Sin and slower in Duty.

2. If you have Assurance, admire this stupendous Mercy. You deserved that God
should give you Gaul and Vinegar to drink, and has he made the Honeycomb of
his Love to drop upon you? O fall down and adore his Goodness, say, Lord, How
is it that thou should manifest thy self to me, and not to other Believers!
Those whom thou love as the Apple of thine Eye, yet thou hold them in
Suspense, and give them no Assurance of thy Love; though thou have given them
the new Name, yet not the White stone; though they have the Seed of* Grace, yet
not the Oil of Gladness; though they have the Holy Ghost the Sanctifier, yet
not the Holy Ghost the Comforter. Lord, whence is it that thou should
manifest thy self to me, and make thy Golden Beams of Assurance shine upon my
Soul? O admire God! this will be the Work of Heaven.

3. Let your Hearts be endeared in Love to God; If God gives his People
Correction, they must love him, much more when he gives them Assurance. Psalm.
31.23. O love the Lord ye his Saints. Has God brought you to the Borders of
Canaan, given you a Bunch of Grapes, crowned you with loving Kindness,
confirmed your Pardon under the Broad Seal of Heaven? How can you be frozen at
such a Fire? How can you choose but be turned into Seraphins Burning in Divine
Love: Say as St. Austin, Animam meam odio Haberem, I would hate my own Soul, if
I did not find it loving God. Give God the Cream and Quintessence of your Love,
and show your Love, by being willing to lose all for his Sake.

4. If you have Assurance, improve it for Gods Glory, several ways; 1. By
encouraging such as are yet unconverted; Tell them how sweet this hidden Manna
is; Tell them what a good Master you serve, what Vails you have had; Tell them
God has carried you to the Hill of Myrrh, to the Mountains of Spices; He has
given you not only a Prospect of Heaven but an Earnest: O persuade Sinners, by
all the Love and Mercy of God, that they would enroll their Names in his
Family, and cast themselves upon him for Salvation. Tell them God has met with
you, and unlocked the Secrets of Free Grace, and assured you of a Land flowing
with those infinite Delights which Eye has not seen. Thus by telling others
what God has done for your Soul, you may make them in love with the ways of
God, and cause them to turn Proselytes to Religion. 2. Improve Assurance by
comforting such as want it; Be as the good Samaritan, pour Wine and Oil into
their Wounds. You ^ho have Assurance, are gotten as it were to the Haven, you
are sure of your Happiness; but do you not see others who are struggling with
the Waves of Temptation and Desertion, and are ready to sink? O now Sympathize
with them, and do what you can to comfort them when they are in this deep
Ocean, 2 Cor. 1.6. Whether we be comforted it is for your Consolation. The
comfortable experience of one Christian being communicated to another, does
much revive and bear up his fainting Heart; Our Comfort, says the Apostle, is
for your Consolation. 3. Improve Assurance by walking more Heavenly; you should
Scorn these things below; you who have an Earnest of Heaven, should not be too
Earnest for the Earth: You have Angels Food, and it becomes not you, with the
Serpent, to lick the Dust. The Wicked are all for Corn, Wine and Oil, but you
have that which is better; God has lifted up the Light of his Countenance:
Will you hanker after the World, when you have been feeding upon the Grapes and
Pomegranates of the Holy Land? Do you now Lust after the Garlic and Onions of
Egypt, when you are Clothed with the Sun, will you set the Moon and Stars
above you? O let them scramble for the World, who have nothing else but Husks
to feed on. Have you assurance of Heaven, and is not that enough? Will not a
Kingdom satisfy you? Such as are high in Assurance, should be in the
Altitudes, live above the World. 4. Improve Assurance by a Cheerful Walking: It
is for Condemned Persons to go hanging down their Head; but have thou thy
Absolution? Does thy God smile on thee? Cheer up, 2 Samuel 13.4. Why art thou,
being the King's Son, Lean? Art thou the King's Son? has God assured thee of
thy Adoption, and art thou ^ad? Assurance should be an Antidote against all
Trouble: What though the World hate thee, yet thou art assured that thou art
one of Gods Favorites. What though there is but little Oil in the Cruse, and
thou art low in the World, yet thou art high in Assurance; O then rejoice. How
Musical is the Bird! How does it chirp and sing, that knows not where to pick
up the next Crumb! And shall they be sad and discontented, who have God's Bond
to assure them of their daily Bread, and his Love to assure them of Heaven? But
certainly, those who have Assurance cannot but be of a Sanguine Complexion.

5. If you have an Assurance of Salvation, let this make you long after a
Glorified State: He who has an Earnest in his Hand, desires the whole Sum to
be paid: That Soul who has tasted how sweet the Lord is, should long for a
fuller enjoyment of him in Heaven. Has Christ put this Ring of Assurance on
thy Hand, and so espoused thee to himself, how should thou long for the
Marriage Supper of the Lamb, Rev. 19.9. O Christian, think with thy self, if a
glimpse of Heaven, a smile of God's Face be so sweet, what will it be to be
ever sunning thy self in the Light of God's Countenance! Certainly, you who
have an Assurance of your Title to Heaven, cannot but desire Possession. Be
content to Live, but willing to Dye.

6. If you have Assurance, be careful you do no not lose it; keep it, for it is
your Life, viz. Been esse.
the comfort of your Life. Keep Assurance 1 st by Prayer, Psalm. 36.10. O
continue thy Loving Kindness; Lord continue Assurance; do not take away this
Privy Seal from me. 2 dly, Keep Assurance by Humility: Pride estrangeth God
from the Soul; when you are high in Assurance, be low in Humility. St. Paul had
Assurance, and he Baptizeth himself with this Name, Chief of Sinners, 1 Timothy
1.15. The Jewel of Assurance is best kept in the Cabinet of an Humble Heart.

Of PEACE.
1 Pet. 1.2. Grace unto you, and Peace be multiplied.


HAving spoken of the first Fruit of Sanctification, Assurance, I proceed to
the Second, viz. Peace, Peace be Multiplied.

Quest. What are the several species or kinds of Peace?

Resp. Peace in Scripture is compared to a River, Isa. 66.12. this River parts
it self into Two Silver Streams.

1. There is an External Peace, and that is either 1. Aeconomical, Peace in a
Family. 2. Political, Peace in the State. Peace is the Nurse of Plenty, Psalm.
147.14. He makes Peace in thy Borders, and fills thee with the finest of the
Wheat. How pleasant is it when the Waters of Blood begin to assuage, and we can
see the Windows of our Ark open, and the Dove returning with an Olive Branch of
Peace? 3. Ecclesiastical Peace, Peace in the Church. Its Unity in Trinity is
the greatest Mystery in Heaven, and Unity in Verity the greatest Mercy on
Earth. Peace Ecclesiastical stands in opposition to Schism and Persecution.

2. A Spiritual Peace, which is Twofold, Peace above us, or Peace with God;
and Peace within us, or Peace with Conscience: This is Superlative; other Peace
may be lasting, this is everlasting.

Quest. 2. Whence comes this Peace?

Resp. This Peace has the whole Trinity for its Author. 1. God the Father is
the God of Peace, 1 These. 5.23. 2. God the Son is the Prince of Peace, Isa.
9.6. 3. Peace is said to be the fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22.

1. God the Father is the God of Peace. As he is the God of Order, 1 Cor.
14.33. so the God of Peace, Phil. 4.9. This was the form of the Priests
blessing the People, Numb. 6.26. The Lord give thee Peace.

2. God the Son is the Purchaser of Peace. He has made Peace by his Blood,
Col. 1.20. Having made Peace by the Blood of his Cross. The Atonement Aaron
made for the People when he entered into the Holy of Holies with Blood, was a
Type of Christ our High Priest, who has by his Sacrifice pacified his angry
Father, and made Atonement for us. Christ purchased our Peace upon hard terms,
his Soul was in an Agony, while he was travailing to bring forth Peace to the
World.

3. Peace is a fruit of the Spirit. He seals up Peace to the Conscience; the
Spirit clears up the work of Grace in the Heart, from whence arises Peace.
There was a Well of Water near Hagar, but she did not see it, therefore wept. A
Christian has Grace, but does not see it, therefore Weeps. Now the Spirit
discovers this Well of Water, it enables Conscience to witness to a Man that he
has the real work of Grace, and so Peace flows into the Soul. Thus you see
whence this Peace comes; the Father decrees it, the Son purchases it, the Holy
Ghost applies it.

Quest. 3. Whether such as are destitute of Grace, may have Peace?

Resp. No. Peace flows from Sanctification, but they being unregenerate, have
nothing to do with Peace, Isa. 57.21. There is no Peace (says my God) to the
Wicked: They may have a Truce, but no Peace. God may forbear the Wicked a
while, and stop the Roaring of his Cannon; but though there be a Truce, yet no
Peace. The Wicked may have something which looks like Peace, but is not. They
may be fearless and stupid; but there is a great difference between a stupefied
Conscience, and a pacified Conscience, Luke 11.21. When a strong Man keeps his
Palace, his Goods are in Peace. This is the Devils Peace; he rocks Men in the
Cradle of Security, he cries Peace, Peace, when Men are upon the Precipice of
Hell. The seeming Peace a Sinner has, is not from the knowledge of his
Happiness, but the ignorance of his Danger.

Quest. 4. What are the Signs of a false Peace?

Resp. 1. A false Peace has much Confidence in it, but this Confidence is
Conceit. The Sinner does not doubt of Gods Mercy, from which presumptuous
Confidence arises some kind of quiet in the Mind. The same Word in the Hebrew,
Gasal, signifies both Confidence and Folly. Indeed a Sinners Confidence is
Folly. How confident were the Foolish Virgins?

2. False Peace separates those things which God has joined together: God
joins Holiness and Peace, but he who has a false Peace separates these Two. He
lays claim to Peace, but banisheth Holiness, Deuteronomy. 29.19. I shall have Peace,
though I walk in the imagination of my Heart, to add Drunkenness to Thirst. The
Wicked are loose and vain, and yet thank God they have Peace: A Delusion. You
may as well suck Health out of Poison, as Peace out of Sin.

3. False Peace is not willing to be Tried; a sign they are bad Wares, which
will not endure the Light; a sign a Man has stolen Goods when he will not have
his House Searched. A false Peace cannot endure to be tried by the Word: The
Word speaks of an humbling and refining work upon the Soul before Peace; false
Peace cannot endure to hear of this: The least trouble will shake this Peace,
it will end in despair. In a false Peace, Conscience is asleep, but when this
Lion of Conscience shall be awakened at Death, then it will roar upon a Man, he
will be a Terror to himself, and be ready to lay violent Hands upon himself.

Quest. 5. How shall we know that ours is a true Peace?

Resp. 1. True Peace flows from Union with Christ; Communio ^undatur in unione.
The Graft or Cien must first be inoculated into the Tree, before it can receive
Sap and Nourishment from it: So we must first be ingrafted into Christ, before
we can receive Peace from him. Have we Faith? By Holiness we are made like
Christ; by believing we are made one with Christ, and being in Christ, we have
Peace, John 16.33.

2. True Peace flows from Subjection to Christ; where Christ gives Peace, there
he sets up his Government in the Heart, Isa. 9.7. Of his Government and Peace
there shall be no end. Christ is called a Priest upon his Throne, Zach. 6.13.
Christ as a Priest makes Peace, but he will be a Priest upon his Throne; he
brings the Heart in subjection to him. If Christ be our Peace, he is our
Prince, Isa. 9.6. Whenever Christ pacifies the Conscience, he subdues the Lust.

3. True Peace is after Trouble. First, God lets loose a Spirit of Bondage, he
convinces and humbles the Soul; then he speaks Peace. Many say they have
Peace; but is this Peace before a Storm or after it? True Peace is after
Trouble. First there was the Earthquake, and then the Fire, and then the still
small Voice, 1 Kings 19.11. Thou who never had any legal Bruisings, may
suspect thy Peace; God pours the Golden Oil of Peace into Broken Hearts.

Quest. 6. Whether have all Sanctified Persons this Peace?

Resp. They have a Title to it; they have the Ground of it; Grace is the Seed
of Peace, and it will in time turn to Peace, as the Blossoms of a Tree to
Fruit, Milk to Cream. They have a Promise of it, Psalm. 29.11. The Lord will
bless his People with Peace: They may have Peace with God, though not Peace in
their own Conscience; they have the initials and beginnings of Peace. There is
a secret Peace the Heart has in serving God, such Meltings and Enlargements in
Duty, as do revive the Soul, and bear it up from sinking.

Quest. 7. But why have not all Believers the full enjoyment and possession of
Peace? Why is not this Flower of Peace fully ripe and blown?

Resp. Some of the Godly may not have so full a degree of Peace. 1. Through the
fury of Temptation; the Devil if he cannot destroy us, he will disturb us:
Satan disputes against our Adoption; he would make us question the work of
Grace in our Hearts, and so troubles the Waters of our Peace: Satan is like a
subtle Cheater, who if he cannot make a Man's Title to his Land void, yet he
will put him to many troublesome Suits in Law. If Satan cannot make us Ungodly,
he will make us unquiet: Violent Winds make the Sea rough and stormy; the Winds
of Temptation blowing, disturb Peace of Spirit, and put the Soul into a
Commotion. 2. The Godly may not enjoy Peace, through mistake and
misapprehension about Sin. They find so much Corruption, that sure if there
were Grace, there would not be such strong Workings of Corruption: Whereas this
should be so far from discouraging Christians, and hindering their Peace, that
it is an Argument for them. Let me ask, whence is it that you feel Sin? no Man
can feel Sin but by Grace. A wicked Man is insensible; lay an 100 weight upon a
Dead Man, he does not complain, but the being sensible of Corruption, argues a
Gracious Principle, Romans 7.21. Again, whence is it that there is a Combat with
Sin, but from the Life of Grace? Gal. 5.17. Dead things cannot Combat. Whence
is it that the Saints weep for Sin? what are these Tears, but Seeds of Faith?
The not understanding of this, hinders a Christians Peace. 3. The Godly may not
enjoy Peace through remisness in Duty; they leave their first Love. When
Christians abate their fervency, God abates their Peace; if you slacken the
Strings of a Viol, the Music is spoiled; if Christians slacken in Duty, they
spoil the sweet Music of Peace in their Souls. As the Fire decays, so the Cold
increases; as Fervency in Duty abates, so our Peace cools.

Use. Labor for this blessed Peace, Peace with God and Conscience; Peace with
Neighbor Nations is sweet, Pax una Triumphis innumeris melior, the Hebrew Word
(...) Peace comprehends all Blessings, it is the Glory of a Kingdom; a Princes
Crown is more Beautiful when it is hung with the white Lilly of Peace, than
when it is set with the Red Roses of a Bloody War: O then how sweet is Peace of
Conscience! it is a Bulwark against the Enemy, Phil. 4.7. (...) it shall keep
you as in a Garrison; you may throw out the Gantlet, and bid defiance to
Enemies: It is the Golden Pot and the Manna, it is the first Fruits of
Paradise. It is still Music; for want of this a Christian is in continual
fear; he does not take that comfort in Ordinances. Hannah went up to the Feast
at Jerusalem, but she wept and did not eat, 1 Samuel 1.7. So a poor dejected Soul
goes to an Ordinance, but does not eat of the Feast; he weeps and does not eat.
He cannot take that comfort in Worldly Blessings, Health, Estate, Relations; he
wants that inward Peace which should be as Sauce to sweeten his Comforts. O
therefore labor for this blessed Peace, consider the noble and excellent
effects of it. First, It gives boldness at the Throne of Grace; Guilt of
Conscience clips the Wings of Prayer, it makes the Face Blush, and the Heart:
But when a Christian has some lively apprehensions of God's Love, and the
Spirit whispering Peace, then he goes to God with boldness, as a Child to his
Father, Psalm. 25.1. Unto thee O Lord I lift up my Soul. Time was when David's
Soul was bowed down, Psalm. 38.6. I am bowed down greatly. But now the case is
altered, he will lift up his Soul to God in a way of Triumph; whence was this?
God had spoken Peace to his Soul, Psalm. 26.3. Thy loving Kindness is before
mine Eyes. 2. This Divine Peace fires the Heart with Love to Christ; Peace is
the result of Pardon; he who has a Pardon sealed, cannot choose but love his
Prince. How endeared is Christ to the Soul! now Christ is precious indeed. O
says the Soul, how sweet is this Rose of Sharon! Has Christ waded through a
Sea of Blood and Wrath to purchase my Peace, has he not only made Peace, but
spoke Peace to me; how should my Heart ascend in a fiery Chariot of Love, how
willing should I be to do and suffer for Christ! 3. This Peace quiets the heart
in Trouble, Mic. 5.5. This Man shall be the Peace when the Assyrian shall come
into our Land, and tread in our Palaces. The Enemy may invade our Palaces, but
not our Peace; this Man Christ shall be the Peace. When the Head aches, the
Heart may be well; when Worldly troubles assault a Christian, his Mind may be
in Peace and Quiet, Psalm. 4.8. I will lay me down in Peace, and Sleep. 'Twas
now a sad time with David, he was flying for his Life from Absalom; it was no
small Afflicton to think that his own Son should seek to take away his Fathers
Life and Crown: David wept and covered his Face, 2 Samuel 15.30. Yet at this time
says he, I will lay me down in Peace and Sleep. He had trouble from his Son,
but Peace from his Conscience: David could sleep upon the soft Pillow of a good
Conscience: This is a Peace worth getting.

Quest. 8. What shall we do to attain this blessed Peace?

Resp. 1. Let us ask it of God; he is the God of Peace, he beats back the
roaring Lion, he stills the raging of Conscience: If we could call all the
Angels out of Heaven, they could not speak Peace without God. The Stars cannot
make Day without the Sun; none can make day in a dark Deserted Soul, but the
Sun of Righteousness; as the Wilderness cannot water it self, but remains dry
and parched, till the Clouds drop their Moisture, so our Hearts cannot have
Peace till he infuse and drop it upon us by his Spirit. Therefore pray, Lord,
thou who art the God of Peace, create Peace, thou who art the Prince of Peace,
command it. Give me that Peace which may sweeten trouble, yea, the bitter Cup
of Death.

2. If you would have Peace, make War with Sin. Sin is the Achan that troubles
us; the Trojan Horse. 2 Kings 9.22. When Joram saw Jehu, he said, is it Peace
Jehu? And he answered what Peace, so long as the Whoredoms of thy Mother
Jezabel and her Witchcrafts are so many? What Peace, as long as Sin remains
unmortified? If you would have Peace with God, break the League with Sin. Give
battle to Sin, it is a most just War, God has proclaimed it. Nay, he has
promised us Victory, Sin shall not have Dominion, Romans 6. No way to Peace but
by maintaining a War with Sin, Pax nostra Bellum contra Daemonem, Tert. When
Sampson had slain the Lion, there came Honey out of the Lion: By Slaying Sin, we
get this Honey of Peace.

3. Go to Christ's Blood for Peace. Some go to fetch their Peace from their own
Righteousness, not Christ's; they go for Peace to their Holy Life, not Christ's
Death. If Conscience be troubled, they strive to quiet it with their Duties;
this is not the right way to Peace: Duties must not be neglected, nor yet
idolized. Look up to the Blood of Sprinkling, Heb. 12.24. That Blood of Christ
which pacified God, must pacify Conscience; Christ's blood being sucked in by
Faith gives Peace, Romans 5.1. Being justified by Faith, we have Peace with God.
No Balm to cure a Wounded Conscience, but the Blood of Christ.

4. Walk closely with God. Peace flows from Purity, Gal. 6.16. As many as walk
according to this Rule, Peace be on them: In the Text, Grace and Peace are put
together. Grace is the Root and Peace is the Flower. As Balm-Water drops from
the Limbeck, so Divine Peace comes out of the Limbeck of a Gracious Heart. Walk
very Holily; God's Spirit is first a Refiner before a Comforter.

Bran. 2. You who have this Peace, Peace above, Peace within, labor to keep
it; it is a precious Jewel, do not lose it. It Is sad to have the League of
National Peace broken, but it is worse to have the Peace of Conscience broken:
Oh preserve this Peace. First, Take heed of Relapses; has God spoken Peace, do
not turn again to Folly, Psalm. 85.8. Besides the Ingratitude, there is folly in
Relapses; it was long ere God was reconciled, and the Breach made up, and will
you again Eclipse and Forfeit your Peace? Has God healed the wound of
Conscience, and will you tear it open again? Will you break another Vein, will
you cut a new Artery? This is returning indeed to folly. What Madness is it to
meddle again with that Sin, which will breed the Worm of Conscience! Secondly,
Make up your Spiritual Accounts daily: See how Matters stand between God and
your Souls, Psalm. 77.6. I commune with my own Heart: Often Reckonings keep God
and Conscience Friends; do with your Hearts as you do with your Watches, wind
them up every Morning by Prayer, and at Night examine whether your Hearts have
gone true all the day, whether the Wheels of your Affections have moved swiftly
toward Heaven: Oh call your selves often to account; keep your Reckonings
even, and that is the way to keep your Peace.

Of JOY.
Gal. 5.22. The Fruit of the Spirit is Joy.


THE third Fruit of Justification, Adoption and Sanctification, is, Joy in the
Holy Ghost. Joy is the setting the Soul upon the Top of a Pinnacle, it is the
Cream of the sincere Milk of the Word.

Quest. 1. What is this Joy?

Resp. Spiritual Joy is a sweet and delightful Passion, arising from the
Apprehension and Feeling of some Good, whereby the Soul is supported under
present Troubles, and fenced against future Fear.

1. It is a Delightful Passion.] So it is contrary to Sorrow, which is a
Perturbation of Mind, whereby the Heart is perplexed and cast down. Joy is a
sweet and pleasant Affection, which eases the Mind, Exhilarates and Comforts
the Spirits.

2. It arises from the Feeling of some Good.] Joy is not a Fancy, or bred of
Conceit, but is Rational, and arises from the feeling of some Good ( viz.) The
Sense of Gods Love and Favor. Joy is so Real a thing, that it makes a sudden
Change in a Person; it turns Mourning into Melody: As in Spring time, when the
Sun comes to our Horizon, it makes a sudden Alteration in the Face of the
Universe; the Birds sing, the Flowers appear, the Fig Tree puts forth forth her
green Figs; every thing seems to rejoice and put off its Mourning, as being
revived with the sweet Influence of the Sun: so when the Sun of Righteousness
arises on the Soul, it makes a sudden Alteration, and the Soul is infinitely
rejoiced with the Golden Beams of Gods Love.

3. By it the Soul is supported under present Troubles.] Joy stupifies and
swallows up Troubles; it carries the Heart above them, as the Oil swims above
the Water.

4. The Heart is fenced against future Fear.] Joy is both a Cordial and an
Antidote; it is a Cordial which gives present Relief to the Spirits when they
are Sad; and an Antidote, it fenceth off Fear of approaching Danger, Psalm.
23.4. I will fear no Evil, for thou art with me, thy Rod and thy Staff comfort
me.

Quest. 2. How is this Joy wrought?

Resp. 1. It arises partly from the Promise: As the Be lies at the Breast of
the Flower, and sucks out the Sweetness of it, so Faith lies at the Breast of a
Promise and sucks out the Quintessence of Joy, Psalm. 94.19. Thy Comforts
delight my Soul; that is, the Comforts which distill from the Limbeck of the
Promises.

2. The Spirit of God (who is called (...), the Comforter, John 14.26.) does
sometimes drop in this Golden Oil of Joy into the Soul; the Spirit whispers to
a Believer the Remission of his Sin, and sheds Gods Love abroad into the Heart,
Romans 5.5. whence flows infinite Joy and Delight.

Quest. 3. What are the Seasons when God does usually give his People these
Divine Ioys?

Resp. Five Seasons: 1. Sometimes at the Blessed Supper; the Soul often comes
Weeping after Christ in the Sacrament, and God sends it away Weeping for Joy.
The Jews had a Custom at their Feasts, they poured Ointment on their Guests and
kissed them. In the Eucharist God often pours the Oil of Gladness on the
Saints, and Kisseth them with the Kisses of his Lips. There are two grand Ends
of the Sacrament, the strengthening of Faith, and the flourishing of Joy: Here
in this Ordinance God displays the Banner of his Love: Here Believers taste not
only Sacramental Bread, but hidden Manna. [Caution, Not that God always meets
the Soul with Joy.] He may give Increase of Grace, when not Increase of Joy;
but oftentimes he pours in the Oil of Gladness, and gives the Soul a Privy Seal
of his Love; as Christ made himself known in the breaking of Bread.

2 Season. Before God calls his People to Suffering, Acts 23.11. Be of good
Cheer, Paul. When God was about to give Paul a Cup of Blood to drink, he spiced
it with Joy, 2 Cor. 1.5. As the Sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our
Consolation also abounds. This made the Martyrs Flames, Beds of Roses; when
Stephen was Stoning, he saw Heaven open, and the Sun of Righteousness shined in
his Face: God Candies our Wormwood with Sugar.

3 Season. After sore Conflicts with Satan Satan is the Red Dragon who
troubles the Waters; he puts the Soul into Frights, makes it believe that it
has no Grace, and that God does not love it: Though Satan cannot blot out a
Christians Evidence, yet he may cast such a Mist before his Eyes that he cannot
read it. Now when the Soul has been bruised with Temptation, God will Comfort
this bruised Reed. He now gives Joy Ad corroborandum Titulum, to confirm a
Christians Title to Heaven. After Satan's Fiery Darts, comes the White Stone; no
better Balm to heal a Tempted Soul than the Oil of Gladness: As after Christ
was Tempted, then came an Angel to Comfort him.

4 Season. After Desertion: Desertion is a poisoned Arrow shoots to the Heart,
Job 6.4. God is called a Fire and a Light, the deserted Soul feels the Fire,
but does not see the Light; it cries out as Asaph, Psalm. 77.8. Is his Mercy
clean gone? Now when the Soul is in this case, and ready to faint away in
Despair, God shines upon the Soul, and gives it some Apprehension of his
Favor, and turns the shadow of Death into the light of the Morning. God keeps
his Cordials for a time of Fainting. Joy after Desertion is like a Resurrection
from the Dead.

5 Season. At the hour of Death, such as have had no Joy in their Lifetime,
God puts in this Sugar in the bottom of the Cup, to make their Death sweet. Now
at the last hour, when all other Comforts are gone, God sends the Comforter;
and when their Appetite to Meat fails, God feeds them with hidden Manna. Sure,
as the Wicked, before they dye, have some Apprehensions of Hell and Wrath in
their Conscience, so the Godly have some Fore-tasts of Gods Everlasting Favor;
though sometimes their Disease may be such, and their Animal Spirits may be so
oppressed, that they cannot express what they feel. Jacob laid himself to sleep
on a stone, where he saw a Vision, a Ladder, and the Angels ascending and
descending; so when the Saints lay themselves down, to sleep the sleep of
Death, they have often a Vision; they see the Light of Gods Face* and have the
Evidences of his Love sealed up to them for ever.

Quest. 4. What are the Differences between Worldly Ioys and Spiritual?

Resp. The Gleanings of the one are better than the Vintage of the other.

1. Spiritual Joys help to make us better, Worldly Joys do often make us worse,
Ier. 22.21. I spoke to thee in thy Prosperity, and thou said, I will not
hear. Pride and Luxury are the two Worms bred of Worldly Pleasure, Hos. 4.11.
Wine takes away the Heart. It Is fomentum libidinis, Aug. The Inflamer of Lust.
As Satan entered in the Sop, so often in the C^p. But Spiritual Joy makes one
better; it is like Cordial Water, which (as Physicians say) does not only cheer
the Heart, but Purges out the noxious Humors; so Divine Joy is Cordial Water,
which does not only Comfort, but Cleanse; it makes a Christian more Holy; it
causes an Antipathy against Sin; it infuseth strength to do and suffer, Neh.
8.10. The Joy of the Lord is your strength. As some Colors do not only delight
the Eye, but strengthen the Sight; so the Joys of God do not only refresh the
Soul, but strengthen it, The Joy of the Lord is your strength.

2. Spiritual Joys are inward, they are Heart-Joys, John 16.22. Your Heart
shall rejoice. Seneca says, True Joy latet in profundo, it is hidden within.
Worldly Joy is in Superficie, it lies in the outside, like the Dew that wets
the Leaf, 2 Cor. 5.12. who Rejoice in appearance, in the Greek (...), in the
Face. It goes no farther than the Face, it is not within; In Laughter the Heart
is sad. Like a House which has a gilded Frontispiece, but all the Rooms within
are hung in Mourning. But Spiritual Joy lies most within, Your Heart shall
rejoice. Divine Joy is like a Spring of Water which runs under Ground; a
Christian does (...), others can see his Sufferings, but they see not his Joy,
Prove. 14.10. A Stranger intermeddleth not with his Joy. This Joy is hidden
Manna, hid from the Eye of the World; he has still Music which others hear
not, the Marrow lies within, the best Joy is within in the Heart.

3. Spiritual Joys are sweeter than others, better than Wine, Cant. 1.2. They
are a Christians Festival; They are the golden Pot and the Manna; They are so
sweet that they make every thing else sweet; sweeten Health, Estate, as sweet
Water poured on Flowers makes them more Fragrant and Aromatical. Divine Joys
are so Delicious and Ravishing, that they do very much put our Mouth out of
Taste to earthly Delights; as he who has been drinking Spirits of Alkermes,
tastes little-sweetness in Water. St. Paul had tasted these Divine Joys, and his
Mouth was out of taste to Wordly things: The World was Crucified to him, Gal.
6.14. it was like a dead thing, he could find no sweetness in it.

4. Spiritual Joys are more pure, they are not tempered with any bitter
Ingredients; a Sinners Joy is mixed dregs, is imbittered with Fear and Guilt;
the Wolf feeds in the Breast of his Joy; he drinks Wormwood Wine: But Spiritual
Joy is not muddied with Guilt, but like a Crystal stream runs pure; it is all
Spirits and Quintessence; it is Joy and nothing but Joy; it is a Rose without
Prickles; it is Honey without the Wax.

5. These are satisfying and filling Joys, John 16.24. Ask that your Joy may be
full. Worldly Joys can no more fill the Heart, than a drop can fill a Cistern;
they may please the Pallat or Fancy, ( Plato calls them Pictures of Joy) not
satisfy the Soul, Eccles. 1.8. The Eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the
Ear with hearing; but the Joys of God satisfy. Psalm. 94.19. Thy Comforts
delight my Soul. There is as much difference between Spiritual Joys and
Earthly, as between a Banquet that is eaten, and one that is painted on the
Wall.

6. These are stronger Joys than Worldly, Heb. 6.18. Strong Consolation. They
are strong indeed, that can bear up a Christians Heart in Trials and
Afflictions, 1 Thessalonians. 1.6. Having received the Word in much Affliction, (...),
with Joy. These are Roses that grow in Winter; these Joys can sweeten the
Waters of Marah; he that has these can gather Grapes of Thorns, and fetch Honey
out of the Carcass of a Lion, 2 Cor. 6.10. As Sorrowing, yet always rejoicing.
At the end of the Rod a Christian tastes Honey.

7. These are unwearied Joys; other Joys, when in Excess often cause a Loathing,
we are apt to Surfeit on them; too much Honey nauseates; one may be tired with
Pleasure as well as Labor: Xerxes offered a Reward to him that could find out
a new Pleasure: But the Joys of God, though they satisfy, yet they never
Surfeit; a drop of Joy is sweet, but the more of this Wine the better; such as
drink of the Joys of Heaven are never cloyed; the Satiety is without Loathing,
because they still desire the Joy wherewith they are satiated.

8. These are more abiding Joys, worldly Joys are soon gone; such as Crown
themselves with Rose-buds, and bath in the perfumed Waters of Pleasure, yet
these Joys which seem to be Sweet are Swift; like Meteors, they give a bright
and sudden Flash, and then disappear; but the Joy which Believers have, are
abiding; they are a Blossom of Eternity, a Pledge and Earnest of those Rivers
of Pleasure which run at Gods right Hand for ever more.

Quest. 5. Why is this Joy to be labored for?

Resp. 1. Because this Joy is Self-existent, it can subsist in the want of all
other Carnal Joy. This Joy depends not upon outward things, as the Philosophers
once said, when the Musicians came to them, Philosophers can be merry without
Music. He that has this Joy, can be cheerful in the Deficiency of Carnal
Joys; he can rejoice in God, and sure hope of Glory. Though the Fig Tree does
not Flourish, Hab. 3.17. Spiritual Joy can go without Silver Crutches to
support it: Spiritual Joy is higher built than upon Creatures, it is built on
the Love of God, on the Promises, on the Blood of Christ.

2. Because Spiritual Joy carries the Soul through Duty cheerfully; the Sabbath
is a Delight, Religion is a Recreation. Fear and Sorrow hinder us in the
Discharge of Duty: But a Christian serves God with Activity, when he serves him
with Joy. The Oil of Joy makes the Wheels of Obedience move faster. How
fervently did they Pray, whom God made joyful in the House of Prayer, Isa. 56.7.

3. Joy is the beginning of Heaven here; it is called the Kingdom of God, Romans
14.17. because it is a Taste of that which the Saints have in the Kingdom of
God. What is the Heaven of the Angels, but the Smiles of Gods Face, the
sensible Perception and Feeling of those Joys which are infinitely ravishing
and full of Glory? And to encourage and quicken us in seeking after them,
consider, that Christ died to purchase this Joy for his Saints: He was a Man of
Sorrows, that we may be full of Joy; he Prays that the Saints may have this
Divine Joy, John 17.13. And now I come to thee, that they may have my Joy
fulfilled in themselves. And this Prayer he now Prays over in Heaven; he knows
we never love him so, as when we feel his Love; which may encourage us to seek
after this Joy; we Pray for that which Christ himself is Praying for, that his
Joy may be fulfilled in us.

Quest. 6. What shall we do to obtain this Spiritual Joy?

Resp. Walk accurately and heavenly; God gives it after a long and close
walking with him.

1. Observe your hours; set time every day apart for God.

2. Mourn for Sin: Mourning is the Seed (as Basil says) out of which the
Flower of Spiritual Joy Grows, Isa. 57.18* I Will restore Comfort to my Mourners.

3. Keep the Book of Conscience fair written; do not, by Presumptuous Sins,
blur your Evidences: A good Conscience is the Ark where God puts the hidden
Manna.

4. Be often upon your Knees, Pray with Life and Fervency: The same Spirit that
fills the Heart with Sighs, fills it with Joys; the same Spirit that indites
the Prayer, Seals it. When Hannah had prayed, her Countenance was no more sad,
1 Samuel 1.18. Praying Christians have much Intercourse with God, and none are so
like to have the Secrets of his Love imparted, as those who hold Correspondence
with him: By a close walking with God, we get these Bunches of Grapes by the
way, which are an Earnest of future Happiness.

Quest. 7. How shall we Comfort them who want this Joy?

Resp. Such as walk in close Communion with God, have more than others.

1. Initial Joy, Joy, in Semine, in the Seed, Psalm. 97.11. Light (a Metaphor
for Joy) is sown for the Righteous, Grace in the Heart is a Seed of Joy. Though
a Christian wants the Sun, he has a Day Star in his Heart.

2. A Believer has Real, though not Royal Comforts; he has, as Aquinas says,
Gaudium in Deo, though not a Deo, Joy in God, though not from God: Joy in God,
is the Delight and Complacency the Soul takes in God, Psalm. 104.34. My Soul
shall be glad in the Lord. He that is truly gracious, is so far joyful, as to
take Comfort in God; though he cannot say, God rejoices in him; yet he can
say, he rejoices in God.

3. He has Supporting, though not Transporting Comforts; he has so much that
keeps him from sinking, Psalm. 138.3. Thou strengthenedst me with strength in my
Soul. If a Christian has not Gods Arm to embrace him, yet to uphold him. Thus
a Christian, who walks with God, has something that bears up his [Heart from
sinking; and it is but waiting a while, and he is sure of those Joys which are
unspeakable and full of Glory.

Use 1. Then see that Religion is no Melancholy thing; it brings Joy, the Fruit
of the Spirit is Joy, Mutatur, non tollitur; a poor Christian that feeds on
Bread and Water, may have purer Joy than the greatest Monarch; though he fares
hard he feeds high, he has a Table spread from Heaven; Angels Food, hidden
Manna; he has sometimes those sweet Raptures of Joy as cause a Jubilation of
Spirit, 2 Cor. 12.3. he has that which is better felt than can be expressed.

Use 2. If God gives his People such Joy in this Life, Oh! then what glorious
Joy will he give them in Heaven, Matt. 25.21. Enter thou into the Joy of thy
Lord; here Joy begins to enter into us, there we shall enter into Joy; God
keeps his best Wine till last. Heliogabalus bathed himself in sweet perfumed
Waters. What Joy when the Soul shall for ever bath it self in the pure and
pleasant Fountain of Gods Love; what joy to see the Orient Brightness of
Christ's Face, and have the Kisses of those Lips which drop sweet smelling
Myrrh? Laetabitur sponsa in amplexibus Domini, Aug. Oh! if a cluster of Grapes
here be so sweet, what will the full Vintage be? How may this set us all a
longing for that place, where Sorrow cannot Live, and where Joy cannot Dye!

Growth of GRACE.
2 Pet. 3.18. But grow in Grace.


Fruit 4. GRowth of Grace.] True Grace is progressive, of a spreading growing
Nature; it is with Grace as with the Light, first there is the Crepusculum or
daybreak; then it shines brighter to the full Meridian: A good Christian is
like the Crocodil, Quam diu vivit, crescit, he has never done growing. The
Saints are not only compared to Stars for their light, but Trees for their
growth, Isa. 61.3. Hos. 14.5. A good Christian is not like Hezekiah's Sun that
went backward, nor Joshua's Sun that stood still, but is always advancing in
Holiness, and increasing with the Increase of God, Col. 2.19. Now to amplify
and illustrate this,

Quest. 1. How many ways may a Christian be said to grow in Grace?

Resp. 1. He grows Vigore, in the Exercise of Grace; his Lamps are burning and
shining; therefore we read of a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1.3. here is the Activity
of Grace; the Church prays for the blowing of the Spirit, that her Spices might
flow forth, Cant. 4.16.

2. A Christian grows Gradu, in the degree of Grace; he goes from strength to
strength, Psalm. 84.7. viz. from one degree of Grace to another. A Saint goes
(...), from Faith to Faith, Romans 1.17. and his Love abounds (...), more and
more, Phil. 1.9. here is growing in the degree.

Quest. 2. What is the right manner of a Christians growth?

Resp. 1. The right manner of growth, is to grow less in ones own Eyes, Psalm.
22.6. I am a worm and no Man. The sight of Corruption and Ignorance makes a
Christian grow into a dislike of himself, he does vanish in his own Eyes: Job
abhorred himself in the Dust, cap. 42.6. This is good, to grow out of conceit of
ones self.

2. The right manner of growth is to grow proportionably, when a Christian
grows in one Grace as well as another, 2 Pet. 1.5. to grow in Knowledge but not
in Meekness, brotherly Love, good Works, this is not the right growth; a thing
may swell and not grow; a Man may be swelled with Knowledge, yet have no
spiritual Growth; the right manner of growth is uniform, growing in one Grace
as well as another. As the Beauty of the Body is when there is a Symmetry of
Parts, not only the Head grows, but the Arm and Breast; so spiritual Growth is
most Beautiful; when there is a Symmmetry and Proportion, every Grace thrives.

3. The right manner of growth is when a Christian has Grace suitable to his
several Employments and Occasions; when Corruptions are strong, and he has
Grace able to give check to them, Burdens are heavy, and he has Patience able
to bear them; Temptations fierce, and he has Faith able to resist them; here
is Grace growing in the right manner.

Quest. 3. Whence is it that true Grace cannot but grow?

Resp. 1. It is proper for Grace to grow, it is semen manens, the Seed of God, 1
John 3.9. It Is the Nature of Seed to grow; Grace does not lie in the Heart, as
a stone in the Earth, but as Seed in the Earth, which will spring up, first the
Blade and then the Ear, and then the full Corn in the Ear.

2. Grace cannot but grow from the Sweetness and Excellency of it; he that has
Grace is never weary of it, but still would have more: The Delight he has in
it, causes thirst; Grace is the Image of God, and a Christian thinks he can
never be enough like God: Grace instills Peace; therefore a Christian cannot
but strive to increase in Grace, because as Grace grows so Peace grows.

3. Grace cannot but grow from a Believers ingrafting into Christ; he who is a
Cien ingrafted into this noble generous Stock, cannot but grow. Christ is so
full of Sap and vivifical Influence, that he makes all, inoculated into him,
grow Fruitful, Hos. 14.8. From me is thy Fruit found.

Quest. 4. What motives or incentives are there to make us grow in Grace?

Resp. 1. Growth is the end of the Ordinances. Why does a Man lay out cost on
Ground, Manure and Water it, but that it may grow? The sincere Milk of the Word
is that we may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2 The Table of the Lord is on purpose for
our Spiritual Nourishment and increase of Grace.

2. The growth of Grace is the best Evidence of the Truth of it; things that
have no Life will not grow; a Picture will not grow, a Stake in the Hedge will
not grow, but a Plant that has a Vegetative life grows. The growing of Grace
shows it to be alive in the Soul.

3. Growth in Grace is the beauty of a Christian. The more a Child grows, the
more it comes to its Favor and Complexion, and looks more Ruddy; so the more a
Christian grows in Grace, the more he comes to his Spiritual Complexion, he
looks fairer. Abraham's Faith was beautiful when in its Infancy, but at last it
grew so Vigorous and Eminent, that God himself was in love with it, and crowned
Abraham with this Honor to be the Father of the Faithful.

4. The more we grow in Grace, the more Glory we bring to God. Gods Glory is
more worth than the Salvation of all Men's Souls. This should be our design to
raise the Trophies of Gods Glory, and how can we do it more than by growing in
Grace, John 15.8. Hereby is my Father glorified, if you bring forth much Fruit.
Though the least Dram of Grace will bring Salvation to us, yet it will not
bring so much Glory to God, Phil. 1.11. Filled with the Fruits of his
Righteousness, which are to the Praise of his Glory. It commends the skill of
the Husbandman when his Plants grow and thrive; it is a praise and honor to
God when we thrive in Grace.

5. The more we grow in Grace, the more will God love us. Is it not That we
pray for? The more Growth, the more will God love us. The Husbandman loves his
Thriving Plants; the thriving Christian is Gods Hephsibah or chief delight.
Christ loves to see the Vine flourishing, and the Pomegranates budding, Cant.
6.11. Christ accepts the truth of Grace, but commends the growth of Grace, Mat.
8.10: I have not found so great Faith, no not in Israel. Would you be as the
beloved Disciple that lay in Christ's Bosom? Would you have much love from
Christ? Labor for much growth, let Faith flourish with good Works, and Love
increase into Zeal.

6. What need we have to grow in Grace. There is still something lacking in our
Faith; 1 These. 3.10. Grace is but in its Infancy and Minority, and we must be
still adding a Cubit to our Spiritual Stature; the Apostles said Lord increase
our Faith, Luke 17.5. Grace is but weak, 2 Samuel 3.39. I am this Day weak tho
anointed King. So though we are anointed with Grace, yet we are but weak, and
had need arrive at further degrees of Sanctity.

7. The growth of Grace will hinder the growth of Corruption: The more Health
grows, the more the Distempers of Body abate: So it is in Spirituals; the more
Humility grows, the more the Swelling of Pride is assuaged; the more Purity of
Heart grows, the more the Fire of Lust is abated. The growth of Flowers in the
Garden does not hinder the growing of Weeds; but the growing of this Flower of
Grace, hinders the sprouting of Corruption. As some Plants have an Antipathy,
and will not thrive if they grow near together, as the Vine and the Bay Tree,
so where Grace grows, Sin will not thrive so fast.

8. We cannot grow too much in Grace, there is no Nimium, no Excess there. The
Body may grow too great, as in the Dropsy, but Faith cannot grow too great. 2
These. 1.3. Your Faith grows exceedingly; here was Exceeding, yet no Excess.
As a Man cannot have too much Health, so not too much Grace; Grace is the
Beauty of Holiness, Psalm. 110.3. We cannot have too much Spiritual Beauty; it
will be the only Trouble at Death, that we have grown no more in Grace.

9. Such as do not grow in Grace, decay in Grace; non progredi in via est
regredi, Bern. There is no standing at a stay in Religion, either we go forward
or backward; if Faith does not grow, Unbelief will. If Heavenly Mindedness does
not grow, Covetousness will. A Man that does not increase his Stock,
diminishes it. If you do not improve your Stock of Grace, your Stock will
decay. The Angels on Jacob's Ladder were either ascending or descending; if you
do not ascend in Religion, you descend.

10. The more we grow in Grace, the more we shall flourish in Glory. Though
every Vessel of Glory shall be full, yet some Vessels hold more; he whose Pound
gained Ten, was made Ruler over Ten Cities, Luke 19.17. Such as do not grow
much, though they do not lose their Glory, yet they lessen their Glory. If any
shall follow the Lamb in whiter and larger Robes of Glory than others, they
shall be such as have shined most in Grace here.

Use. Lament we may the want of growth: Religion in many is grown only into a
Form and Profession: This is to grow in Leaves, not in Fruit. Many Christians
are like a Body in an Atrophy, which does not thrive; they are not nourished by
the Sermons they hear; like the Angels who assumed Bodies, they did eat, but
did not grow. It is very suspicious where there is no growth, there wants a
Vital Principle. Some instead of growing better, grow worse; they grow more
Earthly, more Profane, 2 Timothy 3.13. Evil Men proficient in Pejus, shall wax
worse and worse. Many grow Hell-ward, they grow past shame, Ephesians. 23.5. they are
like some Watered Stuffs which grow more rotten.

Quest. 5. How shall we know whether we grow in Grace?

Resp. For the deciding of this Question, I shall First show the signs of our
not not growing: Secondly, Of our growing.

1. The Signs of our not growing in Grace, but rather falling into a Spiritual
Consumption.

Sign 1. When we have lost our Spiritual Appetite. A Consumptive Person has
not that Stomach to his Meat as formerly. Perhaps Christian, thou can
remember the time when thou did Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness; thou
did come to Ordinances with such a Stomach as to a Feast, but now it is
otherwise. Christ is not so prized, nor his Ordinances so loved; a sad presage,
Grace is on the declining Hand; thou art in a deep Consumption. A sign David
was near his Grave, when he covered him with Clothes and he got no heat, 1
Kings 1.1. So when a Person is plied with hot Clothes, I mean Ordinances, yet
he has no heat of Affection to Spiritual things; this is a sign he is
declining in Grace.

Sign 2. When we grow more Wordly. Perhaps once we were mounted into higher
Orbs, we did (...), set our Hearts on things above, and speak the Language of
Canaan, but now our Minds are taken off of Heaven, we dig our Comfort out of
these lower Mines, and with Satan compass the Earth: A sign we are going down
the Hill apace, and our Grace is in a Consumption. It is observable when Nature
decays, and People are near Dying, they grow more stooping; and truly when Men's
Hearts go more stooping to the Earth, and they can hardly lift up themselves to
an Heavenly Thought; if Grace be not Dead, yet it is ready to Dye, Rev. 3.2.

Sign 3. When we are less troubled about Sin. Time was when the least Sin did
grieve us, (as the least Hair makes the Eye weep,) but now we can digest Sin
without remorse. Time was when a Christian was troubled if he neglected
Closet-Prayer, now he can omit Family Prayer. Time was, when vain Thoughts did
trouble him, now he is not troubled for loose Practices. Here is a sad
declension in Religion; and truly Grace is so far from growing, that we can
hardly perceive its Pulse to beat.

2. The Signs of our growing in Grace.

1. The First Sign of our growth is when we are got beyond our former measures
of Grace: A sign a Child thrives when he has out-grown his Clothes, his
Clothes are too little for him. That Knowledge which would serve us before, will
not serve us now; we have a deeper Insight into Religion, our Light is clearer,
our Spark of Love is increased into a Flame; there is a sign of growth. That
competency of Grace we once had, is now too scanty for us, we have out-grown
our selves,

2. When we are more firmly rooted in Religion, Col. 2.7. (...) rooted in him,
and established; the spreading of the Root shows the growth of the Tree. When
we are so strongly fastened on Christ, that we cannot be blown down with the
Breath of Heretics, a blessed sign of growth. Athanasius called Adamas
Ecclesiae, an Adamant that could not be removed from the love of the truth.

3. The Third sign of growth, when we have a more Spiritual frame of Heart.
First, We are more Spiritual in our Principles; we oppose Sin out of love to
God; and as it strikes at his Holiness. Secondly, We are more Spiritual in our
Affections; we grieve for the first risings of Corruption, for the bubling up
of vain Thoughts; the Spring that runs under Ground. We mourn not only for the
penalty of Sin, but the Pollution. It is not only a Coal that burns but blacks.
Thirdly, we are Spiritual in the Performance of Duty; we are more serious,
reverent, fervent, we have more Life in Prayer, we put Fire to the Sacrifice,
Romans 12. (...), Fervent in Spirit. We serve God with more Love, which Ripens
and Mellows our Duty, and makes it come off with a better relish.

4. The Fourth sign of growth, when Grace gets ground by Opposition. The Fire
by an Antiperistasis burns hottest in the Coldest Season. Peter's Courage
increased by the opposition of the High Priest and the Rulers, Acts 4.8, 11.
The Martyrs Zeal was increased by Persecution: Here was Grace of the first
Magnitude.

Quest. 6. What shall we do to grow in Grace?

Resp. 1. Take heed of that which will hinder growth, the love of any Sin: The
Body may as well thrive in a Fever, as Grace can where any Sin is cherished.

2. Use all means for growth in Grace. First, Exercise your selves to
Godliness, 1 Timothy 4.7. the Body grows stronger by Exercise. Trading of Money
makes Men grow Rich; the more we Trade our Faith in the Promises, the richer in
Faith we grow. Secondly, If you would be growing Christians, be humble
Christians. It Is observed in some Countries (as in France,) the best and
largest Grapes which they make their Wine of, grow on the lower sort of Vines;
the Humble Saints grow most in Grace, 1 Pet. 5.5. God gives Grace to the
Humble. Thirdly, Pray to God for Spiritual growth. Some pray that they may grow
in Gifts. It is better to grow in Grace than Gifts; Gifts are for Ornament,
Grace is for Nourishment, to edify others, to save our selves. Some pray that
they may grow rich; but a Fruitful Heart is better than a full Purse. Pray that
God will make you grow in Grace, though it be by Affliction, Heb. 12.10. the
Vine grows by Pruning. God's Pruning Knife is to make us grow more in Grace.

Quest. 7. How may we comfort such as complain they do not grow in Grace?

Resp. They may mistake; they may grow when they think they do not; Prove. 13.7.
There is that makes himself Poor, yet he is rich. The sight Christians have of
their Defects in Grace, and their Thirst after greater measures of Grace, makes
them think they do not grow when they do. He who covets a great Estate, because
he has not so much as he desires, therefore he thinks himself to be Poor.
Indeed Christians should seek after the Grace they want, but they must not
therefore overlook the Grace they have. Let Christians be thankful for the
least growth; if you do not grow so much in Assurance, bless God if you grow in
Sincerity. If you do not grow so much in Knowledge, bless God if you grow in
Humility. If a Tree grows in the Root, it is a true growth; if you grow in the
Root, Grace of Humility it is as needful for you as any other growth.

Of PERSEVERANCE.
1 Pet. 1.5. Who are kept by the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation.


THE Fifth and Last Fruit of Sanctification, is Perseverance in Grace. The
Heavenly Inheritance is kept for the Saints, 1 Pet. 1.4. and they are kept to
the Inheritance in my Text, Who are kept by the Power of God through Faith unto
Salvation. The Apostle asserts a Saints stability and permanency in Grace. The
Saints Perseverance is much oppugned by Papists and Arminians, but it is not
the less true because it is opposed. A Christians main Comfort depends upon
this Doctrine of Perseverance; take away this, and you much prejudice Religion,
and cut the Sinews of all cheerful Endeavors. Before I come to the full
handling and discussing this great point, let me first clear the Sense of it,
which I shall first do by way of Concession or Grant. When I say Believers do
persevere, First I grant that such as are so only in Possession, may fall away,
2 Timothy 4.10. Demas has forsaken us. Blazing Comets soon Evaporate. A Building
on Sand will fall, Mat. 7.26. Seeming Grace may be lost; no wonder to see a
Bough fall from the Tree that is only tied on. Hypocrites are only tied on to
Christ by an External Profession, they are not ingrafted. Who ever thought
artificial motion would hold long? The Hypocrites motion is only Artificial not
Vital. All Blossoms do not ripen into Fruit. Secondly, I grant, that if
Believers were left to stand upon their own Legs, they might fall finally. Some
of the Angels who were Stars full of Light and Glory, yet did actually lose
their Grace; and if those pure Angels fell from Grace, much more would the
Godly who have so much Sin to betray them, if they were not upheld by a
Superior Power. 3. I grant, true Believers, though they do not fall away
actually; and lose all their Grace, yet their Grace may fail in the degree, and
they may make a great Breach upon their Sanctification. Grace may be moritura,
not mortua, dying but not dead, Rev. 3.2. Strengthen the things which are ready
to dye. Grace may be like Fire in the Embers, though not quenched, yet the
Flame is gone out. This decay of Grace I shall show in two particulars. 1. The
lively actings of Grace may be suspended, Rev. 2.4. Thou have left thy first
love. Grace may be like a sleepy Habit; the Godly may act faintly in Religion,
the pulse of their Affections may beat low. The wise Virgins slumbred, Matt.
25.5. The Exercise of Grace may be hindered; as when the course of Water is
stopped and does not run. 2. Instead of Grace exercising in the Godly,
Corruption may exercise; instead of Patience, Murmuring; instead of
Heavenliness, Earthliness. How did Pride put forth it self in the Disciples,
when they strove who should be greatest? How did Lust put forth in David? Thus
lively and vigorous may Corruption be in the Regenerate; they may fall into
Enormous Sins. But though all this be granted, yet they do not, penitus
excidere, fall away finally from Grace. David did not quite lose his Grace, for
then why did he pray, Take not away thy Holy Spirit from me? He had not quite
lost the Spirit. As Eutiches when he fell from a Window, Acts 20. and all
thought he was dead, No, says Paul, there is Life in him: So David fell
foully, but there was the Life of Grace in him: Though the Saints may come to
that pass they have but little Faith, yet not to have no Faith: Though their
Grace may be drawn low, yet not drawn dry: Though Grace may be abated, not
abolished; though the wise Virgins slumbred, yet their Lamps were not quite
gone out. Grace, when it is at the lowest, shall revive and flourish, as when
Sampson had lost his strength, his Hair grew again, and he renewed his
strength. Having thus explained the Proposition, I come now to the amplifying
this great Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance.

Quest. 1. By what means do Christians come to persevere?

Resp. 1. By the Manuduction and help of Ordinances, Prayer, Word, Sacraments.
Christians do not arrive at Perseverance, when they sit still and do nothing.
It is not with us as with Passengers in a Ship, who are carried to the end of
their Voyage, and they sit still in the Ship; or as it is with Noblemen, who
have their Rents brought in without their Toil or Labor; but we arrive at
Salvation in the use of Means; as a Man comes to the end of a Race by running,
to a Victory by fighting, Matt. 26.41. Watch and Pray. As Paul said, Acts
27.31. Except ye abide in the Ship ye cannot be saved. Believers shall come to
shore at last, arrive at Heaven, but Except they abide in the Ship, viz. in the
use of the Ordinances, they cannot be saved. The Ordinances cherish Grace; as
they beget Grace, so they are the Breast-Milk by which it is nourished and
preserved to Eternity.

2. Auxilio Spiritus, By the Sacred Influence and Concurrence of the Spirit.
The Spirit of God is continually at work in the Heart of a Believer, to carry
on Grace to Perseverance; it drops on fresh Oil to keep the Lamp of Grace
burning. The Spirit excites, strengthens, increases Grace, and makes a
Christian go from one step of Faith to another, till he comes to the end of his
Faith, Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.9. It is a fine Expression of the Apostle, 2 Timothy
1.14. The Holy Ghost which dwells in us. He who dwells in an House keeps the
House in repair; the Spirit dwelling in a Believer, keeps Grace in repair.
Grace is compared to a River of the Water of Life, John 7.38. This River can
never be dried up, because Gods Spirit is a Spring which continually feeds it.

3. Grace is carried on to Perseverance by Christ's daily Intercession. As the
Spirit is at work in the Heart, so is Christ at work in Heaven. Christ is ever
praying that the Saints Grace may hold out, John 17.11. Conserva illos, Father
keep those whom thou have given me; keep them as Stars in their Orb, keep them
as Jewels, that they may not be lost. Father keep them. That Prayer Christ made
for Peter, was the Copy of his Prayer he now makes for Believers, Luke 22.32. I
have prayed for thee that thy Faith fail not, (...), that it be not totally
eclipsed: How can the Children of such Prayers perish?

Quest. 2. By what Arguments may we prove the Saints Perseverance?

Resp. 1. A veritate Dei, from the Truth of God. God has both asserted it and
promised it. 1. God has asserted it, 1 John 3.9. His Seed remains in him, 1
John 2.27. The anointing ye have received of him abides in you. 2. As God has
asserted it, so he has promised it: The Truth of God, the most Orient Pearl of
his Crown, is laid a Pawn in the Promise, John 10.28. I give unto them eternal
Life, and they shall never perish. Jer. 32.42. I will make an everlasting
Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good, but I
will put my Fear in their Hearts, that they shall not depart from me. God will
so love his People, that he will not forsake them; and they shall so fear him
that they shall not forsake him. If a Believer should not persevere, God should
break his Promise, Hos. 2.19. I will betroth thee unto me for ever, in
righteousness and loving kindness. God does not Marry his People to himself,
and then Divorce them; he hates putting away, Mal. 2.16. Gods love ties the
Marriage Knot so fast, that neither Death nor Hell can break it asunder.

2. The second Argument is, a potentia Dei, from the Power of God. In the Text
we are kept by the Power of God unto Salvation; every Person in the Trinity
has an hand in making a Believer persevere. God the Father establishes, 2
Cor. 1.21. God the Son confirms, 1 Cor. 1.8. God the Holy Ghost Seals, Ephesians.
1.13. so that it is the power of God keeps us. Alas, we are not kept by our own
power. The Pelagians held, That Man by his own power might overcome Temptation
and persevere. But St. Austin confutes them, Man (says he) prays unto God for
Perseverance, which would be absurd if he had power of himself to persevere.
And says St. Austin, If all the power be inherent in a Man's self, then why
should not one persevere as well as another? why not Judas as well as Peter? So
that it is not by any other than the power of God that we are kept: As the Lord
preserved Israel from perishing in the Wilderness till he brought them to
Canaan; the same care will he take, if not in a miraculous, yet a spiritual,
invisible manner, in preserving his People in a state of Grace, till he brings
them to the Celestial Canaan. As the Heathens feigned of Atlas, That he did
bear up the Heavens from falling: The power of God is that Atlas which bears up
the Saints from falling. It is disputed whether Grace of it self may not
perish, (as Adam's) yet sure I am, Grace kept by the power of God cannot perish.

3. The third Argument is taken ab Electione, from Gods electing Love; such as
God has from all Eternity elected to Glory, cannot fall away finally; but
every true Believer is elected to Glory, ergo, he cannot fall away. Wat can
frustrate Election, or make Gods Decree void? This Argument stands like Mount
Sion which cannot be moved. Insomuch that some of the Papists hold, that such
who have absolute Election cannot fall away, 2 Timothy 2.19. The Foundation of God
stands sure, having this Seal, The Lord knows them that are his. The Foundation
of God is nothing else, but Gods Decree in Election; and this stands sure, God
will not alter it, others cannot.

4. The fourth Argument is taken, Ab Unione cum Christo, from Believers Union
with Christ. They are knit to Christ, as the Members to the Head by the Nerve
and Ligament of Faith, so that they cannot be broken off, Ephesians. 5.23. What was
once said of Christ's Natural Body, is true of his Mystical, a Bone of it shall
not be broken. As it is not possible to sever the Leaven and the Dough, when
they are once mingled and kneaded together; so it is impossible, when Christ
and Believers are once united, ever to be separated: Christ and his Members
make one Christ. Now is it possible that any part of Christ should perish? How
can Christ lose any Member of his Body Mystical and be perfect? In short, Si
unus excidat quare non and alter? If one Believer may be broken off from
Christ, then by the same Rule why not another? Why not all? And so Christ
should be an Head without a Body.

5. The fifth Argument is taken, ab Emptione, from the Nature of a Purchase. A
Man will not lay down his Money for a Purchase which may be lost, and the
Fee-simple alienated. Christ died that he might purchase us as a People to
himself for ever, Heb. 9.12. Having obtained eternal Redemption for us. Would
Christ (think we) have shed his Blood, that we might believe in him for a
while, and then fall away? Do we think Christ will lose his Purchase?

6. The sixth Argument is, A Victoria supra mundum, from a Believers Victory
over the World. The Argument stands thus, He who overcomes the World does
persevere in Grace; but a Believer does overcome the World, ergo, he perseveres
in Grace, 1 John 5.4. This is the Victory over the World, even your Faith. A
Man may lose a single Battle in the Field, yet at last win the Victory. A Child
of God may be foild in a single Battle against Temptation (as Peter was) but at
last he is Victorious. Now if a Saint be crowned Victor, if the World be
conquered by him, he must needs persevere. I come next to answer some
Objections of the Arminians.

1. The first Objection of the Arminians is, If a Believer shall persevere in
Grace, then to what purpose are all those Admonitions in Scripture, Let him
take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor. 10 12. and Heb. 4.1. Let us fear lest any of you
seem to come short. These Admonitions seem to be Superfluous and Vain, if a
Saint shall certainly persevere.

Answ. No, these Counsels and Admonitions are necessary to Caution Believers
against Carelessness; they are as Goads and Spurs to quicken them to a greater
Diligence in working out Salvation. These Admonitions do not imply the Saints
can fall away, but they are Preservatives to keep them from falling away.
Christ told some of his Disciples they should abide in him, yet he exhorts them
to abide in him, John 15. His exhorting them was not in the least to question
their abiding in him, but to awaken their Diligence, and make them pray the
harder that they might abide in him.

2. The second Objection is, Heb. 6.4. it is impossible for those who were once
enlightened, and have tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and were made Partakers of
the Holy Ghost, and have felt the Powers of the World to come, if they shall
fall away, to renew them again to Repentance.

Answ. This place of Scripture has no Force in it; for the Apostle here speaks
of Hypocrites, he shows how far they may go, yet fall way. 1. They who were
once enlightened.] Men may have great Illuminations, yet fall away. Was not
Judas enlightened? 2. They have been made partakers of the Holy Ghost.] The
common Gifts of the Spirit, not the special Grace. 3. They have tasted the good
word of God.] Tasting here is opposed to Eating; the Hypocrite may have a kind
of Taste of the sweetness of Religion, but this taste does not nourish. There
is a great deal of difference between one that takes a Gargle, and a Cordial:
The Gargle only washes his Mouth, he tastes it, and puts it out again; but a
Cordial is drank down, which nourishes and cheers the Spirits. The Hypocrite,
who has only some smack or taste of Religion (as one tastes a Gargle) may fall
away. 4. And have felt the powers of the World to come.] That is, they may have
such Apprehensions of the Glory of Heaven, as to be affected with it, and seem
to have some joy in the thoughts of it, yet fall away; as in the Parable of the
stony ground, Matt. 13.20. All this is spoken of the Hypocrite; but it does not
therefore prove, that the true Believer, who is effectually wrought upon, can
fall away. Though Comets fall, it does not therefore follow that true Stars
fall: That this Scripture speaks not of sound Believers, is clear from Verse 9.
But we are persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany Salvation.

Of PERSEVERANCE.
1 Pet. 1.5. Who are kept by the power of God through Faith unto Salvation.


Use 1. SEE the Excellency of Grace, it perseveres: Other things are but (...),
for a Season; Health and Riches are sweet, but they are but for a Season, but
Grace is a Blossom of Eternity. The Seed of God remains, 1 John 3.9. Grace may
suffer an Eclipse, not a Dissolution. It is called Substance for its Solidity,
Prove. 8.21. and durable Riches for its Permanency, Prove. 8.18. It lasts as long
as the Soul, as Heaven lasts. Grace is not like a Lease which soon expires, but
it runs parallel with Eternity.

2. See here that which may provoke in the Saints everlasting Love and
Gratitude to God. What can make us love God more than the fixedness of his love
to us? he is not only the Author of Grace, but finisher; his love is
perpetuated and carried on to our Salvation, John 10.27. My Sheep hear my
voice, and I know them, and they follow me. And I give unto them eternal Life.
My Sheep, there is Election; hear my voice, there is Vocation; and I know them,
there is Justification; and I give unto them eternal Life, there is
glorification. How may this make us love God, and set up the Monuments and
Trophies of his Praise? How much have we done, to cause God to withdraw his
Spirit, and suffer us to fall Finally? yet that he should keep us, let his name
be Blessed, and his Memorials eternized, who keeps the Feet of his Saints, 1 Samuel 3.9.

3. See whence it is that the Saints do persevere in Holiness, it is solely to
be ascribed to the power of God; we are kept by his power, (...), kept as in a
Garrison: It is a Wonder any Christian perseveres, if you consider, 1.
Corruption within. The Tares are mingled with the Wheat; there is more Sin than
Grace, yet Grace is habitually predominant. Grace is like a Spark in the Sea, a
wonder it is not quenched; a wonder Sin does not destroy Grace; that it does
not do as sometimes the Nurse to the Infant, overlay it and it dies: so that
this Infant of Grace is not smothered by Corruption. 2. Temptations without.
Satan envies us Happiness, and he raises his Militia, stirs up Persecution; he
shoots his fiery Darts of Temptation; they are called Darts for their
Swiftness, Fiery for their Terribleness; we are every day beset with Devils: As
it was a wonder Daniel was kept alive in the midst of the Roaring Lions, so
that there are so many Roaring Devils about us, and yet we are not torn in
pieces. Now whence is it we stand against these powerful Temptations? We are
kept by power of God. 3. The Worlds Golden Snares, Riches and Pleasure, Luke
18.24. How hardly shall they that have Riches enter into the Kingdom of God.
How many have been cast away upon these golden Sands, 2 Timothy 4.10. as Demas?
What a wonder any Soul perseveres in Religion, that the Earth does not choke
the Fire of all good Affections? Whence is this but from the power of God? We
are kept by his power.

Use 2. Consolation. This Doctrine of Perseverance is as Bezar stone; it is a
Sovereign Cordial to keep up the Spirits of the Godly from Fainting. There is
nothing does more trouble a Child of God than this, he fears he shall never
hold out; these weak Legs of mine will never carry me to Heaven. But
Perseverance is an inseparable Fruit of Sanctification, Once in Christ and for
ever in Christ. A Believer may fall from some degrees of Grace, but not from
the State of Grace. An Israelite could never wholly fell or alienate his Land
of Inheritance, Lev. 25.23. A Type of our Heavenly Inheritance which cannot be
wholly alienated from us. How despairing is the Arminian Doctrine of falling
from Grace? To day a Saint, to morrow a Reprobate; to day a Peter, to morrow a
Judas. This must needs cut the Sinews of a Christians endeavor, and be as the
boaring an hole in the Vessel, to make all the Wine of his Joy run out. Were
the Arminian Doctrine true, how could the Apostle say, The Seed of God remains
in him, 1 John 3.9. and the anointing of God abides, 1 John 2.27. What comfort
were it to have ones name written in the Book of Life, if it might be blotted
out again? But be assured for your Comfort, Grace, if true, though never so
weak, shall persevere: Though a Christian has but little Grace to Trade with,
yet he need not fear breaking, because God does not only give him a Stock of
Grace, but will keep his Stock for him; Gratia concutitur, non excutitur, Aug.
Grace may be shaken with Fears and Doubts, but it cannot be plucked up by the
Roots. Fear not falling away; if any thing should hinder the Saints
Perseverance, then it must be either Sin or Temptation; but neither of these:
1. Not the Sins of Believers: That which humbles them shall not Damn them, but
their Sins are a means to humble them; they gather Grapes of Thorns; from the
Thorn of Sin they gather the Grape of Humility. 2. Not Temptation: The Devil
lays the Train of his Temptation to blow up the Fort of a Saints Grace; but
this cannot do it. Temptation is a Medicine for Security, the more Satan
tempts, the more the Saints Pray. When Paul had the Messenger of Satan to
buffet him, 2 Cor. 12.8. For this besought I the Lord thrice, that it might
depart from me. Thus nothing can break off a Believer from Christ, or hinder
his Perseverance; let this Wine be given to such as are of an heavy Heart. This
Perseverance is Comfort: 1. In the loss of worldly Comforts. When our Goods may
be taken away, our Grace cannot, Luke 10.42. Mary has chosen the better part,
which cannot be taken from her. 2. In the Hour of Death. When all things fail,
Friends take their farewell of us, yet still Grace remains. Death may separate
all things else from us but Grace. A Christian may say on his Deathbed, as
Olevian once, Sight is gone, Speech and Hearing are departing, but the loving
kindness of God will never depart.

Quest. 1. What Motives and Incentives are there to make Christians persevere?

Resp. 1. It is the Crown and Glory of a Christian to persevere, In Christianis
non initia sed fines laudantur. Prove. 16.31. The hoary head is a Crown of
Glory, if found in the way of Righteousness. When gray Hairs shine with golden
Virtues, this is a Crown of Glory. The Church of Ihyatira was best at last,
Rev. 2.19. I know thy patience and thy works, and the last to be more than the
first. The Excellency of a Building is not in having the first stone laid, but
when it is finished. The Glory and Excellency of a Christian, is when he has
finished the work of Faith.

2. You are within a few Days march of Heaven. Salvation is near to you; Romans
13.11. Now is our Salvation nearer than when we believed. Christians, it is but
a while and you shall have done Weeping and Praying, and be triumphing. You
shall put off your Mourning, and put on white Robes; you shall put off your
Armor, and put on a Victorious Crown. You who have made a good Progress in
Religion, you are now almost ready to Commence and take your Degree of Glory;
now is your Salvation nearer than when you began to believe. When a Man is
almost at the end of a Race, will he now tire, or faint away? O labor to
persevere, your Salvation is now nearer; you have but a little way to go, and
you will set your Foot in Heaven. Though the way be up-Hill and full of Thorns,
viz. Sufferings, yet you have gone the greatest part of your way, and shortly
you shall rest from your Labors.

3. How sad it is not to persevere in Holiness; you expose your selves to the
Reproaches of Men, and the Rebukes of God.

First, To the Reproaches of Men. They will divide both you and your
Profession, Luke 14.28. This Man began to Build, and was not able to finish.
Such is he who begins in Religion, and does not persevere. He is the Ludibrium
and Derision of all.

Secondly, To the Rebukes of God. God is most severe against such as fall off,
because they bring an Evil Report upon Religion. Apostasy breeds a bitter Worm
in Conscience. What a Worm did Spira feel! and it brings swift Damnation. It is
a drawing back (...) to Perdition, Heb. 10.38. God will make his Sword drunk
with the Blood of Apostates.

4. The Promises of Mercy are annexed only to Perseverance, Rev. 3.5. He that
overcomes, shall be clothed in white Raiment, and I will not blot out his
Name out of the Book of Life. Non pugnanti, sed vincenti dabitur corona, Aug.
The Promise is not to him that Fights, but that overcomes, Luke 22.28. Ye are
they which have continued with me, and I appoint unto you a Kingdom. The
Promise of a Kingdom says Chrysostom, is not made to them that heard Christ,
or followed him, but that continued with him. Perseverance carries away the
Garland. No Man has the Crown set upon his Head, but he who holds out to the
end of the Race. O therefore by all this, be persuaded to Persevere. God makes
no account of such as do not persevere. Who esteems of Corn, that sheds before
Harvest, or Fruit that falls from the Tree before it be Ripe?

Quest. 2. What expedients or means may be used for a Christians Perseverance?

Resp. 1. Removenda.
Take heed of those things which will make you desist and fall away.

First, Take heed of Presumption: Do not presume upon your own strength.
Exercise an Holy Fear and Jealousy over your own Hearts, Romans 11.20. Be not
high minded but fear, 1 Cor. 10.12. Let him that thinks he stands, take
heed l^st he fall. It was Peter's Sin, he leaned more upon his Grace than upon
Christ, and then he fell. A Christian has cause to fear lest the Lusts and
Deceits of his Heart betray him. Take heed of Presuming: Fear begets Prayer,
Prayer begets Strength, and Strength begets Stedfastness.

Secondly, Take heed of Hypocrisy. Judas was first a Sly Hypocrite, and then a
Traitor, Psalm. 78.37. Their Heart was not right with God, neither were they
steadfast in his Covenant. If there be any Venom or Malignity in the Blood, it
will break forth into a Plague Sore. The Venom of Hypocrisy is in danger of
breaking forth into the Plague Sore of Scandal.

Thirdly, Beware of a Vile Heart of Unbelief. Heb. 3.12. Take heed lest there
be in any of you an evil Heart of Unbelief, departing from the Living God.
Whence is Apostasy but from Incredulity? Men do not believe the Truth, and then
they fall from the Truth. Unbelieving and Unstable go together, Psalm. 78.22.
They believed not in God, ver. 41. They turned back.

2. If you would be Pillars in the Temple of God, and persevere in Sanctity,

First, Look that you enter into Religion upon a right ground; Promovenda.
be well grounded in the distinct knowledge of God; you must know the Love of
the Father, the Merit of the Son, the Efficacy of the Holy Ghost. Such as know
not God aright, will by degrees fall off. The Samaritans sometimes sided with
the Jews when they were in favor, afterward disclaimed all Kindred with them,
when Antiochus persecuted the Jews: And no wonder the Samaritans were no more
fixed in Religion, if you consider what Christ says of the Samaritans, John
4.22. Ye worship ye know not what: They were ignorant of the True God; let your
Knowledge of God be clear, and serve him purely out of Choice, and then you
will persevere. Psalm. 119.30. I have chosen the way of Truth, I have stuck unto
thy Testimonies.

Secondly, Get a real work of Grace in your Heart, Heb. 13.9. It is a good
thing that the Heart he established with Grace. Nothing will hold out but
Grace; it is only this Anointing abides; Paint will fall off. Get an
Heart-changing-work, 1 Cor. 6.11. But ye are Washed, but ye are Sanctified. Be
not content with Baptism of Water, without Baptism of the Spirit. The reason
Men persevere not in Religion, is for want of a Vital Principle. A Branch must
needs wither that has no root to grow upon.

Thirdly, If you would Persevere, be very Sincere. Perseverance grows only upon
the Root of Sincerity, Psalm. 25.21. Let Integrity and Uprightness preserve me.
The Breast Plate of Sincerity can never be shot thorough. How many Storms was
Job in? The Devil sets against him, his Wife tempted him to Curse God, his
Friends accused him for an Hypocrite; here was enough one would think to have
made him desist from Religion: Yet for all this he perseveres. What preserved
him? it was his Sincerity, Job 27.6. My Righteousness I hold fast, and will not
let it go; my Heart shall not Reproach me so long as I live.

Fourthly, If Persevere, be Humble. St. Chrysostom calls it the Mother of all
the Graces. God lets a poor Humble Christian stand, when others of Higher
Parts, and who have higher Thoughts of themselves, fall off by Apostasy. They
are likest to Persevere, who God will give most Grace to; But he gives Grace to
the Humble, 1 Pet. 5.5. They are likest to persevere, who have God dwelling in
them; But God dwells in the Humble Soul, Isa. 57.15. Non requiescit Spiritus
Sanctus nisi super Humilem, Bern. The lower the Tree roots in the Earth, the
firmer it is; the more the Soul is rooted in Humility, the more stablished it
is, and in less danger of falling away.

Fifthly, If Persevere, cherish the Grace of Faith. Faith does stabilire
Animum, 2 Cor. 1.24. By Faith ye stand. 1. Faith knits us to Christ, as the
Members are knit to the Head by Nerves and Sinews. 2. Faith fills us with Love
to God; It works by Love, Gal. 5.6. And he who loves God will rather dye than
desert him. The Soldier who loves his General, will die in his Service* 3.
Faith gives us a Prospect of Heaven, it shows us an invisible Glory, and he who
has Christ in his Heart, and a Crown in his Eye, will not faint away. O
cherish Faith; keep your Faith, and your Faith will keep you. While the Pilot
keeps his Ship, his Ship keeps him.

Sixthly, If Persevere, let us engage the power of God to help us; we are kept
by the power of God. The Child is safest when it is held in the Nurses Arms; so
are we when we are held in the Arms of Free Grace. It is not our holding God,
but his holding us preserves us: When a Boat is tied to a Rock it is secure; so
when we are fast tied to the Rock of Ages, then we are impregnable. O engage
God's power to help us to Persevere; we engage his Power by Prayer. Let us pray
to him to keep us, Psalm. 17.5. Hold up my goings in thy Paths that my Footsteps
slip not. It was a good Prayer of Beza, Domine quod cepisti perfice, ne in
portu naufragium accidat. Lord perfect what thou have begun in me, that I may
not suffer. Shipwreck when I am almost at the Haven.

Seventhly, If Persevere, set often before your Eyes the noble Examples of
those who have Persevered in Religion; quot Martyrs, quot Fideles in Coelis
jam Triumphant? What a glorious Army of Saints and Martyrs have gone before us?
How constant to the Death was St. Paul, Acts 21.13. How Persevering in the
Faith were Ignasius, Policarp, Athanasius? These were Stars in their Orb,
Pillars in the Temple of God. Let us look on their Zeal and Courage, and be
animated; Heb. 12.1. Seeing we are compassed about with so great a Cloud of
Witnesses, let us run with Patience the Race that is set before us. The Crown
is set at the end of the Race, if we win the Race, we shall wear the Crown.

A Believers Privilege at Death.
Phil. 1.21. For to me to Live is Christ, and to Dye is Gain.


SAint Paul was a great Admirer of Christ, he desired to know nothing but
Christ and him Crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2. No Julip to the Blood of Christ; and in
the Text, To me to live is Christ, and to dye is Gain.

First. To me to live is Christ; (...). We must understand Paul of a Spiritual
Life. To me to live is Christ, i. e. Christ is my Life; so Greg. Nyssen. Or
thus, my Life is made up of Christ. As a Wicked Man's Life is made up of Sin; So
Paul's Life was made up of Christ; he was full of Christ. But that I may give
you the Sense of the Te^^ more fully, take it in these Three particulars; 1.
Christ is the principle of my Life. 2. Christ is the end of my Life. 3. Christ
is the Joy of my Life.


1. To me to live is Christ, i. e. Christ is the Principle of my Life. I fetch
my Spiritual Life from Christ, as the Branch fetches its Sap from the Root,
Gal. 2.20. Christ lives in me. Jesus Christ is an Head of Influence, he sends
forth Life and Spirits into me to quicken me to every Holy Action. Thus, To me
to live is Christ. Christ is the principle of my Life, from his Fullness I live,
as the Vine-branch lives from the Root.

2. To me to live is Christ, i. e. Christ is the end of my Life; I live not to
my self, but to Christ. So Grotius and Causabon, Christo Servio, To me to live
is Christ; all my Living is is to do Service to Christ, Romans 14.8. Whether we
live we live unto the Lord. When we lay out our selves wholly for Christ; as
the Factor trades for the Merchant, so we Trade for Christ's Interest, we
propagate his Gospel; the design of our Life is to exalt Christ, and make the
Crown upon his Head to flourish. Now it may be said, to us to live is Christ,
our whole Life is a Living to Christ.

3. To me to live is Christ, i. e. Christ is the Joy of my Life, Psalm. 42.4.
God my exceeding Joy, or the Cream of my Joy. A Christian rejoices in Christ's
Righteousness; he can rejoice in Christ when Worldly Joys are gone. When the
Tulip in a Garden withers, a Man rejoices in his Jewels. When Relations Dye, a
Saint can rejoice in Christ the Pearl of Price; in this Sense to me to live is
Christ, he is the Joy of my Life. If Christ were gone, my Life would be a Death
to me.

Use. It should exhort us all to labor to say as the Apostle, to me to live is
Christ. Christ is the Principle of my Life, the End of my Life, the Joy of my
Life, to me to live is Christ; and then we may comfortably conclude, that to
Dye, shall be Gain.

Secondly. And that brings me to the Second part of the Text, (...), and to Dye
is Gain.

Doct. To a Believer Death is great Gain. A Saint can tell what his Losses for
Christ are, but he cannot tell how great his Gains are at Death: To me to dye
is Gain. Death to a Believer is Crepusculum gloriae, the Daybreak of Eternal
Brightness. To show fully what a Believers Gains are at Death, were a task too
great for an Angel; all Hyperboles fall short; the Reward of Glory exceeds our
very Faith. Only let me give you the (...) some dark views and imperfect
Lineaments of that infinite Glory the Saints shall gain at the Hour of Death:
To me to Dye is Gain.

1. Believers at Death shall gain a Writ of Ease from all Sins and Troubles;
they shall be in a state of Impeccability: Sin expires with their Life. I think
sometimes what an happy state that will be, never to have a sinful Thought
more. And they shall have a quietus est from their Troubles. Here David cried
out, My Life is spent with Griefs and my Years with Sighing, Psalm. 31.10. Quid
est diu vivere nisi diu torqueri, Aug. Life begins with a Cry, and ends with a
Groan; but at Death all Troubles Dye.

2. Believers at Death shall gain the glorious Sight of God. They shall see him
First, Intellectually with the Eyes of their Mind, which Divines call the
Beatifical Vision: If there were not such an Intellectual sight of God, how do
the Spirits of Just Men made Perfect see him? Secondly, They shall behold the
Glorified Body of Jesus Christ; and if it be pleasant to behold the Sun, then
how blessed a sight will it be to see Christ the Son of Righteousness clothed
with our Human Nature shining in Glory above the Angels? Through Christ's Flesh
as through a Transparent Glass, some bright Rays and Beams of the God head
shall display themselves to glorified Eyes: The sight of God through Christ
will be very complacential and delightful: The terror of God's Essence will be
taken away: Gods Majesty will be mixed with Beauty, and sweetened with Clemency;
it will be infinitely delightful to the Saints to see the amiable aspects and
smiles of Gods Face: Which brings me to the third thing.

3. The Saints at Death shall not only have a Sight of God, but shall enjoy the
Love of God; there shall be no more Veil on Gods Face, nor his Smiles checkered
with Frowns, but Gods love shall discover it self in all its Orient Beauty and
fragrant Sweetness. Here the Saints pray for Gods Love, and they have a few
drops, but there they shall have as much as their Vessel can receive. To know
this love passes Knowledge: This will cause a Jubilation of Spirits, and
create such Holy Raptures of Joy in the Saints as are Superlative, and would
soon overwhelm them if God did not make them able to bear.

4. Believers at Death shall gain a Celestial Palace, an House not made with
Hands, 2 Cor. 5.1. Here the Saints are straightened for Room, they have but mean
Cottages to live in, but they shall have a Royal Palace to live in: Here is but
their Sojourning House, there in Heaven is their Mansion House: An House built
high above all the Visible Orbs, an House bespangled with Light, Col. 1.12.
Enriched with Pearls and Precious Stones, Rev. 21.19. And this is not their
Landlord's House, but their Father's House, John 14.2. And this House stands
all upon Consecrated Ground; it is set out by Transparent Glass, to show the
Holiness of it, Rev. 21.27.

5. Believers at Death shall gain the sweet Society of glorified Saints and
Angels. This will add something to the felicity of Heaven, as every Star adds
some luster to the Firmament. First, The Society of the glorified Saints; we
shall see them in their Souls as well as in their Bodies. Their Bodies will be
so clear and bright, that we shall see their Souls shining through their
Bodies, as the Wine through the Glass; and Believers at Death shall have
Converse with the Saints glorified. And how delightful will that be, when they
shall be freed from all their Sinful Corruptions, Pride, Envy, Passion,
Censoriousness, which are Scars upon them here to disfigure them. In Heaven
there shall be perfect Love among the Saints; they shall as the Olive and
Myrtle sweetly embrace each other. The Saints shall know one another, (as
Luther speaks,) If in the Transfiguration Peter knew Moses and Elias, which he
never saw before, Mat. 17.3. then much more in the glorified State, the Saints
shall perfectly know one another, though they never saw them before. Secondly
The Saints at Death shall behold the Angels with the glorified Eye of their
Understanding. The Wings of the Cherubins (representing the Angels,) were made
of Fine Gold, to denote both their Sanctity and Splendour. The Angels are
compared to Lightning, Mat. 28.3. because of those Sparkling Beams of Majesty
which as Lightning shoot from them. And when Saints and Angels shall meet and
sing together in Consort in the Heavenly Quire, what Divine Harmony, what
Joyful Triumphs will it Create!

6. Believers at Death shall gain Perfection of Holiness. Here Grace was but in
Cunabulis, in its Cradle, very Imperfect; we cannot write a Copy of Holiness
without Blotting: Believers are said to receive but Primitias Spiritus, the
first Fruits of the Spirit, Romans 8.23. But at Death the Saints shall arrive at
Perfection, their Knowledge clear, their Sanctity perfect; their Sun shall be
in its full Meridian Splendor. They need not then pray for Increase of Grace;
they shall Love God as much as they would Love him, and as much as he desires
to have them Love him; they shall be then in respect of Holiness (...) as the
Angels of God.

7. At Death the Saints shall gain a Royal Magnificent Feast. I told you before
what a glorious Palace they shall have; but a Man may starve in a House if
there be no Cheer. The Saints at Death shall have a Royal Banquet, shadowed out
in Scripture by a Marriage Supper, Rev. 19.9. Bullinger and Gregory the Great,
understand by that Marriage-Supper of the Lamb, the stately Magnificent
Festival the Saints shall have in Heaven; they shall feed on the Tree of Life,
Rev. 22. They shall have the Heavenly Nectar and Ambrosia, the Spiced Wine, and
Juice of the Pomegranate, Cant. 8.2. This Royal Supper of the Lamb will not
only satisfy Hunger, but prevent it, Rev. 7 16. They shall hunger no more. Nor
can there be any Surfeit at this Feast, because a fresh Course will be
continually served in: New and fresh Delights will spring from God; therefore
the Tree of Life in Paradise is said to bear Twelve sorts of Fruit, Rev. 22.2.

8. Believers at Death shall gain Honor and Dignity, they shall reign as
Kings; therefore we read of the Ensigns of their Royalty, their White Robes,
and Crowns Caelestial, 2 Timothy 4.7. We read that the Doors of the Holy of Holies
were made of Palm Trees and open Flowers covered with Gold, 1 Kings 6.35. An
Emblem of that Victory and Triumph, and that Golden Garland of Honor wherewith
God has invested the Saints glorified. When all Worldly Honor shall lie in
the Dust, the Mace, the Star, the Robe of Ermin, the Imperial Diadem, then
shall the Saints Honor remain; not one Jewel shall be plucked out of their
Crown; they shall gain at Death a Blessed Eternity. If the Saints could have
but the least Suspicion or Fear of losing their Glory, it would much cool and
imbitter their Joy; but their Crown fades not away, 1 Pet. 5.4. As the Wicked
have a Worm that never dies, so the Elect have a Crown that never fades. Ever
is a short Word, but has no ending; in fine erit gaudium sine fine, Bern. 2
Cor. 4.18. The things which are not seen are Eternal. Psalm. 16.11. At thy right
Hand are Pleasures for everm^re. Who can span Eternity? Millions of Ages stand
but for Ciphers in Eternity. This is the Elah, or highest strain of the Saints
Glory; ever in Christ's Bosom.

Quest. How come the Saints to have all this Gain?

Resp. Believers have a right to all this Gain at Death, upon a diverse
account: By virtue of the Fathers Donation, the Sons Purchase, the Holy Ghosts
Earnest, and Faiths acceptance. Therefore the state of future glory is called
the Saints proper inheritance, Col. 1.12. They are Heirs of God, and have a
right to inherit.

Use 1. See the great difference between the Death of the Godly and the Wicked,
the Godly are great gainers at Death, the Wicked are great Losers at Death.
They loose Four things,

1. They lose the World, and that is a great loss to the Wicked; they laid up
their Treasure upon Earth; and to be turned out of all at once is a great loss.

2. They lose their Souls, Mat. 16.26. The Soul was at first a noble piece of
Coin, which God stamped his own Image upon; this Caelestial spark is more
precious than the whole Globe of the World: But the Sinners Soul is lost; not
that the Souls of the Wicked are annihilated at Death, but damnified.

3. They lose Heaven. Heaven is Seeds beatorum, the Royal Seat of the Blessed;
it is the region of Happiness, the Map of Perfection. There is that Manna which
is Angels Food; there is the Garden of Spices, the Bed of Perfumes, the Rivers
of Pleasure. Sinners at Death lose all this.

4. They lose their Hopes. For though they lived wickedly, yet they hoped God
was Merciful, and they hoped they should go to Heaven. Their Hope was not an
Anchor, but a Spiders Web. Now at Death they lose their Hopes, they see they
did but flatter themselves into Hell, Job. 8.14. Whose Hope shall be cut off.
That is sad to have a Man's Life and his Hope cut off together.

Use 2. If the Saints gain such glorious things at Death, then how may they
desire Death? Does not every one desire Preferment? nemo ante funera Foelix --
Faith gives a Title to Heaven, Death a Possession. Though we should be desirous
of doing Service here, yet we should be ambitious to be with Christ, Phil.
1.23. We should be content to live, but willing to Dye. Is it not a blessed
thing to be freed from Sin, and to lie for ever in the Bosom of Divine Love? Is
it not a blessed thing to meet our Godly Relations in Heaven, and to be singing
Divine Anthems of Praise among the Angels? Does not the Bride desire the
Marriage Day, especially if she were to be matched unto the Crown? What is the
Place we now live in, but a Place of Banishment from God? We are in a
Wilderness, while the Angels live at Court. Here we are combating with Satan,
and should not we desire to be out of the Bloody Field where the Bullets of
Tentation fly so fast, and to receive a Victorious Crown? Think what it will be
to have always a smiling Aspect from Christ's Face; to be brought into the
Banqueting House, and have the Banner of his Love displayed over you. O ye
Saints desire Death, it is your Ascension-day to Heaven. Egredere anima,
egredere, said Hilarion on his Deathbed, Go forth my Soul, what fear thou?
Another Holy Man said, Lord lead me to that Glory which I have seen as through
a Glass; Have Lord and do not tarry. Some Plants thrive best when they are
transplanted: Believers when they are by Death transplanted, cannot choose but
thrive, because they have Christ's sweet Sunbeams shine upon them: And what
though the Passage through the Valley of the shadow of Death be troublesome.
Who would not be willing to pass a tempestuous Sea, if he were sure to be
crowned as soon as he came at shore?

Use 3. Comfort in the loss of our dear and pious Relations. They, when they
dye, are not only taken away from the Evil to come, but they are great gainers
by Death: They leave a Wilderness and go to Paradise: They change their
Complaints into Thanksgivings: They leave their Sorrows behind, and enter into
the Joy of their Lord: Why should we weep for their Preferment? Believers have
not their Portion paid till the day of their Death: Gods Promise is his Bond to
make over Heaven in Reversion to them: But though they have his Bond, they do
not receive their Portion till the day of Death. Oh! Rejoice to think of their
Happiness who dye in the Lord; to them to dye is gain: They are as Rich as
Heaven can make them.

A Believers Privilege at Death.
Phil. 1.21. For to me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain.


HOPE is a Christan's Anchor, which he casts within the vail, Romans 12.12.
Rejoicing in Hope. A Christians Hope is not in this Life, but he has Hope in
his Death, Prove. 14.32. The best of a Saints Comfort begins when his Life ends.
The Wicked have all their Heaven here, Luke 6.28. Woe unto you Rich, you have
received your Consolation. You may make your Acquittance and write, Received in
full Payment. Luke 16.25. Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst
thy good things. But a Saints Happiness is in Reversion; The righteous has
Hope in his death. God keeps the best Wine till last. If Cato the Heathen said,
To me to dye is gain; He saw Mortality to be a Mercy: Then what may a Believer
say, Eccles. 7.1. The day of Death is better than the day of ones Birth. Nemo
ante Funera Felix, Solon. A Queen of this Land said she preferred her Coffin
before her Cradle.

Quest. 1. What Benefits do Believers receive at Death?

Resp. 1. They have great Immunities. 2. They pass immediately into a State of
Glory. 3. Their Bodies are united to Christ in the Grave till the Resurrection.

1. The Saints at Death have great Immunities and Freedoms: A Prentice when out
of his time is made Free: When the Saints are out of their time of living, then
they are made Free; not made Free till Death. 1. At Death they are freed from a
Body of Sin. There are in the best reliquiae peccati, some Remainders and
Relics of Corruption, Romans 7.24. O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver
me from this Body of Death! By the Body of Death is meant the Congeries, the
Mass and lump of Sin. It may well be called a Body for its weightiness, and a
Body of Death for its noisomness. (1.) It weighs us down; sin hinders us from
doing good. A Christian is like a Bird that would be flying up, but has a
string tied to its Legs to hinder it; so he would be flying up to Heaven with
the Wings of desire, but sin hinders him, Romans 7.15. The good that I would, I
do not. A Christian is like a Ship that is under Sail and at Anchor. Grace
would sail forward, but Sin is the Anchor that holds it back. (2.) Sin is often
more active in its Sphere than Grace. How stirring was Lust in David, when his
Grace lay dormant? (3.) Sin sometimes gets the Mastery, and leads a Saint
Captive, Romans 7.19. The evil I would not, that do I. Paul was like a Man
carried down the stream, and could not bear up against it. How often is a Child
of God overpowered with Pride and Passion? Therefore Paul calls sin, (...), a
Law in his Members, Romans 7.24. it binds as a Law, it has a kind of
Jurisdiction over the Soul, as Caesar had over the Senate. (4.) Sin defiles the
Soul, it is like a stain to Beauty, it turns the Souls Azure Brightness into
Sables. (5.) Sin debilitates us, it disarms us of our strength, 2 Samuel 3.39. I
am this day weak though anointed King. So though a Saint is crowned with Grace,
yet he is weak, though anointed a Spiritual King. (6.) Sin is ever Restless,
Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the Spirit. It is an Inmate that is always
quarrelling: Like Marcellus that Roman Captain, of whom Hannibal said, Whether
he did beat or was beaten, he would never be quiet. (7.) Sin adheres to us, we
cannot get rid of it. It may be compared to a wild Fig Tree growing on a Wall;
though the Roots are pulled up, yet there are some Fibers, some stings of it in
the joints of the stone-work which cannot be gotten out. (8.) Sin mingles with
our Duties and Graces; we cannot write a Copy of Holiness without blotting.
This makes a Child of God weary of his Life, and makes him water his Couch with
his Tears, to think sin so strong a Party, and he should offend that God whom
he loves. This made Paul cry out, Miser ego Homo, O wretched Man that I am!
Hence Paul did not cry out of his Affliction, of his Prison-chain, but of the
body of sin. Now a Believer at Death shall be freed from sin; he is not taken
away in but from his sins; he shall never have a vain proud thought more; he
shall never grieve the Spirit of God any more. Sin brought Death into the
World, and Death shall carry sin out of the World. The Persians had a certain
day in the Year, in which they killed all Serpents and venomous Creatures: Such
a day will the day of Death be to a Believer; it will destroy all his sins,
which like so many Serpents have stung him. Death smites a Believer, as the
Angel did Peter, it made his Chains fall off. So Death makes all the Chains of
Sin fall off, Acts 12.7. Believers at Death are made perfect in Holiness, Heb.
12.23. The Spirits of just Men made perfect. At Death the Souls of Believers
recover their Virgin-purity. O what a Blessed Privilege is this, to be sine
macula and ruga, without spot and wrinckle, Ephesians. 5.27. to be purer than the
Sunbeams, to be as free from sin as the Angels. This makes a Believer so
desirous to have his Pass to be gone: He would fain live in that pure Air,
where no black Vapors of sin arise.

2. At Death the Saints shall be freed from all the Troubles and Encumbrances
to which this Life is subject. Sin is the Seed sown, and Trouble is the Harvest
reaped: (...), Eurip. Life and Trouble are married together: There is more in
Life to wean us than to tempt us. Parents divide a Portion of Sorrow to their
Children, and yet they leave enough for themselves, Job 5.7. Man is born to
trouble. He is Heir to it; it is his Birthright. You may as well separate
weight from Lead, as Trouble from the Life of Man: Quid est diu vivere nisi diu
Torqueri? Aug. King Henry's Emblem, a Crown hung in a Bush of Thorns. There is
a far greater Proportion of Bitterness than Pleasure in this Life, Prove. 7.17.
I have perfumed my Bed with Myrrh, Aloes and Cynamon. For one sweet Ingredient
there were two bitter; for the Cynamon there was Myrrh and Aloes. A Man's Grace
will not exempt him from Troubles, Genesis 47.9. Few and evil have the days of the
years of my Life been. Though he was a Godly Patriarch, though he had met with
God, Genesis 32.30. He named the name of the place Peniel: For I have seen God
face to face: Yet he had his Troubles few and evil, etc. There are many things
to imbitter Life and cause trouble, and Death frees us from all. 1. Care: The
Mind is full of perplexed thoughts, how to bring about such a Design; how to
prevent such an Evil. The word for Care, (...), comes from a Primitive in the
Greek, that signifies To cut the Heart in pieces. Care does discruciate the
Mind, wast the Spirits: No such bitter Bread as the Bread of Carefulness, Ezekiel.
12.19. Care is a Spiritual Canker which eats out the Comfort of Life. Death is
the Cure of Care. 2. Fear: Fear is the Ague of the Soul, which sets it a
shaking, 1 John 4.14. There is Torment in Fear: Fear is like Prometheus his
Vulture, it gnaws upon the Heart. There is a distrustful Fear, a Fear of Want;
and a distracting Fear, Fear of Danger; and a discouraging Fear, a Fear God
does not love us. These Fears leave sad Impressions upon the Mind: Now at Death
a Believer is freed from these torturing Fears: He now knows he is passed from
Death to Life: He is as far from Fear, as the Damned are from Hope: The Grave
buries a Christians Fears. 3. Labor. Eccles. 1.8. All things are full of
labor. Some labor in the Mine, others among the Muses: God has made a Law*
In the sweat of thy Brows thou shall eat Bread: But Death gives a Believer a
Quietus est; it takes him off from his Day-labour, Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the
dead that dye in the Lord, they rest from their labors. What needs working
when they have their Reward? What needs fighting, when the Crown is set on
their Head? they rest from their Labors. 4. Suffering: Believers are as a
Lilly among Thorns; as the Dove among the Birds of Prey. The Wicked have an
Antipathy against the Righteous, and secret Hatred will break forth into open
Violence, Gal. 4.29. He that was born after the Flesh, persecuted him that was
born after the Spirit. The Dragon is described with seven Heads and ten Horns,
Rev. 12.3. he plotteth with the one, and pusheth with the other. But at Death
the Godly shall be freed from the Molestations of the Wicked; they shall never
be pestered with these Vermin more, Job 3.17. There (viz. in the Grave) the
wicked cease from troubling. Death does to a Believer, as Joseph of Arimathea
did to Christ; it takes him down from the Cross, and gives him a Writ of Ease:
The Eagle that flies high cannot be stung with the Serpent: Death gives the
Soul the Wing of the Eagle, that it flies above all these venomous Serpents
here below. 5. Temptation: Though Satan be a conquered Enemy* yet he is a
restless Enemy, 1 Pet. 5.8. He walks about; the Devil is always going his
Diocese: He has his Snares and his Darts: One he tempts with Riches, another
with Beauty; it is no small trouble to be continually followed with Temptation:
As for a Virgin to have her Chastity daily assaulted: But Death will free a
Child of God from Temptation; he shall never be vexed more with the old
Serpent. After Death has shot its Dart at us, the Devil shall have done
shooting his: Though Grace puts a Believer out of the Devils Possession, only
Death frees him from the Devils Temptation. 6. Sorrow: A Cloud of Sorrow
gathers in the Heart, and drops into Tears, Psalm. 31.10. My life is spent with
Grief, and my years with sighing. It was a Curse, Genesis 3.16. In sorrow thou
shall bring forth. Many things occasion Sorrow; Sickness, Lawsuits, Treachery
of Friends, disappointment of Hopes, loss of Estate. Ruth 1.20. Call me not
Naomi, call me Mara: I went out full, and the Lord has brought me home again
empty. Sorrow is the evil Spirit that haunts us; the World is a Bochim: Rachel
wept for her Children; some grieve that they have no Children, and others
grieve that their Children are undutiful. Thus we spend our years with sighing;
it is a Valley of Tears: But Death is the Funeral of all our Sorrows, Rev. 7.17.
And God shall wipe away all Tears. Then Christ's Spouse puts off her Mourning.
How can the Children of the Bride Chamber Mourn, when the Bridegroom shall be
with them? Matt. 9.15. Thus Death gives a Believer his Quietus est; it frees
him from Sin and Trouble. Though the Apostle calls Death the last Enemy, 1 Cor.
15. yet it is the best Friend: To me to dye is gain.

Use 1. See here that which may make a true Saint willing to die: Death will
set him out of Gunshot; free him from Sin and Trouble. There is no cause of
weeping, to leave a Valley of Tears. The World is the Stage on which Sin and
Misery are Acted. Believers are here in a strange Country, why then should they
not be willing to go out of it? Death beats off their Fetters of Sin, and sets
them free who go weeping out of a Goal: Besides our own Sins the Sins of
others. The World is a place where Satan's Seat is; a place where we see God
daily dishonored. Lot (who was a bright Star in a dark Night) his righteous
Soul was vexed with the unclean Conversation of the Wicked, 2 Pet. 3.8. To see
Gods Sabbaths broken, his Truths adulterated, his Glory eclipsed, is that which
wounds a Godly Heart. This made David cry out, Psalm. 120.5. Woe is me that I
dwell in Mesech, that I sojourn in the Tents of Kedar. Kedar was Arabia, where
were Ishmaels Posterity. This was a cut to David's Heart to dwell there. O then
be willing to depart out of the Tents of Kedar.

2. The Bodies of Believers are united to Christ in the Grave, and shall rest
there till the Resurrection. They are said to sleep in Jesus, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14.
The dust of Believers is part of Christ's Body Mystical. The Grave is a
Dormitory or place of rest to the Saints, where their Bodies quietly sleep in
Christ, till they are awakened out of their sleep by the Trumpet of the
Archangel.

Quest. 2. But how shall we know that we shall gain all this at Death, to be
freed from Sin and Trouble, and to have our Bodies united to Christ in the
Grave?

Resp. If we are Believers, then we gain all this at Death. To me (says Paul)
to dye is gain. To me, quatenus, a Believer. Are we such? Have we this blessed
Faith? Faith, wherever it is, is Operative. Lapidaries say, there is no
precious Stone but has Virtutem insitam, some hidden Virtue in it: So I may
say of Faith: It has some secret Virtue in it: It Anchors the Soul on Christ:
It has both a justifying and sanctifying Virtue in it: It fetches Blood out
of Christ's sides to Pardon, and Water out of his sides to Purge: It works by
love: It constrains to Duty: It makes the Head study for Christ, the Tongue
confess him, the Hands work for him. I have read of a Father who had three
Sons, and being to dye, left in his Will all his Estate to that Son who could
find his Ring with the Jewel which had an healing Virtue. The Case was brought
before the Judges, the two elder Sons counterfeited a Ring, but the younger Son
brought the true Ring; which was proved by the Virtue of it; whereupon his
Fathers Estate went to him. To this Ring I may compare Faith; there is a
counterfeit Faith in the World; but if we can find this Ring of Faith which
has the Healing Virtue in it, to purify the Heart, this is the true Faith,
which gives us an Interest in Christ, and entitles us to all these Privileges
at Death, to be freed from Sin and Sorrow, and to have our Bodies united to
Christ, while they are in the Grave.

3. I should now come to the third Privilege at Death, the Souls of Believers
pass immediately into Glory. Where I shall lead you to the top of Mount Pisgah,
and give you a short view of the Glory of Heaven.

A Believers Privilege after Death.
Phil. 1.21. And to dye is Gain.


3. AT Death the Souls of Believers pass into Glory: Death brings Malorum
omnium ademptionem: Omnium ademptionem; Death's the daybreak of Eternal
Brightness. And here I shall lead you to the top of Mount Pisgah, and give you
a glimpse of the Holy Land.

Quest. 1. What is comprehended in Glory?

Resp. Glory is Status omnium Bonorum aggregatione perfectus, Boethius. It is a
perfect State of Bliss, which consists in the Accumulation and heaping together
all those good things which immortal Souls are capable of. And truly here I am
at a loss; Vox faucibus haeret
all that I can say falls short of the Celestial Glory: Appelles Pencil cannot
delineate it; Angels Tongues cannot express it: We shall never understand Glory
fully, till we are in Heaven: Only let me give you the (...), or some dark
views and some imperfect Lineaments of that State of Glory the Saints shall
arrive at after Death.

1. The first and most sublime part of the Glory of Heaven is the full and
sweet Fruition of God: Ipse Deus sufficit ad praemium, Aug. We are apt to think
the Happiness of Heaven is in being free from Pain and Misery, but the very
(...) and Quintessence of Happiness, is the Enjoyment and Fruition of God; this
is the Diamond Ring of Glory God is an infinite inexhaustible Fountain of Joy;
and to have him is to have all. Now the enjoying of God implies three things.

1. It implies our seeing of God. 2. Our loving of God. 3. Gods loving of us.
1. The enjoying of God implies our seeing of God, 1 John 3.2. We shall see him
as he is: Here we see him as he is not; not mutable, mortal; there as he is.

Quest. 2. How shall we see God?

Resp. 1. We shall see him intellectually, with the Eyes of our mind. This
Divines call the Beatifical Vision. We shall have a full knowledge of God,
though not know him fully. If there were not such an intellectual sight of God,
then how do the Spirits of just Men made perfect see him? This sight of God
will be very glorious: As when a King on his Coronation-day, shows himself in
all his Royalty and Magnificence.

2. We shall corporeally behold the glorified Body of Jesus Christ: And if it
be a pleasant thing to behold the Sun, Eccles. 11.7. then how blessed a sight
will it be to behold the Sun of Righteousness; to see Christ clothed in our
humane Nature, sitting in Glory above the Angels! Solomon says, The eye is not
satisfied with seeing, Eccles. 1.8. But sure the Eyes of the Saints will be
satisfied with seeing that Orient Brightness which shall shine from the
beautiful Body of Christ. It must needs be satisfying, because, through Christ's
Flesh some Rays and Beams of the Godhead shall gloriously display themselves.
Gods excellent Majesty would overwhelm us, but through the Vail of Christ's
Flesh, we shall behold the Divine Glory.

3. Our seeing of God will be transforming. We shall so see him as to be in
some measure assimilated and changed into his image, 1 John 3.2. We shall be
like him. If when Moses was with God on the Mount, and had but some imperfect
sight of his Glory, Moses face shined, Exodus 34.33. How shall the Saints
glorified shine, being always in God's Presence, and having some beams of his
Glory put upon them! We shall be like him. One that is deformed may look on
Beauty, and not be made Beautiful. But the Saints that so see God, as that
sight shall transform them into his Likeness, Psalm. 17.15. When I awake I shall
be satisfied with thy likeness. Not that the Saints shall partake of God's
Essence; for as the Iron in the Fire is made Fiery, yet remains Iron still; so
the Saints by beholding God's Majesty shall be made Glorious Creatures, but yet
Creatures still.

4. Our seeing of God in Heaven will be unweariable. Let a Man see the rarest
Sight that is, he will be soon cloyed; when he comes into a Garden, and sees
delicious Walks, fair Arbours, Pleasant Flowers, within a little while he grows
weary. But it is not so in Heaven; there is no Surfeit, Ibi nec Fames nec
Fastidium, Bern. The Saints will never be weary of their Prospect, viz. of
seeing God; for God being infinite, there shall be every Moment new and fresh
Delights springing from God into the Souls of the Glorified.

II. The Second thing implied in our enjoying God, is our Loving of God, (...);
it is a Saints grief that his Heart is like the Frozen Ocean, that he can melt
no more in Love to God; but in Heaven the Saints shall be like Seraphims
burning in Divine Love. Love is a pleasing Affection. Fear has Torment in it,
1 John 4.18. Love has Joy in it. To love Beauty is delightful: God's amazing
Beauty will attract the Saints Love, and it will be their Heaven to Love him.

III. The Third thing employed in enjoying God, is Gods Loving us. Were there
Glory in God, yet if there were not Love, it would much eclipse the Joys of
Heaven; but God is Love, 1 John 4.16. The Saints glorified, cannot love so much
as they are loved. What is their Love to God's? What is their Star to this Sun?
God does love his People on Earth, when they are black as well as comely; they
have their (...) Imperfections. O how entirely will he Love them, when they are
without Spot or Wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.27.

1. This is the Felicity of Heaven, to be in the sweet Embraces of God's Love.
To be the Hephsibah, the delight of the King of Glory. To be Sunning our selves
in the Light of Gods Countenance. Then the Saints shall know that Love of
Christ which passes Knowledge, Ephesians. 3.19. From this glorious manifestation of
God's Love, will flow infinite Joy into the Souls of the Blessed. Therefore
Heaven is called entering into the joy of our Lord, Mat. 25.21. The Seeing of
God, the Loving of God, and being Beloved of God, will cause a Jubilation of
Spirit, and create such Holy Raptures of Joy in the Saints, as is unspeakable
and full of Glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. In Deo quadam dulcedine delectatur anima, imo
rapitur, Aug. Now the Saints spend their Years with Sighing, they weep over
their Sins and Afflictions; then their Water shall be turned into Wine; then
the Vessels of Mercy shall be filled and run over with Joy; they shall have
their Palm-Branches and Harps in their Hand, Rev. 14.2. in token of their
Triumphs and Rejoicing.

2. The Second thing comprehended in Glory, is the good Society there. There
are the Angels; every Star adds to the Light. Those Blessed Cherubims will
welcome us into Paradise. If the Angels rejoiced so at the Conversion of the
Elect, First, How will they rejoice at their Coronation! Secondly, There is the
Company of the Saints, Heb. 12.23. The Spirits of Just Men made Perfect.

Quest. Whether shall the Saints in Glory know each other?

Resp. Certainly they shall; for our Knowledge in Heaven shall not be
diminished, but increased. We shall not only know our Friends and Godly
Relations, but those glorified Saints which we never saw before. It must be so;
for Society without Acquaintance is not comfortable. And of this Opinion were
St. Austin, Anselm, Luther. And indeed the Scripture seems to hint so much to
us. For, if Peter in the Transfiguration knew Moses and Elias, whom he never
saw before, Mat. 17.4. then surely in Heaven, the Saints shall know one
another, and be infinitely delighted in each others Company.

3. The Third thing comprehended in Glory, is Perfection in Holiness. Holiness
is the Beauty of God and Angels, it makes Heaven. What is Happiness but the
quintessence of Holiness? Here a Christians Grace is imperfect, he cannot write
a Copy of Holiness without blotting. He is said to receive but Primitas
Spiritus, the first Fruits of the Spirit, Grace in Fieri, Romans 8.23. But at
Death Believers shall arrive at Perfection of Grace. Then this Sun shall be in
its Meridian Splendor; then they shall not need to pray for Increase of Grace,
for they shall be as the Angels, (...) their Light shall be clear, as well as
their Joy full.

4. The Fourth thing in Glory is Dignity and Honor, they shall reign as Kings.
Therefore the Saints glorified are said to have their insignia Regalia, their
Ensigns of Royalty, their white Robes and their Crown, 2 Timothy 4.7. Caesar after
his Victories, in token of Honor had a Chair of Ivory set for him in the
Senate, and a Throne in the Theater; the Saints having obtained their Victories
over Sin and Satan, shall be inthroned with Christ in the Empirean Heaven. To
sit with Christ, denotes Safety, to set on the Throne, Dignity, Rev. 3.21. This
Honor have all the Saints.

5. The Fifth thing in Glory is the Harmony and Union among the Heavenly
Inhabitants. The Devil cannot get his Cloven Foot into Heaven: He cannot
conjure up any Storms of Contention there; there shall be perfect Union. There
Calvin and Luther are agreed; there is no jarring String in the Heavenly Music*
there is nothing to make any difference, no Pride or Envy there. Though one
Star may differ from another, one may have a greater degree of Glory, yet every
Vessel shall be full. There shall the Saints and Angels fit as Olive-Plants
round about their Fathers Table in Love and Unity. Then shall they join
together in consort, then shall the loud Anthems of Praise be sung in the
Heavenly Quire.

6. The Sixth thing in Glory is a blessed Rest, Heb. 4.9. There remains a Rest,
Foelix transitus a labor ad requiem, here we can have no rest, tossed and
turned as a Ball on Racket, 2 Cor. 4.8. We are (...) troubled on every side.
How can a Ship rest in a Storm? But after Death the Saints get into their
Haven. Every thing is quiet in the Center. God is centrum quietativum animae,
as the Schoolmen, The Center where the Soul does sweetly acquiesce. A Christian
after his weary Marches and Battles shall put off his Bloody Armor, and rest
himself upon the Bosom of Jesus, that Bed of Perfume. When Death has given the
Saints the Wings of a Dove, then they shall fly away to Paradise and be at rest.

7. The Seventh thing in Glory is Eternity, 2 Cor. 4.17. An Eternal weight of
Glory. First, Glory is a Weight; The Hebrew Word for Glory, ( quod significat
Pondus,) is a Weight: God must make us able to bear it. Secondly, An Eternal
Weight. (...). Glory is such a Manna as does not breed Worms. If the Saints
glory in Heaven were but for a time, and they were in fear of losing it, it
would eclipse and imbitter the Joys of Heaven, but Eternity is written upon
their Joys. The Garland made of Flowers of Paradise fades not, 1 Pet. 5.4. I
have read of a River which they call the Day-River, in which time it runs with
a full Torrent, but at Night it is dried up; such are all Earthly Comforts,
they run with a full Stream all the Daytime of Life, but at the Night of Death
they are dried up; but the Saints glorified shall drink of the Rivers of
Pleasure for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. Eternity is the Heaven of Heavens; in fine
Gaudium erit sine fine, Bern. The Joys of Heaven as overflowing, so
ever-flowing.

Quest. 2. When do Believers enter upon Possession of Glory?

Resp. They pass immediately after Death into Glory. Some hold with the
Platonists and; Lucianists that the Soul dies. But many of the Sober Heathens
believed the Souls immortality. The Romans when their Great Men died, caused an
Eagle to be let loose, and fly about in the Air, signifying hereby that the
Soul was immortal, and did not dye with the Body. Christ tells us the Soul is
not capable of Killing, Luke 12.4. Therefore not of Dying. And as the Soul does
not Dye, so neither does it Sleep in the Body for a time. If the Soul be at
Death absent from the Body, 2 Cor. 5.8. then it cannot Sleep in the Body. There
is an immediate passage from Death to Glory: It is but winking and we shall see
God, Luke 23.43. This Day shall thou be with me in Paradise; by Paradise is
meant Heaven, the Third Heaven into which Paul was wrapped, (which all hold to
be the Heaven of the blessed) was called Paradise, 2 Cor 12.4. Now says Christ
to the Thief on the Cross, (...) This Day shall thou be with me in Paradise,
his Body could not be there, for it was laid in the Grave: But it was spoke of
his Soul, that it should be immediately after Death in Heaven. Let none be so
vain as to talk of Purgatory. A Soul purged by Christ's Blood, needs no fire of
Purgatory, but goes immediately from a Deathbed into a glorified State.

Use 1. See what little cause Believers have to fear Death, when it brings such
glorious Benefits, To me to Dye is Gain. Why should the Saints fear their
Preferment? Is it not a blessed thing to see God, to love God, and to lie for
ever in the Bosom of Divine Love? Is it not a blessed thing to meet our Godly
Relations in Heaven? Why should the Saints be afraid of their Blessings? Is a
Virgin afraid to be matched into the Crown? Now is but the Contract, at Death
is the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb, Rev. 19.9. What hurt does Death but take us
from among Fiery Serpents, and place us among Angels? What hurt does it do, but
to cloth us with a Robe of Immortality? Has he any wrong done, that has his
Sackcloth pulled off, and has Cloth of Gold put upon him? Fear not Dying,
who cannot live but by Dying.

Use 2. You who are Real Saints, whose Hearts are purified by Faith, spend much
time in musing upon these glorious Benefits which you shall have by Christ at
Death. Thus might you by a Contemplative Life, begin the Life of Angels here,
and be in Heaven before your time. Eudoxus was so affected with the Glory of
the Sun, that he thought he was born only to behold it. What should we
contemplate but Caelestial Glory, when we shall see God Face to Face? David was
got above the ordinary sort of Men, he was in the Altitudes, ^sal. 139.18. I am
ever with thee. A true Saint every Day takes a turn in Heaven, his Thoughts and
Desires are like Cherubims flying up to Paradise. Can Men of the World so
delight in looking upon their Bags of Gold, and Fields of Corn, and shall not
the Heirs of Heaven take more delight in Contemplating their Glory in
Reversion? Could we send forth Faith as a Spy, and every Day view the Glory of
the Jerusalem above, how would it rejoice us, as it does the Heir, to think of
the Inheritance which is to come into his Hand shortly?

Use 3. Consolation. This is that which may comfort the Saints in Two Cases.

1. Under their Wants; they abound only in Wants. The Meal is almost spent in
the Barrel, but be patient till Death, and you shall have a Supply of all your
Wants* You shall have a Kingdom, and be as Rich as Heaven can make you. He who
has the promise of an Estate, after the expiring of a few Years, though at
present he has nothing to help himself, yet comforts himself with this, that
shortly he shall have an Estate come into his Hands, 1 John 2.3. It does not
yet appear what we shall be; we shall be enameled with Glory, and be as rich as
the Angels under their Sufferings.

2. A true Saint is (as Luther,) Haeres Crucis; but this may make us go
cheerfully through our Sufferings; there are great things laid up in store,
there is Glory coming which Eye has not seen; we shall drink of the Fruit of
the Vine in the Kingdom of Heaven; though now we drink in a Wormwood Cup, yet
here is Sugar to sweeten it; we shall taste of those Joys of Paradise which
exceed our Faith, and may be better felt than they can be expressed.

Of the RESVRRECTION.
John 5.28. Marvel not at this, for the Hour is coming in which all that are in
the Graves shall hear his Voice, and shall come forth; they that have done Good
unto the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done Evil unto the
Resurrection of Damnation.


Quest. WHat Benefits shall Believers receive from Christ at the Resurrection?

Resp. 1. Their Bodies shall be raised up to Glory.

2. They shall be openly acquitted at the Day of Judgment.

3. They shall be made perfectly blessed in the full enjoyment of God for ever.

1. The Bodies of Believers shall be raised up to Glory. The Doctrine of the
Resurrection is a Fundamental Article of our Faith; the Apostle puts it among
the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6.2. The Body shall rise again;
we are not so sure to rise out of our Beds, as we are to rise out of our
Graves. The saved Body shall arise again. Some hold that the Soul shall be
clothed with a new Body; but then it were improper to call it a Resurrection,
it should be rather a Creation, Job 19.26. Though worms destroy this body, yet
in my flesh shall I see God. Not in another flesh, but my flesh. 1 Cor. 15.53.
This corruptible shall put on incorruption.

Quest. 2. By what Arguments may the Resurrection be proved?

Resp. Argument 1. By Scripture, John 6.44. I will raise him up at the last
day. Isa. 25.8. He will swallow up Death in Victory. That is, by delivering our
Bodies from the Captivity of the Grave, wherein Death for a time had power over
them, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. Them which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.

Argument 2. Christ is risen: Therefore the Bodies of the Saints must rise.
Christ did not rise from the Dead as a private Person, but as the public Head
of the Church; and the Head being raised, the rest of the Body shall not always
lie in the Grave. Christ's rising is a Pledge of our Resurrection, 2 Cor. 4.14.
Knowing that he which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also by
Jesus. Christ is called the first Fruits of them that slept, 1 Cor. 15.20. As
the first Fruits is a sure Evidence that the Harvest is coming on; so the
Resurrection of Christ is a sure Evidence of the rising of our Bodies out of
the Grave. Christ cannot be perfect as he is Christ Mystical, unless his
Members be raised with him.

Argument 3. In respect of Gods Justice. If God be a just God, then he will
reward the Bodies of the Saints as well as the Souls. It cannot be imagined
that the Souls of Believers should be glorified, and not their Bodies: They
have served God with their Bodies: Their Bodies have been Members of Holiness:
Their Eyes have dropped Tears for Sin: Their Hands have relieved the Poor: Their
Tongues have set forth Gods Praise; therefore Justice and Equity require that
their Bodies should be crowned as well as their Souls: And how can that be,
unless they are raised from the Dead?

Argument 4. If the Body did not rise again, then a Believer should not be
completely happy; for though the Soul can subsist without the Body, yet it has
Appetitum Unionis, a desire of reunion with the Body; and it is not fully
happy till it be clothed with the Body: Therefore undoubtedly the Body shall
rise again: If the Soul should go to Heaven, and not the Body, then a Believer
should be only half saved.

Object* 1. But some may say, as the Virgin Mary to the Angel, How can this be?
So how can it be, that the Body which is consumed to Ashes, should arise again?

Resp. It does not oppose Reason, but transcend it. There are some Resemblances
of the Resurrection in Nature. The Corn which is sown in the ground dies before
it springs up, 1 Cor. 15.36. That which thou sowest is not quickened except it
dye. In Winter the Fruits of the Earth dye, in Spring there is a Resurrection
of them. Noah's Olive Tree springing after the Flood, was a lively Emblem of
the Resurrection. After the Passion of our Lord, many of the Saints which slept
in the Grave, arose, Matt. 27.52. God can more easily raise the Body out of the
Grave, than we can wake a Man out of sleep.

Object. 2. But when the Dust of many are mingled together, How is it possible
that a Separation should be made, and the same numerical Body arise?

Resp. If we believe God can Create, then he can distinguish the dust of one
Body from another. Do we not see the Chemist can, out of several Metals mingled
together, as Gold, Silver, Alchimy, extract the one from the other, the Silver
from the Gold, the Alchimy from the Silver, and can reduce every Metal to its
own kind? And shall we not much more believe, that when our Bodies are mingled
and confounded with other Substances, the wise God is able to make an
Extraction, and re-invest every Soul with its own Body?

Quest. 3. Shall none but the Bodies of the Righteous be raised?

Resp. Yes, all that are in the Graves shall hear Christ's Voice, and shall come
forth, Acts 24.15. There shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the just
and unjust, Rev. 20.12. I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God. But
though all shall be raised out of their Graves, yet all shall not be raised
alike.

1. The Bodies of the Wicked shall be raised with Ignominy; those Bodies which
on the Earth did tempt and allure others with their Beauty, shall be at the
Resurrection loathsome to behold; they shall be ghastly Spectacles, as the
Phrase is, Isa. 66.24. They shall be an abhorring unto all flesh. But the
Bodies of the Saints shall be raised with Honor, 1 Cor. 15.43. It is sown in
dishonor, it is raised in Glory. The Saints Bodies then shall shine as
sparkling Diamonds, Matt. 13.43. Then shall the righteous shine forth as the
Sun.

2. The Bodies of the Saints shall arise out of their Graves with Triumph: The
Bodies of the Wicked shall come out of the Grave with Trembling, as being to
receive their fatal Doom: But the Godly, when they awake out of the Dust, shall
sing for Joy, Isa. 26.19. Awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust. When the
Archangels Trumpet sounds, then the Saints shall sing: The Bodies of Believers
shall come out of the Grave to be made happy: As the chief Butler came out of
Prison, and was restored to all his Dignity at the Court: But the Bodies of the
Wicked shall come out of the Grave, as the chief Baker out of Prison to be
executed, Genesis 40.22.

Use 1. Believe this Doctrine of the Resurrection; and that the same Body that
dies, shall arise again, and with the Soul be crowned. Without the belief of
this, tota corruit Religio, all Religion falls to the ground, 1 Cor. 15.4. If
the Dead rise not, then Christ is not risen, and then our Faith is vain.

Use 2. Comfort. The Body shall rise again. This was Job's Comfort, Job 19.26.
Though Worms destroy this Body, yet in my flesh shall I see God. The Body is
sensible of Joy as well as the Soul: And indeed we shall not be in all our
Glory, till our Bodies are reunited to our Souls. O consider what Joy there
will be at the re-uniting of the Body and Soul at the Resurrection: Look what
sweet Embraces of Joy were between Old Jacob and Joseph, when they first saw
one another, Genesis 46.29. Such, and infinitely more, will there be when the Body
and Soul of a Saint shall meet together at the Resurrection. How will the Body
and Soul greet one another? What a welcome will the Soul give to the Body? O
blessed Body! When I prayed thou did attend my Prayers with hands lifted up,
and Knees bowed down: Thou were willing to suffer with me, and now thou shall
reign with me: Thou were sown in dishonor, but now art raised in Glory. O my
dear Body! I will enter into thee again, and be eternally married to thee.

Use 3. The Resurrection of the Body is a Cordial when a Christian lies a
dying. Thy Body, though it drop into the Sepulcher, it shall revive and
flourish as an Herb in the Resurrection: The Grave is a Bed of dust, where the
Bodies of the Saints sleep; but they shall be awakened by the Trump of the
Archangel. The Grave is your long home, but not your last home: Though Death
strip you of your beauty, yet at the Resurrection you shall have it restored
again. As David when he found Saul asleep, took away his Spear and Cruse of
Water, but when he awoke he restored them again, 1 Samuel 26.22. So though at
death all our strength and beauty be taken away, yet at the Resurrection God
will restore all again in a more glorious manner.

Quest. 4. But how shall we know that our Bodies shall be raised to a glorious
Resurrection?

Resp. If we have a part in the first Resurrection, Rev. 20.6. Blessed is he
that has a part in the first Resurrection. Quest. What is meant by this? Answ.
It is a rising by Repentance out of the Grave of Sin: He who lies buried in
sin, can have little hope of a joyful Resurrection: His Body shall be raised,
but not in Glory. O then ask Conscience, Have you a part in the first
Resurrection? Has the Spirit entered into you, and lifted you up? Has it
raised you out of your Unbelief? Has it raised your Hearts above the Earth?
This is the first Resurrection; and if your Souls are thus Spiritually raised,
then your Bodies shall be gloriously raised; and shall shine as Stars in the
Kingdom of Heaven. Regeneration makes way for a glorious Resurrection.

Use Seeing you expect your Bodies should arise to Glory, keep your Bodies
unspotted from sin. Shall a drunken Body rise to Glory? Shall an unclean Body
rise to Glory? Shall a thievish Body steal into Heaven? O keep your Bodies
pure: Keep your Eyes from unchaste Glances; your Hands from Bribes; your Tongues
from Slander: Defile not your Bodies which you hope shall rise one day to
Glory. Your Bodies are the Members of Christ; and hear what the Apostle says,
1 Cor. 6.15. Shall I take the members of Christ, and make them the members of
an Harlot? God forbid. O keep your Bodies unspotted, let them be Instruments of
Righteousness, 1 Cor. 6.20. Glorify God in your Body. If your Bodies glorify
God, God will glorify your Bodies.

Quest. 5. But seeing our Bodies must be laid in the Grave, and they may lie
many years rotting there before the Resurrection; What may support and comfort
us in this case?

Resp. 1. That God will not leave his People in the Grave. Our Friends bring us
to the Grave and leave us there, but God will not: God will go to the Grave
with us, and watch over our dead Bodies; and take care of our Ashes. Rizpah
watched over the dead Bodies of the Sons of Saul, and guarded them against the
ravenous Fouls of the Air, 2 Samuel 21.10. Thus the Lord watches over the dead
Bodies of the Saints, and looks to it, that none of their dust be missing.
Christian, thou have a God to watch over thy Body when thou art dead.

2. The Bodies of the Saints in the Grave, though separated from their Souls,
are united to Christ. The dust of a Believer is part of Christ's Mystical Body.

3. When the Bodies of the Saints are in the Sepulcher, their Souls are in
Paradise* The Soul does not sleep in the Body, but returns to God that gave it,
Eccles. 12.7. The Soul immediately partakes of those Joys the blessed Angels
do: When the Body returns to dust, the Soul returns to rest: When the Body is
sleeping, the Soul is triumphing: When the Body is buried, the Soul is crowned:
As the Spies were sent before to taste of the Fruits of the Land, Numb. 13. so
at Death the Soul is sent before into Heaven, to taste of the Fruit of the Holy
Land.

4. When Gods time is come, the Graves shall deliver up their Dead, Rev. 20.13.
When the Judge sends, the Jailer must deliver up his Prisoners. As God said to
Jacob, Genesis 46.4. I will go down with thee into Egypt, and I will surely bring
thee up again. So the Lord will go down with us into the Grave, and will surely
bring us up again.

5. Though the Bodies of the Saints shall rot and be loathsome in the Grave, yet
afterward they shall be made Illustrious and Glorious. Concerning this
consider,

1. The Bodies of the Saints, when they arise, shall be comely and beautiful.
The Body of a Saint in this Life may be deformed: Those whose minds are adorned
with Virtue, yet may have misshapen Bodies; as the finest Cloth may have the
coarsest List: But this deformed Body shall be aimable and beautiful. This
beauty consists in two things. 1. Perfection of parts: There shall be a full
Proportion of all the Members: In this Life there is often a defect of Members:
The Eye is lost, the Arm is cut off; but in the Resurrection all parts of the
Body shall be restored again: Therefore the Resurrection is called the time of
restoring of all things, Acts 3.19. Malcha's Ear cut, restituit. 2. Clarity and
Splendour: The Bodies of the Saints shall have a graceful Majesty in them; they
shall be like Stephen, whose Face shined as if it had been the Face of an
Angel, Acts 6.15. Nay they shall be made like Christ's glorious Body, Phil. 3.21.

2. The Bodies of the Saints, when they arise, shall be free from the
Necessities of Nature, as Hunger and Thirst, Rev. 7.16. They shall hunger no
more. Moses on the Mount was so filled with the Glory of God, that he needed
not the Recruits of Nature: Much more in Heaven shall the Bodies of the Saints,
so filled with Gods Glory, be upheld without Food.

3. The Bodies of Saints, when they arise, shall be swift and nimble; our
Bodies on Earth are dull and heavy in their Motion; then they shall be swift
and made fit to ascend, as the Body of Elias in the Air. Now the Body is a
Clog; in Heaven it shall be a Wing: We shall be as the Angels, Matt. 22.30. And
how nimble are they? The Angel Gabriel in a short time came from Heaven to the
Earth, Dan. 9.21. As the Helm turns the Ship instantly whether the Steersman
will; so the Body in an instant will move which way the Soul will.

4. The Bodies of the Saints, at the Resurrection, shall be very firm and
strong, 1 Cor. 15.43. It is raised in power. Through frequent Labor and
Sickness, the strongest Body begins to Languish: But at the Resurrection we
shall be of a strong Constitution: Then there will be no Weariness in the Body,
nor Faintness in the Spirits. This may comfort you who now conflict with many
bodily Weaknesses. This weak Body shall be raised in Power: The Body which is
now a weak Reed, shall be like a Rock.

5. The Bodies of the Saints at the Resurrection shall be Immortal, 1 Cor.
15.53. This Mortal shall put on Immortality, our Bodies shall run parallel with
Eternity, Luke 20.36. Neither can they dye any more. Heaven is an healthful
Climate, there is no Bill of Mortality there. If a Physician could give you a
Receipt to keep you from Dying, what Sums of Money would you give? At the
Resurrection Christ will give the Saints such a Receipt, Rev. 21.4. There shall
be no more death.

2. The second Privilege Believers shall have at the Resurrection, is, They
shall be openly acquitted at the day of Judgment.

Of the Day of Judgment.
Quest. WHat Benefits do Believers receive from Christ at the Resurrection?

Resp. 1. Their Bodies shall be raised up to Glory, and shall be openly
acquitted at the day of Judgment, and crowned with the full and perfect
Enjoyment of God to all Eternity.

2. They shall be openly acquitted at the day of Judgment.] This is to be laid
down for a Position, that there shall be a Day of Judgment, 2 Cor. 5.10. For we
must all appear before the Iudgment-Seat of Christ. This is the Grand Assizes;
the greatest Appearance that ever was: Now Adam shall see all his Posterity at
once: We must all appear; the greatness of Men's Persons does not exempt them
from Christ's Tribunal; Kings and Captains are brought in trembling before the
Lambs Throne, Rev. 6.15. We must all appear, and appear in our own Persons, not
by a Proxy.

Quest. 1. How does it appear that there shall be a Day a Judgment?

Resp. Two ways. 1. By the Suffrage of Scripture, Eccles. 11.9.12.14 For God
shall bring every work into Judgment, with every secret thing, Psalm. 96.13. For
he comes, for he comes to judge the Earth. The Reduplication denotes the
certainty, Dan. 7.9. I beheld till the Thrones were cast down, and the ancient
of days did sit, whose garment was white as snow. The Judgment was set, and the
Books were opened.

2. It appears from the petty Sessions kept in a Man's own Conscience; when a
Man does Virtuously, Conscience does excuse him, when evil Conscience does
arraign and condemn him. Now, what is this private Session kept in the Court of
Conscience, but a certain forerunner of that General Day of Judgment, when all
the World shall be summoned to Gods Tribunal?

Quest. 2. Why must there be a Day of Judgment?

Resp. That there may be a Day of Retribution, when God may render to every one
according to his work. Things seem to be carried very unequally in the World:
The Wicked do so prosper, as if they were rewarded for being Evil: And the
Godly do so suffer, as if they were punished for being good. Therefore for the
vindicating Gods Justice, there must be a day, wherein there shall be a
righteous Distribution of Punishments and Rewards to Men, according to their
Actions.

Quest. 3. Who shall be Judge?

Resp. The Lord Jesus Christ, John 5.22. The Father has committed all Judgment
to the Son. It is an Article in our Creed, That Christ shall come to judge the
Quick and the Dead. It is a great Honor put upon Christ: He who was himself
judged, shall now be Judge: He who once hung upon the Cross, shall sit upon the
Bench. Christ is fit to be Judge, as he partakes both of the Manhood and
Godhead.

1. Of the Manhood: Being clothed with the Humane Nature, he may be visibly
seen of all: It is requisite the Judge should be seen, Rev. 1.7. Behold he
comes with Clouds, and every Eye shall see him.

2. As he partakes of the Godhead: He is of infinite Prudence to understand all
Causes brought before him: And of infinite Power to execute Offenders. He is
described with seven Eyes, Zach. 3.9. to denote his Prudence; and a Rod of
Iron, Psalm. 2.9. to denote his Power. He is so Wise that he cannot be deluded;
and so Strong that he cannot be resisted.

Quest. 4. When will the Court fit, when will the time of Judgment be?

Resp. For the Quando, or the time of the General Judgment, it is a Secret kept
from the Angels, Matt. 24.36. Of that day and hour knows no Man, no not the
Angels of Heaven. But this is sure, it cannot be far off: One great sign of the
approach of the Day of Judgment, is, That Iniquity shall abound, Matt. 24. Sure
then this day is near at hand, for Iniquity did never more abound than in this
Age: Lust grows hot and Love grows cold. This is certain, when the Elect are
all converted, then Christ will come to Judgment: As he that owes a Ferry-boat,
stays till all the Passengers are taken into his Boat, and then he rows away.
So Christ stays till all the Elect are gathered in, and then he will hasten
away to ^^dgment.

Quest. 5. What shall be the modus or manner of Trial?

Resp. 1. The Citing of Men to the Court. The Dead are cited as well as the
Living. Men when they Dye, avoid the Censure of our Law-Courts, but at the last
Day, the Dead are cited to God's Tribunal, Rev. 20.12. I saw the Dead Small and
Great stand before God. This citing of Men will be by the Sound of a Trumpet, 1
These. 4.16. and this Trumpet will sound so loud, that it will raise Men out of
their Graves, Mat. 24.31. Such as will not hear the Trumpet of the Gospel sound
in their Ears, Repent and Believe, shall hear the Trumpet of the Archangel
sounding, Arise and be Judged.

2. The approach of the Judge to the Bench.

First, This will be terrible to the Wicked. How can a guilty Prisoner endure
the sight of the Judge? If Foelix trembled when Paul Preached of Judgment, Acts
24.25. How will Sinners Tremble when they shall see Christ come to Judgment?
Christ is described (sitting in Judgment) with a Fiery Stream issuing from him,
Dan. 7.10. Now the Lamb of God will be turned into a Lion. The sight of Christ
will strike Terror into Sinners. As when Joseph said to his Brethren, I am
Joseph whom ye sold into Egypt; they were troubled at his Presence, Genesis 45.6.
Now, how did their Hearts smite them for their Sin! So when Christ shall come
to judge Men, and say, I am Jesus whom ye sinned against, I am Jesus whose Laws
ye have broken, whose Blood ye despised, I am now come to Judge you. O what
horror and amazement will take hold of Sinners! they will be troubled at the
Presence of their Judge.

Secondly, The appro^ch of Christ to the Bench of Judicature, will be
Comfortable to the Righteous.

1. Christ will come in Splendour and Great Glory. His first coming in the Flesh
was obscure, Isa. 53.2. He was like a Prince in Disguise; but his Second coming
will be illustrious, he shall come in the Glory of his Father, with the Holy
Angels, Mark 8 38. O what a bright Day will that be, when such a number of
Angels, those Morning Stars shall appear in the Air, and Christ the Sun of
Righteousness shall shine in Splendor above the brightest Cherub!

2. Christ will come as a Friend. Indeed if the Saints Judge were their Enemy,
they might fear Condemning: But he who Loves them, and Prayed for them is their
Judge; he who is their Husband is their Judge, therefore they need not fear but
all things shall go well on their side.

Thirdly, The Trial it self, which has a Dark and a Light Side.

1. A Dark Side. It will fall heavy on the Wicked: The Judge being set, the
Books are opened, Rev. 20.12. The Book of Conscience, and the Book of God's
Remembrance; and now the Sinners Charge being Read, and all their Sins laid
open, their Murder Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Christ will say, Sinner, what can
you plead for your selves, that the Sentence of Death should not pass? The
Wicked being Convicted will be Speechless. Then follows that Dismal Sentence,
Mat. 25.41. Ite Maledicti, Depart from me ye Cursed into Everlasting-Fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. He that said to God Depart from me, Job
21.14. and to Religion Depart from me, must now hear that Word pronounced from
his Judge, Depart from me; a dreadful Sentence, but Righteous, Psalm. 51.4. The
Sinner himself shall cry Guilty. Though the Wicked have a Sea of Wrath, yet not
one Drop of Injustice. And when once the Sentence is past, it is irreversible,
there is no appealing to an Higher Court.

2. The Trial has a Light side. It will be for the increasing the Joy and
Happiness of the Righteous: The Day of Judgment will be a Day of Iubile to them.

I. At that Day Christ their Judge will own them by Name. Those whom the World
scorned and looked upon as Precisians and Fools, Christ will take by the Hand,
and openly acknowledge them to be his Favorites. What is Christ's Confessing
of Men, Luke 12.8. but his open acknowledging them to be precious in his Eyes?

II. Christ as Judge will plead for them. It is not usual to be both Judge and
Advocate, to sit on the Bench and to Plead; but it shall be so at the Day of
Judgment.

First, Christ will plead his own Blood for the Saints. These Persons I have
paid a Price for, they are the Travail of my Soul; they have sinned, but my
Soul was made an Offering for their Sin.

Secondly, Christ will vindicate them from all unjust Censures. Here they were
strangely misrepresented to the World as Proud, Hypocritical, Factious. Paul
was called a Seditious Man, the Head of a Faction, Acts 24.5. But at the Day of
Judgment Christ will clear the Saints Innocence; then he will bring forth their
Righteousness as the Light, Psalm. 37.6. As he will wipe off Tears from their
Eyes, so Dust from their Name. Moses when he was charged with Ambition, that he
took too much upon him, comforted himself with this, To Morrow will the Lord
show who are his, Numb. 16.5. So may the Saints when reproached, comfort
themselves with the Day of Judgment; then will Christ say who are his. Then the
Saints shall come forth as the Wings of a Dove, covered with Silver.

Thirdly, Christ as Judge will Absolve them before Men and Angels. As Pilate
said of Christ, I find no Fault in this Man, John 18.38. So will Christ say of
the Elect, I find no Fault in them, I pronounce them Righteous. Then follows,
Come ye Blessed of my Father, Inherit the Kingdom, Mat. 25.34. As if Christ
should say, O ye happy ones, the delight of my Soul, the Fruit of my
Sufferings, stand no longer at the Bar, ye are Heirs apparent of the Crown of
Heaven, enter and take possession. At the Hearing of this Sentence, with what
ravishing Joy will the Saints be filled? This Word, Come ye Blessed, will be
Music to their Ear, and a Cordial to their Heart.

Fourthly, Christ will mention before Men and Angels all the Good Deeds the
Saints have done, Mat. 25.35. I was an Hungered and ye gave me Meat, I was
Thirsty and you gave me Drink; you that have wept in Secret for Sin, that have
shown any Love to Christ's Name, that have been rich in Good Works, Christ will
take notice of it at the last Day, and say, Well done Good and Faithful
Servants. He himself will be the Herald to proclaim your Praises. Thus shall
it be done to the Man whom Christ delights to Honor.

Fifthly, Christ will call his Saints from the Bar, to sit upon the Bench with
him to Judge the World. Jude 14. Behold the Lord comes with Ten Thousands of
his Saints to execute Judgment upon all. 1 Cor. 6.2. Know ye not that the
Saints shall Judge the World? The Saints shall sit with Christ in Judicature,
as Justices of Peace with the Judge; they shall applaud Christ's Righteous
Sentence on the Wicked, and as it were Vote with Christ. This as it is a great
Honor to the Saints, so it must needs add to the Sorrows of the Wicked, to see
those whom they once hated and derided, to sit as Judges upon them.

Sixthly, The Saints shall be fully Crowned with the Enjoyment of God for ever.
They shall be in his sweet Presence, in whose Presence is fullness of Joy,
Psalm. 16.11. And this shall be for ever. The Banner of God's Love shall be
eternally Displayed; the Joys of Heaven are without intermission and
expiration, 1 These. 4.17. And so shall we be ever with the Lord.

Use. As it is sad News to the Wicked, they shall not stand in Judgment, Psalm.
1.5. They shall come to Judgment, but they shall not stand in Judgment, viz.
they shall not stand acquitted, they shall not stand with Boldness, but sneak
and hang down their Head, and not be able to look their Judge in the Face; so
it is great Consolation to the Godly. When the Apostle had said, The Lord shall
descend from Heaven with a Shout, with the Voice of the Archangel, and the
Trump of God; he presently adds, Wherefore comfort one another with these
Words, 1 These. 4.16.18.

1. The Day of Judgment is comfort, in respect of Weakness of Grace. A
Christian is ready to be troubled, to see his Grace so minute and imperfect,
but at the last Day if Christ find but a Dram of True Grace, it shall be
accepted. If thine be true Gold, though it be many Grains too light, Christ
will put his Merits into the Scales, and make it pass current.

2. It is a comfort to such of the Saints, who have met with Unrighteous
Judgment in the World, who have been wronged of their Estates in Lawsuits, or
had their Lives taken away by an Unrighteous Sentence, Christ will judge over
things again, and will give a Righteous Sentence; if your Estates have been
taken away wrongfully, you shall be restored a Thousand fold at the Day of
Judgment. If you have lost your Lives for Christ, yet you shall not lose your
Crown. You shall wear a Garland made of the Flowers of Paradise which fades
not away.

Bran. I. Meditate much upon the Day of Judgment. Feathers swim upon the Water,
but Gold sinks into it. Light Feathery Christians flote in Vanity, they mind
not the Day of Judgment, but Serious Spirits sink deep into the Thoughts of it.

1. The Meditation of this Last Day would make us very sincere. We would then
labor to approve our Hearts to God the great Judge and Umpire of the World.
It Is easy to carry it fair before Men, but there is no Dissembling or
Prevaricating with God, he sees what the Heart is, and will accordingly pass
his Verdict.

2. The Meditation of Christ's coming to judge us, would keep us from Judging
our Brethren. We are apt to judge others as to their Final State, which is for
Men to step into Christ's Place, and take his Work out of his Hand, Iam. 4.12.
Who art thou that judge another? Thou that passest a rash Sentence upon
another, thou must come thy self shortly to be judged, and then perhaps he may
be Acquitted, and thou Condemned.

Bran. So demean and carry your selves, that at the Day of Judgment, you may be
sure to be acquitted, and have those glorious Privileges the Saints shall be
Crowned with.

Quest. How is that?

Resp. 1. If you would stand acquitted at the Day of Judgment, then First,
labor to get into Christ, Phil. 3.9. That I may be found in him. Faith
implants us into Christ, it in garrisons us in him; and then there is no
Condemnation, Romans 8.1. There Is no standing before Christ but by being in
Christ. Secondly, Labor for Humility. It Is a kind of Self-Annihilation, 2 Cor.
12.11. (...). Though I be nothing. Christian, have thou Parts and Abilities,
and do thou cover them with the Vail of Humility? As Moses when his Face
shined, put a Vail over it. If thou art Humble, thou shall be acquitted at the
Day of Judgment, Job 22.29. He shall save the Humble Person. An Humble Man
judges himself for his Sins, and Christ will acquit them who judge themselves.

2. If you would stand acquitted at the last Day, then keep a clear Conscience.
Do not load your selves with Guilt, and furnish your Judge with matter against
you. The Lord (says Paul,) has appointed a Day in which he would judge the
World, Acts 17.21. And how would Paul fit himself for that Day, Acts 24.16.
Herein I exercise my Self, to have always a Conscience void of Offense, toward
God and toward Man. Be careful of the First and Second Table; be Holy and
Just. Have Hearts without false Aims, and Hands without false Weights; keep
Conscience as clear as your Eye, that no Dust of Sin fall into it. They that
sin against Conscience, will be shy of their Judge. Such as take in Prohibited
Goods, cannot endure to see the Searchers that are appointed to open their
Packs. Christian, thy Pack will be opened at the last Day, I mean thy
Conscience, and Christ is Searcher to see what Sins, what Prohibited Goods thou
have taken in; and then he proceeds to Judgment. Oh be sure to keep a good
Conscience; this is the best way to stand with boldness at the Day of Judgment.
The Voice of Conscience is the Voice of God; if Conscience does upon just
Grounds acquit us, God will acquit us, 1 John 3.21. If our heart condemn us
not, then have we confidence toward God.

3. If you would stand acquitted at the last Day, then trade your Talents for
God's Glory. Lay out your selves for God; Honor him with your Substance;
Relieve Christ's Members: This is the way to be acquitted. He that had Five
Talents Traded them, and made them Five Talents more. His Lord said unto him,
Well done Good and Faithful Servant, Matt. 25.21.

4. If you would stand acquitted at the Day of Judgment, get an entire Love to
the Saints, 1 John 3.14. We know we are passed from Death to Life, etc. Love is
the truest Touchstone of Sincerity. To love Grace for Grace, shows the Spirit
of God to be in a Man. Does Conscience witness for you? Are you perfumed with
this sweet Spice of Love? Do you delight most in those whom the Image of God
shines? Do you reverence their Graces? Do you bear with their Infirmities? A
Blessed Evidence that you shall be acquitted in the Day of Judgment. We know
that we have passed from Death to Life, because we love the Brethren.

Of Obedience to God's Revealed Will.
Deuteronomy. 27.9, 10. Take heed and hearken O Israel, This Day thou art become the
People of the Lord thy God; thou shall therefore obey the Voice of the Lord thy
God, and do his Commandments.


Quest. WHat is the Duty that God requires of Man?

Resp. Obedience to his Revealed Will. It is not enough to Hear God's Voice,
but we must Obey. Obedience is a part of that Honor we owe to God, Mal. 1.6.
If I am a Father, where is my Honor? Obedience carries in it the Lifeblood of
Religion. Obey the Voice of the Lord thy God, and do his Commandments.
Obedience without Knowledge is Blind, and Knowledge without Obedience is Lame.
Rachel was fair to look upon, but being barren said, Give me Children or I die.
So if Knowledge does not bring forth the Child of Obedience, it will Dye, 1 Samuel 15.22. To obey is better than Sacrifice. Saul thought 'twas enough for him
to offer Sacrifice, though he disobeyed God's Command. No, to obey is better
than Sacrifice. God disclaims Sacrifice, if Obedience be wanting, Ier. 7.22. I
spoke not to your Fathers concerning Burnt-Offerings, but this thing commanded
I them, saying, Obey my Voice. Not but that God did enjoin those Religious
Rights of Worship; but the meaning is, God looked chiefly at Obedience, without
which Sacrifice was but Devout Folly. The end why God has given us his Law, is
Obedience, Levit. 18.4. Ye shall do my Judgments, and keep my Ordinances. Why
does a King publish an Edict, but that it may be observed?

Quest. 1. What is the Rule of Obedience?

Resp. The Written Word. That is proper Ocedience which the Word requires; our
Obedience must correspond with the Word, as the Copy with the Original. To seem
to be zealous, if it be not according to the Word, is not Obedience but
Will Worship Popish Traditions which have no Footing in the Word are
abominable, and God will say, quis quaesivint haec? Who has required this at
your Hand? Isa. 1.12. The Apostle condemns the Worshipping of Angels, which had
a show of Humility, Col. 2.18. The Jews might say, they were loath to be so
bold as to go to God in their own Persons; they would be more Humble, and
prostrate themselves before the Angels, and desire them to present their
Petitions to God. This show of Humility was hateful to God, because there was
no Word to warrant it.

Quest. 2. What are the Right Ingredients into our Obedience to make it
acceptable? Or how must it be qualified?

Resp. 1. Obedience must be cum animi prolubio, Free and Cheerful, else it is
Penance, not Sacrifice, Isa. 1.19. If ye be Willing and Obedient, though we
serve God with Weakness, let it be with Willingness. You love to see your
Servants go cheerfully about your Work. Under the Law God would have a
Free-Will-Offering, Deuteronomy. 16.10. Hypocrites obey God grudgingly and against
their Will; they do facere bonum, but not velle. Cain brought his Sacrifice but
not his Heart. It Is a true Rule, quicquid Cor non facit non fit, What the Heart
does not do, is not done. Willingness is the Soul of Obedience; God sometimes
accepts of Willingness without the Work, but never of the Work without
Willingness. Cheerfulness shows that there is Love in the Duty; and Love does
to our Services, as the Sun does to the Fruit, Mellow and Ripen them, and make
them come off with a better Relish.

2. Obedience must be Devout and Fervent, Romans 12.11. (...), Fervent in Spirit,
etc. Quae ebullit prae ardore, It alludes to Water that boils over. So the
Heart must boil over with Hot Affections in the Service of God. The Glorious
Angels who for their burning in Fervor and Devotion, are called Seraphims;
these God chooses to serve him in Heaven. The Snail under the Law was unclean,
because a dull Sloathful Creature. Obedience without Fervency, is like a
Sacrifice without Fire. Why should not our Obedience be lively and Fervent? God
deserves the Flower and Strength of our Affections. Domitian would not have his
Statue carved in Wood or Iron, but in Gold. Lively Affections make Golden
Services. It is Fervency makes Obedience acceptable: Eliah was fervent in
Spirit, and his Prayers opened and shut Heaven: And again he prayed, and fire
fell on his Enemies, 2 Kings 1.10. Eliah's Prayer fetched Fire from Heaven,
because being fervent it carried Fire up to Heaven: Quicquid decorum ex Fide
proficiscitur, Aug.

3. Obedience must be extensive, it must reach to all Gods Commands, Psalm.
119.6. Then shall I not be ashamed (or as it is in the Hebrew lo Ebosh, blush)
when I have respect to all thy Commandments. Quicquid propter Deum fit
aequaliter fit. There is a Stamp of Divine Authority upon all Gods Commands;
and if I obey one Precept, because God Commands, I must obey all: True
Obedience runs through all the Duties of Religion, as the Blood through all the
Veins; or the Sun through all the Signs of the Zodiac. A good Christian makes
Gospel Piety and Moral Equity kiss each other: Herein some discover their
Hypocrisy, they will obey God in some things which are more facile, and may
raise their Repute; but other things they leave undone, Mark 10.21. One thing
is lacking, Unum deest. Herod would hear John Baptist, but not leave his
Incest: Some will Pray, but not give Alms; others will give Alms but not Pray,
Matt. 23.23. Ye pay Tithe of Mint and Anise, and have neglected the weightier
things of the Law* Judgment, Mercy and Faith. The Badger has one foot shorter
than the other: So these are shorter in some Duties than in other. God likes
not such partial Servants that will do some part of the work he sets them
about, and leave the other undone.

4. Obedience must be sincere, viz. We must aim at the Glory of God in it.
Finis specificat actionem: In Religion the end is all. The end of our Obedience
must not be to stop the Mouth of Conscience, or to gain Applause and
Preferment; but that we may grow more like God, and bring more Glory to God, 1
Cor. 10.31. Do all to the Glory of God. That which has spoiled many glorious
Actions, and made them lose their Reward, is, when Men's aims have been wrong:
The Pharisees gave Alms, but blowed a Trumpet, that they might have Glory of
Men, Matt. 6: 2. Alms should shine, but not blaze. Iehu did well in destroying
the Baal-worshippers, and God commended him for it; but because his Aims were
not good (he aimed at settling himself in the Kingdom) therefore God looked upon
it no better than Murder, Hos. 1.4. I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the
House of Jehu. O let us look to our Ends in Obedience; it is possible the
Action may be right and not the Heart, 2 Chronicles. 25.2. Amaziah did that which
was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect Heart. Two things
are chiefly to be eyed in Obedience, the Principle and the End: A Child of God,
though he shoots short in his Obedience, yet he takes a right Aim.

5. Obedience must be in and thorough Christ, Ephesians. 1.6. He has accepted us in
the Beloved. Not our Obedience, but Christ's Merits, procure acceptance; we must
in every part of Worship, tender up Christ to God in the Arms of our Faith.
Unless we serve God thus, in Hope and Confidence of Christ's Merits, we do
rather provoke God than please him: As when King Uzziah would offer Incense
without a Priest, God was angry with him, and struck him with Leprosy, 2 Chronicles. 26.16. So when we do not come to God in and thorough Christ, we offer up
Incense to God without a Priest, and what can we expect but severe Rebukes?

6. Obedience must be Constant, Psalm. 106.3. Blessed is he who does
righteousness, Be Col Gnet, at all times. True Obedience is not like an high
Color in a Fit, but it is a right Sanguine: It is like the Fire on the Altar,
which was always kept Burning, Lev. 6.13. Hypocrites Obedience is but, (...),
for a Season: It is like plaistering Work, which is soon washed off; but true
Obedience is constant: Though we meet with Affliction, we must go on in our
Obedience, Job 17.9. The Righteous shall hold on his way. We have vowed
Constancy: We have vowed to renounce the Pomp and Vanities of the World, and to
fight under Christ's Banner to the Death. When a Servant has entered into
Covenant with his Master, and the Indentures are sealed, then he cannot go
back, he must serve out his time. There are Indentures drawn in Baptism, and in
the Lords Supper: The Indentures are renewed and sealed on our part, that we
will be Faithful and Constant in our Obedience: Therefore we must imitate
Christ, who became obedient to the Death, Phil. 2.8. The Crown is set upon the
Head of Perseverance, Rev. 2.26. He that keeps my works unto the end, to him
will I give the morning Star.

Use 1. This indicts such who live in a Contradiction to this Text; they have
cast off the Yoke of Obedience, Ier. 44.16. As for the word which thou have
spoken to us in the Name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee. God bids
Men pray in their Family, they live in the total Neglect of it: He bids them
Sanctify the Sabbath, they follow their Pleasures on that day. God bids them
abstain from the Appearance of Sin, they do not abstain from the Act: They live
in the act of Revenge; in the Act of Uncleanness. This is an high Contempt of
God; it is Rebellion, and Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft.

Quest. Whence is it Men do not obey God? They know their Duty yet do it not?

Resp. 1. The not obeying of God is for want of Faith, Isa. 53.1. Quis
credidit? Who has believed our Report? Did Men believe Sin were so bitter,
that Hell followed at the Heels of it, Would they go on in Sin? Did they
believe there were such a Reward for the Righteous, that Godliness were Gain?
Would they not pursue it? But they are Atheists, not fully captivated into the
Belief of these things. Hence it is they obey not. This is Satan's
Masterpiece; His Draw-net by which he drags Millions to Hell by keeping them
in Infidelity, He knows if he can but keep them from believing the Truth, he is
sure to keep them from obeying it.

2. The not obeying God is for want of Self-denial: God commands one thing and
Men's Lusts command another; and they will rather dye than deny their Lusts. Now
if Lust cannot be denied, God cannot be obeyed.

Use 2. Obey Gods Voice, (...). This is the Beauty of a Christian.

Quest. What are the great Arguments or Incentives to Obedience?

Resp. 1. Obedience makes us precious to God; we shall be his Favorites* Exodus
19.15. If ye will obey my Voice, ye shall be a peculiar Treasure to me above
all People; you shall be my Portion, my Jewels, the Apple of mine Eye, I will
give Kingdoms for your Ransom, Isa. 43.3.

2. There is nothing lost by Obedience. To obey Gods Will is the way to have
our Will. 1. Would we have a Blessing in our Estates? Let us obey, Deuteronomy. 28.1,
3. If thou shall hearken to the Voice of the Lord, to do all his Commandments,
Blessed shall thou be in the field; Blessed shall be thy Basket and thy store.
To obey is the best way to thrive in our Estates. 2. Would we have a Blessing
in our Souls, let us obey, Ier. 7.23. Obey and I will be your God. My Spirit
shall be your Guide, Sanctifier and Comforter, Heb. 5.9. Christ became the
Author of eternal Salvation to all them that obey him. While we please God we
pleasure our selves: While we give him the Duty, he gives us the Dowry: We are
apt to say as Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25.9. What shall we do for the hundred Talents?
You see you lose nothing by obeying: The obedient Son has the Inheritance
settled on him: Obey and you shall have a Kingdom, Luke 12.32. It is your
Fathers good pleasure to give you a Kingdom.

3. What a Sin Disobedience is: 1. It is an irrational Sin. 2. We are not able
to stand it out in Defiance against God; 1 Cor. 10.22. Are we stronger than he?
Will the Sinner go to measure Arms with God? He is the Father Almighty, who can
command Legions: If we have not strength to resist him, it is irrational to
disobey him. 2. It is irrational, as it is against all Law and Equity: We have
our daily Subsistence from God; in him we live and move: Is it not equal, that
as we live by him, we should live to him? That as God gives us our Allowance,
so we should give him our Allegiance?

2. It is a destructive Sin, 1 Thessalonians. 7.8. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed
from Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming Fire, taking Vengeance on them
who obey not the Gospel. He who refuses to obey Gods Will in commanding, shall
be sure to obey his Will in punishing: The Sinner, while he thinks to slip the
knot of Obedience, twists the Cord of his own Damnation: He perishes without
excuse; he has no Plea or Apology to make for himself, Luke 12.47. The Servant
which knew his Lords will, but did it not, shall be beaten with many stripes.
God will say, why did ye not obey? You knew to do good, but did it not,
therefore your Blood is upon your own Head.

Quest. What means shall we use that we may obey?

Resp. 1. Serious Consideration: Consider Gods Commands are not grievous: He
commands nothing unreasonable, 1 John 5.3. It is easier to obey the commands of
God than Sin: The Commands of Sin are Burdensome: Let a Man be under the power
of any Lust, How does he tire himself? What Hazards does he run, even to the
endangering his Health and Soul, that he may satisfy his Lust? What tedious
Journeys did Antiochus Epiphanes take in persecuting the Jews? Ier. 9.5. They
weary themselves to commit Iniquity; and are not Gods commands more easy to
obey? Chrysostom. says, (...). Virtue is easier than Vice; Temperance is less
Burdensome than Drunkenness: Some have gone with less pains to Heaven, than
others have to Hell.

Consideration 2. God commands nothing but what is Beneficial, Deuteronomy. 10.12, 13.
O Israel what does the Lord require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, and
to keep his Statutes, which I command thee this day for thy good? To obey God,
is not so much our Duty as our Privilege: His commands carry Meat in the Mouth
of them: He bids us repent; and why? That our Sins may be blotted out, Acts
3.19. He commands us to believe: And why? That we may be saved, Acts 16.31.
There is love in every command. As if a King should bid one of his Subjects dig
in a Gold Mine, and then take the Gold to himself.

2. Earnest Supplication: Implore the help of the Spirit to carry us on in
Obedience: Gods Spirit makes Obedience easy and delightful: If the Loadstone
draw the Iron; now it is not hard for the Iron to move: If Gods Spirit quicken
and draw the Heart; now it is not hard to obey. When a Gale of the Spirit
blows; now we go full Sail in Obedience: Turn that Promise into a Prayer, Ezekiel.
36.27. I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes.
The Promise encourages us, the Spirit inables us to Obedience.

Of LOVE.
THE Rule of Obedience being the Moral Law comprehended in the Ten
Commandments; the next Question is,

Quest. What is the Sum of the Ten Commandments?

Resp. The Sum of the Ten Commandments, is to love the Lord our God, with all
our Heart, with all our Soul, with all our Strength, and with all our Mind, and
our Neighbor as our selves, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with
all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy might. The Duty called
for is Love, yea the strength of Love, with all thy Heart: God will lose none
of our Love. Love is the Soul of Religion, and that which goes to the right
constituting a Christian: Love is the Queen of the Graces; it shines and
sparkles in Gods Eye, as the precious Stones did on the Breast Plate of Aaron.

Quest. 1. What is Love?

Resp. It is an Holy Fire kindled in the Affections, whereby a Christian is
carried out strongly after God as the Supreme Good.

Quest. 2. What is the antecedent of Love to God?

Resp. The Antecedent of Love is Knowledge: The Spirit shines upon the
Understanding, and discovers those Orient Beauties in God, his Wisdom,
Holiness, Mercy, and these are the Lenocinium, the Lodestone to entice and
draw the Love to God: Ignoti nulla Cupido: Such as know not God cannot love
him: If the Sun be set in the Understanding, there must needs be night in the
Affections.

Quest. 3. Wherein does the formal Nature of Love consist?

Resp. The Nature of Love is in delighting in the Object: Complacentia amantis
in amato, Aquin. This is our loving God, our taking delight in him, Psalm. 37.4.
Delight thy self in the Lord: As a Bride delights in her Jewels. Grace changes
a Christians Aims and Delights.

Quest. 4. How must our Love to God be qualified?

Resp. 1. If it be a sincere Love, we must love God with all our Heart: In the
Text, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, Becol Leuauca, with all thy Heart. God
will have the whole Heart; we must not divide our Love between God and Sin: The
true Mother would not have the Child divided: Nor will God have the Heart
divided; it must be the whole Heart.

2. We must love God propter se, for himself, for his own intrinsic
Excellencies: We must love him for his Loveliness; Meretricius est amor plus
annulum quam sponsum amare. It is an Harlots Love to love the Portion more than
the Person. Hypocrites love God because he gives them Corn and Wine: We must
love God for himself; for those shining Perfections which are in him. Gold is
loved for it self.

3. We must love God with all our might. In the Hebrew Text our Vehemence. We
must love God quoad posse, as much as we are able: Christians should be like
Seraphins burning in Holy Love: We can never love God so much as he deserves:
The Angels in Heaven cannot love God so much as he deserves.

4. Love to God must be Active in its Sphere: Love is an Industrious Affection;
it sets the Head a studying for God, Hands a working, Feet a running in the
ways of his Commandments; it is called the Labor of Love, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. Mary
Magdalen loved Christ, and poured her Ointments on him. We think we can never
do enough for the Person whom we love.

5. Love to God must be Superlative: God is the Quintessence of Beauty, a whole
Paradise of Delight; and he must have a Priority in our Love: Our Love to God
must be above all things besides; as the Oil swims above the Water: We must
love God above Estate, Relations; great is the Love to Relations. There is a
Story in the French Academy, of a Daughter, who when her Father was condemned
to dye by Famine, gave him suck with her own Breasts. But our Love to God must
be above Father and Mother, Matt. 10.37. We may give the Creature the Milk of
our Love, God must have the Cream: The Spouse keeps the Juice of her Pomgranate
for Christ, Cant. 8.2.

6. Our Love to God must be constant, like the Fire the vestal Virgins kept in
Rome, which did not go out. Love must be like the motion of the Pulse, it beats
as long as there is Life, Cant. 8.7. Many Waters cannot quench Love, not the
Waters of Persecution, Ephesians. 3.17. (...), rooted in love. A Branch withers that
does not grow on a Root: That Love may not dye, it must be well rooted.

Quest. 5. What are the visible Signs of our Love to God?

Resp. 1. If we love God, then our Desire is after him, Isa. 26.8. The desire
of our Soul is to thy Name. He who loves God breaths after Communion with him,
Psalm. 42.2. My Soul thirsts for the living God. Persons in Love desire to be
often conferring together: He who loves God desires to be much in his Presence:
He loves the Ordinances, they are the Glass where the Glory of God is
resplendent: In the Ordinances we meet with him whom our Soul loves: We have
Gods Smiles and Whispers, and some Fore-tasts of Heaven: Such as have no desire
after Ordinances, have no love to God.

2. The second Visible Sign: He who loves God cannot take Contentment in any
thing without him: An Hypocrite who pretends to love God, give him but Corn and
Wine, and he can be content without God: But a Soul fired with love to God
cannot be without him. Lovers faint away if they have not a sight of the Object
loved. A gracious Soul can want Health, but not want God who is the Health of
his Countenance, Psalm. 43.5. If God should say to a Soul that entirely loves
him, Take thy Ease, swim in Pleasure, solace thy self in the Delights of the
World, but thou shall not enjoy my Presence; this would not content the Soul.
Nay, if God should say, I will let thee be taken up to Heaven, but I will
retire into a withdrawing Room, and thou shall not see my Face: This would not
content the Soul; it is an Hell to want God. The Philosopher says, There can
be no Gold without the Influence of the Sun: There can be no golden Joy in the
Soul, without Gods sweet Presence and Influence.

3. The third visible Sign: He who loves God, hates that which would separate
between him and God, and that is Sin: Sin makes God hide his Face; it is like
an Incendiary which parts chief Friends. Therefore the Keneness of a Christians
Hatred is set against Sin, Psalm. 119.128. I hate every false way. Antipathies
can never be reconciled; one cannot love Health but he must hate Poison: So we
cannot love God, but we must hate Sin, which would destroy our Communion with
him.

4. The fourth visible Sign is Sympathy: Friends that love do grieve for the
Evils which befall each other. Homer describing Agamemnon's Grief, when he was
forced to Sacrifice his Daughter, brings in all his Friends weeping with him,
and accompanying him to the Sacrifice in Mourning: Lovers grieve together: If
we have true Love in our Heart to God, we cannot but grieve for those things
which grieve him: We shall lay to Heart his Dishonours: The Luxury,
Drunkenness, Contempt of God and Religion, Psalm. 119.136. Rivers of Tears run
down mine eyes, etc. Some speak of the Sins of others, and make a laughing at
them; sure they have no love to God, who can laugh at that which grieves his
Spirit. Does he love his Father, who can laugh to hear him Reproached?

5. The Fifth Visible Sign. He who loves God, labors to render him Lovely to
others; he not only admires God, but speaks in his Praises, that he may allure
and draw others to be in love with God. She that is in Love, will commend her
Lover. The Lovesick Spouse extols Christ, she makes a Panegyrical Oration of
his worth, that she might persuade others to be in love with him, Cant. 5.11.
His Head is as the most Fine Gold. True love to God cannot be silent, it will
be elegant in setting forth God's Renown; no better sign of loving God, than by
making him appear Lovely, and so drawing Proselytes to him.

6. The Sixth Visible Sign. He who loves God, weeps bitterly for his Absence.
Mary comes weeping, they have taken away my Lord, John 20.2. One cries, my
Health is gone, another my Estate is gone; but he who is a Lover of God, cries
out, my God is gone, I cannot enjoy him whom I love. What can all Worldly
Comfors do, when once God is absent? It is like a Funeral Banquet, where there
is much Meat, but no Cheer, Job 30.28. I went Mourning without the Sun. If
Rachel Mourned so for the loss of her Children, what Vail or Pensil can shadow
out the Sorrow of that Christian, who has lost God's sweet Presence? Such a
Soul pours forth Floods of Tears, and while it is lamenting, seems to say thus
to God, Lord, thou art in Heaven hearing the Melodious Songs and Triumphs of
Angels; but I sit here in the Valley of Tears, weeping because thou art gone. O
when will thou come to me and revive me with the Light of thy Countenance? Or,
Lord if thou will not come to me, let me come to thee, where I shall have a
perpetual Smile of thy Face in Heaven, and shall never more Complain, My
Beloved has withdrawn himself.

7. The Seventh Visible Sign. He who loves God, is willing to do and Suffer for
him. He subscribes to God's Commands; he submits to his Will. First, He
subscribes to Gods Commands. If God bids him Mortify Sin, Love his Enemies, be
Crucified to the World, he obeys: It Is a vain thing for a Man to say he loves
God, and slights his Commands. Secondly, He submits to God's Will. If God will
have him suffer for him, he does not Dispute but Obey, 1 Cor. 13.7. Love
endures all things. Love made Christ suffer for us, and Love will make us
suffer for him. It is true every Christian is not a Martyr, but he has a
Spirit of Martyrdom in him. He has a Disposition of Mind to suffer, if God
call him to it, 2 Timothy 4.6. (...), I am ready to be Offered up: Not only the
Sufferings were ready for Paul, but he was ready for the Sufferings. Origin
chose rather to live despised in Alexandria, than with Plotinus to deny the
Faith, and be great in the Princes Favor, Rev. 12.11. Many say they love God,
but will not suffer the loss of any thing for him. If Christ should have said
to us, I love you well, you are dear to me, but I cannot suffer for you, I
cannot lay down my Life for you, we should have questioned his Love very much.
And may not the Lord question ours, when we pretend Love to him, but will
endure nothing for his sake?

Use 1. What shall we say to them who have not a Dram of Love in their Hearts
to God? They have their Life from him, yet do not Love him. God spreads their
Table every Day, yet they do not Love him. Sinners dread God as a Judge, but do
not love him as a Father. All the strength in the Angels cannot make the Heart
love God: Judgments will not do it. Only Omnipotent Grace can make a Stony
Heart melt in Love. How sad is it to be void of Love to God. When the Body is
cold, and has no heat in it, it is a sign of Death: He is Spiritually Dead, who
has no heat of Love in his Heart to God. Shall ever such live with God, that
do not love him? Will God lay an Enemy in his Bosom? Such as will not be drawn
with Cords of Love, shall be bound in Chains of Darkness.

Use 2. Let us be persuaded to love God with all our Heart and Might; O let us
take our Love off from other things, and place it upon God. Love is the Heart
of Religion, the Fat of the Offering. It Is the Grace which Christ enquires most
after, John 21.15. Peter, love thou me? Love makes all our Services
Acceptable, it is the Musk that perfumes them. It Is not so much Duty, as Love
to Duty God delights in; therefore Serving and Loving God are put together,
Isa. 56.6. It Is better to Love him than to Serve him. Obedience without Love,
is like Wine without the Spirits. O then be persuaded to love God with all your
Heart and Might. To persuade to this Virgin Affection of Love,

1. It Is nothing but your Love God desires. The Lord might have demanded your
Children to be offered in Sacrifice; he might have bid you Cut and Lance your
Selves, or lain in Hell a while; but he only desires your Love; he would only
have this Flower. Is this an hard Request to Love God? Was ever any Debt easier
paid than this? Is it any labor to the Wife to Love her Husband? Love is
delightful. Non potest Amor esse, and dulcis non esse, Bern. What is there in
our Love that God should desire it? Why should a King desire the Love of a
Woman that is in Debt, and Diseased? God does not want our Love. There are
Angels enough in Heaven to Adore and Love him. What is God the better for our
Love? It adds not the least Cubit to his Essential Blessedness. God does not
need our Love, yet seeks it. Why does God desire us to give him our Heart?
Prove. 23.26. Not that he needs our Heart, but that he may make it better.

2. Great will be our Advantage if we love God. God does not court our Love
that we should lose it, 1 Cor. 2.9 Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard the things
which God has prepared for them that love him. If you will Love God, you shall
have such a Reward as exceeds your Faith. God will betroth you to himself in
the dearest Love, Hos. 2.19. I will betroth thee unto me for ever in
Loving Kindness and Mercies. Zeph. 3.17. The Lord thy God will rejoice over
thee with Joy, he will rest in his Love. If you love God, he will interest you
in all his Riches and Dignities he will give you Heaven and Earth for your
Dowry, he will set a Crown on your Head. Vespasian the Emperor gave a great
Reward to a Woman who came to him, and professed she Loved him. God gives a
Crown of Life to them that Love him, James 1.12.

3. Love is the only Grace that shall live with us in Heaven. In Heaven we
shall need no Repentance, because we have no Sin; no Faith, because we shall
see God Face to Face. But Love to God shall abide for ever. Love (...) never
fails, 1 Cor. 13.8. How should we nourish this Grace which shall outlive all
the Graces, and run parallel with Eternity!

4. Our Love to God is a sign of his Love to us, 1 John 4.19. We love him,
because he first loved us. By Nature we are (...), we have no Love to God, we
have Hearts of Stone, Ezekiel. 36.1. And how can any love be in Hearts of Stone!
Our Loving God is from his Loving us. If the Glass burn, it is because the Sun
has shined on it, else it could not burn: If our Hearts burn in Love, it is a
sign the Sun of Righteousness has shined upon us.

Quest. How shall we do to Love God aright?

Resp. 1. Wait on the Preaching of the Word. As Faith comes by Hearing, so does
Love: The Word sets forth God in his incomparable Excellencies; it does
decipher and pencil him out in all his Glory, and a sight of his Beauty
inflames Love.

2. Beg of God that he will give you an Heart to Love him. When King Solomon
asked Wisdom of God, the Speech pleased the Lord, 1 Kings 3.10. So when thou
cryest to God, Lord give me an Heart to love thee, it is my Grief I can Love
thee no more. Sure this Prayer pleases the Lord, and he will pour of his
Spirit upon thee, whose Golden Oil will make the Lamp of thy Love burn bright.

3. You who have Love to God, keep it Flaming upon the Altar of your Heart.
Love, as Fire, will be ready to go out, Rev. 2.4. Thou have left thy first
Love. Through neglect of Duty, or too much love of the World, our love to God
will cool. O preserve your love to God: As you would be careful to preserve the
Natural Heat in your Body; so be careful to preserve the Heat of Love to God.
Love is like Oil to the Wheels, it quickens us in God's Service. When you find
your Love abate and cool, use all means for quickening; when the Fire is going
out, you throw on Fuel. When the Flame of Love is going out, make use of all
Ordinances as Sacred Fuel to keep the Fire of your Love burning.

Of the Commandments.
Exodus 20.1, 2. And God spoke all these Words saying, I am the Lord thy God,
etc.


Quest. What is the Preface to the Ten Commandments?

Resp. The Preface to the Ten Commandments, is I am the Lord thy God. Where
observe First the Preface to the Preface, God spoke all these Words, saying. 2.
The Preface it self to the Commandments, I am the Lord thy God.

1. I begin with the First, the Preface to the Preface, vaiedabbur elohim, God
spoke all these Words, saying, etc. This is like the Sounding of a Trumpet
before a Solemn Proclamation, [ God spoke;] other parts of the Bible are said
to be uttered by the Mouth of the Holy Prophets, Luke 1.70. but here God spoke
in his own Person.

Quest. How may we understand this, [God spoke,] he has no Bodily Parts or
Organs of Speech?

Resp. God made some intelligible sound, or formed a Voice in the Air, which
was to the Jews as God's very speaking to them. In the Text, 1. The Lawgiver,
God, [ God spoke.] 2. The Law it self, [ all these Words.]

1. The Lawgiver, [ God spoke:] There are Two things requisite in a Lawgiver.
First, Wisdom. Laws are Founded upon Reason; and he must be Wise that makes
Laws. God in this respect is most fit to be a Lawgiver; he is Wise in Heart,
Job 9.4. He has a Monopoly of Wisdom, 1 Timothy 1.17. The only Wise God.
Therefore he is the fittest to Enact and Constitute Laws. 2. The Second thing
requisite in a Lawgiver is Authority. If a Subject make Laws, though never so
wise, yet they want the stamp of Authority. God has the Supreme Power in his
Hand; he derives a being to all; and he who gives Men their Lives, has most
right to give them their Laws.

2. The Law it self, [ all these Words;] that is, all the Words of the Moral
Law, which is usually styled the Decalogue, or Ten Commandments. It is called
the Moral Law, because it is the Rule of Life and Manners. St. Chrysostom
compares the Scripture to a Garden; the Moral Law is a chief Flower in it; the
Scripture is a Banquet, the Moral Law the chief Dish in it.

First, The Moral Law is perfect, Psalm. 19.7. The Law of the Lord is Perfect.
It is an exact Model and Platform of Religion; it is the Standard of Truth, the
Judge of Controversies, the Pole Star to direct us to Heaven, Prove. 6.23. The
Commandment is a Lamp. Though the Moral Law be not a Christ to Justify us, yet
it is a Rule to instruct us.

Secondly, The Moral Law is unalterable; it remains still in force. Though the
Ceremonial and Judicial Laws are abrogated, yet the Moral Law delivered by
God's own Mouth is to be of perpetual use in the Church. Therefore the Law was
written in Tables of Stone, to show the perpetuity of it.

Thirdly, The Moral Law is very illustrious and full of Glory. God did put
Glory upon it in the manner of the Promulgation of it. 1. The People before the
Moral Law was delivered, were to wash their Clothes, Exodus 19.10. Whereby as by
a Type God required the Sanctifying of their Ears and Hearts to receive the
Law. 2. There were Bounds set that none might touch the Mount, Exodus 19.12.
which was to breed in the People reverence to the Law. 3. God wrote the Law
with his own Finger, Exodus 31.18. Which was such an Honor put upon the Moral
Law, as we read of no other Writing. God did by some mighty Operation make the
Law legible in Letters, as if it had been written with his own Finger. 4. God's
putting the Law in the Ark to be kept, was another signal Mark of Honor put
upon it. The Ark was the Cabinet in which God put the Ten Commandments, as Ten
Jewels. 5. At the delivery of the Moral Law there was the attendance of many
Angels, Deuteronomy. 32. Here was a Parliament of Angels called, and God himself was
the Speaker.

Use 1. Here we may take notice of God's Goodness, who has not left us without
a Law. Therefore the Lord does often set it down as a Demonstration of his
Love, in giving his Commandments, Psalm. 147.20. He has not dealt so with any
Nation, and as for his Judgments they have not known them. Nehem. 9.13. Thou
gave them true Laws, Good Statutes and Commandments. What a strange Creature
would Man be, if he had no Law to direct him? There would be no living in the
World; we should have none born but Ishmaels, every Man's Hand would be against
his Neighbor. Man would grow wild if he had not Affliction to ^ame him, and
the Moral Law to guide him. The Law of God is an Hedge to keep us within the
bounds of Sobriety and Piety.

Use 2. If God spoke all these Words of the Moral Law, then it condemns, First,
The Marcionites and Manichees, who spoke slightly, yea, blasphemously of the
Moral Law; they say it is below a Christian, it is Carnal; which the Apostle
con^u^es, when he says, The Law is Spiritual, but I am Carnal, Romans 7.14.
Secondly, The Antinomians, who will not admit the Moral Law to be a Rule to a
Believer. We say not he is under the Curse of the Law, but the Commands; we say
not the Moral Law is a Christ, but it is a Star to lead one to Christ; we say
not it does Save, but it does Sanctify. They who cast God's Law behind their
Backs, God will cast their Prayers behind his Back. They who will not have the
Law to Rule them, shall have the Law to Judge them. Thirdly, The Papists; who
(as if Gods Law were imperfect, and when he spoke all these Words, he did not
speak enough,) add their Canons and Traditions to the Moral Law. This is to tax
Gods Wisdom, as if he knew not how to make his own Law. And surely it is an high
provoking Sin, Rev. 22.18. If any Man shall add to these Words, God shall add
unto him the Plagues written in this Book. As it is a great evil to add any
thing to a Man's sealed Will, so much more to add any thing to that Law God
himself spoke, and wrote with his own Fingers.

Use 3. If God spoke all these Words, viz. of the Moral Law, then this presses
upon us several Duties.

1. If God spoke all these Words, then we must hear all these Words; the Words
which God speaks are too precious to be lost. As we would have God hear all our
Words when we Pray, so we must hear all his Words when he speaks. We must not
be as the deaf Adder which stops her Ears. He that stops his Ears when God
cries, shall cry himself and not be heard.

2. If God spoke all these Words, then we must attend to them with Reverence.
Every Word of the Moral Law is an Oracle from Heaven, God himself is the
Preacher; this calls for Reverence. If a Judge gives a Charge upon the Bench,
all attend with Reverence. In the Moral Law God himself gives a Charge, God
spoke all these Words; therefore with what Veneration should we attend? Moses
was to put off his Shoes from his Feet (in token of Reverence,) when God was
about to speak to him, Exodus 3.5, 6.

3. If God spoke all these Words of the Moral Law, then we must remember them.
Sure all God speaks is worth remembering; those Words are weighty which concern
Salvation, Deuteronomy. 32.47. It is not a vain thing for you, because it is your
Life. Our Memory should be like the Chest in the Ark where the Law was kept:
Gods Oracles are Ornaments, and shall we forget them, Ier. 2.32. Can a Maid
forget her Ornaments?

4. If God spoke all these Words, then believe them. See the Name of God
written upon every Commandment. The Heathens that they might gain Credit to
their Laws, reported that they were inspired by the Gods at Rome. The Moral Law
fetches its Pedigree from Heaven, ipse dixit, God spoke all these Words. Shall
we not give credit to the God of Heaven? How would the Angel confirm the Women
in the Resurrection of Christ, Mat. 28.7. Lo (says he,) I have told you; I
speak in the Word of an Angel. Much more should the Moral Law be believed, when
it comes to us in the Word of a God. God spoke all these Words. Unbelief
enervates the Virtue of God's Word, and makes it prove Abortive, Heb. 4.2. The
Word did not profit, not being mixed with Faith. Eve gave more credit to the
Devil when he spoke, than she did to God.

5. If God spoke all these words* then love the Commandments, Psalm. 119.97. O
how love I thy Law? It is my Meditation all the day. Consider how I love thy
Precepts, Psalm. 119.159. The Moral Law is the Copy of Gods Will; our Spiritual
Directory; it shows what Sins to avoid, what Duties to pursue: The Ten
Commandments are a Chain of Pearl to adorn us: They are our Treasury to enrich
us: They are more precious than Lands of Spices or Rocks of Diamonds, Psalm.
119.72. The Law of thy mouth is better unto me than thousands of Gold and
Silver. The Law of God has Truth and Goodness in it, Nehem. 9.13. Truth, for
God spoke it; and Goodness, for there is nothing the Commandment enjoins but is
for our good: O then let this command our Love.

6. If God spoke all these words, Then teach your Children the Law of God,
Deuteronomy. 6.7. These words which I command thee this day shall be in thy Heart, and
thou shall teach them diligently to thy Children: He who is Godly is both a
Diamond and a Load stone; a Diamond for the sparkling of his Grace; and a
Lodestone for his attractive Virtue in drawing others to the Love of Gods
Precepts: Vir bonus magis aliis prodest quam sibi: You that are Parents
discharge your Duty: Though you cannot impart Grace to your Children, yet you
may impart Knowledge: Let your Children know the Commandments of God, Deuteronomy.
11.19. Ye shall teach them your Children: You are careful to leave your
Children a Portion: Leave the Oracles of Heaven with them; instruct them in the
Law of God: If God spoke all these words, you may well speak them over again to
your Children.

7. If God spoke all these words, then the Moral Law must be obeyed: If a King
speaks, his words command Allegiance: Much more when God speaks, all his words
must be subscribed to: Some will obey partially, obey some Commandments, not
others; like a Plow, which when it comes to a stiff piece of Earth makes a
Baulk. But God that spoke all the words of the Moral Law, will have all obeyed.
God will not dispense with the Breach of one Law: Indeed Princes for special
Reasons, dispense sometimes with Penal Statutes, and will not take the Severity
of the Law. But God who spoke all these words, binds Men with a Subpoena to
yield Obedience to every Law. This condemns the Church of Rome, who instead of
obeying the whole Moral Law, blot out one Commandment, and dispense with others.

1. They leave out the second Commandment out of their Catechises, because it
makes against Images; and to fill up the number of Ten, they divide the Tenth
Commandment into two. Thus they run themselves into that dreadful Praemunire,
Rev. 22.19. If any Man shall take away from the words of this Book, God shall
take away his part out of the Book of Life.

2. As they blot out one Commandment, and cut that knot which they cannot
untye, so they dispense with other Commandments: They dispense with the sixth
Commandment, making Murder Meritorious in case of propagating the Catholic
Cause: They dispense with the seventh Commandment, wherein God forbids
Adultery: The Pope dispenses with the Sin of Uncleanness, yea Incest, only
paying such Fines and Sums of Money into his Coffer. No wonder the Pope takes
Men off from their Loyalty to Kings and Princes, when he teaches them
Disloyalty to God. Some of the Papists say expressly in their Writings, That the
Pope has Power to dispense with the Laws of God, and can give Men a License to
break the Commandments of the Old and New Testament: That such a Religion ever
get foot in England, the Lord in Mercy prevent. If God spoke all the
Commandments, then we must obey all: He who breaks this Hedge of the
Commandments a Serpent shall bite him.

Object. But what Man alive can obey all Gods Commandments?

Resp. To obey the Law in a legal Sense, viz. To do all the Law requires, no
Man alive can: Sin has cut the Lock of original Righteousness, where our
strength lay: But in a true Gospel Sense, we may so obey the Moral Law, as to
find Acceptance. Which Gospel-Obedience consists in a Real Endeavor to observe
the whole Moral Law, Psalm. 119.166. I have done thy Commandments. Not I have
done all I should do, but I have done all I am able to do; and wherein our
Obedience comes short, we look up to the perfect Righteousness and Obedience of
Christ, and hope for Pardon through his Blood. This is Evangelically to obey
the Moral Law; which though it be not to Satisfaction, yet it is to
Acceptance. Thus I have done with the first, The Preface to the Preface, God
spoke all these words: I should now come to the second, the Preface it self to
the Commandments, I am the Lord thy God, etc.

Of the Commandments.
Exodus 20.2. I am the Lord thy God, etc.


2. THE Preface it self, which consists of three parts: 1. I am the Lord thy
God: 2. Which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt: 3. Out of the House
of Bondage.

1. I am the Lord thy God.] Where we have a Description of God: 1. By his
Essential Greatness, I am the Lord: 2. By his relative Goodness, Thy God. 1. By
his essential greatness, I am the Lord; or as in the Hebrew, Jehovah. This name
of God sets forth his Majesty: Sanctius habitum fuit, says Buxtorf, the name
Iohavah was had in more Reverence among the Jews, than any other name of God;
it signifies Gods Self-sufficiency, Eternity, Independency, Immutability, Mal.
3.6.

Use 1. If God be Jehovah, the Fountain of being, who can do what he will, let
us fear this great Lord, Deuteronomy. 28.58. That thou may fear Hashem, Hanicbad
Jehovah, this glorious and fearful name Jehovah.

Use 2. If God be Jehovah, the supreme Lord, then it condemns the Blasphemous
Papists who speak after this manner, Our Lord God the Pope: Is it a Wonder the
Pope lifts his Tripple Crown above the Heads of Kings and Emperors, when he
Usurps Gods Title, Showing himself that he is God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. The Pope goes
to make himself Lord of Heaven, for he will Canonize Saints there: Lord of
Earth; for with his Keys he does bind and loose whom he pleases: Lord of Hell,
for he can free Men out of Purgatory: But God will pull down these Plumes of
Pride, He will consume this Man of sin with the breath of his mouth, and the
brightness of his coming, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.

Use 3. God is described by his relative goodness, Eloeka, Thy God: Had God
only called himself Jehovah, it might have terrified us and made us fly from
him; but when he says, Thy God, this may allure and draw us to him: This,
though a Preface to Law, is pure Gospel. This word Eloeka, Thy God, is so
sweet, that we can never suck out all the Honey in it. I am thy God, not only by
Creation, but by Election. This word Thy God, though it was spoken to Israel,
yet it is a Charter belongs to all the Saints: For the further Explication,
here are three Questions.

Quest. 1. How God comes to be our God?

Resp. Through Jesus Christ: Christ is a middle Person in the Trinity: He is
Emanuel, God with us: He brings two differing Parties together: He makes our
Nature lovely to God, and Gods Nature lovely to us: He by his Death causes
Friendship, yea, Union: He brings us within the Verge of the Covenant, and so
God becomes our God.

Quest. 2. What does this imply, God being our God?

Resp. It is comprehensive of all good things: God is our strong Tower; our
Fountain of living Water; our Salvation: More particularly, God being our God,
implies the sweetest Relation.

1. The Relation of a Father, 2 Cor. 6.18. I will be a Father unto you: A
Father is full of tender care for his Child: Who does he settle the Inheritance
upon but his Child? God being our God will be a Father to us; a Father of
Mercy, 2 Cor. 1.3. the everlasting Father, Psalm. 9.7. If God be our God, we
have a Father in Heaven that never dies.

2. It imports the Relation of an Husband, Isa. 54.5. Thy Maker is thy Husband.
If God be our Husband, he esteems us precious to him as the Apple of his Eye,
Zech. 2.8. He imparts his Secrets to us, Psalm. 25.14. He bestows a Kingdom upon
us for our Dowry, Luke 12.32.

Quest. 3. How may we come to know this Covenant-Union, That God is our God?

Resp. 1. By having his Graces planted in us: Kings Children are known by their
costly Jewels: It is not having common Gifts which shows we belong to God; many
have the Gifts of God without God; but it is Grace gives us a true genuine
Title to God. In particular, Faith is Vinculum Unionis, the Grace of Union: By
this we may spell out our Interest in God. Faith does not as the Mariner, cast
its Anchor downwards, but upwards; it trusts in the Mercy and Blood of God, and
trusting in God, engages him to be our God: Other Graces make us like God,
Faith makes us one with him.

2. We may know God is our God, by having the Earnest of his Spirit in our
Hearts, 2 Cor. 1.22. God often gives the Purse to the Wicked, but the Spirit
only to such as he intends to make his Heirs. 1. Have we had the Consecration
of the Spirit? If we have not had the Sealing work of the Spirit, have we had
the Healing work, 1 John 2.20. Ye have an Unction from the Holy One. The Spirit
where it is, stamps the Impress of its own Holiness upon the Heart: It
embroiders and bespangles the Soul, and makes it all glorious within. 2. Have
we had the Attraction of the Spirit? Cant. 1.4. Draw me, we will run after
thee. Has the Spirit, by its magnetic Virtue, drawn our Hearts to God? Can we
say, as Cant. 1.7. O thou whom my Soul loves. Is God our Paradise of Delight?
Our Segullah, or chief Treasure? Are our Hearts so chained to God, that no
other Object can inchant us or draw us away from him? 3. Have we had the
Elevation of the Spirit? Has it raised our Hearts above the World? Ezekiel. 3.14.
The Spirit lifted me up. Has the Spirit made us superna anhelare, seek the
things above, where Christ is? Though our Flesh is on Earth, is our Heart in
Heaven? Though live here, trade above? Has the Spirit thus lifted us up? By
this we may come to know, that God is our God: Where God gives his Spirit for
an Earnest, there he gives himself for a Portion.

3. We may know God is our God, if he has given us the Hearts of Children.
Have we obediential Hearts? Psalm. 27.8. Do we subscribe to Gods Commands, when
his Commands cross our Will? A true Saint is like the Flower of the Sun, it
opens and shuts with the Sun: He opens to God and shuts to Sin. If we have the
Hearts of Children, then God is our Father.

4. We may know God is ours, and we have an Interest in him by our standing up
for his Interest. We will appear in his Cause, and vindicate his Truth, wherein
his Glory is so much concerned. Athanasius was (...), the Bulwark of Truth, he
stood up for it when most of the World were Arrians. In former times the Nobles
of Polonia, when the Gospel was read, did lay their Hands upon their Swords,
signifying that they were ready to defend the Faith, and hazard their Lives for
the Gospel. No better sign of our having an Interest in God, than by our
standing up for his Interest.

5. We may know God is ours, and we have an Interest in him, by his having an
Interest in us, Cant. 2.16. My beloved is mine, and I am his. When God says to
the Soul, Thou art mine; the Soul answers, Lord I am thine: All I have is at
thy Service: My Head shall be thine to study for thee: My Tongue shall be thine
to praise thee. If God be our God by way of Donation, we are his by way of
Dedication: We live to him, and are more his than we are our own. And thus we
may come to know that God is our God.

Use 1. Above all things let us get this great Charter confirmed, that God is
our God: Deity is not comfortable without Propriety: Toll meum and toll Deum.
Aug. O let us labor to get sound Evidences, that God is our God: We cannot
call Health, Liberty, Estate ours: O let us be able to call God ours, and say
as the Church, Psalm. 67.6. God, even our own God shall bless us. Let every Soul
here labor to pronounce this Shibboleth, My God. And that we may endeavor
after this to have God for our God: Consider 1. The Misery of such as have not
God for their God; in how sad a Condition are they, when an hour of distress
comes? This was Readiness Case, 1 Samuel 28.15. I am sore distressed; for the
Philistines make war against me, and the Lord is departed from me. A wicked Man
in time of Trouble, is like a Vessel tossed on the Sea without an Anchor, it
falls on Rocks or Sands: A Sinner not having God to be his God, though he makes
a shift while Health and Estate last; yet when these Crutches are broken he
leaned upon, his Heart sinks. It is with a wicked Man, as it was with the Old
World when the Flood came; the Waters at first came to the Valleys, but then
the People would get to the Hills and Mountains: But then the Waters came to
the Mountains: Then there might be some Trees on the high Hills, and they would
climb up to them: I but then the Waters did rise up to the tops of the Trees:
Now all hopes of being saved were gone, their Hearts failed them. So it is with
a Man that has not God to be his God: If one Comfort be taken away, he has
another: If he lose a Child, he has an Estate: I but then the Waters rise
higher, Death comes and takes away all; now he has nothing to help himself
with, no God to go to, he must needs dye despairing. 2. How great a Privilege
it is to have God for our God, Psalm. 144.15. Happy are the People whose God is
the Lord. Beatitudo hominis est Deus, Aug. That you may see the Privilege of
this Charter,

1. If God be our God, then though we may feel the stroke of Evil, yet not the
sting. He must needs be happy, who is (...), in such a Condition, that nothing
can hurt him: If he lose his Name it is written in the Book of Life: If he lose
his Liberty, his Conscience is free: If he lose his Estate, he is possessed of
the Pearl of Price: If he meets with Storms, he knows where to put in for
Harbor. God is his God, and Heaven is his Haven.

2. If God be our God, then our Soul is safe: The Soul is the Jewel, it is a
Blossom of Eternity, Dan. 7.15. I was grieved in the midst of my Body. In the
Chaldee it is, In the midst of my Sheath. The Body is but the Sheath; the Soul
is the Princely part of Man, which sways the Scepter of Reason: It is a
Celestial Spark, as Damascen calls it: If God be our God, the Soul is safe as
in a Garrison. Death can do no more hurt to a virtuous Heaven-born Soul, than
David did to Saul, when he cut off the lap of his Garment: The Soul is safe,
being hid in the Promises; hid in the Wounds of Christ; hid in Gods Decree: The
Soul is the Pearl, and Heaven is the Cabinet where God will lock it up safe.

3. If God be our God, then all that is in God is ours: The Lord says to a
Saint in Covenant, as the King of Israel to the King of Syria, 1 Kings 20.4. I
am thine and all that I have. So says God, I am thine: How happy is he who not
only inherits the Gifts of God, but inherits God himself? All that I have shall
be thine, my Wisdom shall be thine to teach thee, my Power shall be thine to
support thee, my Mercy shall be thine to save thee. God is an infinite Ocean of
Blessedness, and there is enough in him to fill us: If a thousand Vessels be
thrown into the Sea, there is enough in the Sea to fill them.

4. If God be our God, he will entirely love us: Propriety is the ground of
Love: God may give Men Kingdoms, and not love them; but he cannot be our God
and not love us: He calls his Covenanted Saints Iediduth Naphshi, The dearly
beloved of his Soul, Jer. 12.7. He rejoices over them with Joy, and rests in
his Love, Zeph. 3.17. They are his Refined Silver, Zech. 13.9. His Jewels, Mal.
3.17. His Royal Diadem, Isa. 62.3. He gives them the Cream and Flower of his
love: He not only opens his hand and fills them, Psalm. 145.16. but opens his
Heart and fills them.

5. If God be our God, he will do more for us than all the World besides can.
What is that? 1. He will give us Peace in Trouble: When a Storm without, he
will make Music within: The World can create Trouble in Peace, but God can
create Peace in Trouble: He will send the Comforter, who as a Dove brings an
Olive Branch of Peace in his Mouth, John 14.16. 2. God will give us a Crown of
Immortality: The World can give a Crown of Gold; but that Crown has Thorns in
it, and Death in it; but God will give a Crown of Glory which fades not away,
1 Pet. 5.4. The Garland made of the Flowers of Paradise never withers.

6. If God be our God, he will bear with many Infirmities: God may respit
Sinners a while, but long Forbearance is no Acquittance; he will throw them to
Hell for their Sins. But if God be our God, he will not for every failing
destroy us: He bears with his Spouse, as with the weaker Vessel: God may
Chastise, Psalm. 89.32. He may use the Rod and the pruning Knife, but not the
Bloody Axe, Numb. 23.21. He has not seen Iniquity in Jacob: He will not see
Sin in his People, so as to destroy them: He sees their Sins so as to pity
them; he sees them as a Physician sees a Disease in his Patient to heal him,
Isa. 57.18. I have seen his Iniquities and I will heal him: Every failing does
not break the Marriage Bond asunder: The Disciples had great Failings, they all
forsook Christ and fled; but this did not break off their Interest in God:
Therefore says Christ at his Ascension, Tell my Disciples I go to my God and
to their God.

7. If God be once our God, he is so for ever, Psalm. 48.14. This God is our
God, Gnolam Vagned, for ever and ever. Whatever worldly Comforts we have, are
but (...), for a Season, Heb. 11.25. We must part with all, as Paul's Friends
did accompany him to the Ship and there left him, Acts 20.28. So all our
earthly Comforts will but go with us to the Grave and there leave us. You
cannot say you have Health, and shall have it for ever: You have a Child and
shall have it for ever: But if God be your God you shall have him for ever:
This God is our God for ever and ever. If God be our God, he will be a God to
us as long as he is a God: You have taken away my God, says Micah, Judges
18.24. But it cannot be said so to a Believer, that his God is taken away; he
may lose all things else, but cannot lose his God. God is ours from everlasting
in Election, and to Everlasting in Glory.

8. If God be our God, we shall enjoy all our Godly Relations with him in
Heaven. The great Felicity on Earth is to enjoy Relations; a Father sees his
own Picture in his Child; a Wife sees a piece of her self in her Husband. We
plant the Flower of Love among our Relations, and the loss of them is like the
pulling a Limb from the Body. But if God be ours, with enjoying God, we shall
enjoy all our pious Relations in Glory. The gracious Child shall see his Godly
Father; the Virtuous Wi^e shall see her Religious Husband in Christ's Arms; and
then there will be a dearer Love to Relations than ever was before, though in a
far different manner; then Relations shall meet and never part; and so shall we
be ever with the Lord.

Of the Commandments.
Exodus 20.1. I am the Lord, thy God, etc.


3.
TO all such as can make out this Covenant-Union, It exhorts to several things.

I. If God be our God, let us improve our Interest in him, cast all our Burdens
upon him; the Burden of our Fears, Wants, Sins, Psalm. 55.22. Cast thy Burden
upon the Lord. Wicked Men who are a Burden to God, have no right to cast their
Burden upon him; but such as have God for their God, are called upon to cast
their Burden on him. Where should the Child ease all its cares, but in the
Bosom of its Parent? Judge. 19.20. Let all thy Wants lie upon me. So God seems
to say to his Children, let all your Wants lie upon me. Christian, what does
trouble thee? Thou have a God to pardon thy Sins, to supply thy Wants:
Therefore roll your Burden on the Lord, 1 Pet. 5.7. Casting all your Care on
him. Whence are Christians so disquieted in their Minds? they are taking care,
when they should be casting care.

II. If God be our God, let us learn to be contented, though we have the less
of other things. Contentment is a rare Jewel, it is the Cure of Care. If we
have God to be our God; well may we be contented, I know whom I have believed,
2 Timothy 1.12. There was Paul's Interest in God, 2 Cor. 6.10. As having nothing,
yet possessing all: There was his Content. That such who have Covenant-Union
with God may be filled with Contentation of Spirit, consider what a rich
Blessing God is to the Soul.

1. God is Bonum Sufficiens, a sufficient Good. He who has God has enough: If
a Man be thirsty, bring him to the Ocean, and he is satisfied; in God there is
enough to fill the Heaven-born Soul* He gives Grace and Glory, Psalm. 84 11.
There is in God not only a sufficiency, but a redundancy: He is not only full
as a Vessel, but as a Spring. Other things can no more fill the Soul, than a
Mariners Breath can fill the Sails of a Ship. But in God is a Cornu-Copia, an
infinite fullness. He has enough to fill the Angels, therefore enough to fill
us. The Heart is a Triangle, which only the Trinity can fill.

2. God is bonum Sanctificans, a Sanctifying Good. First, He sanctifies all our
Comforts, and turns them into Blessings. Health is blessed, Estate is blessed,
he gives with the Venison a Blessing, Psalm. 132.15. I will abundantly bless her
Provision. He gives us that Life we have, ^anquam ar^abo, as an Earnest of
more. He gives the little Meal in the Barrel, as an Earnest of the Royal Feast
in Paradise. Secondly, He sanctifies all our Crosses. They shall not be
destructive P^^ishments but Medicines; they shall corrode and eat out the Venom
of Sin, they shall Polish and Refine our Grace. The more the Diamond is cut, it
sparkles the more* Gods stretching the Strings of his Viol, is to make the
Music better.

3. God is bonum se^ectum, Choice Good; all things sub sole, are but ba^^
s^abelli, as Austin, the Blessings of the Footstool; but to have God himself to
be ours, is the Blessing of the Throne. Abraham gave gifts to the Sons of the
Co^^ubines, but he settled the (...) ^5.5. Abraham gave all that he had to
Isaac. God may send away the Men of the World with Gifts, a little Gold and
Silver, but in giving us himself, he gives us the very quintessence, his Grace,
his Love, his Kingdom. Here is the Crowning Blessing.

4. God is Bonum summum, the chief Good. In the chief Good, there must be First
Delectability, it must have something that is delicious and sweet: And where
can we suck those pure quintessential Comforts which ravish us with Delight,
but in God? In Deo quadam dulcedine delectatur anima, imo rapitur; At Gods
Right Hand are Pleasures, Psalm. 16.11. Secondly, In the chief Good there must
be Transcendency, it must have a surpassing Excellency. Thus God is infinitely
better than all other things; it is below the Deity to compare other things with
it. Who would go to weigh a Feather with a Mountain of Gold? God is Fons and
Origo, the Spring of all Entities, and the Cause is more noble than the Effect.
It is God that bespangles the Creation, that puts Light into the Sun, that
fills the Veins of the Earth with Silver; other Creatures do but maintain Life,
God gives Life. God infinitely out-shines all Sublunary Glory; he is better
than the Soul, than Angels, than Heaven. Thirdly, In the chief Good, there must
be not only Fullness but Variety; where Variety is wanting, we are apt to
nauseate; to feed only on Honey, would breed Loathing; but in God is (...) all
Variety of Fullness, Col. 1.19. He is an Universal Good, Commensurate to all our
Wants; He is Bonum in quo omnia Bona, a Sun, a Portion, an Horn of Salvation:
He is called the God of all Comfort, 2 Cor. 1.3. There is a Complication of all
Beauties and Delights in him; Health has not the comfort of Beauty, nor Beauty
of Riches, nor Riches of Wisdom, but God is the God of all Comfort. Fourthly,
In the chief Good there must be Eternity. God is (...): He is a Treasure that
can neither be drawn low, nor drawn dry. Though the Angels are still spending
on him, he can never be spent; he abides for ever. Eternity is a Flower of his
Crown. Now if God be our God, here is enough to let in full Contentment into
our Souls. What though we want Torch-light, if we have the Sun? What if God
deny us the Flower, if he has given us the Jewel? How should this rock a
Christians Heart quiet? If we say God is our God, and we are not content, we
have cause to question our Interest in him.

III. If we can clear up this Covenant-Union, that God is our God, let this
cheer and revive us in all Conditions. To be content with God, is not enough,
but to be cheerful; what greater Cordial can you have, than Union with Deity?
When Jesus Christ was ready to Ascend, he could not leave a richer consolation
with his Disciples than this, Tell them, I go to my God and their God, John
20.17. Who should rejoice, if not they, who have an Infinite, Alsufficient
Eternal God to be their Portion, who are as Rich as Heaven can make them? What
though I want Health, I have God, who is the Health of my Countenance and my
God, Psalm. 42.11. What though I am low in the World, if I have not the Earth, I
have him that made it. The Philosopher comforted himself with this, though he
had no Music or Vine-Trees, yet (...) here are the Household Gods with me. So
though we have not the Vine or Fig Tree, yet we have God with us. I cannot be
Poor (says St. Bernard,) as long as God is Rich; for his Riches are mine. O
Let the Saints rejoice in this Covenant-Union. To say God is ours, is more than
to say Heaven is ours. Heaven would not be Heaven without God. All the Stars
cannot make Day without the Sun. All the Angels those Morning Stars, cannot
make Heaven without Christ the Sun of Righteousness. And as to have God for our
God, is matter of rejoicing in Life; so especially it will be at our Death. Let
a Christian think thus, I am going to my God. A Child is glad when he is going
home to his Father. This was Christ's comfort when he was leaving the World,
John 20.17. I go to my God. And this is a Believers Deathbed Cordial, I am
going to my God; I shall change my Place, but not my Kindred, I go to my God
and my Father.

IV. If God be our God, then let us break forth into Doxology and Praise, Psalm.
118.28. Thou art my God, and I will praise thee. O infinite Astonishing Mercy,
that God should take Dust and Ashes into so near a Bond of Love, as to be our
God* As Micah said, Judge. 18.24. What have I more? So what has God more? What
richer Jewel has he to bestow upon us than himself? What has he more? That
God should put off most of the World with Riches and Honors, and that he
should pass over himself to us by a Deed of Gift, to be our God, and by virtue
of this, settle a Kingdom upon us. O let us praise him with the best
Instrument, our Heart, and let this Instrument be scrued up to the highest Peg:
Let us praise him with our whole Heart. See how David rises by degrees, Psalm.
32.11. Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, and shout for Joy. Be glad, there is
Thankfulness, rejoice, there is Cheerfulness, shout, there is Triumph. Praise
is called Incense, because it is so sweet a Sacrifice. Let the Saints be
Queristers in Gods Praises; the deepest Springs yield the sweetest Water. The
more deeply sensible we are of Gods Covenant-Love to us, the sweeter Praises we
should yield. We should begin here to eternize Gods Name, and do that Work on
Earth, which we shall be always doing in Heaven, Psalm. 146.2. While I live will
I praise the Lord.

5. Let us carry our selves as those who have God to be our God; that is, when
we walk so that others may see there is something of God in us. Live Holily.
What have we to do with Sin? Is it not this, that if it does not break, yet
will weaken the Interest, Hos. 14.8. What have I to do any more with Idols? So
should a Christian say, God is my God, what have I to do any more with Sin,
with Lust, Pride, Malice? Bid me commit Sin, as well bid me Drink Poison. Shall
I forfeit my Interest in God? Let me rather Dye than willingly offend him, who
is the Crown of my Joy, the God of my Salvation.

Of the Ten Commandments.
Exodus 20.2. The Land of Egypt, etc.


THE Second part of Preface. Who have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt,
out of the House of Bondage. Egypt and the House of Bondage are the same, only
they are represented to us under a different Expression or Notion, I begin with
the First Expression, Who have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt.

Quest. Why does the Lord mention this Deliverance of Israel out of the Land of
Egypt?

Resp. 1. Because of the strangeness of the Deliverance. God delivered his
People Israel by strange Signs and Wonders, by sending Plague after Plague upon
Pharaoh, blasting the Fruits of the Earth, killing all the Firstborn in Egypt,
Exodus 12.29. And when Israel marched out of Egypt, God made the Waters of the
Sea to part, and become a Wall to his People, while they went on Dry Ground;
and as he made the Sea a Cawsey to Israel, so a Grave to Pharaoh and his
Chariots. Well might the Lord mention his bringing them out of the Land of
Egypt, because of the strangeness of the Deliverance; God wrought Miracle upon
Miracle, for their Deliverance.

2. God mentions Israel's Deliverance out of Egypt, because of the greatness of
the Deliverance. God delivered Israel from the Pollutions of Egypt; Egypt was a
bad Air to live in, it was infected with Idolatry. The Egyptians were gross
Idolaters, they were guilty of that which the Apostle speaks of, Romans 1.23.
They changed the Glory of the uncorruptible God into an Image made like to
Corruptible Man, and to Birds and Four-Footed Beasts, and Creeping Things. The
Egyptians Worshipped instead of the true God, First, A Corruptible Man, they
Deified their King Apis, forbidding all under pain of Death to say that he was
a Man. Secondly, They were Worshippers of Birds; they worshipped the Hawk.
Thirdly, They were Worshippers of Beasts; they worshipped an Ox: Thus they made
the Image of a Beast to be their God. Fourthly, They were Worshippers of
Creeping Things, they worshipped the Crocodile, and the Indian Mouse. Therefore
God mentions this as a memorable and signal favor to Israel, that he brought
them out of such an Idolatrous Country; I brought you out of the Land of Egypt.

The thing I would note is this, That it is no small Blessing to be delivered
from Places of Idolatry. God speaks of it no less than Ten times in the Old
Testament, I brought you out of the Land of Egypt; an Idolatrous Place. Had
there been no Iron Furnace in Egypt, yet there being so many Altars there, and
False Gods, it was a great Privilege to Israel to be delivered out of Egypt.
Joshua reckons it among the chief and most memorable Mercies of God to Abraham,
that he brought him out of Ur of the Chaldeans, where Abraham's Ancestors
served strange Gods, Josh. 24.2, 3. It Is well for the Plant that is set in a
bad Soil, to be transplanted into a better, where it may grow and flourish. So
when any are planted among Idolaters, It Is a Mercy when they are removed and
transplanted into Sihon, where are the Silver Drops of Gods Word to make them
grow in Holiness.

Quest. Wherein does it appear that it is such a great Blessing to be delivered
from Places of Idolatry?

Resp. It is a great Mercy, because our Nature is so prone to Idolatry: Israel
began to be defiled with the Idols of Egypt, Ezekiel. 23.3. Dry Wood is not more
prone to take Fire, than our Nature is to Idolatry. The Jews made Cakes to the
Queen of Heaven, that is the Moon, Ier. 7.18.

Quest. Whence is it that we are so prone to Idolatry?

Resp. 1. Because we are led much by Visible Objects, and love to have our
Senses pleased. Men naturally fancy a God that they may see, though it be such
a God as cannot see them, yet they would see it. The true God is invisible;
this makes the Idolater worship something that he may see.

2. It Is a Mercy to be delivered from Idolatrous Places, because of the
greatness of the Sin of Idolatry. It is giving that Glory to an Image, which is
due to God. All (...) or Divine Worship God appropriates to himself; it is a
Flower of his Crown; the Fat of the Sacrifice God laid claim to, Levit. 3.3.
Divine Worship is the Fat of the Sacrifice which God reserves for himself. The
Idolater devotes this Worship to his Idol, which the Lord will by no means
endure, Isa. 42.8. My Glory will I not give to another, neither my Praise to
Graven Images. Idolatry is Spiritual Adultery, Ezekiel. 23.37. With their Idols
have they committed Adultery. To worship any other than God, is to break
Wedlock. This makes the Lord disclaim his interest in a People, Hos. 2.2. Plead
with your Mother, plead, for she is not my Wife. And Exodus 32.7. Thy People have
corrupted themselves; no more my People, but thy People. God calls Idolatry
Blasphemy, Ezekiel. 20.27, 31. Thus your Fathers have blasphemed me. Idolatry is
Devil-worship, Deuteronomy. 32.17. They Sacrificed to Devils, not unto God; to new
Gods. These New Gods were Old Devils, Lev. 17.7. And they shall no more offer
their Sacrifices unto Devils; the Hebrew Word Lashegnirim, is the Hairy Ones,
because the Devils were Hairy, and appeared in the Forms of Satyrs and Goats.
How dreadful a Sin is Idolatry; and what a signal Mercy is it to be snatched
out of an Idolatrous Place, as Lot was snatched by the Angel out of Sodom?

3. It is a Mercy to be delivered from Idolatrous Places, because Idolatry is
such a silly irrational Religion; I may say as Ier. 8.9. What Wisdom is in
them? Is it not Folly to refuse the best, and choose the worst? The Trees of
the Field in Iotham's Parable, despised the Vine-Tree which chears both God and
Man, and the Olive which is full of Fatness, and the Fig Tree which is full of
Sweetness, and choose the Bramble to reign over them; this was a Foolish
Choice, Judge 9. So for us to refuse the Living God, who has power to save us,
and to make choice of an Idol, that has Eyes and sees not, Feet but walks not,
Psalm. 115.6. What a Prodigy of Madness is this? therefore to be delivered from
committing such folly is a Mercy.

4. It is a Mercy to be delivered from Idolatrous Places, because of the sad
Judgments inflicted upon Idolaters. This is a Sin enrageth God, and makes the
Fury come up in his Face, Ezekiel. 38.18. Search through the whole Book of God,
and you shall find no Sin God has followed with more Plagues, than Idolatry,
Psalm. 16.4. Their Sorrows shall be Multiplied, that hasten after another God.
Psalm. 78.58, 59. They moved him to Jealousy with their Graven Images. When God
heard this, he was wroth, and greatly abhorred Israel, ver. 60. So that he
forsook the Tabernacle of Shiloh. Shiloh was a City belonging to the Tribe of
Ephraim: There God set his Name, Ier. 7.12. But for their Idolatry God forsook
that Place; gave his People up to the Sword, caused his Priests to be Slain;
his Ark to be carried away Captive, and it never returned to Shiloh any more.
How severe was God against Israel for Worshipping the Golden Calf, Exodus 32.27.
The Jews say, that in every Misery that befalls them, there is Uncia Aurei
Vituli, an Ounce of the Golden Calf in it, Rev. 18.4. Come out of her my
People, that ye be not partakers of her Sins, and that ye receive not of her
Plagues. Idolatry lived in, cuts Men off from Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9. So then it is
no small Mercy to be delivered out of Idolatrous Places.

Use 1. See the goodness of God to our Nation, who has brought us out of
mystical Egypt, delivering us from Popery, which is Romish Idolatry, and has
caused the light of his Truth to break forth gloriously among us. In former
times, and more lately in the Marian days, England was overspread with
Idolatry; we worshipped God after a false manner: That is Idolatry, not only to
worship a false God, but the true God in a false manner. This was our case
formerly, we had Purgatory, Indulgences, the Idolatrous Mass, the Scriptures
locked up in an unknown Tongue, Invocation of Saints and Angels, Image Worship:
Images are Teachers of Lies, Hab. 2.18. Wherein do they teach Lies? Because
they represent God in a Bodily shape, whereas he cannot be seen, Deuteronomy. 4.12. Ye
saw no similitude, only ye heard a voice. Quod invisibile est, pingi non
potest, Ambr. God cannot be pictured out by any Figure: You cannot Picture the
Soul, being a Spirit, much less God, Isa. 40.18. To whom then will ye liken
God? The Papists say, they worship God by the Image; which has a great
Absurdity in it; for if it be absurd to bow down to the Picture of the King,
when the King himself is present, then much more to bow down to the Image of
God, when God himself is present, Ier. 23.24. What is the Popish Religion, but
a bundle of ridiculous Ceremonies? Their Wax, Flowers, Pixes, Agnus Dei, Cream
and Oil, Beads, Crucifixes: What are these but Satan's Policy, to dress up a
carnal Worship fitted to carnal Minds? Oh what cause have we to bless God for
delivering us from Popery! It was a Mercy to be delivered from the Spanish
Invasion, and the Powder Treason, but a far greater to be delivered from the
Popish Religion, which would have made God give us a Bill of Divorce.

2. If it be a great Blessing to be delivered from Egypt, Popish Idolatry, then
it shows their Sin and Folly, who being brought out of Egypt, are willing to
return into Egypt again: Having put off the Yoke of Rome, would fain put it on
again: The Apostle says, Fly from Idolatry, 1 Cor. 10.14. But these rather fly
to Idolatry: Herein we are like the People of Israel, who notwithstanding all
the Idolatry and Tyranny of Egypt, yet longed to go back to Egypt, Numb. 14.4.
Let us make a Captain and return into Egypt. But how shall they go back into
Egypt? How shall they have Food in the Wilderness? Will God rain down Manna any
more upon such Rebels? How will they get over the Red Sea? Will God divide the
Water again by Miracle, for such as leave his Service, and go into Idolatrous
Egypt? Yet say they, Let us make a Captain. And are there not such Spirits
amongst us, who say, Let us make a Captain, and go back to the Romish Egypt
again? And if we do, what shall we get by it? I am afraid the Leeks and Onions
of Egypt will make us Sick. Do we ever think, if we drink in the Cup of
Fornication, we shall drink in the Cup of Salvation? O that any should so
Forfeit their Reason, as to enslave themselves to the Sea of Rome! That they
should be willing to hold a Candle to a Mass-Priest, and bow down to a strange
God. Let us not say, we will make a Captain; but rather say as Ephraim, Hos.
14.8. What have I to do any more with Idols?

3. If it be a Mercy to be brought out of Egypt, then it is not desirable or
safe to plant ones self in an Idolatrous place, where it may be a capital Crime
to be seen with a Bible in ones hand. Some for secular Gain thrust themselves
among Idolaters, and think there is no danger to live where Satan's Seat is:
But do you pray God would not lead you into Temptation, and do you lead your
selves? You are in great danger of being polluted: It is hard to be as the Fish
which keep fresh in Salt Waters: A Man cannot dwell among the Black-a-moors,
but he will be discolored: You will sooner be corrupted by Idolaters, than
they will be converted by you: Joseph got no good by living in an Idolatrous
Court; he did not teach Pharaoh to Pray, but Pharaoh taught him to Swear, Psalm.
106.35. They were mingled among the Heathen, and served their Idols. I fear
this has been the undoing of many; they have seated themselves amongst
Idolaters, for the advancing their Trade, and at last have not only traded with
them in their Commodities, but in their Religion.

Use 2. Is it a Mercy to be brought out of Egypt, places which are defiled, and
where Sin reigns, then it reproaches such Parents as show little love to the
Souls of their Children, whether it be in putting them out to Service, or in
matching of them. 1. In putting them out to Service; Their Care is chiefly for
their Bodies that they may be provided for, but care not what becomes of their
Souls: Their Souls are in Egypt, in Houses where there is Drinking, Swearing,
Sabbath-breaking, and where Gods name is every day dishonored. 2. In matching
their Children, they look only at Money, 2 Cor. 6.14. Be ye not unequally
yoaked: If their Children be equally yoaked for Estate, they care not whether
they be unequally yoaked for Religion. Now to such Parents, 1. Think how
precious the Soul of your Child is, it is Immortal, it is capable of Communion
with God and Angels, and will you let this Soul be lost, by placing it in a bad
Family? If you had an Horse you loved, you would not put him into a Stable with
other Horses that were Sick and Diseased: And do you not love your Child better
than your Horse? 2. God has entrusted you with the Souls of your Children, you
have a Charge of Souls. God says, as 1 Kings 20.39. Keep this Man, if he be
missing thy Life shall go for his Life. So says God, If the Soul of thy Child
miscarry by thy Negligence, his Blood will I require at thy hand: Think of this
all ye Parents, take heed of placing your Children in Egypt in a wicked Family:
Do not put them in the Devils Mouth; find out a Sober Religious Family, such a
Family as Joshua's, Cap. 24.15. I and my House will serve the Lord. Such a
Family as Cranmer's, which was Palaestra pietatis, a Nursery of Piety: Such a
Family as is a Bethel, of which it may be said, as Col. 4.15. The Church which
is in his House.

Use 3. Let us Pray that God will keep our English Nation from the Defilements.
of Egypt; that it may not be again overspread with Superstition and Idolatry O
sad Religion! not only to have our Estates, our Bodies enslaved, but our
Consciences: Pray that the true Protestant Religion may still flourish among
us: That the Sun of the Gospel may still shine in our Horison. The Gospel lifts
a People up to Heaven; it is Columna and Corona Regni: The Crown and Glory of
the Kingdom: If this be removed, then, Ichabod, the Glory is departed: The top
of the Beach Tree being cut off, the whole Body of the Tree withers apace: The
Gospel is the top of all our Blessings, if this top be cut, the whole Body
Politic will soon wither. O pray that the Lord will continue the visible
Tokens of his presence among us, his Ordinances, that England may be called,
Jehovah Shammah, The Lord is there, Ezekiel. 48.35. Pray that Righteousness and
Peace may kiss each other, that so Glory may dwell in our Land.

Of the Commandments.
Exodus 20.2. Out of the House of Bondage.


EGypt and the House of Bondage are the same, only they are expressed be under
a different Notion. By Egypt is meant a place of Idolatry and Superstition, by
the House of Bondage is meant a place of Affliction. Israel while they were in
Egypt were under great Tyranny, they had cruel Taskmasters set over them, who
put them to hard labor, and set them to make Brick, yet allowed them no Straw;
therefore Egypt is called the Iron Furnace, Deuteronomy. 4.20. and here the House of
Bondage: From this Expression, I brought thee out of the House of Bondage, two
things are to be noted. 1. Gods Children may sometimes be under sore
Afflictions, in the House of Bondage. 2. That God will in his due time bring
them out of their afflicted State, I brought thee out of the House of Bondage.

1. Gods Children may sometimes be under sore Afflictions, In domo servitutis,
in the House of Bondage: Gods People have no Writ of Ease granted them, no
Charter of Exemption from Trouble in this Life: While the Wicked are kept in
Sugar, the Godly are often kept in Brine: And indeed, how could Gods power be
seen in bringing them out of trouble, if he did not sometimes bring them in? Or
how should God wipe away the Tears from their Eyes in Heaven, if on Earth they
shed none? Doubtless God sees there is need that his Children should be
sometimes in the House of Bondage, 1 Pet. 1.6. (...), If need be, ye are in
heaviness: The Body sometimes does more need a bitter Potion than a Julip.

Quest. 1. Why God lets his People be in the House of Bondage, in an afflicted
State?

Resp. He does it: 1. For Probation for Trial, Deuteronomy. 8.16. Who led thee through
that terrible Wilderness that he might humble thee and prove thee. Affliction
is the Touchstone of Sincerity, Psalm. 66.10, 11. Thou, O God, have proved us:
Thou have tried us as Silver: Thou laidest Affliction upon our Loins.
Hypocrites may embrace the true Religion in Prosperity, and court this Queen
while she has a Jewel hung at her Ear: But he is the good Christian, who will
keep close to God in a time of Suffering. Psalm. 44.17. All this is come upon
us; yet have we not forgotten thee: To love God in Heaven is no wonder, but to
love God when he chastises us, this discovers Sincerity.

2. For Purgation: To purge out Corruption, Ardet palea, purgatur aurum, Isa.
27.9. And this is all the Fruit to take away his sin. The Eye though it be a
tender part, yet when it is sore we put sharp Powders and Waters into it, to
eat out the Pearl: Though the People of God are Dear to him, yet when
Corruption begins to grow in them, he will apply the sharp Powder of Affliction
to eat out the Pearl in the Eye. Affliction is Gods Flail to thresh off our
Husks: It is a means God uses to purge out Sloth, Luxury, Pride and Love of
the World: Gods Furnace is in Zion, Isa. 31.9. This is not to consume, but
refine: What if we have more Affliction, if by this means we have less Sin?

3. For Augmentation: To increase the Graces of the Spirit: Grace thrives most
in the Iron Furnace: Sharp Frosts nourish the Corn; so do sharp Afflictions
Grace: Grace in the Saints is often as Fire hid in the Embers, Affliction is
the Bellows to blow it up into a Flame: The Lord makes the House of Bondage a
Friend to our Grace: Now Faith and Patience act their part: The darkness of the
Night cannot hinder the Brightness of a Star: So the more the Diamond is cut
the more it sparkles: And the more God afflicts us, the more our Graces cast a
sparkling Luster.

4. For Preparation: To fit and prepare the Saints for Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.
Those stones which are cut out for a Building are first hewn and squared: The
Godly are called, (...), living stones, 1 Pet. 2.5. And God does first hew and
polish them by Affliction, that they may be fit for the heavenly Building: The
House of Bondage prepares for the House not made with Hands, 2 Cor. 5.1. The
Vessels of Mercy are seasoned with Affliction, and then the Wine of Glory is
poured in.

Quest. 2. How the Afflictions of the Godly differ from the Afflictions of the
Wicked?

Resp. 1. These are but, (...), Castigations, those on the Wicked are, (...),
Punishments; these come from a Father, those from a Judge.

2. Afflictions on the Godly are Fruits of Covenant-Mercy, 2 Samuel 7.14. But
Afflictions on the Wicked are Effects of Gods Wrath, Eccles. 5.17. He has much
wrath with his Sickness. Afflictions on the Wicked are the Pledge and Earnest
of Hell: They are like the pinnioning of a Malefactor, which does presage his
Execution.

3. Afflictions on the Godly make them better, but Afflictions on the Wicked
make them worse: The Godly pray more, Psalm. 130.1. The Wicked Blaspheme more,
Rev. 16.9. Men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the Name of God.
Afflictions on the Wicked make them more Impenitent: Every Plague upon Egypt
increased the Plague of Hardness in Pharoah's Heart: To what a prodigy of
Wickedness do some Persons come after great Sickness? Affliction on the Godly
is like bruising of Spices which are more sweet and fragrant: Affliction on the
Wicked is like stamping of Weeds with a Pestle, which makes them more Unsavory.

Use 1. It shows us that we are not to wonder to see Israel in the House of
Bondage, 1 Pet. 4.12. The Holiness of the Saints will not excuse them from
Sufferings: Christ was the Holy one of God, yet he was in the Iron Furnace:
Christ's Spouse is a Lilly among Thorns, Cant. 2.2. His Sheep, though they have
the Ear-mark of Election upon them, yet may have their Wool fleeced off: The
Godly have some Good in them, therefore the Devil afflicts them, and some evil
in them, therefore God afflicts them. While there are two Seeds in the World,
expect to be under the Black Rod. The Gospel tells us of reigning, but first of
Suffering, 2 Timothy 2.12.

2. It informs us that Affliction is not always the Sign of Gods Anger: Israel
the Apple of Gods Eye, a peculiar Treasure to him above all People, Exodus 19.5.
Yet these were in the House of Bondage: We are apt to judge and censure them
who are in an afflicted State. When the Barbarians saw the Viper on Paul's
hand, they said, No doubt this Man is a Murderer, Acts 28.4. So when we see the
Viper of Affliction fasten upon the Godly, we are apt to censure them, and say,
These are greater Sinners than others, and God hates them: This rash censuring
is for want of Wisdom. Were not Israel in the House of Bondage? Jeremy in the
Dungeon? Paul a night and a day in the Deep? Gods Afflicting is so far from
evidencing Hatred, that his not afflicting is, Hos. 4.14. I will not punish
your Daughters when they commit Whoredom. Deus maxim irascitur cum non
irascitur, Ber. God punishes most when he does not punish; his Hand is
heaviest when it seems to be lightest: The Judge will not burn him in the Hand,
whom he intends to execute.

3. If Gods own Israel may be in the House of Bondage, then Afflictions do not
of themselves demonstrate a Man Miserable. Indeed Sin unrepented of, makes one
miserable, but the Cross does not. If God has a design in afflicting his
Children, to make them happy, then they are not miserable; but Gods afflicting
them is to make them happy: Therefore they are not Miserable, Job 5.17. Happy
is the Man whom God corrects. The World counts them happy, who can keep out
of Affliction; but the Scripture calls them happy, who are afflicted.

Quest. How are they happy?

Resp. 1. Because they are more Holy, Heb. 12.10. 2. Because they are more in
Gods Favor, Prove 3.12. The Goldsmith loves his Gold, when in the Furnace. 3.
Because they have more of Gods sweet Presence, Psalm. 91.15. And they cannot be
unhappy, that have Gods powerful Presence in supporting, his gracious Presence
in Sanctifying their Affliction. 4. Because the more affliction they have, the
more degrees of Glory they shall have. The lower they have been in the Iron
Furnace, they shall sit upon the higher Throne of Glory. The heavier their
Cross, the heavier shall be their Crown. So then if Affliction make a Christian
happy, they cannot denominate him miserable.

4. See the Merciful Providence of God to his Children, though they may be in
the House of Bondage, and smart by Affliction, yet they shall not be hurt by
Affliction. What hurt does the Fan to the Corn? only separates the Chaft from
it. Or the Lance to the Body, only let out the Impostume. The House of Bondage
does that which sometimes Ordinances will not do, it does Humble and Reform,
Job 36.8, 11. If they be held in Cords of Affliction, he opens their Ear to
Discipline, and commands that they return from Iniquity. O what a merciful
Providence is this, though God bruise his People, yet while he is bruising
them, he is doing them good. As if one should throw a Bag of Money at another,
and a little bruise him, yet it does enrich him. Affliction enricheth the Soul,
and yields the sweet Fruits of Righteousness, Heb. 12.11.

5. If Israel be in the House of Bondage, if the Lord deals so with his own
Children, then how severely will he deal with the Wicked? If God be so severe
with them he loves, how severe will he be with them he hates? If it be done in
the Green Tree, what shall be done in the Dry? If they that Pray and Mourn for
Sin be so severely dealt with, what will become of them that Swear and break
the Sabbath, and are unclean? If Israel be in the Iron Furnace, the Wicked
shall lie in the Fiery Furnace of Hell. It should be the saddest News to wicked
Men, to hear that the People of God are afflicted; let them think how dreadful
will the case of Sinners be, 1 Pet. 4.17. Judgment must begin at the House of
God, and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not
the Gospel? If God thresh his Wheat, he will burn the Chaff. If the Godly
suffer Castigation, the Wicked shall suffer Condemnation. If he mingle his
Peoples Cup with Wormwood, he will mingle the Wickeds Cup with Fire and
Brimstone.

2 Use. 1. If Israel be in the House of Bondage, then do not entertain too hard
Thoughts of Affliction. Christians are apt to look upon the Cross and the Iron
Furnace, as Frightful things, and do what they can to shun them. Nay, sometimes
to avoid Affliction, they run themselves into Sin. But do not think too hardly
of Affliction, do not look upon it through the Multiplying Glass of Fear; the
House of Bondage is not Hell. Consider First, Whence does Affliction come? even
from a Wise God, who prescribes whatever befalls us. Persecutions are but like
Apothecaries, they give us that Physic which God prescribes. Secondly,
Affliction has its Light side as well as its Dark. God can sweeten our
Afflictions, candy our Wormwood, 2 Cor. 1.5. As our Sufferings abound, so does
also our Consolation. Argerius dated his Letters from the pleasant Garden of
the Leonine Prison. God does sometimes so revive his Children in Trouble, that
they had rather bear their Afflictions, than want their Comforts. Why then
should Christians entertain such hard thoughts of Affliction? Do not look at
its grim Face, but at the Message it brings, which is to enrich us both with
Grace and Comfort.

2. If Israel be sometimes in the House of Bondage, in an Afflicted State, then
think beforehand of Affliction; say not as Job 29.18. I shall dye in my Nest.
In the House of Mirth, think of the House of Bondage; you that are now Naomi,
may be Marah, Ruth 1.20. How quickly may the Scene turn, and the Hyperbole of
Joy end in a Catastrophe; all outward things are upon the Tropicks, given to
change. The fore-thoughts of Affliction, would make us Sober and Moderate in
the use of Lawful Delights, it would cure a Surfeit. Christ at a Feast mentions
his Burial, a good Antidote against a Surfeit. The forethoughts of Affliction
would make us prepare for it; it would take us off the World, it would put us
upon a Search of our Evidences, she would see what Oil we have in our Lamp,
what Grace we can find, that we may be able to stand in the Evil Day. That
Soldier was imprudent, who had his Sword to whet, when he was just going to
Fight. He who forecasts Sufferings, will have the Shield of Faith, and the
Sword of the Spirit ready, that he may not be surprised.

3. If Afflictions do come, let us labor to deport our selves wisely as
Christians, that we may adorn our Sufferings: That is, let us endure with
Patience, James 5.10. Take my Brethren the Prophets for an Example of enduring
Affliction and Patience. Satan labors to take advantage of us in Affliction,
by making us either Faint or Murmr. He blows the Coals of Passion and
Discontent, and then warms himself at the Fire. Patience adorns Sufferings. A
Christian should say, as Jesus Christ, Lord, not my Will, but thy Will be done.
And indeed, it is a sign the Affliction is sanctified, when the Heart is brought
to a sweet submissive frame, and then God will remove the Affliction: He will
take us out of the Iron Furnace. And that brings me to the Second thing, Gods
Deliverance of his People Israel, I brought you out of the House of Bondage.

Of the Commandments.
Exodus 20.2. Who brought thee out of the House of Bondage.


WE may consider these Words, Who brought thee out of the House of Bondage,
either 1. Literally, or 2. Spiritually and mystically. 1. In the Letter, I
brought thee out of the House of Bondage; that is, I delivered you out of the
Misery and Servitude you sustained in Egypt when you were in the Iron Furnace.
2. Spiritually and Mystically, I brought thee out of the House of Bondage. So
it is a Type of our Deliverance by Christ from Sin and Hell.

1. Literally, in the Letter, I brought thee out of the House of Bondage; viz.
Out of great Misery and Slavery in the Iron Furnace. The thing I note hence is,
though God bring his People sometimes into trouble, yet he will bring them out
again. Israel was in the House of Bondage, but at last I brought you out of
Bondage. First, (...), That God does deliver out of Trouble. Secondly, In what
manner. Thirdly, When are the Seasons. Fourthly, Why God delivers. Fifthly, How
the deliverances of the Godly and Wicked out of Trouble differ?

First (...). That God does deliver his Children out of Troubles, Psalm. 22.4.
Our Fathers trusted in thee, they trusted, and thou did deliver them. 2 Timothy
4.17. And I was delivered out of the Mouth of the Lion, viz. from Nero. Psalm.
66.11, 12. Thou laidst Affliction upon our Loins, but thou broughtest us out
into a Wealthy Place. Psalm. 30.5. Heaviness may endure for a Night, but Joy
comes in the Morning. God brought Daniel out of the Lions Den, Sihon out of
Babylon. God in his due time gives an issue out of trouble, Psalm. 68.20. The
Tree which in Winter seems dead, in the Spring revives: Post nubila Phoebus:
Affliction may leap on us as the Viper did on Paul, but at last this Viper
shall be shaked off. It Is called a Cup of Affliction, Isa. 51.17. The Wicked
drink a Sea of Wrath, the Godly drink only a Cup of Affliction, and God will
say shortly, Let this Cup pass away. God will give his People a Goal Delivery.

Secondly. Quest. In what manner does God deliver his People out of Trouble?

Resp. He does it like a God, in Wisdom. 1. He does it sometimes suddenly, as
the Angel was caused to fly swiftly, Dan. 9.21. So God sometimes makes a
Deliverance fly swiftly upon the Wing, and on a Sudden he turns the shadow of
Death into the Light of the Morning. As God gives us Mercies above what we can
think, Ephesians. 3.20. so sometimes before we can think of them, Psalm. 126.1. When
the Lord turned the Captivity of Sion, we were like them that Dreamed; we were
in a Dream, we never thought of it. Joseph could not have thought of such a
sudden Alteration, to be the same Day freed out of Prison, and made the chief
Ruler in the Kingdom. Mercy sometimes does not stick long in the Birth, but it
is brought forth on a sudden. 2. God sometimes delivers his People strangely.
That the Whale which swallowed up Jonah, should be a means to bring him safe to
Land. God sometimes delivers his People in that very way they think he will
destroy. In Bringing Israel out of Egypt, God stirred up the Hearts of the
Egyptians to hate them, Psalm. 105.22. And that was the means of their
Deliverance. He brought Paul to Shore by a contrary Wind, and upon the broken
Pieces of the Ship, Acts 27.44.

Thirdly. Quest. When are the times and Seasons that God usually delivers his
People out of the Bondage of Affliction?

Resp. 1. When they are in the greatest Extremity. When Jonah was in the Belly
of Hell, then Chap. 2.5. Thou have brought up my Life from Corruption. When
there is but an Hairs breadth between the Godly and Death, then God ushers in
Deliverance. When the Ship in the Gospel was almost covered with Waves, then
Christ awoke, and rebuked the Wind. When Isaac was upon the Altar, and the
Knife going to be put to his Throat, then comes the Angel, Lay not thy Hand
upon the Child. When Peter began to sink, then Christ took him by the Hand. Cum
duplicantur lateres venit Moses: When the Tale of Brick was doubled, then comes
Moses the Temporal Savior. When the People of God are in the greatest danger,
then appears the Morning Star of Deliverance. When the Patient is ready to
faint, now the Cordial is given.

2. The Second Season is, when Affliction has done its Work upon them: When it
has effected that God has sent it for. As First, When it has humbled them,
Lam. 3.19. Remembering my Affliction, the Wormwood and Gall, my Soul is humbled
in me. When Gods Corrosive has eat out the Proud Flesh. Secondly, When it has
tamed their Impatience. Before they were proud and impatient, like froward
Children, that would struggle with their Parents, but when their cursed Hearts
are tamed, and they say as Micah 7.9. I will bear the Indignation of the Lord,
because I have sinned against him; and as Eli, It is the Lord, let him do what
seems him good; Let him hedge me with Thorns, if he will plant me with Grace.

3 When they are more Partakers of God's Holiness, Heb. 12.10. they are more
full of Heavenly-Mindedness. When the sharp Frost of Affliction has brought
forth the Spring Flowers of Grace, now the Cross is sanctified, and God will
bring them out of the House of Bondage. Luctus in laetitiam vertetur, cineres
in Corollas. When the Metal is refined, then it is taken out of the Furnace.
When Affliction has healed us, now God takes off the smarting Plaster.

Fourthly. Quest. Why does God bring his People out of the House of Bondage?

Resp. Hereby he makes way for his own Glory. Gods Glory is dearer to him than
any thing besides; it is a Crown-Jewel. God by raising his People, raises the
Trophies of his own Honor: He glorifies his Attributes: His Power, Goodness,
Truth, do all Ride in Triumph.

1. His Power. If God did not sometimes bring his People into Trouble, how
would his Power be seen in bringing them out? He brought Israel out of the
House of Bondage, with Miracle upon Miracle, he saved them with an
outstretched-Arm; Psalm. 114.5. What ailed thee O thou Sea, that thou fleddest,
etc. It is spoken of Israel's March out of Egypt, when the Sea fled, and the
Waters were parted each from other. Here was the power of God set forth, Ier.
32.27. Is any thing too hard for me? God loves to help, when things seem past
hope; he creates Deliverance, Psalm. 124.8. He brought Isaac out of a Dead Womb,
and the Messiah out of a Virgins Womb. O how does his Power shine forth, when
he overcomes seeming Impossibilities, and works a Cure, when things look
desperate!

2. His Truth. God has made Promises to his People, when they are under great
pressures to deliver them, and his Truth is engaged in his Promise, Psalm.
50.15. Call-upon me in the Day of Trouble, I will deliver thee. Job 5.19. He
shall deliver thee in Six Troubles, and in Seven. How is the Scripture
bespangled with these Promises, as the Firmament is with Stars; either God will
deliver them from Death, or by Death; (...), he will make a way to escape, 1
Cor. 10.13. When Promises are verified, God's Truth is magnified.

3. His Goodness. God is full of Compassion to such as are in Misery. The
Hebrew Word Racham, for Mercy, signifies Bowels. God has Soundings of Bowels,
Isa. 63.15. And this Sympathy stirs up God to deliver, Isa. 63.9. In his Love
and in his Pity he Redeemed them. This makes way for the Triumph of Gods
Goodness. First* He is Tenderhearted, he will not over-afflict; he cuts
asunder the Bars of Iron, he breaks the Yoaks of the Oppressor. Thus all his
Attributes ride in Triumph, in the saving his People out of Trouble.

Fifthly. Quest. How the Deliverances of the Godly and Wicked out of Trouble
differ?

Resp. 1. The deliverances of the Godly are Preservations; of the Wicked are
Reservations, 2 Pet. 2.9. The Lord knows how to deliver the Godly, and to
reserve the Unjust to be Punished. A Sinner may be delivered from dangerous
Sickness, and out of Prison; but all this is but a Reservation to some greater
Evil.

2. God delivers the Wicked (or rather spares them,) in Anger. Deliverances to
the Wicked are not given as Pledges of Gods Love, but Symptoms of his
Displeasure; as Quails were given to Israel in Anger. But Deliverances of the
Godly are in Love, 2 Samuel 22.20. He delivered me, because he delighted in me.
Isa. 38.17. Thou have in love to my Soul delivered me from the Pit of
Corruption; or as in Hebrew, Chashiacta Naphshi, Thou have loved me from the
Pit of Corruption. A Wicked Man may say, Lord thou have loved me out of the Pit
of Corruption. But a Godly Man may say, Lord thou have loved me out of the Pit
of Corruption. It is one thing to have Gods Power deliver us, and another thing
to have his Love deliver us. O says Hezekiah, Thou have in Love to my Soul
delivered me from the Pit of Corruption.

Quest. How may it be known that a Deliverance comes in Love?

Resp. 1. When a Deliverance makes our Heart boil over in love to God, Psalm.
116.1. I love the Lord because he has heard my Voice. It is one thing to love
our Mercies, another thing to love the Lord: Then a Deliverance is in Love,
when it causes Love.

2. Then a Deliverance is in Love, when we have Hearts to improve it for Gods
Glory: The Wicked, instead of improving their Deliverances for Gods Glory,
improve their Corruptions; they grow worse after, as the Metal when it is taken
out of the Fire grows harder: But then our Deliverance is in Love, when we
improve it for Gods Glory: God raises us out of a low Condition, and we lift
him up in our Praises, and honor him with our Substance, Prove. 3.9. He
recovers us from Sickness, and we spend our selves in his Service. Mercy is not
as the Sun to the Fire, to dull it and put it out; but as Oil to the Wheel to
make it move faster.

3. Then a Deliverance comes in Love, when it makes us more Exemplary in
Holiness: Our Lives are walking Bibles. A Thousand Praises and Doxologies do
not honor God, so much as the Mortifying one Lust, Obadiah 17. On Mount Zion
there shall be Deliverance and Holiness. When these two go together,
Deliverance and Holiness; when being made Monuments of Mercy, we are Patterns
of Piety: Now a-Deliverance comes in Love, and we may say as Hezekiah, Thou
have loved me out of the Pit of Corruption.

1. If God brings his People out of Bondage, then let none despond in trouble;
say not, I shall sink under this burden; as David, I shall one day perish by
the hand of Saul. God can make this Text good, Personally and Nationally, to
bring his People out of the House of Bondage: When he sees a fit Season he will
put forth his Arm and save them; and he can do it with ease, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. It
is nothing for thee Lord to help. He that turns the Tides can turn the Times:
He that raised Lazarus when he was Dead, can raise thee when thou art Sick,
Isa. 63.5. I looked, and there was none to help; therefore my own arm brought
Salvation. Do not despond; believe in Gods Power; Faith sets God on work to
deliver us.

2. Labor (if you are in trouble) to be fitted for Deliverance: Many would
have Deliverance, but are not fitted for it.

Quest. When are we fitted for Deliverance?

Resp. When we are by our Afflictions conformed to Christ: Namely, When we have
learned Obedience, Heb. 5.8. He learned Obedience by the things which he
suffered: That is, he learned sweet Submission to his Fathers Will, Luke 22.42.
Not my will, but thy will be done. When we have thus learned Obedience by our
Suffering, we are willing to do what God will have us do, and be what God will
have us be. Now we are conformed to Christ, and are fitted for Deliverance.

3. If God have brought you at any time out of the House of Bondage, out of
great and eminent Troubles, be much in Doxology and Praise; Deliverance calls
for Praise, Psalm. 30.11, 12. Thou have put off my Sackcloth, and girded me with
gladness: To the end that my Glory may sing praise to thee. My Glory, (that is,
my Tongue which is the Instrument of glorifying thee.) The Saints are Temples
of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 3.16. Where should Gods Praises be sounded but in his
Temples? Beneficium postulat officium: The deepest Springs yield the sweetest
Water: And Hearts deeply sensible of Gods Deliverances yield the sweetest
Praises. Moses tells Pharaoh, when he was going out of Egypt, We will go with
our Sheep and our Cattle, Exodus 10.9. Why so? Because he might have Sacrifices
of Thanksgiving ready to offer to God for their Deliverance. To have a thankful
Heart for a Deliverance, is a greater Blessing than the Deliverance it self,
Luke 17.15. One of the Lepers, when he saw he was healed, turned back, and with
a loud voice glorified God. The Lepers thankful Heart was a greater Blessing
than to be healed of his Leprosy: Have any of you here been brought out of the
House of Bondage, out of Prison, Sickness, or any Death-threatning Danger? Do
not forget to be thankful; be not Graves, but Temples: And that you may be the
more Thankful, observe every Emphasis and Circumstance in your Deliverance; as
to be brought out of trouble when you were In articulo mortis, there was but an
Hairs breadth between you and Death; or to be brought out of Affliction,
without Sin, you did not purchase your Deliverance, by the insnaring of your
Consciences; or, to be brought out of trouble upon the Wings of Prayer; or,
that those who were the Occasions of bringing you into trouble, should be the
Instruments of bringing you out: These Circumstances being well weighed, do
highten a Deliverance, and should highten our Thankfulness: The cutting of a
Stone may be of more Value than the Stone it self: And the Circumstancing of a
Deliverance may be greater than the Deliverance it self.

Quest. But how shall we praise God in a right manner for Deliverances?

Resp. 1. Be Holy Persons: In the Sacrifices of Thanksgiving, whosoever did eat
thereof, with their Uncleanness upon them, were to be cut off, Lev. 7.20. to
typifie how unpleasing their Praises and Thank-offerings are who live in Sin.

2. Praise God with humble Hearts, acknowledge how unworthy you were of
Deliverance: Gods Mercies are not Debts but Legacies, and that you should have
a Legacy given you, be humble, Rev. 11.16. The Elders fell upon their Faces (an
Expression of Humility) and worshipped and praised God.

3. Praise God for Deliverances cordially, Psalm. 111.1. I will praise the Lord,
Becol Levau, with my whole Heart. In Religion there is no Music but in
Consort, when Heart and Tongue join.

4. Praise God for Deliverance constantly, Psalm. 146.2. While I live will I
bless the Lord: Some will be thankful while the Memory of a Deliverance is
fresh, and then they leave off. Like the Carthaginians, who used at first to
send the Tenth of their yearly Revenue to Hercules; but by degrees they grew
weary, and left off sending. But we must be constant in our Eucharistical
Sacrifice or Thank-offering: The Motion of our Praise must be like the Motion
of our Pulse, which beats as long as Life lasts, Psalm. 146.1. I will sing
praises to my God while I have any Being.

Of the Commandments.
Exodus 20.2. Out of the House of Bondage.


2. THese words are to be understood Mystically and Spiritually. By Isreal's
Deliverance from the House of Bondage, is typified their Spiritual Deliverance
from Sin, Satan and Hell.

I. From Sin.] The House of Bondage was a Type of Isreal's Deliverance from Sin.
Sin is the true Bondage, it inslaves the Soul: Nihil durius Servitute, Cicero.
Of all Conditions Servitude is the worst. I was held before Conversion (says
Austin) not with an iron Ghain, but with the Obstinacy of my own Will. Sin is
the inslaver; Sin is called, (...), a Law, Romans 7.23. because it has such a
binding power over a Man: And it is said, (...), to reign, Romans 6.12. because
it exercises a Tyrannical Power: And Men are said to be the Servants of Sin,
Romans 6.17. because they are so inslaved by it. Thus Sin is the House of
Bondage; Israel was not so inslaved in the Iron Furnace, as the Sinner is by
Sin. Those are worse Slaves and Vassals who are under the power of Sin, than
those are who are under the power of Earthly Tyrants.

1. Other Slaves have the Tyrants only rule over their Bodies; but the Sinner
has his Soul Tyrannized over: The Soul, that Princely thing, which sways the
Scepter of Reason, and was once crowned with perfect Knowledge and Holiness,
now this Prince goes on foot, it is inslaved and made a Lackey to every base
Lust.

2. Other Slaves have some pity shown them, the Tyrant gives them Meat, and
lets them have hours for their Rest: But Sin is a merciless Tyrant, it will let
Men have no Rest. Judas had no rest till he had betrayed Christ; and after that
he had less rest in his Conscience. How does a Man Hackney himself out in the
Service of Sin, wast his Body, break his Sleep, distract his Mind? A wicked Man
is every day doing Sins drudgery-work.

3. Other Slaves, though they are set about servile work, yet about lawful; it
is lawful to work in the Gally, tug at the Oar; but all the Laws and Commands
of Sin are unlawful: Sin says to one Man Defraud, to another be Unchaste, to
another take Revenge; to another, take a false Oath. Thus all Sins commands are
unlawful, we cannot obey Sins Law but by breaking Gods Law.

4. Other Slaves are forced against their will: Israel groaned under Slavery,
Exodus 2.23. But Sinners are content to be under the command of Sin, they are
willing to be Slaves, they love their Chains, they will not take their Freedom:
They Glory in their shame, Phil. 3.19. They wear their Sins, not as their
Fetters, but their Ornaments: They rejoice in Iniquity, Ier. 11.15.

5. Other Slaves are brought to Correction, but Sins Slaves are without
Repentance brought to Condemnation: Other Slaves lie in the Iron Furnace, Sins
Slaves lie in the Fiery Furnace. What freedom of Will has a Sinner to his own
Conversion, when he can do nothing but what Sin will have him? He is enslaved.
Thus Sinners are in the House of Bondage, but God takes his Elect out of this
House of Bondage: He beats off the Chains and Fetters of Sin: He rescues them
from their Slavery: He makes them free, by bringing them into the glorious
Liberty of the Children of God, Romans 8. The Law of Love now commands not the
Law of Sin: Though the Life of Sin be prolonged, yet not the Dominion: As those
Beats in Daniel had their Lives prolonged for a Season, but their Dominion was
taken away, Dan. 7.12. The Saints are made Spiritual Kings, to rule and conquer
their Corruptions, to bind these Kings in Chains: This is matter of the highest
Praise and Thanksgiving, to be thus taken out of the House of Bondage, to be
freed from enslaving Lusts, and made Kings to reign in Glory for ever.

II. The bringing Israel out of the House of Bondage, was a Type of their
Deliverance from Satan. Thus Men naturally are in the House of Bondage, they
are inslaved to Satan: Satan is called the Prince of this World, John 14.30.
and the God of this World, 2 Cor. 4.4. because he has such power to command
and inslave them: Though Satan shall one day be a close Prisoner in Chains, yet
now he does Insult and Tyrannize over the Souls of Men: Sinners are under the
Rule of Satan, he exercises over them such a Jurisdiction as Caesar did over
the Senate. The Devil fills Men's Heads with Error, and their Hearts with
Malice, Acts 5.3. Why has Satan filled thine Heart? A Sinners Heart is the
Devils Mansion House, Matt. 12.44. I will return into my House. And sure that
must needs be an House of Bondage which is the Devils Mansion House. Satan is a
perfect Tyrant, 1. He rules Men's Minds, he blinds them with Ignorance, 2 Cor.
4.4. The God of this World has blinded the minds of them that believe not. 2.
He rules their Memories; they shall remember that which is Evil, and forget
that which is good: Their Memories are like a Siercer or Strainer that lets go
all the pure Liquor, and retains only the Dregs. 3. He rules their Wills:
Though the Devil cannot force the Will, yet he draws it, John 8.44. The Lusts
of your Father you will do. He has got your Hearts, and him you will obey: His
strong Temptations do more draw Men to Evil, than all the Promises of God can
draw them to Good. This is the State of every Man by Nature, he is in the House
of Bondage, Casus.
the Devil has him in his power: A Sinner grinds in the Devils Mill; he is at
the Command of Satan, as the Ass is at the command of the Driver: No wonder to
see Men, Non mirum.
oppress and persecute; these Slaves must do what the God of this World will
have them: How could those Swine but run, when the Devils entered into them
Matt. 8.32. When the Devil tempted Ananias to tell a Lie, he could not but
speak what Satan had put in his Heart, Acts 5.3. When the Devil entered into
Judas, and bid him betray Christ, Judas would do it though he hanged himself.
This case is sad and dismal to be thus in the House of Bondage under the power
and Tyranny of Satan: Tristis.
When David would curse the Enemies of God, how did he pray against them, that
Satan might be at their right hand, Psalm. 109.6. He knew he could lead them
into any Snare: If Satan be at the Sinners right hand, let the Sinner take heed
he be not set on Gods left hand: Is not this a case to be bewailed, to see Men
taken Captive by Satan at his will, 2 Timothy 2.26. He leads Sinners as Slaves
before him in Triumph: He possesses them; If People should see but their
Beasts bewitched and possessed of the Devil, they would be much troubled: Yet
their Souls are possessed by Satan, but they are not sensible. [What can be
worse than to be in the House of Bondage, to have the Devil hurry Men on in
their Lusts to Perdition?] Sinners are willingly enslaved to Satan, they love
their Jailer; are content to sit quietly under Satan's Jurisdiction; they choose
this Bramble to rule them, though within a while Fire will come out of this
Bramble to devour them, Judges 9. Now what an infinite Mercy of God is it, when
he brings poor Souls out of this House of Bondage, when he gives them a Goal
delivery from the Prince of Darkness! Jesus Christ Redeems Captives: He Ransoms
Sinners by Price, and Rescues them by Force: As David took a Lamb out of the
Lions Mouth, 1 Samuel 17.34. So Christ rescues Souls out of the Mouth of this
Roaring Lion. O what a Mercy is it, to be brought out of the House of Bondage,
to be taken from being made Captives to the Prince of the Air, and to be made
Subjects of the Prince of Peace! And this is done by the preaching of the Word,
Acts 26.18. To turn them from the power of Satan unto God.

III. The bringing of Israel out of the House of Bondage, was a Type of their
being delivered from Hell. Hell is Domus Servitutis, An House of Bondage; an
House built on purpose for Sinners to lie in.

1. That there is such an House of Bondage where the Damned lie, Psalm. 9.17.
The wicked shall be turned into Hell, Matt. 23.33. How can ye escape the
damnation of Hell. If any one shall ask where this House of Bondage is, where
is the place of Hell? I wish you may never know feelingly, (...), Chrysostom. Let us
not so much, says Chrysostom, labor to know where Hell is, as how to escape
it. Yet to satisfy Curiosity, Hell is Locus subterraneus, Some place beneath,
Prove. 5.24. Hell beneath. Hesiod says, Hell is as far under the Earth, as
Heaven is above it. Luke. 8.31. The Devils besought Christ, That he would not
command them to go into the deep. Hell is in the Deep.

2. Q. Why there must be this House of Bondage, why an Hell? Resp. Because
there must be a place for the Execution of Divine Justice: Earthly Monarchs
have their Prison for Malefactors, and shall not God have his? Sinners are
Criminal Persons, they have offended God, and it would not consist with Gods
Holiness and Justice, to have his Laws infringed, and not appoint Penalties for
the Transgressors.

3. The Dreadfulness of this place: Could you but for one hour hear the Groans
and Shreaks of the Damned, it would confirm you in this Truth, that Hell is an
House of Bondage: Hell is the Emphasis of Misery: Besides the Poena damni, the
Punishment of Loss, which is the Exclusion of the Soul from the glorified sight
of God, which Divines think the worst part of Hell. I say besides this, there
will be Poena Sensus, the Punishment of Sense. If when Gods Wrath is kindled
but a little, and a spark of it flies into a Man's Conscience in this Life, it
is so terrible (as in the case of Spira) then what will Hell it self be? That I
may describe this House of Bondage.

1. In Hell there will be a Plurality of Torments. 1. Bonds and Chains, 2 Pet.
2.4. 2. The Worm, Mark 9.44. This is the Worm of Conscience, and the Lake of
Fire, Rev. 20.15. other Fire is but painted to this.

2. This House of Hell is haunted with Devils, Matt. 25.41. Anselm has a
saying, I had rather endure all Torments, than see the Devil with bodily Eyes.
Such as go to Hell must not only be forced to behold the Devil, but must be
shut up in the Den with this Lion: They must keep the Devil company: The Devil
is full of spite against Mankind: This red Dragon will spet Fire in Men's Faces.

3. The Torment of Hell abides for ever, Rev. 14.11. The smoke of their Torment
ascends up for ever and ever, Mark 9.44. Time cannot finish it, Tears cannot
quench it: The Wicked are Salamanders who live always in the Fire of Hell, and
are not consumed: After Sinners have lain Millions of Years in Hell, their
Punishment is as far from ending, as it was at the beginning: If all the Earth
and Sea were Sand, and every thousand Year a Bird should come and take away one
grain of this Sand, it would be a long time ever that vast heap of Sand were
emptied. Yet if after all that time the Damned might come out of Hell, there
were some hope, but this word EVER breaks the Heart.

Quest. But how does this seem to stand with Gods Justice, for a Sin committed
in a moment, to punish it with eternal Torment?

Resp. 1. Because there is an Eternity of Sin in Man's Nature. 2. Because Sin is
Crimen laesae Majestatis, it is committed against an infinite Majesty,
therefore the Sin is Infinite, and proportionably the Punishment must be
Infinite. Now, because a finite Creature cannot bear infinite Wrath, therefore
he must be eternally satisfying what he cannot satisfy at once. Now then, if
Hell be such an House of Bondage, what infinite cause have they to bless God,
who are delivered from it? 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. Jesus delivered us from the Wrath to
come. Jesus Christ suffered the Torments of Hell in his Soul, that Believers
should not suffer them. If we are thankful when we are ransomed out of Prison,
or delivered from Fire, Oh how should we bless God to be preserved from Wrath
to come! And that which may cause the more Thankfulness, is because the most go
into this House of Bondage, the most go to Hell: Therefore to be of the number
of those few that are delivered from it, is matter of infinite Thankfulness. I
say, most go to this House of Bondage when they dye; most go to Hell, Matt.
7.13. Broad is the way which leads to destruction, and many there be that go
in thereat. The greatest part of the World lies in Wickedness, 1 John 5.19.
Divide the World, says Brerewood, into 31 parts, nineteen parts of it are
possessed by Jews and Turks, seven parts by Heathens; so that there are but
five parts of Christians; and among these Christians so many seduced Papists on
one hand, and so many formal Protestants on the other, that we may conclude the
major part of the World goes to Hell. 1. The Scripture compares the Wicked to
Briars, Isa. 10.17. There are but few Lillies in your Fields, but in every
Hedge Thorns and Briars. 2. To the mire in the streets, Isa. 10.6. Few Jewels
or precious Stones in the Street, but you cannot go a step but you meet with
Mire. The Wicked are as common as the Dirt in the Street: Look into the
Generality of People; How many Drunkards for one that is Sober? How many
Adulterers for one that is Chaste? How many Hypocrites for one that is Sincere?
The Devil has the Harvest, and God only a few Gleanings. Oh then such as are
delivered from the House of Bondage, Hell, have infinite cause to admire and
bless God. How should the Vessels of Mercy run over with Thankfulness? When
most are carried Prisoners to Hell, they are delivered from Wrath to come.

Quest. How shall I know I am delivered from Hell?

Resp. 1. Those whom Christ saves from Hell, he saves from Sin, Matt. 1.21. He
shall save his People from their sins. Has God delivered you from the power of
Corruption, from Pride, Malice, Lust? If he has delivered you from the Hell of
Sin, then he has delivered you from the Hell of Torment.

2. If you have got an Interest in Christ, prizing, confiding, loving him, then
you are delivered from Hell and Damnation, Romans 8.1. No Condemnation to them
which are in Christ Jesus. If you are in Christ, then he has put the Garment
of his Righteousness over you, and Hell Fire can never singe this Garment.
Pliny observes, nothing will so soon quench Fire as Salt and Blood: The Salt
tears off Repentance, and the Blood of Christ will quench the Fire of Hell,
that it shall never kindle upon you.

Of the Commandments.
Exodus 20.3. Thou shall have no other Gods before me, etc.


BEfore I come to the Commandment, I shall premise some things about the Moral
Law: Answer Questions, Rules.

Quest. 1. What is the difference between the Moral Law and the Gospel?

Resp. 1. The Law requires that we worship God as our Creator: The Gospel
requires that we worship God in and through Christ. God in Christ is
propitious, out of Christ we may see Gods Power, Justice, Holiness; in Christ
we see his Mercy displayed.

2. The Moral Law requires Obedience, but gives no strength (as Pharaoh
required Brick but gave no Straw) but the Gospel gives strength: The Gospel
bestows Faith upon the Elect: The Gospel sweetens the Law; it makes us serve
God with delight.

Quest. 2. What use is there of the Moral Law to us?

Resp. The Law is a Glass to show us our Sins, that so seeing our Pollution and
Misery, we may be forced to fly to Christ to satisfy for former guilt, and
save from future Wrath, Gal. 3.24. The Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us to
Christ.

Quest. 3. But is the Moral Law still in force to Believers, is it not
abolished to them?

Resp. In some sense it is abolished to Believers. 1. In respect of
Justification; they are not justified by their Obedience to the Moral Law.
Believers are to make great use of the Moral Law (as I shall show) but they
must trust only to Christ's Righteousness for Justification; as Noah's Dove made
use of her Wings to fly, but trusted to the Ark for Safety: If the Moral Law
could justify, what need were there of Christ's Dying? 2. The Moral Law is
abolished to Believers, in respect of the Malediction of it: They are freed
from the Curse and damnatory power of it, Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us
from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us.

Quest. 4. How was Christ made a Curse for us?

Resp. Christ may be considered, 1. As the Son of God, and so he was not made a
Curse. 2. As our Pledge and Surety, Heb. 7.22. And so he was made a Curse for
us: This Curse was not upon his Godhead, but upon his Manhood. This Curse was
the Wrath of God lying upon him. And thus Christ has taken away from Believers
the Curse of the Law, by being made a Curse for them. But though the Moral Law
is thus far abolished, yet it remains as a perpetual Rule to Believers: Though
the Law Moral be not their Savior, yet it is their Guide: Though it be not
Foedus, a Covenant of Life, yet it is Norma, a Rule of Living: Every Christian
is bound to conform to the Moral Law, and write as exactly as he can, after
this Copy, Romans 3.31. Do we then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid.
Though a Christian is not under the condemning power of the Law, yet he is
under the commanding power. To love God, to reverence and obey him, this is a
Law always binds, and will bind in Heaven. This I urge against the Antinomians,
who say the Moral Law is abrogated to Believers; which as it contradicts
Scripture, so it is a Key to open the Door to all Licentiousness. They who will
not have the Law to rule them, shall never have the Gospel to save them. Having
answered these Questions, I shall in the next place, law down some general
Rules for the right understanding of the Decalogue or Ten Commandments: These
Rules may serve to give us some light into the Sense and Meaning of the
Commandments.

Rule 1. The Commands and Prohibitions of the Moral Law reach the Heart.

1. The Commands of the Moral Law reach the Heart: The Commandments require not
only outward Actions, but inward Affections: They require not only the outward
Act of Obedience, but the inward Affection of Love, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Thou shall love
the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart.

2. The Threats and Prohibitions of the Moral Law reach the Heart: The Law of
God forbids not only the Act of Sin, but the Desire and Inclination: Not only
does it forbid Adultery, but Lusting, Matt. 5.28. Not only Stealing but
Coveting, Romans 7.7. Lex humana ligat manum, lex Divina comprimit animam. Man's
Law binds only the Hands, Gods Law binds the Heart.

Rule 2. In the Commandments there is a Synecdoche, more is intended than is
spoken. 1. Where any Duty is commanded, there the contrary Sin is forbidden,
etc. When we are commanded to keep the Sabbath day Holy, there we are forbidden
to break the Sabbath: When we are commanded to live in a calling, Six days
shall thou labor, there we are forbidden to live idly and out of a Calling. 2.
Where any Sin is forbidden, there the contrary Duty is commanded: When we are
forbidden to take Gods Name i^ vain, the contrary Duty is commanded, that we
should reverence his Name, Deuteronomy. 28.58. That thou may fear this glorious and
fearful Name, the Lord thy God. Where we are forbidden to wrong our Neighbor;
there is the contrary Duty included, that we should do him all the good we can,
by vindicating his Name, and supplying his Wants.

Rule 3. Where any Sin is forbidden in the Commandment, there the occasion of
it is also forbidden. Where Murder is forbidden, there Envy and rash Anger are
forbidden which may occasion it. Where Adultery is forbidden in the
Commandment, there is forbidden all that may lead to it, as wanton glances of
the Eye, or coming into the Company of an Harlot, Prove. 5.8. Come not nigh the
Door of her House. He who would be free from the Plague, must not come near the
Infected House. Under the Law the Nazarite was forbid to drink Wine, nor might
he eat Grapes of which the Wine was made.

Rule 4. In relato subintelligitur correlatum. Where one Relation is named in
the Commandment, there another Relation is included. Where the Child is named,
there the Father is included. Where there is the Duty of Children to Parents
mentioned, there is included also the Duty of Parents to Children. Where the
Child is commanded to honor the Parent, there is employed, that the Parent is
also commanded to instruct, to love, to provide for the Child.

Rule 5. Where greater Sins are forbidden, there lesser Sins are also
forbidden. Though no Sin in its own Nature is little, yet comparatively one may
be less than another. Where Idolatry is forbidden, there is forbidden
Superstition, or bringing any Innovation into God's Worship which he has not
appointed. As the Sons of Aaron were forbid to worship an Idol, so to Sacrifice
to God with strange Fire, Lev. 10.1. Mixture in Sacred things, is like a dash
in the Wine, which though it gives it a color, yet does but debase and
adulterate it. It Is highly provoking to God to bring any Superstitious Ceremony
into his Worship which he has not prescribed; it is to tax God's Wisdom, as if
he were not Wise enough to appoint the manner how he will be served.

Rule 6. The Law of God is Copulative, Lex est Copulativa: The First and Second
Table are knit together; Piety to God, and Equity to our Neighbor. These Two
Tables which God has joined together, must not be put asunder. Try a Moral Man
by the Duties of the First Table, Piety to God, and there you will find him
Negligent. Try an Hypocrite by Duties of the Second Table, Equity to his
Neighbor, and there you find him Tardy. He who is strict in the Second Table,
but neglects the First, or he who is zealous in the First Table, but neglects
the Second, his Heart is not right with God. The Pharisees were the Highest
Pretenders to the First Table, Zeal and Holiness; but Christ detects their
Hypocrisy, Mat. 23.23. Ye have omitted Judgment, Mercy and Faith. They were
bad in the Second Table; they omitted Judgment, that was, being Just in their
Dealings, Mercy in Relieving the Poor, and Faith, that is Faithfulness in their
Promises and Contracts with Men. God wrote both the Tables, and our Obedience
must set Seal to both.

Rule 7. God's Law forbids not only the Acting of Sin in our own Persons, but
being accessory to, or having any Hand in the Sins of others.

Quest. How and in what Sense may we be said to partake and have an Hand in the
Sins of others?

Resp. 1. By Decreeing Unrighteous Decrees, and imposing on others that which
is unlawful: Jeroboam made the People of Israel to Sin; he was accessory to
their Idolatry by setting up golden Calves: So David, though he did not in his
own Person kill Uriah; yet because he wrote a Letter to Ioab, to set Uriah in
the Forefront of the Battle, and it was done by his command, therefore he was
accessory to Uriah's Death, and the Murder of him was laid to David's Charge
by the Prophet, 2 Samuel 12.9. Thou have killed Uriah the Hittite with the Sword.

2. We become accessory to the Sins of others, by not hindering them when it is
in our power: Qui non prohibet cum potest, jubet: If a Master of a Family sees
his Servant break the Sabbath, or hears him Swear, and lets him alone, does not
use the power he has to suppress him, he becomes accessory to his sin. Eli,
for not punishing his Sons, when they made the Offering of the Lord to be
abhorred, made himself guilty, 1 Samuel 3.14. He that suffers an Offender to
escape unpunished, makes himself an Offender.

3. By counselling, abetting, or provoking others to sin. Achitophel made
himself guilty of the Fact, by giving Counsel to Absalom to go in and defile
his Fathers Concubines, 2 Samuel 16.21. He who shall tempt and solicit another to
be Drunk, though he himself be sober, yet being the occasion of another sin,
he is accessory to it, Hab. 2.15. Woe unto him that gives his neighbor drink,
that put thy Bottle to him.

4. By consenting to another sin: Saul did not cast one stone at Stephen, yet
the Scripture says, Saul was consenting to his Death, Acts 8.1. Thus he had an
hand in it; if several did combine to Murder a Man, and they should tell
another of their intent, and he should give his consent to it, he were guilty,
though his hand were not in the Murder, yet his Heart was in it: Though he did
not act it, yet he did approve it; so it became his sin.

5. By Example, Vivitur Exemplis, Examples are powerful and cogent; setting a
bad Example occasions another to sin; and so a Person becomes accessory. If the
Father Swears, and the Child by his Example learns to Swear, the Father is
accessory to the Child's sin, he taught him by his Example: As there are
Diseases Hereditary, so Sins.

Rule 8. The last Rule about the Commandments, is this, that though we cannot
by our own strength fulfill all these Commandments, yet doing, quoad posse, what
we are able, the Lord has provided Encouragement for us. There is a threefold
Encouragement.

1. That though we have not Ability to obey any one Command, yet God has in
the New Covenant promised to work that in us, which he requires, Ezekiel. 36.27. I
will cause you to walk in my Statutes. God commands us to love him: Alas, how
weak is our Love? It is like the Herb that is hot only in the first Degree: But
God has promised to Circumcise our Hearts, that we shall love him, Deuteronomy. 30.6.
He that does command us will enable us: God commands us to turn from sin, but
alas we have not power to turn; therefore God has promised to turn us; to put
his Spirit within us, and turn the Heart of stone into flesh, Ezekiel. 36.26.
There is nothing in the Command, but the same is in the Promise. Therefore
Christian be not discouraged; though thou have no strength of thy own, yet God
will give thee this strength. The Iron has no power to move, but when the
Lodestone draws it it can move, Isa. 26.12. Thou have wrought all our works in
us.

2. Though we cannot exactly fulfill the Moral Law, yet God will for Christ's
sake mitigate the Rigor of the Law, and accept of something less than he
requires. God in the Law requires exact Obedience, yet he will accept of
sincere Obedience. He will abate something of the Degree, if there be Truth in
the inward parts. God will see the Faith, and pass by the Failing: The Gospel
remits something of the Severity of the Moral Law.

3. Wherein our personal Obedience comes short, God will be pleased to accept
us in our Surety, Ephesians. 1.6. He has accepted us, (...), in his beloved. Though
our Obedience be imperfect, yet through Christ our Surety, God looks upon it as
perfect. And that very Service which Gods Law might condemn, Gods Mercy is
pleased to crown, by virtue of the Blood of our Mediator. Having given you
these Rules about the Commandments, I should come next to the direct handling
of them.

Of the Commandments.
Exodus 20.3. Thou shall have no other Gods before me, etc.


Quest. WHy does the Commandment run in the second Person singular, Thou] why
does not God say, You shall have no other Gods, but Thou?

Resp. Because the Commandment concerns every one, and God would have you take
it as spoken to you by Name: Though we are forward to take Privileges to our
selves, yet we are apt to shift off Duty from our selves to others: Thefore the
Commandment runs in the second Person, Thou and Thou, that every one may know
that the Commandment is spoken to him, as it were by name. And so I come to the
Commandment, Thou shall have no other Gods before me. This Commandment may well
lead the Van, and be set in the Front of all the Commandments, because it is
the Foundation of all true Religion. The sum of this Commandment is, that we
should sanctify God in our Hearts, and give him a Precedence above all created
Beings. There are two Branches of this Commandment. 1. That we must have One
God. 2. That we must have but one. Or thus: 1. That we must have God for our
God: 2. That we must have no other. 1. That we must have God for our God: It is
manifest we must have a God, and who is God save the Lord? 2 Samuel 22.32. The
Lord Jehovah (one God in three Persons) is the true, living, eternal God, and
him must we have for our God.

Quest. 1. What is it to make God to be a God to us?

Resp. 1. To make God to be a God to us, is to acknowledge him for a God: The
Gods of the Heathen are Idols, Psalm 96.5. and we know that an Idol is nothing,
1 Cor. 8.4. that is, it has nothing of Deity in it: If we cry, Help O Idol, an
Idol cannot help; the Idols were themselves carried into Captivity, Isa. 46.2.
So that an Idol is nothing, Vanity is ascribed to it, Ier. 14.22. we do not
acknowledge it to be a God. But this is to make God to be a God to us, when we
do, ex animo, acknowledge him to be God, 1 Kings 18.39. All the People fell on
their Faces, and said, The Lord he is the God! The Lord he is the God! Yea, we
acknowledge God to be the only God, 2 Kings 19.15. O Lord God of Israel, which
dwell between the Cherubims, thou art the God, even thou alone. Deity is a
Jewel belongs only to his Crown: Yet further, we acknowledge that there is no
God like him, 1 Kings 8.23. And Solomon stood before the Altar of the Lord, And
he said, Lord God of Israel, there is no God like thee, Psalm 89.6. For who in
the Heaven can be compared unto the Lord; who among the Sons of the Mighty, can
be likened unto the Lord? In the Chaldee it is, Who among the Angels? None can
do as God, he brought the World out of nothing; And he hangs the Earth upon
nothing, Job 26.7. This is to make God to be a God to us, when we are persuaded
in our Hearts, and confess with our Tongue, and subscribe with our Hand, that
God is the only true God, and that there is none comparable to him.

2. To make God to be a God to us, is to choose him, Joshua 24.15. Choose ye
this day whom you will serve; but as for me and my House, we will serve the
Lord. That is, we will choose the Lord to be our God: It is one thing for the
Judgment to approve of God, and another thing for the Will to choose him.
Religion is not a matter of Chance, but Choice. Quest. What is antecedent to,
or goes before this Choice? Resp. 1. Before this choosing God for our God,
there must be Knowledge: We must know God before we can choose him; before one
choose the Person he will Marry, he must first have some Knowledge and
Cognizance of the Person: So we must know God before we can choose him for our
God, 2 Chronicles. 28.9. Know thou the God of thy Fathers. We must know God in his
Attributes, Glorious in Holiness, Rich in Mercy, Faithful in Promises: We must
know God in his Son: As in a Glass a Face is represented, so in Christ as in a
Transparent Glass, we see Gods Beauty and Love shine forth. This Knowledge must
go before our choosing of God. Lactantius said, All the Learning of the
Philosophers was without an Head, because it wanted the Knowledge of God. 2.
Wherein our choosing of God consists: It is an Act of Mature Deliberation; a
Christian having viewed the Superlative Excellencies in God, and being stricken
into an Holy Admiration of his Perfections, he singles out God from all other
Objects to set his Heart upon: He says as Jacob, Genesis 28.21. The Lord shall be
my God. 3. The Effect of choosing God: The Soul that chooses God, devotes
himself to God, Psalm 119.38. Thy Servant, who is devoted to thy fear. As the
Vessels of the Sanctuary were consecrated and set apart from common to Holy
Uses: So the Soul who has chosen God to be his God, has dedicated and set
himself apart for God, and will be no more for Profane Uses.

3. To make God to be a God to us, is to enter into a Solemn Covenant with him,
that he shall be our God: After Choice follows the Marriage Covenant: As God
makes a Covenant with us, Isa. 55.3. I will make an everlasting Covenant with
you, even the sure Mercies of David: So we make a Covenant with him, 2 Chronicles.
15.12. They entered into Covenant to seek the Lord God of their Fathers. And
Isa. 44.5. One shall say, I am the Lords: And another shall subscribe with his
hand unto the Lord. Like Soldiers that subscribe their Names in the
Muster-Roll. This Covenant, that God shall be our God, we have often renewed in
the Lord's Supper: And it is like a Seal to a Bond, to bind us fast to God, and
to keep us that we do not depart from him.

4. To make God to be a God to us, is to give him Adoration: Which consists 1.
in reverencing of him, Psalm. 89.7. God is to be had in reverence of all them
that are about him. The Seraphims who stood about Gods Throne, covered their
Faces, Isa. 6. And Eliah wrapped himself in a Mantle when the Lord passed by*
in token of reverence. This Reverence shows the high Esteem we have of Gods
Sacred Majesty. 2. Adoration is in bowing to him or worshipping him, Psalm
29.2. Worship the Lord in the beauty of Holiness. Nehem. 8.6. They bowed their
heads and worshipped the Lord with their faces to the ground. This (...), or
Divine Worship, is the peculiar Honor belongs to the Godhead. This God is
jealous of, and will have no Creature share in, Isa. 42.8. My Glory will I not
give to another. Magistrates may have a civil Respect or Veneration, God only a
Religious Adoration.

5. To make God to be a God to us, is to fear him, Deuteronomy. 28.58. That thou may
Fear this glorious and fearful Name, the Lord thy God. This fearing of God is,
1. To have God always in our eye, Psalm. 16.8. I have set the Lord always before
me. And Psalm 25.15. Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord. He who fears God,
imagines that whatever he is doing, God looks on, and as a Judge, weighs all
his Actions. 2. To fear God, is when we have such an Holy awe of God upon our
Hearts that we dare not sin, Psalm. 4.4. Stand in awe and sin not. The Wicked
sin and fear not; the Godly fear and sin not, Genesis 39.9. How shall I do this
great wickedness and sin against God? Bid me sin, bid me drink Poison. It is a
Saying of Anselm, If Hell were on one side, and sin on the other, I would
rather leap into Hell, than willingly sin against my God. 1. This glorious and
fearful Name: He who fears God will not sin, though it be never so secret,
Levit. 19.14. Thou shall not curse the Deaf, nor put a stumbling block before
the Blind, but shall fear thy God. Suppose you should curse a Deaf Man, he
cannot hear you curse him: Or if you lay a Block in a Blind Man's way, and make
him fall, he cannot see you lay it. Ay, but the fear of God will make you avoid
those sins which can neither be heard nor seen by Men. 2. Where the fear of God
is, it destroys the fear of Man: The three Children feared God, therefore they
feared not the Kings Wrath, Dan. 3.16. The greater noise drowns the less; the
noise of Thunder drowns the noise of a River: So when the fear of God is
superintendent in the Soul, it drowns all other carnal Fear. This is to make
God to be a God to us, when we have an Holy Filial fear of him; that thou may
fear.

6. To make God to be a God to us, is to trust in him, Psalm. 141.8. Mine eyes
are unto thee, O God, the Lord, in thee will I trust, 2 Samuel 22.3. The God of
my Rock, in him will I trust. There is nothing we can trust in but God: All the
Creatures are a Refuge of Lies: They are like the Egyptian Reed, too weak to
support us, but strong enough to wound us: Omnis motus fit super immobili. God
only is a sufficient Foundation to build our Trust upon. And then when we
Trust, we make him a God to us; else we make him an Idol if we do not trust in
him. Trusting in God, is when we rely on his Power as a Creator, and on his
Love as a Father. Trusting in God, is when we commit our chief Treasure to him:
Our Soul is our chief Treasure, we commit our Soul to him, Psalm. 31.5. Into thy
hands I commit my Spirit. As the Orphant trusts his Estate with his Guardian,
so we trust our Souls with God: This is to make him a God to us. Quest. How
shall we know that we trust in God aright? Resp. If we trust in God aright,
then we will trust in God at one time as well as another, Psalm. 62.8. Trust in
him, Becol gnet, at all times. Can we trust God 1. in our streights? When the
Fig Tree does not flourish; When our earthly Crutches are broken; Can we now
lean upon Gods Promise? When the Pipes are cut off that use to bring us
Comfort, can we live upon God, in whom are all our fresh Springs? When we have
no Bread to eat but the Bread of Carefulness, Ezekiel. 19 8. When we have no
Waters to drink unless Tears, Psalm. 80.5. Thou give them tears to drink in
great measure; Can we now trust in Gods Providence, to make supply for us? A
good Christian believes, that if God feed the Ravens, he will feed his
Children: He lives upon Gods All Sufficiency, not only for Grace, but Food: He
believes if God will give him Heaven, he will daily Bread: He trusts Gods Bond,
Psalm. 37.3. Verily thou shall be fed. 2. Can we trust God in our Fears? Fear is
the Ague of the Soul: When Adversaries begin to grow high, can we now display
the Banner of Faith? Psalm. 56.3. What time I am afraid I will trust in thee.
Faith cures the Trembling at the Heart: Faith gets above Fear, as the Oil swims
above the Water. This is to trust in God, and it is to make him to be a God to
us.

7. To make God to be a God to us, is to love him; in the Godly, Fear and Love
Kiss each other.

8. To make him a God to us, is to obey him: But I forbear to speak of these,
because I shall be large upon them in the Second Commandment; Showing Mercy
unto Thousands of them that love me and keep my Commandments.

Quest. 2. Why we must cleave to the Lord as our God?

Resp. 1. From the Equity of it: It is but equal we should cleave to him, as
our God, from whom we receive our Being: Who can have a better Right to us,
than he that gives us our Breath, Psalm. 100.3. for it is he that has made us,
and not we our selves. It is unequal, yea ungrateful, to give away our Love or
Worship to any but God.

2. From the Utility: If we cleave to the Lord as our God, then 1. he well
Bless us, Psalm. 67.6. God even our own God will bless us. He will bless us
first in our Estate, Deuteronomy. 28.4, 5. Blessed shall be the fruit of thy ground,
Blessed shall be thy Basket and thy Store: We shall not only have our Sack full
of Corn, but it shall be Blessed: Here is Money in the mouth of the Sack. 2. He
will bless us with Peace, Psalm. 29.11. The Lord will bless his people with
Peace: Outward Peace, which is the Nurse of Plenty, Psalm. 147.14. He makes
peace in thy borders: Inward Peace, a smiling Conscience: This is sweeter than
the dropping Honey. 2. God will turn all Evils to our Good, Romans 8.28. He will
make a Treakle of Poison. Ioseph's Imprisonment was a means for his
Advancement, Genesis 50.20. Out of the bitterest Drug, God will distill his Glory
and our Salvation. In short, God will be our guide to Death, our Comfort in
Death, our Reward after Death. So then the Utility of it may make us cleave to
the Lord as our God, Psalm. 144.15. Happy is that People who have the Lord for
their God.

3. From the Necessity: 1. If God be not our God, he will Curse our Blessings,
Mal. 2.2. And Gods Curse Blasts wherever it comes. 2. If God be not our God,
we have none to help us in Misery: Will God help his Enemies? Will he assist
them who disclaim him? 3. If we do not make God to be our God, he will make
himself to be our Judge: And if he Condemns, there is no appealing to a Higher
Court. So that there is a Necessity of having God for our God, unless we intend
to be eternally espoused to Misery.

Use 1. If we must have one God, and the Lord Jehovah for our God, it condemns
the Atheist who has no God, Psalm. 14.1. The Fool has said in his Heart there
is no God. There is no God he believes in or worships: Such Atheists were
Diagoras and Theodorus: When Seneca did reprove Nero for his Impieties; Says
Nero, Do thou think I believe there is any God, when I do such things? The
Duke of Silecia was so infatuated, that he affirmed, Neque inferos, neque
superos esse. That there was neither God nor Devil. We may see God in the works
of his Fingers: The Creation is a great Volume, in which we may read a
Godhead; and he must needs put out his own Eyes, that denies a God. Aristotle,
though an Heathen, did not only acknowledge God, when he cried out, Thou Being
of Beings, have Mercy on me; But he thought he that did not confess a Deity,
was not worthy to live. They who will not believe a God, shall feel him, Heb.
10.31. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

Use 2. It condemns Christians who profess to own God for their God, yet they
do not live as if he were their God. 1. They do not believe in him as a God
When they look upon their Sins, they are apt to say, Can God Pardon? When they
look upon their Wants, Can God provide? Can he prepare a Table in the
Wilderness? 2. They do not love him as a God: They do not give him the Cream of
their Love, but are apt to love other things more than God: They say they love
God, but will part with nothing for him. 3. They do not worship him as a God:
They do not give him that Reverence, nor pray with that Devotion, as if they
were praying to a God. How dead are their Hearts? If not dead in Sin, yet dead
in Duty: It Is as if praying to a God that has Eyes and sees not; Ears and
hears not: In hearing the Word, how much Distraction, what regardless Hearts
have many? they are thinking of their Shop and Drugs. Would a King take it well
at our hands, if when he is speaking to us, we should be playing with a
Feather? When God is speaking to us in his Word, and our Hearts are taken up
with Thoughts about the World, is not this playing with a Feather? O how may
this humble most of us, we do not make God to be a God to us: We do not believe
in him, love him, worship him as a God. Many Heathens have worshipped their
False ^ods with more Seriousness and Devotion, than some Christians do the true
God. O let us chide our selves: Did I say Chide? let us Abhor our selves for
our Deadness and Formality in Religion, how we have professed God, yet we have
not worshipped him as a God. So much for the first, We must have God for our
God. I should come to the Second, We must have no other God.

Of the Commandments.
Exodus 20.3. Thou shall have no other Gods before me.


2. THat we must have no other God: Thou shall have no other God before me.

Quest. What is meant by this word, Before me?

Resp. That is, before my Face, In conspectu m^o, in my sight, Deuteronomy. 27.15.
Cursed be he that makes a Graven Image, and puts it in a secret place. Some
would not bow to the Idol that others might see, but they would secretly bow to
it: But though this was out of Man's sight, it was not out of Gods sight: Cursed
therefore (says God) be he who puts the Image in a secret place. Thou shall
have no other Gods. 1. There is really no other God. 2. We must have no other.

1. There is really no other God. The Valentinians held there were two Gods;
the Polythites that there were many. The Persians worshipped the Sun, the
Egyptians the Ox and Elephant, the Grecians Jupiter: But there is no other than
the True God, Deuteronomy. 4.39. Know therefore this day, and consider it in thy
heart, that the Lord is God in Heaven above, and upon the Earth beneath; there
is no other. For there is but one first Cause, that has its Being of it self,
and on which all other Beings depend: As in the Heavens the primum mobile moves
all the other Orbs. So God is the Great Mover, he gives Life and Motion to
every thing existent.

2. There is but one Omnipotent Power. If there be two Omnipotents, then we
must always suppose a Contest between these two; that which one would do, the
other Power being equal would oppose, and so all things would be brought into a
Confusion. If a Ship should have two Pilots of equal Power, one would be ever
Crossing the other; when one would Sail, the other would cast Anchor: Here were
a Confusion, and the Ship must needs perish. The Order and Harmony in the
World, the constant and uniform Government of all things, is a clear Argument,
that there is but one Omnipotent, one God that rules all, Isa. 44 6. I am the
first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no God.

2. We must have no other God. Thou shall have no other Gods before me: This
Commandment forbids, 1. Serving a False God, and not the True, Ier. 2.27.
Saying to a stock, Thou art my Father; and to a stone, Thou have brought me
forth: Or 2. Joining a False God with a True, 2 Kings 17.33. They feared the
Lord, and served their own Gods. Both these are forbidden in the Commandment;
we must adhere to the true God, and no other: God is a jealous God, and he will
endure no corrival: A Wife cannot lawfully have two Husbands at once; nor may
we have two Gods, Exodus 34.14. Thou shall worship no other God, for the Lord is
a jealous God, Psalm. 16.4. Their Sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten after
another God. The Lord interprets it a forsaking of him* to espouse any other
God, Judges 2.12. They forsook the Lord and followed other Gods. God would not
have his People so much as make mention of Idol Gods, Exodus 23.13. Make no
mention of the Names of other Gods, neither let it be heard out of thy mouth.
God looks upon it as a breaking of the Marriage Covenant, to go after other
Gods. Therefore when Israel committed Idolatry with the golden Calf, God
disclaims his Interest in them, Exodus 32.7. Thy People have corrupted
themselves. Before, God called Israel his People; but when they went after
other Gods, Now, says the Lord to Moses, they are no more my People but thy
People, Hosea 2.2. Plead with her Mother, Plead, for she is not my Wife; she
does not keep Faith with me; she has stained her self with Idols, therefore I
will divorce her, she is not my Wife. To go after other Gods, is that God
cannot bear, it makes the Fury rise up in his Face, Deuteronomy. 13 6, 8, 9. If thy
Brother, or thy Son, or the Wife of thy Bosom, or thy Friend, which is as thy
own Soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other Gods. Thou
shall not consent unto him, neither shall thy eye pity him. But thou shall
surely kill him; thy hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and
afterward the hand of all the People.

Quest. But what is it to have other Gods besides the True God? I fear upon
search we have more Idolaters among us than we are aware of.

Resp. To trust in any thing more than God, is to make it a God. 1. If we trust
in our Riches, then we make Riches our God: We may take Comfort, not put
Confidence in them: It is a foolish thing to trust in them. 1. They are
deceitful Riches, Matt. 13.22. and it is foolish to trust to that which will
deceive us. (...). Chrysostom. 1. They have no solid Consistency, they are like
Lanskips or golden Dreams, which leave the Soul empty when it awakes and comes
to it self. 2. They are not what they promise; they promise to satisfy our
Desires, and they increase them: They promise to stay with us, and they take
Wings. 2. They are hurtful, Eccles. 5.13. Riches kept for the Owners thereof to
their hurt. It is Foolish to trust to that which will hurt one: Who would take
hold of the edge of a Razor to help him? They are often Fuel for Pride and Lust,
Ezekiel. 28.5. Ier. 5.7. So that it is Folly to trust in our Riches; but some do,
and so make Money their God, Prove. 10.15. The rich Man's Wealth is his strong
Tower. He makes the Wedge of Gold his Hope, Job 31.24. God made Man of the Dust
of the Earth, and Man makes a God of the Dust of the Earth. Money is his
Creator, Redeemer, Comforter. His Creator: If he has Money, now he thinks he is
made. His Redemer: If he be in danger he trusts to his Money to redeem him. His
Comforter: If he be Sad, Money is the golden Harp to drive away the evil Spirit.
Thus by trusting in Money we make it a God.

2. If we trust in the Arm of Flesh, we make it a God, Ier. 17.5. Cursed be Man
that trusts in Man, and makes flesh his arm. The Syrians trusted in their
Army, which was so Numerous, that it filled the Country, 1 Kings 20.27. but
this arm of Flesh withered, ver. 29. What we make our Trust, God makes our
Shame: The Sheep run to the Hedges for shelter, and they lose their Wool: We
have run to second Causes to help us, and we have lost much of our golden
Fleece: They have not only been Reeds to fail us, but Thorns to prick us: We
have broken our Parliament-Crutches by leaning too hard upon them.

3. If we trust in our Wisdom, we make it a God, Ier. 9.23. Let not the wise
man glory in his wisdom. Glorying is the highth of Confidence; many a Man does
make an Idol of his Wit and Parts: He Deifies himself: But how often does God
take the Wi^e in their own Craftiness, Job 5.13. Achitophel had a great Wit,
his Council was as the Oracle of God, but his Wit brought him to the Halter, 2 Samuel 17.23.

4. If we trust in our Civility, we make it a God: Many trust to this, none can
charge them with gross Sin. Civility is but Nature refined and cultivated; a
Man may be washed and not changed: His Life may be civil, yet there may be some
reigning Sin in his Heart: The Pharisee could say, I am no Adulterer, Luke
18.11. but he could not say, I am not proud: To trust to Civility, is to trust
to a Spiders Web.

5. If we trust to our Duties to save us, we make them a God, Isa. 64.6. Our
Righteousnesses are as filthy rags: They are Fly-blown with Sin: Put Gold in
the Fire and there comes out much Dross: Our most golden Duties are mixed with
Infirmity: We are apt either to neglect Duty or idolize it. Use Duty, but do
not trust to it, for then you make it a God. Trust not to your Praying, and
Hearing; these are the means of Salvation, but they are not Saviors. If you
make Duties Bladders to trust to, you may sink to Hell with these Bladders.

6. If we trust in our Grace, we make a God of it. Grace is but a Creature; if
we trust in it, we make it an Idol. Grace is imperfect, we cannot trust to that
to save us which is imperfect, Psalm 26.1. I have walked in my Integrity: I have
trusted also in the Lord. David did walk in his Integrity, but did not trust in
his Integrity. I have trusted in the Lord. If we trust in our Graces, we make a
Christ of them. They are good Graces but bad Christ's. To love any thing more
than God, is to make it a God.

1. If we love our Estate more than God, then we make it a God. The young Man
in the Gospel loved his Gold better than his Savior; the World lay nearer his
Heart than Christ, Matt. 19.22. Fulgens hoc aurum praestringit oculos, Var.
Hence it is the covetous Man is called an Idolater, Ephesians. 5.5. Why so? Because
he loves his Estate more than God, and so he makes it his God: Though he does
not bow down to an Idol, yet he worships the Graven Image in his Coins; he is
an Idolater: That which has most of the Heart, that we make a God.

2. If we love our Pleasures more than God, we make a God of Pleasure, 2 Timothy
3.4. (...). Lovers of Pleasure more than Lovers of God. Many let loose the
Reins, and give themselves up to all manner of sensual Delights, they idolize
Pleasure, Job 21.12, 13. They take the Timbrel and the Harp, and rejoice at the
sound of the Organ. They spend their days in mirth. I have read of a place in
Africa, where the People spend all their time in Dancing, and making Merry: And
have not we many, who make a God of Pleasure; who spend their time in going to
Plays, and visiting Stews, as if God had made them like the Leviathan to play
in the Water, Psalm. 104.26. In the Country of Sardinia there is an Herb like
Balm, that if one eat too much of it, he well die laughing. Such an Herb is
Pleasure; if one seeds immoderately on it, he will go laughing to Hell. Such as
make a God of Pleasure, let them read but two Scriptures, Eccl. 7.4. The Heart
of Fools is in the House of Mirth. And Rev. 18.7. How much she has lived
Deliciously, so much Torment give her. Sugar laid in a damp p^ace turns to
Water: So all the sugared Joys and Pleasures of Sinners, will turn to the Water
of Tears at last.

3. If we love our Belly more than God, we make a God of it, Phil. 3.19. Whose
God is their Belly. Clemens Alexandrinus writes of a Fish that has its Heart
in its Belly: An Emblem of Epicures, their Heart is in their Belly, they do
Sacrificare lari, their Belly is their God, and to this God they pour
Drink Offerings: The Lord allows what is fitting for the Recruit of Nature,
Deuteronomy. 11.15. I will send grass, that thou may eat and be full. But to mind
nothing but the indulging the Appetite is Idolatry, Whose God is their Belly.
What pity is it, that the Soul, that Princely part, which sways the Scepter of
Reason, and is akin to Angels, should be enslaved to the Brutish part!

4. If we love a Child more than God, we make a God of it. How many are guilty
in this kind! They think more of their Children, and delight more in them, than
in God: They grieve more for the loss of their Firstborn, than for the loss of
their first Love. This is to make an Idol of a Child, and to set it in Gods
room. Thus God is often provoked to take away our Children: If we love the Jewel
more than him that gave it, God will take away the Jewel, that our love may
return to him again.

Use 1. It Reproaches such as have other Gods, and so renounce the true God. 1.
Such as set up Idols, Ier. 2.28. According to the number of thy Cities, are thy
Gods, O Israel. Hos. 12.11. Their Altars are as heaps in the Furrows of the
Field. 2. Such as seek to Familiar Spirits. This is a Sin condemned by the Law
of God, Deuteronomy. 18.11. There shall not be found among you, any that consult with
Familiar Spirits. It is ordinary if People have lost any of their Goods, they
send to Wizards and Soothsayers, to know how they may come by their Goods
again. What is this but for People to make a God of the Devil, by consulting
with him, and putting their Trust in him? What! because you have lost your
Goods, will you lose your Souls too? 2 Kings 1.6. So is it not because you
think there is not a God in Heaven, that you ask Council of the Devil? If any
be guilty, be humbled.

Use 2. It sounds a Retreat in our Ears; let it call us off from the Idolizing
any Creature, and renouncing other Gods: Let us cleave to the true God, and his
Service: If we go away from God, we know not where to mend our selves.

1. It is honorable serving of the true God: Servire Deo est regnare: It is
more Honor to serve God, than to have Kings serve us. 2. Serving the true God
is Delightful, Isa. 56.7. I will make them joyful in my House of Prayer. God
often displays the Banner of his Love in an Ordinance, and pours in the Oil of
Gladness into the Heart. All Gods Ways are Pleasantness, his Paths are strowed
with Roses, Prove. 3.17. 3. Serving the true God is beneficial; they have great
Vails here, the hidden Manna, inward Peace, and a great Reward to come. They
that serve God, shall have a Kingdom when they dye, Luke 12.32. and shall wear
a Crown made of the Flowers of Paradise, 1 Pet. 5.4. To serve the true God is
our true Interest. God has twisted his Glory and our Salvation together. He
bids us believe; and why? That we may be saved. Therefore renouncing all
others, let us cleave to the true God.

2. You have covenanted to serve the true Jehovah, renouncing all others. When
one has entered into Covenant with his Master, and the Indentures are drawn and
sealed, then he cannot go back, but must serve out his time. We have covenanted
in Baptism to take the Lord for our God, renouncing all others; And renewed
this Covenant in the Lord's Supper, and shall we not keep our Solemn Vow and
Covenant? We cannot go away from God without the highest Perjury, Heb. 10.38.
(...). If any Man draw back, as a Soldier that steals away from his Colors, my
Soul shall have no pleasure. I will pour Viols of wrath on him, make my Arrows
drunk with blood. Miosis.


3. None ever had cause to repent of cleaving to God and his Service: Some have
repented that they have made a God of the World. Cardinal Woolsey said, Had I
served God as Faithfully as I have served my King, he would not have left me
thus. None ever complained of serving God, it was both their Comfort and Crown
on Deathbed.

Of the Commandments.
Exodus 20.4. Thou shall not make unto thee any Graven Image, etc.


IN the First Commandment is forbidden the worshipping a False God, in this,
the worshipping the true God in a false manner.

1. Thou shall not make unto thee any Graven Image; this forbids not the making
an Image for Civil use, Mat. 22.20. Whose is this Image and Superscription?
they say unto him Caesar's. But the Commandment forbids setting up an Image for
Religious Use or Worship.

2. Nor the likeness of any thing, etc. All Ideas, Pourtraitures, Shapes,
Images of God, whether by Effigies or Pictures, are here forbidden. Deuteronomy. 4.15.
Take heed lest ye corrupt your Selves, and make the Similitude of any Figure.
God is to be adored in the heart, not painted to the Eye.

3. Thou shall not bow down to them. The intent of making Images and Pictures,
is to worship them. No sooner was Nebuchadnezzars Golden Image set up, but all
the People fell down and worshipped it, Dan. 3.7. Therefore God forbids the
prostrating our selves before an Idol: So then the thing prohibited in this
Commandment is Image Worship. To set up an Image to represent God, is a
debasing of the Deity, it is below God. If one should make the Images of Snakes
or Spiders, saying, he did it to represent his Prince, would not the Prince
take this in high disdain? What greater disparagement to God, than to represent
the infinite God by that which is finite; the Living God, by that which is
without Life, and the Maker of all, by a thing which is made?

1. To make a true Image of God is impossible. God is a Spiritual Essence, John
4.24. And being a Spirit he is invisible, Deuteronomy. 4.15. Ye saw no Similitude on
the Day the Lord spoke with you out of the midst of the Fire. How can any paint
the Deity? Can they make an Image of that which they never saw? Quod invisibile
est, pingi non potest, Ambr. Ye saw no Similitude. It is impossible to make a
Picture of the Soul, or to paint the Angels, because they are of a Spiritual
Nature; much less then can we paint God by an Image, who is an Infinite,
Increate Spirit.

2. To worship God by an Image, is both absurd and unlawful.

I. It is absurd and irrational; for First, The Workman is better than the
Work, Heb. 3.3. He who builds the House, has more Honor than the House; if
the Workman be better than the Work, and none bows to the Workman, how absurd
then is it to bow to the work of his Hands? Secondly, Is it not an absurd thing
to bow down to the Kings Picture, when the King himself is present? So to bow
down to an image of God, when God himself is every where present.

II. It is unlawful to worship God by an Image; for First, It is against the
Homily of the Church; it runs thus, The Images of God, our Savior, the Virgin
Mary, are of all others most dangerous, therefore the greatest care ought to be
had that they stand not in Temples and Churches. So that Image Worship is
contrary to our own Homilies, and does affront the authority of the Church of
England. Secondly, Image Worship is expressly against the Letter of Scripture,
Lev. 26.1. Ye shall make no Graven Image, neither shall ye set up any Image of
Stone to bow down to it. Deuteronomy. 16.22. Neither shall thou set up any Image which
the Lord thy God hates. Psalm. 97.7. Confounded be all they that serve Graven
Images. Do we think to please God by doing that which is contrary to his Mind,
and which he has expressly forbidden? Thirdly, Image Worship is against the
practice of the Saints of old. Josiah that Renowned King, destroyed the Groves
and Images, 2 Kin. 23.24. Constantine abrogated the Images set up in Temples.
The Christians destroyed Images at Basil, Zurick, Bohemia; when the Roman
Emperors would have thrust Images upon them, they chose rather to dye than
deflour their Virgin Profession by Idolatry. They refused to admit any Painter
or Carver into their Society, because they would not have any Carved Statue, or
Image of God: When Seraphion bowed to an Idol, the Christians excommunicated
him, and delivered him up to Satan.

Use 1. It reproves and condemns the Church of Rome, who from the Alpha of
their Religion, to the Omega, are wholly Idolatrous; they make Images of God
the Father, painting him in their Church-Windows as an Old Man, and an Image of
Christ in the Crucifix. And because it is against the Letter of this
Commandment, therefore they sacrilegiously blot out the Second Commandment out
of their Catechises, dividing the Tenth Commandment into Two. Now this
Image Worship must needs be very Impious and Blasphemous, because it is a
giving that (...), or Religious Worship to the Creature, which is only due to
God. It is vain for Papists to say they give God the worship of the Heart, and
the Image only the worship of the Body; for the worship of the Body is due to
God, as well as the worship of the Heart, and to give an outward Veneration to
an Image, is to give that Adoration to a Creature, which only belongs to God.
Isa. 42.8. My Glory will I not give to another.

Obj. 1. But the Papists say, they do not worship the Image, only make use of
it as a Medium, they worship God by it; Ne imagini quidem Christi in quantum
est Lignum sculptum, ulla debetur reverentia, Aquinas.

Resp. 1. Where has God bid them worship him by an Effigies or Spirit? Isa.
1.12. Who has required this at your Hands? The Papists cannot say so much as
the Devil, Scriptum est, it is written.

2. The Heathens may bring the same Argument for their gross Idolatry, as the
Papists do for their Image Worship; who of the Heathens were so simple, as to
think Gold and Silver, or the Figure of an Ox or Elephant, were God? They were
only Emblems and Hieroglyphics to represent him; they did worship the
invisible God, by such visible things. To worship God by an Image, God takes as
done to the Image itself.

Obj. 2. But say the Papists, Images are Laymens Books, and they are good to
put us in mind of God. One of the Popish Councils affirmed that we might learn
more by an Image, than by long study of the Scriptures.

Resp. Hab. 2.18. What profits the Graven Image, the Molten Image, and a
Teacher of Lies? Is an Image a Lay-mans Book? See then what Lessons this Book
teaches, it teaches Lies, it represents God in a visible shape, who is
invisible. For the Papists to say they make use of an Image, to put them in
mind of God, is as if a Woman should say she keeps company with another Man, to
put her in mind of her Husband.

Obj. 3. But did not Moses make the Image of a Brazen Serpent, why then may not
Images be set up?

Resp. That was done by Gods special command, Number. 21.8. Make thee a Brazen
Serpent; and there was a special use of it, both Literal and Spiritual; but
what, does the setting up this Image of the Brazen Serpent justify the setting
up of Images in Churches? What, because Moses did make an Image by Gods
appointment, may we therefore set up an Image of our own Devising? Because
Moses made an Image to heal them that were stung, is it lawful therefore to set
up Images in Churches, to sting them that are whole? This does not at all
follow. Nay, that very brazen Serpent which God himself commanded to be set up,
when Israel did look upon it with too much Reverence, and began to burn Incense
to it, Hezekiah defaced that Image, and called it Nehushtan, and God commended
him for doing so, 2 Kings 18.4.

Obj. 4. But is not God represented as having Hands and Eyes and Ears? Why then
may we not make an Image to represent him by, and help our Devotion?

Resp. Though God is pleased to stoop to our weak Capacities, and set himself
out in Scripture by Eyes, to signify his Omnisciency, and Hands, to signify
his Power, yet it is very absurd from Metaphors and Figurative Expressions, to
bring an Argument for Images and Pictures; for by that Rule God may be pictured
by the Sun and the Element of Fire, and by a Rock, for God is set forth by
these Metaphors in Scripture; and sure the Papists themselves would not like to
have such Images made of God.

Quest. 1. If it be not lawful to make the Image of God the Father, yet may we
not make an Image of Christ, who took upon him the nature of Man?

Resp. No. Epiphanius seeing an Image of Christ hanging in a Church, brake it
in Pieces; it is Christ's Godhead, united to his Manhood, that makes him to be
Christ; therefore to Picture his Manhood, when we cannot Picture his Godhead,
is a Sin, because we make him to be but half Christ; we separate what God has
joined, we leave out that which is the chief thing, which makes him to be
Christ.

Quest. 2. But how then shall we conceive of God aright, if we may make no
Image or Resemblance of him?

Resp. We must conceive of God Spiritually, viz. 1. In his Attributes, his
Holiness, Justice, Goodness, which are the Beams by which his Divine Nature
shines forth. 2. We must conceive of him as he is in Christ. Christ is the
Image of the Invisible God, Col. 1.15. As in the Wax we see the print of the
Seal. Set the Eyes of your Faith on Christ-God-Man, John 14.9. He that has
seen me, has seen the Father.

Use 2. Take heed of Idolatry, viz. Image Worship; our Nature is prone to this
Sin, as dry Wood to take Fire; and indeed what needs so many Words in the
Commandment, Thou shall not make any Graven Image, or the likeness of any
thing, in Heaven, Earth, Water, Sun, Moon, Stars, Male, Female, Fish; Thou
shall not bow down to them; I say, what needed so many Words, but to show how
subject we are to this sin of false Worship? It concerns us therefore to resist
this sin. Where the Tide is apt to run with greater force, there we had need
make the Banks higher and stronger; the Plague of Idolatry is very infectious,
Psalm. 106.35, 36. They were mingled among the Heathens, and served their Idols.
It is my Advice to you, to avoid all occasions of this Sin.

1. Come not into the Company of Idolatrous Papists; dare not to live under the
same Roof with them: You run into the Devils Mouth. John the Divine would not
be in the Bath where Cerinthus the Heretic was.

2. Go not into their Chapels to see their Crucifixes or hear Mass: As the
looking on an Harlot draws to Adultery, so the looking on the Popish gilded
Picture, may draw to Idolatry. Some care not though they go and see their
Idol-worship; indeed a Vagrant that has nothing to lose, cares not though he
goes among Thieves. Such as have no goodness in them, care not into what
Idolatrous Places they come, or what Temptations they cast themselves upon; but
you who have a Treasure about you, good Principles, take heed the Popish
Priests do not rob you of your Principles, and defile you with their Images.

3. Dare not to join in Marriage with Image-worshippers. Solomon though a Man
of Wisdom, yet his Idolatrous Wives drew away his Heart from God; the People of
Israel entered into an Oath and Curse, that they would not give their Daughters
in Marriage to the Idolaters, Nehem. 10.30. For a Protestant and Papist to
Marry, is to be unequally yoaked, 2 Cor. 6.14. and there is more danger the
Papist will corrupt the Protestant, than hope the Protestant will convert the
Papist. Mingle Wine and Vinegar, the Vinegar will sooner sour the Wine, than
the Wine will sweeten the Vinegar.

4. Avoid Superstition, which is a Bridge leads over to Rome. Superstition is
the bringing in any Ceremony, Fancy or Innovation into Gods worship which he
never appointed. This is very provoking to God, because it reflects much upon
his Honor, as if he were not wise enough to appoint the manner of his own
Worship. God hates all strange Fire to be offered in his Temple, Lev. 10.1. A
Ceremony may in time bring to a Crucifix. They who contend for the Cross in
Baptism, why may they not as well have the Oil, Salt and Cream, the one being
as ancient as the other? Such as are for Altar-worship, they who will bow to
the East, may in time bow to the Host. Take heed of all occasions of Idolatry.
Idolatry is Devil-worship, Psalm. 106.37. And if you search through the whole
Bible, there is no one Sin that God has more followed with Plagues than
Idolatry; the Jews have a Saying, that in every Evil which befalls them, there
is uncia aurei vituli, an Ounce of the Golden Calf in it. Hell is a Place for
Idolaters, Rev. 22.15. For without are Idolaters. Synesius calls the Devil
(...), a Rejoycer at Idols, because Image-worshippers help to fill Hell. That
you may be preserved from Idolatry and Image Worship,

1. Get good Principles, that you may be able to oppose the Gain-sayer. Whence
does the Popish Religion get ground? not from the goodness of their cause, but
from the ignorance of the People.

2. Get love to God. The Wife that loves her Husband is safe from the
Adulterer; and the Soul that loves Christ is safe from the Idolater.

3. Pray that God will keep you. Though it is true, there is nothing in an
Image to tempt; for if we pray to an Image, it cannot hear, and if we pray to
God by an Image, he will not hear; I say there is nothing to tempt; yet we know
not our own Hearts, or how soon we may be drawn to Vanity, if God leave us;
therefore pray that you be not enticed to false Worship, or receive the Mark of
the Beast in your right hand or Forehead: Pray, Psalm. 119.117. Hold thou me up,
and I shall be safe. Lord, let me neither mistake my way for want of Light, or
leave the true way for want of Courage.

2. Let us Bless God who has given us the Knowledge of his Truth: That we have
tasted the Honey of his Word, and our Eyes are enlightened. Bless him that he
has shown us the Pattern of his House; the right Mode of Worship: That he has
discovered to us the Forgery and Blasphemy of the Romish Religion. Let us pray,
that God will preserve pure Ordinances and powerful Preaching among us.
Idolatry came in at first by the want of good Preaching. Then the People began
to have golden Images when they had wooden Priests.

Of the Ten Commandments.
Exodus 20.5. For I the Lord thy God, am a jealous God, visiting the Iniquity of
the Fathers upon the Children unto the third and fourth Generation, of them
that hate me.


1. I The Lord thy God, am a jealous God.] The first reason why Israel must not
worship graven Images, is because the Lord is a jealous God, Exodus 34.14 The
Lord whose name is Jehovah is a jealous God. Jealousy is taken in a good
sense, and so God is jealous for his People. 2. In a bad Sense, and so God is
jealous of his People.

1. In a good Sense, and so God is jealous for his People, Zech. 1.14. Thus
says the Lord, I am jealous for Jerusalem, and for Zion, with a great
jealousy. God has a dear Affection to his People, they are his Hephsibah or
Delight, Isa. 62.4. The Apple of his Eye, Zech. 2.8. To express how dear they
are to him, and how tender he is of them, Nihil charius pupilla oculi, Drusius.
They are his Spouse, adorned with the Jewels of Grace: They lie near to his
Heart. He is jealous for his Spouse, therefore will be avenged on them who go
to wrong her, Isa. 42.13. The Lord shall stir up jealousy like a man of war;
he shall roar, he shall prevail against his enemies. What is done to the
Saints, God takes as done to himself, 2 Kings 19.22. and the Lord will undo all
them that afflict Sion, Zeph. 3.19. I will undo all that afflict thee. 2.
Jealousy is taken in a bad Sense, and so God is jealous of his People: And so
it is taken in this Commandment. I the Lord thy God am a jealous God. I am
jealous lest you should go after false Gods, or worship the true God in a false
manner; lest you defile your Virgin Profession by Images. God will have his
Spouse keep close to him, and not go after other Lovers, Hos. 3.3. Thou shall
not be for another man. God cannot bear a Corrival. Our conjugal Love, viz. a
Love joined with Adoration, and Worship, must be given only to God.

Use 1. Let us give God no just cause to be jealous. A good Wife will be so
Discreet and Chaste, as to give her Husband no just occasion of Jealousy. Let
us avoid all Sin, especially this Sin of Idolatry or Image Worship: It is
heinous, after we have entered into a Marriage-Covenant with God, now to
prostitute our selves to an Image. Idolatry is Spiritual Adultery, and God is a
jealous God, he will avenge it: Image Worship makes God abhor a People, Psalm.
78.58. They moved him to jealousy with their graven Images. When God heard
this, he was Wroth, and greatly abhorred Israel. Image Worship enrageth God,
Prove. 6.34. Jealousy is the Rage of a man: It makes God divorce a People,
Exodus 32.7. Thy People, lo-ammi, Hos. 2.2. Plead with your Mother, plead, for
she is not my Wife, Cant. 8.6. Jealousy is cruel as the grave. As the Grave
devours Men's Bodies, so God will devour Image-worshippers:

Use 2. If God be a jealous God, let it be a word to such whose Friends are
Popish Idolaters, and they are hated by their Friends, because they are of a
different Religion, and perhaps they cut off their Maintenance from them. O
remember God is a jealous God, better move your Parents to hatred, than move
God to jealousy: Their Anger cannot do you so much hurt as Gods: If they will
not provide for you, God will, Psalm. 27.10. When my Father and Mother forsake
me, then the Lord will take me up.

2. The second Reason against Image Worship, Visiting the Iniquity of the
Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth Generation.] There is a
Twofold Visiting. 1. There is Gods visiting in Mercy, Genesis 50.25. God will
surely visit you. That is, he will bring you into the Land of Canaan, the Type
of Heaven. Thus God has visited us with the Sunbeams of his Favor: He has
made us swim in a Sea of Mercy: This is an happy Visitation. 2. There is Gods
visiting in Anger, Ier. 5.9. Shall I not visit for these things? That is, Gods
visiting with the Rod; and Isa. 10.3. What will ye do in the day of Visitation?
That is, in the day when God shall visit with his Judgments. Thus Gods visiting
is taken here, in this Commandment, visiting Iniquity, that is, punishing
Iniquity. Observe here three things.

Observe. 1. That Sin makes God visit: Visiting Iniquity. Sin is the cause why
God visits with Sickness, Poverty, Psalm. 89.31, 32. If they break my
Commandments: Then will I visit their transgression with the rod. Sin twists
the Cords which pinch us: Sin creates all our Troubles: It is the Gaul in our
Cup, and the Gravel in our Bread: Flagitium and flagellum sunt sicut acus and
filum. Sin is the Trojan Horse: The Phaeton that sets all on Fire: It is the
Womb of our Sorrows, and Grave of our Comforts. God visits for Sin.

Observe. 2. One special sin God visits for, is Idolatry and Image Worship.
Visiting the iniquity of the Fathers. Most of Gods invenomed Arrows have been
shot among Idolaters, Ier. 7.12. Go now unto my place which was in Shiloh,
where I set my name at the first, and see what I did to it. God for Isreal's
Idolatry, suffered their Army to be routed, their Priests slain, the Ark taken
Captive, and we never read that the Ark returned to Shiloh any more. Jerusalem
was the most Famous Metropolis of the World: There was the Temple, Psalm. 122.4.
Whither the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the Lord. Yet for their high places and
Images, their City was besieged and taken by the Chaldean Forces, 2 Kings 25.4.
When Images were set up in Constantinople, the chief Seat of the Eastern
Empire, this City which was in the eye of the World impregnable, was taken by
the Turks, and many cruelly Massacred. Then the Turks, in their Triumphs,
reproached the Idolatrous Christians, causing an Image or Crucifix to be
carried through the Streets in Contempt, and throwing Dirt upon it, cried, This
is the God of the Christians: Here was Gods Visitation for their Idolatry. God
has set special marks of his Wrath upon Idolaters. At a place called Epoletium
there perished by an Earthquake 350 Persons, while they were offering
Sacrifice to Idols. Idolatry has brought Misery upon the Eastern Churches, it
removed the golden Candlesticks of Asia. This Iniquity God visits for.

Observe 3. Idolatrous Persons are Enemies not only to their own Souls, but to
their Children: Visiting the Iniquity of the Fathers upon their Children. As an
Idolatrous Father intails his Land of Inheritance, so he intails Gods Anger and
Curse upon them. A jealous Husband finding his Wife has stained her Integrity,
may justly cast off her and her Children too, because they are none of his. If
the Father be a Traitor to his Prince, no wonder if all the Children suffer.
God may visit the Iniquity of Image-worshippers upon their Children.

Quest But is it not said, Every one shall dye for his own Sin? The Son shall
not bear the Iniquity of the Father? How then does God say, he will visit the
Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children?

Resp. Though the Son be not Damned for his Fathers Sin, yet he may be severely
punished, Job 21.19. God lays up his iniquity for his Children. That is, God
lays up the Punishment of his Iniquity for his Children; the Child smarts for
the Fathers Sin. Jeroboam thought to have established the Kingdom by Idolatrous
Worship, but it brought Ruin upon him and all his Posterity, 1 Kings 14.10.
Ahab's Idolatry wronged his Posterity, they lost the Kingdom and were all
Beheaded, 2 Kings 10.7. They took the Kings Sons, and slew seventy Persons.
There God visited the I^^quity of the Father upon the Children. As a Son
catches an Hereditary Disease from his Father, the Stone or Gout; so he
catches Misery from him, his Fathers Sin ruins him.

Use 1. If so, then how sad is it to be the Child of an Idolater? It had been
sad to have been one of Gehazi's Children, who had Leprosy entailed upon them,
2 Kings 5.27. The Leprosy of Naaman shall cleave to thee, and to thy Seed for
ever. So it is sad to be a Child of an Idolater, or Image-worshipper. His Seed
are exposed to Gods heavy Judgments in this Life: God visits the Iniquity of
the Fathers upon their Children. Methinks I hear God speak, as Isa. 14.21.
Prepare slaughter for his Children for the Iniquity of their Fathers.

Use 2. See what a Privilege it is to be the Children of good Parents: The
Parents are in Covenant with God, and God lays up Mercy for their Posterity,
Prove. 20.7. The just man walks in his Integrity, his Seed are blessed after
him. A Religious Parent does not procure Wrath, but helps to keep off Wrath
from his Child: He seasons his Child with Religious Principles; he prays down a
Blessing on his Child: He is a Lodestone, drawing his Child to Christ by good
Council and Example. O what a Privilege is it to be born of Godly Religious
Parents! St. Austin says, That his Mother Monica traveled with greater Care
and Pains for his new Birth, than for his Natural. Wicked Idolaters entail
Misery on their Posterity. God visits the Iniquity of the Fathers upon their
Children: But Religious Parents procure a Blessing upon their Children. God
reserves Mercy for their Posterity.

3. The third Reason against Image Worship, Of them that hate me.] This is a
Reason against Image Worship, it is hating God: The Papists who worship God by
an Image, hate God. Image Worship is a pretended Love to God, but God
interprets it an hating of him: Quae diligit alienum odit sponsum: She that
loves another Man, hates her own Husband. An Image-lover is a God-hater.
Idolaters are said to go a Whoring from God, Ezekiel. 34.15. How can they love
God? I shall show that Image-worshippers hate God, whatever love they pretend.

1. They who go contrary to Gods express Will, hate him. God says, You shall
not set up any Statue, Image, Picture, to represent me: These things I hate,
Deuteronomy. 16.22. Neither shall thou set up any Image which the Lord thy God hates.
Yet the Idolater will set up Images and worship them. This God looks upon as an
hating of him. How does that Child love his Father, who does all he can to
cross him?

2. They who shut the Truth out of Doors, hate God. Iephtha proves, that his
Brethren did hate him, because they labored to shut him out of his Fathers
House, Judges 11.7. The Idolater shuts the Truth out of doors: He blots out the
Second Commandment: He makes a shape of the invisible God: He brings a Lie into
Gods Worship, which is a clear proof he hates God.

3. Idolaters, though they love the false Image of God in a Picture, yet they
hate the true Image of God in a Believer. They pretend to Honor Christ in a
Crucifix, yet persecute Christ in his Members: These bate God.

Use 1. This may confute those who plead for Image-worshippers, they are very
devout People, they adore Images, they set up the Crucifix, kiss it, light
Candles to it: They love God. Nay, but who shall be judge of their Love? God
says, they hate him: They give Religious Adoration to a Creature: These hate
God, and God hates them: And they shall never live with God, whom he hates: He
will never lay such Vipers in his Bosom: Heaven is kept as Paradise, with a
Flaming Sword that they shall not enter: And Deuteronomy. 7.10. He repayeth them that
hate him, to their face. God will shoot all his murdering pieces among
Idolaters: All the Plagues and Curses in the Book of God shall befall the
Idolater: The Lord repays him that hates him to his Face.

Use 2. Let it exhort us all to fly from Romish Idolatry; let us not be among
God-haters, 1 John 5.21. Little Children keep your selves from Idols. As you
would keep your Bodies from Adultery, so keep your Souls from Idolatry. Take
heed of Images, they are Images of Jealousy to provoke God to Anger: They are
Damnable: You may as well perish by false Devotion, as by real Scandal: By
Image Worship, as Drunkenness and Whoredom. A Man may as well dye by Poison as
Pistol: We may as well go to Hell by drinking Poison in the Romish Cup of
Fornication, as by being Pistoll'd with gross scandalous Sins. To conclude, God
is a jealous God, no Corrival; he will visit the Iniquity of the Fathers upon
their Children: He will entail a Plague upon the Posterity of Idolaters. He
interprets Idolaters to be such as hate him. He that is an Image-lover, is a
God-hater: Therefore keep your selves pure from Romish Idolatry: If you love
your Souls, keep your selves from Idols.

Of the Commandments.
Exodus 20.6. Showing Mercy unto Thousands, etc.


THis is another Argument against Image Worship, because such as do not provoke
God with their Images, he is merciful to them, and will entail Mercy upon their
Posterity, Showing Mercy to Thousands.

1. Here is the golden Scepter of Gods Mercy displayed. 2. The Persons
interested in Gods Mercy, such as love him and keep his Commandments. 1. The
Golden Scepter of Gods Mercy displayed, showing Mercy to Thousands. The
Heathens thought they praised Jupiter enough, when they called him (...), Good
and Great. Both these Excellencies meet in God, Majesty and Mercy. Mercy is
that innate propensness in God to do good to Distressed Sinners. God showing
Mercy, makes his Godhead appear full of Glory. When Moses said to God, I
beseech thee show me thy Glory, I will (says God) show Mercy, Exodus 33.19. His
Mercy is his Glory. Mercy is the Name by which God will be known, Exodus 34.6.
The Lord passed by, and proclaimed, the Lord, the Lord God, Merciful and
Gracious. Mercy proceeds primarily and originally from God; he is called the
Father of Mercies, 2 Cor. 1.3. because he begets all those Mercies and Bowels
which are in the Creature. Our Mercies compared with Gods, are scarce so much
as the Drop to the Ocean.

Quest. What are the Qualifications?

Resp. 1. The Spring of Mercy which God shows, is free and spontaneous: To set
up Merit, is to destroy Mercy; nothing can deserve Mercy, or force it, we
cannot deserve Mercy, because of our Enmity, nor force it; we may force God to
punish us, not to love us, Hos. 14.4. I will love them freely. Every link in
the golden Chain of Salvation is wrought and interwoven with Free Grace.
Election is free, Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us in him, (...), according to the
good pleasure of his Will. Justification is free, Romans 3.24. Being justified
freely by his Grace. Say, not then, I am unworthy, for Mercy is free. If God
should show Mercy only to such as deserve it, he must show Mercy to none at all.

2. The Mercy God shows is Powerful. How Powerful is that Mercy which softens
an Heart of Stone? Mercy changed Mary Magdalens Heart, out of whom Seven Devils
were cast. She who was an Inflexible Adamant, Mercy made her a weeping
Penitent. Gods Mercy works sweetly, yet irresistibly; it allures, yet conquers.
The Law may terrify, Mercy does mollify. Of what Sovereign Power and Efficacy
is that Mercy which subdues the Pride and Enmity of the Heart, and beats off
those Chains of Sin in which the Soul is held!

3. The Mercy which God shows is superabundant, Exodus 34.6. Abundant in
Goodness, showing Mercy to Thousands. God visits Iniquity only to the Third and
Fourth Generation, Exodus 20.5. But he shows Mercy to a Thousand Generations.
The Lord has Treasures of Mercy lying by, therefore he is said to be Plenteous
in Mercy, Psalm. 86.5. And Rich in Mercy, Ephesians. 2.4. The Viol of God's Wrath
does but drop, but the Fountain of his Mercy runs. The Sun is not so full of
Light, as God is of Love.

God has Mercy, First, Of all Dimensions; he has Depth of Mercy, it reaches
as low as Sinners; and Height of Mercy, it reaches above the Clouds.

Secondly, God has Mercies of all Seasons; Mercies for the Night, he gives
Sleep, nay sometimes he gives a Song in the Night, Psalm. 42.8. And he has
Mercies for the Morning, Lam. 3.23. His Compassions are fresh every Morning.

Thirdly, God has Mercies for all sorts. Mercies for the Poor, 1 Samuel 2.8. He
raises the Poor out of the Dust. Mercies for the Prisoner, Psalm. 69.33. He
despises not his Prisoners. Mercies for the Dejected, Isa. 54.8. In a little
Wrath I hid my Face from thee, but with great Mercies will I gather thee. God
has old Mercies, Psalm. 25.6. Thy Mercies have been ever of old. And new
Mercies, Psalm. 40.3. He has put a new Song in my Mouth. Every time we draw our
Breath, we suck in Mercy; God has Mercies under Heaven, and those we taste of,
and Mercies in Heaven, and those we hope for: Thus Gods Mercy is superabundant.

4. The Mercy God shows is abiding, Psalm. 103.16. The Mercy of the Lord is from
Everlasting to Everlasting. Gods anger to his Children lasts but a while, Psalm.
103.9. but his Mercy lasts for ever. Gods Mercy is not like the Widows Oil,
which ran a while and then ceased, 2 Kings 4.6. Overflowing, Ever-flowing.
Gods Mercy as it is without Bounds, so without Bottom, Psalm. 136. His Mercy
endures for ever. God never cuts off the Intail of Mercy from the Elect.

Quest. 2. How many ways is God said to show Mercy?

Resp. 1. We are all Living Monuments of Gods Mercy. God shows Mercy to us in
daily supplying us. First, He supplies us with Health. Health is the Sauce
which makes our Life relish Sweeter. How would they prize this Mercy, who are
Chained to a Sickbed? Secondly, God supplies us with Provision, Genesis 48.15.
The God who has fed me all my Days. Mercy spreads our Table, it carves us
every bit of Bread we eat; we never drink but in the Golden Cup of Mercy.

2. God shows Mercy in lengthening out our Gospel-Liberties, 1 Cor. 16.9.
(...); there are many Adversaries; many would stop the Waters of the Sanctuary
that they should not run: We enjoy the sweet Seasons of Grace, we hear joyful
Sounds, we see the goings of God in his Sanctuary, we enjoy Sabbath after
Sabbath; the Manna of the Word yet falls about our Tents, when in diverse parts
of the Land they have no Manna. Here is God showing Mercy to us; he spins out
our forfeited Liberties.

3. God shows Mercy to us in preventing many Evils from invading us, Psalm. 3.3.
Thou O Lord art a Shield for me. God has restrained the Wrath of Men, and been
a Screen between us and Danger. When the Destroying Angel has been abroad, and
shot his deadly Arrow of Pestilence, God has kept off the Arrow that it has
not come near us.

4. God shows Mercy in delivering us, 2 Timothy 4.17. And I was delivered out of
the Mouth of the Lion, viz. Nero. God has restored us from the Grave. May we
not write the Writing of Hezekiah, Isa. 38 9. when he had been sick, and was
recovered of his Sickness? When we thought the Sun of our Life had been
setting, God has made it return to its former Brightness.

5. God shows Mercy in restraining of us from Sin: Lusts within, are worse than
Lions without. The greatest sign of Gods Anger, is to give Men up to their
Sins, Psalm. 81.12. So I gave them up to their own Hearts Lusts; let them Sin
themselves to Hell. But God has laid the Bridle of restraining Grace upon us:
As God said to Abimelech, Genesis 20.6. I withheld thee from sinning against me.
So God withheld us from those Exorbitancies which might have made us a Prey to
Satan, and a Terror to our Selves.

6. God shows Mercy in guiding and directing us. Is it not a Mercy for one that
is out of the way, to have a Guide? First, There is a Providential guiding, God
guides our Affairs for us, Chaulks out a way he would have us to walk in; he
resolves our Doubts, unties our Knots, appoints the bounds of our Habitation,
Acts 17.26. Secondly, A Spiritual guiding, Psalm. 73.24. Thou shall guide me
with thy Counsel. As Israel had a Pillar of Fire to go before them, so God
guides us with the Oracles of his Word, and the Conduct of his Spirit. He
guides our Head, keeps us from error, and he guides our Feet, keeps us from
Scandal. O what Mercy is it to have God to be our Guide and Pilot, Psalm. 31.3.
For thy Name's sake lead me and guide me.

7. God shows Mercy in Correcting us. God is Angry in Love, he smites that he
may save Gods Rod is not a Rod of Iron to break us, but a Fatherly Rod to
Humble us, Heb. 12.10. He for our profit, that we may be partakers of his
Holiness. Either God will mortify some corruption, or exercise some grace. Is
there not Mercy in this? Every Cross to a Child of God, is like Paul's Cross
Wind, which though it broak the Ship, it brought Paul to Shore upon the broken
Pieces, Acts 27.44.

8. God shows Mercy in Pardoning us, Mic. 7.18. Who is a God like thee, that
pardonest Iniquity? It Is Mercy to Feed us, Rich Mercy to Pardon us. This Mercy
is spun out of the Bowels of Free Grace; this is enough to make a Sick Man
well, Isa. 33.24. The Inhabitant shall not say I am Sick, the People that dwell
therein, shall be forgiven their Iniquity. Pardon of Sin is a Mercy of the
first Magnitude, God seals the Sinners Pardon with a Kiss. This made David put
on his best Clothes, and anoint himself; his Child newly Dead, and God had told
him the Sword should not depart from his House, yet now he falls Anointing
himself; the reason was, God had sent him his Pardon by the Prophet Nathan, 2 Samuel 12.13. The Lord has put away thy Sin. Pardon is the only fit Remedy for a
troubled Conscience. What can give ease to a Wounded Spirit, but pardoning
Mercy? Offer him the Honors and Pleasures of the World, it is as if you bring
Flowers and Music to one that is condemned.

Quest. How may I know my Sins are pardoned?

Resp. Where God removes the guilt, he breaks the power of Sin, Mic. 7.19. He
will have Compassion, he will subdue our Iniquities. With Pardoning Love God
gives Subduing Grace.

9. God shows his Mercy in Sanctifying us, Lev. 20.8. I am the Lord that
sanctify you. This is the partaking of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Gods
Spirit is a Spirit of Consecration; though it Sanctifies us but in part, yet in
every part, 1 These. 5.23. This is such a Mercy, that God cannot give in Anger,
if we are Sanctified, then we are Elected, 2 These. 2.13. God has chosen you,
to Salvation through Sanctification. This does disponere ad Coelum, it prepares
for Happiness, as the Seed prepares for Harvest. When the Virgins had been
Anointed and Perfumed, then they were to stand before the King, Esther 2.12. So
when we have had the Anointing of God, then we shall stand before the King of
Heaven.

10. God shows Mercy in hearing our Prayers, Psalm. 4 1. Have Mercy upon me, and
hear my Prayer. Is it not a Favor when a Man puts up a Petition to the King,
and has it granted? When we pray for Pardon, Adoption, the Sense of Gods Love,
to have God give a gracious Answer, what a signal Mercy is this? God may
sometimes delay an Answer, when he will not deny. You do not presently throw a
Musician Money, because you love to hear his Music. God loves the Music of
Prayer, therefore does not presently let us hear from him; but in due Season he
will give an Answer of Peace. Psalm. 66.20. Blessed be God who has not turned
away my Prayer nor his Mercy from me. If God does not turn away our Prayer,
then he does not turn away his Mercy.

11. God shows Mercy in Saving us, Tit. 3.5. According to his Mercy he saved
us. This is the (...), the Top Stone of Mercy, and it is laid in Heaven. Now
Mercy displays it self in all its Orient Colors; now Mercy is Mercy is indeed,
when God shall perfectly refine us from all the ^ees and Dregs of Corruption.
Our Bodies shall be made like Christ's Glorious Body, and our Souls like the
Angels-Saving Mercy is Crowning Mercy. It Is not only to be freed from Hell, but
inthroned in a Kingdom. In this Life we do rather desire God than enjoy him:
But what rich Mercy will it be, to be fully possessed of God, to see his
smiling Face, and to have God lay us in his Bosom? This will fill us with Joy
unspeakable, and full of Glory, Psalm. 17.15. I shall be satisfied, when I awake
with thy Likeness.

Use 1. As an Argument against Despair, see what a great Encouragement here is
to serve God; he shows Mercy to Thousands. Who would not be willing to serve a
Prince that is given to Mercy and Clemency? God is represented with a Rainbow
round about him, Rev. 4.3. An Emblem of his Mercy. Acts of Severity are rather
forced from God; Justice is his strange Work, Isa. 28.21. Therefore the
Disciples who are not said to wonder at other Miracles of Christ, yet did
wonder when the Fig Tree was Cursed and Withered, because it was not Christ's
manner to put forth acts of Severity. God is said to delight in Mercy, Mic.
7.18. Justice is Gods Left Hand, Mercy is his Right Hand: God uses his Right
Hand most, he is more used to Mercy than Justice, pronior est Deus ad parcendum
quam ad puniendum. God is said to be slow to Anger, Psalm. 103.8. But ready to
Forgive, Psalm 86.5. This may encourage us to serve God. What Argument will
prevail, if Mercy will not? Were God all Justice, it might Fright us from him,
but his Mercy may be a Loadstone to draw us to him.

Use 2. Bran. 1. Hope in Gods Mercies, Psalm. 147.11. The Lord takes Pleasure in
them that fear him, and hope in his Mercy. God counts it his Glory to be
scattering Pardons among Men.

Obj. But I have been a great Sinner, and sure there is no Mercy for me?

Resp. No, not if thou go on in Sin, and art so resolved; but if thou will
break off thy Sins, the Golden Scepter of Mercy shall be held forth to thee,
Isa. 55.7. Let the Wicked forsake his way, and let him return unto the Lord,
and he will have Mercy upon him. And Christ's Blood is a Fountain set open for
Sin and Uncleanness, Zach. 13.1. Mercy does more overflow in God, than Sin in
us; Gods Mercy can drown great Sins, as the Sea covers great Rocks. Some of
those Jews who had their Hands embrued in Christ's Blood, were saved by that
Blood: God loves to magnify his Goodness, to display the Trophies of Free
Grace, and to set up his Mercy above you, in spite of Sin: Therefore hope in
Gods Mercy.

Bran. 2. If God show Mercy to Thousands, labor to know that this Mercy is for
you, Psalm. 59.17. He is the God of my Mercy. A Man that was ready to Drown, saw
a Rainbow, says he, What am I the better, though God will not Drown the
World, if I Drown? so what are we the better God is Merciful, if we perish? Let
us labor to know Gods special Mercy is for us.

Quest. How shall we know it belongs to us?

Resp. 1. If we put an high value and estimate upon God's Mercy: God will not
throw away his Mercy on them that slight it; we prize Health, but we prize
Adopting Mercy above it. This is the Diamond in the Ring, it out-shines all
other Comforts.

2. If we are Fearers of God, we have a reverend awe upon us; we tremble at
Sin, and fly from it as Moses did from his Rod turned into a Serpent, Luke
1.50. His Mercy is on them that Fear him.

3. If we take Sanctuary in Gods Mercy, we trust in it, Psalm. 52.8. As a Man is
saved by catching hold of a Cable. Gods Mercy is a great Cable, let down from
Heaven to us; now taking fast hold on this Cable by Faith, we are saved, Psalm.
52.8. I trust in the Mercy of God for ever. As a Man trusts his Life and
Goods in a Garrison, so we trust our Souls in Gods Mercy.

Quest. What shall we do to get a share in Gods special Mercy?

Resp. 1. If we would have Mercy, it must be through Christ; out of Christ no
Mercy is to be had. We read in the old Law, First, None might come into the
Holy of Holies where the Mercy-Seat stood, but the High Priest; signifying, we
have nothing to do with Mercy, but through Christ our High Priest. Secondly,
The High Priest might not come near the Mercy-Seat without Blood, Lev. 16.14.
to show that we have no right to Mercy, but through the expiatory Sacrifice of
Christ's Blood. Thirdly, The High Priest might not upon pain of Death come near
the Mercy-Seat without Incense, Lev. 16.13. No Mercy from God without the
Incense of Christ's Intercession. So that if we would have Mercy, we must get a
part in Christ. Mercy swims to us through Christ's Blood.

2. If we would have Mercy, we must Pray for it, Psalm. 85.7. Show us thy Mercy
O Lord, and grant us thy Salvation. Psalm. 25.16. Turn thee unto me, and have
Mercy upon me. Lord put me not off with common Mercy; give me not only Mercy to
Feed and Cloth me, but Mercy to Pardon me; not only sparing Mercy, but saving
Mercy. Lord give me the Cream of thy Mercies; let me have Mercy and Loving
Kindness, Psalm. 103.4. Who crowns thee with Loving Kindness and Tender Mercy.
Be earnest Suitors for Mercy; let your Wants quicken your Importunity: Then we
pray most fervently, when we pray wost feelingly.

Of the Commandments.
Exodus 20.6. Of them that Love me, etc.


1. GODS Mercy is for them that Love him. Love is a Grace shines and sparkles
in Gods Eye, as the precious Stones did upon Aarons Breast Plate. Love is an
holy expansion or enlargement of Soul, whereby it is carried with delight after
God, as the chief Good: So Aquinas defines Love, Complacentia amantis in amato;
Love is a complacential delighting in God as in our Treasure: Love is the Soul
of Religion, it is a Grace highly momentous. If we had Knowledge as the Angels,
or Faith of Miracles, yet without Love it would profit nothing, 1 Cor. 13.2.
Love is the First and Great Commandment, Mat. 22.38. It is so, because if this
be wanting, there can be no Religion in the Heart, there can be no Faith, for
Faith works by Love, Gal. 5.6. All is but Pageantry, or a Devout Complement.

2. Because Love does meliorate and sweeten all the Duties of Religion; it
makes them Savoury Meat, else God cares not to taste of them.

3. It is the First and Great Commandment, in respect of the Excellency of this
Grace. Love is the Queen of the Graces, it out-shines all the other, as the Sun
the Lesser Planets. In some respect it is more excellent than Faith, though in
one sense Faith be more excellent, Virtute unionis, as it unites us to Christ.
Faith puts upon us the Embroidered Robe of Christ's Righteousness, which is a
brighter Robe than any of the Angels wear. Yet in another sense, Love is more
excellent, respectu durationis, in respect of the continuance of it; it is the
most durable Grace: Faith and Hope will shortly cease, but Love will remain.
When all the other Graces, like Rachel, shall dye in Travel, Love shall revive.
The other Graces are in the nature of a Lease, only for term of Life: Love is
as a Freehold, it continues for ever. Thus Love carries away the Garland from
all the other Graces, it is the most long lived Grace, it is a Bud of Eternity;
this Grace alone shall accompany us in Heaven.

Quest 1. How must our Love to God be qualified?

Resp. 1. Love to God must be pure and genuine, he must be loved chiefly for
himself, this the Schoolmen call Amor amicitiae. We must love God not only for
his Benefits, but those intrinsic Excellencies wherewith he is Crowned. We
must love God not only for the good which flows from him but the good which is
in him. True love is not Mercenary; a Soul that is deeply in love with God,
needs not be hired with Rewards; he cannot but love God for the Beauty of his
Holiness; not but that it is lawful to look at Gods Benefits. Moses had an Eye
to the recompense of Reward, Heb. 11.26. But we must not love God only for his
Benefits, for then it is not love of God, but Self-Love.

2. Love to God must be (...), with all the Heart, Mark 12.30. Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy Heart. We must not love God a little, give him a
Drop or two of our Love; but the main Stream of our Love must run after him;
the Mind must think of God, the Will choose him, the Affections pant after him.
The true Mother would not have the Child divided, nor God will not have the
Heart divided; we must love him with our whole Heart. Though we may love the
Creature, yet it must be a subordinate Love. Love to God must be highest, as
the Oil swims above the Water.

3. Love to God must be Flaming; to love coldly, is all one as not to love. The
Spouse is said to be amore perculsa, Sick of Love, Cant. 2.5. The Seraphims are
so called from their Burning. Love turns Saints into Seraphims, it makes them
burn in Holy Love to God; and many Waters cannot quench this Love.

Quest. 2. How may we know whether we love God?

Resp. 1. He that loves God, desires his sweet Presence: Lovers cannot be long
asunder; they have their (...), Fainting Fits, they want a sight of the Object
of their Love. A Soul deeply in Love with God, desires the enjoyment of him in
his Ordinances, in Word, Prayer, Sacrament. David was ready to faint away and
Dye, when he had not a sight of God, Psalm. 84.2. My Soul faints for God; such
as care not for Ordinances, but say, when will the Sabbath be over? plainly
discover want of Love to God.

2. He who loves God, does not love Sin, Psalm. 97.10. Ye that love the Lord,
hate evil. The love of God, and love of Sin, can no more mix together, than
Iron and Clay: Every Sin loved, strikes at the Being of God; but he who loves
God has an Antipathy against Sin. He who would part between Two Lovers, is an
Hateful Person; God and the Believing Soul, are Two Lovers; Sin comes to part
between them, therefore the Soul is implacably set against Sin. By this try
your Love to God. How could Dalilah say she loved Sampson, when she entertained
correspondence with the Philistines who were his Mortal Enemies? How can he say
he loves God, who loves Sin, which is God's Enemy?

3. He who loves God, is not much in love with any thing else; his love is very
cool to worldly things; his love to God moves as the Sun in the Firmament
swiftly, his love to the World moves as the Sun on the Dial, very slow: The
love of the World eats out the Heart of Religion: It choaks good Affections, as
the Earth puts out the Fire. The World was a dead thing to Paul, Gal. 6.14. I
am Crucified to the World, and the World is Crucified to me. In Paul, we might
see both the Picture and Pattern of a Mortified Man. He that loves God, uses
the World, but chooses God; the World is his Pension, but God is his Portion,
Psalm. 119.57. The World does busy him, but God does delight and satisfy him.
He says as David, Psalm. 43.4. God my exceeding joy, the Gladness or Cream of
my Joy.

4 He who loves God, cannot live without him. Things we love, we know not how
to be without. A Man can want Music or Flowers, but not Food. A Soul deeply in
love with God, looks upon himself as undone without him, Psalm. 143.7 Hide not
thy Face from me, lest I be like them that go down into the Pit. He says as
Job, Ch^p. 30.28. I went Mourning without the Sun. I have Starlight, I want
the Sun of Righteousness; I enjoy not the sweet Presence of my God. Is God our
chief Good, that we cannot live without? Alas, how do they demonstrate they
have no love to God, who can make a shift well enough to be without him? Let
them but have Corn and Oil, and you shall never hear them complain of the want
of God.

5. He who loves God, will be at any pains to get him. What pains does the
Merchant take? what hazards does he run to have a rich Return from the Indies?
Extremos currit Mercator (...). Jacob loved Rachel, and he would endure the
Heat by Day, an^ the Fro^t by Night that he might enjoy her. A Soul that loves
God will take any pains for the Fruition of him, Psalm. 63.8. My Soul follows
hard after God. Love is Pondus animae, Aug. It is as the weight which sets the
Clock a going. The Soul is much in Prayer, Weeping, Fasting; he strives as in
an Agony, that he may obtain him whom his Soul loves. Plutarch reports of the
Gauls, an ancient People of France, after they had tasted the sweet Wine of
Italy, they never rested till they had arrived at that Country. He who is in
love with God, never rests till he has gotten a part in him, Cant. 3.2. I
sought him whom my Soul loved. How can they say they love God, who are not
industrious in the use of means to obtain him, Prove. 19.24. A sloathful man
hides his hands in his Bosom. These not in Agony, but Lethargy: If Christ and
Salvation would drop as a ripe Fig into his mouth, he could be content to have
them; but he is loath to put himself to too much trouble. Does he love his
Friend, that will not make a Journey to him?

6. He that loves God, prefers him before Estate and Life. 1. Before Estate,
Phil. 3.8. For whom I have suffered the loss of all things. Who that loves a
rich Jewel, would not part with a Flower for it? Galcanus Marquess of Vico,
parted with a fair Estate to enjoy God in his pure Ordinances: When a Jesuit
persuaded him to return to his Popish Religion in Italy, promising him an huge
Sum of Money: Says he, Let their Money perish with them, who esteem all the
Gold in the World worth one days Communion with Jesus Christ and his Holy
Spirit. 2. Before Life, Rev. 12.11. They loved not their lives to the death.
Love to God carries the Soul above the love of Life; and the fear of Death.

7. He who loves God loves his Favorites, viz. the Saints, 1 John 5.1. Idem
est motus animi in imaginem and rem. To love a Man for his Grace, and the more
we see of God in him, the more we love him, is the infallible sign of love to
God. The Wicked pretend to love God, but hate and persecute his Image. Does he
love his Prince, who abuses his Statue, tears his Picture? Indeed they seem to
show great Reverence to the Saints departed; they have a great Reverence for
St. Paul, and St. Stephen, and St. Luke: They Canonize dead Saints, but
per^ecute living Saints: And do these love God? Can it be imagined he should
love God, who hates his Children because they are like him? If Christ were
alive again, he would not escape a second Persecution.

8. If we love God, as we cannot but be fearful of dishonouring him (the more a
Child loves his Father, the more he is afraid to displease him) so we weep and
mourn when we have offended him. Peter went out and wept bitterly, Matt. 26.75.
When Peter thought how dearly Christ loved him, he took him up to the Mount,
where he was Transfigured: Christ showed him the Glory of Heaven in a Vision.
Now that he should deny Christ, after he had received such signal Tokens of
Christ's Love, this broke his Heart with grief, He wept bitterly. Are our Eyes
Limbicks, dropping Tears of grief for Sin against God? A blessed Evidence of
our love to God; and such shall find Mercy. He shows Mercy to Thousands of them
that love him.

Use. Let us be Lovers of God; we love our Food, and shall not we love him that
gives it? All the Joy we hope for in Heaven is in God, and shall not he who
shall be our Joy be our Love? It is a Saying of St. Austin, Annon poena satis
magna est, non amare te? Is it not Punishment enough, Lord, not to love thee?
And again, Animam meam odio haberem. I would hate my own Soul, if I did not
find it loving of God.

Quest. What are the Incentives to provoke and inflame our Love to God?

Resp. 1. Gods Benefits bestowed on us. A Prince who bestows continual Favors
on a Subject, if that Subject have any Ingenuity, he cannot but love his
Prince. God is continually heaping Benefits upon us: He fills our hearts with
food and gladness, Acts 14.17. As the Rock followed Israel, whither ever they
went streams of Water out of the Rock followed them. So Gods Blessings follow
us every day: We swim in a Sea of Mercy. That Heart is hard that is not
prevailed with by all Gods Blessings, to love him; Magnes amoris amor. Kindness
works on a Bruit. The Ox knows his Owner.

2. Love to God would make Duties of Religion Facile and Pleasant. I confess to
him that has no love to God, Religion must needs be a Burden. And I wonder not
to hear him say, What a weariness is it to serve the Lord? It is like rowing
against Tide. But Love oils the Wheels, it makes Duty a Pleasure. Why are the
Angels so swift and winged in Gods Service, but because they love him? Jacob
thought seven years, but little for the love he did bear to Rachel: Love is
never weary: He who loves Money is not weary of telling it: And he who loves
God, is not weary of serving him.

3. It is Advantageous. There is nothing lost by our Love to God. ^ Cor. ^.^.
Eye has not seen, etc. the things which God has prepared for them (...). Such
glorious Rewards are laid up for such as love God: That (as Austi^ says) they
do not only transcend our Reason, but Faith it self is not able to comprehend
them. A Crown is the highest Ensign of Worldly Glory; and God has promis^^ a
Crown of Life to them that love him, James 1.12. And it is a never-fading
Crown, 1 Pet. 5.4.

4. By our loving God we may know that he loves us, 1 John 4.19. We love (...),
because he first loved us. If the Ice melts, it is because the Sun has shined
on (...): I^ the frosen Heart melts in Love, it is because the Sun of
Righteousness has shined upon it.

Quest. What means may be used to excite our love to God?

Resp. 1. Labor to know God aright. The Schoolmen say true, Bonum non amatur
quod non cognoscitur: We cannot love that which we do not know: God is the most
Eligible good. All the Excellencies which lie scattered in the Creature, are
united in God: He is Optimus maximus. Wisdom, Beauty, Riches, Love, do all
concenter in God. How fair were that Tulip which had the Colors of all Tulips
in it? All Perfections and Sweetnesses are eminently in God. Did we know God
more, and by the Eye of Faith, see his orient Beauty, our Hearts would be fired
with love to him.

2. Make the Scriptures familiar to you. St. Austin says, Before his
Conversion he took no pleasure in Scripture; but after Conversion it was his
chaste delight. The Book of God discovers God to us in his Holiness, Wisdom,
Veracity and Truth: It represents God rich in Mercy, incircled with Promises.
St. Austin calls the Scripture a golden Epistle, or Love-letter sent from God
to us. By reading this Love-letter, we shall be the more inamoured with love to
God: As by reading Lascivious Books, Comedies, Romances, Lust is provoked.

3. Mediate much of God, and this will be a means to love him, Psalm. 39.3.
While I was musing, the fire burned. Meditation is the Bellows of the
Affections. Meditate on Gods love in giving us Christ, John 3.16. God so loved
the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. That God should give Christ
to us, and not to the Angels that fell; that the Sun of Righteousness should
shine in our Horison; that he is revealed to us and not to others; what
wonderful love is this, Prove. 6.28. Who can go upon hot coals and his feet not
be burned? Who can meditate on Gods love, who can tread on these hot Coals, and
his Heart not burn in love to God! Beg an Heart to love God: The Affection of
Love is natural, but not the Grace of Love, Gal. 5.22. This fire of love is
kindled from Heaven; beg that it may burn upon the Altar of your Heart. Sure
this request is pleasing to God, and he will not deny such a Prayer, Lord give
me an heart to love thee.

Of the Commandments.
Exodus 20.6 And keep my Commandments.


LOve and Obedience, like two Sisters, must go hand in hand: Indeed this is a
good Evidence of our loving God, John 14.21. If ye love me, keep my
Commandments. Probatio dilectionis est exhibitio operis. The Son that loves his
Father, will obey him; Obedience pleases God, 1 Samuel 15.22. To obey is better
than Sacrifice. In Sacrifice only a dead Beast is offered, in Obedience a
living Soul. In Sacrifice only a part of the Fruit is offered; in Obedience
Fruit and Tree and all. A Man offers up himself to God. Keep my Commandments.]
It is not said, God shows Mercy to Thousands of them that know his
Commandments, but that keep them. The knowing Gods Commandments, without
keeping them, does not entitle any to Mercy. The Commandment is not only a Rule
of Knowledge, but Duty. God gives us his Commandments, not only as a Lanskip to
look upon, but as his Will and Testament, which we are to perform. A good
Christian is like the Sun, which does not only send forth light, but goes its
Circuit round the World. So he has not only the light of Knowledge, but goes
his Circuit too, and moves in the Sphere of Obedience.

Quest. In what manner must we keep Gods Commandments?

Resp. 1. Our keeping the Commandments must be Fiducial. Our Obedience to Gods
Commands, must Profluere a Fide, spring from Faith, therefore it is called the
Obedience of Faith, Romans 16.26. Abel by Faith offered up (...), a better
Sacrifice than Cain, Heb. 11.4 Faith is a vital Principle, without it all our
Services are Opera Mortua, dead Works, Heb. 6.1. Faith does meliorate and
sweeten our Obedience, and make it come off with a better Relish. Quest. But
why must Faith be mixed with Obedience to the Commandment? Resp. Because Faith
eyes Christ in every Duty, and so both the Person and Offering are accepted.
The High Priest under the Law laid his Hand upon the Head of the Beast slain,
which did point to the Messiah, Exodus 29.10. So Faith in every Duty, lays its
hand upon the Head of Christ. His Blood does expiate the guilt, and the sweet
Odours of his Intercession perfume our works of Obedience, Ephesians. 1.6. He has
made us accepted in the Beloved.

2. Our keeping the Commandments must be uniform. We must make Conscience of
one Commandment as well as another, Psalm. 119.6. Then shall I not be ashamed,
when I have respect to all thy Commandments. Every Commandment has a Ius
divinum, the same stamp of Divine Authority upon it: And if I obey one Precept,
because God commands, by the same Reason I must obey all. Some obey the
Commands of the first Table, but are careless in the Duties of the second: And
so, e contra. Physicians have a Rule, when the Body sweats in one part, but is
cold in another, it is a sign of a Distemper. So when Men seem Zealous in some
Duties of Religion, but are Cold and Frozen in another, it is a sign of
Hypocrisy. We must have respect to all Gods Commandments. Quest. But who can
keep all Commandments? Resp. There is a fulfilling of Gods Commands, and a
keeping them: Though we cannot fulfill all, yet we may be said to keep them in
an Evangelical Sense. We may facere, though not perficere: We keep the
Commandments Evangelically. 1. Where we make Conscience of every Command:
Though we come short in every Duty, yet we dare not neglect any Duty. 2. Our
desire is to keep every Commandment, Psalm. 119.5. O that my ways were directed
to keep thy Statutes. What we want in Strength, we make up in Will. 3. We
grieve that we can do no better. When we fail, we weep: We prefer Bills of
Complaint against our selves, and judge our selves for our Failings, Romans 7.24.
4. We do elicere conatum, we endeavor to obey every Commandment, Phil. 3.14 I
press toward the mark. We strive as in an Agony, and if it lay in our power we
would fully comport with every Commandment. 5. When we fall short, and are
unable to come up to the full Latitude of the Law, we look to Christ's Blood to
sprinkle our imperfect Obedience; and with the grains of his Merits cast into
the Scales to make it pass current. This is in an Evangelical Sense to keep all
the Commandments; and though it be not to Satisfaction, yet it is to
Acceptance.

3. Our keeping Gods Commandments must be willing, Isa. 1.19. If ye be willing
and obedient. God was for a Free will-offering, Deuteronomy. 16.10. David will run the
way of Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119.32. that is, Freely and Cheerfully. The
Lawyers have a Canon, Adverbs are better than Adjectives; it is not the Bonum
but the Been; not the doing much, but the doing well. A Musician is not
commended for playing long, but for playing well: It is obeying God willingly
is accepted: Virtus nolentium nullum est. The Lord hates that which is forced,
it is rather a paying a Tax than an Offering. Cain served God grudgingly, he
brought his Sacrifice, not his Heart. To obey Gods Commandments unwillingly, is
like the Devils who came out of the Men possessed at Christ's command, but with
Reluctance and against their Will, Matt. 8.29. Obedientia praeest, and a est
non timore poenae, sed amore Dei. Good Duties must not be pressed or beaten out
of us, as the Waters came out of the Rock, when Moses smote it with his Rod,
but must freely drop from us as Myrrh from the Tree, or Honey from the Comb. If
a willing mind be wanting, there wants that flower which should perfume our
Obedience, and make it a sweet smelling Savor to God. That we may keep Gods
Commandments willingly, let these things be well weighed.

1. Our Willingness is more esteemed than our Service. Therefore David Counsels
Solomon, not only to serve God, but with a willing Mind, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. The
Will makes Sin to be worse, and it makes Duty to be better. To obey willingly,
shows we do it with love: And this Crowns all our Services.

2. There is that in the Lawgiver, as may make us willing to obey the
Commandments, viz. Gods Indulgence to us.

1. God does not require the Summum jus, as absolutely necessary to Salvation.
He expects not perfect Obedience, only requires Sincerity. Do but act from a
Principle of Love, and aim at Honoring God in your Obedience, and it is
accepted.

2. In the times of the Gospel a Surety is admitted. The Law would not favor
us so far, but now God does so indulge us, that what we cannot do of our
selves, we may do by Proxy. Jesus Christ is a Surety of a better Testament,
Heb. 7.22. We fall short in every thing, but God looks upon us in our Surety,
and Christ having fulfilled all Righteousness, it is as if we had fulfilled the
Law in our own Persons.

3. God gives strength to do what he requires. The Law called for Obedience,
but though it required Brick it gave no Straw. But in the Gospel, God with his
Commands gives power, Ezekiel. 18.31. Make ye a new Heart. Alas it is above our
strength, we may as well make a new World, Ezekiel. 36.26. I will give you a new
Heart. God commands us to cleanse our selves, Isa. 1.16. Wash ye, make you
clean. But who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Job 14.4. Therefore
the Precep^ is turned into a Promise, Ezekiel. 36.25. From all your filthiness
will I cleanse you. When the Child cannot go, the Nurse takes it by the Hand,
Hos. 11.3. I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by their arms.

3. There is that in Gods Commandments which may make us willing, they are not
burdensome.

1. For first a Christian (so far as he is regenerate) consents to Gods
Commands, Romans 7.16. (...). I consent to the Law, that it is good. What is done
with consent is no burden. If a Virgin gives her consent, the Match goes on
cheerfully. If a Subject consent to his Princes Laws (as seeing the Equity and
Rationality in them) then they are not irksome. A regenerate Person in his
Judgment approves, and in his Will consents to Gods Commandments, therefore
they are not burdensome.

2. Gods Commandments are sweetened with Joy and Peace. Cicero questions whether
that can properly be called a Burden, which one carries with Delight and
Pleasure. Utrum onus appellatur quod laetitia fertur. If a Man carries a Bag of
Money given him, it is heavy, but the Delight takes off the Burden. When God
gives inward Joy, that makes the Commandment delightful, Isa. 56.7. I will make
them joyful in my House of Prayer. Joy is like Oil to the Wheels, which makes a
Christian run in the way of Gods Commandments; so that it is not burdensome.

3. Gods Commandments are Advantageous. 1. The Commandments are preventive of
Evil; a Curb-bit to check us from Sin. What Mischiefs should not we run into,
if we had not Affliction to humble us, and the Commandment to restrain us? Gods
Commandments are to keep us within Bounds. The Yoke keeps the Beast from
straggling. We are to be thankful to God for Precepts; had not he set his
Commandments as an Hedge or Bar in our way, we might have run to Hell and never
stopped.

2. There is nothing in the Commandment but what is for our good, Deuteronomy. 10.13.
To keep the Commandments of the Lord and his Statues, which I command thee for
thy good. 1. God commands us to read his word, and what hurt is in this? God
bespangles the Word with Promises: As if a Father should bid his Son read his
Last Will and Testament, wherein he makes over a fair Estate to him. God bids
us Pray: And he tells us, If we ask, it shall be given, Matt. 7.7. Ask power
against Sin, ask Salvation and it shall be given. If you had a Friend should
say, Come when you will to me, I will supply you with Money: Would you think it
a trouble to visit that Friend often? God commands us to fear him, Lev. 25.43.
But fear thy God. And there is Honey in the mouth of this Command, Luke 1.50.
His mercy is upon them that fear him. God commands us to believe, and why so?
Believe and ye shall be saved, Acts 16.31. Salvation is the Crown set upon the
Head of Faith. Good reason then we obey Gods Commands willingly, they are for
our good, they are not so much our Duty as our Privilege.

3. Gods Commandments are Ornamental; Omnia quae praestari jubet Deus, non
onerant nos sed ornant, Salvian. Gods Commandments do not burden us but adorn
us. It is an Honor to be employed in a Kings Service: And so to be employed in
Gods, by whom Kings reign. To walk in Gods Commandments proclaims us to be
wise, Deuteronomy. 4.5, 6. Behold I have taught you Statutes: Keep, therefore, and do
them, for this is your wisdom. And to be wise is an Honor: I may say of every
Commandment of God, as Prove. 4.9. It shall give to thy head an ornament of
Grace.

4. The Commands of God are infinitely better than the Commands of Sin; these
are intolerable. Let a Man be under the command of any Lust, how does he tire
himself! what Hazards does he run to the endangering his Health and Soul that
he may satisfy his Lust, Ier. 9.5. They weary themselves to commit Iniquity.
And are not Gods Commandments more equal, facile, pleasant, than the Commands
of Sin? Chrysostom says true, (...). To act Virtue, is easier than to act
Vice: Temperance is less troublesome than Drunkenness: Meekness is less
troublesome than Passion and Envy. There is more difficulty in the Contrivement
and Pursuit of a wicked Design, than in Obeying the Commandments of God. Hence
a Sinner is said to travel with Iniquity, Psalm. 7.14. A Woman while she is in
Travel, is in pain, to show what pain and trouble a Wicked Man has, in
bringing forth Sin. Many have gone with more pains to Hell, than others have to
Heaven. This may make us obey the Commandments willingly.

5. Willingness in Obedience makes us resemble the Angels. The Cherubims Types
representing the Angels, are described with Wings displayed, to show how ready
the Angels are to serve God. God no sooner speaks the Word, but they are
ambitious to obey. How are they ravished with Joy, while they are praising God!
In Heaven we shall be (...), as the Angels; by our willingness to obey Gods
Commandments, we shall be like them here. This is that we pray for, that Gods
Will may be done by us on Earth, as it is in Heaven: Is it not done willingly
there? We must keep Gods Commandments constantly, Psalm 106.3. Blessed is he
who does Righteousness at all times. Our Obedience to the Command must be as
the Fire of the Altar which never went out, Lev. 13.6. It must be as the motion
of the Pulse, always beating. The Wind blows off the Fruit; our Fruits of
Obedience must not be blown off by the Wind of Persecution, John 15.16. I have
chosen you that you should go and bring forth Fruit, and that your Fruit should
remain.

Use. It reproves them who live in a wilful breach of Gods Commandments, in
Malice, Uncleanness, Intemperance; they walk Antipodes to the Commandment. To
live in a wilful breach of the Commandment, is

First, Against Reason. Are we able to stand it out against God, 1 Cor. 10.22.
Do we provoke the Lord, are we stronger than he? Can we measure Arms with God?
Can Impotency stand against Omnipotency? A Sinner in acting Sin, acts against
Reason.

Secondly, It is against Equity. We have our Being from God, and is it not
equal we should obey him who gives us our Being? We have all our Subsistence
from God, and is it not fitting that as God gives us our Allowance, we should
give him our Allegiance? If a General gives his Soldier Pay, he is to march at
his Command, so that to live in the breach of his Commands, is against Equity.

Thirdly, It is against Nature. Every Creature in its kind, obeys Gods Laws: 1.
Animate Creatures obey him, God spoke to the Fish, and it set Jonah ashore,
Jonah 2.10. 2. Inanimate Creatures, the Wind and the Sea obey him; Mark 4.41.
The very Stones, if God give them a Commission, will cry out against the Sins
of Men, Hab. 2.11. The Stone shall cry out of the Wall, and the Beam out of the
Timber shall answer it: None disobeys God but Man and the Devil, and can we
find none to join with else?

Fourthly, It is against Kindness. How many Mercies have we to allure us to
obey! Miracles of Mercy; therefore the Apostle joins these Two together,
Disobedient and Unthankful, 2 Timothy 3.2. And this dies a Sin of a Crimson
color. And as the Sin is great, for it is a contempt of God, a hanging out of
the Flag of Defiance against God, (and Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft,)
so the Punishment will be proportionable: Such cut themselves off from Mercy.
Gods Mercy is for them that keep his Commandments, but no Mercy to them that
live in a wilful breach of them. All God's Judgments set themselves in Battle
Array against the Disobedient. 1. Temporal Judgments, Lev. 26.15, 16. 2.
Eternal Christ comes in Flames of Fire to take Vengeance on them that obey not,
2 These. 1.8. Such as break the Golden Chains of Gods Commands, God has Iron
Chains to hold them, Chains of Darkness, in whch the Devils are held, Jude 6.
As long as there is Eternity, God has time enough to reckon with all the
wilful Breakers of his Commandments.

Quest. How shall we do to keep Gods Commandments?

Resp. Beg the Spirit of God. We cannot do it in our own Strength; the Spirit
must work in us both the (...) and (...), to will and to do, Phil. 2.13. When
the Loadstone draws, the Iron moves; when Gods Spirit draws, then we run in the
way of Gods Commandments.

Of the Commandments.
Exodus 20.7. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the
Lord will not hold him guiltless, etc.


THis Commandment has Two Parts; First, A Negative expressed, that we must not
take Gods Name in vain, viz. Cast any Reflection or Dishonor upon Gods Name.
Secondly, An Affirmative implied, That we should have a care to Reverence and
Honor his Name; but that I shall speak to more fully, when I come to the First
Petition in the Lord's Prayer, Hallowed be thy Name. I shall now speak of the
Negative expressed in this Commandment, or the Prohibition, Thou shall not take
the Name of the Lord thy God in Vain. The Tongue is an unruly Member; all the
Parts and Organs of the Body are defiled with Sin, as every Branch of Wormwood
is bitter, but the Tongue is full of deadly Poison, Iam. 3.8. There is no one
Member of the Body does more break forth into Gods Dishonor, than the Tongue;
therefore this Commandment is a Bridle for the Tongue, it is to bind the Tongue
to its good Behavior; Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in
vain: And this Prohibition is backed with a strong Reason, For the Lord will
not hold him guiltless, that is, he will not hold him Innocent. Men of Place
and Eminency take it hainously to have their Names abused, and will inflict
heavy Penalties on the Offenders. The Lord will not hold him guiltless that
takes his Name in vain; God looks upon him as a Criminal Person, and he will
severely punish him. Well then, the thing to be insisted on, is, that great
care must be had, that the Holy and Reverend Name of God, be not profaned by
us, or taken in vain.

Quest. How many ways may we be said to take Gods Name in vain?

Resp. I. We take Gods Name in vain, when we speak slightly and irreverently of
his Name, Deuteronomy. 28.58. That thou may fear this Glorious and Fearful Name, the
Lord thy God. David speaks of God with Reverence, Psalm. 50.1. The Lord, even
the most mighty God. Psalm. 83.18. That Men may know, that thou whose Name alone
is Jehovah, art the most high over all the Earth. And the Disciples speaking of
Jesus, did hallow his Name, Luke 24.19. Jesus of Nazareth, which was a Prophet
mighty in Deed and Word before God and all the People. When we mention the
Names of Kings, we give them some Title of Honor, as Excellent Majesty. So
should we speak of God with such Sacred Reverence as is due to the infinite
Majesty of Heaven. When we speak slightly of God or his Works, God interprets
it to be a Contempt, and it is a taking his Name in vain.

II. When we profess Gods Name, but do not live answerable to it, it is a
taking his Name in vain, Titus 1.16. In Words they profess him, but in Works
they deny him. When Men's Tongues and Lives cross one another; when under a Mask
of Profession Men will Lie and Cousen, and be Unclean, these make use of Gods
Name to abuse him, they take his Name in vain; Simulata Sanctitas duplex
iniquitas, Romans 2.24. The Name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through
you. When the Heathens saw the Jews, who professed to be Gods People, to be
Scandalous, this made them speak Evil of God, and hate the true Religion for
their sakes.

III. We take Gods Name in vain, when we use Gods Name in Idle Discourse. God
is not to be spoken of, but with an Holy Awe upon our Hearts; and to bring Gods
Name in at every turn, when we never think of God, to say, O God, or O Christ,
or As God shall save my Soul, this is taking Gods Name in vain; and how many
are guilty in this kind? Though they have God in their Mouths, they have the
Devil in their Hearts. It Is a wonder that Fire does not come out from the Lord
and consume them, as it did Nadab and Abihu, Lev. 10.2.

IV. We take Gods Name in vain, when we worship him with our Lips, but not our
Hearts; this is to abuse God. It Is the Heart which God calls for, Prove. 23.26.
My Son give me thy Heart; the Heart is the chief thing in Religion, it draws
the Will and Affections after it, as the Primum M^bile the other Orbs along
with it. The Heart is the Incense that perfumes our Holy things; it is the
Altar that sanctifies the Offering. Now when we seem to worship God, but
withdraw our Heart from him, we take his Name in vain Isa. 29.13 This People
draw near me with their Mouth, and with their Lips do honor me, but they have
removed their Heart from me.

First, Hypocrites take Gods Name in vain, their Religion is a Lie; they seem
to Honor God, but they do not Love him, their Hearts go after their Lusts,
Hos. 4.8. They set their Hearts on their Iniquity. Their Eyes are lifted up to
Heaven, but their Hearts are rooted in the Earth, Ezekiel. 33.31. These are Devils
in Samuel's Mantle, they take Gods Name in vain.

Secondly, Superstitious Persons take Gods Name in vain. They bring God a few
Ceremonies which he never appointed; they bow at Christ's Name, and cringe to
the Altar, but hate and persecute Gods Image: These take his Name in vain.

V. We take Gods Name in vain, when we pray to him, but do not believe in him.
Faith is the great Grace that Honors God, Romans 4.20. Abraham being strong in
Faith, gave Glory to God; but when we pray to God, but do not mix Faith with
our Prayer, we take his Name in vain. I may Pray, (says a Christian,) but I
shall be never the better, I question whether God does hear, or whether he will
grant. This is to dishonor God, and take his Name in vain; this is to make God
either an Idol, that he has Ears and hears not, or a Liar, who promises Mercy
to the Penitent, but will not make good his Word, John 5.10. He that believes
not, has made God a Liar. When the Apostle says, How shall they call on him
whom they have not believed? Romans 10.14. The meaning is, how shall they call on
God aright, and not believe in him? But how many do call on God, who do not
believe in him? they ask for Pardon, but Unbelief whispers, their Sins are
greater than can be forgiven. Thus to Pray and not Believe, is to take Gods
Name in Vain, and is an high dishonouring of God, as if he were not such a God
as the Word represents him; Plenteous in Mercy to all that call upon him, Psalm.
86.5.

VI. We take Gods Name in vain, when we in any kind abuse and profane his
Word. Now the Word of God is profaned, First, In General, when Profane Men
meddle with it. It is unseemly and unbecoming a Wicked Man, to talk of Sacred
things, of Gods Providence, and the Decrees of God and Heaven; it was very
distastful to Christ, to hear the Devil quote Scripture, It is written. To hear
a Wicked Man that wallows in Sin, talk of God and Religion, is offensive, it is
the taking Gods Name in vain. When the Word of God is in a Drunkards Mouth, it
is like a Pearl hung upon a Swine. Under the Law, the Lips of the Leper were to
be covered, Lev. 13.45. The Lips of a Profane Drunken Minister ought to be
covered; he is unfit to speak of Gods Word, because he takes Gods Name in vain.
But Secondly, More particularly, they profane Gods Word, and take his Name in
vain,

1. That speak Scornfully of Gods Word, 2 Pet. 3.4. Where is the Promise of his
Coming? For since the Fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were
from the beginning of the Creation. As if they had said, here is much ado the
Preachers make about the Day of Judgment, when all must be called to account
for their Works; but where is the appearing of that Day? We see things keep
their Course, and continue as they were since the Creation; thus they speak
scornfully of Scripture, and did take God's Name in vain. If Sentence be not
speedily executed, Men scorn and deride, but Prove. 19.29. Judgments are
prepared for Scorners.

2. That speak Jestingly. Such are they who sport and play with Scripture; it is
playing with Fire. Some cannot be merry unless they make bold with God; they
make the Scripture an Harp to drive away the Spirit of Sadness. Eusebius
relates of one who took a piece of Scripture to jest with, God struck him with
Frenzy. To play with Scripture, shows a very profane Heart. Some will rather
lose their Souls than lose their Jest: These are guilty of taking God's Name in
vain. Tremble at it: Such as mock at Scripture, God will mock at their
Calamity, Prove. 1.26

3. They abuse Gods Word, and take his Name in vain, that bring Scripture to
countenance any Sin. The Word which was written for the suppressing of Sin,
some bring it for the defending of Sin. For instance, First, If we tell a
Covetous Man of his Sin, that Covetousness is Idolatry, he will bring Scripture
to maintain his Sin: Has not God bid me live in a Calling? Six Days shall thou
Labor. Has not God said, that He who provides not for his Family, is worse
than an Infidel? Thus he goes to support his Covetousness with Scripture. Resp.
It is true, God has bid thee take pains in a Calling, but not hurt thy
Neighbor; he has bid thee provide for thy Family, but not by oppression, Lev.
25.14. Ye shall not Oppress one another. He has bid thee look after a
Livelihood, but not with the neglect of thy Soul: He has bid thee lay up thy
Treasure in Heaven, Mat. 6.20. He has commanded thee to lay out, as well as
lay up; to sow Seeds of Charity on the Backs and Bellies of the Poor, which
perhaps thou neglectest. So that to bring Scripture to uphold thee in thy Sin,
is an high profaning of Scripture, and a taking of Gods Name in vain. Second
Instance, if we tell a Man of his inordinate Passions, that he may be Drunk as
well with rash Anger as Wine; he will bring Scripture to justify it: Does not
the Word say, Be Angry and Sin not, Ephesians. 4.26. It Is true, that Anger is good,
which is mixed with Zeal; then Anger is without Sin, when it is against Sin.
But thou do Sin in thy Anger, thou speak unadvisedly with thy Lips, thy
Tongue is set on Fire of Hell, and to bring Scripture to defend thy Sin, is to
profane Scripture, and to take Gods Name in vain.

4. They abuse the Word, and take Gods Name in vain, who adulterate the Word,
and wrest it in a wrong Sense. Such are Heretics, who put their own gloss upon
Scripture, and make it speak that which the Holy Ghost never meant. For
instance, First, When we expound those Texts Literally, which are meant
Figuratively. Thus the Pharisees were guilty, when God said in the Law, Thou
shall bind the Commandments for a sign upon thy Hand, and they shall be as
Frontlets between thine Eyes, Deuteronomy. 6.8. The Pharisees took it in the Literal
Sense, they got Two Scrolls of Parchment, wherein they wrote the Two Tables,
putting one on their Left Arms, and binding the other to their Eyebrows: Thus
they wrested the Scripture, and took Gods Name in vain. That Scripture was to
be understood Spiritually, and by a Figure; God meant by binding his Law upon
their Hands, that they should meditate in his Law, and put it in practice. And
so the Papists expound that Scripture, This is my Body, Literally, of the very
Body of Christ; then when Christ gave the Bread, he should have had Two Bodies,
one in the Bread, and the other out of the Bread; whereas Christ meant it
Figuratively, It is a sign of my Body. Thus they by wresting the Scripture to a
wrong Sense, profane it, and take Gods Name in vain. Secondly, When we expound
those Scriptures Figuratively and Allegorically, which the Holy Ghost means
Literally. For example, Christ said to Peter, launch out into the Deep, and
make a Draught, Luke 5.4. This Text is spoken in a plain Literal Sense, of
Launching out the Ship; but the Papists take it in a Mystical and Allegorical.
This Text proves say they, That the Pope which is Peter's Successor, shall
launch forth and catch the Ecclesiastical and Political power over the West
Parts of the World; this say they, was meant when Christ bad Peter launch out
into the Deep. But I think the Papists have launched out too far beyond the
meaning of the Text. When Men strain their Wits, to wrest the Word to such a
Sense as pleases them, they do profane Gods Word, and highly take his Name in
vain.

VII. We take Gods Name in vain, when we swear by his Name. Many seldom name
God's Name but in Oaths; for this Sin the Land Mourns, Mat. 5.34. Swear not at
all; that is, Rashly and Sinfully, so as to take Gods Name in vain; not but
that in some cases it is lawful to take an Oath before a Magistrate, Deuteronomy.
6.13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and Swear by his Name,
Heb. 6.16. An Oath for Confirmation, is an end of all strife. But when Christ
says, Swear not at all; he forbids such a Swearing as takes Gods Name in vain.
There is a Threefold Swearing forbidden.

1. Vain Swearing, when Men in their ordinary Discourse let fly Oaths. Some
will go to excuse their Swearing. It is a course Wool that will take no Dye,
and a bad Sin indeed that has no Excuse.

Excuse 1. I swear little trifling Oaths, as Faith, or by the Mass. Resp. The
Devil has Two false Glasses which he sets before Men's Eyes, the one is a
little Glass, in which the Sin appears so small, that it can hardly be seen;
this Glass the Devil sets before Men's Eyes when they are going to commit Sin;
the other is a great Multiplying Glass, wherein Sin appears so big that it
cannot be forgiven: The Devil sets this before Men's Eyes when they have sinned.
Thou that say, Sin is small, when God shall open the Eye of thy Conscience,
then thou will see it great, and be ready to despair. But to answer this Plea,
thou say, they are but small Oaths; but Christ forbids Vain Oaths, Swear not
at all: If God will reckon with us for Idle Words, shall not Idle Oaths be put
in the Account Book?

Excuse 2. But I swear to the Truth. See how this Harlot-Sin would paint it
self with an Excuse. Resp. 1. Though it be true, yet if it be a Rash Oath, it is
Sinful. Besides 2. He that swears commonly, it cannot be avoided but sometimes
he may swear more than is true; as where much Water runs, some Gravel or Mud
will pass along with the Water; so where there is much Swearing, some Lies will
run along with the Oaths.

Excuse 3. But I shall not be believed, unless I seal up my Word with an Oath.
Resp. 1. A Man that is Honest, will be believed without an Oath, his bare Word
carries Authority with it, and is as good as Letters Testimonial. 2. I answer,
He who swears, the more he swears, the less others will believe him: Iuras
credit minus, Thou art a Swearer. Another thinks an Oath weighs very light with
thee, thou carest not what thou swearest; and the more thou swearest, the less
he believes thee: He will trust thy Bond, but not thy Oath.

Excuse 4. But it is a Custom of Swearing I have gotten, and I hope God will
forgive me. Resp. Though among Men, custom Carries it, and is pleadable in Law,
yet it is not so in the case of Sin; Custom here is no Plea. Thou have got an
habit of Swearing, and can not leave it, is this an Excuse? Is a thing well
done, because it is commonly done? This is so far from being an Excuse, that it
is an Aggravation of Sin. As if one that had been accused for Killing a Man,
should plead with the Judge to spare him, because it was his Custom to Murder;
this is an Aggravation of the Offense, so it is here: Therefore all Excuses for
this Sin of Vain-Swearing are taken away. Dare not to live in this Sin, it is a
taking Gods Name in vain.

2. Vile Swearing, Horrid prodigious Oaths not to be named. Swearers like Mad
Dogs, fly in the Face of Heaven, and when they are angered, spue out their
blasphemous Venom on Gods Sacred Majesty. Some in Gaming, when things go cross,
and the Dice run against them, their Tongues run as fast against God in Oaths
and Curses: And tell them of their Sin, go to bring home these Asses from going
astray, and it is but pouring Oil on the Flame, they will swear the more. St.
Austin says, They do no less Sin who blaspheme Christ now in Heaven, than the
Jews did, who Crucified him upon Earth. Swearers profane Christ's Blood, and
tear his Name. An Harlot told her Husband, that of her Three Sons, there was
but one of them his; the Father dying, desired the Executors to find out which
was the true natural Son, and all his Estate he bequeathed to him. The Father
being dead, the Executors set up his Corpse against a Tree, and delivered to
every one of these Three Sons a Bow and Arrows, telling them, that he who could
shoot nearest the Fathers Heart should have all the Estate; the Two Bastard
Sons shot as near as they could to his Heart, but the Third did feel nature so
work in him, that he refused to shoot at his Fathers Heart: Whereupon the
Executors judged him to be the true Son, and gave all the Estate to him. Such
as are the true Children of God, fear to shoot at him; but such as are Bastards
and not Sons, care not, though they shoot at him in Heaven with their Oaths and
Curses. And which makes Swearing yet more heinous is, when Men have resolved
upon any wicked Action, they bind themselves with an Oath to do it; such were
they, Acts 23.12. who bound themselves with an Oath and Curse to kill Paul. To
commit Sin is bad enough, but to swear we will commit Sin, is an high
Profaning Gods Name, and is as it were to call God to approve our Sin.

3. Forswearing: This is an Heaven-daring Sin, Lev. 19.12. Ye shall not swear
by my name falsely, neither shall ye prosane my name. Perjury is a calling God
to witness to a Lie. It is said of Philip of Macedon, he would Swear and
Unswear, as might stand best with his Interest, Ier. 4.2. Thou shall swear the
Lord lives in Truth, in Judgment, and in Righteousness. In Righteousness,
therefore it must not be an unlawful Oath: In Judgment, therefore it must not
be a rash Oath: In Truth, therefore it must not be a false Oath. Among the
Scythians, if a Man did Forswear himself, he was to have his Head stricken off:
Because if Perjury were allowed, there would be no living in a Commonwealth,
it would take away all Faith and Truth among Men. The Perjurer is in as bad a
case as the Witch, for by a false Oath he binds his Soul fast to the Devil. In
Forswearing, or taking a false Oath in a Court, there are many Sins linked
together; Plurima peccata in uno. For besides the taking Gods name in vain, the
Perjurer is a Thief, by his false Oath he robs the Innocent of his Right: He is
a Perverter of Justice: He does not only sin himself, but occasions the Jury to
give a false Verdict, and the Judge to pass an unrighteous Sentence. And sure
Gods Judgments will find him out. When Gods flying Roll or Curse goes over the
face of the Earth, into whose House does it enter? Into the house of him that
swears falsely: And it shall consume the timber and stones of his house, Zech.
5.4. Beza relates of a Perjurer, That he had no sooner taken a false Oath, but
he was immediately struck with an Apoplexy, and never sp^ke more, but died. O
tremble at such horrid Impiety.

VIII. We highly take Gods Name in vain, when we prefix Gods name to any wicked
Action. I say, the mentioning of God in a wicked Design, is taking his name in
v^in, 2 Samuel 15.7. I pray (says Absalom) let me pay my vow which I vowed to
the Lord, in Hebron. This pretense of paying his Vow made to God, was only to
color over his Treason, ver. 10. When ye hear the sound of the Trumpet, ye
shall ^ay, A^^al in reigns. When any wicked Action is baptized with the name of
Religion, this is taking Gods Name in vain. Herein the Pope is guilty highly
when he sends out his B^lls of Excommunication or Curses against the
Christians, he begins with In nomine Domini: In the name of God. What a
provoking Sin is this! I^ is to do the Devi^s work, and put Gods name to it.

IX. We t^ke God Name in vain, when we use our Tongues any way to the Dishonor
of Gods Name, as when we use Railing, or Curse in our Passions: Especially when
we wi^h a Curse upon our selves, if a thing be not so, when we know it to be
false. I have read of one who wished his Body might rot if that which he said
was not true; and soon after his Body rotted, and he became a loathsome
Spectacle.

X. We take Gods Name in vain, by Rash and Unlawful Vows. There is a good Vow,
when a Man binds himself by Vow to do that which the Word binds him to; as if
he be Sick, he Vows if God restore him, he will live a more strict holy Life,
Psalm. 66.13. I will pay thee my vows, which my lips have uttered when I was in
trouble. But Voveri non debet quod Deo displicet: Such a Vow should not be
made, as is displeasing to God: As to vow voluntary Poverty, as your Friars; or
to vow to live in Nunneries. Iephtha's Vow was rash and unlawful; he vowed to
the Lord ^o Sacrifice that to him which he met with next, and it was his
Daughter, Judges 11.31. He did ill to make the Vow, and worse to keep it: He
became guilty of the Breach of the Third and Sixth Commandment.

XI. When we speak evil of God, now we take his name in vain, Numb. 21.5. They
spoke against God. Quest. How do we speak against God? Resp. When we murmur at
his Providence, as if he had dealt hardly with us. Murmuring is the accusing
of Gods Justice, Genesis 18.25. Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?
Murmuring springs from a bitter Root, it comes from Pride and Discontent: It is
a Reproaching of God, and an high taking his name in vain. It is such a Sin as
God cannot ^ear, Numb. 14.27. How long shall I bear with this people that
murmur against me?

XII. And lastly, We take Gods name in vain when we falsify our Promise. To
say, if God spare us life we will do this, and never intend it. Our Promise
should be Sacred and Inviolable; but if we make no reckoning to make a Promise,
and mention Gods name in it, yet never intend to keep it, it is a double Sin,
it is telling a Lie, and taking Gods name in vain. I should come now to the
Affirmative implied* But hereafter --

Use. Take heed of taking Gods name in vain any of these ways. Remember this
Commination or Threatening in the Text, The Lord will not hold him guiltless.
Here is a Meiosis, less is said and more intended: He will not hold him
guiltless, that is, he will be severely avenged on such an one. The Lord will
not hold him guiltless. Here the Lord speaks after the manner of a Judge who
holds the Court of Assize. The Judge here is God himself, the Accusers Satan
and a Man's own Conscience: The Matter of Fact is, Taking Gods name in vain; and
the Malefactor accused is found guilty and Condemned, The Lord will not hold
him guiltless. Methinks these words, The Lord will not hold him guiltless, may
set a Lock upon our Lips, and make us afraid of speaking any thing that may
redound Dishonor upon God, or may be a taking his Name in vain. The Lord will
not hold him guiltless: It may be Men may hold such Guiltless, when they Curse,
Swear, speak Irreverently of God: Men may hold them Guiltless, let them alone,
not punish them. If one takes away another good Name, he shall be sure to be
punished; but if he takes away Gods good Name, where is he that does punish
him? He that Robs another Goods, shall be put to Death; but he that Robs God
of his Glory, by Oaths and Curses, he is spared; but God himself will take the
Matter into his own hand, and he will punish him who takes his Name in vain.

1. Sometimes God punishes Swearing and Blasphemy in this Life. 1. Swearing.
In the Country of Samurtia, there arose a Tempest of Thunder and Lightning: A
Soldier burst forth into Swearing, but the Tempest tearing up a great Tree by
the Roots, it fell upon him and crushed him to pieces. The German History
relates of a Youth who was given to Swearing, and did use to invent new Oaths;
the Lord sent a Canker into his Mouth, which did eat out his Tongue, whereupon
he died. 2. Blasphemy. He who did Blaspheme God, the Lord caused him to be
stoned to death, Lev. 24.11, 23. The Israelitish woman's Son blasphemed the name
of the Lord and cursed. And Moses spoke to the People of Israel, that they
should bring forth him that had cursed, and stone him with stones. Olympias an
Arian Bishop, Reproached and Blasphemed the Sacred Trinity; whereupon he was
suddenly stricken with three Flashes of Lightning which burned him to Death.
Felix, an Officer of Julian, seeing the Holy Vessels which were used in the
Sacrament, said in Scorn of Christ, See what precious Vessels the Son of Mary
is served withal. Soon after he was taken with a Vomiting of Blood out of his
Blasphemous Mouth, whereof he died.

2. Or if God should not execute Judgment on the Profaners of his Name in this
Life, yet their Doom is to come; God will not remit their Guilt, but deliver
them to Satan the Jailer, to torment them for ever. If God justify a Man, who
shall condemn him? but if God condemn him, who shall justify him? If God lay a
Man in Prison, where shall he get Bail or Main-prize? God will take his full
blow at the Sinner in Hell, Heb. 10.31. It is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God.

EXODUS XX.8. Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it Holy. Six Days shall thou
labor, and do all thy Work. But the Seventh Day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy
God: in it thou shall not do any Work, thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, thy
Manservant, nor thy Maidservant, nor thy Cattle, nor thy Stranger that is
within thy Gates. For in Six Days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and
all that in them is, and rested the Seventh Day: Wherefore the Lord blessed the
Sabbath Day, and hallowed it.


This Commandment was engraven in Stone by God's own Finger, and it will be our
Comfort to have it engraven in our Hearts.

The Sabbath Day is set apart for God's Solemn Worship, it is God's Enclosure,
and it must not be alienated to common Uses. The Lord has set a Preface before
this Commandment, he has put a Memento to it, Remember, to keep the
Sabbath Day holy. This Word Remember, shows, that we are apt to forget
Sabbath-Holiness, therefore we need a Memorandum to put us in mind of
sanctifying this Day.

I shall explain the Words.

I. Here is a Solemn Command, Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy. II.
Many Cogent Arguments to induce us to observe the Command.
I. In the Command, 1. The Matter of it, viz. The sanctifying of the Sabbath,
which Sabbath-Sanctification consists in two things.

First, In resting from our own Works.

Secondly, In a Conscientious Discharge of our Religious Duties.

2. The Persons to whom the Command of sanctifying the Sabbath is given, (1.)
Either Superiors, and they are 1 st. More Private, as Parents and Masters. Or,
2 ly. More Public, as Magistrates. Or, (2.) Inferiors. First, Natives, as
Children and Servants, Thy Son and thy Daughter, thy Manservant and thy Maid
Servant. Secondly, Foreigners, The Stranger that is within thy Gates.

II. The Cogent Arguments to obey this Command of keeping Holy the Sabbath, 1.
From the Rationality of it -- Six Days shall thou labor, and do all thy Work:
As if God had said, I am not an hard Master, I do not grutch thee time to look
after thy Calling, and to get an Estate. I have given thee Six Days, Six to do
all thy Work in, and have taken but one Day for my self: I might have reserved
Six Days for my self, and allowed thee but one; but I have given thee Six Days
for the Works of thy Calling, and have taken but One Day for my own Service;
therefore it is equal and rational, that thou should set this Day in a
special manner apart for my Worship.

2. The Second Argument is taken from, 2 ly. The Justice of it. The Seventh Day
is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: As if God had said, The Sabbath Day is my
Due, I challenge a special Right in it, and none has any thing to do to lay
claim to it. He who robs me of THIS DAY, and puts it to common Uses, is a
Sacrilegious Person, he steals from the Crown of Heaven, and I will in no wise
hold him guiltless.

3. The Third Argument for sanctifying the Sabbath, is taken from God's own
Pattern, he rested the Seventh Day. As if the Lord should say, Will not you
follow my Pattern? Having finished all my Works of Creation, I rested the
Seventh Day. So you having done all your Secular Work on the Six Days, you
should now cease from the Labor of your Calling, and Dedicate the Seventh Day
to the Lord as a Day of Holy Rest.

4. The Fourth Argument for Sabbath-Sanctification, is taken ab Vtili, from the
Benefit which redounds from a Religious Observation of the Sabbath. The Lord
blessed the Seventh-Day and hallowed it: It is not only a Day of God's
Benediction, God did not only appoint the Seventh-Day, but he blessed the
Seventh Day. The Sabbath Day is not only a Day of Honor to God, but a Day of
Blessing to us; it is not only a Day wherein we give God Worship, but a Day
wherein he gives us Grace; on this Day a Blessing drops down from Heaven. This
is a great Argument for the keeping the Sabbath Day Holy: God is not benefited
by it, we cannot add one Cubit to his Essential Glory; but we our selves are
advantaged: The Sabbath Day religiously observed, entails a Blessing upon our
Souls, our Estate, our Posterity. As the not keeping this Day Holy brings a
Curse, Ier. 17.27. God curses a Man's Blessings, Mal. 2.2. The Bread which he
eats is poisoned with a Curse: So the Conscientious Observation of the Sabbath,
brings all manner of Blessings with it. These are the Arguments to induce
Sabbath-Sanctification. And so I have divided the Commandment into its several
Parts, and explained the Sense of it.

The thing I would have you observe is, That this Commandment about keeping the
Sabbath, was not abrogated with the Ceremonial Law, but it is purely Moral, and
the Observation of the Sabbath is to be continued to the end of the World.
Where can we show that God has given us a Discharge from keeping one Day in
seven? So that I say, this fourth Commandment is Moral, and obliges Christians
to the perpetual Commemoration and Sanctification of the Sabbath.

Quest. Why God has appointed a Sabbath?

Ans. 1. In respect of Himself; it is requisite that God should reserve one Day
in Seven for his own immediate Service, that hereby he might be acknowledged to
be the great Plenipotentiary or Sovereign Lord, who has Power over us both to
command Worship, and appoint the Time when he will be worshipped.

2. In respect of Us. The Sabbath Day makes for our Interest, it promotes
Holiness in us. The business on the Weekday makes us too forgetful of God and
our Souls; the Sabbath brings God into our Remembrance. When the Dust of the
World falling has clogged the Wheels of our Affections, that they would scarce
move toward God, the Sabbath comes and oils the Wheels of our Affections, and
now they move swiftly in Religion: Therefore God has appointed a Sabbath to
ripen our Holiness. On this Day the Thoughts contemplate Heaven, the Tongue
speaks of God, and is as the Pen of a ready Writer; now the Eyes drop Tears,
now the Soul burns in Love. When the Heart was all the Week frozen, now on the
Sabbath it is melted with the Word. The Sabbath is a Friend to Religion, it
files off the Rust of our Graces, it is a Spiritual Jubilee wherein the Soul is
set to converse with its Maker.

I should in the next place show you the Modus, or Manner how we should keep
the Sabbath Day Holy. But before I come to that, I shall propound a great
Question, viz.

Qu. How comes it to pass that we do not keep the Seventh Day Sabbath, as it
was in the Primitive Institution, but have changed it to another Day?

Ans. The old Seventh-day Sabbath (which was the Jewish Sabbath) is abrogated,
and in the room of it, the first Day of the Week, which is the Christian
Sabbath, succeeds. The Morality or Substance of the Fourth Commandment, does
not lie in keeping the Seventh Day precisely, but in keeping one Day in Seven,
which God has appointed.

Qu. But how comes the First Day in the Week to be substituted in the room of
the Seventh Day?

Ans. Not by Ecclesiastical Authority. The Church (says Mr. Perkins) has no
power to Ordain a Sabbath. But,

1. The Change of the Sabbath from the Last Day of the Week to the First, was
by Christ's own Appointment. Christ is Lord of the Sabbath, Mark 2.28. And who
shall appoint a Day, but he who is Lord of it? He made this Day, Psalm 118.24.
This is the Day which the Lord has made. Arnobius and the Current of
Expositors understand it of our Christian Sabbath, and it is called (...), the
Lords Day, Rev. 1.10. As it is called the Lord's Supper, because of the Lords
instituting the Bread and Wine, and setting it apart from a common Use to a
more special and Sacred Use: So it is called the Lords Day, because of the
Lord's Instituting it, and setting it apart from common Days to his special
Worship and Service. Christ arose on the First Day of the Week out of the
Grave, and appeared twice on this Day to his Disciples, John 20.19, 26. which
was to intimate to the Disciples (says Austin and Athanasius) that he
transferred the Jewish Sabbath to the Lord's Day.

2. The keeping of the First Day, (which is the Lord's Day) was the Practice of
the Apostles, 1 Cor. 16.2. Acts 20.7. On the first Day of the Week, when the
Disciples came together to break Bread, Paul Preached to them. Here was both
Preaching and Breaking of Bread on this Day. Austin, and Innocentius, and
Isidore, make the keeping of our Gospel-Sabbath to be an Apostolical Sanction,
and affirm that by Virtue of the Apostles Practice, this Lord's Day is to be
sequestered and set apart for Divine Worship. What the Apostles did, they did it
by Divine Authority, for they were inspired by the Holy Ghost.

3. Besides, the Primitive Church had the Lord's Day, which we now Celebrate in
High Estimation. It was a great Badge of their Religion to observe this Day.
Ignatius the most ancient Father, who lived in the time of St. John the
Apostle, has these Words, Let every one that loves Christ, keep holy the
First Day of the Week, the Lord's Day. This Day has been observed by the
Church of Christ above Sixteen Hundred Years, as Learned Bucer notes. Thus you
see how the Seventh-day Sabbath comes to be changed to the First Day Sabbath.

Now there is a Grand Reason for changing of the Jewish Sabbath to the Lord's
Day, because this puts us in Mind of the Mystery of our Redemption by Christ.
The Reason why God did institute the Old Sabbath, was, Because God would have
it kept as a Memorial of the Creation: But the Lord has now brought the First
Day of the Week in the room of it, in memory of a more Glorious Work than
Creation, and that is Redemption.

Great was the Work of Creation, but greater was the Work of Redemption. As it
was said, Hag. 2.9. The Glory of the Second Temple was greater than the Glory
of the First Temple: So the Glory of the Redemption was greater than the Glory
of the Creation. Great Wisdom was seen in the curious making us, but more
miraculous Wisdom in saving us. Great Power was seen in bringing us out of
nothing, but greater Power in helping us when we were worse than nothing. It
cost more to redeem us than to create us. In the Creation there was but
speaking a Word, Psalm. 148.5. In the Redeeming us there was shedding of Blood,
1 Pet. 1.18, 19. The Creation was the Work of God's Fingers, Psalm. 8.3.
Redemption was the Work of his Arm, Luke 1.5. In the Creation* God gave us our
selves, in the Redemption he gave us Himself: By Creation we have a Life in
Adam, by Redemption we have a Life in Christ, Col. 3.3. By Creation we had a
right to an Earthly Paradise, by Redemption we have a Title to an Heavenly
Kingdom. So that well might Christ change the Seventh Day of the Week into the
First, because this Day puts us in mind of our Redemption, which is a more
glorious Work than the Creation.

Use. The Use I shall make is, That we should have this Christian Sabbath we
now Celebrate in high Veneration. The Jews called the Sabbath, Desiderium
Dierum, The Desire of Days, and the Queen of Days. It is a Day of sweet Rest.
This Day we must call a Delight, the Holy of the Lord, Honorable, Isa. 58.13.
Metal that has the King's Stamp upon it is Honorable, and of great value.
God has set his Royal Stamp upon the Sabbath: It is the Sabbath of the Lord,
this makes it Honorable. This Day we should look upon as the best Day in the
Week. What the Phoenix is among the Birds, what the Sun is among the Planets,
that the Lord's Day is among other Days. This is the Day which the Lord has
made, Psalm. 118.24. God has made all the Days, but he has blessed this. As
Iocob got the Blessing from his Brother, so the Sabbath has got the Blessing
from all the other Days in the Week. The Sabbath is a Day in which we converse
in a special manner with God. The Jews called the Sabbath, Dies Lucis, A Day of
Light; on this Day the Sun of Righteousness shines upon the Soul. The Sabbath
is the Market Day of the Soul, the Cream of Time; this is the Day of Christ's
rising out of the Grave, and the Holy Ghosts descending upon the Earth. This
Day is perfumed with the sweet Odor of Prayer, which goes up to Heaven as
Incense. This Day the Manna falls, that Angels Food; this is the Soul's
Festival Day; on this Day all the Graces act their Part: The other Days of the
Week are most employed about Earth, this Day about Heaven: Then you gather
Straw, now Pearl. Now Christ takes the Soul up into the Mount, and gives it
transfiguring Sights of Glory. Now Christ leads his Spouse into the
Wine-Cellar, and displays the Banner of his Love; now he gives her his Spiced
Wine, and the Juice of the Pomegranate, Cant. 8.2. The Lord does usually reveal
himself more to the Soul on this Day. The Apostle John was in the Spirit on the
Lord's Day, Revel. 1.10. He was carried up in Divine Raptures toward Heaven.
This Day a Christian is in the Altitudes, he walks with God, and takes as it
were a turn with him in Heaven, 1 Ioh. 1.3. On this Day holy Affections are
quickened: The Stock of Grace is improved, Corruptions are weakened. On this
Day Satan falls like Lightning before the Majesty of the Word. Christ wrought
most of his Miracles upon the Sabbath: So he does now. The dead Soul is raised;
the Heart of Stone is made Flesh. How should this Day be highly esteemed, and
had in Reverence! This Day is more precious than Rubies, God has anointed this
Day with the Oil of Gladness above its Fellows. On the Sabbath we are doing
Angels Work, our Tongues are tuned to God's Praises. This Sabbath on Earth is a
Shadow and Type of that Glorious Rest and Eternal Sabbath we hope for in
Heaven, when God shall be the Temple, and the Lamb shall be the Light of it,
Rev. 21.22, 23.

EXODUS XX.9, 10. Six Days shall thou labor and do all thy Work, but the
Seventh Day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall do no manner
of Work, etc.


Six Days shall thou labor -- God would not have any live out of a Calling;
Religion seals no Warrant for Idleness. It Is as well a Duty to labor Six Days,
as to keep Holy Rest on the Seventh Day; Six Days shall thou labor. 2 Thessalonians.
3.11. We hear there are some among you walking Disorderly, (...), working not
at all. Now them that are such we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus, that
with Quietness they work and eat their own Bread. A Christian must not only
mind Heaven, but his Calling. While the Pilot has his Eye to the Star, he has
his Hand to the Stern. Without labor the Pillars of a Commonwealth will
dissolve, and the Earth will be like the Sluggards Field, overrun with Briars,
Prove. 24.31. Adam in Innocence, tho he was the Monarch of the World, yet God
would not have him idle, but he must dress and till the Ground, Genesis 2.15.
Piety does not exclude Industry. Six Days shall thou labor. Standing Water
putrifies. The Inanimate Creatures are in Motion: The Sun goes its Circuit, the
Fountain runs, the Fire sparkles: And Animate Creatures; Solomon sends us to
the Ant and Pismire to learn Labor, Prove. 6.6. Chap. 30.35. The Be is the
Emblem of Industry; some of the Bees trim the Honey, others work the Wax,
others frame the Comb, others lie Sentinel at the Door of the Hive to keep out
the Drone. And shall not Man much more inure himself to labor? That Law in
Paradise was never yet repealed, In the Sweat of thy Brows shall thou eat
Bread, Genesis 3.19. Such Professors are to to be disliked, who talk of living by
Faith, but live out of a Calling. They are like the Lillies which toil not,
neither do they spin, Mat. 6.28. It Is a Speech of Holy and Learned Mr. Perkins,
Let a Man be endued with excellent Gifts, and hear the Word with Reverence, and
receive the Sacrament, yet if he practice not the Duties of his Calling, all is
but Hypocrisy. What is an idle Person good for? What benefit is there of a
Ship that lies always on the shore? Or of Armor that hangs up and rusts? To
live out of a Calling, exposes a Person to Temptation. Melancton calls
Idleness Balneum Diaboli, the Devil's Bath, because he bathes himself with
delight in an idle Soul. We do not use to sow Seed in ground when it lies
fallow; but Satan sows most of his Seed of Temptation in such Persons as lie
fallow, and are out of a Calling. Idleness is the Nurse of Vice. Seneca an
Heathen could say, Nullus mihi per Otium Dies exit: No Day passes me without
some labor. An idle Person stands for a Cipher in the World, and God writes
down no Ciphers in the Book of Life. We read in Scripture of eating the Bread
of Idleness, Prove. 31.27. and drinking the Wine of Violence, Prove. 4.17. It is
as well a sin to eat the Bread of Idleness, as to drink the Wine of Violence.
An idle Person can give no account of his Time. Time is a Talent to trade with,
both in our Particular and General Calling. The slothful Person hides his
Talent in the Earth, he does no good, his Time is not lived but lost. An idle
Person lives unprofitably, he cumbers the ground: God calls the slothful
Servant wicked, Mat. 25.26. Thou wicked and slothful Servant. Draco, whose Laws
were written in Blood, deprived them of their Life, who would not work for
their Living. In Hetruria they caused such Persons to be banished. Idle Persons
live in the Breach of this Commandment, Six Days shall thou labor: Let them
take heed they be not banished Heaven. A Man may as well go to Hell for not
working in his Calling, as for not Believing. So I pass to the next.

But The Seventh Day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall do no
manner of work.

Having spoken already of the Reasons of sanctifying the Sabbath, I come now to
that Question:

Quest. In what manner we are to sanctify the Sabbath?

Resp. 1. Negatively, we must do no Work in it; that is expressed in the
Commandment, In it thou shall do no manner of Work. God has enclosed this Day
for himself, therefore we are not to lay it common by doing any Civil Work. As
Abraham when he went to sacrifice, left his Servant and the Ass at the bottom
of the Hill, Genesis 22.5. So when we are to Worship God this Day, we must leave
all worldly business behind, leave the Ass at the Bottom of the Hill. And as
Joseph when he would speak with his Brethren, thrust out the Egyptians; so when
we would converse with God this Day, we must thrust out all earthly
Employments. The Lord's Day is a Day of Holy Rest, all secular Works must be
forborne and suspended, it is a profaning the Day. N^hem. 13.15. In these days
saw I in Judah some treading Wine-presses on the Sabbath, and bringing in
Sheaves, as also Wine-Grapes and Figs, and all manner of Burdens which they
brought into Jerusalem on the Sabbath Day, and I testified against them. Thou I
contended with the Nobles of Judah, and said to them, What evil thing is this
that ye do, and profane the Sabbath Day. It is Sacrilege to rob that Time for
Civil Work, which God has Dedicated and set apart for his Worship. He that
converts any time of the Sabbath to worldly business, is a worse Thief than he
who robs on the Highway; for such a Thief does but rob Man, but this Thief
robs God, he robs him of his Day. The Lord forbad Manna to be gathered on the
Sabbath, Exodus 16. One would think that might have been dispensed with; for
Manna was the Staff of their Life; and the time when Manna fell was early,
between Five and Six in the morning; so that they might have gathered it
betimes, and all the rest of the Sabbath they might have employed in God's
Worship: And besides, they needed not to have taken any great Journey for
Manna, for it was but stepping out of their Doors, and it fell about their
Tents; yet they might not gather Manna on the Sabbath; and but for purposing to
gather it, God was very angry, Exodus 16.27, 28. There went out some of the
People on the Seventh Day to gather, and they found none, and the Lord said,
How long refuse ye to keep my Commandments and my Laws? Surely the anointing
Christ when he was dead was a commendable Work; but Mary Magdalen, and Mary the
Mother of James, though they had prepared sweet Ointments to anoint the dead Body
of Christ, yet they came not to the Sepulcher to embalm him till the Sabbath
was past, Luke 23.56. They rested on the Sabbath Day, according to the
Commandment. The Hand cannot be busied on the Lord's Day, but the Heart will be
defiled. The very Heathens by the Light of Nature would not do any Secular
Work, in that time which they had set apart for the Worship of their False
Gods. Clem. Alexandrinus reports of one of the Emperors of Rome, that on the
Day of set Worship for his Gods, he did forbear Warlike Affairs, and did spend
that time in his Devotion. To do servile Work on the Sabbath, shows an
irreligious Heart, and highly affronts God. To work servile Work this Day, is
to follow the Devils Plough; it is to debase the Soul. God has made this Day
on purpose to raise the Heart up to Heaven, to converse with God, to do Angels
Work; and to be employed in earthly Work, is to degrade the Soul of it is
Honor. God will not have his Day entrenched upon, or defiled in the least
thing. The Man that gathered sticks on the Sabbath, God would have him stoned,
Numb. 15. One would think that a small thing, to pick a few sticks to make a
Fire; but God would not have his Day violated in the smallest matters. Nay,
that Work which had a reference to a religious Use, might not be done on the
Sabbath, as the hewing of stones for the building of the Sanctuary: Bezaleel,
who was to cut the stones, and carve the Timber out for the Sanctuary, yet he
must forbear it on the Sabbath, Exodus 31.15. A Temple is the place of God's
Worship, but it were a sin to build a Temple upon the Lord's Day. This is
keeping the Sabbath Day holy Negatively, in doing no servile Work. Yet Caution:
Not but that Works of Necessity and Charity may be done on this day. God in
these cases will have Mercy and not Sacrifice.

1. It Is lawful to take the necessary Recruits of Nature: Food is to the Body
as Oil to the Lamp.

2. It Is lawful to do Works of Mercy, as helping our Neighbor when either Life
or Estate are in Danger. Herein the Jews were too nice and precise, they would
not suffer Works of Charity to be done on the Sabbath. If a Man were sick, they
thought on this day they might not use means for his Recovery. Christ charge
them with this, that they were angry that he had wrought a Cure on the Sabbath,
John 7.23. If an House were on Fire, the Jews thought they might not bring
Water to quench it. If a Vessel did run, they thought that on this day they
might not stop it. These were righteous overmuch. Here was seeming Zeal, but it
wanted Discretion to guide it. But unless in these two Cases of Necessity and
Charity, all secular Work is to be suspended and laid aside on the Lord's Day:
In it thou shall do no manner of work; which justly does arraign and condemn
many among us, who do too much foul their Fingers with Work on this Day. Some
in dressing great Feasts, others in opening their Shop-doors and selling Meat
on the Sabbath, which I have seen. The Mariner will not set to Sea but on the
Sabbath, and so runs full Sail into the Breach of this Commandment. Others work
on this Day, tho privately. They put up their Shop-windows, but follow their
Trade within doors: But tho they think to hide their sin under a Canopy, God
sees it. Psalm. 139.7. Whither shall I go from thy Presence? ver. 12. The
Darkness hides not from thee. These Persons do profane this Day, and God will
have an Action of Trespass against them.

2. Positively. We keep the Sabbath Day holy by Consecrating and Dedicating
this Day to the Service of the High God. It Is good to rest on the Sabbath Day
from the works of our Calling: But if we rest from Labor, and do no more, the
Ox and the Ass keep the Sabbath as well as we, for they rest from Labor. We
must dedicate the Day to God, we must not only keep a Sabbath, but sanctify a
Sabbath. This Sabbath-sanctification consists in two things.

I. The solemn Preparation for it. II. The sacred Observation of it.
1. The solemn Preparation for it. If a Prince were to come to your House, what
Preparation would you make for his Entertainment? Sweep the House, wash the
Floor, adorn the Room with the richest Tapestry and Hangings, that there might
be something suitable to the state and dignity of so great a Person. On the
blessed Sabbath God intends to have sweet Communion with you; he seems to say
to you as Christ to Zaccheus, Luke 19.5. Make have and come down, for this day
I must dine with you. Now what Preparation should you make for the entertaining
this King of Glory! Now this Preparation for the Sabbath is, First, When the
Evening of the Sabbath approaches, sound a Retreat, call your Minds off from
the World, and summon your Thoughts together to think of the great Work of the
Day opproaching. Secondly, Purge out all unclean Affections, which may
indispose you for the Work of the Sabbath. Evening-Preparation will be like the
tuning of the Instrument, it will fit the Heart the better for the Duties of
the Sabbath ensuing.

2. The sacred Observation of it, touching which these things are to be
practiced.

(1.) Rejoice at the approach of this Day, as being a Day wherein we have a
Prize for our Souls, and enjoy much of God's Presence, Ioh. 8.56. Abraham saw
my day and rejoiced. So when we see the Light of a Sabbath shine we should
rejoice. Isa. 58.13. Thou shall call the Sabbath a delight: This is the Queen
of Days, which God has Crowned with a Blessing. As there was one Day in the
Week on which God did rain Manna twice as much as upon any other Day, so God
rains down the Manna of Heavenly Blessings twice as much on the Sabbath, as on
any other. This is the Day wherein Christ carries the Soul into the House of
Wine, and displays the Banners of Love over it. Now the Dew of the Spirit falls
on the Soul, whereby it is revived and comforted. How many may write the Lord's
day the day of their New Birth! This day of Rest is a Pledge and Earnest of
that Eternal Rest in Heaven; and shall not we rejoice at the approach of it?
That day on which the Sun of Righteousness shines, should be a day of Gladness.

(2.) Get up betimes on the Sabbath-morning. Christ rose early on this day
before the Sun was up, John 20.1. Did Christ rise early to save us, and shall
not we rise early to worship and glorify him? Psalm. 63.1. Early will I seek
thee. Can we be up betimes on other days? The Husbandman is early at his
Plough, the Traveller rises early to go his Journey, and shall not we, when we
are on this day traveling to Heaven? Certainly did we love God as we should,
we would rise on this day betimes, that we may meet with him whom our Soul
loves. Such as sit up late at work on the Night before, will be so buried in
sleep, that they will hardly be up betimes on a Sabbath-morning.

(3.) Having dressed our Bodies, we must dress our Souls for the hearing of the
Word. As the People of Israel were to wash themselves before the Law was
delivered to them, Exodus 19.10. so we must wash and cleanse our Souls, and that
is by Reading, Meditation and Prayer.

I. By Reading the Word. The Word is a great means to sanctify the Heart, and
bring it into a Sabbath-frame, John 17.17. Sanctify them through thy truth,
etc. And read the Word not carelessly, but with seriousness and affection; it is
the Oracle of Heaven, the Well of Salvation, the Book of Life. David for the
preciousness of God's Word esteemed it above Gold, and for the sweetness above
Honey, Psalm. 19.10. By reading the Word aright, our Hearts when they are dull
are quickened, when they are hard are mollified, when cold and frozen are
enflamed, and we can say as the Disciples, Did not our Hearts burn within us?
Some step out of their Bed to hearing. The Reason why many get no more good on
a Sabbath by the Word Preached, is because they did not break Fast with God in
the Morning by the Reading of his Word.

II. Meditation. Get upon the Mount of Meditation, and so converse with God.
Meditation is the Soul's retiring of its self, that by a serious and solemn
thinking upon God the Heart may be raised up to Divine Affections.

Meditation is a Work fit for the Morning of a Sabbath. Meditate on Four things.

(1.) On the Works of Creation. That is expressed here in the Commandment, The
Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, etc. The Creation is a Looking-glass, in
which we see the Wisdom and Power of God gloriously represented. God produced
this fair Structure of the World without any pre-existent Matter, and with a
Word. Psalm. 33.6. By the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made. The Disciples
wondered that Christ could with a Word calm the Sea, Matthew. 8.26. but it was far
more with a Word to make the Sea. Let us on a Sabbath meditate on the
Infiniteness of our Creator, look up to the Firmament, there we may see God's
Glory blazing in the Sun, twinkling in the Stars; look into the Sea, there we
may see God's Wonders in the Deep, Psalm. 107.24. Look into the Earth, there we
may behold the Nature of Minerals, the Power of the Lodestone, the Virtue of
Herbs, and Beauty of Flowers: By meditating on these Works of Creation so
curiously embroidered, we come to admire God, and praise him, Psalm. 104.24. O
Lord, how manifold are thy Works! in Wisdom have thou made them all. By
meditating on the Works of Creation we come to confide in God. He who can
Create, can Provide; he that could make us when we were nothing, he can raise
us when we are low. Psalm. 124.8. Our Help stands in the Name of the Lord, who
made Heaven and Earth.

(2.) Meditate on God's Holiness. Psalm. 111.9. Holy and reverend is his Name.
Hab. 1.13. Thou art of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity. God is Essentially,
Originally and Efficiently Holy: All the Holiness in Men and Angels is but a
Crystal Stream that runs from this Glorious Ocean. God loves Holiness because
it is his own Image. A King cannot but love to see his own Effigies stamped on
Coin. God counts Holiness his Glory, and the most sparkling Jewel of his Crown.
Exodus 15.11. Glorious in Holiness. Here is a Meditation fit for our first
entrance into a Sabbath, God's Holiness: The Contemplation of this would work
in us such a Frame of Heart as is suitable to an Holy God: It would make us
then Reverence his Name, Hallow his Day: While we are musing of the Holiness of
God's Nature, we begin to be transformed into his Likeness.

(3.) Meditate on Christ's Love in redeeming us, Rev. 1.5. Redemption exceeds
Creation; the one is a Monument of God's Power, the other of his Love. Here is
fit Work for a Sabbath. O the infinite stupendous Love of Christ in raising
poor lapsed Creatures from a state of Guilt and Damnation!

1. That Christ who was God should die; That this Glorious Sun of Righteousness
should be in an Eclipse, we can never enough admire this Love; no, not in
Heaven.

2. That Christ should die for Sinners. Not sinful Angels, but sinful Mankind.
That such Clods of Earth and Sin should be made bright Stars of Glory. O the
amazing Love of Christ! This was Brugensis.
Illustre amoris Christi mnemosynum.

3. That Christ should not only die for Sinners, but die as a Sinner. 2 Cor.
5.21. He was made sin for us. He who was among the Glorious Persons of the
Trinity, was numbered among Transgressors, Isa. 53.12. Not that he had Sin, but
he was like a Sinner, having our Sins imputed to him. Sin did not live in him,
but it was laid upon him. Here was an Hyperbole of Love, enough to strike us
into Astonishment.

4. That Christ should redeem us, when he could not look to gain any thing, or
be at all advantaged by us. Men will not lay out their Money upon a Purchase,
unless it will turn to their Profit. But what Benefit could Christ expect in
purchasing and redeeming us? We were in such a Condition, that we could neither
deserve nor recompense Christ's Love.

First, We could not deserve it, for we were in our Blood, Ezekiel. 16.6. We had
no Spiritual Beauty to tempt Christ. Nay, we were not only in our Blood, but we
were up in Arms, Romans 5.8. When we were Enemies, Christ died for us: When he
was shedding his Blood, we were spitting our Poison.

Secondly, As we could not deserve, so neither could we recompense Christ's
Love. For,

1. After he had died for us, we could not so much as love him, till he made us
love him.

2. We could give Christ nothing in lieu of his Love. Romans 11.35. Who has
first given to him? We were fallen to Poverty; if we have any Beauty, it is
from Christ. Ezekiel. 16.14. Thou were comely through my comeliness which I put
upon thee. If we bring forth any good Fruit, it is not of our own Growth, it
comes from Christ the True Vine, Hos. 14.8. From me is thy Fruit found. So that
it was nothing but pure Love for Christ to lay out his Blood to redeem such as
he could not expect to be really bettered by.

5. That Christ should die so willingly, John 10.17. I lay down my Life. The
Jews could not have taken it away, if he had not laid it down; he could have
called to his Father for a Legion of Angels to be his Lifeguard; but what
needed that, when his Godhead could have defended him from all Assaults? But he
laid down his Life: The Jews did not so much thirst for Christ's Death, as he
thirsted for our Redemption; Luke 12.50. I have a Baptism to be baptized with,
and how am I straightened till it be accomplished. Christ called his Sufferings a
Baptism: He was to be baptized and sprinkled with his own Blood, and Christ
thought the time long before he suffered. (...), How am I straightened till it be
accomplished. Therefore to show Christ's willingness to die, his Sufferings is
called an Offering, Heb. 10.10. By the offering of the Body of Jesus: His Death
was a Free Will Offering.

6. That Christ should not grutch or think much of all his Sufferings, his
being scourged and crucified, (we grutch him a light Service) but that he
should be well contented with what he has done; and if it were to do again, he
would do it. Isa. 53.11. He shall see of the Travel of his Soul, and be
satisfied. As the Mother, tho she has had hard Labor, yet when she sees a
Child brought forth, she does not repent of her Pangs, but is well contented.
So Christ, though he had Hard Travel upon the Cross, which put him into an
Agony, yet he does not think much, he is not troubled, but thinks his Sweat and
Blood well bestowed, because he sees the Man-child of Redemption brought forth
into the World. He shall see of the Travel of his Soul and shall be satisfied.

7. That Christ should make Redemption effectual to some, and not to others.
Here is the Quintessence of Love. Tho there is a Sufficiency in Christ's Merit
to save all, yet only some partake of its saving Virtue; all do not believe.
John 6.64. There are some of you that believe not. Christ does not pray for
all. John 17.9. Some refuse Christ, Psalm. 118.22. This is the Stone which the
Builders refused. Others deride him, Luke 16.14. Others throw off his Yoke.
Luke 19.14. We will not have this Man reign over us. So that all have not the
benefit of Salvation by him. Herein appears the distinguishing Love of Christ,
that the Virtue of his Death should reach some and not others. 1 Cor. 1.26. Not
many wise Men after the Flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called. That
Christ should pass by many of Birth and Parts, and that the Lot of Free Grace
should fall upon thee; that he should sprinkle his Blood upon thee: (...), the
Depth of the Love of Christ.

8. That Christ should love us with such an entire transcendent Love. The
Apostle calls it a Love which passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3.19. That he should love
us more than the Angels: He loves them as his Friends, Believers as his Spouse.
He loves them with such a kind of Love as God the Father bears to him, John
15.9. As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you. O what an Hyperbole of
Love does Christ show in redeeming us!

9. That Christ's Love in our Redemption should be everlasting, John 13.1.
Having loved his own, he loved them, (...), to the end. As Christ's Love is
matchless, so endless: The Flower of Christ's Love is sweet, and that which
makes it sweeter, it never dies. Christ's Love is Eternized, Ier. 31.3. He will
never divorce his Elect Spouse: The Failings of his People cannot quite take
off his Love: They may eclipse his Love, not wholly remove it; their Failings
may make Christ angry with them, but not hate them. Every Failing does not
break the Marriage-knot. Christ's Love is not like the Saints Love; sometimes
they have strong Affections toward Christ, at other times the hot Fit is off,
and they can find little or no Love stirring in them. But it is not so with
Christ's Love to the Saints, it is a Love of Eternity. When the Sunshine of
Christ's Electing Love has once risen upon the Soul, it never sets finally.
Death may take away our Life from us, but not Christ's Love. Behold here a rare
Subject on a Sabbath-morning to meditate upon. The Meditation of Christ's
wonderful Love in Redeeming us, would work in us a Sabbath-Frame of Heart.

First, It would melt us into Tears for our Spiritual Unkindness. That we
should sin against so sweet a Savior, that we should be no more affected with
his Love, but requite Evil for Good. Like the Athenians, who notwithstanding
all the good Service Aristides had done them, banished him out of their City.
That we should grieve Christ with our Pride, rash Anger, our Unfruitfulness,
Animosities, strange Factions: Have we none to abuse but our Friend? Have we
nothing to kick against but the Bowels of a Savior? Did not Christ suffer
enough upon the Cross, but must we needs make him suffer more? Do we give him
more Gall and Vinegar to drink? O, if any thing can dissolve the Heart in
Sorrow, and broach the Eyes with Tears, it is dis-ingenuity and unkindness
offered to Christ. When Peter thought of Christ's Love to him, how he had made
him an Apostle, and revealed his Bosom-Secrets to him, and taken him to the
Mount of Transfiguration, and that he should deny Christ, it broke his Heart
with Sorrow, he went out and wept bitterly, Mat. 26.75. What a blessed thing is
it to have the Eyes dropping Tears on a Sabbath! And nothing would sooner fetch
Tears, than to meditate of Christ's Love to us, and our unkind Requitals.

Secondly, The Meditating on a Lord's Day Morning of Christ's Love, would
kindle Love in our Hearts to Christ. How can we look on Christ bleeding and
dying for us, and our Hearts not be warmed with Love to him? Love is the Soul
of Religion, the purest Affection; it is not Rivers of Oil, but Sparks of Love,
that Christ values. And sure, as David said, While I was musing, the Fire
burned, Psalm. 39.3. So while we are musing of Christ's Love in redeeming us,
the Fire of our Love would burn toward Christ; and then is a Christian in a
Blessed Sabbath-Frame, when he is like a Seraphim burning in Love to Christ.

(4.) On a Sabbath-morning meditate on the Glory of Heaven. Heaven is the
Extract and Quintessence of Happiness. It is called a Kingdom, Mat. 25.34. A
Kingdom for it is Riches and Magnificence: It is set out by Precious Stones,
Gates of Pearl, Rev. 21. There is all that is truly Glorious, transparent
Light, perfect Love, unstained Honor, unmixed Joy; and that which crowns the
Joy of the Celestial Paradise, is Eternity. Suppose Earthly Kingdoms were more
glorious than they are, their Foundations of Gold, their Walls of Pearl, their
Windows of Sapphire, yet they are corruptible: But the Kingdom of Heaven is
Eternal, those Rivers of Pleasure run for evermore, Psalm 16.11. And that
wherein the Essence of Glory consists, and makes Heaven to be Heaven, is the
immediate Sight and Fruition of the Blessed God. Psalm. 17.15. When I awake I
shall he satisfied with thy likeness. O think of this Jerusalem above! This is
proper for a Sabbath.

1. The meditation of Heaven would raise our Hearts above the World. O how
would these things disappear and shrink into nothing, if our Minds were mounted
above the Visible Orbs, and we had a Prospect of Glory!

2. How would the Meditation of Heaven make us Heavenly in our
Sabbath-Exercises* It would quicken Affection, it would add Wings to Devotion,
it would make us to be in the Spirit on the Lord's Day, Rev. 1.10. How
vigorously does he serve God, who has a Crown of Glory always in his Eye!

III. We dress our Souls on a Sabbath-Morning, by Prayer. Mat. 6.6. When thou
Prayest, enter into thy Closet, etc. Prayer sanctifies a Sabbath.

(1.) The things we should pray for on the Morning of a Sabbath.

1. Beg a Blessing upon the Word which is to be Preached, that it may be a
Savor of Life to us, that by it our Minds may be more Illuminated, our
Corruptions more weakened, our Stock of Grace more increased. Pray that God's
special Presence may be with us, that our Hearts may burn within us while God
speaks. Pray that we may receive the Word into meek humble Hearts, James 1.22.
That we may submit to it, and bring forth the Fruits of it. Nor should we only
Pray for our selves, but for others.

First, For him who dispenses the Word; that his Tongue may be touched with a
Coal from God's Altar; That God would warm his Heart, who is to help to warm
others. Your Prayers may be a means to quicken the Minister. Some complain,
they find not that Benefit by the Word Preached. Perhaps they did not Pray for
their Minister as they should. Prayer is like the whetting and sharpening of an
Instrument, which makes it cut the better.

Secondly, Pray with and for your Family: Yea, Pray for all the Congregations
that meet this Day in the Fear of the Lord, that the Dew of the Spirit may fall
with the Manna of the Word, that some Souls may be converted, and others
strengthened, and that Gospel Ordinances may be continued, and have no
Restraint put upon them. These are the things we should pray for. The Tree of
Mercy will not drop its Fruit, unless it be shaken by the Hand of Prayer.

(2.) The Manner of our Prayer. It is not enough to say a Prayer, to pray in a
dull cold manner, which teaches God to deny; but we must Pray with Reverence,
Humility, Hope in God's Mercy, Fervency, Luke 22.44. Christ Prayed (...), more
earnestly. And that we may pray with more Fervency, we must Pray with a Sense
of our Wants. He who is pinched with Want, will be earnest in craving an Alms.
He Prays most Fervently, who Prays most Feelingly. This is to sanctify the
Morning of a Sabbath, and it is a good Preparatory for the Word Preached. When
the Ground is broken up by the Plough, now it is fit to receive the Seed. When
the Heart has been broken by Prayer, now it is fit to receive the Seed of the
Word Preached. Thus you see how to dress your Souls on a Sabbath-morning. There
are other Duties remaining.

EXODUS XX.10.
IV. Having thus dressed your Souls in a Morning, for the further
Sanctification of the Sabbath, address your selves to the Hearing of the Word
Preached.

(1.) And when you are set down in your Seat,

1. Lift up your Eyes to Heaven for a Blessing upon the Word to be dispensed.
For, you must know the Word Preached does not work as Physic, by its own
inherent Virtue, but by a Virtue from Heaven, and the Cooperation of the Holy
Ghost. Therefore put up a short Ejaculatory Prayer for a Blessing upon the
Word, that it may be made effectual to you.

(2.) The Word being begun to be Preached, set your selves in a right manner:

1. With Reverence and Holy Attention. Acts 16.14. A certain Woman named Lydia
attended unto the things that were spoken of Paul. Constantine the Emperor was
noted for his Reverend Attention to the Word. Luke 19.48. Christ taught daily
in the Temple: And all the People were attentive to hear him, (...), in the
Greek, They hung upon his Lip. Could we tell Men of a Rich Purchase, they would
diligently attend: And shall they not much more, when the Gospel of Grace is
Preaching to them? Now that we may sanctify and hallow the Sabbath by
attentive Hearing, take heed of two things: I. Distraction in Hearing. II.
Drowsiness in Hearing.


I. Distraction. 1 Cor. 7.35. That ye may attend upon the Lord without
Distraction. It is said of St. Bernard, That when he came to the Church-Door,
he would say, Stay here all my Earthly Thoughtt. So should we say to our
selves, when we are at the Door of God's House, Stay here all my worldly Cares,
and wandering Cogitations, I am now going to hearken what the Lord will say to
me. Distraction hinders Devotion. Distraction in Hearing is, when the Mind is
tossed with vain Thoughts, and diverted from the Business in hand. It Is hard to
make the Quicksilver Heart fix. St. Hierom complained of himself, Some times
(says he) when I am about God's Service, per Porticus deambulo, I am walking
in the Galleries, and sometimes casting up Accounts. So often in hearing of the
Word the Thoughts dance up and down; and when our Eye is upon the Minister, our
Mind is upon other things. Distracted Hearing is far from sanctifying the
Sabbath. It must needs be very heinous to give way to vain Thoughts at this
time, because when we are hearing the Word, we are now in God's Special
Presence. To do any Treasonable Action in the King's Presence, is high
Impudence. Ier. 23.11. Yea, in my House have I found their Wickedness. So may
the Lord say, In my House, while they are hearing of my Word, I have found
Wickedness; they have wanton Eyes, and their Soul is set on Vanity. This
inhanceth and aggravates the sin.

Qu. Whence do these roving distracted Thoughts in hearing come?

Answ. 1. Partly from Satan. The Devil is no Recusant, he will be sure to be
present in our Assemblies: If he cannot hinder us from hearing, he will hinder
us in hearing. Job 1.6. When the Sons of God came to present themselves before
the Lord, Satan came also among them. The Devil sets vain Objects before the
Fancy to cause a Diversion. Satan's great Design is to render the Word we hear
fruitless: As when one is writing, another joggs him that he cannot write even:
So when we are hearing, the Devil will be jogging us with a Temptation, that we
should not attend to the Word Preached. Zach. 3.1. He showed me Joshua the High
Priest standing before the Angel of the Lord, and Satan standing at his Right
Hand to resist him.

2. These wandering Thoughts in Hearing come partly from our selves. We must not
lay all the blame upon Satan.

(1.) They come from the Eye. A wandering Eye causes wandering Thoughts. A Thief
may be let into the House at a Window: So vain Thoughts are let in at the Eye.
So that as we are bid to keep our Feet when we enter into the House of God,
Eccles. 5.1. so we had need make a Covenant with our Eyes when we are in the
House of God, Job 31.1. that we be not distracted by beholding other Objects.

2. Wandering Thoughts in hearing arise out of the Heart. These Sparks come out
of our own Furnace. Vain Thoughts are the Mud which the Heart (as a troubled
Sea) casts up. Mark 7.21. For from within, out of the Heart of men, proceed
evil Thoughts. It is the Foulness of the Stomach sends up Fumes into the Head;
and the Corruption of the Heart sends up Evil Thoughts into the Mind.

3. Distracted Thoughts in hearing proceed from an Evil Custom. We inure our
selves to vain Thoughts at other times, therefore we cannot forbear them on a
Sabbath. Custom is a Second Nature. Ier. 13.23. Can the Ethiopian change his
Skin, or the Leopard his Spots, then may ye also do good that are accustomed to
do evil? He that is used to bad Company, knows not how to leave it. Such as
have vain Thoughts keeping them Company all the Week, they know not how to get
rid of them on the Sabbath. Let me show you how evil these vain distracting
Thoughts in hearing are.

First, To have the Heart distracted in Hearing, is a Disrespect to God's
Omnisciency. God is an all-seeing Spirit, and Thoughts speak louder in his Ears
than Words do in ours. Amos 4.13. He declares unto Man what is his Thought.
Therefore to make no Conscience of Wandering Thoughts in Hearing, is the
affronting of God's Omnisciency, as if he knew not our Heart, or did not hear
the Language of our Thoughts.

Secondly, To give way to wandering Thoughts in Hearing, is Hypocrisy. We
pretend to hear what God says, and our Mind is quite upon another thing. We
present God with our Bodies, but do not give him our Hearts, Hos. 7.11. This
Hypocrisy God complains of, Isa. 29.13. This People draw near me with their
Mouth, and with their Lips do honor me, but have removed their Heart far from
me. This is to prevaricate, and deal falsely with God.

Thirdly, Vain Thoughts in Hearing discover much want of Love to God. Did we
love God, we should listen to his Words as Oracles, and bind them upon the
Table of our Heart, Prove. 3.3. When a Friend whom we love speaks to us, and
gives us Advice, we mind it with Seriousness, and suck in every Word. The
giving our Thoughts leave to ramble in Holy Duties, shows the Defect of our
Love to God.

Fourthly, Vain impertinent Thoughts in Hearing defile an Ordinance: They are
as dead Flies in the Box of Ointment. When a String in the L^te is out of Tune,
it spoils the Music. Distraction of Thoughts puts our Mind out of Tune, and
makes our Services sound harsh and unpleasant. Wandering Thoughts poison a Duty,
and turn it into sin. Psalm. 109.7. Let his Prayer become sin. What can be
worse, than to have a Man's Praying and Hearing of the Word become sin? Were it
not sad when the Meat we eat should increase bad Humors? So when the Hearing
of the Word, which is the Food of the Soul, should be turned into Sin?

Fifthly, Vain Thoughts in Hearing anger God. If the King were speaking to one
of his Subjects, and he should not give heed to what the King says, but be
thinking on another business, or playing with a Feather, would not this provoke
the King? So when we are in God's Presence, and God is speaking to us in his
Word, and we mind not much what he says, but our Hearts go after Covetousness,
Ezekiel. 33.31. will not this anger God to be thus slighted? God has pronounced a
Curse upon such; Mal. 1.14. Cursed be the Deceiver which has in his Flock a
Male, and Sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt thing. To have strong lively
Affections to the World, here is a Male in the Flock; but to hear the Word with
Distraction, to give God Duties fly-blown with Vain Thoughts, this is to offer
to the Lord a corrupt thing; this brings a Curse, Cursed be the Deceiver.

Sixthly, Vain Thoughts in Hearing (when allowed and not resisted) make way for
hardening the Heart. A Stone in the Heart, is worse than in the Kidneys.
Distracted Thoughts in hearing do not Better the Heart, but Harden it. Vain
Thoughts take away the holy Awe of God which should be upon the Heart, they
make Conscience less Tender, and hinder the Efficacy the Word should have upon
the Heart.

Seventhly, Vain distracting Thoughts rob us of the Comfort of an Ordinance. A
gracious Soul often meets with God in the Sanctuary, and can say as Cant. 3.4. I
found him whom my Soul loves. He is like Jonathan, who having tasted the Honey
on the Rod, his Eyes were enlightened. But Vain Thoughts hinder the Comfort of
an Ordinance, as a black Cloud hides the warm comfortable Beams of the Sun from
us. Will God speak Peace to us when our Minds are wandering, and our Thoughts
are traveling to the Ends of the Earth, Prove. 17.24? If ever you would hear
the Word with Attention, do as Abraham, he drove away the Fowls from the
Sacrifice, Genesis 15.11. So when we find these Excursions and sinful Wanderings
in hearing, labor to drive away the Fowls; get rid of these vain Thoughts;
they are Vagrants, and we must not give them Entertainment.

Qu. But how shall we get help against these Vagabond Thoughts?

Resp. 1. Pray and watch against them.

2. Let the Sense of God's Omniscient Eye overawe our Hearts. The Servant will
not sport in his Masters Presence.

3. Labor for an Holy Frame of Heart. Were the Heart more Spiritual, the Mind
would be less Feathery.

4. Bring more Love to the Word. That which we love we fix our Minds upon. He
that loves his Pleasures and Recreations, his Mind is fixed on them, and he can
follow them without Distraction. Were our Love more set upon the Word Preached,
our Minds would be more fixed upon it. And surely, there is enough to make us
love the Word Preached, for it is the Word of Life -- the Inlet to Knowledge,
the Antidote against Sin, the Quickner of Holy Affections: It is the True
Manna, which has all sorts of sweet Tastes in it. It is the Pool of Bethesda,
in which the Rivers of Life spring forth to heal the broken in Heart. It is a
Soveveraign Elixir or Cordial to revive the sorrowful Spirit. Get Love to the
Word Preached, and you will not be so distracted in hearing. What the Heart
delights in, the Thoughts dwell upon.

II. If you would sanctify the Sabbath by deligent attentive hearing, take
heed of Drowsiness in Hearing. Drowsiness shows much Irreverence. How lively
are many when they are about the World, but in the Worship of God how drowsy,
as if the Devil had given them some Opium to make them sleep! A Drowsy Temper
is ( now) very absurd and sinful. Are not you in Prayer asking Pardon of sin?
Will the Prisoner fall asleep when he is begging his Pardon? In the Preaching
of the Word is not the Bread of Life breaking to you, and will a Man fall
asleep at his Food? Which is worse, to stay from a Sermon, or sleep at a
Sermon? While you sleep, perhaps that Truth was delivered, which might have
converted your Souls. Besides, sleeping is very offensive in these Holy
Assemblies: It is not only a grieving the Spirit of God, but a making the
Hearts of the Righteous sad, Ezekiel. 13.22. It troubles them to see any show such
a Contempt of God and his Worship; to see Men busy in the Shop, but drowsy in
the Temple. Therefore as Christ said, Mat. 26.40. Could ye not watch one Hour?
So can ye not wake one Hour? I deny not but a Child of God may sometimes
through Weakness and Indisposition of Body drop asleep at a Sermon, but it is
not voluntary or ordinary. The Sun may be in an Eclipse, but not often. If
sleeping be customary, and allowed, it is a very bad sign, and is a profaning
of the Ordinance. A good Remedy against Drowsiness is to use a Spare Diet upon
this Day. Such as indulge their Appetite too much on a Sabbath, are fitter to
sleep on a Couch than pray in the Temple. Now, that you may throw off
Distracting Thoughts and Drowsiness on the Lord's Day, and may hear the Word
with reverend Attention, consider,

1. It is God that speaks to us in his Word; therefore the Preaching of the
Word is called the Breath of his Lips, Isa. 11.4. And Christ is said now to
speak to us from Heaven, Heb. 12.25. as a King speaks in his Ambassador.
Ministers are but as the Pipes and Organs, it is the Spirit of the Living God
breathes in them: When we come to the Word, we should think thus with our
selves, God speaks in this Preacher. The Thessalonians heard the Word Paul
Preached, as if God himself had spoken to them, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. When ye received
the Word of God, which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the Word of Men,
but (as it is in truth) the Word of God. When Samuel knew it was the Lord that
spoke to him, he lent his Ear, 1 Samuel 3.10. If we do not regard God when he
speaks to us, he will not regard us when we pray to him.

2. Consider how serious and weighty the matters delivered to us are. As Moses
said, Deuteronomy. 30.19. I call Heaven and Earth ^o record this day, that I have set
before you Life and Death. Can Men be regardless of the Word, or drowsy when
the weighty matters of Eternity are set before them? We Preach of Faith, and
Holiness of Life, and the Day of Judgment, and the Eternal Recompenses; here is
Life and Death set before you; and does not all this call for serious
Attention? If a Letter were read to one of special business, wherein his Life
and Estate were concerned, would not he be very serious in listening to that
Letter? In the Preaching of the Word, your Salvation is concerned, and if ever
you will attend, it should be now, Deuteronomy. 32.47. It is not a vain thing for you,
because it is your Life.

3. To give way to Vain Thoughts and Drowsiness in hearing, does much gratify
Satan. He knows, that not to mind a Duty, is all one as not to do a Duty.
Quicquid cor non facit, non sit; in Religion, What the Heart does not do, is
not done. Therefore Christ says of some, Hearing they hear not, Mat. 13.13.
How could that be? Because though the Word sounded in their Ear, yet they minded
not what was said to them; their Thoughts were upon other things; therefore it
was all one as if they did not ^ear. Hearing they hear not. And does not this
please Satan, to see Men come to the Word, and as good stay away? They are
haunted with vain Thoughts, they are taken off the Duty while they are in it;
their Body is in the Assembly, their Heart in their Shop; Hearing they hear not.

4. It may be the last Sabbath that ever we shall keep. We may go from the
place of Hearing to the place of Judging, and shall not we give Reverend
Attention to the Word? Did we think thus when we come into God's House, Perhaps
this will be the last time that ever God will counsel us about our Souls;
before another Sermon Death's Alarm will sound in our Ears: With what
Attention and Devotion should we come hither, and our Affections would be all
on Fire in hearing!

5. You must give an Account for every Sermon you hear, Luke 16.2. Read
rationem: Give an account of thy Stewardship. So will God say, Give an Account
of thy Hearing. Have thou been affected with the Word? Have thou profited by
it? And how can we give an Account, if we have been distracted in hearing, and
have not taken notice what has been said to us? The Judge to whom we must give
an Account is God. Were one to give an Account to Man, he might falsify his
Accounts, but we must give an Account to God. Bern.
Nec donis corrumpitur, nec blanditiis fallitur. He is so Just a God, that he
cannot be bribed; and so Wise, that he cannot be deceived. Therefore being to
give an Account to such an impartial Judge, how should we observe every Word
Preached, remembering the Account! Let all this make us shake off Distraction
and Drowsiness in Hearing, and have our Ears chained to the Word.

EXODUS XX.8. Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy, etc.


II. If you would hear the Word aright, lay aside those things which may render
the Word Preached ineffectual. As,

1. Curiosity. Some come to the Word Preached, not so much to get Grace, as to
enrich themselves with Notions. Itching Ears, 2 Timothy 4.3. Austin confesses
that before his Conversion, he went to hear St. Ambrose rather for his
Eloquence, than the Spirituality of the matter. Ezekiel. 33.32. Thou art unto them
as a very lovely Song of one that has a pleasant Voice, and can play well on
an Instrument. Many come to the Word only to feast their Ears; they like the
Melody of the Voice, the Mellifluous Sweetness of the Expression, the Newness
of the Notion, Acts 17.21. This is to love the Garnishing of the Dish more than
the Food. This is to desire to be pleased, rather than edifyed. Like a Woman
that paints her Face, but neglects her Health. So they paint and adorn
themselves with curious Speculations, but neglect their Souls Health. This
hearing does neither sanctify the Heart nor the Sabbath.

2. Lay aside Prejudice.

(1.) Prejudice against the Truths Preached. The Sadduces were prejudiced
against the Doctrine of the Resurrection, Luke 20.27.

(2.) Prejudice against the Person preaching, 1 King. 22.8. There is one
Micaiah, by whom we may enquire of the Lord, but I hate him. This hinders the
Virtue of the Word. If a Patient has an ill Opinion of his Physician, he will
not take any of his Receipts tho never so good. Prejudice in the Mind is like
an Obstruction in the Stomach, which hinders the Nutritive Virtue of the Meat.
Prejudice poisons the Word, and makes it to lose its Efficacy.

3. Lay aside Covetousness. Covetousness is in not only getting the World
unjustly, but loving it inordinately. This is a Great Hindrance to the Word
Preached. The Seed which fell among Thorns was choked, Mat. 13.22. An Emblem of
the Word being Preached to a Covetous Hearer. The Covetous Man is thinking of
the World when he is hearing; his Heart is in his Shop. Ezekiel. 33.31. They sit
before thee as my People, and they hear thy Words, but their Heart goes after
their Covetousness. A Covetous Hearer derides the Word, Luke 16.14. The
Pharisees who were covetous heard all, and they derided him.

4. Lay aside Partiality. Partiality in hearing is, when we like to hear some
Truths Preached, but not all. We love to hear of Heaven, but not of
Self-denial; of reigning with Christ, but not of suffering; of the more Facil
Duties of Religion, but not them which are more knotty and difficult, as
Mortification, laying the Ax to the Root, and hewing down their Beloved Sin,
Isa. 30.10. Proyhesie smooth things, such as may not grate upon our Conscience.
Many like to hear of the Love of Christ, but not of loving their Enemies: They
like the Comforts of the Word, not the Reproofs. Herod heard John Baptist
gladly; he liked many Truths, but not when he spoke against his Incest. Lay
aside Partiality.

5. Lay aside Censoriousness. Some instead of judging themselves for Sin, sit
as Judges upon the Preacher: Either his Sermon had too much Gall in it, or it
was too long: These will sooner censure a Sermon than practice it. God will
judge the Judger. Mat. 7.1.

6. Lay aside Disobedience, Romans 10.21. All the day long have I stretched forth
my hands unto a disobedient People. It Is spoken of the Jews, God stretched out
his Hands in the Preaching of the Word, but they rejected Christ. Let there be
none among you that wilfully refuse the Counsels of the Word: It Is sad to have
an Adders Ear, an Adamant Heart. Zac. 7.11, 12. If when God speaks to us in his
Word we are deaf, when we speak to him in Prayer he will be dumb.

III. If you would hear the Word aright, have God Ends in hearing. Come to the
Word to be made better. Some have no other end in hearing, but because it is in
Fashion, or to gain Repute, or stop the Mouth of Consbience. But come to the
Word to be made more Holy. There Is a great deal of difference between one that
goes to a Garden for Flowers to wear in her Bosom, and another that goes for
Flowers to make Syrups and Medicines of. We should go to the Word for a
Medicine to cure us; as Naaman the Syrian went to Jordan to be healed of his
Leprosy. 1 Pet. 2.2. Desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that ye may grow
thereby. Come to the Word to be changed into the Similitude of it. As the Seal
leaves its Print upon the Wax, so labor that the Word Preached may leave the
Print of its own Holiness upon your Heart. Labor that the Word may have such a
Virtue upon you as the Water of Jealousy, to kill and make fruitful, Numb.
5.27. That it may kill your Sins, and make your Souls fruitful in Grace.

IV. If you would hear the Word aright, come to it with Delight. The Word
Preached is a Feast of fat things. With what Delight do Men come to a Feast?
The Word Preached anoynts the blind Eye, mollifies the Rocky Heart; it beats
off our Fetters, and turns us from the Power of Satan to God, Acts 26.18. The
Word is the Seed of Regeneration, Iam. 1.18. the Engine of Salvation. Hear the
Word with Delight and Complacency. Ier. 15.16. Thy Words were found and I did
eat them, they were the joy and rejoicing of my Heart. Psalm. 119.103. How sweet
are thy words unto my taste, yea, sweeter than Honey unto my mouth. Yea, love
that Word which comes most home to the Conscience. Bless God when your
Corruptions have been met with; when the Sword of the Spirit has divided
between you and your Sins. Who cares for that Physic which will not work?

V. If you would hear the Word aright, mix it with Faith. Believe the Verity of
the Word Preached, that it is that Word by which you must be judged; and not
only give Credence to the Word Preached, but learn to apply it to your own
Souls. Faith concocts the Word, and turns it into Spiritual Nourishment. Many
hear the Word, but it may be said of them as Psalm. 106.24. They believed not
his Word. As Melancton once said to some of the Italians, Ye Italians Worship
God in the Bread, when ye do not believe him to be in Heaven So many hear God's
Word, but do not believe that God is; they question the Truth of his Oracles.
If we do not mix Faith with the Word, it is like leaving out the Chief
Ingredient in a Medicine, which makes it ineffectual. Unbelief hardens Men's
Hearts against the Word. Acts 19.9. Diverse were hardened and believed not. Men
hear many Truths delivered concerning the Preciousness of Christ, the Beauty of
Holiness, the Felicity of a Glorified Estate; but if through Unbelief and
Atheism they question these Truths, we may as well speak to the Stones and
Pillars of the Church as to them. That Word which is not Believed can never be
Practiced. Hierom.
Vbi male creditur, ibi nec been vivitur. Unbelief makes the Word Preached of
no effect. Heb. 9.2. The Word preached did not profit, not being mixed with
Faith in them that heard it. The Word to an Unbeliever is like Dioscordium put
into a Dead Man's Mouth, which loses all its Virtue. If there be any
Unbelievers in our Congregations, what shall Ministers say to God at the last
Day? Lord, we have preached to the People thou sentest us to; we showed them
our Commission, we declared unto them the whole Counsel of God, but they
believed never a Word we spoke: We told them what would be the Fruit of Sin,
but they would drink their Sugared Draught, tho there was Death in the Cup:
Lord, we are free from their Blood. God forbid that ever Ministers should make
this Report to God of their People: But this they must be forced to do, if
People live and die in Unbelief. Would you sanctify a Sabbath in hearing the
Word aright? Hear the Word with Faith. The Apostle puts these two together,
Belief and Salvation. Heb. 10.39. We are of them that believe to the Saving of
the Soul.

VI. If you would hear the Word aright, hear it with meek Spirits, Iam. 1.21.
Receive the Word in mansuetudine, with meekness. Meekness is a submissive Frame
of Heart to the Word. Contrary to this Meekness is Fierceness of Spirit, when
Men rise up in a Rage against the Word. As if the Patient should be angry with
the Physician when he gives him a Receipt to purge out his bad Humors. Acts
7.54. When they heard this they were cut to the Heart, and gnashed on Stephen
with their Teeth. 2 Chronicles. 16.10. Asa was wroth with the Seer, and put him in a
Prisonhouse. Pride and Guilt make Men ^ret at the Word. What made Asa storm so
but Pride? He was a King, and thought he was too good to be told of his Sin.
What made Cain so angry, when God said to him, Where is Abel thy Brother? Says
he, Am I my Brothers Keeper? What made him so touchy, but Guilt? He had embrued
his Hands in his Brothers Blood. If you would hear the Word aright, lay down
your Passions, Receive the Word with Meekness; get humble Hearts to submit to
the Truths delivered. God takes the meek Person to be his Scholar. Psalm. 25.9.
The Meek will he teach his way. Meekness makes the Word Preached to be (...),
an engrafted Word, Iam. 1.21. A good Cion grafted into a Bad Stock, changes
the Nature of it, and makes it bear sweet and generous Fruit. So when the Word
Preached is grafted into Man's Heart, it sanctifies them, and makes them bring
forth the sweet Fruits of Righteousness. By Meekness it becomes an engrafted
Word.

VII. If you would hear the Word aright, be not only attentive, but retentive:
Lay the Word up in your Memories and Hearts, Luke 8.15. The Seed on the good
Ground are they, who having heard the Word keep it. The Greek Word (...), to
keep, signifies to hold the Word fast that it does not run from us. If the Seed
be not kept in the Ground, but is presently washed away, it is sown to little
purpose: So if the Word Preached be not kept in your Memories and Hearts, it is
Preached in vain. Many People have Memories like leaking Vessels, the Word goes
out as fast as it comes in. How can it profit? If a Treasure be put in a Chest,
and the Chest be not locked, it may easily be taken out. A bad Memory is like a
Chest without a Lock, the Devil can easily take out all the Treasure. Luke
8.12. Then comes the Devil and takes away the Word out of their Hearts. Labor
to keep in Memory the Truths you hear. The things we esteem we are not so apt
to forget. Will a Bride forget her Jewels? Ier. 2.32. Can a Maid forget her
Ornaments? Did we prize the Word more, we should not so soon forget it. If the
Meat does not stay in the Stomach, but comes up as fast as we eat it, it cannot
nourish: So if the Word stays not in the Memory, but is presently gone, it can
do the Soul but little good.

VIII. If you would hear aright, practice what you hear; Practice is the Life
of all. Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may
have right to the Tree of Life. Bare Hearing will be no Plea at the Day of
Judgment. Lord, I have heard so many Sermons. But God will say, What Fruits of
Obedience have ye brought forth? The Word we Preach is not only to inform you,
but to reform you; not only to mend your Sight, but to mend your Pace in the
way to Heaven. A good Hearer is like the Helitropium, etc. it opens and shuts
with the Sun, to God, against Sin. Now that you may sanctify a Sabbath by
Hearing:

1. If you do not hear the Word aright, you lose all your Labor. How many a
weary Step have you taken? Your Body has been crowded, your Spirit faint; if
you are not bettered by hearing, if you are as proud, as vain, as earthly as
ever, all your hearing is lost. You would be loath to Trade in vain; and why not
as well to hear Sermons in vain? Job 9.29. Why then labor I in vain? Put this
Question to thy own Soul, Why labor I in vain? Why do I take all this Pains to
hear, yet have not the Grace to practice? I am as bad as ever, why then labor
I in vain?

2. If you hear the Word, and are not bettered by it, you are like the
Salamander in the Fire, not hotter; your hearing will increase your
Condemnation. Luke 12.47. That Servant which knew his Lord's Will and did it
not, shall be beaten with many Stripe^. We pity such as know not where to hear;
it will be worse with such as care not how they hear. To graceless disobedient
Hearers every Sermon will be a Faggot to heat Hell. It Is sad to go laden to
Hell with Ordinances. O beg the Spirit to make the Word Preached effectual.
Ministers can but speak to the Ear, the Spirit speaks to the Heart. Acts 10.44.
While Peter spoke, the Holy Ghost sell upon all them that heard the Word.

V. Having heard the Word in an Holy and Spiritual manner, for the further
Sanctification of the Sabbath, confer of the Word. We are forbid on this Day to
speak our own Words, Isa. 58.14. but we must speak of God's Word. Speak of the
Sermon as you sit together; This is one part of sanctifying the Sabbath. Good
Discourse brings holy Truths into our Memories, and fastens them upon our
Hearts. Mal. 3.17. Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another.
There is a great Power and Efficacy in good Discourse. Job 6.25. How forcible
are right words! By holy Conference on a Sabbath, one Christian helps to warm
another when he is frozen, to strengthen another when he is weak. Latimer
confessed he was much furthered in Religion, by having Conference with Mr.
Bilny the Martyr. Psalm. 119.172. My Tongue shall speak of thy Word. One reason
why Preaching the Word on a Sabbath does no more good, is, because there is so
little good Conference. Few speak of the Word they have heard, as if Sermons
were such Secrets, that they must not be spoken of again: Or, as if it were a
shame to speak of that which will save us.

VI. Shut up the Sabbath-Evening with Repetition, Singing of Psalms and Prayer:
Beg that God would bless the Word you have heard; but I hope your Practice
herein will prevent my farther speaking. Could we but* thus spend a Sabbath, we
might be in the Spirit on the Lord's Day, Rev. 1.10. our Souls might be
nourished and comforted: And this Sabbath which we now keep, would be an
earnest of that everlasting Sabbath which we shall Celebrate in Heaven.

EXODUS XX.8. Remember to keep the Sabbath Day Holy.


Use I. See here a Christians Duty, To keep the Sabbath Day Holy.

1. The whole Sabbath is to be Dedicated to God. It is not said, Keep a part of
the Sabbath holy, but the whole day must be religiously observed. If God has
given us Six Days, and taken but One to himself, shall we grudge him any part
of that Day? It were Sacrilege. The Jews kept a whole Day to the Lord, and we
are not to abridge or curtail the Sabbath, (says St. Austin) more than the
Jews did. The very Heathens by the Light of Nature did set apart a whole Day in
the Honor of their False Gods: Macrobius
And Scaevola their High Priest did affirm, That the wilful Transgression of
that Day could have no Expiation or Pardon. Whoever do rob any part of the
Sabbath for servile Work or Recreation, Scaevola the High Priest of the
Heathenish Gods shall rise up in Judgment against such Christians and condemn
them. And they who say, that to keep a whole Sabbath is too Iudaical, let them
show where God has made any Abatement of the Time of Worship, where he has
said, You shall keep but a Part of the Sabbath. And if they cannot show that,
it argues much Boldness to go to rob God of his Due. That a whole Day be
designed and set apart for God's special Worship, is a perpetual Statute while
the Church remains upon the Earth, says Pet. Martyr. Of this Opinion also were
Die Dominico nihil aliud vacandum nisi ad pietati^ munia.
Theodoret, Austin, Iraeneus, and the Chief of the Fathers.

2. As the whole Sabbath is to be Dedicated to God, so it must be kept Holy.
You see the manner of sanctifying the Lord's Day, by Reading, Meditation,
Prayer, hearing of the Word, and by Singing of Psalms, to make Melody to the
Lord. Now, besides what I have said for the keeping this Day holy, let me make
a short Comment or Paraphrase on that Scripture, Isa. 58.13. If thou turn away
thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the
Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and shall honor him, not
doing thy own ways, nor finding thy own pleasure, nor speaking thy own words.
Here is a Description of the right sanctifying a Sabbath.

(1.) If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath.] That may be understood
either Literally or Principally.

First, Literally. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, that is, If
thou withdrawest thy Foot from taking long Walks or Journeys on the
Sabbath Day. So the Jewish Doctors expound it. Or,

Secondly. Spiritually. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, that is,
If thou turn away thy Affections (the Feet of thy Soul) from enclining to any
worldly Business.

(2.) From doing thy Pleasure on my holy Day.] That is, Thou must not do that
which may please the Carnal Part, as Sports and Pastimes. This is to do the
Devil's Work on God's Day.

(3.) And call the Sabbath a Delight.] Call it a Delight, that is, esteem it
so. Tho the Sabbath be not a Day for Carnal Pleasure, yet holy Pleasure is not
forbidden. The Soul must take pleasure in the Duties of a Sabbath. The Saints
of old counted the Sabbath a Delight. The Jews called the Sabbath, Dies Lucis,
A Day of Light. The Lord's Day, on which the Sun of Righteousness shines, is
both a Day of Light and Delight. This is the Day of sweet Intercourse between
God and the Soul. On this Day a Christian makes his Sallies out to Heaven, his
Soul is lifted above the Earth; and can this be without Delight? The higher the
Bird flies, the sweeter it sings. On a Sabbath the Soul acts its Love to God;
and where the Love is, there is the Delight. On this Day a Believers Heart is
melted, q. d. quickened, enlarged in Holy Duties; and how can all this be, and
not a secret Delight go along with it? On a Sabbath a gracious Soul can say as
Cant. 2.3. I sat under his shadow with great delight, and his Fruit was sweet
to my taste. How can a Spiritual Heart choose but call the Sabbath a Delight? Is
it not delightful to a Queen to be putting on her Wedding Robes in which she
shall meet the King her Bridegroom? When we are about Sabbath-Exercises, we are
dressing our selves, and putting on our Wedding-Robes in which we are to meet
our Heavenly Bridegroom the Lord Jesus? And is not this delightful? On the
Sabbath God makes a Feast of fat things, he Feasts the Ear with his Word, and
the Heart with his Grace. Well then may we call the Sabbath a Delight; and to
find this holy Delight, is to be in the Spirit on the Lord's Day.

(4.) The Holy of the Lord, honorable.] In the Hebrew it is (...), Glorious.
To call the Sabbath Honorable, is not to be understood so much of an outward
Honor given to it by wearing richer Apparel, or having better Diet on this
Day, as the Jewish Doctors corruptly gloss. This is the chief Honor some give
to this Day. But thou shall call the Sabbath Honorable, that is meant, of the
Honor of the Heart that we give to this Day, reverencing it, and esteeming it
the Queen of Days. We are to count the Sabbath Honorable, because God has
honored it. All the Persons in the Trinity have honored it, God the Father
blessed it, God the Son rose upon it, God the Holy Ghost descended on this Day,
Acts 2.1. And indeed this Day is to be honored of all good Christians, and had
in high Veneration. It is a Day of Renown: On this Day a Golden Scepter of
Mercy is held forth. The Christian Sabbath is the very Crepusculum and Dawning
of the Heavenly Sabbath. It is honorable, because this Day God comes down to
us, and visits us. To have the King of Heaven present in a special manner in
our Assemblies, makes the Sabbath Day honorable. Besides, the Work that is
done on this Day makes it honorable. The Six Days are filled up with-servile
Work, which makes them lose much of their Glory, but on this Day Sacred Work is
done. The Soul is employed wholly about the Worship of God; it is Praying,
Hearing, Meditating; it is doing Angels Work, Praising and Blessing of God.
Again, The Day is Honorable by virtue of a Divine Institution. Silver is of it
self valuable; but when the Royal Stamp is put upon it, it is honorable. So
God has put a Sacred Stamp upon this Day, the stamp of Divine Authority, and
the stamp of Divine Benediction. This makes it honorable. This is a
sanctifying the Sabbath, to call it a Delight, and Honorable.

(5.) Not doing thy own ways.] That is, Thou shall not defile the Day by doing
any Servile Work.

(6.) Nor Finding thy own pleasure.] That is, not gratifying the Fleshly Part
by Walks, Visits or Pastimes.

(7.) Nor Speaking thy own Words.] That is, Words Heterogeneous and unsuitable
for a Sabbath, vain impertinent Words, Discourses of Worldly Affairs. Here is
the sanctifying of a Sabbath described.

Use II. If the Sabbath Day be to be kept holy, it reproves them, who instead
of sanctifying the Sabbath, profane it. They take that Time which should be
Dedicated wholly to God, and spend it in the Service of the Devil and their
Lusts. The Lord has enclosed this Day for his own Worship, and they lay God's
Day common: God has set an Hedge about this Commandment, Remember, and they
break this Hedge. But he who breaks an Hedge, a Serpent shall bite him, Eccles.
10.8. The Sabbath Day in England lies bleeding: And Oh! that our Parliament
would pour in some Balm into the Wounds which the Sabbath has received. How is
this Day profaned, by sitting idle at home, by selling Meat, by vain Discourse,
by sinful Visits, by walking in the Fields, by using Sports. The People of
Israel might not gather Manna on the Sabbath, and may we use Sports and
Dancings on this Day? Truly it should be matter of Grief to us to see so much
Sabbath-profanation. When one of Darius's Eunuchs saw Alexander setting his
Feet on a rich Table of Darius's, he fell a weeping. Alexander asked him why he
wept? He said, It was to see the Table which his Master so highly esteemed, to
be now made a Footstool. So we may weep to see the Sabbath Day, which God so
highly esteems, and has so honored and blessed, to be made a Footstool, and
to be trampled upon by the Feet of Sinners. To profane the Sabbath is a Sin of
an High Nature; it is a wilful Contempt of God: It is not only a Casting God's
Law behind our back, but a trampling it under foot. God says, Keep the Sabbath
holy, but Men will pollute it: This is to despise God, to hang out the Flag of
Defiance, to throw down the Gantlet, and challenge God himself. Now how can God
endure to be thus saucily confronted by proud Dust? God will not suffer this
high Impudence to go unpunished. This will draw God's Curses upon the
Sabbath-breaker, and God's Curse blasts where it comes. No sooner did Christ
curse the Fig Tree, but it withered. Tho the Law of the Land lets
Sabbath Breakers alone; to rob a Man of his Purse shall be punished with Death,
but to rob God of his Day shall not be punished with Death. But God will take
the matter into his own hand; he will see after the punishing of
Sabbath-violation: And how does he punish it?

1. With Spiritual Plagues. He gives up Sabbath-profaners to hardness of Heart,
and a seared Conscience. Spiritual Judgments are sorest. Psalm. 81.12. So I gave
them up to their own Hearts Lusts. A Sear in the Conscience is a Brand-mark of
Reprobation.

2. God punishes this Sin of Sabbath-breaking, by giving them up to commit
other Sins. God to revenge the breaking of his Sabbath, suffers Men to break
open Houses, and so come to be punished by the Magistrate. How many such
Confessions have we heard from Thieves going to be executed! They never
regarded the Sabbath, and so God suffered them to commit those heinous Sins,
for which now they are to die.

3. God punishes Sabbath-breaking by sudden visible Judgments on Men for this
Sin. God punishes them in their Estates, and in their Persons. One carrying
Corn into his Barn on the Lord's Day, both House and Corn consumed with Fire
from Heaven. In Wiltshire there was a Dancing Match appointed upon the Lord's
Day, and one of the Company as he was dancing fell down dead suddenly, and so
was made a Spectacle of God's Justice. The Theater of God's Judgments relates
of one, who used every Lord's Day to hunt in Sermon-time, and he had a Child by
his Wife with an Head like a Dog, and it cried like an Hound. His Sin was
monstrous, and it was punished with a monstrous Birth. The Lord threatened the
Jews, That if they would not hallow the Sabbath Day, he would kindle a Fire in
their Gates, Jer. 17.27. The dreadful Fire which brake out in London began on
the Sabbath Day; as if God would tell us from Heaven, he was then punishing us
for our Sabbath-profanation. Nor does God punish it only in this Life with
Death, but with Damnation. Such as break God's Sabbath, let them see if they
can break those Chains of Darkness in which they and the Devils shall be held.

Use III. It exhorts us to Sabbath-holiness.

I. Make Conscience of keeping this Day Holy. The other Commandments have only
an Affirmative in them, or a Negative: This Fourth Commandment has both an
Affirmative in it, and a Negative: Thou shall keep the Sabbath Day holy: And,
Thou shall not do any manner of Work in it: To show how carefully God would
have us observe this Day. Nor only must you keep this Day your Selves, but have
a care that all under your Charge keep it. Thou, and thy Son, and thy Daughter,
and thy Manservant, and thy Maidservant. That is, Thou who art a Superior, a
Parent or a Master, thou must have a Care that not only thy self sanctify the
Day, but those who are under thy Trust and Tuition. To blame are those Masters
of Families, who are careful that their Servants serve them, but have no care
that they serve God. They care not though their Servants should serve the
Devil, so long as their Bodies do them Service. That which St. Paul says to
Timothy, 1 Timothy 6.20. Serva Depositum, Keep that which is committed to thy
Trust, is of a large Extension. Not only have a Care of thy own Soul, but have
a Care of the Souls thou art entrusted with. See that they who are under thy
Charge sanctify the Sabbath. God's Law provided, That if a Man met an Ox or an
Ass going astray, he should bring him back again: Much more when thou see the
Soul of thy Child or Servant going astray from God, and breaking his Sabbath,
thou should bring him back again to a Religious Observation of this Day. Now
that I may press you to Sabbath-Sanctification, consider,

(1.) God has promised great Blessings to the strict Observers of this Day. 1.
A Promise of Joy. Psalm. 37.4.
If this Day be a Delight, Isa. 58.14. Then shall thou delight thy self in the
Lord. Delighting in God is both a Duty, and a Reward. In this Text it is a
Reward, Then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord: As if God had said, If
thou keep the Sabbath Conscientiously, I will give thee that which shall fill
thee with Delight. If thou keep the Sabbath willingly, I will make thee keep
it joyfully: I will give thee those Enlargements in Duty, and that inward
Comfort as shall abundantly satisfy thee; thy Soul shall overflow with such a
stream of Joy, that thou shall say, Lord, in keeping thy Sabbath there is great
Reward. And, 2. Of Honor.
I will cause thee to ride upon the High Places of the Earth: That is, I will
advance thee to Honor, ascendere faciam; so Munster interprets it. Some by the
High Places of the Earth understand Iudaea: So Grotius. I will bring thee into
the Land of Iudaea, which is higher situated than the other Countries adjacent.
3. Of Earth and Heaven.
And I will feed thee with the Heritage of Jacob. That is, I will feed thee
with all the delicious things of Canaan, and afterward I Will translate thee to
Heaven, whereof Canaan was but a Type -- And another Promise, Isa. 56.2.
Blessed is the Man that does this, that keeps the Sabbath from polluting it.
Blessed is the Man; in the Hebrew it is, [in the Plural, Ashre,] Blessedness.
To him that keeps the Sabbath holy, here is Blessedness upon Blessedness
belongs to him: he shall be blessed with the Upper and Nether Springs; he shall
be blessed in his Name, Estate, Soul, Progeny. Who would not keep the Sabbath
from polluting it, that shall have so many Blessings entailed upon him and his
Posterity after him?

(2.) A Conscientious keeping the Sabbath seasons the Heart for God's Service
all the Week after. Christian, the more holy thou art on a Sabbath, the more
holy thou will be on the Week following.

EXODUS XX.12. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy Days may be long upon
the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee.


Having done with the First Table, I am next to speak of the Duties of the
Second Table. The Commandments may be likened to Jacob's Ladder: The First
Table, as the Top of the Ladder, reaches to Heaven, it respects God. The
Second Table, as the Foot of the Ladder, rests on the Earth; it respects
Superiors and Inferiors. By the First Table we walk Religiously toward God, by
the Second we walk Righteously toward Man. He cannot be good in the First
Table, that is bad in the Second. Honor thy Father and thy Mother.

In this, 1. A Command, Honor thy Father and thy Mother.

2. A Reason annexed to it; That thy Days may be long in the Land.

(1.) The Command, Honor thy Father.

Quest. Who is meant here by Father?

Ans. Father (Verbum (...)) is taken several ways; the Political, Ancient,
Spiritual, Oeconomical, Natural.

First, The Political Father, the Magistrate. He is the Father of his Country,
he is to be an Encourager of Virtue, a Punisher of Vice, a Father to the Widow
and Orphan. Such a Father was Job, Chap. 29.16. I was a Father to the Poor, and
the Cause which I knew not I searched out. And as Magistrates are Fathers, so
especially the King, who is the Head of Magistrates, is a Political Father. He
is placed as the Sun among the lesser Stars. The Scripture calls Kings Fathers.
Isa. 49.23. Kings shall be thy Nursing Fathers: They are to nurse up their
Subjects in Piety, by their good Edicts and Examples; and to nurse them up in
Peace and Plenty. Such nourishing Fathers were David, Hezekiah, Josiah,
Constantine, Theodosius. It is happy for a People who have such nursing
Fathers, whose Breasts milk Comfort to their Children. These Fathers are to be
Honored. For,

(1.) Their Place deserves Honor. God has set these Political Fathers to
preserve Order and Harmony in a Nation, and to prevent those State-Convulsions
which otherwise might ensue. Judge. 17.6. When there was no King in Israel,
every man did that which was right in his own Eyes. A Wonder. Prove. 30.27.

(2.) God has promoted Kings, that they may promote Justice. As they have a
Sword in their Hand to signify their Power, so a Scepter, an Emblem of
Justice. It is said of Marcus Aurelius Emperor, That he allotted one Hour of
the Day to hear the Complaints of such as were oppressed. Kings place Judges,
as Cherubims about the Throne, for distribution of Justice. These Political
Fathers are to be honored, Honor the King, 1 Pet. 2.17. And this Honor is to
be shown by a Civil Respect to their Persons, and a cheerful Submission to
their Laws, so far as they agree and run parallel with God's Law. Kings are to
be Prayed for, which is a part of that Honor we give them. 1 Timothy 2.1. I
exhort that Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions be made for Kings, that we
may lead a quiet, peaceable Life under them in all Godliness and Honesty. We
are to pray for Kings, that God would honor them to be Blessings, that under
them we may enjoy the Gospel of Peace, and the Peace of the Gospel. How happy
was the Reign of Numa Pompilius, when the Swords were beaten into
Plough-shares, and the Bees made their Hives of the Soldiers Helmets!

Secondly, There is the grave, ancient Father, who is Venerable for old Age;
whose Gray Hairs are resembled to the White Flowers of the Almond-tree, Eccles.
12.5.
Eccles. 12.5. These are Fathers for Seniority, on whose wrinkled Brows, and in
the Furrows of whose Cheeks is pictured the Map of Old Age. These Fathers are
to be honored. Levit. 19.32. Thou shall rise up before the hoary Head, and
honor the Face of the Old Man. Especially those are to honored who are
Fathers, not only for their Seniority, but their Piety, whose Souls are
flourishing when their Bodies are a decaying. It Is a blessed sight to see the
Spring of Grace in the Autumn of Old Age: To see Men stooping toward the
Grave, yet going up the Hill of God. To see them lose their Color, yet keep
their Savor. Such whose silver Hairs are crowned with Righteousness, are
worthy of double Honor: They are to be honored, not only as Pieces of
Antiquity, but as Patterns of Virtue. If you see an Old Man fearing God, whose
Grace shines brightest when the Sun of his Life is setting, O honor him as a
Father by reverencing and imitating him.

Thirdly, There are Spiritual Fathers, as Pastors and Ministers. These are the
Instruments of the New Birth, 1 Cor. 4.15. Tho you have Ten Thousand
Instructors, yet have ye not many Fathers, for in Christ Jesus I have begotten
you through the Gospel. The Spiritual Fathers are to be honored,

1. In respect of their Office. Whatever their Persons are, their Office is
honorable. They are the Messengers of the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 2.7. They
represent no less than God himself, 2 Cor. 5.20. Now then we are Ambassadors
for Christ. Jesus Christ was of this Calling; he had his Mission and Sanction
from Heaven, Ioh. 8.18. And this Crowns the Ministerial Calling with Honor.

2. Ministers, these Spiritual Fathers are to be honored for their Work sake;
they come like the Dove with an Olive Branch in their Mouth; they preach glad
Tidings of Peace. Their Work is to save Souls. Other Callings have only to do
with Men's Bodies or Estates, but the Ministers Calling is employed about the
Souls of Men. Their Work is to redee^ Spiritual Captives, and turn Men from the
Power of Satan to God, Acts 26.18. Their Work is to enlighten them who sit in
the Region of Darkness, and make them shine as Stars in the Kingdom of Heaven.
These Spiritual Fathers are to be honored for their Work sake, and this Honor
is to be shown three ways.

1. By giving them Respect, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. Know them which labor among you,
and are over you in the Lord, and esteem them very highly in love for their
work sake. I confess the scandalous Lives of some Ministers has been a great
Reproach, and has made the Offering of the Lord to be abhorred in some places
of the Land. The Leper in the Law was to have his Lip covered. Such as are
Angels by Office, but Lepers in their Lives, ought to have their Lips covered,
and to be silenced. But tho some deserve no Honor, yet such as are faithful,
and make it their Work to bring Souls to Christ, are to be reverenced as
Spiritual Fathers. Obadiah honored the Prophet Elijah, 1 King. 18.17. Why did
God reckon the Tribe of Levi for the Firstborn? Numb. 3.12. Why did he appoint
that the Prince should ask Counsel of God by the Priest? Numb. 27.21. Why did
the Lord show by that Miracle of Aaron's Rod flourishing, that he had chosen
the Tribe of Levi to Minister before him? Numb. 17. Why does Christ call his
Apostles the Lights of the World? Why does he say to all his Ministers, Lo, I
am with you to the end of the World? But because he would have these Spiritual
Fathers reverenced? In ancient times the Egyptians chose their Kings out of
their Priests. They are far from showing this Respect and Honor to their
Spiritual Fathers, who have slight Thoughts of such as have the Charge of the
Sanctuary, and do minister before the Lord -- Know them, says the Apostle,
which labor among you -- Many can be content to know their Ministers in their
Infirmities, and are glad when they have any thing against them; but not to
know them in the Apostles Sense, so as to give them double Honor. Surely, were
it not for the Ministry, you would not be a Vineyard, but a Desert. Were it not
for the Ministry, you would be destitute of the two Seals of the Covenant,
Baptism and the Lord's Supper; you would be Infidels; For Faith comes by
hearing; and how shall they hear without a Preacher? Romans 10.14.

2. Honor the Ministers, these Spiritual Fathers, by becoming Advocates for
them, and wiping off those Slanders and Calumnies which are unjustly cast upon
them, 1 Timothy 5.19. Constantine was a great Honourer of the Ministry, he
vindicated them, he would not read the envious Accusations brought in against
them, but did burn them. Do the Ministers open their Mouths to God for you in
Prayer, and will not you open your Mouths in their Behalf? Surely, if they
labor to preserve you from Hell, you should preserve them from Slander. If
they labor to save your Souls, you ought to save their Credit.

3. Honor them, by conforming to their Doctrine. This is the greatest Honor
you can put upon your Spiritual Fathers, by believing and obeying their
Doctrine. He is an Honourer of the Ministry, who is not only an Hearer, but a
Follower of the Word. As Disobedience reproacheth the Ministry, so Obedience
honors it. The Apostle calls his Thessalonians, his Crown, 1 Thessalonians. 2.19.
What is our Crown of rejoicing, are not ye? A thriving People are a Ministers
Crown. When there is a Metamorphosis, a Change wrought; People came to the Word
proud, but they go away humble; they came Earthly, but go away Heavenly: They
came as Naaman to Jordan, Lepers, but they go away healed. This is an Honor to
the Ministry. 2 Cor. 3.1. Need we as some others, Epistles of Commendation? Tho
other Ministers might need Letters of Commendation, yet Paul needed none: For
when Men should hear of the Obedience of these Corinthians, which was wrought
in them by Paul's Preaching; this was a sufficient Certificate for him, that
God had blessed his Labors. The Corinthians were a sufficient Honor to him,
they were his Letters Testimonial. You cannot honor your Spiritual Fathers
more, than by thriving under their Ministry, and living those Sermons which
they preach.

Fourthly, There is the Oeconomical Father; that is, the Master. He is Pater
Familias, the Father of the Family. Therefore Naaman's Servants called their
Master Father, 2 Kings 5.13. And the Centurion calls his Servant Son (...)
signifies Son as well as Servant.
, Matthew. 8.6. The Servant is to honor his Master as the Father of the Family.
Tho the Master be not so exactly qualified as he should, yet the Servant must
not neglect his Duty, but show some kind of Honor to him.

(1.) In obeying his Master in licitis and honestis, in things that are lawful
and honest. 1 Pet. 2.18. Servants be subject to your Masters; not only to the
Good and Gentle, but also to the Froward. God has no where given you a Charter
of Exemption to free you from your Duty. You cannot disobey your Earthly
Master, but you disobey your Master in Heaven. Think not that Birth, or High
Parts, no nor yet your Grace, will exempt you from Obedience to your Master. To
obey him, is an Ordinance of God; and the Apostle says, Whosoever resists
the Ordinance, shall receive to themselves Damnation, Romans 13.2.

(2.) The Servants honoring of his Master (his Oeconomical Father) is seen in
being diligent in his Service. Apelles painted a Servant with his Hands full of
Tools, an Emblem of Diligence. The loytering Servant is a kind of Thief, tho he
does not steal from his Master Goods, yet he steals that Time which he should
have employed in his Masters Service. The slothful Servant is called a Wicked
Servant, Matthew. 25.26.

(3.) The Servant is to Honor his Master, who is his Family-Father, by being
Faithful. Matthew. 24.45. Who then is a faithful and wise Servant. Faithfulness
is the chief thing in a Servant. This Faithfulness in a Servant is seen in Six
things.

First, In Tenaciousness, in concealing the Secrets your Master has entrusted
you with: If those Secrets are not Sins, you ought to promise Privacy. What is
whispered in your Ear, you are not to publish on the Housetop. Such Servants
are Spies. Who would keep a Glass tkat is cracked? Who would keep a Servant
that has a Crack in his Brain, and cannot keep a Secret?

Secondly, Faithfulness in a Servant is seen in designing the Masters
Advantage. A Faithful Servant esteems his Masters Good as his own. Such a good
Servant had Abraham. When his Master sent him to transact business for him, he
was as careful about it, as if it had been his own. Genesis 24.12. O Lord God of
my Master Abraham, I pray thee send me good speed this day, and show kindness
unto my Master Abraham. Doubtless Abraham's Servant was as glad he had got a
Wife for his Masters Son, as if he had got a Wife for himself.

Thirdly, Faithfulness in a Servant is seen in standing up for the Honor of
his Master. When he hears him spoken against, he must vindicate him. As the
Master is careful of the Servant's Body, so the Servant should be careful of
the Master's Name. When the Master is unjustly reproached, the Servant cannot
be excused if he be possessed with a dumb Devil.

Fourthly, Faithfulness is, when a Servant is true to his Word. He dares not
tell a Lie, but will speak the Truth, tho it be against himself. A Lie doubles
the sin. Psalm. 101.7. He that tells Lies, shall not tarry in my sight. A Liar
is of near akin to the Devil, Ioh. 8.44. And who would let any of the Devil's
Kindred live with him? The Lie that Gehazi told his Master Elisha, entailed a
Leprosy on Gehazi and his Seed for ever, 2 Kings 5.22. A Faithful Servant, his
Tongue is the true Index of his Heart.

Fifthly, Faithfulness is, when a Servant is against Impropriation. He dares
not convert his Masters Goods to his own Use. Tit. 2.10. Not purloyning. Bern.
Ne aliquid haereat in digitis. What a Servant filcheth from his Master, is
damnable Gain. The Servant who enricheth himself by stealing from his Master,
stuffs his Pillow with Thorns, and his Head will lie very uneasy when he comes
to die.

Sixthly, Faithfulness is in preserving the Masters Person, if unjustly in
Danger. Banister who betrayed his Master the Duke of Buckingham in King Richard
the Third's Reign, it is remarkable how the Judgments of God befell that
Traitorous Servant: His eldest Son ran mad, his Daughter of a singular Beauty
was suddenly struck with Leprosy, his younger Son was drowned, and he himself
arraigned, and had been executed, had he not been saved by his Clergy. That
Servant who is not true to his Master, will never be true to God or his own
Soul.

(4.) The Servant is to honor his Master, by serving him as with Love, (for
Willingness is more than the Work) so with Silence: That is, without repining,
and without replying. Titus 2.9. Exhort Servants to be obedient to their
Masters, not answering again. Greek, (...), Not giving cross Answers. Some
Servants are quick of Speech, tho slow at Work; and instead of being sorry for
a Fault, they provoke by unbeseeming Language. Were the Heart more humble, the
Tongue would be more silent. They are the Apostles Words, not answering again.
And to those Servants who do thus honor their Masters, or Family-Fathers, by
Submission, Diligence, Faithfulness, Love, and humble Silence, for their
encouragement let them take that, Col. 3.24. Servants obey in all things your
Masters according to the Flesh, not with eye-service, knowing that of the Lord
ye shall receive the Reward of the Inheritance, for ye serve the Lord Christ.
In serving your Masters ye serve Christ, and he will not let you lose your
Labor, ye shall receive the Reward of the Inheritance. From serving on Earth,
you shall be taken up to Reign in Heaven, and shall sit with Christ upon his
Throne, Rev. 3.21.

EXODUS XX.12. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, etc.


If we are not just we cannot be holy. Having shown you how Servants are to
honor their Masters, the Fathers of Families, I shall next show how Masters
are to carry it toward their Servants, that they may gain Honor from them.

1. In General. Masters must remember that they have a Master in Heaven, who
will call them to Account. Ephesians. 6.9. Knowing, that your Master is also in
Heaven.

2. More Particularly.

(1.) Masters must have a care to provide for their Servants: As they cut them
out Work, so they must give them their Meat in due season, Luke 17.7. And the
Food should be wholesome and sufficing. It is an unworthy thing in some Governors
of Families, to lay out so much upon their own Backs, as to pinch their
Servants Bellies.

(2.) Masters should encourage their Servants in their Work, by commending them
when they do well: Tho a Master is to tell a Servant of his Faults, yet he is
not always to beat upon one string, but sometimes take notice of that which is
praiseworthy. This makes a Servant more cheerful in his Work, and gains the
Master Love from his Servant.

(3.) Masters must not over-burden their Servants, but proportion their Work to
their Strength. If you lay too much load on a Servant, he will faint under it.
Christianity teaches Compassion.

(4.) Masters must endeavor the Spiritual Good of their Servants; they must be
Seraphims to kindle their Love to Religion: They must be Monitors to put them
in mind of their Souls: They must bring them to the Pool of the Sanctuary,
waiting till the Angel stir the Waters, John 5.4. They must seek God for them,
that their Servants may be his Servants: They must allow them Time convenient
for secret Devotion. Some Masters are cruel to the Souls of their Servants;
they look that they do the Work about the House, but abridge them of Time they
should employ in working out Salvation.

(5.) Masters should use mild gentle Behavior toward Servants, Ephesians. 6.9
Forbearing Threatening. Lev. 25.43. Thou shall not rule over him with rigor,
but fear thy God. It requires Wisdom in a Master to know how to keep up his
Authority, yet lay down his Austerity. We have a good Copy to write after. Our
Master in Heaven is slow to Anger, and of great Mercy, Psalm. 145.8. Some
Masters are so harsh and implacable, that they are enough to spoil a good
Servant.

(6.) Be very exact and punctual in the Compacts and Agreements you make with
your Servants: Do not prevaricate; keep not back any of their Wages, nor deal
deceitfully with them, as Laban did with Jacob, changing his Wages, Genesis 31.7.
Falseness in Promise is as as bad as False Weights.

(7.) Be careful of your Servants, not only in Health but in Sickness. They
have got their Sickness in your Service; use what means you can for their
Recovery. Be not like the Amalekite, who forsook his Servant when he was sick,
1 Samuel 30.13. but be as the good Centurion, who kept his sick Servant, and
sought to Christ for a Cure, Mat. 8.6. If you have a Beast that falls sick, you
will not turn it off, but have it looked to, and pay for its Cure. Will you be
kinder to your Horses than your Servants? Thus should Masters (the Fathers of
the Family) carry themselves prudently and piously, that they may gain Honor
from their Servants, and may give up their Accounts to God with Joy.

Fifthly, The Natural Father. The Father of the Flesh, Heb. 12.9. Honor thy
Natural Father. This is so necessary a Duty, that Philo the Jew placed the
Fifth Commandment in the First Table, as though we had not performed our whole
Duty to God, till we had paid this Debt of Honor to our Natural Parents.
Children are the Vineyard of the Parents planting, and Honor done to the
Parent, 1 Cor. 9.7.
is some of the Fruit of the Vineyard.

Quest. Wherein are Children to show their Honor to their Parents?

Resp. I. In a Reverential Esteem of their Persons. They must Arist.
(...), Give them a Civil Veneration. Therefore when the Apostle speaks of
Fathers of our Bodies, he speaks also of giving them Reverence, Heb. 12.9. This
Veneration or Reverence must be shown,

1. Inwardly, by Fear mixed with Love. Lev. 19.3. Ye shall fear every Man his
Mother and his Father. In the Commandment the Father is named First, here the
Mother is named First. (1.) Partly, to put the Honor upon her the Mother,
because by reason of many Weaknesses incident to her Sex, she is apt to be more
slighted by Children. And (2.) Partly, because the Mother endures more for the
Child; therefore here God gives the Mother the Priority, names her first, Ye
shall fear every one his Mother and his Father.

2. Reverence must be shown to Parents Outwardly, viz. In Word and Gesture.

(1.) In Word; and that either in speaking to Parents, or speaking of them.

First, Reverence in speaking to Parents. Children must speak to Parents
respectively, and in decent Language. 1 Kings 2.20. Ask on my Mother, said King
Solomon, to his Mother Bathsheba.

Secondly, Reverence in speaking of Parents. Children must speak of their
Parents honorably; they ought to speak well of them if they deserve well.
Prove. 31.28. Her Children rise up and call her Blessed. And in case a Parent
betrays Weakness and Indiscretion, the Child should make the best of it, and by
his wise Apologies for his Father, cover his Fathers Nakedness.

(2.) In Gesture. Children are to show their Reverence to their Parents by
Submissive Behavior, by uncovering the Head, bending the Knee. Joseph, tho he
were a Great Prince, and his Father grown poor, yet he bowed to him, and
behaved himself as humbly as if his Father had been the Prince, and he the poor
Man, Genesis 48.46. And King Solomon, when his Mother came to him, rose off his
Throne, and bowed himself to her, 1 Kings 2.19. Among the Lacedaemonians, if a
Child had carried himself arrogantly and sawcily to his Father, it was lawful
for the Father to appoint whom he would to be his Heir. O how many Children are
far from this giving Reverence to their Parents! They despise their Parents;
they carry themselves with that Pride and Malapertness toward them, that they
are a shame to Religion, and bring their Parents Gray Hairs with Sorrow to the
Grave. Deuteronomy. 27.16. Cursed be he that sets light by his Father or Mother. If
all that set light by their Parents are Cursed, how many Children in our Age
are under a Curse! If such as are disrespectful to their Parents live to have
Children, they will be Thorns in their sides, and God will make them read their
Sin in their Punishment.

II. The Second way of showing Honor to Parents, is in careful Obedience. Col.
3.20. Children obey your Parents in all things. Our Lord Christ herein set a
Pattern to Children. Luke 2.51. He was subject to his Parents. He to whom
Angels were subject, yet was subject to his Parents. This Obedience to Parents
is shown three ways.

(1.) In harkening to their Counsel. Prove. 1.8. Hear the Instruction of thy
Father, and forsake not the Law of thy Mother. Parents are as it were in the
room of God; if they would teach you the Fear of the Lord, you must listen to
their Words as Oracles, and not be as the deaf Adder to stop your Ears. Ely's
Sons hearkened not to the Voice of their Father, 1 Samuel 2.25. but they were
called Sons of Belial, ver. 12. -- And Children must hearken to the Counsel of
their Parents, as in Spiritual Matters, so in other Affairs which relate to
this Life, as in the Choice of a Calling, and in case of entering into Marriage.
Jacob would not dispose of himself in Marriage, (tho he were Forty Years old)
without the Advice and Consent of his Parents, Genesis 28.1, 2. Children are as it
were the Parents proper Goods and Possession, and it is high Injustice in a
Child to give away her self without the Parents leave. If Parents should indeed
counsel a Child to match with one that is Irreligious or Popish, I think the
case is plain; and many of the Learned are of Opinion, that here the Child may
have a Negative Voice, and is not obliged to be ruled by the Parent. Children
are to marry in the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.39. Therefore not with Persons Irreligious,
for that is not to marry in the Lord.

(2.) Obedience to Parents is shown in subscribing to their Commands. A Child
should be the Parents Echo: When the Father speaks, the Child should Echo
back Obedience. The Rechabites were forbidden by their Father to drink Wine,
and they did obey him, and were commended for it, Ier. 35.6. And Children must
obey their Parents (...), in all things, Col. 3.20. Things that are more
against the Grain, and which they have some Reluctance to, yet they must obey
their Parents. Esau would obey his Father, when he commanded him to fetch him
Venison, because it is probable he took pleasure in hunting; but refused to
obey him in a matter of greater Concernment, namely, in the Choice of a Wife.
But tho Children must obey their Parents in all things, yet Davenant
restringitur ad licita and honesta, it is with this Limitation, Things just
and honest. Obey in the Lord, Ephesians. 6.1. That is, so far as the Commands of
Parents agree with, and are consonant to Gods Commands. If they command against
God, here they lose their Right of being obeyed, and in this Case we must
unchild our selves.

(3.) Honor is to be shown to Parents in relieving their Wants. Joseph
cherished his Father in his Old Age, Genesis 47.12. It is but the paying a just
Debt. Parents have brought up Children when they were young, and Children ought
to nourish their Parents when they are old. The young Storks by the Instinct of
Nature bring Meat to the Old Storks, when by reason of Age there are not able to
fly, Pliny. Lex Pelargica -- The Memory of Aeneas was honored, for carrying
his Aged Father out of Troy when it was on Fire. I have read of a Daughter,
whose Father being condemned to be starved to Death, she did in Prison give him
Suck with her own Breasts, which being known to the Governors, procured his
Freedom out of Prison. To blame are such, shall I say Children or Monsters, who
are ashamed of their Parents when they are old, and fallen to decay. When
Parents Tears and lean Cheeks may plead Pity, yet Children have no Compassion:
When they ask for Bread they give them a Stone. When Houses are shut up, we say
the Plague is there. When Childrens Hearts are shut up against their Parents,
the Plague is in those Hearts. Our blessed Savior took great Care for his
Mother: When he was on the Cross, he charged his Disciple John to take her home
to him as his Mother, and see that she wanted nothing, John 19.26, 27. The
Reasons why Children should honor their Parents, are:

1. It is a Solemn Command of God, Honor thy Father, etc. As God's Word is the
Rule, so his Will must be the Reason of our Obedience. Reason.


2. They deserve Honor, in respect of that great Love and Affection which they
bear to their Children, and that Love is evidenced both by their Care and Cost.
(1.) Their Care in bringing up their Children. A Sign their Hearts are full of
Love, because their Heads are so full of Care. Parents often take more Care for
their Children than for themselves. They take Care of them when they are
tender, least like Wall-Fruit they should be nip'd in the Bud. And as Children
grow older, so the Care of Parents grows greater. They are afraid of their
Childrens falling when young, and of worse Faults when they are older. (2.)
Their Love is evidenced by their Cost. 1 Cor. 12.14. They lay up, and lay out
for their Children. They are not like the Raven or Ostrich, Job. 39.14. which
are cruel to their Young. Parents sometimes do impoverlsh themselves to enrich
their Children. All this calls for Honor from the Children. Children can never
parallel or equal Parents Love. Parents are the Instruments of Life to their
Children, Children cannot be so to their Parents.

3. To honor Parents is (...), well-pleasing to the Lord, Col. 3.20. As it is
joyful to the Parents, so it is pleasing to the Lord. Children, is it not your
Desire to please God? In honoring and obeying your Parents, you please God as
well as when you Repent and Believe. And that you may see how well it pleases
God, he bestows a Reward upon it, That thy Days may be long in the Land which
the Lord thy God gives thee. Jacob would not let the Angel go till he had
blessed him; nor God would not part with this Commandment till he had blessed
it. Here is the Blessing, That thy Days may be long in the Land, etc. St. Paul
calls this the First Commandment with Promise, Ephesians. 6.2. The Second Commandment
has a General Promise of Mercy. But this is the First Commandment that has a
Particular Promise made to it, That thy Days may be long in the Land which the
Lord thy God gives thee. Long Life is mentioned as a Blessing, Psalm. 128.6.
Thou shall see thy Childrens Children. It was a great Favor of God to Moses,
that though he was an Hundred and Twenty Years old he needed no Spectacles, his
Eye was not dim, nor his Natural Strength abated, Deuteronomy. 34.7. God threatened it
as a Curse to Eli, That there should not be an Old Man in his Family, 1 Samuel
2.31. Since the Flood Life is much abbreviated and cut short: Some the Womb is
their Tomb; others exchange their Cradle for their Grave; others die in the
Flower of their Age; Death serves it is Warrant every Day upon one or other. Now
when Death lies in Ambush continually for us, if God satisfy us with Long
Life: Psalm. 91.16. With long Life will I satisfy him: This is to be esteemed a
Blessing. It is a Blessing that God gives a long time to repent, and a long
time to do Service, and a long time to enjoy the Comfort of Relations; and who
is this Blessing of Long Life entailed upon, but Obedient Children? Honor thy
Father, that thy Days may be long. Nothing sooner shortens Life than
Disobedience to Parents. Absalom was a disobedient Son, who sought to deprive
his Father of his Life and Crown, and he did not live out half his Days. The
Mule he rode upon, as being weary of such a Burden, left him hanging in the Oak
betwixt Heaven and Earth, as not fit to tread upon the one, or enter into the
other. Obedience to Parents spins out thy Life, -- That thy Days may be long.
Nor does Obedience to Parents only lengthen Life, but sweeten it: Therefore it
follows, That thy Days may be long in the Land which the Lord thy God gives
thee. To live long, and not have a Foot of Land, is a Misery; but Obedience to
Parents settles Land of Inheritance upon the Child. Have thou but one Blessing,
O my Father? said Esau. Behold, God has more Blessings for an Obedient Child
than one; not only shall he have a Long Life, but a Fruitful Land: And not only
shall he have Land, but Land given in Love. The Land which the Lord thy God
gives thee. Thou shall have thy Land not only with God's Leave, but with his
Love. All which are cogent Arguments to make Children Honor and Obey their
Parents.

EXODUS XX.12. Honor thy Father --


Use I. If we are to Honor our Fathers on Earth, then much more our Father in
Heaven. Mal. 1.6. If then I am a Father, where is my Honor? A Father is but
the Instrument of conveying Life, but God is the Original Cause of our Being.
Psalm. 100.3. For it is he that has made us, and not we our selves. Honor and
Adoration is a Pearl belongs only to the Crown of Heaven. And,

1. We show Honor to our Heavenly Father by obeying him. Thus Christ honored
his Father. John 6.38. I came down from Heaven, not to do my own Will, but the
Will of him that sent me. This he calls honoring of God. John 8.29. I do
always those things which please him. Ver. 49. I honor my Father. The Wise Men
did not only bow the Knee to Christ, but presented him with Gold and Myrrh,
Mat. 2.8. So we must not only bow the Knee, give God Adoration, but bring
Presents, give him Golden Obedience.

2. We show Honor to our Heavenly Father, by appearing as Advocates in his
Cause, and standing up for his Truth in an Adulterous Generation. That Son
honors his Father, who stands up in his Defense, and vindicates him when he is
calumniated and reproached. Do they honor God who are ashamed of him? John
12.42. Many believed on him, but durst not confess him. They are Bastard Sons,
who are ashamed to own their Heavenly Father. Such as are born of God, are
steeled with Courage for his Truth: They are like the Rock which no Waves can
break; like the Adamant, which no Sword can cut. Basil was a Champion for Truth
in the Time of the Emperor Valens; and Athanasius, when the World was Arrian,
appeared for God.

3. We show Honor to our Heavenly Father, by ascribing the Honor of all we do
to him. 1 Cor. 15.10. I labored more abundantly than they all, yet not I, but
the Grace of God which was in me. If a Christian has any Assistance in Duty,
any strength against Corruption, he rears up a Pillar, and writes upon it,
Hitherto the Lord has helped me. As Ioab when he had fought against Rabbah,
and had like to have taken it, sent for King David, that he might carry away
the Honor of the Victory, 2 Samuel 12.27. So when a Child of God has any
Conquest over Satan, he gives all the Honor to God. Hypocrites (whose Lamp is
fed with the Oil of Vainglory) while they do any eminent Service for God, seek
themselves; and so their very serving of him is a dshonouring him.

4. We show Honor to our Heavenly Father by Celebrating his Praise. Psalm.
71.8. Let my mouth be filled with thy praise, and with thy honor all the Day.
Rev. 5.13. Blessing, Honor, Glory and Power be unto him that sits upon the
Throne. Blessing God is honoring of God. It lifts him up in the Eyes of
others; it spreads his Fame and Renown in the World. In this manner the Angels,
the Quiristers of Heaven, are now honoring God, they Trumpet forth his Praise.
In Prayer we act like Saints, in Praise like Angels.

5. We show Honor to our Heavenly Father by suffering Dishonor, yea, Death
for his sake. St. Paul did bear in his Body the Marks of the Lord Jesus, Gal.
6.17. As they were Marks of Honor to him, so Trophies of Honor to the Gospel.
The Honor which comes to God, is not by bringing that Outward Pomp and Glory
to him as we do to Kings, but it comes in another way, by the Sufferings of his
People. They let the World see what a good God they serve, and how they love
him, and will fight under his Banner to the Death. Thus you see how you are to
Honor your Heavenly Father. God is worthy of Honor. Psalm. 104.1. Thou art
Clothed with Honor and Majesty. What are all his Attributes, but Glorious
Beams shining from this Sun. He deserves more Honor than Men or Angels can
give him. 2 Samuel 22. I will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be praised.
God is worthy of Honor. Often times we confer Honor upon them that do not
deserve it. Many Noble Persons we give Titles of Honor to, who are sordid and
vicious; they do no deserve Honor, but God is worthy of Honor. Neh. 9.5.
Blessed be thy Glorious Name, which is exalted above all Blessings and Praise.
He is above all the Acclamations and Triumphs of the Archangels. O then let
every true Child of God honor his Heavenly Father! Tho the wicked dishonor
him by their Flagitious Lives, yet let not his own Children dishonor him. Sins
in you are worse than in others: A Fault in a Stranger is not so much taken
notice of as a Fault in a Child. A Spot in a black Cloth is not so much
observed, but a Spot in Scarlet every ones Eye is upon it. A Sin in the Wicked
is not so much wondered at, it is a Spot in black: But a Sin in a Child of God,
here is a Spot in Scarlet; this is more visible, and brings an Odium and
Dishonor upon the Gospel. The Sins of God's own Children go nearer to his
Heart. Deuteronomy. 32.19. When the Lord sa^ it, h^ abhorred them, because of the
provoking of his Sons and Daughters. O forbear doing any thing may reflect
Dishonor upon God. Will you disgrace your Heavenly Father? Let not God
complain of the Provocations of his Sons and Daughters; let him not cry out as
Isa. 1.2. I have brought up Children, and they have rebelled against me. So
much for the First: If our Earthly Father be to be honored, then much more our
Heavenly.

Use II. Exhort. First Branch. Does God Command, Honor thy Father and thy
Mother? Then let it exhort Children to put this great Duty in Practice, be
living Commentaries upon this Commandment. Honor and Reverence your Parents;
not only obey their Commands, but submit to their Rebukes. You cannot honor
your Father in Heaven, unless you honor your Earthly Parents. To deny
Obedience to Parents entails God's Judgments upon Children. Prove. 30.17. The
Eye that mocketh at his Father, and despises to obey his Mother, the Ravens of
the Valley shall pick it out The Eye is the first part Ravens pick out.
, and the young Eagle shall eat it. Eli's Two Disobedient Sons were slain, 1 Samuel 4.11. God made a Law that the Rebellious Son should be stoned; the same
Death the Blasphemer had, Lev. 24.14. Deuteronomy. 21.18. If a Man have a stubborn and
rebellious Son, which will not obey the voice of his Father or the voice of his
Mother, then shall his Father and his Mother lay hold on him, and bring him out
unto the Elders of the City, and all the Men of his City shall stone him with
Stones that he die. A Father once complaining, Never had Father a worse Son
than I have. Yes, says the Son, my Grandfather had: A Prodigy of Impudence
that can hardly be paralleled. Manlius, when he was grown old and poor, and had
a Son very rich, the old Father desired some Food of him, but the Son denied
him Relief; yea, disclaimed him from being his Father, and sent him away with
reproachful Language. The poor old Father let Tears fall, (as Witnesses of his
Grief.) But God to revenge this Disobedience, struck this unnatural Son with
Madness, of which he could never be cured. Disobedient Children stand in the
place where all God's Arrows fly.

Second Branch. Let Parents so carry it, as they may gain Honor from their
Children.

Quest. How may Parents so carry it toward their Children, that their Children
may willingly pay the Debt of Honor and Reverence to their Parents?

Resp. 1. If you would have your Children honor you,

1. Be careful to bring them up in the Fear and Nurture of the Lord, Ephesians.
6.4. Bring them up in the Admonition of the Lord. You conveyed the Plague of
Sin to them, Ergo, Endeavor to get them healed and sanctified. Austin says,
his Mother Monica traveled more for his Spiritual Birth, than his Natural.
Timothy's Mother instructed him from a Child, 2 Timothy 3.15. She did not only
give him her Breastmilk, but the sincere Milk of the Word. Season your Children
with good Principles betimes, that they may with Obadiah, fear the Lord from
their Youth, 1 King. 18.12. When Parents instruct not their Children, they
seldom prove Blessings. God often punishes the carelessness of Parents with
Undutifulness in their Children. It is not enough that in Baptism your Child is
Dedicated to God, but it must be Educated for God. Children are young Plants
which you must be continually watering with good Instruction. Prove. 22.6. Train
up a Child in the way he should go, and he will not depart from it when he is
old. The more your Children fear God, the more they will honor you.

2. If you would have your Children honor you, keep up your Parental Authority
over your Children; be kind, but do not cocker them: If you let them get too
much Head, they will Contemn you instead of Honoring you. The Rod of
Discipline must not be withheld. Prove. 23.14. Thou shall beat him with the
Rod, and deliver his Soul from Hell. A Child indulged and humored in
Wickedness, will be a Thorn in the Parents Eye. David cockered Adonijah, 1
Kings 1.6. His Father had not displeased him at any time, in saying, Why have
thou done so? And he afterward was a Grief of Heart to his Father, and was
false to the Crown, ver. 7* 9. Keep up your Authority, and you keep up your
Honor.

3. Provide for your Children what is fitting both in their Minority, and when
they come to Maturity. 2 Cor. 12.14. The Children ought not to lay up for the
Parents, but the Parents for the Children. They are your own Flesh; and as the
Apostle says, No Man yet ever hated his own Flesh, Ephesians. 5.29. The Parents
Bountifulness will cause Dutifulness in the Child. If you pour Water into a
Pump, the Pump will send Water out again freely. So if Parents pour in
something of their Estate to their Children, Children (if ingenuous) will pour
out Obedience again to their Parents.

4. When your Children are grown up, put them to some Lawful Calling, wherein
they may serve their Generation. And it is good to consult the Natural Genius
and Inclination of a Child. Forced Callings do as ill sometimes as Forced
Matches. To let a Child be out of a Calling, is to expose it to Temptation.
Melancton. Otium Balneum Diaboli. A Child out of a Calling is like Fallow
Ground, and what can you expect should grow up but Weeds of Disobedience.

5. Carry it Lovingly to your Children. In all your Counsels and Commands, let
them read Love. Love will command Honor: And how can the Parent but love the
Child who is his living Picture, nay, part of himself. The Child is the Father
in the Second Edition.

6. Carry it prudently toward your Children. A great Point of Prudence is,
when a Parent does not provoke his Children to Wrath. Col. 3.21. Fathers
provoke not your Children to Anger, lest they be discouraged.

Quest. How many ways may a Parent provoke his Children to Wrath?

Resp. 1. By giving them Opprobrious Terms. 1 Samuel 20.30. Thou Son of the
perverse rebellious Woman, said Saul to his Son Jonathan. Some Parents use
Imprecations and Curses to their Children. This is to provoke them to Wrath.
Would you have God bless your Children, and do you curse?

(2.) Parents provoke Children to Wrath, when they strike their Children
without a Cause; or when the Correction exceeds the Fault. This is rather to be
a Tyrant than a Father. Saul cast a Javelin at his Son to smite him, 1 Samuel
20.33. and his Son was provoked to Anger. Ver. 34. So Jonathan arose from the
Table in fierce Anger. In Filium pater obtinet non tyrannicum imperium sed
Basilicum. Davenant.

(3.) When Parents deny their Children Conveniences; they will not let them
have that which may cherish or cover Nature. Some have thus provoked their
Children; they have stinted them, and kept them so short, that they have forced
their Children upon indirect Courses, and made them put forth their Hands to
Iniquity.

(4.) When Parents carry it unequally toward their Children, showing more
kindness to one than another; this sometimes breeds bad Blood. Tho a Parent
has a greater Love to one Child, yet Discretion should guide Affection, that
he should not show more Love to one than to another. Jacob showed more love to
Joseph than all his Children, and what did it procure but Envy of his Brethren?
Genesis 37.3. Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his Children, and when his
Brethren saw that, they hated him, and could not speak peaceably to him.

(5.) When a Parent does any thing which is sordid and unworthy, that which
casts Disgrace upon himself, and his Family; as to cosen, or take a false Oath;
this is to provoke the Child to Wrath. As the Child should honor his Father,
so the Father should not dishonor the Child.

(6.) When Parents lay such Commands upon their Children, as their Children
cannot perform without wronging their Conscience. Saul commanded his Son
Jonathan to bring David to him. 1 Samuel 20.3. Fetch him to me, for he shall
surely die. Jonathan could not do this with a good Conscience, but was provoked
to Anger. Ver. 34. Jonathan rose from the Table in fierce Anger. Now the Reason
why Parents should show their Prudence in not provoking their Children to
Wrath, is set down, Col. 3.21. Lest they be discouraged. This Word (...),
Discouraged, implies three things. 1. Grief. The Parents provoking the Child,
the Child so takes it to Heart, that it causes immature Death. 2. Despondency.
The Parents Austerity dispirits the Child, and makes it unfit for Service: Like
Members of the Body stupifyed, which are unfit for Work. 3. Contuma^y and
Refractoriness. The Child being provoked by the cruel and unnatural carriage of
the Parent, grows desperate, and often studies to irritate and vex his Parent:
Which tho it be evil in the Child, yet the Parent is accessory to it, as being
the occasion of it.

(7.) If you would have Honor from your Children, pray much for them: Not only
lay up a Portion for them, but lay up a Stock of Prayer for them. Monica prayed
much for her Son Austin; and it was said, It was impossible a Son of so many
Prayers and Tears should perish. Pray that your Children may be preserved from
the Contagion of the Times: Pray that as your Children bear your Image in their
Faces, they may bear God's Image in their Hearts. Pray they may be Instruments
and Vessels of Glory. This may be one Fruit of Prayer, that the Child shall
honor a Praying Parent.

(8.) Encourage that which you see good and commendable in your Children*
Virtus laudata crescit. Commending that which is good in your Children, makes
them more in love with Virtuous Actions; and is like watering of Plants, which
makes them grow more. Some Parents discourage the good they see in their
Children, and so nip Virtue in the Bud, and help to damn their Childrens Souls.
They have their Childrens Curses.

(9.) If you would have Honor from your Children, set them a good Example: It
makes Children despise their Parents, when the Parents live in a contradiction
to their own Precepts: When they bid their Children be sober, yet they
themselves will be drunk: They bid their Children fear God, yet are themselves
loose in their Lives. Plutarch.
Oh! If you would have your Children honor you, teach them by an Validiora
sunt Exempla quam verba.
Holy Example. A Father is a Looking-glass which the Child often dresseth himself
by; let the Glass be Clear and not Spotted. Parents should observe a Good
Decorum in their whole Carriage, lest they give occasion to their Children to
say to them as Plato's Servant, My Master has made a Book against rash Anger,
but he himself is passionate. Or as a Son once said to his Father, If I have
done Evil, I have learned it of you.

Quest. Which is the Sixth Commandment?

Resp. EXODUS XX.13.

Thou shall not Kill.


In this Commandment, (1.) Is a Sin forbidden, viz. Murder. Thou shall not
kill. (2.) A Duty implied, To preserve our own Life, and the Life of others.

1. The Sin forbidden, Murder. Thou shall not kill. Where two things are to be
understood. (1.) The not injuring another. (2.) Our selves.

I. In this, Thou shall not kill, is meant the not Injuring another. 1. We must
not injure him in his Name. 2. In his Body. 3. In his Soul.

(1.) We must not injure another in his Name. A good Name is a precious Balsom;
it is a great Cruelty to murder a Man in his Name. We injure others in their
Name. When we calumniate and slander them. 'Twas David's Complaint, Psalm.
35.11. They laid to my Charge things which I knew not. The Primitive Christians
were traduced for Incest and killing their Children, as Tertul. Dicimur
infanticidii, incestus rei. This is to behead others in their good Name; this
is an irreparable Injury: No Physician can heal the Wounds of the Tongue.

(2.) We must not injure another in his Body. The Life is the most precious
thing, and God has set this Commandment as a Fence about it to preserve it,
Thou shall not kill. God made a Statute which was never to this Day repealed.
Genesis 9.6. Who so sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed. In the
Old Law had a Man killed another unawares, he might take Sanctuary; but if he
had killed him willingly, tho he did fly to the Sanctuary, the Holiness of the
Place was not to defend him. Exodus 21.14. If a Man come presumptuously upon his
Neighbor to slay him with Guile, thou shall take him from my Altar that he may
die. Now in this Commandment, Thou shall do no Murder, all those Sins are
forbidden which lead to it, and are the occasions of it. As,

1. Unadvised Anger. Anger boyls up the Blood in the Veins, and often produces
Murder. Genesis 49.6. In their Anger they slew a Man.

2. Envy. Satan envied our first Parents the Robe of Innocence, and the Glory
of Paradise, therefore never left till he had procured their Death. Ioseph's
Brethren envied him, because his Father loved him, and gave him a Coat of
diverse Colors, therefore take Counsel to slay him, Genesis 37.20. (...) and
(...), Envy and Murder are near akin, therefore the Apostle puts them
together. Gal. 5.21. Envyings, Murders. Envy is a Sin breaks both the Tables at
once. It begins in Discontent against God, and ends in Injury against Man, as
we see in Cain, Genesis 4.6, 8. Envious Cain, first discontented with God, there
he broke the First Table; and then he fell out with his Brother and slew him,
there he broke the Second Table. Anger is sometimes soon over, like Fire
kindled in Straw, which is quickly out; but Envy is a radicated thing, and will
not quench its Thirst without Blood. Prove. 27.4. Who is able to stand before
Envy?

3. Hatred. The Pharisees hated Christ because he excelled them in Gifts, and
had more Honor among the People than they, therefore they never left till they
had nailed him to the Cross, and taken away his Life. Hatred is a Vermin lives
upon Blood. Ezekiel. 35.5. Because thou have had a perpetual Hatred, and have shed
the Blood of the Children of Israel. Haman hated Mordecai because he did not
bow to him, and he presently sought Revenge. He got a Bloody Warrant sealed for
the Destruction of the whole Race and Seed of the Jews, Esther 3.9. Hatred is
ever cruel. All these Sins are forbidden in this Commandment which lead the
Van, and are often the occasions of this Sin of Murder.

Quest. How many ways is Murder committed?

Resp. We may be said to Murder another, Twelve ways.

(1.) With the Hand. As Ioab kill (...) Abner and Amasa, 2 Samuel 20.10. He smote
him in the Fifth Rib, and shed out his Bowels.

(2.) Murder is committed with the Mind. Malice is Mental Murder, 1 John 3.15.
Whosoever hates his Brother is a Murderer. To malign another, and wish Evil
against him in the Heart, is a murdering him.

(3.) Murder is committed with the Tongue. By speaking to the Prejudice of
another, and causing him to be put to Death. Thus the Jews killed the Lord of
Life, when they inveighed against him, and accused him falsely to Pilate, John
18.30.

(4.) Murder is committed with the Pen. So David killed Vriah, in writing to
Ioab to set Vriah in the Forefront of the Battle, 2 Samuel 11.15. Tho the
Ammonites Sword cut off Vriah, yet David's Pen was the Cause of his Death.
Therefore the Lord tells David by the Prophet Nathan, 2 Samuel 12.9. Thou have
killed Vriah.

(5.) Murder is committed by Plotting another Death. Thus Iezabel, tho she did
not lay Hands her self upon Naboth, yet because she contrived his Death, and
caused Two false Witnesses to swear against him, and bring him within the
Compass of Treason, she was a Murderer, 1 Kings 21.10.

(6.) Murder is committed by instilling Poison into Potions. Thus the Wife of
Commodus the Emperor killed her Husband, by poisoning the Wine which he drank.
So many kill the Children they go with, by taking such Medicines or strong
Purges as prove the Death of the Child.

(7.) By Witchcraft and Sorcery, a thing forbidden under the Law, Deuteronomy. 18.10.
There shall not be found among you an Enchanter or a Witch, or a Consulter with
Familiar Spirits.

(8.) By having an Intention to kill another; as Herod would, under a Pretense
of Worshipping Christ, have killed him. Mat. 2..8, 13. So Saul, when he made
David go as Captain against the Philistines, designing thereby that the
Philistines should have killed him. 1 Samuel 18.17. Saul said, Let not my Hand be
upon him, but let the Hand of the Philistines be upon him. Here was intentional
Murder, and it was in God's Account as bad as actual.

(9.) By consenting to another Death. So Saul to the Death of Stephen. Acts
22.20. I also was standing by and consenting to his Death. He that gives
Consent is accessory to the Murder.

(10.) By not hindering the Death of another when in our Power. Pilate knew
Christ was innocent, I find no Fault in him; but he did not hinder his Death;
therefore he was guilty. It was not washing his Hands in Water could wash away
the Guilt of Christ's Blood.

(11.) By Unmercifulness. 1. By taking away that which is necessary for the
Sustentation of Life: As, to take away those Tools or Utensils whereby a Man
gets his Living. Deuteronomy. 24.6. No man shall take away the nether or the upper
Millstone to pledge, for he takes a man's Life. 2. By not helping him when he is
ready to perish. You may be the Death of another as well by not relieving him,
as by offering him Violence. Si non paveris, occidisti. Ambrose. If thou do
not feed him that is starving, thou killest him. And then how many are guilty
of the Breach of this Commandment?

(12.) By not Executing the Law upon Capital Offenders. A Felon having
committed Six Murders, the Judge may be said to be guilty of Five of them, Isa.
1.21
because he did not execute the Felon for his first Offense. The next thing I
shall speak to, is to show the Aggravations of this Sin of Murder. As,

1. To shed the Blood of another Causless; as to kill another in an Humor or
Frolic. A Be will not sting unless provoked. But many when they are not
provoked will take away the Life of another. This makes the Sin of Blood more
bloody. The less Provocation to a Sin, the greater the Sin.

2. To shed the Blood of another contrary to Promise. Thus after the Princes of
Israel had sworn to the Gibeonites that they should live, Josh. 9.15. Saul slew
them, 2 Samuel 21.1. Here were two Sins twisted together, Breach of Oath and
Murder.

3. To take away the Life of any Public Person inhanceth the Murder, and makes
it greater. As 1. To Kill a Judge upon the Bench, because he represents the
King's Person. 2. To murder a Person, whose Office is Sacred, and comes on the
King of Heaven's Embassage: The murdering of him may be the murdering of many.
Herod added this Sin above all, that he shut up John Baptist in Prison, Luke
3.20. Then much more to behead John in Prison. 3. To stain ones Hands with
Royal Blood. David's Heart smote him, because he did but cut off the Lap of
King Readiness Garment, 1 Samuel 24.5. How would David's Heart have smote him, if he
had cut off Saul's Head?

4. To shed the Blood of a near Relation aggravates the Murder, and dies it of
a deeper Crimson. For a Son to kill his Father is horrid. Parricides are
Monsters in Nature. Qui occidit patrem plurima committit peccata in uno.
Cicero. He who takes away his Fathers Life, commits many Sins in one. He is
not only guilty of Murder, but of Disobedience, Ingratitude, Ostracism, and
Diabolical Cruelty. Exodus 21.15. He who strikes his Father or Mother, shall be
surely put to Death. Then how many Deaths is he worthy of, that destroys his
Father or Mother. Such a Monster was Nero, who caused his Mother Agrippina to
be slain.

5. To shed the Blood of any Righteous Person aggravates the Sin. First, Hereby
Justice is perverted. Such a Person being innocent, is unworthy of Death.
Secondly, A Saint being (...), a Public Blessing; he lies in the Breach to
turn away Wrath: So that to destroy him, is to go to pull down the Pillars of a
Nation. Thirdly, He is precious to God, Isa. 15.43, 44. He is a Member of
Christ's Body; therefore what Injury is offered to him, is done to God himself,
Acts 9.4.

Caution I. Tho this Commandment forbids Private Persons, Thou shall not kill,
to shed the Blood of another, (unless in their own Defense,) yet such as are in
Office must punish Public Offenders; yea, with Death, else they sin. To kill
an Offender is not Murder but Justice. A Private Person sins if he draws the
Sword, a Public Person sins if he put up the Sword. A Magistrate ought not to
let the Sword of Justice rust in the Scabbard. As the Magistrate should not let
the Sword be too sharp by Severity, so neither should the Edge of it be blunted
by too much Lenity.

Caution II. Neither does this Commandment, Thou shall not kill, prohibit a
Just War. When Men's Sins grow ripe, and long Plenty has bred Surfeit. Then God
says, Sword, go through the Land, Ezekiel. 14.17. God did abet the War between
the Tribes of Israel and Benjamin. When the Iniquity of the Amorites was full,
then God sent Israel to commence a War against them, Judge. 11.21.

Use I. Lamentation, That this Land is so defiled with Blood: Numb. 35.33. How
common is this Sin in this Hectoring Age! England's Sins are written in Letters
of Blood. Some make no more of killing Men, than Sheep. Ier. 2.34. In thy
Skirts is found the Blood of the poor Innocents. Iunius reads it in Alis; and
so in Hebrew, In Thy Wings is found the Blood of Innocents. It alludes to the
Birds of Prey, which stain their Wings with the Blood of other Birds. May not
the Lord justly take up a Controversy with the Inhabitants of the Land,
because Blood touches Blood, Hos. 4.2. There is a Concatenation, a Plurality
of Murders. And that which may increase our Lamentation, is, that not only
Man's Blood is shed among us, but Chrst's Blood. Such as are profane flagitious
Sinners are said to Crucify the Son of God afresh, Heb. 6.6. (1.) They Swear by
his Blood, and so do as it were make his Wounds bleed afresh. Acts 9.4.
(2.) Crucify Christ in his Members. Why persecutest thou me? The Foot being
trodden on, the Head cried out. (3.) If it lay in their Power, were Christ
alive on Earth, they would nail him again to the Cross. Thus Men Crucify
Christ afresh. And if Man's Blood does so cry, how loud will Christ's Blood cry
against Sinners?

Use II. Beware of having your Hands imbrued in the Blood of others.

Obj. But such a one has wronged me by Defamation, or other ways; and if I
spill his Blood, I do but revenge my own Quarrel.

Resp. If he has done you wrong, the Law is open; but take heed of shedding
Blood. What, because he has wronged you, will you therefore wrong God? Is it
not a Wrong to God, to take his Work out of his Hand? He has said, Vengeance
is mine, and I will repay, Romans 12.19. But you will take upon you to revenge
your self: You will be both Plantiff, and Judge, and Executioner your self.
This is an high Wrong done to God, and he will not hold you guiltless. Now to
deterr all from having their Hands defiled with Blood, consider what a Sin
Murder is.

1. A God-affronting Sin. It is a Breach of Commandment, trampling upon God's
Royal Edict: It is a Wrong offered to God's Image. Genesis 9.6. In the Image of
God made he Man. It is a tearing God's Picture, and breaking in Pieces the King
of Heavens Broad-Seal. Man is the Temple of God. 1 Cor. 6.19. Know ye not that
your Body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost? So that the Manslayer destroys
God's Temple: And will God endure to be thus confronted by proud Dust?

2. It is a crying Sin. Clamitat in Coelum vox Sanguinis -- There are three
Sins in Scripture said to cry. (1.) Oppression, Psalm. 12.5. (2.) Sodomy, Genesis
18.21. (3.) Bloodshed. This comes so loud, that it drowns all the other Cries.
Genesis 4.10. The Voice of thy Brothers Blood cries unto me from the Ground.
Abel's Blood had as many Tongues as Drops to cry aloud for Vengeance. This Sin
of Blood lay heavy on David's Conscience. Tho he had sinned by Adultery, yet
that he cried out of most was, this Crimson Sin of Blood. Psalm. 51.14. Deliver
me from Blood-guiltiness, O God. Tho the Lord visits for every Sin, yet he will
in a special manner make Inquisition for Blood, Psalm. 9.12. If a Beast did kill
a Man, the Beast was to be stoned, and his Flesh must not be eaten, Exodus 21.8.
If God would have a Beast stoned that killed a Man, who had not the Use of
Reason to restrain him, then much more will he be incensed against those, who
go both against Reason and Conscience in spoiling the Life of a Man.

3. Murder is a Diabolical Sin: It makes a Man Primogenitum Diaboli, The
Devil's Firstborn: He was a Murderer from the beginning, John 8.44. By saying
to our First Parents, Ye shall not die, he brought in Death to the World.

4. It is a Cursed Sin. If there be a Curse for him that smites his Neighbor
secretly, Deuteronomy. 27.4. then he is double cursed that kills him. The first Man
that was born was a Murderer. Genesis 4.11. And now art thou cursed from the
Earth. He was an excommunicate Person, banished from the place of God's Public
Worship. God set a Mark upon bloody Cain, Genesis 24* 15. Some think it was Horror
of Mind, which (above all Sins) does accompany the Sin of Blood. Others think
this Mark was a continual Shaking and trembling in his Flesh, which was a Mark
of Infamy God set upon him. He carried a Curse along with him.

5. It is a Wrath-procuring Sin, 2 Kings 24.4.

(1.) It procures Temporal Judgments. Phocas, to get the Empire, put to Death
all the Sons of Mauritius the Emperor, and then slew him. But this Phocas was
pursued by his Son-in-law Priscus, who cut off his Ears and Feet, and then
killed him. Charles the 9 th, who caused the Massacre of so many Christians at
Paris, Blood issued out at several parts of his Body, of which he died. Albonia
killed a Man, and then made a Cup of his Skull to drink in: afterward his own
Wife caused him to be murdered in his Bed. Vengeance as a Blood-hound pursues
the Murderer. Bloody Men shall not live out half their Days, Psalm. 55.23.

(2.) It brings Eternal Judgments. It binds Men over to Hell. The Papists make
nothing of Massacres; theirs is a Bloody Religion: They dispense with Men for
Murder, so it be to propagate the Catholic Cause. If a Cardinal put his Red
Hat upon the Head of a Murderer going to Execution, he is saved from Death. But
let all impenitent Murderers read their Doom, Rev. 21.8. Murderers shall have
their part in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone: This is the Second
Death. We read of Fire mingled with Blood, Rev. 8.7. Such as have their Hands
full of Blood, must undergo the Wrath of God. Here is Fire mingled with Blood,
and this Fire is inextinguishable, Mark 9.44. Time will not finish it, Tears
will not quench it.

EXODUS XX.12. Thou shall not Kill.


(3.) We must not injure another Soul. This is the greatest Murder of all,
because there is more of God's Image in the Soul than in the Body. Ths Soul,
tho it cannot be annihilated, is said to be murdered, because it misseth of
Happiness, and is for ever in Torment. Now how many are Soul-murderers?

1. Such as corrupt others by bad Example. Vivitur Exemplis -- The World is led
by Example; especially the Examples of Great ones are very pernicious. --
Magnates, Magnetes -- We are apt to do as we see others before us, especially
above us. Such as are placed in High Power are like the Pillar of Cloud, when
that went Israel went. When Great Ones move in their Sphere, others will follow
them, tho it be to Hell. Evil Magistrates, like the Tail of the Dragon, draw
the third part of the Stars after them.

2. Such as entice others to Sin. The Harlot by curling her Hair, rolling her
Eyes, laying open her Breasts, does what in her lies, to be both a Tempter and
a Murderer. Such an one was Messalina, Wife to Claudius the Emperor. Prove. 7.7,
10. I discerned a young Man, and there met him a Woman with the Attire of an
Harlot, so she caught him and kissed him. Better are the Reproofs of a Friend,
than the Kisses of an Harlot.

3. Ministers are Murderers, who either starve, or poison, or infect Souls.

(1.) That starve Souls. 1 Pet. 5.2. Feed the Flock of God which is among you.
These Feed themselves, and starve the Flock: Either through Non-residing they
do not Preach, or through Insufficiency they cannot. There are many in the
Ministry (a shame to speak it) so ignorant, that they had need to be taught the
First Principles of the Oracles of God, Heb. 5.12. Was not he fit to be a
Preacher in Israel, (think ye) who being asked something concerning the
Decalogue, answered, He never saw any such Book?

(2.) That Poison Souls. Such are Heterodox Ministers, who poison People with
Error. The Basilisk poisons Herbs and Flowers by breathing on them. The Breath
of Heretical Ministers, like the Basilisks Breath, poisons Souls. The Socinian,
that would rob Christ of his Godhead; the Arminian, that by advancing the Power
of the Will, would take off the Crown from the Head of Free Grace; the
Antinomian, who denies the Use of the Moral Law to a Believer, as if it were
antiquated and out of date* these Poison Men's Souls. Error is as damnable as
Vice. 1 Pet. 2.1. There shall he false Teachers among you, who privily shall
bring in damnable Hereresies, denying the Lord, that bought them.

(3.) That Infect Souls, viz. By their Scandalous Lives. Exodus 19.22. Let the
Priests which come near to the Lord sanctify themselves. Ministers who by
their Places are nearer to God, should be holier than others. The Elements, the
higher they are, the purer. The Air is purer than the Water; the Fire is purer
than the Air. The higher Men are by Office, the holier they should be. John
Baptist was a shining Lamp. But there are many who infect their People with
their Bad Life: They preach one thing, and live another. Qui curios simulant
and Bacchanalia vivunt. They, like Eli's Sons, are in White Linen, but they
have Scarlet Sins. Some say that Prester John, the Lord of Africa, causes to
be carried before him a Golden Cup full of Dirt: A fit Emblem of such Ministers
as have a Golden Office, but are dirty and polluted in their Lives. They are
Murderers, and the Blood of Souls will cry against them at the last Day.

4. Such as destroy others by getting them into bad Company, and so making them
Proselytes to the Devil. Vitia in proximum quemque transiliunt. Sen. A Man
cannot live in the Ethiopian Climate, but he will be discolored with the Sun;
nor he cannot be in bad Company, but he will partake of their Evil. One
Drunkard makes another; as the Prophet speaks in another Sense, Ier. 35.5. I
set before them pots full of Wine and Cups, and said unto them, Drink ye Wine.
So the Wicked set Pots of Wine before others, and make them drink till Reason
be stupefied, and Lust enflamed. These are guilty of the Breach of this
Commandment, they are Murderers of Souls. How sad will it be with these, who
have not only their own Sins, but the Blood of others to answer for. So much
for the First thing forbidden in the Commandment, the Injuring of others.

II. The Second thing forbidden in it is, the injuring ones self. Thou shall
not kill: Thou shall do no hurt to thy self.

(1.) Thou shall not hurt thy own Body. One may be guilty of Self-murder,
either 1. Indirectly and Occasionally. 2. Directly and Absolutely.

1. Indirectly and Occasionally. As,

First, When a Man thrusts himself into Danger which he might prevent. As if a
Company of Archers were shooting, and one should go and stand in the place
where the Arrows fly, if the Arrow did kill him, he is accessory to his own
Death. In the Law God would have the Leper shut up to keep others from being
infected, Lev. 13.4. Now if any would be so presumptuous as to go in to the
Leper and get the Plague of Leprosy, he might thank himself, he occasioned his
own Death.

Secondly, A Person may be in some Sense guilty of his own Death, by neglecting
the Use of Means: if sick, and use no Physic. If hehath received a Wound, and
will not apply Balsom, he hastens his own Death. God appointed Hezekiah to lay
a Lump of Figs to the Boil, Isa. 38.21. If he had not used the Lump of Figs, he
had been the cause of his own Death.

Thirdly, By Immoderate Grief, 2 Cor. 7.10. The Sorrow of the World works
Death. When God takes away a dear Relation, and one is swallowed up with
Sorrow. How many weep themselves into their Graves! Queen Mary grieved so
excessively for the loss of Calice, that it broke her Heart.

Fourthly, By Intemperance, Excess in Diet. Surfeiting shortens Life. Plures
periere crapula quam gladio: Many dig their Grave with their Teeth. Too much
Oil choaks the Lamp: The Cup kills more than the Canon. Excessive drinking
causes untimely Death.

2. One may be guilty of Self-murder Directly and Absolutely.

(1.) By Envy. Envy is Tristitia de bonis alienis, a secret repining at the
Welfare of another. Invidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis. An envious Man is
more sorry at another Prosperity, than at his own Adversity. He never laughs
but when another Weeps. Envy is a Self-murder, a Fretting Canker. Cyprian calls
it Vulnus occultum, a Secret Wound; it hurts a Man's self most-Envy corrodes
the Heart, dries up the Blood, rots the Bones. Prove. 14.30. Envy is the
rottenness of the Bones. It is to the Body as the Moth to the Cloth, it eats
it, and makes its Beauty consume. Envy drinks its own Venom. The Viper which
leaped on Paul's Hand, thought to have hurt Paul, but fell her self into the
Fire, Acts 28.3. So while the envious Man thinks to hurt another, he destroys
himself.

(2.) By laying Violent Hands upon himself, and thus he is Felo de se; as Saul
fell upon his own Sword and killed himself. Because I see so many in the Bills
of Mortality who make away themselves, let me a little expatiate. It is the
most unnatural and barbarous kind of Murder for a Man to butcher himself, and
imbrue his Hands in his own Blood. A Man's self is most near to him, therefore
this Sin of Self-murder breaks both the Law of God and the Bonds of Nature. The
Lord has placed the Soul in the Body as in a Prison; now it is a great Sin to
break Prison, till God by Death open the Door. Self-murders are worse than the
Brute-Creatures, they will tear and gore one another, but no Beast will go to
destroy its self. Self-murder is occasioned usually from Discontent. Discontent
is joined with a sullen Melancholy. The Bird that beats her self in the Cage,
and is ready to kill her self, is the true Emblem of a discontented Spirit. And
this Discontent arises,

1. From Pride. A Man that is swelled with an High Opinion of himself, thinks
he deserves better than others; and if any Cross befall him, he is
discontented, and now in a sudden Passion will make away himself. Achitophel
had high Thoughts of himself, his Words were esteemed Oracles; and to have his
Wise Counsel rejected, he was not able to bear it. 2 Samuel 17.23. He put his
House in order, and hanged himself.

2. Discontent is occasioned from Poverty. Poverty is a sore Temptation: (...),
Menand. Prove. 30.29. Give me not Poverty. Many by their Sin have brought
themselves to Poverty; and when a great Estate is boiled away to nothing, then
they are discontented, and think better to die quickly, than languish in
Misery. Hereupon the Devil helps them to dispatch themselves.

3. Discontent is occasioned from Covetousness. Avarice is a dry Drunkenness,
an Horseleech that is never satisfied. The Covetous Man is like Behemoth, Job
40.23. Behold he drinks up a River, and yet his Thirst is not allayed. The
covetous Miser hoards up Corn; and if he hears the Price of Corn begins to
fall, then he is troubled, and there is no Cure for his Discontent but an Halter.

4. From Horror of Mind. A Man has sinned a great Sin, he has swallowed down
some Pills of Temptation the Devil has given him; and these Pills begin to
work in his Conscience, and the Horror is so great, that he chooses
Strangling. Judas having betrayed Innocent Blood, he was in that Agony, that he
hanged himself to quiet his Conscience. As if one should, to avoid the stinging
of a Gnat, endure the biting of a Serpent. This Self-murder, (...), is an High
Breach of this Commandment, it is an execrable Sin. I can see no ground of hope
for such as make away themselves; for they die in the very Act of Sin, and
cannot have time to repent.

(2.) Here is forbidden hurting ones own Soul. Thou shall not Kill. Many who
are free from other Murder, yet are guilty here; they go about to murder their
own Souls; they are wilfully set to damn themselves, and throw themselves into
Hell.

Quest. Who are they that go about desperately to murder their own Souls?

Resp. 1. Such wilfully go about to murder their Souls, who have no Sense of
God, or the other World. They are past feeling, Ephesians. 4.19. Tell them of God's
Holiness and Justice, they are not at all affected. Zech. 7.12. They made their
Hearts like an Adamant. The Adamant, says Pliny, is insuperable, the Hammer
cannot conquer it: Sinners have Adamantine Hearts. The Altar of Stone, when the
Prophet spoke to it, rent asunder, 1 Kings 13.2. But Sinners Hearts are so
hardened in Sin, that nothing will work upon them, neither Ordinances nor
Judgments; they do not believe a Deity, they laugh at Hell: These go about to
murder their Souls, they are throwing themselves as fast as they can into Hell.

2. Such as are set wilfully to murder their Souls, are they who are resolved
upon their Lusts, let what will come of it; the Soul may cry out, I am killing,
I am murdering. Ephesians. 4.19. They have given themselves over to work all
Uncleanness with Greediness. Let Ministers speak to them about their Sins, let
Conscience speak, let Affliction speak, yet they will have their Lusts, tho
they go to Hell for them. Are not these resolved to murder their Souls? As
Agrippina, Mother to Nero, said, Occidat modo imperet, Let my Son kill me, so
he may Reign. So many say in their Hearts, Let our Sins damn us, so they may
but please us. Herod will have his incestuous Lust, tho it cost him his Soul.
Men will for a drop of Pleasure drink a Sea of Wrath. Are not these about to
massacre and damn their own Souls?

3. They murder their Souls, who avoid all means of saving their Souls. They
will go to Plays, to drunken Meetings, but will not set their Foot within God's
House, or come near the Sound of the Gospel Trumpet. As if one that is Diseased
should shun the Bath, for fear of being healed. These do wilfully damn their
Souls, and are as great Murderers of themselves, as he, who having means of
Cure offered him, chooses Death rather than Physic.

4. They do voluntarily murder their Souls, who suck in false Prejudices
against Religion; as if Religion were too strict and severe; they that espouse
Holiness must live a melancholy Life, like Hermits and Anchorites, and drown
all their Joy in Tears. This is a Slander which the Devil has cast upon
Religion: For there is no true Joy but in believing, Romans 15.13. No Honey so
sweet as that which drops from a Promise. Some Men have foolishly taken up a
Prejudice against Religion; they are resolved rather never to go to Heaven,
than go thither through the Strait Gate. I may say of Prejudice as Paul to
Elimas, Acts 13.10. O Prejudice, thou Child of the Devil, thou Enemy of all
Righteousness, how many Souls have thou damned!

5. They are wilfully set to murder their own Souls, who will neither be good
to themselves, nor suffer others to be so. Matthew. 23.13. Ye neither go into the
Kingdom of Heaven your selves, neither suffer ye them that are entering, to go
in. Such are those that persecute others for their Religion. Drunken Meetings
shall escape Punishment: But if Men meet to serve God, then let all Severity be
used. These are resolved to Shipwreck others, tho they themselves are cast away
in the Storm. Oh! Take heed of this, of murdering your own Souls: No Creature
but Man does willingly kill its self. So I have done with the First, the Sin
Forbidden in this Commandment, Thou shall not kill.

EXODUS XX.13. Thou shall not Kill.


II. The Second Duty employed, is, That we should do all the Good we can to our
selves and others.

1. In reference to Others. We should endeavor to preserve the Lives and Souls
of others. 2. In reference to our selves. To preserve our own Life and Soul.

[1.] In reference to Others.

(1.) To preserve the Life of others. Comfort them in their Sorrows, relieve
them in their Wants: Be as the good Samaritan, pour Wine and Oil into their
Wounds. Job 29.16. I was a Father to the poor. -- 13. The blessing of him that
was ready to perish came upon me. This is a great means of preserving the Life
of another, by relieving him when he is ready to perish. Pompey, when there was
a great Dearth in Rome, provided Corn for their Relief; and when the Mariners
were backward to sail thither in a Tempest, says he, (...), It is not
necessary that we should live, but it is necessary that Rome be relieved. Grace
makes the Heart tender, it causes Sympathy and Charity: As it melts the Heart
in Contrition toward God, so in Compassion toward others. Psalm. 112.9. He
has dispersed, he has given to the poor. This the Commandment implies, That
we should be so far from ruining others, that we should do all we can to
preserve the Lives of others. When we see the Picture of Death drawn in their
Faces, administer to their Necessities. Be Temporal Saviors to them; draw them
out of the Waters of Affliction with a Silver Cord of Charity. That I may
persuade you to this, let me lay before you Arguments.

First, Works of Charity evidence Grace.

1. Faith. Iam. 2.18. I mill show thee my Faith by my Works. Works are Faith's
Letters of Credence to show. We judge of the Health of the Body by the Pulse,
where the Blood stirs and operates. Christian, judge of the Health of thy Faith
by the Pulse of Charity: The Word of God is the Rule of Faith, and good Works
are the Witnesses of Faith.

2. Love. Love loves Mercy: It is a Noble bountiful Grace. Mary loved Christ,
and how liberal was her Love! She bestows on Christ her Tears, Kisses, costly
Ointments. Love is like a full Vessel, will have Vent; it vents it self in Acts
of Liberality.

Secondly, To communicate to the Necessities of others, is not Arbitrary, (it is
not left to our Choice whether we will or no) but it is a Duty incumbent. 1 Timothy 6.17. Charge them that are Rich in this World, that they do good, -- that
they be rich in good Works. This is not only a Counsel, but a Charge. If God
should lay a Charge upon the Inanimate Creatures, they would obey. If he should
charge the Rocks, they would send forth Water: If he should charge the Clouds,
they would melt into Showers: If he should charge the Stones, they would become
Bread. And shall we be harder than the Stones, not to obey God, when he
charge us to be rich in Good Works?

Thirdly, God supplies our Wants, and shall not we supply the Wants of others?
We could not live without Mercy. God makes every Creature helpful to us. The
Sun does enrich us with it is Golden Beams: The Earth yields us its Increase,
Veins of Gold, Crops of Corn, store of Flowers. God opens the Treasury of his
Mercy, he feeds us every Day out of the Alms-basket of his Providence. Thou
openest thy hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing, Psalm.
145.16. Now, does God supply our Wants, and shall not we minister to the Wants
of others? Shall we be only as a Sponge to suck in Mercy, and not as a Breast
to milk it out to others?

Fourthly, Herein we resemble God, to be doing Good to others. It Is our
Excellency to be like God. Godliness is God-likeness. And wherein are we more
like him than in Acts of Bounty and Munificence? Psalm. 119.68. Thou art good,
and do good. Thou art good, there is God's Essential Goodness; and do good,
there is his Communicative Goodness. The more helpful we are to others, the
more like we are to God. We cannot be like God in Omnisciency, or in working
Miracles, but we may be like him in doing Works of Mercy.

Fifthly, God remembers all our Deeds of Charity, and takes them kindly at our
Hands. Heb. 6.10. God is not unrighteous to forget your labor of Love which ye
have showed toward his Name, in that ye have ministered to the Saints. The
Chief Butler may forget Ioseph's Kindness, but the Lord will not forget any
kindness we show to his People. Mat. 25.35. I was an hungered and ye gave me
Meat, Thirsty and ye gave me Drink. Christ takes the kindness done to his
Saints as done to himself. God that has a Bottle for your Tears, has a Book
to write down your Alms. Mal. 3.16. A Book of Remembrance was written before
him. Tamerlane had a Register to write down all the Names, and good Service of
his Soldiers: So God has a Book of Remembrance to write down all your
Charitable Works, and at the Day of Judgment there shall be an open and
honorable mention made of them in the Presence of the Angels.

Sixthly, Hard-heartedness to them in Misery reproacheth the Gospel. When Men's
Hearts are like pieces of Rocks, or as the Scales of the Leviathan, shut up as
with a close Seal, Job 41.15. You may as well extract Oil out of a Flint, as
the Golden Oil of Charity out of their Hearts. These Unchristian themselves.
Unmercifulness is the Sin of the Heathen, Romans 1.31. (...), without Mercy. It
eclipseth the Glory of the Gospel. Does the Gospel teach Uncharitableness? Does
it not bid us draw out our Soul to the Hungry, Isa. 58.10. Tit. 3.8. These
things I will that you affirm, that they which have believed in God might be
careful to maintain good Works. While you relieve not such as are in Want, you
walk Antipodes to the Gospel; you cause it to be evil spoken of, and lay it
open to the Las^ and Censure of others.

Seventhly, There is nothing lost by relieving the Necessitous. The Shunamite
Woman was kind to the Prophet, she welcomed him to her House, and she received
Kindness from him another way. He restored her Dead Child to Life. 2 Kings
4.35. Such as are helpful to others, shall find Mercy to help in time of need.
Such as pour out the Golden Oil of Compassion to others, God will pour out the
Golden Oil of Salvation to them. For a Cup of cold Water they shall have Rivers
of Pleasure. Nay, God will make it up some way or other in this Life. Prove.
11.25. The Liberal Soul shall be made fa^: As the Loaves in breaking
multiplied, or as the Widows Oil increased by pouring out, 1 Kings 17.16. An
Estate may be imparted, yet not impaired.

Eighthly, To do good to others in Necessity, keeps up the Credit of Religion.
Works of Mercy adorn the Gospel as the Fruit Adorns the Tree. When our Light so
shines that others see our Good Works, this glorifies God, Crowns Religion,
silenceth the Lips of Gainsayers. Basil says, Nothing rendered the True
Religion more famous in the Primitive Times, and made more Proselytes to it,
than the Bounty and Charity of the Christians.

Ninthly and Lastly, The Evil that does accrue by not preserving the Lives of
others, and helping them in their Necessities. God sends often a secret Moth into
their Estate. Prove. 11.24. There is that withholds more than is meet, but it
tends to Poverty. Prove. 21.13. Whosoever stops his Ears at the cry of the
poor, he also shall cry himself, but shall not be heard. Jam. 2.13. He shall
have Judgment without Mercy, that showed no Mercy. Dives denied Lazarus a Crumb
of Bread, and Dives was denied a Drop of Water. Mat. 25.41. Depart from me ye
cursed, for I was an hungered and ye gave me no meat. Christ says not, Ye took
away my Meat: But, Ye gave me no Meat; ye did not feed my Members, therefore
depart from me. By all this, be ready to distribute to the Necessities of
others. This is included in the Commandment, Thou shall not kill. Not only,
Thou shall not destroy his Life, but thou shall preserve it by giving to his
Necessities.

(2.) It is implied, that we should endeavor to preserve the Souls of others;
counsel them about their Souls, set Life and Death before them, help them to
Heaven. In the Law, if one met his Neighbors Ox or Ass going astray, he must
bring him back, Exodus 33.4. Much more if we see our Neighbors Soul going
astray, we should use all means to bring him back to God by Repentance.

[2.] In reference to our selves. The Commandment, Thou shall not kill,
requires that we should preserve our own Life and Soul. It Is engraven upon
every Creature, that we should preserve our own Natural Life. We must be so far
from Self-murder, that we must do all we can to preserve our Natural Life. We
must use all means of Diet, Exercise, and lawful Recreation, which is like Oil
to preserve the Lamp of Life from going out. Some have been under Temptation;
Satan has suggested, they are such Sinners as do not deserve a bit of Bread,
and so they have been ready to starve themselves. This is contrary to this
Sixth Commandment, Thou shall do no Murder; it is implied, we are to use all
means for the preserving our own Life, 1 Timothy 5.23. Drink no longer Water, but
use a little Wine for thy Stomach's sake. Timothy was not by drinking too much
Water to over-cool his Stomach, and weaken Nature; but he must use means for
Self-preservation, Drink a little Wine, etc.

Secondly, This Commandment requires, that we should endeavor (as to preserve
our own Life, so especially) to preserve our own Souls. Omnia si perdas animam
servare memento. It is engraven upon every Creature, as with the Point of a
Diamond, that it should look to its own Preservation. If the Life of the Body
must be preserved, then much more the Life of the Soul. If he who does not
provide for his own House is worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. then much more
he who does not provide for his own Soul. This is a main thing implied in the
Commandment, a special Care for the preserving our Souls. The Soul is the
Jewel, (...), Macar. The Soul is a Diamond set in a Ring of Clay. Christ puts
the Soul in balance with the World, and it outweighs, Matthew. 16.26. The Soul
is a Glass, in which some Rays of Divine Glory shine: It has in it some Faint
Idea and Resemblance of a Deity: It is a Celestial Spark lighted by the Breath
of God. The Body was made out of the Dust, but the Soul is of a more noble
Extract and Original. Genesis 2.7. God breathed into Man a living Soul.

1. The Soul is Excellent in its Nature. It is a Spiritual Being, it is a kind
of Angelical thing: 1. Excellency of the Soul.
The Mind sparkles with Knowledge, the Will is crowned with Liberty, and all
the Affections are as Stars shining in their Orb. The Soul being Spiritual,
(1.) Is of quick Operation. How quick is the Motion of a Spark! How swift is
the Wing of a Cherubim! So quick and agil is the Motion of the Soul! What is
quicker than a Thought? How many Miles can the Soul travel in an Instant! (2.)
The Soul being Spiritual, moves upward, it contemplates God and Glory. Psalm.
73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? The Motion of the Soul is upward; only
Sin has put a wrong Bias upon the Soul, and made it move too much down-ward.
(3.) The Soul being Spiritual, is (...), it has a self-moving Power, it can
subsist and move when the Body is dead, as the Mariner can subsist when the
Ship is broken. (4.) The Soul being Spiritual, is Immortal. Scaliger.
Aeternitatis Gemma, a Bud of Eternity.

2. As the Soul is excellent in its Nature, so in its Capacities: It is capable
of Grace, 2. Excellency.
it is fit to be an Associate and Companion of Angels. It is capable of
Communion with God, of being Christ's Spouse, 2 Cor. 11.2. That I might espouse
you Virgin-Souls to Christ. It is capable of being Crowned with Glory for ever.
O then, carrying such precious Souls about you, created with the Breath of God,
redeemed with the Blood of God, what Endeavors should you use for the Saving
of these Souls! Let not the Devil have your Souls. Heliogabalus fed his Lions
with Pheasant. The Devil is called a Roaring Lion, feed him not with your
Souls. Besides, the Excellency of the Soul, which may make you labor to get it
saved, consider, how sad it will be not to have the Soul saved. It is such a
Loss, as there is none like it: Because in losing the Soul, you lose a great
many things with it. A Merchant in losing his Ship, loses many things with it:
He loses Money, Jewels, Spices. So he that loses his Soul, loses Christ, the
company of Angels, Heaven: It is an infinite Loss, and it is an irreparable
Loss; it can never be made up again. Two Eyes, but one Soul. Chrysostom. O what Care
should be taken about the Immortal Soul. I would request but this of you, that
you would but take as much Care for the saving your Souls, as you do for the
getting an Estate: Nay, I will say this, Do but take as much Care for the
saving your Souls, as the Devil does for destroying them. O how industrious is
Satan to damn Souls! How does he play the Serpent in his subtle laying of
Snares to catch Souls! How does he shoot Fiery Darts! The Devil is never idle:
The Devil is a busy Bishop in his Diocese, he walks up and down seeking whom
he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. Now is not this a Reasonable Request, to take but as
much Care for the saving of your Souls, as the Devil does for the destroying
them?

Quest. How shall we do to get our Souls saved?

Resp. By having them sanctified. Only the pure in Heart shall see God. Get
your Souls in-laid and enameled with Holiness. 1 Pet. 1.16. It is not enough
that we cease to do Evil, (which is all the Evidence some have to show,) this
is to lose Heaven by short shooting; but we must be inwardly sanctified: Not
only the unclean Spirit must go out, but we must be filled with the Holy Ghost,
Ephesians. 5.18. This Holiness must needs be, if you consider God is to dwell with
you here, and you are to dwell with him hereafter.

First, God is to dwell with you here. God takes up the Soul for his own
Lodgings. Ephesians. 3.17. That Christ may dwell in your Heart. Therefore the Soul
must be Consecrated. A King's Palace must be kept clean, especially his
Presence Chamber. The Body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19. then
the Soul is the Sanctum Sanctorum, how Holy ought that to be?

Secondly, You are to dwell with God. Heaven is an Holy Place. 1 Pet. 1.4. An
Inheritance undefiled. And how can you dwell with God till you are sanctified?
We do not put Wine into a musty Vessel: God will not put the New Wine of Glory
into a sinful Heart. O then, as you love your Souls, and would have them saved
Eternally, endeavor after Holiness; by this means you will have an Idoneity
and Fitness for the Kingdom of Heaven, and your Souls will be saved in the Day
of the Lord Jesus.

EXODUS XX.14. Thou shall not commit Adultery.


God is (...), a pure holy Spirit, and has an infinite Antipathy against all
Uncleanness. In this Commandment he has entered his Caution against it. Non
maechaberis, Thou shall not commit Adultery. The Sum of this Commandment, is,
The Preservation of Corporal Purity. We must take heed of running on the Rock
of Uncleanness, and so making Shipwreck of our Chastity. In this Commandment
there is something tacitly employed, and something tacitly forbidden.

1. Something tacitly Employed, (viz.) That the Ordinance of Marriage should be
observed.

2. Something expressly Forbidden, (viz.) The infecting our selves with Bodily
Pollution, Thou shall not commit Adultery.

(1.) Something Employed, That the Ordinance of Marriage should be observed. 1
Cor. 7.2. Let every Man have his own Wife, and every Woman have her own
Husband. Marriage is honorable, and the Bed undefiled, Heb. 13.4. God did
institute Marriage in Paradise; he brought the Woman to the Man, Genesis 2.22. He
did as it were give them in Marriage. And Jesus Christ did honor Marriage with
his Presence, John 2.2. The first Miracle he wrought was at a Marriage, when he
turned the Water into Wine. Marriage is a Type and Resemblance of the Mystical
Union between Christ and his Church, Ephesians. 5.32. Concerning Marriage,

[1.] There are General Duties. 1. The General Duty of the Husband is to Rule.
Ephesians. 5.23. The Husband is the Head of the Wife. The Head is the Seat of Rule
and Government: but he must rule with Discretion. He is Head, therefore must
not rule without Reason. 2. The General Duty on the Wife's part, is,
Submission. Ephesians. 5.22. Wives submit your selves unto your own Husbands as unto
the Lord. It is observable the Holy Ghost passes by Sarah's Failings; he does
not mention her Unbelief; but he takes notice of that which was good in her,
her Reverence and Obedience to her Husband. 1 Pet. 3.6. Sarah obeyed Abraham,
calling him Lord.

[2.] Special Duties belonging to Marriage, are Love and Fidelity. 1. Love.
Ephesians. 5.25. Love is the Marriage of the Affections. There is as it were but one
Heart in two Bodies: Love lines the Yoke, and makes it easy: Love perfumes the
Marriage-Relation, without which it is not Conjugium, but Conjurgium; it is
like two Poisons in one Stomach, one is ever sick of the other. 2. Fidelity. In
Marriage there is a mutual Promise of living together Faithfully according to
God's Holy Ordinance. Among the Romans, on the Day of Marriage the Woman
presented to her Husband Fire and Water: Fire refines Metal, Water cleanses:
Hereby signifying, that she would live with her Husband in Chastity and
Sincerity. This is the First thing in the Commandment implied, that the
Ordinance of Marriage should be purely observed.

(2.) The thing Forbidden in the Commandment, i. e. Infecting our selves with
Bodily Pollution and Uncleanness, Thou shall not commit Adultery. The Fountain
of this Sin is Lust. Since the Fall, Holy Love is degenerated into Lust. Lust
is the Fever of the Soul. There is a twofold Adultery. 1. Mental. Matthew. 5.28.
Whosoever looks on a Woman to lust after her, has committed Adultery already
with her in his Heart. As a Man may die of an inward Bleeding, so he may be
damned for the inward boylings of Lust, if they be not mortified. 2. Corporal
Adultery; when Sin has conceived and brought forth in the Act. This is
expressly forbidden, under a Sub poena, Thou shall not commit Adultery. This
Commandment is set as an Hedge to keep out Uncleanness, and they that break
this Hedge, a Serpent shall bite them. Job calls Adultery an heinous Crime, Job
31.11. Every Failing is not a Crime, and every Crime is not an heinous Crime,
but Adultery is Flagitium, an Heinous Crime. The Lord calls it Villainy. Jer.
29.23. They have committed Villainy in Israel, and have committed Adultery with
their Neighbors Wives.

Quest. Wherein appears the Heinousness of this Sin of Adultery?

Resp. 1. In that Adultery is the Brea^h of the Marriage-Oath. When Persons
come together in a Matrimonial way, they bind themselves by Covenant each to
other, in the Presence of God, to be true and faithful in the Conjugal
Relation. Unchastity is a falsifying this Solemn Oath. And herein Adultery is
worse than Fornication, because it is a Breach of the Conjugal Bond.

2. The Heinousness of Adultery lies in this, that it is such an high Dishonor
done to God. God says, Thou shall not commit Adultery. The Adulterer sets his
Will above God's Law, tramples upon God's Command, affronts him to his Face; as
if a Subject should tear his Princes Proclamation. The Adulterer is highly
injurious to all the Persons in the Trinity. (1.) To God the Father. Sinner,
God has given thee thy Life, and thou do waste the Lamp of thy Life, the
Flower of thy Age in Lewdness. He has bestowed on thee many Mercies, Health
and Estate, and thou spendest all on Harlots. Did God give thee Wages to serve
the Devil? (2.) Injurious to God the Son, two ways. First, As he has purchased
thee with his Blood. 1 Cor. 6.20. Ye are bought with a price. Now, he who is
bought, is not his own; it is a Sin for him to go to another without consent
from Christ, who has bought him with a price. Secondly, By virtue of Baptism
thou art a Christian, and professest that Christ is thy Head, and thou art a
Member of Christ; therefore what an Injury is it to Christ, to take the Members
of Christ and make them the Members of an Harlot! 1 Cor. 6.15. (3.) It is
injurious to God the Holy Ghost, for the Body is his Temple. 1 Cor. 6.19. Know
ye not that your Body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you? And what
a Sin is it to defile his Temple.

3. The Heinousness of Adultery lies in this, That it is committed with mature
Deliberation. First, There is the contriving the Sin in the Mind, then Consent
in the Will, and then the Sin is put forth into Act. To sin against the Light
of Nature, and to sin deliberately, is like the Die to the Wool, it gives Sin
a Tincture, and dies it of a Crimson Color.

4. That which makes Adultery so Heinous is, that it is a Sin after Remedy. God
has provided a Remedy to prevent this Sin. 1 Cor. 7.2. To avoid Fornication
let every Man have his own Wife. Therefore, after this Remedy prescribed, to be
guilty of Fornication or Adultery, is inexcusable; it is like a rich Thief,
that steals when he has no need. This does enhance and accent the Sin, and
make it heinous.

Use I. It condemns the Church of Rome, who allow the Sin of Fornication and
Adultery. They suffer not their Priests to marry, but they may have their
Curtizans. The worst kind of Uncleanness, Incest with the nearest of Kin, is
dispensed with for Money. It was once said of Rome, -- Vrbs est jam tota
Lupanar, -- "Rome was become a Common Stews. And no wonder, when the Pope
could, for a Sum of Money, give them a License and Patent to commit
Uncleanness; and if the Patent were not enough, he would give them a Pardon.
Many of the Papists judge Fornication Venial. God condemns the very Lusting,
Mat. 5.28. If God condemns the Thought, how dare they allow the Fact of
Fornication? You see what a Cage of Unclean Birds the Church of Rome is. They
call themselves the Holy Catholic Church. But how can they be Holy, who are so
steeped and parboiled in Fornication, Incest, Sodomy, and all manner of
Uncleanness.

Use II. It is matter of Lamentation to see this Commandment so slighted and
violated among us. Adultery is the reigning Sin of the Times. Hos. 7.4. They
are all Adulterers, as an Oven heated by the Baker. The time of King Henry the
8 th was called the Golden Age, but this may be called the Unclean Age, wherein
Whore-hunting is common. Ezekiel. 24.13. In your Filthiness is Lewdness. Luther
tells of one who said, If he might but satisfy his Lust, and be carried from
one Whore-house to another, he would desire no other Heaven. Afterward he
breathed out his Soul betwixt two notorious Strumpets. This is to be the right
Seed of Adam, to love the Forbidden-Fruit, to love to drink of Stolen Waters.
Ezekiel. 8.8, 9. Son of Man, dig in the Wall; and when I had dug, behold a
Door; and he said, Go in and behold the wicked Abominations that they do here.
Could we, as the Prophet, dig in the Walls of many Houses, what vile
Abominations should we see there! In some Chambers we might see Fornication,
dig further and see Adultery, dig further and we might see Incest, etc. And may
not the Lord go from his Sanctuary? As Ezekiel. 8.6. See thou the great
Abominations that the House of Israel commits, that I should go far off from
my Sanctuary. God might remove his Gospel, and then we might write Ichabod on
the Nation, The Glory is departed. Let us mourn for what we cannot reform.

Use III. It exhorts us to keep our selves from this Sin of Adultery. Let every
Man have his own Wife, says Paul, 1 Cor. 7.2. Not his Concubine, not his
Curtezan. Now that I may deterr you from Adultery, let me show you the great
Evil of it.

First, It is a thievish Sin. Adultery is the highest sort of Theft. The
Adulterer steals from his Neighbor that which is more than his Goods and
Estate, he steals away his Wife from him, who is Flesh of his Flesh.

Secondly, Adultery debaseth a Person, it makes him resemble the Beasts.
Therefore the Adulterer is described like an Horse neighing. Ier. 5.8. Every
one neighed after his Neighbors Wife. Nay, this is worse than brutish; for
some Creatures that are void of Reason, yet by the Instinct of Nature observe a
kind of Decorum, or Chastity. The Turtle-Dove is a chaste Creature, and keeps
to it is Mate. The Stork, wherever he flies, comes in no Nest but his own.
Naturalists write, if a Stork leaving his own Mate joyneth with any other, all
the rest of the Storks fall upon him, and pull his Feathers from him. Adultery
is worse than Brutish, it degrades a Person of his Honor.

Thirdly, Adultery does pollute and befilthy a Person. The Devil is called an
Unclean Spirit, Luke 11.24. The Adulterer is the Devils Firstborn; he is
unclean; he is a moving Quagmire; he is all over ulcerated with Sin: His Eyes
sparkle with Lust, his Mouth fomes out Filth, his Heart burns like Mount Aetna
in unclean Desires: He is so Filthy, that if he die in this Sin, all the Flames
of Hell will never purge away his Uncleanness. And as for the Adulteress, who
can paint her black enough? The Scripture calls her a deep Ditch, Prove. 23.27.
She is a Common-shore. Whereas a Believer, his Body is a Living Temple, and his
Soul a little Heaven, bespangled with the Graces as so many little Stars. The
Body of an Harlot is a walking Dunghill, and her Soul a lesser Hell.

Fourthly, Adultery is destructive to the Body. Prove. 5.11. And thou mourn at
last, when thy Flesh and thy Body is consumed. It brings into a Consumption.
Uncleanness turns the Body into an Hospital; it wastes the Radical Moisture,
rots the Skull, eats the Beauty of the Face. As the Flame wastes the Candle, so
the Fire of Lust consumes the Bones. The Adulterer hastens his own Death. Prove.
7.23. Till a Dart strike through his Liver. Plutarch.
The Romans had their Funerals at the Gate of Venus Temple, to signify that
Lust brings Death. Venus is Lust.

Fifthly, Adultery is a Purgatory to the Purse, as it wastes the Body so the
Estate. Prove. 6.26. By the means of a Whorish Woman a Man is brought to a piece
of Bread. Whores are the Devil's Horseleeches, Spunges that will soon suck in
all ones Money. The Prodigal had soon spent his Portion when once he fell among
Harlots, Luke 15.30. King Edward the Third's Concubine, when he lay a dying,
got all she could from him, and plucked the Rings off his Fingers, and so left
him. He that lives in Luxury dies in Beggary.

Sixthly, Adultery blots and eclipseth the Name. Prove. 6.33. Whosoever commits
Adultery with a Woman, a wound and dishonor shall he get, and his Reproach
shall not be wiped away. Some while they get Wounds get Honor. The Soldiers
Wounds are full of Honor. The Martyrs Wounds for Christ are full of Honor:
These get Honor while they get Wounds: But the Adulterer gets Wounds in his
Name, but no Honor. His Reproach shall not be wiped away. The Wounds of the
Name no Physician can heal. The Adulterer, when he is dead, his Shame lives.
When his Body rots under ground, his Name rots above ground. His base-born
Children will be the Living Monuments of his Shame.

Seventhly, This Sin does much eclipse the Light of Reason; it steals away the
Understanding, it stupifies the Heart. Hos. 4.11. Whoredom takes away the
Heart: It eats out all Heart for good. Solomon besotted himself with Women, and
they enticed him to Idolatry.

Eighthly, This Sin of Adultery ushers in Temporal Judgments. The Mosaical Law
made Adultery Death, Lev. 20.10. The Adulterer and the Adulteress shall surely
be put to Death: And the usual Death was Stoning, Deuteronomy. 22.24. The Saxons
commanded the Persons taken in this Sin to be burnt. The Romans caused their
Heads to be stricken off. This Sin, like a Scorpion, carries a Sting in the
Tail of it. The Adultery of Paris and Helena a beautiful Strumpet, ended in the
Ruin of Troy, and was the Death both of Paris and Helena. Jealousy is the rage
of a Man; and the Adulterer is often killed in the Act of his Sin. Adultery cost
Otho the Emperor and Pope Sixtus the Fourth their Lives.

Laeta venire Venus tristis abire solet. I have read of two Citizens in London,
1583. who defiling themselves with Adultery on the Lord's Day, were immediately
struck dead with a Fire from Heaven. If all that were now guilty of this Sin
should be punished in this manner, it would rain Fire again, as on Sodom.

Ninthly, Adultery, (without Repentance) damns the Soul. 1 Cor. 6.9. Neither
Fornicators, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, shall enter into the Kingdom of
God. The Fire of Lust brings to the Fire of Hell. Heb. 13.4. Whoremongers and
Adulterers God will judge. Tho Men may neglect to judge them, yet God will
judge them. -- But, will not God judge all other Sinners? Yes. Why then does
the Apostle say, Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge? The meaning is,
(1.) He will judge them assuredly; they shall not escape the Hand of Justice.
(2.) He will punish them severely, 2 Pet. 2.10. The Lord knows how to reserve
the Unjust to the Day of Judgment to be punished, but chiefly them that walk in
the Lust of Uncleanness. The Harlot's Breast keeps from Abraham's Bosom.
Momentaneum est quod delectat Aeternum, q. d. Cruciat. Who would for a Cup of
Pleasure drink a Sea of Wrath? Prove. 9.18. Her Guests are in the depths of
Hell. A wise Traveller when he comes to his Inn, tho many pleasant Dishes are
set before him, yet he forbears to taste, because of the Reckoning which will
be brought in. We are here all Travelers to Jerusalem above; and tho many
Baits of Temptation are set before us, yet we should forbear, and think of the
reckoning which will be brought in at Death. With what Stomach could Dionisius
eat his Dainties, when he imagined there was a naked Sword hung over his Head
as he sat at Meat. While the Adulterer feeds on strange Flesh, the Sword of
God's Justice hangs over his Head. Causinus speaks of a Tree that grows in
Spain, that is of a sweet Smell, and pleasant to the Taste, but the Juyice of
it is poisonous. The Emblem of an Harlot; she is perfumed with Powders, and
fair to look on, but poisonous and damnable to the Soul. Prove. 7.26. She has
cast down many wounded, yea, many strong Men have been slain by her.

Tenthly, The Adulterer does not only wrong his own Soul, but does what in him
lies to destroy the Soul of another, and so kill two at once. And thus the
Adulterer is worse than the Thief. For suppose a Thief Rob a Man, yea, take
away his Life, yet that Man's Soul may be happy, he may go to Heaven, as well
as if he had died in his Bed. But he who commits Adultery endangers the Soul of
another, and deprives her of Salvation so far as in him lies. Now, what a
fearful thing is it to be an Instrument to draw another to Hell.

Eleventhly, The Adulterer is abhorred of God. Prove. 22.14. The mouth of a
strange Woman is a deep Pit: he who is abhorred of the Lord shall fall therein.
What can be worse than to be abhorred of God? God may be angry with his own
Children; but for God to Abhor a Man, it is the highest Degree of Hatred.

Quest. But how does the Lord show his abhorring of the Adulterer?

Answ. In giving him up to a Reprobate Mind and a Seared Conscience, Romans 1.26.
And now he is in such a condition that he cannot repent. This is to be abhorred
of God: Such a Person stands upon the Threshold of Hell, and when Death gives
him a Jog he tumbles in. All which may sound a Retreat in our Ears, and call us
off from the pursuit of so damnable a Sin as Uncleanness. I will conclude with
two Scriptures, Prove. 5.8. Come not nigh the Door of her House. Prove. 7.27. Her
House is the way to Hell.

Twelfthly, Adultery is a Sower of Discord: It destroys Peace and Love, the
two best Flowers which grow in a Family. Adultery sets Husband against Wife,
and Wife against Husband, and so it causes the Joints of the same Body to
smite one against another. And this Division in a Family works Confusion: For
an House divided against it self cannot stand, Luke 11.17. Omne divisibile est
corruptibile.

Quest. How may we abstain from this Sin of Adultery?

Resp. I shall lay down some Directions, by way of Antidote, to keep you from
being infected with this Sin.

(1.) Come not into the Company of a Whorish Woman, avoid her House as a Seaman
does a Rock. Prove. 5.8. Come not near the Door of her House. He who would not
have the Plague, must not come near Houses infected. Every Whore-house has the
Plague in it. Beware of the occasion of Sin: To venture upon the occasion of
Sin, and then pray, Lead us not into Temptation, is, as if one should put his
Finger in the Candle, and then pray that it may not be burnt.

(2.) Look to your Eyes. Much Sin comes in by the Eye. 2 Pet. 2.14. Having Eyes
full of Adultery. The Eye tempts the Fancy, and the Fancy works upon the Heart.
A wanton amorous Eye may usher in Sin. Eve first saw the Tree of Knowledge, and
then she took, Genesis 3.6. First she looked, and then she loved; (...). The Eye
often sets the Heart on Fire: Therefore Job laid a Law upon his Eyes. Job 31.1. I
made a Covenant with my Eyes, why then should I think upon a Maid? Democritus
the Philosopher plucked out his Eyes, because he would not be tempted with vain
Objects: The Scripture does not bid us do so, but set a Watch before our Eyes.

(3.) Look to your Lips. Take heed of any unseemly Word that may enkindle
unclean Thoughts in your selves or others. 1 Cor. 15.33. Evil Communications
corrupt good Manners. Impure Discourse is the Bellows to blow up the Fire of
Lust. Much Evil is conveyed to the Heart by the Tongue. Psalm. 141.3. Set a
watch, O Lord, before my mouth.

(4.) Look in a special manner to your Heart. Prove. 4.23. Keep thy Heart with
all keeping. Every one has a Tempter in his own Bosom. Matthew. 15.19. Out of
the Heart come Evil Thoughts. And thinking of Sin makes way for the Act of Sin.
Suppress the first Risings of Sin in your Heart. As the Serpent, when Danger is
near, keeps his Head: So keep your Heart, which is the Spring from whence all
lustful Motions do proceed.

(5.) Look to your Attire. We read of the Attire of an Harlot, Prove. 7.10. A
wanton Dress is a Provocation to Lust. Curlings and Towrings of the Hair, a
Painted Face, naked Breasts, are Allurements to Vanity. Where the Bush is hung
out, People will go in and taste of the Liquor. Hierom says, Such as by their
lascivious Attires endeavor to draw others to Lust, tho no Evil follow; yet
these Tempters shall be punished, because they offered Poison to others, tho
they would not drink.

(6.) Take heed of Evil Company. Serpunt vitia and in proximum quemque
transiliunt. Sen.
Sin is a Disease very catching: One Man tempts another to sin, and hardens him
in Sin. There are three Cords to draw Men to Adultery: The Inclination of the
Heart, the Persuasion of Evil Company, and the Embraces of the Harlot; and this
Threefold Cord is not easily broken. Psalm. 106.18. A Fire was kindled in their
Company. I may allude to it, the Fire of Lust is kindled in bad Company.

(7.) Beware of going to Plays. A Playhouse is often a Preface to a Whore-house.
Ludi praebent semina nequitiae. We are forbid to avoid all appearance of Evil:
Are not Plays the appearance of Evil? Such Sights are there as are not fit to
be beheld with chaste Eyes. Both Fathers and Councils have shown their Dislike
of going to Plays. A Learned Divine observes, That many have on their
Deathbeds confessed with Tears, that the Pollution of their Bodies has been
occasioned by going to Plays.

(8.) Take heed of mixed Dancing. Instrumenta luxuriae tripudia. From Dancing
People come to Dalliance one with another, and from Dalliance to Uncleanness.
There is, says Calvin, for the most part some unchaste Behavior in Dancing.
Dances draw the Heart to Folly by wanton Gestures, by Unchaste Touches, by
Lustful Looks. St. Chrysostom did inveigh against mixed Dancing in his Time. We
read, says he, of a Marriage Feast, and of Virgins going before with Lamps,
Matthew. 25.7. but of Dancing there, we read not. Many have been ensnared by
Dancing; as the Duke of Normandy, and others. Saltatio ad adulteras non ad
pudicas pertinet. Ambros. Chrysostom says, Where Dancing is, there the Devil
is: I speak chiefly of mixed Dancing. And whereas we read of Dances in
Scripture, Exodus 15. those were sober and modest. They were not mixed Dances,
but Pious and Religious, being usually accompanied with singing Praises to God.

(9.) Take heed of Lascivious Books, and those Pictures that provoke to Lust.
1. Books. As the reading of Scripture does stir up Love to God, so reading of
bad Books does stir up the Mind to Wickedness. I could name one who published a
Book to the World full of effeminate, amorous and wanton Expressions; before he
died he was much troubled for it, and did burn that Book which did make so many
burn in Lust. 2. And to Lascivious Books, I may add Lascivious Pictures, which
bewitch the Eye, and are the Incendiaries of Lust. They secretly convey Poison
to the Heart. Qui aspicit innocens aspectu fit nocens. Popish Pictures are not
more prone to stir up to Adultery, than unclean Pictures are to stir up to
Concupiscence.

(10.) Take heed of Excess in Diet. When Gluttony and Drunkenness lead the Van,
Chambering and Wantonness bring up the Rear. Vinum fomentum libidinis; any Wine
inflames Lust: And Fullness of Bread is made the Cause of Sodom's Uncleanness,
Ezekiel. 16.49. The rankest Weeds grow out of the fattest Soil. Uncleanness
proceeds from Excess. Ier. 5.8. When they were fed to the full, every one
neighed after his Neighbors Wife. Get the Golden Bridle of Temperance. God
allows Recruits of Nature, and what may fit us the better for his Service; but
beware of Surfeit. Excess in the Creature clouds the Mind, choaks good
Affections, provokes Lust! St. Paul did (...), keep under his Body, 1 Cor.
9.27. The Flesh pampered is apt to rebel. Corpus impinguatum recalcitrat.

(11.) Take heed of Idleness. When a Man is out of a Calling, now he is fit to
receive any Temptation. We do not use to sow Seed in Fallow Ground: But the
Devil sows most Seed of Temptation in such as lie sallow. Idleness is the Cause
of Sodomy and Uncleanness, Ezekiel. 16.49. When David was idle on the Top of his
Leads, then he espied Bathsheba, and took her to him, 2 Samuel 11.4. Hierom gave
his Friend this Counsel, to be always well employed in God's Vineyard, that
when the Devil came he might have no leisure to listen to a Temptation.

(12.) To avoid Fornication and Adultery, let every Man have a chaste entire
Love to his own Wife. Ezekiel's Wife was the Desire of his Eyes, chap. 24.16.
When Solomon had dissuaded from strange Women, he prescribes a Remedy against
it: Prove. 5.18. Rejoice with the Wife of thy Youth. It is not the having a
Wife, but the loving a Wife, makes a Man live Chastely. He who loves his Wife,
whom Solomon calls his Fountain, will not go abroad to drink of muddy poisoned
Waters. Pure Conjugal Love is a Gift of God, and comes from Heaven. This, like
the Vestal Fire, must be cherished, that it do not go out. He who loves not his
Wife, is the likelyest Person to embrace the Bosom of a Stranger.

(13.) Labor to get the Fear of God into your Hearts. Prove. 16.6. By the Fear
of the Lord Men depart from Evil. As the Banks keep out the Water, so the Fear
of the Lord keeps out Uncleanness. Such as want the Fear of God, want the
Bridle that should check them from Sin. How did Joseph keep from his Mistresses
Temptation? The Fear of God pulled him back. Genesis 39.9. How should I do this
great Wickedness and sin against God? St. Bernard calls Holy Fear Ianitor
Animae, The Doorkeeper of the Soul. As a Noble-man's Porter stands at the
Door, and keeps out Vagrants, so the Fear of God stands and keeps out all
sinful Temptations from entering.

(14.) Get a Delight in the Word of God. Psalm. 119.123. How sweet is thy Word
to my taste! St. Chrysostom compares God's Word to a Garden. If we walk in this
Garden, and suck Sweetness from the Flowers of the Promises, we shall never
care to pluck the Forbidden Fruit. Sint castae deliciae meae Scripturae. Aug.
The Reason why Persons seek after unchaste sinful Pleasures, is, because they
have no better. Caesar riding through a City, and seeing the Women play with
Dogs and Parrots, said, Sure they have no Children. So they that sport with
Harlots, it is because they have no better Pleasures. He that has once tasted
Christ in a Promise, is ravished with Delight, and how would he scorn a Motion
to sin! Job said, the Word was his appointed Food, Job 23.12. No Wonder then he
made a Covenant with his Eyes.

(15.) If you would abstain from Adultery, use Serious Consideration. Consider,

1. God sees thee in the Act of Sin. He sees all thy Curtain-wickedness. He is
Totus Oculus, All Eye. Aug. The Clouds are no Canopy, the Night is no Curtain
to hide thee from God's Eye. Thou can not sin, but thy Judge looks on. Ier.
13.27. I have seen thy Adulteries and thy Neighings. Jer. 29.33. They have
committed Adultery with their Neighbors Wives, even I know, and am a Witness,
says the Lord.

2. Few that are entangled in the Sin of Adultery recover out of the Snare.
Prove. 2.19. None that go to her return again. That made some of the Ancients
conclude that Adultery was an unpardonable Sin. But not so: David repented, and
Mary Magdalen was a Weeping Penitent. Her Amorous Eyes that had sparkled with
Lust, she seeks to be revenged of them, she washed Christ's Feet with her
Tears. So that some have recovered out of the Snare. But None that go to her
return, that is, very few. It is rare to hear of any who are enchanted and
bewitched with this Sin of Adultery, that recover out of it. Eccles. 7.26. Her
Heart is Snares and Nets, and her Hands as Bands. Her Heart is Snares, that is,
she is subtle to deceive those who come to her. And, Her Hands are Bands. That
is, Her Embraces are powerful to hold and entangle her Lovers. Plutarch said of
the Persian Kings, They were Captives to their Concubines. They were so
inflamed, that they had no Power to leave their Company. This Consideration may
make all fearful of this Sin; None that go to her return again. Soft Pleasures
harden the Heart.

3. Consider what the Scripture says, and it may ponere obicem, Lay a Bar in
the way to this Sin. Mal. 3.5. I will be a swift Witness against the
Adulterers. It is good when God is a Witness for us: When he witnesses for our
Sincerity, as he did for Job: But it is sad to have God a Witness against us. I
(says God) will be a Witness against the Adulterer. And who shall disprove his
Witness? And he is both Witness and Judge. Heb. 13.4. Whoremongers and
Adulterers God will judge.

4. Consider the Sad Farewell this Sin of Adultery leaves; it leaves an Hell in
the Conscience. Prove. 15.4. The Lips of a strange Woman drop as an Honeycomb,
her End is bitter as Wormwood. The Goddess Diana was so artificially drawn,
that she seemed to smile upon those that came into her Temple, but frown on
those that went out. So the Harlot smiles on her Lovers as they come to her,
but at last comes the Frown and Sting, A Dart strikes through their Liver,
Prove. 7.23. Her End is bitter. When a Man has been virtuous, the Labor is
gone, but the Comfort remains. But when he has been vicious and unclean, the
Pleasure is gone, but the Sting remains. Delectat in momentum, cruciat in
aeternum. Jerome. When the Senses have been feasted with unchaste Pleasures, the
Soul is left to pay the Reckoning. Stolen Waters are sweet. But as Poison,
though it be sweet in the Mouth, it torments the Bowels. Sin alwas ends in a
Tragedy. Memorable is that which Fincelius reports of a Priest in Flanders, who
enticed a Maid to Uncleanness. She objected how vile a Sin it was. He told her,
By Authority from the Pope he could commit any Sin. So at last he drew her to
his wicked purpose. But when they had been together a while, in came the Devil
and took away the Harlot from the Priest's side; and notwithstanding all her
crying out, carried her away. If all that are guilty of Bodily Uncleanness in
this Nation, should have the Devil come and carry them away, I fear more would
be carried away than would be left behind.

(16.) Pray against this Sin. Luther gave a Lady this Advice, That when any
Lust began to rise in her Heart, she should go to Prayer. Prayer is the best
Armor of Proof. Prayer quenches the Wildfire of Lust. If Prayer will cast
out the Devil, why may it not cast out those Lusts which come from the Devil?

Use ult. If the Body must be kept pure from Defilement, much more the Soul of
a Christian must be kept pure. This is the meaning of the Commandment, Not only
that we should not stain our Bodies with Adultery, but that we should keep our
Souls pure. To have a chaste Body, but an unclean Soul, is like a fair Face
with bad Lungs; or a guilt Chimney-piece, that is all Soot within. 1 Pet. 1.16.
Be ye holy, for I am holy. The Soul cannot be lovely to God, till it has
Christ's Image stamped upon it, which Image consists in Righteousness and true
Holiness, Ephesians. 4.14. The Soul must especially be kept pure, because it is the
chief place of God's Residence, Ephesians. 3.17: A King's Palace must be kept clean,
especially his Presence Chamber. If the Body of the Temple, the Soul, is the
Holy of Holies, this must be consecrated. We must not only keep our Bodies from
Carnal Pollution, but our Souls from Envy and Malice.

Quest. How shall we know our Souls are pure?

Resp. 1. If our Souls are pure, then we fly from the appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. We will not do that which looks like sin. When Ioseph's Mistress
did court and tempt him, he left his Garment in her hand, and fled, Genesis 39.12.
'Twas suspicious to be near her. Polycarp would not be seen in Company with
Marcion the Heretic, because it would not be of good Report.

2. If our Souls are pure, this Light of Purity will shine forth. Aaron had
Holiness to the Lord written upon his Golden Plate. Where there is Sanctity in
the Soul, there Holiness to the Lord is engraven upon our Life; we are adorned
with Patience, Humility, good Works, and shine as Lights in the World, Phil.
2.15. carry Christ's Picture in our Conversations. 1 John 2.6. O let us labor
for this Soul-Purity, without it there is no seeing of God. Heb. 12.14. What
Communion has Light with Darkness? And that we may keep our Souls pure, (1.)
Have Recourse to the Blood of Christ: This is the Fountain set open for Sin and
Uncleanness, Zech. 13.1. A Soul steeped in the Brinish Tears of Repentance, and
bathed in the Blood of Christ, is made pure. (2.) Pray much for Pureness of
Soul. Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a clean Heart, O God. Some pray for Children,
others for Riches, but pray for Soul-purity. Say, Lord, tho my Body is kept
pure, yet, Lord, my Soul is defiled, I pollute all I touch. O purge me with
Hyssop: Let Christ's Blood sprinkle me, let the Holy Ghost come upon me and
anoint me. O make me Evangelically pure, that I may be translated to Heaven,
and placed among the Cherubims, where I shall be as holy as thou would have
me to be, and as happy as I can desire to be.

EXODUS XX.15. Thou shall not Steal.


As the Holiness of God sets him against Uncleanness, Thou shall not commit
Adultery, so the Justice of God sets him against Rapine and Robbery, Thou shall
not steal. The thing forbidden in the Commandment, is, meddling with another
Man's Propriety, Thou shall not steal. The Civil Lawyers define Furtum, Stealth
or Theft, to be, the laying Hands unjustly on that which is another: The
invading another Right.

Quest. 1. Whence does Theft arise?

Resp. 1. The Internal Causes are, (1.) Unbelief. A Man has an high Distrust
of God's Providence. Can God prepare a Table in the Wilderness? Psalm 78.19. So
says the Unbeliever, Can God spread a Table for me? No, he cannot. Therefore
he is resolved he will spread a Table for himself, but it shall be of other
Men's Cost, and both first and second Course shall be served in with stolen
Goods. (2.) Covetousness. The Greek Word for Covetousness, (...), signifies an
immoderate Deisre of Getting. This is the Root of Theft. A Man covets more than
his own, and this Itch of Covetousness makes him scratch what he can from
another. Achan's covetous Humor made him steal the Wedge of Gold, which Wedge
did cleave asunder his Soul from God, Josh. 7.21.

2. The External Cause of Theft, is, Satan's Solicitation: Judas was a Thief,
John 12.6. How came he to be a Thief? Satan entered into him, John 13.27. The
Devil is the great Master-Thief, he robbed us of our Coat of Innocence, and he
persuades Men to take up his Trade: He tells Men how bravely they shall live by
Thieving, and how they may catch an Estate. And as Eve listened to the Serpents
Voice, so do they; and as Birds of Prey, live upon Spoil and Rapine.

Quest. 2. How many sorts of Theft are there?

Res. I. There is a stealing from God; and so they are Thieves who rob any part
of God's Day from him. -- Remember to keep holy the Sabbath Day -- Not a part
of the Day only, but the Whole Day must be dedicated to God. And lest any
should forget this, the Lord has prefixed a Memento, Remember. Therefore to
cut God short, and after Morning Sacrifice, to spend the other part of the
Sabbath in Vanity and Pleasure; this is Spiritual Thievery, it is to rob God of
his Due; and the very Heathens will rise up in Judgment against such
Christians. For the Heathens (as Macrobius notes) did observe a whole Day to
their False Gods.

II. There is a stealing from Others. (1.) A stealing away their Souls; and so
Heretics are Thieves: By robbing Men of the Truth, they rob them of their
Souls. (2.) A stealing away their Money and Goods from them. And under this
Head of stealing away others Money, there may be several arraigned for Thieves.

(1.) The Highway Thief, who takes a Purse contrary to the Letter of this
Commandment, Lev. 19.13. Thou shall not rob thy Neighbor. Mark 10.19. (...),
Do not steal. This is not the Violence which takes the Kingdom of Heaven,
Matthew. 11.12.

(2.) The House-Thief, who purloyns and filcheth out of his Masters Cash, or
steals his Wares and Drugs. The Apostle says, Some have entertained Angels
into their Houses unawares, Heb. 13.2. But many Masters have entertained
Thieves into their Houses unawares. The House-Thief is an Hypocrite as well as
a Thief; he has demure Looks, and pretends he is helping his Master, when he
only helps to rob him.

(3.) The Thief that shrowds himseif under Law, as the unjust Attorney or
Lawyer, who prevaricates and deals falsely with his Client. This is to steal
from the Client. By Deceit and Prevarication the Lawyer robs the Client of his
Land, and may be the means to ruin his Family. He is no better than a Thief in
God's Account.

(4.) The Church-Thief, or Plura^st, who holds several Benifices, but seldom or
never preaches to the People: He gets the Golden Fleece, but lets his Flock
starve. Ezekiel. 34.2. Woe be to the Shepherds of Israel. Ver. 8. They feed
themselves, and feed not my Flock. These Ministers will be indicted for Thieves
at God's Bar.

(5.) The Shop-Thief, he steals in selling, (1.) Who uses False Weights and
Measures, and so steals from others what is their due. Amos 5.8. Who make the
Ephah small. The Ephah was a Measure the Jews used in Selling; they made the
Ephah small, gave scant measure, which was plain stealing. Hos. 12.7. The
Balances of Deceit are in his Hand. Men by making their Weights lighter, make
their Accounts heavier. (2.) He steals in selling, who puts excessive Prices on
his Commodities. He takes thrice as much for a Commodity as it cost him, or as
it is worth. To overreach others in selling, is to steal Men's Money from them.
Lev. 19.13. Thou shall not defraud thy Neighbor, neither rob him. To defraud
him is to rob him. This overreaching others in selling, (which is a cunning
way of stealing) is both against Law and Gospel. 1. It is against the Law of
God. Levit. 25.14. If thou sell ought to thy Neighbor, ye shall not oppress
one another. And, 2. Against Gospel. 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. Let no Man go beyond, or
defraud his Brother. It is stealing.

(6.) The Usurer, who takes of others even to Extortion: He seems to help
another by letting him have Money in his Necessity, but gets him into Bonds, and
sucks out his very Blood and Marrow. I read of a Woman whom Satan had Bound,
Luke 13.16. And truly, he is almost in as bad a Condition whom the Usurer has
bound. The oppressing Usurer is a Robber. An Usurer once asked a Prodigal, When
he would leave spending? Says the Prodigal, Then I will leave spending what is
my own, when thou leavest off stealing from others. Zacheus was an Extortioner,
and after his Conversion, he made Restitution, Luke 19.8. He thought all he got
by Extortion was Theft.

(7.) The Feoffee in Trust, who has the Orphans Estate committed to him: He is
deputed to be his Guardian, and manage his Estate for him; and he curtails the
Estate, and gets a Fleece out of it for himself, and wrongs the Orphan. This is
a Thief. This is worse than taking a Purse, because he betrays his Trust, which
is the highest piece of Treachery and Injustice.

(8.) The Borrower, who borrows Money from others with an Intention never to pay
them again. Psalm. 37.21. The wicked borrows and pays not again. What is it
but Thievery to take Money and Goods from others, and not restore them again?
The Prophet Elisha bad the Widow sell her Oil, and pay her Debts, and then live
upon the rest, 2 Kings 4.7.

(9.) and Vlt. The last sort of Thief is, the Receiver of stolen Goods. The
Receiver, if he be not the Principal, yet he is Accessory to the Theft, and the
Law makes him guilty. The Thief steals the Money, and the Receiver holds the
Sack to put it in. The Root would die if it were not watered; and Thievery
would cease, if it were not encouraged by the Receiver. I am apt to think he
who does not scruple to take Stolen Goods into his House, would as little
scruple to take a Purse.

Quest. What are the Aggravations of this Sin of Stealing?

Resp. 1. To steal when one has no need. To be a Rich Thief.

2. To steal Sacrilegiously. To devour things set apart to holy Uses. Prove.
20.25. It is a Snare to the Man who devoureth that which is holy. Such an one
was Dionysius, who robbed the Temple, and took away the Silver Vessels.

3. To commit the Sin of Theft against Checks of Conscience, and Examples of
God's Justice; this is like the Dye to the Wool, it does dye the Sin of a
Crimson Color.

4. To rob the Widow and Orphan, Exodus 22.22. Ye shall not afflict the Widow or
Fatherless: Peccatum clamans: If they cry unto me I will surely hear them.

5. To Rob the Poor. How did David disdain that the Rich Man should take away
the poor Man's Lamb! As the Lord lives he shall surely die, 2 Samuel 12.5. What
is the Enclosing of Commons, but robbing of the Poor?

III. There is a stealing from a Man's Self. A Man may be a Thief to himself.

Quest. How so?

Resp. 1. By Niggardliness. The Niggard is a Thief, he steals from himself, in
that he does not allow himself what is fitting. He thinks that lost which is
bestowed upon himself. He robs himself of Necessaries. Eccles. 6.2. A Man to
whom God has given Riches, yet God gives him not power to eat thereof. He
gluts his Chest and starves his Belly. He is like the Ass that is loaded with
Gold, but feeds upon Thistles. He robs himself of that which God allows him.
This is indeed to be punished with Riches; to have an Estate, and want an Heart
to take the Comfort of it, this Man is a Thief to himself.

2. A Man may be a Thief to himself, and rob himself by Prodigality, viz.
Wasting his Estate. The Prodigal lavisheth Gold out of tht Bag; he is like
Crates the Philosopher, who threw his Gold into the Sea. The Prodigal boils a
great Estate to nothing. This is to be a Thief to himself, to spend away that
Estate from himself, which might conduce to the Comfort of Life.

3. He is a Thief to himself, by Idleness, when he mispends his Time. To spend
ones Hours in Pleasure and Vanity, this is to rob himself of that precious Time
which God has given him to work out Salvation. Time is a rich Commodity,
because on the well spending this present Time, an happy Eternity depends. He
that spends his Time idly and vainly, is a Thief to himself; he robs himself of
his Golden Seasons, and by consequence of Salvation.

4. A Man may be a Thief to himself by Suretiship. Prove. 22.26. Be not thou one
of them that are Sureties for Debt: The Creditor comes upon the Surety for
Debt, and so by paying another Debt he is a Thief to himself, he undoes
himself. Let not any Man say, He should have been counted unkind, if he had not
entered into Bonds for his Friend. Better thy Friend count thee unkind, than all
Men count thee unwise. Lend another what you can spare; nay, give him if he
needs, but never be a Surety. It is no Wisdom for a Man so to help another, as
to undo himself. This is to rob himself and his Family.

Use I. It confutes the Doctrine of Community; that all things are common, and
one Man has a Right to another Estate. The Scripture confutes it. Deuteronomy.
23.25. When thou come into the standing Corn of thy Neighbors, thou shall
not move a Sickle unto thy Neighbors Corn. Propriety must be observed. God
has set this Eighth Commandment as an Hedge about a Man's Estate, and this
Hedge cannot be broken without Sin. If all things be common, then there is no
Stealth, and so this Commandment were in vain.

Use II. It reproves such as live upon Stealing. Instead of Living by Faith,
they live by their Shifts. The Apostle exhorts, that every Man eat of his own
Bread, 2 Thessalonians. 3.12. The Thief does not eat of his own Bread, but of another.
If there be any who are guilty of this Sin, let them labor to recover out of
the Snare of the Devil by Repentance, and let them show their Repentance by
Restitution. Non remittitur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum. Aug. Without
Restitution no Remission. Luke 19.8. If I have taken away any thing from any
Man unjustly, I restore fourfold. It may suffice to restore ill-gotten Goods
by ones own Hand, or by a Proxy. Better a thousand times restore Goods
unlawfully gotten, than to stuff ones Pillow with Thorns, and have Guilt
trouble ones Conscience upon a Deathbed.

Use III. Exhort. To all to take heed of this Sin of Thieving; it is a Sin
against the Light of Nature. Some may go to excuse this Sin. Hear the Thiefs
Plea: It Is a course Wool will take no die; and a bad Sin indeed that has no
Excuse. I am (says one) grown low in the World, and trading is bad, and I have
no other way to a Livelihood.

Resp. 1. This shows a great Distrust of God, as if he could not provide for
thee without thy Sin. 2. This shows Sin is gotten to a great Height, that
because a Man is Low in the World, therefore he will Acheronta movere, Go to
the Devil for a Livelihood. Abraham would not have it said, that the King of
Sodom had made him rich, Genesis 14.23. O let it never be said, that the Devil
has made thee rich! 3. Thou ought not to undertake any Action which thou
can not pray for a Blessing upon: But if thou live on Thieving, thou can
not pray for a Blessing upon stolen Goods. Therefore take heed of this Sin.
Lucrum in arca, damnum in conscientia. Aug. Take heed of getting the World with
the Loss of Heaven. To dissuade all from this horrid Sin, consider,

(1.) Thieves are the Caterpillars of the Earth, Enemies to Civil Society.

(2.) God hates them. In the Law the Cormorant was unclean, Lev. 11.17. because
a thievish devouring Creature, a Bird of Prey, by which God showed his Hatred
of this Sin.

(3.) The Thief is a Terror to himself, he is always in Fear. Psalm. 53.5. There
were they in great Fear: True of the Thief. Guilt breeds Fear. If he hear but
the shaking of a Tree, his Heart shakes. It was said of Cataline, He was afraid
of every Noise. If a Briar does but take hold of a Thiefs Garment, he is afraid
it is the Officer to apprehend him: And Fear has Torment in it, 1 John 4.18.

(4.) The Judgments which follow this Sin. Achan the Thief was stoned to Death,
Josh. 7. and Zech. 5.2. What see thou? And I said, A flying roll. Ver. 3.
This is the Curse that goes over the Face of the Earth, I will bring it forth,
says the Lord, and it shall enter into the House of the Thief. Fabius a Roman
Censor, condemned his own Son to die for Theft. Thieves die with Ignominy, the
Ladder is their Preferment. And there is a worse thing than Death, while they
rob others of Money, they rob themselves of Salvation.

Quest. What is to be done to avoid stealing?

Resp. 1. Live in a Calling. Ephesians. 4.28. Let him that stole steal no more, but
rather let him labor, working with his Hands, etc. Such as stand idle, the
Devil hires them, and puts them into the pilfering Trade. An idle Person tempts
the Devil to tempt him.

2. Be contented with the Estate God has given you. Heb. 13.5. Be content with
such things as you have. Theft is the Daughter of Avarice. Study Contentment.
Believe that Condition best God has carved out to you. God can bless that
little Meal in the Barrel. We shall not need these things long; we shall carry
nothing out of the World with us but our Winding Sheet. If we have but enough
to bear our Charges to Heaven, it is sufficient.

EXODUS XX.16. Thou shall not bear False Witness against thy Neighbor.


The Tongue, which at first was made to be an Organ of God's Praise, is now
become an Instrument of Unrighteousness. This Commandment binds the Tongue to
its good Behavior. God has set two Fences to keep in the Tongue, the Teeth
and Lips. And this Commandment is a Third Fence set about it, that it should
not break forth into Evil: Thou shall not bear False Witness against thy
Neighbor. This Commandment has a Prohibitory and a Mandatory Part. The First
is set down in plain Words, the other is clearly employed.

I. The Prohibitory Part of the Commandment, or what it forbids in general. It
forbids any thing which may tend to the Disparagement or Prejudice of our
Neighbor. More particularly, two things are forbidden in this Commandment.
(1.) Slandering. (2.) False Witness.

(1.) Slandering our Neighbor. This is a Sin against the 9 th Commandment. The
Scorpion carries his Poison in his Tail, the Slanderer carries his Poison in
his Tongue. Slandering, is to report things of others unjustly. Psalm. 35.11.
They laid things to my charge which I knew not. It is usual to bring in a
Christian beheaded of his Good Name. They raised a Slander of Paul, that he
should preach Men might do Evil that Good might come of it. Romans 3.8. We are
slanderously reported, and some affirm that we say, Let us do Evil that Good
may come. Surius of Luther.
Eminency is commonly blasted by Slander. Holiness its self is no Shield for
Slander. The Lambs Innocence will not preserve it from the Wolf. Christ was the
most innocent upon Earth, yet was reported to be a Friend of Sinners. John
Baptist, a Man of an holy Austere Life, yet they said of him, He had a Devil,
Matthew. 11.18. The Scripture calls Slandering, Smiting with the Tongue. Ier.
18.18. Come and let us smite him with the Tongue. You may smite another and
never touch him. Majora sunt linguae vulnera quam gladii. Aug. The Wounds of
the Tongue no Physician can heal: And to pretend Friendship to a Man, yet
slander him, is most odious. St. Hierom speaks thus, The Arrian Faction made a
show of Kindness; they kissed my Hands, but slandered me, and sought my Life.
And as it is a Sin against this Commandment to raise a false Report of another,
so it is a Sin to receive a false Report before we have examined it. Psalm.
15.1. Lord, who shall dwell in thy holy Hill? Quis ad Coelum? Ver. 3. He that
back biteth not, nor takes up a Reproach against his Neighbor. We must not
only not raise a false Report, but not take it up. He that raises a Slander,
carries the Devil in his Tongue; and he that receives it, carries the Devil in
his Ear.

(2.) The Second thing Forbidden in this Commandment, is False Witness. Here
Three Sins are condemned. 1. Speaking. 2. Witnessing. 3. Swearing that which is
False, contra proximum.

1. Speaking that which is false. Prove. 12.22. Lying Lips are an Abomination to
the Lord. To lie, is to speak that which one knows to be an Untruth. There is
nothing more contrary to God than a Lie. The Holy Ghost is called the Spirit of
Truth, 1 John 4.5, 6. Lying is a Sin that does not go alone, it ushers in other
Sins. Absalom told his Father a Lie, that he was going to pay his Vow at
Hebron, 2 Samuel 15.7. and this Lie was a Preface to his Treason. Where there is
a Lie in the Tongue, it shows the Devil is in the Heart. Acts 5.3. Why has
Satan filled thy Heart to lie? Lying is such a Sin as unfits Men for Civil
Society. How can you converse or bargain with him, that you cannot trust a Word
he says? This is a Sin which highly provokes God. Ananias and Saphira were
struck dead for telling a Lie, Acts 5.5. The Furnace of Hell is heated for
Liars. Rev. 22.15. Without are Sorcerers, and whosoever loves and makes a
Lie. Oh abhor this Sin! Quicquid dixeris juratum putes. Hierom. When thou
speak, let thy Words be as Authentic as thy Oath. Imitate God, who is the
Pattern of Truth. Pythagoras being asked, What made Men like God? Answered, Cum
vera loquuntur, When they speak Truth. It is made the Character of a Man that
shall go to Heaven, Psalm. 15.2. He speaks the Truth from his Heart.

2. That which is condemned in the Commandment, is, (...), Witnessing that
which is false, Thou shall not bear false witness. There is a twofold bearing
of False Witness. (1.) There is a bearing False Witness for another. (2.) A
Bearing False Witness against another.

(1.) A bearing False Witness for another. When we do give our Testimony for a
Person that is Criminal and Guilty, we justify him as if he were Innocent.
Isa. 5.23. Which justify the Wicked for Reward. He that goes to make a wicked
Man just, makes himself Unjust.

(2.) There is a bearing False Witness against another: i. e. When we accuse
another in open Court falsely. This is to imitate the Devil, who is the Accuser
of the Brethren. Tho the Devil is no Adulterer, yet he is a False Witness.
Solomon says, Prove. 25.18. A Man that bears false Witness against his
Neighbor, is a Hammer and a Sword. In his Face he is hardened like an Hammer,
he cannot blush, he cares not what Lie he witnesses to. And he is a Sword: His
Tongue is a Sword to wound him he witnesses against in his Goods or Life. Thus
1 Kings 21.13. There came in two men, Children of Belial, and witnessed against
Naboth, saying, Naboth did blaspheme God and the King: And their Witness took
away his Life. The Queen of Persia being sick, the Magicians accused two Godly
Virgins, that they had by Charms procured the Queens Sickness; whereupon she
caused these Virgins to be sawn asunder. A False Witness does pervert the place
of Judicature: He corrupts the Jury; his bearing False Witness makes them give
in a false Verdict: And he corrupts the Judge, by making him pronounce a wrong
Sentence, and cause the Innocent to suffer. Vengeance will find out the False
Witness. Prove. 19.5. A False Witness shall not be unpunished. Deuteronomy. 19.18, 19.
If the witness be a false witness, and has testified falsely against his
Brother, then shall ye do unto him as he had thought to have done unto his
Brother: i. e. If he had thought to have taken away his Life, his own Life
shall go for it.

3. That which is condemned in the Commandment, is, Swearing that which is
false. When Men take a False Oath, and by that take away the Life of another.
Zech. 8.17. Love no false Oath. Chap. 5.2. What see thou? I said, A flying
Roll. Ver. 3, 4. This is the Curse that goes forth, and it shall enter, inquit
Dominus, into the House of him that swears falsely by my Name, and it shall
consume his House, with the Timber and Stones of it. The Scythians made a Law,
when a Man did bind two sins together, a Lie with an Oath, he was to lose his
Head; because this Sin did take away all Truth and Faith among Men. The Devil
has taken great possession of such who dare swear to a Lie. This is a manifest
Breach of this Commandment.

Use I. 1 st. Br. It reproves the Church of Rome, who will dispense with a Lie,
or a False Oath, if it be to promote the Catholic Cause. They approve of an
Officious Lie: They hold some Lies to be lawful; they may as well hold some
Sins to be lawful. God has no need of our Lie. It is not lawful to tell a Lie,
propter Dei gloriam, if we were sure to bring Glory to God by it, as Austin
speaks.

2 d. Br. 2. It reproves those who make no Conscience of slandering others;
they come under the Breach of this Commandment. Psalm. 50.20. Thou sit and
slanderest thy own Mothers Son. Jer. 20.10. Report, say they, and we will
report. Ezra 4.15. This City (i. e. Jerusalem) is a rebellious City, and
hurtful to Kings and Provinces. Paul was slandered as a Mover of Sedition, and
the Head of a Faction, Acts 24.5. The same Word signifies both a Slanderer and
a Devil, 1 Timothy 3.11. Not Slanderers. In the Greek, (...), Not Devils. Some
think it is no great matter to misreport and slander others; Know that this is
^o Act the part of a Devil. Clipping a Man's Credit to make it weigh lighter,
is worse than clipping of Coin. The Slanderer wounds three at once: He wounds
him that he slanders, and he wounds him to whom he reports the Slander, by
causing uncharitable Thoughts to arise in his Mind against the Party slandered;
and he wounds his own Soul, by reporting that of another which is false. This
is a Great Sin, and I would I could not say it is common. You may kill a Man as
well in his Name as in his Person. Some are loath to take away their Neighbors
Goods, Conscience would fly in their Face: But better take away their Corn out
of their Field, their Wares out of their Shop, than take away their good Name.
This is a Sin you can never make them reparation for; a Blot in a Man's Name
being like a Blot in a White Paper, which will never be got out. Surely God
will visit for this Sin. If Idle Words shall be accounted for, shall not Unjust
Slanders? The Lord will make Inquisition one day as well for Names as for
Blood. Oh therefore take heed of this Sin! It is a Breach of the Ninth
Commandment. Was it a Sin under the Law to defame a Virgin, Deuteronomy. 22.19. And is
it not a greater Sin to defame a Saint, who is a Member of Christ? The
Heathens, by the Light of Nature, abhorred this Sin of slandering. Diogenes
used to say, Of all Wild Beasts, a Slanderer is the worst. Antoninus made a
Law, That if a Person could not prove the Crime he reported another to be
guilty of, he should be put no Death.

3 d. Br. 3. It reproves them who are so wicked, as to bear false witness
against others. These are Monsters in Nature, unfit to live in a Civil Society.
Eusebius relates of one Narcissus, a Man famous for Piety, who was accused by
two False Witnesses of Unchastity, and to prove their Accusation, they bound it
with Oaths and Curses after this manner: One said, If I speak not true, I pray
God I may perish by Fire: The other said, If I do not speak true, I wish I may
be deprived of my sight. It pleased God, that the first Witness who forswore
himself, his House being set on Fire, he was burnt in the Flame. The other
Witness being troubled in Conscience, confessed his Perjury, and continued so
long Weeping, that he wept himself blind. Iezabel, who suborned two false
Witnesses against Naboth, she was thrown down out of a Window, and the Dogs
licked her Blood, 2 Kings 9.33. O tremble at this Sin! A perjured Person is the
Devils Excrement. He is cursed in his Name, and seared in his Conscience. Hell
gapes for such a Wind-fall.

Use II. 1 st Br. Exhort. To all, to take heed of the Breach of this
Commandment, of lying, slandering, and bearing False Witness, and to avoid
these Sins,

1. Get the Fear of God. Why does David say, The Fear of the Lord is clean?
Psalm. 19.8. Because it cleanses the Heart of Malice, it cleanses the Tongue
of Slander. The fear of the Lord is clean. It is to the Soul as Lightning to
the Air, which cleanses it.

2. Get Love to your Neighbor, Lev. 19.18. Then there would not be (...). If
we love a Friend, we will not speak or attest any thing to his Prejudice. Men's
Minds are cankered with Envy and Hatred: Hence comes slandering and false
Witness. Love is a Lovely Grace. Love thinks no Evil, 1 Cor. 13.5. It makes the
best Interpretation of another Words. Love is a Well-wisher, and it is rare to
speak ill of him we wish well to. Love is that which cements Christians
together; it is the Healer of Division, and the Hinderer of Slander.

2 d Br. To such whose Lot it is to meet with Slanderers and false Accusers,
(1.) Labor to make a Sanctified use of it. When Shimei railed on David, David
made a sanctified use of it, 2 Samuel 16.10. The Lord has said to him, Curse
David. So if you are slandered, or falsely accused, make a good use of it. See
if you have no sin unrepented of, for which God may suffer you to be
calumniated and reproached. See if you have not at any time wronged others in
their Name, and said that of them which you cannot prove, then lay your Hand on
your Mouth, and confess the Lord is Righteous to let you fall under the Scourge
of the Tongue. (2.) If you are slandered, or falsely accused, but know your own
Innocence, be not too much troubled: Let this be your rejoicing, the Witness of
your Conscience. Murus aheneus esto nil conscire sibi -- A good Conscience is a
Wall of Brass, that will be able to stand against all False Witness. As no
Flattery can heal a bad Conscience, so no Slander can hurt a good. God will
clear up the Names of his People. Psalm. 37.6. He shall bring forth thy
Righteousness as the Light. God, as he will wipe away Tears from the Eyes, so
he will wipe off Reproach from the Name. Believers shall come forth out of all
their Slanders and Reproaches as the Wings of a Dove covered with Silver, and
her Feathers with yellow Gold.

3 d. Br. It should exhort such to be v^^y thankful to God, whom God has
preserved from Slander and False-Witness. Job calls it the Scourge of the
Tongue, Chap. 5.21. As a Rod does scourge the Back, so the Slanderers Tongue
does scourge the Name. It is a great Mercy to be kept from the Scourge of the
Tongue; a Mercy that God stops malignant Mouths from bearing False Witness.
What mischief may not a lying Report, or a False Oath do? One destroys the
Name, the other the Life. It is the Lord that muzzles the Mouths of the wicked,
and keeps these Dogs that snarl at us from flying upon us. Psalm. 31.20. Thou
shall keep them secretly in a Pavilion from the strife of Tongues. It is, I
suppose, an Allusion to Kings, who being resolved to protect their Favorites
against the Accusations of Men, take them into their Bedchamber, or Bosom,
where none may touch them. So God has a Pavilion, or secret hiding place for
his Favorites, where he preserves their Credit and Reputation untouched; he
keeps them from the Strife of Tongues. This is a Mercy we ought to acknowledge
to God.

II. The Mandatory part of this Commandment implied, that is, that we should
stand up for others, and vindicate them when they are injured by Lying Lips.
This is the Sense of the Commandment, not only that we should not slander, or
falsely accuse others, but that we should witness for them, and stand up in
their Defense when we know them to be traduced. A Man may wrong another as well
by Silence as Slander; when he knows him to he wrongfully accused, yet does not
speak in his behalf. If others cast false Aspersions on any, we should wipe
them off. The Apostles (who were filled with the Wine of Spirit) being charged
with Drunkenness, Peter was their Compurgator, and openly cleared their
Innocence. Acts 2.15. These are not drunken as ye suppose. Jonathan knowing
David to be a worthy Man, and all those things Saul said of him to be Slanders,
vindicated David. 1 Samuel 19.4, 5. David has not sinned against thee, but his
Works to thee-ward have been very good. Wherefore then will thou sin against
innocent Blood, and slay David without a Cause. When the Primitive Christians
were falsely accused for Incest, and killing their Children, Tertullian made a
Famous Apology in their Vindication. This is to act the part both of a Friend
and a Christian: To be an Advocate for another, when he is wronged in his good
Name.

EXODUS XX.17. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors House, thou shall not covet
thy Neighbors Wife, nor his Manservant, nor his Maidservant, nor his Ox, nor
his Ass, nor any thing that is thy Neighbors.


This Commandment forbids, (1.) Covetousness in General, Thou shall not covet.
(2.) In Particular, Thy Neighbors House, thy Neighbors Wife, etc.

(1.) It forbids Covetousness in General, Thou shall not covet. It Is lawful to
use the World, yea, and to desire so much of it, as may, 1. Keep us from the
Temptation of Poverty. Prove. 30.8. Give me not Poverty, lest I steal, and take
the Name of my God in vain* 2. As may enable us to Honor God with Works of
Mercy. Prove. 3.9. Honor the Lord with thy Substance. But all the Danger is,
when the World gets into the Heart. The Water is useful for the Sailing of the
Ship; all the Danger is, when the Water gets into the Ship: So the Fear is,
when the World gets into the Heart. Thou shall not covet.

Quest. What is it to covet?

Resp. There are two Words in the Greek which set forth the Nature of
Covetousness. 1. (...), which signifies an insatiable desire of getting the
World. Covetousness is a dry Dropsy. Austin defines Covetousness, plus velle
quam sat est; To desire more than enough: To aim at a great Estate: To be like
the Daughters of the Horseleech, crying, Give, give, Prove. 30.15. Or like
Behemoth, Job 40.23. He trusts that he can draw up Jordan into his Mouth. 2.
(...), which signifies an inordinate Love of the World. The World is the Idol;
it is so loved, that a Man will not part with it to any good Use. This is to
come under the Indictment of Covetousness. He may be said to be covetous, not
only who gets the World unrighteously, but who loves the World inordinately.
But for a more full Answer to the Question, What is it to covet? I shall show
you in Six Particulars, when a Man may be said to be given to Covetousness.

1. When his Thoughts are wholly taken up about the World. As a good Man's
Thoughts are still in Heaven: He is thinking of Christ's Love, and Eternal
Recompenses. Psalm. 139.18. When I awake I am still with thee: That is,
Ainsworth.
by Divine Contemplation. So a covetous Man is still with the World: His Mind
is wholly taken up about it; he can think of nothing but his Shop or Farm. The
Fancy is a Mint-House, and most of the Thougts a covetous Man mints are
Worldly. He is always plotting and projecting about the (...), the things of
this Life. Like a Virgin that has all her Thoughts running upon her Suitor.

2. A Man may be said to be given to Covetousness, when he takes more pains for
the getting of Earth, than for the getting of Heaven. He will turn every Stone,
break his Sleep, take many a weary Step for the World, but will take no pains
for Christ or Heaven. The Gauls, who were an ancient People of France, after
they had tasted the sweet Wine of the Italian Grape, they enquired after the
Country, and never rested till they had arrived at it. So a covetous Man,
having had a Relish of the World, pursues after it, and never leaves till he
has got it; but he neglects the things of Eternity. He could be content if
Salvation would drop into his Mouth, as a ripe Fig drops into the Mouth of the
Eater, Nahum. 3.12. But he is loath to put himself to too much Sweat or Trouble
to obtain Christ or Salvation. He hunts for the World, he wishes only for
Heaven.

3. A Man may be said to be given to Covetousness, when all his Discourse is
about the World. John 3.31. He that is of the Earth, speaks of the Earth: As
it is a sign of Godliness to be still speaking of Heaven, to have the Tongue
tuned to the Language of Canaan. Eccles. 10.12. The Words of a wise Man's Mouth
are gracious. He speaks as if he had been already in Heaven. So a sign of a Man
given to Covetousness, he is speaking of Secular things, his Wares and Drugs. A
covetous Man's Breath, like a Dying Man's, smells strong of the Earth. As they
said to Peter, Thy Speech bewrays thee, Matthew. 26.73. So a covetous Man's
Speech bewrays him. He is like the Fish in the Gospel, which had a Piece of
Money in the Mouth, Matthew. 17.27. Verba sunt Speculum mentis. Bern. The Words
are the Looking-glass of the Heart, they show what is within. Ex abundantia
cordis.

4. A Man is given to Covetousness, when he does so set his Heart upon worldly
things, that for the love of them he will part with Heavenly. For the Wedge of
Gold he will part with the Pearl of Price. The Young Man in the Gospel, when
Christ said, Sell all, and come and follow me; Abiit trist is, He went away
sorrowful, Matthew. 19.22. He would rather part with Christ, than with his
Earthly Possessions. Cardinal Burbon said, He would for go his part in
Paradise, if he might keep his Cardinalship in Paris. When it comes to a
critical point, that Men must either relinquish their Estate or Christ, and
they will rather part with Christ and a good Conscience, than with their
Estate, it is a clear Case they are possessed with the Devil of Covetousness.

5. A Man is given to Covetousness, when he over-loads himself with worldly
Business. He has many Irons in the Fire; he is in this Sense a Pluralist, he
takes so much business upon him, that he cannot find time to serve God; he has
scarce time to eat his Meat, but no time to Pray. When a Man does over-charge
himself with the World, and as Martha, cumber himself about many things, that
he cannot have time for his Soul, sure he is under the Power of Covetousness.

6. He is given to Covetousness, whose Heart is so set upon the World, that to
get it he cares not what unlawful indirect means he uses; he will have the
World per fas and nefas: He will wrong and defraud, and raise his Estate upon
the Ruins of another. Hos. 12.7, 8. The Balances of Deceit are in his Hand,
he loves to oppress. And Ephraim said, Yet I am become rich. Pope Sylvester
the Second did sell his Soul to the Devil for a Popedom.

Use. Take heed and beware of Covetousness, Luke 12.15. It is a direct Breach
of this Tenth Commandment. Covetousness is a Moral Vice, it infects and
pollutes the whole Soul. The Sin,

(1.) It is a Subtle Sin, a Sin that many do not so well discern in
themselves: As some have the Scurvy, yet do not know it. This Sin can dress it
self in the Attire of Virtue. It is called the Cloak of Covetousness, 1 Thessalonians.
2.5. Covetousness is a Sin that wears a Cloak, it cloaks it self under the Name
of Frugality and good Husbandry. It has many Pleas and Excuses for it self,
more than any other Sin, as, the providing for ones Family. The more subtle
the Sin is, the less discernable.

(2) Covetousness is a dangerous Sin, it checks all that is good. It is an
Enemy to Grace, it damps good Affections, as the Earth puts out the Fire. The
Hedgehog in the Fable came to the Cony-burroughs in stormy Weather, and desired
Harbor; but when once he had gotten Entertainment, he set up his Prickles, and
did never leave till he had thrust the poor Conies out of their Buroughs. So
Covetousness by fair Pretenses wins it self into the Heart, but as soon as you
have let it in, it will never leave till it has choked all good Beginnings,
and thrust all Religion out of your Hearts. Covetousness hinders the Efficacy
of the Word Preached. In the Parable the Thorns (which Christ expounded to be
the Cares of this Life) choked the Good Seed, Matthew. 13.7. Many Sermons lie
dead, buried in Earthly Hearts. We preach to Men to get their Hearts in Heaven;
but where Covetousness is predominant, it chains them to the Earth, and makes
them like the Woman which Satan had bowed together, that she could not lift up
her self, Luke 13.11. You may as well bid an Elephant fly in the Air, as a
covetous Man live by Faith. We Preach to Men to give freely to Christ's Poor;
but Covetousness makes them to be like him in the Gospel, who had a withered
Hand, Mark 3.1. They have a withered Hand, and cannot stretch it out to the
Poor. It is impossible to be Earthly-minded and charitable-minded. Thus
Covetousness obstructs the Efficacy of the Word, and makes it prove Abortive.
Such whose Hearts are rooted in the Earth, will be so far from profiting by the
Word, that they will be ready rather to deride it. Luke 16.14. The Pharisees
who were covetous derided him.

(3.) Covetousness is a Mother-Sin, a Radical Vice. 1 Timothy 6.10. The Love of
Money is the root of all Evil. -- Quid non mortalia pectora cogit
Auri sacra fames --
Hor. He who has this Spiritual Itch, a greedy desire of getting the World,
has in him the Root of all Sin. Covetousness is a Mother-sin. I shall make it
appear that Covetousness is a Breach of all the Ten Commandments.

1. It breaks the First Commandment, Thou shall have no other Gods but one. The
covetous Man has more God's than one; Mammon is his God. He has a God of
Gold, therefore he is called an Idolater, Col. 3.5.

2. Covetousness breaks the Second Commandment: Thou shall not make any graven
Image, thou shall not bow down thy self to them. A covetous Man bows down, tho
not to the graven Image in the Church, yet to the Graven Image in his Coin.

3. Covetousness is a Breach of the Third Commandment, Thou shall not take the
Name of the Lord thy God in vain. Absalom's Design was to get his Fathers
Crown, there was Covetousness; but he talks of paying his Vow to God, there he
took God's Name in vain.

4. Covetousness is a Breach of the Fourth Commandment, Remember the
Sabbath Day to keep it holy. A Covetous Man does not keep the Sabbath Holy: He
will ride to Fairs on a Sabbath. Instead of reading in the Bible, he will cast
up his Accounts.

5. Covetousness is a Breach of the Fifth Commandment, Honor thy Father and
thy Mother. A covetous Person will not honor his Father, if he does not feed
him with Money: Nay, he will get his Father to make over his Estate to him in
his Lifetime, and so the Father shall be at the Sons Command.

6. Covetousness is a Breach of the Sixth Commandment, Thou shall not kill.
Covetous Ahab killed Naboth to get his Vineyard, 1 Kings 21.13. How many have
swum to the Crown in Blood!

7. Covetousness is a Breach of the Seventh Commandment, Thou shall not commit
Adultery. Covetousness causes Uncleanness. You read of the Hire of a Whore,
Deuteronomy. 23.18. An Adulteress for Money sets both Conscience and Chastity to Sale.

8. Covetousness is a Breach of the Eighth Commandment, Thou shall not steal.
Covetousness is the Root of Theft. Covetous Achan stole the Wedge of Gold.
Therefore Thieves and Covetous are put together, 1 Cor. 6.10.

9. Covetousness is a Breach of the Ninth Commandment, Thou shall not bear
false witness. What makes the Perjurer take a false Oath, but Covetousness? He
hopes for a Dividend. And,

10. It is plainly a Breach of the Last Commandment, Thou shall not covet. The
Mammonist covets his Neighbors House and Goods, and endeavors to get them
into his own Hands. Thus you see how vile a Sin Covetousness is: It is a
Mother-sin, it is a plain Breach of every one of the Ten Commandments.

(4.) Covetousness is a Sin dishonorable to Religion. For such as say their
Hopes are Above, yet their Hearts are below. For them who profess to be above
the Stars, to lick the Dust of the Serpent: To be born of God, yet buried in
the Earth: How dishonorable is this to Religion! The Lapwing wears a little
Coronet on its Head, yet feeds on Dung. An Emblem of such as profess to be
Crowned Kings and Priests unto God, yet feed immoderately on these Terrene
Dunghill Comforts. Ier. 45.5. And seek thou great things for thy self, seek
them not. What thou Baruk, who art enobled by thy New Birth, and art
illustrious by thy Office, a Levite, do thou seek earthly things? And seek
them now? When the Ship is sinking, art thou trimming thy Cabin? O do not so
degrade thy self, nor blot thy Scutcheon! Seek thou great things? Seek them
not. The higher Grace is, the less earthly should Christians be: The Higher the
Sun is, the shorter always is the Shadow.

1. Covetousness exposes us to God's Abhorrency. Psalm. 10.3. The Covetous whom
the Lord abhors. A King abhors to see his Statue abused. God abhors to see a
Man made in his Image should have the Heart of a Beast given to him. Who would
live in such a Sin as makes him abhorred of God? Whom God abhors he curses,
and God's Curse blasts wherever it comes.

2. Covetousness precipitates Men to Ruin: It shuts them out of Heaven. Ephesians.
5.5. This ye know, that no covetous Man, who is an Idolater, has any
Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God. What should a covetous Man do
in Heaven? God can no more converse with them, than a King can converse with a
Swine. 1 Timothy 6.9. They that will be rich fall into a Snare, and many hurtful
Lusts, which drown Men in Perdition. A covetous Man is like a Be that gets
into a Barrel of Honey, and there drowns it self. He is like a Ferry-man that
takes in so many Passengers to increase his Fare, that he sinks his Boat. So a
covetous Man takes in more Gold to the increasing of his Estate, that he damns
himself in Perdition. I have read of some Inhabitants near Athens, who lived in
a very dry barren Island, and they took much pains to draw a River to this
Island to water it, and make it fruitful; but when they had opened the
Passages, and brought the River to it, the Water brake in with such a Force,
that it drowned the Land, and all the People in it. An Emblem of a Covetous
Man; he labors to draw Riches to him, and at last they come in in such
abundance, that they drown him in Hell and Perdition. How many, to build up an
Estate, pull down their Souls. Oh therefore fly from Covetousness. I shall next
prescribe some Remedies against Covetousness.

EXODUS XX.17. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbor's House, thou shall not covet
thy Neighbors Wife, etc.


I am in the next place to resolve a Question, How we may do to cure this Itch
of Covetousness?

Resp. For Answer to this, I shall prescribe some Remedies and Antidotes
against this Sin.

1. Faith. 1 John 5.4. This is the Victory over the World, even your Faith. The
Root of Covetousness is, the Distrust of God's Providence. Faith believes God
will provide. God who feeds the Birds will feed his Children. He who clothes
the Lillies, will cloth his Lambs: And so Faith overcomes the World. Faith is
the Cure of Care. Faith not only purifies the Heart, but satisfies the Heart.
Faith makes God our Portion, and so in him we have enough. Psalm. 16.5. The Lord
is the Portion of mine Inheritance, the Lines are fallen unto me in pleasant
places; yea, I have a goodly Heritage. Faith by a Divine Chemistry extracts its
chief Comforts out of God. A little with God is sweet. Thus Faith is a Remedy
against Covetousness. Faith overcomes not only the Fear of the World, but the
Love of the World.

2. The Second Remedy is, Judicious Consideration.

(1.) What poor things these things below are, that we should covet them. 1.
They are below the worth of the Soul, which carries in it an Idea and
Resemblance of God. The World is but the Workmanship of God, the Soul is the
Image of God. 2. You covet that which will not satisfy you. Eccles. 5.10. He
that loves Silver shall not be satisfied with Silver. Solomon had put all the
Creatures in a Limbeck, and stilled out the Quintessence, and behold, All was
Vanity, Eccles. 2.11. Covetousness is a dry Dropsy; the more a Man has, the
more he thirsts. Quo plus sunt potae, plus sitiuntur aquae. 3. Worldly things
cannot remove Trouble of mind. King Saul being perplexed in Conscience, all his
Crown-Jewels could not administer Comfort to him, 1 Samuel 28.15. The things of
the World will no more ease a troubled Spirit, than a Gold Cap will cure the
Headache. 4. The things of the World, if you had more of them, cannot continue
with you. (...), Isocr. The Creature has a little Honey in its Mouth, but it
has Wings to fly away. Glass Metal. These things either go from us, or we
from them. What poor things are these to covet?

(2.) Second Consideration. The Frame and Contexture of the Body. God has made
the Face to look upwards toward Heaven. Os Homini sublime dedit, coelumque
tueri
Iussit --
Ovid. Anatomists observe, that whereas other Creatures have but Four Muscles
to their Eyes, Man has a Fifth Muscle, by which he is able to look up to
Heaven. And as for the Heart, it is made like a Glass Viol, narrow and
contracted downwards, but wide and broad upwards. And as the Frame and
Contexture of the Body teaches us to look to things Above, so especially the
Soul is planted in the Body, as a Divine Sparkle to ascend upwards. Can it be
imagined that God gave us intellectual Immortal Souls, to covet only Earthly
things? What wise Man would fish for Gudgeons with Golden Hooks? Did God give
us Glorious Souls, only to fish for the World? Sure our Souls are made for an
higher End; to aspire after the enjoyment of God in Glory.

(3.) Third Consideration. The Examples of those who have been Contemners and
Despisers of the World. The Primitive Christians, as Clemens Alexandrinus
observes, were sequestered from the World, and where wholly taken up in Converse
with God; they lived in the World above the World. Like the Birds of Paradise,
Ambrose.
who soar above in the Air, and seldom or never touch with their Feet upon
Earth. Luther says, That he was never tempted to this Sin of Covetousness. The
Saints of old, tho they did live in the World, they did trade in Heaven. Phil.
3.20. (...), Our Conversation is in Heaven. The Greek Word signifies, our
Commerce, or Traffic, or Burghership is in Heaven. Enoch walked with God, Genesis
5.24. His Affections were sublimated, he did take a turn in Heaven every Day.
The Righteous are compared to a Palm Tree, Psalm. 92.12. Philo observes, That
whereas all other Trees have their Sap in their Root, the Sap of the Palm Tree
is toward the Top. The Emblem of the Saints, whose Hearts are above in Heaven,
where their Treasure is.

3. The Third Remedy. Covet Spiritual things more, and you will Covet earthly
things less. Covet Grace. Grace is the best Blessing; it is the Seed of God, 1
John 3.9. The Angels Glory: covet Heaven. Heaven is the Region of Happiness,
it is the most pleasant Climate. Did we covet Heaven more, we should covet Earth
less. They that stand on the top of the Alps, the great Cities of Campania seem
but as small Villages in their Eye. If we could have our Hearts more fixed upon
the Jerusalem above, how would all Worldly things disappear, and be as nothing
in our Eye. We read of an Angel coming down from Heaven, who did tread with his
right Foot on the Sea, and with his left Foot on the Earth, Rev. 10.2. Had we
but once been in Heaven, and viewed the Superlative Glory of it, how might we
in an holy Scorn trample with one Foot upon the Earth, and with the other Foot
upon the Sea. Oh covet after Heavenly things. There is the Tree of Life, the
Mountains of Spices, the Rivers of Pleasure, the Honeycomb of God's Love
dropping, the Delights of Angels, the Flower of Joy fully ripe and blown. There
is the pure Air to breath in; no Fogs nor Vapors of Sin arise to infect that
Air, but the Sun of Righteousness enlightens that Horizon continually with its
glorious Beams. O let your Thoughts and Delights be always taken up about the
City of Pearl, the Paradise of God. Did we covet Heavenly things more, we
should covet earthly things less. It is reported after Lazarus was raised from
the Grave, he was never seen to smile or be delighted with the World after.
Were our Hearts raised by the Power of the Holy Ghost up to Heaven, we should
not be much taken with Earthly things.

4. The Fourth Remedy. Pray for an Heavenly Mind. Lord, let the Loadstone of
thy Spirit draw my Heart upward. Lord, dig the Earth out of my Heart; teach me
how to possess the World, and not love it; how to hold it in my hand, and not
let it get into my Heart. So much for the Commandment in General, Thou shall
not cover.

(2.) I shall speak of it more Particularly: Thou shall not covet thy
Neighbors House, thou shall not covet thy Neighbors Wife, etc. Observe here
the Holiness and Perfection of God's Law. It forbids the Motus primo primi, the
First Motions and Risings of Sin in the Heart, Thou shall not covet. The Laws
of Men take hold of the Actions, but the Law of God goes further, it forbids
not only the Actions, but the Affections. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors
House. It is not said, Thou shall not take away his House: But, Thou shall not
covet it. These Lustings and Desires after the Forbidden Fruit are sinful. Romans
7.7. The Law has said, Thou shall not covet. Tho the Tree bears no bad Fruit,
it may be faulty at the Root. Tho a Man does not commit Gross Sin, yet who can
say his Heart is pure? There may be a Faultiness at the Root, there may be
sinful Covetings and Lustings in the Soul.

Use. Let us be humbled for the Sin of our Nature, the Risings of Evil
Thoughts, coveting that which we ought not. Our Nature is a Seed-Plot of
Iniquity; it is like Charcoal, that is ever sparkling. The Sparkles of Pride,
Envy, Covetousness, arise in the Mind. How should this humble us! If there be
not sinful Actings, there are sinful Covetings. Let us pray for mortifying
Grace, which may be like the Water of Jealousy, to make the Thigh of Sin to
rot. But to come to the Words more nearly, Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors
House, nor thy Neighbors Wife, etc.

Quest. Why is the House put before the Wife? In Deuteronomy the Wife is put
first, Deuteronomy. 5.21. Neither shall thou desire thy Neighbors Wife, neither shall
thou covet thy Neighbors House. Here the House is put first.

Resp. In Deuteronomy the Wife is set down first in respect of her Value. She
(if a good Wife) is of far greater Value and Estimate than the House. Prove.
31.10. Her Price is far above Rubies. She is the Furniture of the House, and
this Furniture is more worth than the House. When Alexander had overcome King
Darius in Battle, Darius seemed not to be much dismayed. But when he heard his
Wife was taken Prisoner, now his Eyes like Spouts did gush forth Water, as
valuing his Wife dearer than his Life. But yet in this place in Exodus, the
House is put before the Wife: The Reason is, Because the House is first in
Order. The House is erected before the Wife can live in it. The Nest is built
before the Bird is in it. The Wife is first esteemed, but the House must be
first provided.

1. Then, Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors House. How depraved is Man since
the Fall! Man knows not how to keep within Bounds, but is coveting more than
his own. Ahab one would think had enough; he was King, and one would suppose
his Crown-Revenues should have contented him; but still he was coveting more;
Naboth's Vineyard was in his Eye, and stood near the Smoke of his Chimney, and
he could not be quiet till he had it in Possession. Were there not so much
Coveting, there would not be so much Bribing. One Man pulls away another House
from him. It is only the Prisoner lives in such a Tenement as he may be sure
none will go about to take from him.

2. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors Wife. This Commandment is a Bridle to
check the Inordinacy of Brutish Lusts. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors
Wife. It was the Devil that sowed another Man's Ground, Matthew. 13.25. But how
is the Hedge of this Commandment trodden down in our Times! There be many who
do more than covet their Neighbors Wives, they take them. Deuteronomy. 27.20. Cursed
be he that lies with his Fathers Wife, and all the People shall say Amen. If it
were to be proclaimed, Cursed be he that lies with his Neighbors Wife, and all
that were guilty should say Amen, how many would curse themselves!

3. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors Manservant, nor his Maidservant.
Servants, when Faithful, are a Treasure. What a true and trusty Servant had
Abraham, he was his Right Hand! How prudent and faithful was he in the matter
he was entrusted with, in getting a Wife for his Masters Son! Genesis 24.9. And
surely, it would have gone near to Abraham to have had any one enticed away his
Servant from him. But this Sin of coveting Servants is common. If one has a
better Servant, others will be inveigling and laying Baits for him, and
endeavor to draw him away from his Master. This is a Sin against the Tenth
Commandment. To steal away another Servant by Enticement, is no better than
Thievery.

4. Nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing that is thy Neighbors. Were there
not coveting of Ox and Ass, there would not be so much stealing. First Men
break the Tenth Commondment by coveting, and then they break the Eighth
Commandment by stealing. It was an excellent Appeal that Samuel made to the
People, 1 Samuel 12.3. Witness against me before the Lord, whose Ox have I taken,
or whose Ass, or whom have I defrauded. And it was a brave Speech of St. Paul,
Acts 20.33. I have coveted no Man's Gold, or Silver, or Apparel.

Quest. But what means may we use to keep us from coveting that which is our
Neighbors?

Ans. The best Remedy is Contentation. If we are content with our own, we shall
not covet that which is another. St. Paul could say, I have coveted no Man's
Gold or Silver. Whence was this? It was from Contentment. Phil. 4.11. I have
learned in whatever state I am, therewith to be content. Content says, as
Jacob, Genesis 33.11. I have enough: I have a Promise of Heaven, and have
sufficient to bear my Charges thither, I have enough. And he who has enough
will not covet that which is another. Be content: And the best way to be
contented is, (1.) Believe that Condition best which God carves out to you by
his Providence. If God had seen it fit for us to have more, we should have had
it; but his Wisdom sees this best for us. Perhaps we could not manage a great
Estate, it is hard to carry a full Cup without spilling, and a full Estate
without sinning. Great Estates may he Snares; a Boat may be overturned by
having too great a Sail. The believing that Estate best God carves us, makes us
content; and being contented, we will not covet that which is another. (2.)
The way to be content with such things as we have, and not to covet another,
is to consider the less Estate we have, the less Account we shall have to give
at the last Day. Every Person is a Steward, and must be accountable to God.
They who have great Estates, have the greater Reckoning. God will say, What
good have you done with your Estates? Have you honored me with your Substance?
Where are the poor you have fed and clothed? If you cannot give a good
Account, it will be sad. This may make us contented with a less Portion: To
consider, the less Estate, the less Account we have to give: The less Riches,
the less Reckoning. This is the way to have Contentment, and no better Antidote
against coveting that which is another, than being content with that which is
our own.

So much for the Commandments. Quest. Is any Man able perfectly to keep the
Commandments of God?

Answ. No mere Man since the Fall is able in this Life perfectly to keep the
Commandments of God, but does daily break them in Thought, Word and Deed?

James 3.2. In many things we offend all. Man in his Primitive State of
Innocence was endued with Ability to keep the whole Moral Law. Adam had
rectitude of Mind, Sanctity of Will, Perfection of Power. Adam had the Copy of
God's Law written in his Heart; no sooner did God command, but he did obey. As
the Key is suited to all the Wards in the Lock, and can open them; so Adam had
a Power suited to all God's Commands, and could obey them. Adam's Obedience did
exactly run parallel with the Moral Law, as a well-made Dial goes exactly with
the Sun. Man in Innocence was like a well-tuned Organ, he did sweetly tune to
the Will of God. He was adorned with Holiness as the Angels, but not confirmed
in Holiness as the Angels. Adam was Holy but Mutable; he fell from his Purity,
and we with him. Sin cut the Lock of Original Righteousness where our Strength
lay. Sin has brought such a Languor and Faintness into our Souls, and has so
weakened us, that we shall never recover our full Strength till we put on
Immortality. The thing I am now to demonstrate is, That we cannot yield perfect
Obedience to the Moral Law. -- In many things we offend all.

1. The Case of an Unregenerate Man is such, that he cannot perfectly obey all
God's Commands. He may as well touch the Stars, or span the Ocean, as yield
exact Obedience to the Law. A Person unregenerate cannot act Spiritually, he
cannot pray in the Holy Ghost, he cannot live by Faith, he cannot do Duty out
of love to Duty; and if he cannot do Duty Spiritually, then much less
Perfectly. Now that a Natural Man cannot yield perfect Obedience to the Moral
Law, is evident: (1.) Because he is Spiritually dead, Ephesians. 2.1. And being so,
how can he keep the Commandments of God perfectly? A dead Man is not fit for
Action. A Sinner has the Symptoms of Death upon him. 1. He has no Sense; a
Dead Man has no Sense: He has no Sense of the Evil of Sin, of God's Holiness
and Veracity; therefore he is said to be without feeling, Ephesians. 4.19. 2. He has
no Strength, Romans 5.6. What Strength has a dead Man? A Natural Man has no
Strength to deny himself, to resist Temptation; he is dead: And can a dead Man
fulfill the Moral Law? (2.) A natural Man cannot perfectly keep all God's
Commandments, because he is so interlarded with Sin. He is born in Sin, Psalm.
51.5. Job 15.16. -- He drinks Iniquity as Water. All the Imagination of his
Thoughts are evil, and only evil, Genesis 6.5. Now the least Evil Thought is
(...), a Breach of the Royal Law: And if there be Defection, there cannot be
Perfection. And as a natural Man has no Power to keep the Moral Law, so he
has no Will. He is not only Dead, but worse than dead. A dead Man does no
Hurt, but there is a Life of Resistance against God goes along with the Death
of sin? A Natural Man not only cannot keep the Law through Weakness, but he
breaks it through Wilfulness. Ier. 44.17. We will do whatsoever goes out of
our Mouth, to burn Incense to the Queen of Heaven.

2. As the Unregenerate cannot keep the Moral Law perfectly, so neither the
Regenerate. Eccles. 7.20. There is not a just Man upon the Earth that does good
and sins not: Nay, that sins not in doing good. There Is that in the best
Actions of a Righteous Man that is damnable, if God should weigh him in the
Balance of Justice. Alas! How are his Duties Fly-blown. He cannot pray without
wandering, nor believe without doubting. Romans 7.18. To me to will is present,
but how to perform I find not. In the Greek it is (...), How to do it
thoroughly I find not. Paul, tho a Saint of the first Magnitude, was better at
willing, than at performing. Mary asked where they had laid Christ: She had a
mind to have carried him away, but she wanted Strength: So the Regenerate have
a Will to obey God's Law perfectly, but they want Strength: Their Obedience is
weak and sickly: The Mark they are to shoot at is perfection of Holiness; tho
they take a right Aim, yet do what they can they shoot short. Romans 7.19. The
Good which I would I do not. A Christian, while he is serving God, is hindered.
Like a Ferry-man that plies the Oar, and rows hard, but a Gust of Wind carries
him back again. So says Paul, The Good I would I do not; I am driven back by a
Temptation. Now if there be any Failure in our Obedience, we cannot make a
perfect Commentary upon God's Law. No Christian alive can write a Copy of
Holiness without blotting. The Virgin Mary's Obedience was not perfect, she
needed Christ's Blood to wash her Tears. Aaron was to make Atonement for the
Altar, Exodus 29.37. to show that the most holy Offering has Defilement in it,
and needs Atonement to be made for it.

Quest. 1. But if Man has not power to keep the whole Moral Law, then why does
God require that of Man, which he is not able to perform? How does this stand
with his Justice?

Answ. Tho Man has lost his Power of Obeying, God has not lost his Right of
Commanding. If a Master entrusts a Servant with Money to lay out, and the
Servant spends it dissolutely, may not the Master justly demand this Money? God
gave us a Power to keep the Moral Law; we by tampering with Sin lost it: But
may not God still call for perfect Obedience? Or in case of Default, justly
punish us?

Quest. 2. But why does God suffer such an Impotency to lie upon Man, that he
cannot perfectly keep the Law?

Answ. The Lord does it (1.) To humble us. Man is a self-exalting Creature, and
if he has but any thing of Worth, he is ready to be puffed up: But when he
comes to see his (...), his Deficiencies and Failings, and how far short he
comes of the Holiness and Perfection God's Law requires; this is a means to
pull down his Plumes of Pride, and lay them in the Dust. He weeps over his
Impotency, he blusheth for his Leprous Spots; he says as Job, I abhor my self
in Dust and Ashes. (2.) God lets this Impotency and Infirmness lie upon us,
that we may have recourse to Christ to obtain Pardon for our Defects, and to
sprinkle our best Duties with his Blood. When a Man sees himself indebted, he
owes perfect Obedience to the Law, but he has nothing to pay: This makes him
fly to Christ to be his Friend, and answer all the Demands and Challenges of
the Law, and set him free in the Court of Justice.

Use I. Is matter of Humiliation for our Fall in Adam. In the State of
Innocence we were perfectly holy; our Minds were crowned with Knowledge, and
our Wills as a Queen did sway the Scepter of Liberty: But now we may say as
Lam. 5.16. The Crown is fallen from our Head. We have lost that Power which was
Inherent in us. When we look back to our Primitive Glory, when we s^ined as
Earthly Angels, we may take up Job's Words, Chap. 29.2. O that it were as in
Months past! O that it were with us as at first, when there was no Stain upon
our Virgin-Nature, when there was a perfect Harmony between God's Law, and
Man's Will. But alas! Now the Scene is altered, our Strength is gone from us,
we tread awry every Step; we come below every Precept; our Dwarfishness will
not reach the Sublimity of God's Law; we fail in our Obedience; and while we
fail, we forfeit. This may put us in close Mourning, and spring a Leak of
Sorrow in all our Souls.

Use II. 1 st. Br. Confutation. It confutes the Arminians, who cry up the Power
of the Will: They hold they have a Will to save themselves. But, by Nature we
not only want Strength, Romans 5.6. but we want Will to that which is Good. The
Will is not only full of Impotency, but Obstinacy. Psalm. 81.11. Israel would
none of me. The Will hangs forth a Flag of Defiance against God. Such as speak
of the Sovereign Power of the Will, forget Phil. 2.13. It is God that works
in you (...), both to will and to do. If the Power be in the Will of Man, then
what needs God to work in us to Will? If the Air can enlighten it self, what
needs the Sun to shine? Such as talk of the Power of Nature, and the Ability
they have to save themselves, they disparage Christ's Merits. I may say as Gal.
5.4. Christ is become of no effect to them. This I affirm, Such as advance the
Power of their Will in matters of Salvation, without the Medicinal Grace of
Christ, do absolutely put themselves under the Covenant of Works. And now I
would ask them, Can they perfectly keep the Moral Law? Malum oritur ex quolibet
defectu. If there be but the least Defect in their Obedience, they are gone.
For one sinful Thought the Law of God curses them, and the Justice of God
arraigns them. Confounded be their Pride, who cry up the Power of Nature, as if
by their own inherent Abilities they could rear up a Building, the top whereof
should reach to Heaven.

2 d. Br. It confutes a sort of People that brag of Perfection; and according
to that Principle, they can keep all God's Commandments perfectly. I would ask
these, Have they at no time a vain Thought come into their Mind? if they have,
then they are not perfect. The Virgin Mary was not perfect; though her Womb were
pure (being overshadowed with the Holy Ghost) yet her Soul was not perfect.
Christ does tacitly imply a Failing in her, Luke 2.49. And are they more
perfect than the Blessed Virgin was? Such as hold Perfection, need not confess
Sin. David confessed Sin, Psalm. 32.6. And Paul confessed Sin, Romans 7.24. But
they are got beyond David and Paul; they are perfect, they never transgress;
and where there is no Transgression, what needs Confession?

2. If they are perfect, they need not ask Pardon: They can pay God's Justice
what they owe; therefore what need they pray, Forgive us our Debts? O that the
Devil should rock Men so fast asleep, as to make them dream of Perfection. And
whereas they bring that, Phil. 3.15. Let us therefore as many as be Perfect be
thus minded. Answ. Perfection there is meant of Sincerity. God is best able to
interpret his own Word, he calls Sincerity Perfection. Job 1.8. A perfect and
an upright Man. But who is exactly perfect? A Man full of Diseases may as well
say he is healthful, as a Man full of Sin say he is perfect.

Use III. To Regenerate Persons. Tho you fail in your Obedience, and cannot
keep the Moral Law exactly, yet be not discouraged.

Quest. What comfort may be given to a Regenerate Person under the Failures and
Imperfections of his Obedience?

Resp. 1. That a Believer is not under the Covenant of Works, but under the
Covenant of Grace. The Covenant of Works requires perfect, personal, perpetual
Obedience. But in the Covenant of Grace God will make some Abatements: He will
accept of less than he required in the Covenant of Works.

(1.) In the Covenant of Works God required Perfection of Degrees. In the
Covenant of Grace he accepts Perfection of Parts: There he required perfect
Working, here he accepts sincere Believing. In the Covenant of Works God
required us to live without Sin; in the Covenant of Grace God accepts of our
Combat with Sin.

(2.) Tho a Christian cannot in his own Person perform all God's Commandments,
yet Christ as his Surety, and in his stead has fulfilled the Law for him, and
God accepts of Christ's Obedience, which is perfect, to satisfy for that
Obedience which is imperfect: Christ being made a Curse for Believers, all the
Curses of the Law have their Sting pulled out.

(3.) Tho a Christian cannot keep the Commands of God to Satisfaction, yet he
may to Approbation.

Quest. How is that?

Answ. 1. He gives his full Assent and Consent to the Law of God. Romans 7.12.
The Law is Holy and Just. There was Assent in the Judgment. Romans 7.16. I
consent to the Law. There was Consent in the Will.

2. A Christian mourns that he cannot keep the Commandments fully: When he
fails, he weeps: He is not angry with the Law, because it is so strict; but he
is angry with himself because he is so deficient.

3. He takes a sweet complacential Delight in the Law. Romans 7.22. I delight in
the Law of God, in the inward Man. Gr. (...), I take Pleasure in it. Psalm.
119.97. O how love I thy Law! Tho a Christian cannot keep God's Law, yet he
loves his Law. Tho he cannot serve God perfectly, yet he serves him willingly.

4. It is his cordial Desire to walk in all God's Commands. Psalm. 119.5. O that
my ways were directed to keep thy Statues. Tho his Strength fails, yet his
Pulse beats.

5. He does really endeavor to obey God's Law perfectly, and wherein he comes
short, he runs to Christ's Blood to make Supply for his Defects. This cordial
Desire and real Endeavor God esteems as perfect Obedience. 2 Cor. 8.12. If
there be a willing mind, it is accepted. Let me hear thy Voice, for sweet is
thy Voice, Cant. 2.14. Tho the Prayers of the Righteous are mixed with Sin, yet
God sees they would pray better; God picks out the Weeds from the Flowers; he
sees the Faith, and winks at the Failing. The Saints Obedience, tho it falls
short of Legal Perfection, yet having Sincerity in it, and Christ's Merits
mixed with it, finds gracious Acceptance. When the Lord sees endeavors after
Perfect Obedience, this he takes well at our Hands: As a Father that receives a
Letter from his Child, though there be Blots in the Letters and False Spellings,
yet the Father takes all in good Part. O what Blottings are there in our Holy
Things! But God is pleased to take all in good part. Says God, It is my Child,
and he would do better if he could; I will accept it.

Quest. Are all the Transgressions of the Law equally heinous?

Answ. Some Sins in themselves, and by reason of several Aggravations, are more
heinous in the sight of God than others.

John 19.11. He that delivered me unto thee has the Greater Sin. The Stoic
Philosophers held, that all Sins were equal. But this Scripture clearly holds
forth, that there is a gradual difference in Sin: Some are greater than others:
Some are mighty Sins, Amos 5.12. And crying Sins, Genesis 18.21. Every Sin has a
Voice to speak, but some Sins cry. As some Diseases are worse than others, and
some poisons more venomous; so some Sins are more heinous, Ezekiel. 16.47. Ier.
16.12. You have done worse than your Fathers, your Sins have exceeded theirs.
Some Sins have a blacker Aspect than others. To clip the King's Coin is
Treason, but to strike his Person is an higher degree of Treason. A vain
Thoughr is a Sin, but a blasphemous Word is a greater Sin. That some Sins are
greater than others, appears, (1.) Because there was difference in the
Offerings under the Law. The Sin-offering was greater than the
Trepass Offering. (2.) Because some Sins are not capable of Pardon as others
are, therefore they must needs he more heinous, as the Blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost, Matthew. 12.31. (3.) Because some Sins have a greater Degree of
Punishment than others. Matthew. 23.14. Ye shall receive greater Damnation,
(...). Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? God would not punish one
more than another, but that his Sin is greater. It is true, all Sins are
equally heinous in respect of the Object, or the Person against whom Sin is
committed, (viz.) The Infinite God. But in another Sense all Sins are not alike
heinous. Some Sins have more bloody Circumstances in them, which are like the
Die to the Wool, to give it a deeper Color.

Quest. What Sins may be said to be more heinous than others?

Resp. 1. Such Sins as are committed without any occasion offered: A Man swears
or is angry, and has no Provocation. The less the occasion of Sin is, the
greater is the Sin. (2.) Such Sins are more heinous that are committed
presumptuously. Under the Law there was no Sacrifice for Presumptuous Sins,
Numb. 15.30.

Quest. What is it to sin presumptuously, which does heighten and aggravate
Sin, and make it more heinous?

Answ. To sin presumptuously, is to sin against Convictions and Illuminations,
or an enlightened Conscience. Job 24.13. They are of those that rebel against
the Light. Conscience, like the Cherubim, stands with a Flaming Sword in its
Hand, to deterr the Sinner, yet he will sin. Did not Pilat sin against
Conviction, and with an high hand, in condemning Christ? He knew that of Envy
the Jews had delivered him, Matthew. 27.18. He confessed he found no fault with
him, Luke 23.14. And his own Wife sent to him, Have nothing to do with that
just Man, Matthew. 27.19. Yet, for all this he gave the Sentence of Death against
Christ. Here he sinned presumptuously, against an enlightened Conscience. To sin
ignorantly does something extenuate and pare off the Guilt. John 15.22. If I
had not come, ye had had no sin. That is, your Sin had been less. But to sin
against Illuminations and Convictions, does inhance and accent Men's Sins. These
Sins make deep Wounds in the Soul. Other Sins fetch Blood, these are a Stab at
the Heart.

Quest. How many ways does a Man Sin against Illuminations and Convictions?

Answ. 1. When he lives in the total neglect of Duty. He is not ignorant that
it is a Duty to read the Word, yet he lets the Bible lie by as rusty Armor,
that he seldom makes use of. He is convinced that it is a Duty to pray in his
Family, yet he can go Days and Months, and God never hear of him. He calls God
Father, but never asks him Blessing. Neglect of Family Prayer does as it were
uncover the Roof of Men's Houses, and make way for a Curse to be rained down
upon their Table.

2. When a Man lives in the same Sins which he condemns in others. Romans 2.1.
Thou that judge another do the same things. As Austin says of Seneca, He
wrote against Superstitions, yet he worshipped those Images which he reproved.
One Man condemns another for rash censuring, yet lives in the same Sin himself.
A Master reproves his Apprentice for Swearing, yet he himself Swears. The
Snuffers of the Tabernacle were of pure Gold. They who reprove and snuff the
Vices of others, had need themselves to be free from those Sins. The Snuffers
must be of Gold.

3. When a Man sins after Vow. Psalm. 56.12. Thy Vows, O God, are upon me. A Vow
is a Religious Promise made to God to dedicate our selves to him. A Vow is not
only a Purpose, but a Promise. Every Votary makes himself a Debtor, he binds
himself to God in a solemn manner. Now to Sin after Vow, to vow himself to God,
and give his Soul to the Devil, must needs be against the highest Convictions.

4. When a Man sins after Counsels, Admonitions, Warnings, he cannot plead
Ignorance: The Trumpet of the Gospel has been blown in his Ears, and sounded a
Retreat to call him off from his Sins; he has been told of his Injustice,
living in Malice, keeping bad Company, yet he would venture upon Sin. This is
to sin against Conviction; it aggravates the Sin, and is like a Weight put in
the Scale, to make his Sin weigh the heavier. If a Sea-mark be set up to give
Warning that there are Shelves and Rocks in that place, yet if the Mariner will
fail there, and split his Ship, it is Presumption; and if he be cast away, who
will pity him?

5. When a Man sins against express Comminations and Threatenings. God has
thundered out Threatenings against such Sins. Psalm. 66.21. God shall wound the
hairy Scalp of such an one as goes on still in his Trespasses. Yet tho God set
the point of his Sword to the Breast of a Sinner, yet he will commit Sin. The
Pleasure of Sin does more delight him, than the Threatenings affright him. He,
like the Liviathan, laughs at the shaking of a Spear, Job 41.29. Nay, he
derides God's Threatenings. Isa. 5.19. Let him make speed and hasten his Work
that we may see it. We have heard much what God intends to do, and of Judgment
approrching, we would fain see it. For Men to see the Flaming Sword of God's
Threatenings brandished, yet to strengthen themse^ves in Sin, is in an high
manner to sin against Illumination and Conviction.

6. When a Man sins under Affliction. God does not only thunder by Threatening,
but has let his Thunderbolt fall; he has inflicted Judgments on a Person, he
may read his Sin in his Punishment, yet he sins: His Sin was Uncleanness; he
has wasted his Strength as well as his Estate; he has had a Fit of Apoplexy,
yet tho he feels the smart of Sin, he retains the Love of Sin. This is to sin
against Conviction. 2 Chronicles. 28.22. In his Distress did he trespass yet more:
this is that King Ahaz. This does inhance and make the Sin greater than other
Sins: For sinning against an enlightened Conscience,

First, Is full of Obstinacy and Pertinaciousness. Men can give no Reason, make
no Defense for their Sins, yet they are resolved to hold fast Iniquity. This is
desperate Wilfulness: And Voluntas est regula and mensura actionis, The more of
the Will in a Sin, the greater the Sin. Ier. 18.12. We will walk after our own
Devices. Tho there be Death and Hell every step, we will march on under Satan's
Colors. This made the Sin of the Apostate Angels so great, because it was
wilful; they had no Ignorance in their Mind, no Passion to stir them up, there
was no Tempter to deceive them, but they sinned obstinately and out of Choice.

Secondly, To sin against Convictions and Illuminations, is joined with
slighting and contempt of God. It is bad for a Sinner to forget God, but it is
worse to contemn him. Prove. 10.13. Wherefore do the wicked contemn God? An
enlightened Sinner knows that by his Sin he disobligeth and angers God; but he
cares not whether God be pleased or no, he will have his Sin. Therefore such an
one is said to reproach God. Numb. 15.30. The Soul that does ought
presumptuously, the same reproacheth the Lord. Every Sin displeases God, but
sins against an enlightened Conscience reproach the Lord. To contemn the
Authority of a Prince, is a Reproach done to him.

Thirdly, It is accompanied with Impudency. Fear and Shame are banished, the
Vail of Modesty is laid aside. Zeph. 3.5. The Unjust knows no shame. Judas
knew Christ was the Messiah, he was convinced of it by an Oracle from Heaven,
and by the Miracles he wrought, and yet he impudently goes on in his Treason;
nay, when Christ said, He that dips his Hand with me in the Dish, he shall
betray me. And Judas knew Christ meant him: And when Judas was going about his
Treason, Christ pronounced a Woe to him, Luke 22.22. yet for all that he
proceeded in his Treason. Thus to sin presumptuously, against an enlightened
Conscience, dies the Sin of a crimson Color, and makes it greater than other
Sins.

(3.) Such Sins are more heinous than others, which are Sins of Continuance.
The continuing of Sin is the inhancing of Sin. He who plots Treason, makes
himself a greater Offender. Some Men's Heads are the Devil's Mint-house, they
are minting of Mischief. Romans 1.30. Inventers of evil things. Some invent new
Oaths, others new Snares: Such were those Presidents that invented a Decree
against Daniel, and got the King to sign it, Dan. 6.9.

(4.) Those Sins are greater which proceed from a Spirit of Malignity. To
malign Holiness is Diabolical. It Is a Sin to want Grace, it is worse to hate
it. In Nature there are Antipathies, as between the Vine and Laurel. Some have
an Antipathy against God because of his Purity. Isa. 30.11. Cause the Holy One
of Israel to cease from before us. Sinners, if it lay in their Power, would not
only Unthrone God, but Unbe God. If they could help it, God should be no longer
God. This Sin is boiled up to a greater height.

(5.) Those Sins are of a greater Magnitude, which are mixed with Ingratitude.
God cannot endure of all things to have his kindness slighted. God's Mercy is
seen in reprieving Men so long, in wooing them by his Spirit and Ministers to
be reconciled, in crowning them with so many Temporal Blessings; now to abuse
all this Love, when God has been filling up the Measure of his Mercy, that Men
should fill up the Measure of theit Sins! This is high Ingratitude, and does
make their Sins of a deeper Crimson. Some are worse for Mercy. The Vulture
(says Aelian) draws Sickness from Perfumes: So the Sinner contracts Evil from
the sweet Perfumes of God's Mercy. The English Chronicle reports of one Parry,
who being condemned to die, Queen Elizabeth sent him his Pardon; and after he
was pardoned, he conspired and plotted the Queens Death. Just ^o some deal with
God; he bestows Mercy, and they plot Treason against him. Isa. 1.2. I have
nourished and brought up Children, and they have rebelled against me. The
Athenians, in lieu of the good Service Themistocles had done them, banished him
their City. The Snake in the Fable being frozen, stung him that gave it Warmth.
Certainly sins against Mercy are far more heinous.

(6.) Those Sins are more heinous than other, which are committed with
Delectation. A Child of God may sin through a Surprizal, or against his Will.
Romans 7.19. The Evil which I would not, that do I. Like one that is carried down
the Stream involuntarily. But to sin with Delight, does heighten and greaten
the Sin: A sign the Heart is in the Sin. Hos. 4.8. They set their Heart on
their Iniquity. As a Man follows his Gain with Delight. Rev. 22.15. Without are
Dogs, and whosoever loves and makes a Lie. To tell a Lie is a sin, but to
love to tell a Lie is a greater sin.

(7.) Those sins are more hanous than others, which are committed under a
pretense of Religion. To cousen and defraud is a sin, but to do it with a Bible
in ones Hand is a double sin. To be unchaste is a sin, but to put on a Mask of
Religion to play the Whore, makes the sin the greater. Prove. 7.14. I have
Peace Offerings with me; this day have I paid my Vows, come let us take our
fill of Love. She speaks as if she had been at Church, and had been saying her
Prayers; who would ever have suspected her of Dishonesty? But behold her
Hypocrisy; she makes her Devotion a Preface to Adultery. Luke 20.47. Who
devour Widows Houses, and for pretense make long Prayers. This sin was not in
making long Prayers, (for Christ was a whole Night in Prayer) but to make long
Prayers that they might do unrighteous Actions, did make their sin more horrid.

(8.) Sins of Apostasy are more heinous than other. Demas forsook the Truth, 2 Timothy 4.10. and afterward became a Priest in an Idol Temple, says Dorotheus.
To fall is a sin, but to fall away is a greater sin. Apostates cast a Disgrace
upon Religion. The Apostate (says Tertullian) seems to put God and Satan in
the Balance, and having weighed both their Services, prefers the Devils
Services, and proclaims him to be the best Master. In which respect the
Apostate is said to put Christ to open Shame, Heb. 6.6. This dies a sin in
grain, and makes it greater. It is a sin not to profess Christ, but it is a
greater to deny him. Not to wear Christ's Colors is a sin, but to run from his
Colors is a greater Sin. A Pagan sins less than a Baptized Renegado.

(9.) To persecute Religion, makes sin greater, Acts 7.22. To have no Religion
is a sin, but to endeavor to destroy Religion is a greater. Antiochus
Epiphanes took more tedious Journies, Epiphan. Luke 3.20
and run more hazards, to vex and oppose the Jews, than all his Predecessors
had done in obtaining Victories. Herod added this above all, that he put John
in Prison. He sinned before by Incest; but by imprisoning the Prophet, this
added to his sin, and made it greater. Persecution fills up the Measure of sin.
Matthew. 23.32. Fill you up the measure of your Fathers. If you pour in a
Porringer of Water into a Cistern, that adds something to it; but pour in a
Bucket full or two, and that fills up the measure of the Cistern. So
Persecution fills up the measure of sin, and makes it greater.

(10.) To sin maliciously, makes sin greater. Aquinas and other of the
Schoolmen place the sin against the Holy Ghost in Malice. The Sinner does all
he can to vex God, and despite the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10.29. Thus Julian,
who threw up his Dagger in the Air, as if he would have been revenged upon God.
This swells sin to its full bigness, it cannot be greater. When a Man is once
come to this, blasphemously to despite the Spirit, there is but one step lower
he can fall, and that is to Hell.

(11.) and ult. It aggravates sin, and makes it greater, when a Man not only
sins himself, but endeavors to make others sin. 1. Such as teach Errors to the
People, who decry Christ's Deity, or deny his Virtue, making him only a
Political Head, not an Head of Influence; who preach against the Morality of
the Sabbath, or the Immorality of the Soul. These Men's sins are greater than
others. If the Breakers of God's Law sin, what do they that teach Men to break
them? Matthew. 5.19. 2. Such as destroy others by their bad Example. The swearing
Father has taught his Son to swear, and damned him by his Example. These Men's
sins are greater than others, and they shall have an hotter place in Hell.

Use. You see all sins are not Equal, some are more grievous than others, and
bring greater Wrath; therefore especially take heed of these Sins. Psalm. 19.13.
Keep hack thy Servant from presumptuous sins. The least sin is bad enough, you
need not aggravate your sins, and make them more heinous. He that has a little
Wound will not make it deeper. Oh beware of those bloody Circumstances which
greaten your sin, and make it more heinous. The higher a Man is in sinning, the
lower he shall lie in Torment.

Quest. What does every Sin deserve?

Answ. "God's Wrath and Curse both in this Life, and that which is to come.

Matthew. 25.41. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting Fire. --

Man having sinned, is like a Favorite turned out of the King's Favor, and
deserves the Wrath and Curse of God.

(1.) God's Curse, Gal. 3.10. As when Christ cursed the Fig Tree, it withered,
Matthew. 21.19. So when God curses any, he withers in his Soul. God's Curse
blasts wherever it comes.

(2.) God's Wrath; which is nothing else but the Execution of God's Curse.

First, What this Wrath is? In this Wrath there is, 1. Something that is
Privative; that is, the being deprived of the Smiles of God's Face. It is Hell
enough to be excluded God's Presence; In whose Presence is fullness of Joy,
Psalm. 16.11. God's smiling Face has that Splendour and Oriency of Beauty
shining in it, as ravisheth the Angels with delight. This is the Diamond in the
Ring of Glory. And if it were such a Misery for Absalom that he might not see
the King's Face, 2 Kings 14.22. what will it be for the wicked to be shut out
from beholding God's pleasant Face! Privatio divinae Visionis omnium
suppliciorum summum.

Secondly, God's Wrath has something in it Positive. That is, his Frown and
enraged Fury, which is (...), Wrath come upon the Sinner to the uttermost, 1 Thessalonians. 2.16. Here, three Positions or Maxims.

1. God's Wrath is irresistible. Psalm. 90.11. Who knows the power of thy anger?
Sinners may oppose God's Ways, but not his Wrath. Shall the Briars contend with
the Fire? Shall finite contend with infinite? Job 40.9. Have thou an Arm like
God?

2. God's Wrath is Terrible. The Spanish Proverb is, The Lion is not so fierce
as he is painted. We are apt to have slight Thoughts of God's Wrath, but it is
very tremendous and dismal: as if scalding Lead should be dropped in ones Eye.
The Hebrew Word for Wrath, (...), signifies Heat. To show that the Wrath of God
is hot, therefore it is compared to Fire in the Text. Fire, when it is in its
Rage, is dreadful, (as we saw in the Flames of this City.) So the Wrath of God
is like Fire, it is the Terrible of Terribles. Other Fire is but painted to
this. If when God's Wrath is kindled but a little, and a Spark of it flies into
a wicked Man's Conscience in this Life, it is so terrible; what will it be when
God stirs up all his Wrath? Psalm 78.38. How sad is it with a Soul in
Desertion! Now God dips his Pen in Gall, and writes bitter things. Now his
poisoned Arrow sticks fast in the Heart. Psalm. 88.15, 16. While I suffer thy
Terrors I am distracted, thy fierce Wrath goes over me. Luther in Desertion
was in such Horror of Mind, that Nec calor, nec Sanguis super-esset, He had no
Blood seen in his Face, but he lay as one dead. Now, if God's Wrath be such
toward them whom he loves, what will it be toward them whom he hates? If they
who sip of the Cup find it so bitter, what will they do who drink the Dregs of
the Cup? Psalm. 75.8. Solomon says, The Wrath of a Prince is as the roaring of
a Lion, Prove. 19.12. What then is God's Wrath? When God musters up all his
Forces, and sets himself in Battalia against a Sinner, how can his Heart
endure? Ezekiel. 22.14. Who is able to lie under Mountains of Wrath? God is the
sweetest Friend but the forest Enemy. To set forth the fearfulness of this
Wrath:

(1.) The Wrath of God shall seize upon every part of a Sinner. 1. Upon the
Body: The Body which was so tender, it could not bear Heat or Cold, shall be
tormented in the Wine Press of God's Wrath. Those Eyes which before could only
behold Amorous Objects, shall be tormented with the sight of Devils. The Ears,
which before were delighted with Music, shall be tormented with the hideous
Shrieks of the Damned. 2. The Wrath of God shall seize upon the Soul of of a
Reprobate. Ordinary Fire cannot touch the Soul. When the Martyrs Bodies were
consuming, their Souls did triumph in the Flames; but God's Wrath burns the
Soul. 1. The Memory shall be tormented to remember what means of Grace have
been abused. 2. The Conscience shall be tormented with self-accusations: The
Sinner shall accuse himself for presumptuous sins, for mis-spending his
precious hours, for resisting the Holy Ghost.

(2.) The Wrath of God is without Intermission. Hell is an abiding-place, but
no resting place: There is not a Minutes Rest. Outward Pain has some
Abatement: If it be the Stone or Cholick, the Patient has sometimes Ease; but
the Torments of the Damned have no Intermission. He that feels God's Wrath,
never says, I have Ease.

(3.) The Wrath of God is Eternal. So says the Text, Everlasting Fire. No
Tears can quench the Flame of God's Anger; no, tho we could shed Rivers of
Tears. In all Pains of this Life Men hope for a Cessation, the Suffering will
not continue long; either the Tormentor dies, or the Tormented: But the Wrath
of God is always feeding upon a Sinner. The Terror of Natural Fire is, that it
consumes what it burns: But this makes the Fire of God's Wrath terrible, that
it does not consume what it burns. Sic morientur damnati ut semper vivunt.
Bern. The Sinner shall ever be in the Furnace, after innumerable Millions of
Years the Wrath of God is as far from ending as it was at the beginning. If all
the Earth and Sea were Sand, and every Thousand Years a Bird should come and
take away one Grain of this Sand, it would be a long while e're that vast heap
of Sand were emptied; but if after all that time the Damned might come out of
Hell, there were some Hope. But this Word Ever breaks the Herrt.

Quest. But how does it seem to consist with God's Justice to punish Sin,
(which perhaps was committed in a Moment) with Eternal Fire?

Answ. In respect of the heinous Nature of Sin. Consider the Person offended;
it is Crimen laesae Majestatis: Sin is committed against an Infinite Majesty:
therefore the Sin is infinite, and so the Punishment must be Infinite. Now
because the Nature of Man is but Finite, and a Sinner cannot at once bear
Infinite Wrath, therefore he must in Eternity of Time be satisfying what he
cannot satisfy at once.

(4.) While the Wicked lie scorching in the Flames of Wrath, they have none to
commiserate them. It Is some Ease of Grief to have some condole with us; but the
Wicked have Wrath and no Pity shown them. Who should pity them? God will not
pity them. They derided his Spirit, and now he will laugh at their Calamity,
Prove. 1.26. The Saints will not pity them: They persecuted the Saints upon
Earth, therefore they will rejoice to see God's Justice executed on them. Psalm.
58.10. The Righteous shall rejoice when he sees the Vengeance.

(5.) The Sinner under Wrath has none to speak a good Word for him. An Elect
Person when he sins has one to intercede for him: 1 John 2.1. We have an
Advocate, Jesus Christ the righteous. Christ will say, It is one of my Friends,
one whom I have shed my Blood for; Father, pardon him. But the Wicked (that die
in Sin) have none to solicit for them; they have an Accuser but no Advocate;
Christ's Blood will not plead for them; they slighted Christ, and refused to
come under his Government, therefore Christ's Blood cries against them.

3. God's Wrath is Just. The Greek Word for Vengeance, (...), signifies
Justice. The Wicked shall drink a Sea of Wrath, but not one drop of Injustice.
It Is just that God's Honor be repaired, and how can that be but by punishing
Offenders? Having shown you what this Wrath of God is, I shall show you, 2.
That we have deserved the Curse and Wrath of God. He who infringeth the Kings
Laws, deserves the Penalty. Mercy goes by Favor, Punishment by Desert. Dan.
9.8. To us belongs Confusion of Face. Wrath is that which belongs to us as
we are Sinners; it is as due to us as any Wages that is paid.

Use I. Inform. First Branch. It justifies God in condemning Sinners at the
last Day. Sinners deserve Wrath, and it is no Injustice to give them that which
they deserve. If a Malefactor deserves Death, the Judge does him no wrong in
condemning him.

2 d. Br. See what a great Evil Sin is, which exposes a Person to God's Wrath
for ever. Ex uguue Leonem.
You may know the Lion by his Paw: And you may know what an evil thing sin is
by the Wrath and Curse it brings. When you see a Man drawn upon an Hurdle to
Execution, you conclude he is guilty of some Capital Crime that brings such a
Punishment. When a Man lies under the Torrid Zone of God's Wrath, and roars out
in Flames, then say, How horrid an Evil is Sin! They who now see no Evil in
Swearing, or Sabbath-breaking, they will see it look black in the Glass of
Hell Torments.

3 d. Br. See here an Handwriting upon the Wall; here is that which may check
a Sinners Mirth. He is now brisk and frolic, he chants to the sound of the
Viol, and invents Instruments of Music. Amos 6.5. He drinks stolen Waters,
and says they are sweet. Oh! but let him remember that the Wrath and Curse of
God hang over him, which will shortly (without Repentance) be executed on him.
Dionisius thought, as he sat at Table, he saw a naked Sword hang over his Head.
The Sword of God's Justice hangs over a Sinner; and when the slender Thread of
Life is cut asunder, the Sword falls upon him. Rejoice, O young Man, in thy
Youth, and let thy Heart cheer thee in the Days of thy Youth, Eccles. 11.9. But
know thou for all these things God will bring thee into Judgment. For a drop of
Pleasure thou must drink a Sea of Wrath. Your Pleasure cannot be so sweet, as
Wrath is bitter. The Delights of the Flesh cannot countervail the Horror of
Conscience. Better want the Devils Honey, than be so stung with the Wrath of
God. The Garden of Eden, (which signifies Pleasure) had a Flaming Sword placed
at the East End of it, Genesis 3.24. The Garden of carnal and sinful Delight is
surrounded with the Flaming Sword of God's Wrath.

Use II. Reproof. It reproves the Stupidity of Sinners, who are no more
affected with the Curse and Wrath of God which is due to them. Isa. 44.19. No
Man considers in his Heart. If they were in Debt, and were ready to have the
Sergeant Arrest them, they would be affected with that: But tho the fierce
Wrath of God is ready to Arrest them, they remember not. A Beast, tho he has
no Shame, yet he has Fear; he is afraid of Fire. But Sinners are worse than
Brutish, they fear not the Fire of Hell till they are in it. Most have their
Conscience asleep or feared; but when they shall see the Vials of God's Wrath
dropping, then they will cry out as Dives, O I am tormented in this Flame! Luke
16.24.

Use III. Exhort. 1. Let us Adore God's Patience, who has not brought this
Wrath and Curse upon us all this while. We have deserved Wrath, yet God has
not given us our Desert. We may all subscribe to that, Psalm 103.8. The Lord is
slow to Anger. And ver. 10. He has not rewarded us according to our
Iniquities. God has deferred his Wrath, and given us space to repent, Rev.
2.21. God is not like an hasty Creditor, that requires the Debt, and gives no
time for the Payment. He shoots off his Warning-Piece, that he may not shoot
off his Murdering-Piece. 2 Pet. 3.9. The Lord is long-suffering to usward, not
willing that any should perish. God adjourns the Assizes, to see if Sinners
would turn; he keeps off the storm of his Wrath. But if Men will not be warned,
let them know, that long Forbearance is no Forgiveness.

2 d. Br. Let us labor to prevent the Wrath we have deserved. How careful are
Men to prevent Poverty or Disgrace! Oh labor to prevent God's Eternal Wrath,
that it may not only be deferred but removed.

Quest. What shall we do to prevent, and escape Wrath to come?

Answ. 1. By getting an Interest in Jesus Christ. Christ is the only Skreen to
stand between us and the Wrath of God. He did feel God's Wrath, that they who
believe in him should never feel it. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. Jesus has delivered us
from Wrath to come. Nebuchadnezzar's Fiery Furnace was a Type of God's Wrath,
and that Furnace did not singe the Garments of the Three Children, nor was the
smell of Fire upon them, Dan. 3.27. Jesus Christ went into the Furnace of his
Fathers Wrath, and those that believe in him, the smell of the Fire of Hell
shall never pass upon them.

2. If we would prevent the Wrath of God, let us take heed of those sins which
will bring the Wrath of God. Edmund, Successor of Anselm, has a Saying, I had
rather leap into a Furnace of Fire, than willingly commit a Sin against God.
There are several fiery sins we must take heed of, which will bring the Fire of
God's Wrath.

(1.) The Fire of Rash Anger. Some who profess Religion, yet cannot bridle
their Tongue; they care not what they say in their Anger, they will curse their
Passions. St. James says, The Tongue is set on Fire of Hell, Chap. 3.6. O take
heed of a Fiery Tongue, le^t it bring thee to Fiery Torment. Dives begged a
Drop of Water to cool his Tongue: St. Cyprian says, He had offended most in
his Tongue, and now that was most set on Fire.

2. Take heed of the Fire of Malice. Malice is a malignant Humor, whereby we
wish Evil to another. It is a Vermin lives on Blood, it studies Revenge.
Caligula had a Chest where he kept deadly Poisons for them he had Malice
against. The Fire of Malice brings Men to the Fiery Furnace of God's Wrath.

3. Take heed of the Sin of Uncleanness. Heb. 13.4. Whoremongers and Adulterers
God will judge. Such as burn in Uncleanness, are in great Danger to burn one
Day in Hell. Let one Fire put out another; let the Fire of God's Wrath put out
the Fire of Lust.

3 d. Br. To you who have a well-grounded hope, that you shall not feel this
Wrath which you have deserved, let me exhort you, 1. To be very thankful to
God, who has given his Son to save you from this tremendous Wrath. Jesus has
delivered you from Wrath to come. The Lamb of God was scorched in the Fire of
God's Wrath for you: Christ did feel the Wrath which he did not deserve, that
you may escape the Wrath which you have deserved. Pliny observes, that there is
nothing better to quench Fire than Blood. Christ's Blood has quenched the Fire
of God's Wrath for you. Upon me, upon me be the Curse, said Rebecka to Jacob,
Genesis 27.13. So said Christ to God's Justice, Upon me be the Curse, that my
Elect may inherit the Blessing. 2. Be patient under all the Afflictions which
you endure. Affliction is sharp, but this is not Wrath, this is not Hell. Who
would not willingly drink in the Cup of Affliction, that knows he shall never
drink in the Cup of Damnation? Who would not be willing to bear the Wrath of
Men, that knows he shall never feel the Wrath of God?

Christian, tho thou may feel the Rod, thou shall never feel the bloody Ax.
Austin once said, Strike, Lord, where thou will, if sin be pardoned. So say,
Afflict me, Lord, as thou will in this Life, seeing I shall escape Wrath to
come.

Quest. What does God require of us, that we may escape the Wrath and Curse due
to us for Sin?

Answ. Faith in Jesus Christ, Repentance unto Life, with the diligent use of
all the outward means, whereby Christ communicates to us the Benefits of
Redemption.

I begin with the First, Faith in Jesus Christ, Romans 3.25. Whom God has set
forth to be a Prop^tiation through Faith in his Blood. The great Privilege in
the Text is, to have Christ for a Propitiation, which is not only to free us
from God's Wrath, but to ingra^iate us into God's Love and Favor. And the
Means of having Christ to be our Propitiation is, Faith in his Blood. There is
a twofold Faith, Fides quae creditur, (i. e.) The Doctrine of Faith; and Fides
qua creditur, (i. e.) the Grace of Faith. The Act of Justifying Faith lies in
Recumbency: We do (...), Rest on Christ alone for Salvation. As a Man that is
ready to drown, catches hold on the Bough of a Tree. So a poor trembling
Sinner seeing himself ready to perish, catches hold by Faith on Christ the
Tree of Life, and so is saved. The Work of Faith is the Holy Spirit; therefore
Faith is called the Fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. Faith does not grow in
Nature, it is an outlandish Plant, a Fruit of the Spirit. This Grace of Faith
is Sanctissimum humani pectoris Bonum; of all others the most precious rich
Faith, and most Holy Faith, and Faith of Gods Elect. Hence it is called
Precious Faith, 2 Pet. 1.1. As Gold is the most precious among the Metals, so
is Faith among the Graces. Faith is the Queen of the Graces: Faith is the
Condition of the Gospel. Thy Faith has saved thee, Luke 7.50. Not thy Tears.
Faith is the Vital Artery of the Soul, it animates it. Hab. 2.4. The Just shall
live by his Faith. Unbelievers, tho they breathe, yet want Life. Faith is (as
Clemens Alexandrinus calls it) a Mother-Grace; it excites and invigorates all
the Graces: Not a Grace stirs till Faith sets it awork. Faith sets Repentance
awork; it is like Fire to the Still. Faith sets Hope awork. First we believe the
Promise, then we hope for it. Did not Faith feed the Lamp of Hope with Oil, it
would soon die. Faith sets Love awork. Gal. 5.6. Faith which works by love.
Who can believe in the Infinite Merits of Christ, and his Heart not ascend in a
Fiery Chariot of Love? Faith is a Catholicon, or Remedy against all Troubles: A
Sheat-Anchor we cast out into the Sea of God's Mercy, and are kept from sinking
in Despair. Other Graces have done worthily; but thou (O Faith) excellest them
all. Indeed in Heaven Love will be the chief Grace; but while we are here
militant, Love must give place to Faith. Love takes possession of Glory, but
Faith gives a Title to it. Love is the crowning Grace in Heaven, but Faith is
the conquering Grace upon Earth. 1 John 5.4. This is the Victory that
overcomes the World, even our Faith. Faith carries away the Garland from all
the other Graces. Other Graces help to sanctify us, but it is Faith only that
has the Honor to Justify. Romans 5.1. Being justified (...), By Faith.

Quest. But how comes Faith to be so precious?

Ans. Not as it is a more holy Quality, or as if it had more Worthiness than
other Graces, but respectu Objecti, As it lays hold on Christ the blessed
Object, and fetches in his Fullness, Luther.
John 9.16. Faith in it self considered, is but manus mendica, The Beggar's
Hand: But as this Hand receives the rich Alms of Christ's Merits, so it is
precious, and does Challenge a Superiority over the rest of the Graces.

Use I. 1 st. Br. Of all Sins beware of the Rock of Unbelief. Heb. 3.12. Take
heed lest there be in any of you an evil Heart of Unbelief. Men think as long
as they are not Drunkards or Swearers, it is no great matter to be Unbelievers.
This is the Gospel-sin, it dies your other Sins in Grain.

1. Unbelief is a Christ-reproaching Sin. Unbelief disparageth Christ's
Infinite Merit, as if it could not save. Unbelief makes the Wound of Sin to be
broader than the Plaster of Christ's Blood. This is an high Contempt offered
to Christ, and is a deeper Spea^ than that which the Jews thrust into his Side.

2. Unbelief is an Ungrateful Sin. Ingratus vitandus est ut dirum scelus tellus
ipsa foedius nihil creat. Ingratitude is a Prodigy of Wickedness. Unbelief is
ungrateful, being against the richest Mercy. Suppose a King should redeem a
Captive, and to redeem him should part with his Crown of Gold from his Head;
and when he had done this, should say to the Man redeemed, All I desire of thee
in lieu of my Kindness, is, to believe that I love thee. Now if he should say,
No, I do not believe any such thing. Or, That thou carest not at all for me. I
appeal to you, Were not this odious Ingratitude? So is the Case here, God has
sent his Son to shed his Blood; now God requires only to believe in him, that
he is able and willing to save us. No, says Unbelief, his Blood was not shed
for me, I cannot persuade my self that Christ has any purpose of Love to me.
Is not this horrid Ingratitude? And this inhanceth a Sin, and makes it of a
Crimson Color.

3. Unbelief is a Leading Sin. It is the Breeder of Sin. Qualitas malae vitae
initium sumit ab infidelitate. Unbelief is a Root-sin, and the Devil labors to
water this Root, that the Branches may be fruitful. (1.) Unbelief breeds
Hardness of Heart: Therefore they are put together, Mark 16.14. Christ
upbraided them with their Unbelief and Hardness of Heart. Unbelief breeds the
Stone of the Heart. He who believes not in Christ, is not affected with his
Sufferings, he melts not in Tears of Love. Unbelief freeth the Heart; first it
defiles, and then it hardens. (2.) Unbelief breeds Profaneness. An Unbeliever
will stick at no sin; neither at Fals^ Weights nor False Oaths. He will swallow
down Treason. Judas was first an Unbeliever, and then a Traitor, John 6.64. He
who has no Faith in his Heart, will have no Fear of God before his Eyes.

4. Unbelief is a Wrath-procuring Sin; it is Inimica Salutis, Bern. John 3.18.
Iam condemnatus est, (...), Dying so, he is as sure to be condemned as if
already. John 3.36. He that believes not on the Son, the Wrath of God abides
on him. He who believes not in the Blood of the Lamb, must feel the Wrath of
the Lamb. The Gentiles that believe not in Christ, will be as well damned as
the Jews who blaspheme him. And if Unbelief be so fearful and damnable a Sin,
shall we not be afraid to live in it?

2 d. Br. All Graces set Faith awork on Christ. John 3.15. That whosoever
believes in him should not perish. Ephesians. 6.16. (...), Above all taking the
Shield of Faith. Say as Queen Esther, I will go in to the King, and if I perish
I perish. She had nothing to encourage her, she ventured against Law, yet the
Golden Scepter was held forth to her. We have Promises to encourage our Faith.
John 6.37. He that comes unto me I will in no wise cast out. Let us then
advance Faith by an holy Recumbency on Christ's Merits. Christ's Blood will not
justify without believing: They are both put together in the Text, Faith in
his Blood. The Blood of God, without Faith in God, will not save. Christ's
Sufferings are the Plaster to heal a Sin-sick Soul, but this Plaster must be
applied by Faith. It Is not Money in a rich Man's Hand, though offered to us, will
enrich us, unless we receive it. So it is not Christ's Virtues or Benefits will
do us good, unless we receive them by the Hand of Faith. Above all Graces set
Faith on Work. Remember this Grace is most acceptable to God, and that upon
many accounts.

(1.) Because it is a God-exalting Grace. It glorifies God, Romans 4.20. Abraham
being strong in Faith, gave Glory to God. To believe that there is more Mercy in
God and Merit in Christ than Sin in us, and that Christ has answered all the
Demands and Challenges of the Law, and that his Blood has fully satisfied for
us; this is in an high Degree to honor God. Faith in the Mediator brings more
Glory to God than Martyrdom, or the most Heroic Act of Obedience.

2. Faith in Christ is so acceptable to God, because it is such a Self-denying
Grace; it makes a Man go out of himself, renounce all Self-righteousness, and
wholly rely on Christ for Justification. Faith is very humble, it confesses
its own Indigence, and lives wholly upon Christ. As the Be sucks Sweetness
from the Flower, so Faith sucks all its Strength and Comfort from Christ.

3. Faith is a Grace so acceptable to God, because by Faith we present a
Righteousness to God which does best please him. We bring the Righteousness of
Christ into the Court, which is called the Righteousness of God, 2 Cor. 5.21.
To bring Christ's Righteousness, is to bring Benjamin with us. A Believer may
say, Lord, it is not the Righteousness of Adam, or of the Angels, but of Christ
who is God-Man, Man that I bring before thee. The Lord cannot choose but smell
a sweet Savor in Christ's Righteousness.

Use II. Trial. Let us try our Faith; there is something which looks like
Faith, and is not. Pliny says there is a Cyprian Stone, which is in Color
like a Diamond, but it is not of the right kind. There is a false spurious
Faith in the World. Some Plants have the same Leaf with others, but the
Herbalists can distinguish them by the Root and Taste. Something may look like
true Faith, but it may be distinguished several ways.

(1.) Trial. True Faith is grounded upon Knowledge: Knowledge carries the Torch
before Faith. There is a Knowledge of Christ's Orient Exercises, Phil. 3.8. He
is (...), all made up of Love and Beauty. True Faith is a Judicious Intelligent
Grace, it knows whom it believes, and why it believes. Faith is seated as well
in the Understanding as the Will: It has an Eye to see Christ, as well as a
Wing to fly to him. Such therefore as are invailed with Ignorance; or have only
an Implicit Faith, to believe as the Church believes, have no true genuine
Faith.

(2.) Faith lives in a broken Heart. Mark 9.24. He cried out with Tears, Lo! I
believe. True Faith is always in an Heart bruised for Sin: Such therefore whose
Hearts were never touched for Sin, have no Faith. If a Physician should tell us
there were an Herb would help us against all Infections, but it always grows in
a watery place: If we should see an Herb like it in Color, Leaf, Smell,
Blossom, but it grows upon a Rock, we would conclude this were the wrong Herb.
So saving Faith does always grow in an Heart humbled for Sin; it grows in a
weeping Eye, a watery Conscience: Therefore if there be a show of Faith, but it
grows upon a Rock, an hard impenitent Heart, this is not the true Faith.

(3.) True Faith is at first nothing but an Embryo, it is minute and small; it
is full of Doubtings, Temptations, Fears: It begins in Weakness. It is like the
smoking Flax, Matthew. 12.20. It smoaks with Desires, but does not flame with
Comfort. It is at first so small, that it is scarce discernable. Such as at the
first dash have a strong Persuasion that Christ is theirs, who leap out of Sin
into Assurance; their Faith is false and spurious. That Faith which is come to
its full Stature on its Birthday, is a Monster. The Seed that sprung up
suddenly withered, Matthew. 13.5.

(4.) Faith is a Refining Grace, it consecrates and purifies. Moral Virtue may
wash the outside, Faith washes the inside. Acts 15.9. Having purified their
Hearts by Faith. Faith makes the Heart a Sacrary or Temple, with this
Inscription, Holiness to the Lord. Such whose Hearts have Legions of Lusts in
them, were never acquainted with true Faith. For one to say he has Faith, yet
lives in Sin, is as if one should say he were in Health, yet his Vitals are
perished. Faith is a Virgin-Grace, it is joined with Sanctity. 1 Timothy 3.9.
Holding the Mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience. The Jewel of Faith is always
put in the Cabinet of a pure Conscience. The Woman that touched Christ by
Faith, fetched an healing and cleansing Virtue from him.

(5.) True Faith is Obediential. Romans 16.26. The Obedience of Faith. Faith
melts our Will into the Will of God. If God commands Duty, (tho cross to Flesh
and Blood) Faith obeys. Heb. 11.8. By Faith Ab^aham obeyed. Faith does not only
believe the Promise, but obey the Command. It is not having a Speculative
Knowledge will evidence you to be Believers: The Devil has Knowledge; but that
which makes him a Devil is, he wants Obedience.

6. True Faith is increasing, Romans 1.17. From Faith to Faith: (i. e.) From one
Degree of Faith to another. Faith does not lie in the Heart as a Stone in the
Earth, but as Seed in the Earth, it grows. Joseph of Atimathea was a Disciple
of Christ, but afraid to confess him, afterward he went boldly to Pilate, and
begged the Body of Jesus, John 19.36. And a Christians Increase in Faith is
known two ways.

1. By Stedfastness. He is a Pillar in the Temple of God. Col. 2.7. Rooted and
built up in him, and stablished in the Faith. Unbelievers are Scepticks in
Religion, they are unsettled; they question every Truth. But when the Faith is
on the increasing Hand, it does Stabilire animum, it does corroborate a
Christian; he is able to prove his Principles; he holds no more than he will
die for. As that Martyr Woman said, I cannot dispute for Christ, but I can burn
for him. An increasing Faith is not like a Ship in the midst of the Sea, that
fluctuates, and is tossed upon the Waves, but like a Ship at Anchor, which is
firm and steadfast.

2. A Christians Increase in Faith is known by Strength. He can do that now
which he could not do before. When one is Man-grown, he can do that which he
was not able to do when he was a Child: He can carry an heavier Burden: So a
Christian can bear Crosses with more Patience.

Obj. But I fear I have no Faith, it is so weak.

Resp. If you have Faith, tho but in its Infancy, be not discouraged. For, (1.)
A little Faith is Faith, as a Spark of Fire is Fire. (2.) A weak Faith may lay
hold on a strong Christ: A weak Hand can tie the Knot in Marriage as well as a
strong. She in the Gospel, who but touched Christ, fetched Virtue from him.
(3.) The Promises are not made to Strong Faith, but to True. The Promise does
not say, He who has a Giant-faith, who can believe God's Love through a Frown,
who can rejoice in Affliction, who can work Wonders, remove Mountains, stop the
Mouth of Lions, shall be saved; but whosoever believes, be his Faith never so
small. A Reed is but weak, especially when it is bruised, yet the Promise is
made to it, Matthew. 12.20. A bruised Reed he will not break. (4.) A weak Faith
may be Fruitful. Weakest things multiply most. The Vine is a weak Plant, but it
is Fruitful. The Thief's Cross, which was newly converted, was but weak in
Grace; but how many precious Clusters grew upon that tender Plant! Luke 23.40.
He chi^les his Fellow-Thief, Do not thou fear God? He Judges himself, We
indeed suffer justly. He believes in Christ when he said, Lord. He makes a
Heavenly Prayer, Remember me when thou come into thy Kigdom. Weak Christians
may have strong Affections. How strong is the first Love, which is after the
first planting of Faith! (5.) The weakest Believer is a Member of Christ, as
well as the strongest; and the weakest Member of the Body Mystical shall not
perish. Christ will cut off rotten Members, but not weak Members. Therefore
Christian, be not discouraged: God who would have us receive them that are weak
in Faith, Romans 14.1. will not himself refuse them.

II. The Second means whereby we escape the Curse and Wrath due to Sin, is by
Repentance.

Acts 11.18. Then has God also to the Gentiles granted Repentance unto Life.

Repentance seems to be a bitter Pill to take, but it is to purge out the bad
Humor of Sin. Repentance is by some Antinomian Spirits cried down as a Legal
Doctrine; but Christ himself preached it. Matthew. 4.17. From that time Jesus
began to Preach, and to say, Repent, etc. And in his last Farewell, when he was
ascending to Heaven, he commanded that Repentance should be Preached in his
Name, Luke 24.37. Repentance is a pure Gospel Grace. The Covenant of Works
would not admit of Repentance: It cursed all that could not perform perfect and
personal Obedience, Gal. 3.10. Repentance comes in by the Gospel; it is the
Fruit of Christ's Purchase, that Repenting Sinners shall be saved. Repentance
is wrought by the Ministry of the Gospel, while it sets before our Eyes Christ
Crucified. Repentance is not Arbitrary, but Necessary; there is no being saved
without it. Luke 13.3. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise Perish. And we
may be thankful to God, that he has left us this Plank after Shipwreck.

(1.) I shall show the Counterfeits of Repentance.

1. Natural Softness and Tenderness of Spirit. Some have a tender Affection
arising from their Complexion, whereby they are apt to weep and relent when
they see any Object of Pity. These are not Repenting Tears: For many weep to
see another Misery, who cannot weep at their own Sin. August.


2. Counterfeit, Legal Affrightments. A Man has lived in a course of Sin; at
last he is made a little sensible, he sees Hell ready to devour him, and he is
filled with Anguish and Horror; but within a while the Tempest of Conscience is
blown over, and he is quiet: Then he concludes he is a true Penitent, because
he has felt some bitterness in Sin. This is not Repentance. Judas had some
trouble of Mind. If Anguish and Trouble were sufficient to Repentance, then the
Damned should be most penitent, for they are most in Anguish of Mind. There may
be Trouble of Mind where there is no grieving for the Offense against God.

3. Counterfeit, a slight superficial Sorrow. When God's Hand lies heavy upon a
Man, (he is sick or lame) he may vent a Sigh or Tear, and say, Lord, have
Mercy; yet this is no true Repentance. Ahab did more than all this; 1 Kings
21.27. He rent his Clothes and fasted, and lay in Sackcloth, and went softly.
His Clothes were rent, but not his Heart. The Eye may be Watery, and the Heart
Flinty. An Apricock may be soft without, but it has an hard Stone within.

4. Counterfeit, Good Motions arising in the Heart. Every good Motion is not
Repentance. Some think if they have Motions in their Hearts to break off their
Sins, and become Religious, this is Repentance. As the Devil may stir up bad
Motions in the Godly, so the Spirit of God may stir up good Motions in the
Wicked. Herod had many good Thoughts and Inclinations stirred up in him by John
Baptist's Preaching, yet he did not truly repent, for he still lived in Incest.

5. Counterfeit, Vows and Resolutions. What Vows and Solemn Protestations do
some make in their Sickness, if God recover them they will be new Men, but
afterward are as bad as ever! Ier. 2.20. Thou said, I will not transgress.
Here was a Resolution, but for all this she ran after her Idols. Under every
green Tree thou wanderest, playing the Harlot.

6. Counterfeit, Leaving off some gross Sin. But that is a Mistake: For, (1.) A
Man may leave some Sins, and keep other. Herod did reform many things amiss,
but kept his Herodias. (2.) An old Sin may be left to entertain a new. A Man
may leave off Riot and Prodigality, and turn Covetous. This is to exchange a
Sin. These are the Counterfeits of Repentance. Now if you find that yours is a
Counterfeit Repentance, and you have not repented aright, mend what you have
done amiss: As in the Body, if a Bone be set wrong, the Chyrurgeon has no ways
but to break it again, and set it right. So must you do by your Repentance, if
you have not repented aright; you must have your Heart broken again in a Godly
Manner, and be more deeply afflicted for Sin than ever. And that brings me to
the Second, to show wherein True Repentance consists. It consists in Two things.

(1.) Humiliation. Lev. 26.41. If their Uncircumcised Hearts be humbled. There
is (as the Schoolmen) a twofold Humiliation, or breaking of the Heart. 1.
Attrition: As when a Rock is broken in pieces, this is done by the Law, which
is an Hammer to break the Heart. 2. Contrition; as when Ice is melted into
Water. This is done by the Gospel, which is as a Fire to melt the Heart, Ier.
23.9. It is the Sense of abused kindness causes Contrition.

(2.) Transformation, or Change. Romans 12.2. Be ye transformed by the renewing
of your Mind. Repentance works a Change in the whole Man: As Wine put into a
Glass where Water is, the Wine runs into every part of the Water, and changes
its Color and Taste. So true Repentance does not rest in one part, but diffuse
and spread it self into every part.

1. Repentance causes a Change in the Mind. Whereas before a Man did like Well
of Sin, and say in Defense of it, as Jonah, I did well to be angry, Chap. 2.9.
So, I did well to Swear, and break the Sabbath. When once a Man becomes a
Penitent, his Judgment is changed, he now looks upon Sin as the Greatest Evil.
The Greek Word for Repentance, (...), signifies After-Wisdom. When having seen
how deformed and damnable a thing Sin is, we change our Mind. Paul, before
Conversion, verily thought he ought to do many things contrary to the Name of
Jesus, Acts 26.9. But when he became a Penitent, now he was of another Mind.
Phil. 3.8. I count all things but loss for the Excellency of the Knowledge of
Christ Jesus. Repentance causes a Change of Judgment.

2. Repentance causes a Change in the Affections, which move under the Will,
as the Commander in Chief. Repentance does metamorphize the Affections. It
turns rejoicing in Sin into Sorrow for Sin: It turns Boldness in Sin into holy
Shame: It turns the Love of Sin into Hatred. As Amnon hated Tamar more than
ever he loved her, 2 Samuel 13.15. So the true Penitent hates Sin more than ever
he loved it. Psalm. 119.104. I hate every false way.

3. Repentance works a Change in the Life. Tho Repentance begins at the Heart,
it does not rest there, but goes into the Life. I say it begins at the Heart.
Ier. 4.14. O Jerusalem, wash thy Heart. If the Spring be corrupt, there can no
pure Stream run from it. But tho Repentance begins at the Heart, it does not
rest there, but changes the Life. What a Change did Repentance make in Paul!
It changed a Persecutor into a Preacher. What a Change did it make in the
Jailor! Acts 16.33. He took the Apostles and washed their Stripes, and set Meat
before them. What a Change did it make in Mary Magdalen! She that before did
kiss her Lovers with wanton Embraces, now kisseth Christ's Feet. She that did
use to ^^rl her Hair, and dress it with costly Jewels, now she makes it a Towel
to wipe Christ's Feet. Her Eyes that used to sparkle with Lust, and with impure
Glances to entice her Lovers, now she makes them a Fountain of Tears to wash
her Saviors Feet. Her Tongue that used to speak vainly and loosely, now it is
an instrument set in Tune to praise God. And this Change of Life has two
things in it.

1. The Terminus a quo, a breaking off Sin. Dan. 4.27. Break off thy Sin by
Righteousness. And this breaking off Sin must have three Qualifications. (1.)
It must be Universal, a breaking off all Sin. One Disease may kill as well as
more: One Sin lived in may damn as well as more. The real Penitent breaks off
Secret, Gainful, Complexion Sins: He takes the Sacrificing Knife of
Mortification, and runs it through the Heart of his dearest Lusts. (2.)
Breaking off Sin must be Sincere; it must not be out of Fear or Design, but
upon Spiritual Grounds. As, 1. From Antipathy and Disgust. 2. From a Principle
of Love to God. If Sin had not such Evil Effects, yet a true Penitent would
forsake it out of Love to God. The best way to separate things that are frozen,
is, by Fire. When Sin and the Heart are frozen together, the best way to
separate them is the Fire of Love. Shall I sin against a gracious Father, and
abuse that Love which pardons me? (3.) The breaking off Sin must be perpetual,
so as never to have to do with Sin any more. Hos. 14.8. What have I to do any
more with Idols? Repentance is a Spiritual Divorce, which must be till Death.

2. Change of Life has in it Terminus ad quem, a returning to the Lord. It is
called Repentance toward God, Acts 20.21. It Is not enough when we repent to
leave Old Sins, but we must engage in God's Service. As when the Wind leaves
the West, it turns into a contrary Corner. The repenting Prodigal did not only
leave his Harlots, but did arise and go to his Father, Luke 15.18. In true
Repentance the Heart points directly to God, as the Needle to the North Pole.

Use. Let us all set upon this great Work of Repentance; let us repent
sincerely and speedily: Let us repent of all our Sins, our Pride, rash Anger,
Unbelief: Without Repentance no remission. It is not consistent with the
Holiness of God's Nature to pardon a Sinner while he is in the Act of
Rebellion. O meet God not with Weapons, but Tears in your Eyes: And to stir you
up to a melting penitent Frame,

1. Consider, What is there in Sin, that you should continue in the Practice of
it? It is the accursed thing, Josh. 7.11. It is the Spirits of Mischief
distilled. (1.) It defiles the Souls Glory; it is like a Stain to Beauty: It Is
compared to a Plague Sore, 1 King 8.38. Nothing so changes ones Glory into
Shame as Sin. (2.) Without Repentance Sin tends to final Damnation. Peccatum
transit actu manet reatu -- Sin at first shows its Color in the Glass, but
afterward it bites like a Serpent. Those Locusts, Rev. 9.7. were an Emblem of
sin, On their Heads were Crowns like Gold, and they had Hair as the Hair of
Women, and their Teeth were as the Teeth of Lions, and there were Stings in
their Tails. Sin unrepented of ends in a Tragedy. Sin has the Devil for its
Father, Shame for its Companion, and Death for its Wages, Romans 6.23. What is
there in sin then, that Men should continue in it? Say not it is sweet: Who
would desire that Pleasure which kills?

2. Repentance is very pleasing to God; to Sacrifice like a broken Heart, Psalm.
51.17. A contrite and a broken Heart, O God, thou will not despise: St. Austin
caused this Sentence to be written over his Bed when he was sick. When the
Widow brought empty Vessels to Elisha, the Oil was poured into them, 2 Kings.
4.6. Bring God the broken Vessel of a contrite Heart, and he will pour in the
Oil of Mercy. Repenting Tears are the Joy of God and Angels, Luke 15. Cyprian.
Doves delight to be about the Waters: And surely Gods Spirit (who once
descended in the likeness of a Dove) takes great Delight in the Waters of
Repentance. Mary stood at Jesus Feet weeping, Luke 7.38. She brought two things
to Christ, Tears and Ointment; her Tears were more precious to Christ than her
Ointment.

3. Repentance ushers in Pardon; therefore they are joined together, Acts 5.31.
Repentance and Remission. Pardon of Sin is the Richest Blessing, it is enough
to make a sick Man well. Isa. 33.24. The Inhabitant shall not say, I am sick;
the People that dwell therein shall be forgiven their Iniquity. Pardon settles
upon us the rich Charter of the Promises. Pardoning Mercy is the Sauce that
makes all other Mercies relish the sweeter; it sweetens our Health, Riches,
Honor. David had a Crown of Pure Gold set upon his Head, Psalm. 21.3. But that
which David did most bless God for, was not that God had set a Crown of Gold
upon his Head, but that God had set a Crown of Mercy upon his Head. Psalm.
103.4. Who crowns thee with Mercies. But what was this Crown of Mercy? You
may see, ver. 3. Who forgiveth all thy Iniquity. David more rejoiced that he
was Crowned with Forgiveness, than that he wore a Crown of pure Gold. Now what
is it makes way for pardon of sin, but Repentence? When David's Soul was
humbled and broken, then the Prophet Nathan brought him that good News, 2 Samuel
12.13. The Lord has put away thy Sin.

Obj. But sure my Sins are so great, that if I should repent, God would not
pardon them.

Resp. God will not go from his Promise. Ier. 3.12. Return thou backsliding
Israel, (says the Lord) and I will not cause my Anger to fall upon you, for I
am merciful. If thy Sins are as Rocks, yet upon thy Repentance the Sea of God's
Mercy can drown these Rocks. Isa. 1.16. Wash ye, make ye clean. Wash in the
Laver of Repentance. Ver. 18. Come now, and let us reason, says the Lord; though
your Sins be a Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow. Manasseh was a Crimson
Sinner, but when he humbl^d himself greatly, the Golden Scepter of Mercy was
held forth; when his Head was a Fountain to weep for Sin, Christ's Sides were a
Fountain to wash away Sin. It Is not the greatness of Sin, but Impenitency
destroys. The Jews (some of them) that had an hand in Crucifying Christ, upon
their Repentance, the Blood they shed was a sovereign Balm to heal them. When
the Prodigal came home to his Father, he had the Robe and Ring put upon him,
and his Father kissed him, Luke 15. If you break off your Sins, God will become
a Friend to you, all that is in God shall be yours: His Power shall be yours to
help you, his Wisdom shall be yours to counsel you, his Spirit shall be yours
to sanctify you, his Promises shall be yours to comfort you, his Angels shall
be yours to guard you, his Mercy shall be yours to save you.

4. There Is much Sweetness in Repenting Tears. The Soul is never more enlarged
and inwardly delighted, than when it can melt kindly for Sin. Weeping Days are
Festival Days. The Hebrew Word to Repent, Nicham, signifies Consolari, to tak^
Comfort. John 16.21. Your Sorrow shall be turned into Joy. Christ turns the
Water of Tears into Wine. David, who was the great Mourner in Israel, was the
Sweet Singer: And the Joy a true Penitent finds, is a Prelibation and Foretaste
of the Joy of Paradise. The Wicked Man's Joy turns to Sadness; the Penitents
Sadness turns to Joy. Tho Repentance seems at first to be thorny and bitter,
yet of this Thorn a Christian gathers Grapes. All which Considerations may open
a Vein of Godly Sorrow in our Souls, that we may both weep for Sin, and turn
from Sin. If ever God restores Comfort, it is to his Mourners, Isa. 57.18. And
when we have wept, let us look up to Christ's Blood for Pardon: Say as that
holy Man, Lavae Domine lachrimas meas -- Lord, wash my Tears in thy Blood. We
drop sin with our Tears, and need Christ's Blood to wash them: And this
Repentance must not only be for a few days, like the Mourning for a Friend,
which is soon over; but it must be the Work of our Lives. The Issue of Godly
Sorrow must not be stopped till Death. After Sin is pardoned, we must repent. We
run afresh upon the Score, we sin daily, therefore must repent daily. Some shed
a few Tears for Sin, and when their Tears, like the Widows Oil, have run
awhile, they cease. Many, if the Plaster of Repentance begin to smart a
little, pluck it off; whereas this Plaster of Repentance must still lie on,
and not be plucked off till Death, when as all other Tears, so these of Godly
Sorrow, shall be wiped away.

Quest. What shall we do to obtain a Penitential Frame of Heart?

Resp. Seek to God for it: It is his Promise to give an Heart of Flesh, Ezekiel.
36. and to pour on us a Spirit of Mourning, Zech. 12.10. Beg God's Holy Spirit.
Psalm. 147.18. He causes his Wind to blow, and the Waters flow. When the Wind
of God's Spirit blows upon us, then the Waters of Repentant Tears will flow
from us.

III. The Third way to escape the Wrath and Curse of God, and obtain the
Benefit of Redemption by Christ, is, The diligent Use of Ordinances. In
particular, the Word, Sacraments, and Prayer.

1. I begin with the First of these Ordinances.

I. The Word. 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. -- which effectually works in you that believe.

Quest. 1. What is meant by (...), the Words working effectually?

Resp. The Word of God is said to work effectually, when it has that good
effect upon us for which it was appointed of God; namely, when the Word works
powerful Illumination, and thorough Reformation. Acts 26.18. To open their
Eyes, and turn them from the power of Satan to God. The opening their Eyes,
denotes Illumination: And turning them from Satan to God, denotes Reformation.

Quest. 2. How is the Word to be read and heard, that it may become effectual
to Salvation?

This Question consists of Two Branches.

1. How may the Word be read Effectually? 2. How may it be heard Effectually?
1. I shall begin with the First Branch of the Question, How is the Word to be
read, that it may be effectual to our Salvation?

Answ. That we may so read the Word, that it may conduce effectually to our
Salvation:

1. Let us have a Reverend Esteem of every part of Canonical Scripture. Psalm.
19.10. More are they to be desired than Gold. Value this Book of God above all
other Books. It is a Golden Epistle, endited by the Holy Ghost, sent to us from
Heaven, more particularly to raise our Esteem, 1. The Scripture is a Spiritual
Glass to dress our Souls by; it shows us more than we can see by the Light of a
Natural Conscience; that may discover gross Sins, but the Glass of the Word
sh^ws us Heart-Sins, Vain Thoughts, Unbelief, etc. And it not only shows us our
Spots, but washes them away. 2. The Scripture is a Sacred Magazine, out of
which we may fetch our Spiritual Artillery to fight against Satan. When the
Devil tempted our Savior, he fetched Armor and Weapons from Scripture, It is
written, Matthew. 4.4, 7. 3. The Holy Scripture is a Panacea, or Universal
Medicine for the Soul, it gives a Receipt to cure Deadness of Heart, Psalm.
119.50. Pride, 1 Pet. 5.5. Infideli^y, John 3.36. It is a Physick-Garden, where
we may gather any Herb or Antidote to expel the Poison of sin. The Leaves of
Scripture, like the Leaves of the Tree of Life, are for the healing of the
Nations, Rev. 22.2. And may not this cause a reverend Esteem of the Word?

2. If we would have the Word written effectual to our Souls, let us peruse it
with Intenseness of Mind. John 5.39. Search the Scriptures. The Greek Word
(...)* signifies to search as for a Vein of Silver. The Bereans, Acts 17.
searched the (...) daily. The Word (...), signifies to make a curious and
critical Search. And (...) was mighty in the Scriptures, Acts 18.24. Some
gallop over a Chapter (...), and get no good by it. If we would have the Word
effectual and saving, we must mind and observe every Passage of Scripture. And
that we may be di^igent in the perusal of Scripture: Consider,

First, The Word written is Norma Cultus, the Rule and Platform by which we are
to square our Lives; it contains in it all things needful to Salvation, Psalm.
19.7. What Duties we are to do, what Sins we are to avoid. God gave Moses a
Pattern how he would have the Tabernacle made, and he was to go exactly
according to the Pattern, Exodus 25.9. The Word is the Pattern God has given us
in Writing, for modelling our Lives; therefore how careful should we be in the
pursuing and looking over this Pattern.

Secondly, The Written Word, as it is our Pattern, so it will be our Judge.
John 12.48. The Word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him at the last
Day. We read of the opening of the Books, Rev. 20.12. This is one Book God will
open, the Book of Scripture, and will judge Men out of it. He will say, Have
you lived according to the Rule of this Word. The Word has a double Work, to
Teach and to Judge.

3. If we would have the Word written effectual, we must bring Faith to the
reading of it. Believe it to be the Word of the Eternal Jehovah. The Word
written comes with Authority, it shows its Commission from Heaven, Thus says
the Lord -- It is of Divine Inspiration, 2 Timothy 3.16. The Oracles of Scripture
must be surer to us than a Voice from Heaven, 1 Pet. 1.18. Unbelief enervates
the Virtue of Scripture, and renders it ineffectual. First Men question the
Truth of the Scripture, and then fall away from it.

4. If we would have the Word written effectual to Salvation, we must delight
in it as our Spiritual Cordial. Ier. 15.16. Thy Words were found, and I did eat
them, and they were the joy and rejoicing of my Heart. All true solid Comfort
is fetched out of the Word. The Word (as Chrysostom says) is a Spiritual
Garden, and the Promises are the Fragrant Flowers or Spices in this Garden. How
should we delight to walk among these Beds of Spices! Is it not a Comfort in
all dubious perplexed Cases to have a Counselor to advise us? Psalm. 119.24. Thy
Testimonies are my Counselors. Is it not a Comfort to find our Evidences for
Heaven? and where should we find them but in the Word? 1 Thessalonians. 1.4, 5. The
Word written is a Sovereign Elixir, or Comfort in an hour of Distress. Psalm.
119.50. This is my Comfort in Afflictions, for thy Word has quickened me. It
can turn all our Water into Wine. How should we take a great Complacency and
Delight in the Word! They only who come to the Word with Delight, go from it
with Success.

5. If we would have the Scripture effectual and saving, we must be sure when
we have read the Word, to hide it in our Hearts. Psalm. 119.11. Thy Word have I
hid in my Heart. The Word locked up in the Heart is a Preservative against sin.
Why did David hide the Word in his Heart? In the next Words, That I might not
sin against thee. As one would carry an Antidote about him when he comes near a
place infected; so David carried the Word in his Heart, as a Sacred Antidote to
preserve him from the Infection of Sin. When the Sap is hid in the Root, it
makes the Branches fruitful. When the Seed is hid in the Ground, then the Corn
springs up: So when the Word is hid in the Heart, then it brings forth good
Fruit.

6. If we would have the Word written effectual, let us labor not only to have
the Light of the Word in our Heads, but the Power of the Word in our Hearts.
Let us endeavor to have the Word copied out, and written a Second time in our
Hearts. Psalm. 37.31. The Law of God is in his Heart. The Word says, Be
clothed with Humility, 1 Pet. 5.5. Let us be low and humble in our own Eyes.
The Word calls for Sanctity, Let us labor to partake of the Divine Nature, and
to have something conceived in us which is of the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.4. When
the Word is thus copied out into our Hearts, and we are changed into the
Similitude of it, now the Word written is made effectual to us, and becomes a
Savor of Life.

7. and ult. When we read the Holy Scriptutes, let us look up to God for a
Blessing. Beg the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, that we may see the (...),
the deep things of God, Ephesians. 1.17. Pray to God, that the same Spirit that wrote
the Scripture, would enable us to understand it. Pray that God will give us
that (...), 2 Cor. 2.14. That Savor of Knowledge, that we may relish a
Sweetness in the Word we read. David tasted it sweeter than the Honeycomb,
Psalm. 19.10. Let us pray that God will not only give us his Word as a Rule of
Holiness, but his Grace as a Principle of Holiness.

2 d. Branch of the 2 d. Question. How may we so hear the Word, that it may be
effectual and saving to our Souls?

Resp. 1. Give great Attention to the Word preached; let nothing pass without
taking special Notice of it. Luke 19.48. All the People were very attentive to
hear him. Greek, (...), they hanged upon his Lip. Acts 16.14. Lydia, a Seller
of Purple, which worshipped God, heard us, whose Heart the Lord opened, that
she attended to the things which were spoken of Paul. Give Attention to the
Word as to a matter of Life and Death: And to that purpose, have a care, (1.)
To banish vain impertinent Thoughts, which will distract you, and take you off
from the Work in hand. These Fowls will be coming to the Sacrifice, Genesis 15.11.
therefore we must drive them away. An Archer may take a right Aim, but if one
stand at his Elbow and jog him when he is going to shoot, he will not hit the
Mark. Christians may have good Aims in hering, but take heed of impertinent
Thoughts which will jog and hinder you in God's Service. (2.) Banish Dullness.
The Devil gives many Hearers a sleepy Sop, they cannot keep their Eyes open at
a Sermon: They eat so much on a Lord's Day, that they are fitter for the Pillow
and Couch than the Temple. Frequent and customary sleeping at a Sermon, shows
high Contempt and Irreverence of the Ordinance, it gives bad Example to others;
it makes your Sincerity to be called in question; it is the Devil's Seed-time,
Matthew. 13.25. While the Men slept, the Enemy came and sowed Tares. Oh shake off
Drowsiness, as Paul shook off the Viper! Be serious and attentive in hearing
the Word. Deuteronomy. 32.47. For it is not a vain thing for you, it is your Life.
When People do not mind what God speaks to them in his Word, God does as little
mind what they say to him in Prayer.

2. If you would have the Word Preached effectual, come with an holy Appetite
to the Word, 1 Pet. 2.2. The Thirsting Soul is the Thriving Soul. In Nature one
may have an Appetite and no Digestion: But it is not so in Religion; where
there is a great Appetite to the Word, there is for the most part Digestion,
the Word does concoct and nourish. Come with Hungrings of Soul after the Word.
And therefore desire the Word, that it may not only please you, but profit you.
Look not more at the garnishing of the Dish than the Meat, at Eloquence and
Rhetoric more than solid matter. It argues both a wanton Pallat, and surfeited
Stomach, to feed on Sallets and Kickshaws rather than wholesome Food.

3. If you would have the Preaching of the Word effectual, come to it with a
Tenderness upon your Heart, 2 Chronicles. 34.19. Because thy Heart was tender. If we
preach to hard Hearts, it is like shooting against a Brazen Wall, the Word does
not enter; it is like setting a Gold Seal upon Marble, which takes no
Impression. Oh come to the Word preached with a melting Frame of Heart! It Is
the melting Wax receives the Stamp of the Seal. When the Heart is in a
melting Frame, it will better receive the Stamp of the Word preached. When
Paul's Heart was melted and broken for Sin, then, Lord, what will thou have me
do? Acts 9.6. Come not hither with hard Hearts: Who can expect a Crop when the
Seed is sown upon stony Ground?

4. If you would have the Word effectual, receive it with Meekness, Iam. 1.21.
Receive with meekness the engrafted Word. Meekness is a Submissive Frame of
Heart to the Word; a willingness to hear the Counsels and Reproofs of the Word.
Contrary to this Meekness, is, (1.) Fierceness of Spirit, whereby Men are ready
to rise up in Rage against the Word. Proud Men and Guilty cannot endure to hear
of their Faults. Proud Herod put John in Prison, Mark 12.12. The guilty Jews
being told of their Crucifying Christ, stoned Stephen, Acts 7.59. To tell Men
of Sin, is to hold a Glass to one that is deformed, who cannot endure to see
his own Face. (2.) Contrary to Meekness is Stubbornness of Heart, whereby Men
are resolved to hold fast their Sins, let the Word say what it will. Ier.
44.16. We will burn Incense to the Queen of Heaven. Oh take heed of this! If
you would have the Word preached work effectually, lay aside Fierceness and
Stubbornness, receive the Word with Meekness. By Meekness the Word preached
comes to be (...).
engrafted: As a good Cion that is grafted into a bad Stock, does change the
Nature of the Fruit, and make it taste sweet: So when the Word comes to be
engrafted into the Soul, it sanctifies it, and makes it bring forth the sweet
Fruit of Righteousness.

5. Mingle the Word preached with Faith. Heb. 4.2. The Word preached profited
not, not being mixed with Faith. If you leave out the chief ingredient in a
Medicine, it hinders the Operation: Do not leave out this Ingredient of Faith.
Believe the Word, and so believe it as to apply it. When you hear Christ
Preached, apply him to your selves; this is to put on the Lord Jesus, Romans
13.14. When you hear a Promise spoken of, apply it: This is to suck the Flower
of the Promise, and turn it to Honey.

6. Be not only attentive in Hearing, but retentive after Hearing. Heb. 2.1. We
ought to give the more diligent heed to the things we have heard, lest at any
time we let them slip. (...), Lest we let them run out as Water out of a Sieve.
If the Ground does not retain the Seed thrown into it, there can be no good
Crop. Some have Memories like leaking Vessels, the Sermons they hear are
presently gone, and then there is no good done. If Meat does not stay and
concoct in the Stomach, it will not nourish. Satan labors to steal the Word
out of our Mind. Mark 4.15. When they have heard, Satan comes immediately and
takes away the Word that was sown. Our Memories should be like the Chest of
the Ark wherein the Law was put.

7. Reduce your Hearing to Practice: Live the Sermons your hear. Psalm. 119.166.
I have done thy Commandments. Rachel was not content that she was Beautiful,
but her Desire was to be Fruitful. What is a knowing Head without a fruitful
Heart? Phil. 1.11. Filled with the Fruits of Righteousness. It is Obedience
crowns Hearing. That Hearing will never save the Soul, which does not reform
the Life.

8. Beg of God that he will accompany his Word with his Presence and Blessing.
The Spirit must make all effectual. Ministers may prescribe Physic, but it is
God's Spirit must make it work. Cathedram habet in Coelo qui corda docet in
terra. Aug. He has his Pulpit in Heaven that converts Souls. Acts 10.44. While
Peter was speaking, the Holy Ghost fell upon all them that heard. It is said
the Alchimist can draw Oil out of Iron. God's Spirit can produce Grace in the
most obdurate Heart.

9. and ult. If you would have the Word work effectually to your Salvation,
make it Familiar to you, discourse of the Word you have heard when you come
home. Psalm. 119.172. My Tongue shall speak of thy Word. That may be one reason
why some People get no more good by what they hear, because they never speak
one to another of what they have heard: As if Sermons were such Secrets, that
they must not be spoken of again; or as if it were a Shame to speak of matters
of Salvation. Mal. 3.16. They that feared the Lord spoke often one to another,
and a Book of Remembrance was written.

Use. Caution. Take heed, as you love your Souls, that the Word become not
ineffectual to you. There are some to whom the Word preached is ineffectual.
(1.) Such as Censure the Word; in stead of judging themselves, judge the Word.
(2.) Such as live in contradiction to the Word, Isa. 30.8. (3.) Such as are
more hardened by the Word, Zech. 7.11. They made their Heart as an Adamant. And
when Men harden their Hearts wilfully, God hardens them judicially. Isa. 6.8.
Make their Ears heavy. The Word to these is ineffectual. Were it not sad if a
Man's Meat should not nourish; nay, if it should turn to Poison? Oh! Take heed
that the Word Preached be not ineffectual and to no purpose. Consider Three
things.

(1.) If the Word Preached does us no good, there is no other way by which we
can be saved. This is God's Institution, and the main Engine he uses to convert
Souls. Luke 16.31. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they
be persuaded though one arose from the Dead. If an Angel should come to you out
of Heaven, and preach of the Excellency of the glorified Estate and the Joys of
Heaven, and that in the most Pathetical manner; if the Word preached does not
persuade, neither would you be wrought upon by such an Oration from Heaven. If
a damned Spirit should come from Hell, and preach to you in Flames, and tell
you what a place Hell is, and roar out the Torments of the Damned, it might
make you tremble, but it would not convert, if the Preaching of the Word would
not do it.

(2.) To come to the Word, and not be savingly wrought upon, is that which the
Devil is pleased with. He cares not though you hear frequently, if it be not
effectually. He is not an Enemy to Hearing, but Profiting. Though the Minister
holds out the Breast of the Ordinance to you, he cares not, as long as you do
not suck the sincere Milk of the Word. The Devil cares not how many
Sermon-Pills you take, so long as they do not work upon your Conscience.

(3.) If the Word preached be not effectual to Men's Conversion, it will be
effectual to their Condemnation: The Word will be effectual one way or other;
if it does not make your Hearts better, it will make your Chains heavier. We
pity them who have not the Word preached, but it will be worse with them who
are not sanctified by it. Dreadful is their Case, who go laden to Hell with
Sermons. But I will conclude with the Apostle, Heb. 6.9. I am persuaded better
things of you, and things that accompany Salvation.

Matthew. XXVIII.19. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Teaching them --.


We are still upon that Question in the Catechism,

Quest. What are the Outward Means whereby Christ communicates to us the
Benefits of Redemption?

Answ. " They are his Ordinances, especially, the Word, Sacraments and Prayers.

I have spoken to the First, The Word Read and Preached, I now proceed to the
Second.

II. The Way whereby Christ communicates to us the Benefits of Redemption, is,
in the Use of the Sacraments.

Quest. 1. What are Sacraments in general?

Resp. They are Visible Signs of Invisible Grace.

Quest. 2. Is not the Word of God sufficient to Salvation? What need then is
there of Sacraments?

Resp. We must not be wise above what is written. This may satisfy, it is
God's Will that his Church should have Sacraments. And, it is God's Goodness
thus by Sacraments to condescend to our weak Capacities. John 4.48. Except ye
see Signs ye will not believe. God to strengthen our Faith confirms the
Covenant of Grace, not only by Promises, but by Sacramental Signs.

Quest. 3. What are the Sacraments of the New Testament?

Resp. Two: Baptism and the Lord's Supper.

Quest. 4. But are there no more? The Papists tell us of Five more, viz.
Confirmation, Penance, Matrimony, Orders, and the Extreme Unction.

Resp. 1. There were but Two Sacraments under the Law, therefore there are no
more now, 1 Cor. 10.2, 3, 4.

2. These two Sacraments are sufficient: The one signifying our Entrance into
Christ, and the other our Growth and Perseverance in him.

(1.) I begin with the First Sacrament, Baptism. Go ye therefore, and Teach all
Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, Teaching them. -- Go teach all Nations: The Greek Word is (...),
Make Disciples of all Nations. If it be asked, How should we make them
Disciples? It follows, Baptizing them, and teaching them. In an Heathen Nation,
first Teach them, and then Baptize them; but in a Christian Church, first
Baptize them, and then Teach them.

Quest. 5. "What is Baptism?

Resp. In General, it is a Matriculation, or Visible Admission of Children into
the Congregation of Christ's Flock: More particularly, Baptism is a Sacrament,
wherein the washing or sprinkling with Water in the Name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, does signify and seal our engrafting into Christ, and partaking
of the Benefits of the Covenant of Grace, and our Engagement to be the Lords.

Quest. 6. What is the meaning of the Parent in Presenting his Child to be
Baptized?

Resp. The Parent in presenting his Child to be Baptized, does, (1.) Make a
Public Acknowledgment of Original Sin; that the Soul of his Child is polluted,
therefore needs washing away of Sin by Christ's Blood and Spirit; both which
Washings are signified by the sprinkling of Water in Baptism. (2.) The Parent
by bringing his Child to be Baptized, does solemly Devote his Child to the
Lord, and enroll him in God's Family. And truly this may be a great
Satisfaction to a Religious Parent, that he has given up his Child to the Lord
in Baptism. How can a Parent look with Comfort on that Child, who was never yet
Dedicated to God?

Quest. 7. What is the Benefit then of Baptism?

Resp. The Party Baptized has, (1.) An Entrance into the Visible Body of the
Church. (2.) The Party Baptized has a Right Sealed to the Ordinances, which is
a Privilege full of Glory, Romans 9.4. (3.) The Child Baptized is under a more
special providential Care of Christ, who appoints the Tutelage of Angels to be
the Infants Lifeguard.

Quest. 8. Is this all the Benefit?

Resp. No: To such as belong to the Election, Baptism is a Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4.11. A Laver of Regeneration, and a Badge of
Adoption.

Quest. 9. How does it appear that Children have right to Baptism?

Resp. Children are Parties of the Covenant of Grace. The Covenant was made
with them. Genesis 17.7. I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy
Seed after thee, for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee and thy
Seed after thee. And Acts 2.39. The Promise is to you and to your Children. The
Covenant of Grace may be considered either, (1.) More strictly, as an absolute
Promise to give Saving Grace: And so none but the Elect are in Covenant with
God. Or, (2.) More largely, as a Covenant containing in it many outward
glorious Privileges, in which respect the Children of Believers do belong to
the Covenant of Grace: The Promise is to you and to your Seed. The Infant Seed
of Believers may as well lay a Claim to the Covenant of Grace as their Parents;
and having a Right to the Covenant, they cannot justly be denied Baptism, which
is the Seal. I would ask this Question of them who deny Infant Baptism. It is
certain the Children of Believers were once Visibly in Covenant with God, and
did receive the Seal of their Admission into the Church? Now, where do we find
this Covenant Interest, or Church Membership of Infants was ever repealed, or
made void? Certainly Jesus Christ did not come to put Believers and their
Children into a worse condition than they were in before. If the Children of
Believers should not be Baptized, then they are in a worse Condition now than
they were in before Christ's Coming -- Before I came to prove the Baptizing of
Infants, I shall answer the Objections made against it.

Obj. 1. The Scripture is silent herein, and does not mention Infant Baptism.

Resp. Though there is not the Word Infant Baptism in Scripture, yet there is the
Thing. There is not mention made in Scripture of Women's receiving the
Sacrament; but who doubts but the Command, Take, Eat, this is my Body, concerns
them? Does not their Faith need strengthening as well as others? So the Word
Trinity is not to be found in Scripture, but there is that which is equivalent:
1 John 5.7. There are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word,
and the Holy Ghost, and these Three are One. So though the Word Infant Baptism is
not mentioned in Scripture, yet the Practice of Baptizing Infants may be drawn
out of Scripture by undeniable consequence.

Quest. How is that proved?

Answ. The Scripture mentions whole Families Baptized: As the Household of
Lydia, Crispus, and the Iailor. Acts 16.33. He was baptized, he and all his.
Wherein we must rationally imagine that there were some little Children. If it
be said, there is no mention there made of Children. I Answer, Neither are
Servants named; yet it cannot be supposed but that in so great a Family there
were some Servants.

Obj. 2. But Infants are not capable of the End of Baptism: For Baptism
signifies the washing away of Sin by the Blood of Christ. Now Infants cannot
understand this; therefore what Benefit can Baptism be to them?

Answ. Whereas it is said, Infants cannot understand the Mystery of Baptism,
neither could the Child that was to be Circumcised understand Circumcision; yet
the Ordinance of Circumcision was not to be omitted or deferred. An Infant, tho
it understand not the meaning of Baptism, yet it may partake of the Blessing of
Baptism. The little Children that Christ took in his Arms understood not
Christ's meaning, but they had Christ's Blessing. Mark 10.16. He put his Hands
upon them and blessed them.

Quest. But what Benefit can the Child have of Baptism, if it understands not
the Nature of Baptism?

Answ. It may have a Right to the Promise sealed up, which it shall have an
actual Interest in when it comes to have Faith. A Legacy may be of use to the
Child in the Cradle; though now it understand not the Legacy, yet when it is
grown up to Years, it is fully possessed of it. But it may be further Objected,

Obj. The Party to be Baptized is to be engaged to God; but how can the Child
engage?

Answ. The Parents can engage for it, which God is pleased to accept as
equivalent to the Child's Personal engaging.

Obj. 3. If Baptism comes in the room of Circumcision, only the Males were
Circumcised, Genesis 17.30. Then, what Warrant is there for Baptizing Females?

Answ. The Females were included, and were virtually Circumcised in the Males.
What is done to the Head, is done to the Body; the Man therefore being the Head
of the Woman, 1 Cor. 11.3. what was done to the Male Sex, was interpretatively
done to the Female. Having Answered these Objections, I come now to prove by
Argument Infant Baptism.

1 st Arg. If Children, during their Infancy, are capable of Grace, then they
are capable of Baptism: But Children in their Infancy are capable of Grace,
therefore they are capable of Baptism. I prove the Minor, That they are capable
of Grace, thus: If Children in their Infancy may be saved, then they are
capable of Grace; but Children in their Infancy may be saved: Which is proved
thus; If the Kingdom of Heaven may belong to them, then they may be saved; but
the Kingdom of Heaven may belong to them, as it is clear from Mark 10.14. Of
such is the Kingdom of God. Who then can forbid that the Seal of Baptism should
be applied to them?

2 d Arg. If Infants* may be among the Number of God's Servants, then there is
no reason why they should be shut out of God's Family: but Infants may be in
the Number of God's Servants: That is evident, because God calls them his
Servants. Levit. 25.4. He shall depart from thee, and his Children with him,
for they are my Servants. Therefore Children in their Infancy being God's
Servants, why should they not have Baptism, which is the Tessera, the Mark or
Seal which God sets upon his Servants.

3 d Arg. Is from 1 Cor. 7.14. But now are your Children holy. Children are not
called Holy, as if they were free from Original Sin, but in the Judgment of
Charity they are to be esteemed holy and true Members of the Church of God,
because their Parents are Believers. Hence that excellent Divine Mr. Heldersam
says, That the Children of the Faithful, as soon as they are born have a
Covenant-Holiness, and so a Right and Title to Baptism, which is the Token of
the Covenant.

4 th Arg. From the Opinion of the Fathers, and the Practice of the Church,
(1.) The Ancient Fathers were strong Assertors of Infant Baptism, Irenaus,
Basil, Lactantius, Cyprian, and Austin. (2.) It was the Practice of the Greek
Church to baptize her Infants. Erasmus says, That Infant Baptism has been
used in the Church of God for above Fourteen Hundred Years. And St. Austin, in
his Book against Pelagius, affirms, That it has been the Custom of the Church
in all Ages to Baptize Infants: Yea, it was an Apostolical Practice. St. Paul
affirms, that he Baptized the whole House of Stephanus, 1 Cor. 1.16.

And as you have seen Scripture Arguments for Infant Baptism, so let us
consider whether the Practice of those who delay the Baptizing of Children till
Riper Years, be warrantable -- For my part, I cannot gather it from Scripture:
For though we read of Persons Adult and grown up to Years of Discretion in the
Apostles times Baptized, yet those were such as were converted from Heathenish
Idolatry to the True Orthodox Faith. But that in a Christian Church the
Children of Believers should be kept unbaptized several Years, I know neither
Precept nor Example for it in Scripture, but it is wholly Apocryphal. The
Baptizing of Persons grown up to Maturity, we may argue against ab effectu,
from the Ill Consequences of it. They dip the Persons they baptize over Head
and Ears in cold Water, and naked, which as it is Indecent, so it is Dangerous,
and has been often times the occasion of Chronical Diseases, yea, Death it
self, and so is a plain Breach of the Sixth Commandment. And how far God has
given up many Persons, who are for the deferring of Baptism, to other vile
Opinions and vicious Practices, is evident, if we consult with History:
Especially if we read over the Actings of the Anabaptists in Germany.

Use I. See the Riches of God's Goodness, who will not only be the God of
Believers, but takes their Seed into Covenant. Genesis 17.7. I will establish my
Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed after thee, to be a God unto thee
and thy Seed. A Father counts it a great Privilege, not only to have his own
Name, but his Child's Name put in a Will.

2. It blames those Parents who forbid little Children to be brought to Christ;
they withold the Ordinance: By denying their Infants Baptism, they exclude
them from having a Membership in the Visible Church, and so their Infants are
sucking Pagans. Such as deny their Children Baptism, make God's Institutions
under the Law more full of Kindness and Grace to Children, than they are now
under the Gospel; which how strange a Paradox it is, I leave to you to judge.

Use. III. Exhort. 1 st. Branch. We that are Baptized, let us labor to find
the Blessed Fruits of Baptism in our own Souls: Let us labor not only to have
the Sign of the Covenant, but the Grace of the Covenant. Many glory in this,
that they are Baptized. The Jews gloried in their Circumcision, because of
their Royal Privileges: To them belonged the Adoption, and the Glory, and the
Covenants, Romans 9.4. But many of them were a Shame and Reproach to their
Circumcision. Romans 2.24. For the Name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles
through you. The scandalous Jews (tho Circumcised) were in God's Account as
Heathens. Amos 9.7. Are ye not as Children of the Ethiopians to me, says the
Lord? Alas! What is it to have the Name of Christ, and want his Image? What is
Baptism of Water, without the Baptism of the Spirit? Many Baptized Christians
are no better than Heathens. O, labor to find the Fruits of Baptism, that
Christ is formed in us! Gal. 4.19. That our Nature is changed, we are made Holy
and Heavenly; this is to be Baptized into Jesus, Romans 6.3. Such as live
unsuitable to their Baptism, may go with Baptismal Water on their Faces, and
Sacramental Bread in their Mouths, to Hell.

2 d. Br. Let us labor to make a Right Use of our Baptism.

1 st. Use of Baptism. Let us use it as a Shield against Temptations. Satan, I
have given up my self to God by a Sacred Vow in Baptism, I am not my own, I am
Christ's, therefore I cannot yield to thy Temptations, but I break my Oath of
Allegiance which I made to God in Baptism. Luther tells us of a Pious Woman,
who when the Devil tempted her to sin, she answered Satan, Baptizata sum, I am
baptized; and so beat back the Tempter.

2 d. Use of Baptism. Let us use it as a Spurr to Holiness: By remembering our
Baptism, let us be stirred up to make good our Baptismal Engagements:
Renouncing the World, Flesh and Devil, let us Devote our selves to God and his
Service. To be Baptized into the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
implies ^ Solemn Dedication of our selves to the Service of all the Three
Persons in the Trinity. It is not enough that our Parents dedicate us to God in
Baptism, but we must dedicate our selves to him. This is called a Living (...),
to the Lord, Romans 14.8. Our Life should be spent in worshipping God, in loving
God, in exalting God: We should walk (...), as becomes the Gospel, Phil. 1.27.
Shine as Stars in the World, and live as Earthly Angels.

3 d. Use of Baptism. Let us use it as an Argument to Courage. We should be
ready to confess that Holy Trinity, into whose Name we were baptized. With the
Conversion of the Heart must go the Confession of the Tongue. Luke 12.8.
Whosoever shall confess me before Men, him shall the Son of Man also confess
before the Angels of God. Peter openly confessed Christ crucified, Acts 4.10.
Cyprian, a Man of a brave Spirit, was like a Rock, whom no Waves could shake;
like an Adamant, whom no Sword could cut. He confessed Christ before the
Proconsul, and suffered himself to be proscribed, yea, chose Death, rather than
he would betray the Truths of Christ. He that dares not confess the Holy
Trinity, shames his Baptism, and God will be ashamed to own him at the Day of
Judgment.

Vlt. Use. See the fearfulness of the Sin of Apostasy! It Is a renouncing of our
Baptism: It Is damnable Perjury to go away from God after a Solemn Vow. 2 Timothy
4.10. Demas has forsaken me. He turned Renegado, and afterward became a Priest
in an Idol Temple, says Dorotheus. Julian the Apostate ( Gregory Nazianzen
observes) bathed himself in the Blood of Beasts offered in Sacrifice to the
Heathen Gods, and so as much as in him lay, washed off his former Baptism. The
Case of such as fall away after Baptism is dreadful. Heb. 10.38. If any Man
draw back: The Greek Word (...), to draw back, alludes to a Soldier that
steals away from his Colors. So if any Man steal away from Christ, and run
over to the Devils side, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him. That is, I will
be severely avenged on him, I will make my Arrows drunk with his Blood. If all
the Plagues in the Bible can make that Man miserable, he shall be so.

II. The Second Sacrament wherein Jesus Christ communicates to us the Benefits
of his Redemption, is, the Lord's Supper.

Mark XIV.24. And as they did Eat, Jesus took Bread, etc.


Secondly, Having spoken of the Sacrament of Baptism, I come now to the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. The Lord's Supper is the most Spiritual and
sweet Ordinance that ever was instituted. Here we have to do more immediately
with the Person of Christ. In Prayer we draw nigh to God, in the Sacrament we
become one with him. In Prayer we look up to Christ, in the Sacrament by Faith
we touch him. In the Word Preached we hear Christ's Voice, in the Sacrament we
feed on him.

Quest. 1. What Names and Titles in Scripture are given to the Sacrament?

Resp. 1. It is called, (1.) Mensa Domini, The Lord's Table, 1 Cor. 10.21. The
Papists call it an Altar, not a Table. The Reason is, because they turn the
Sacrament into a Sacrifice, and pretend to offer up Christ corporally in the
Ma^s. It being the Lord's Table, shows with what Reverence and solemn Devotion
we should approach to these Holy Mysteries. The Lord takes notice of the Frame
of our Hearts when we come to his Table. Matthew. 22.11. The King came in to see
the Guests. We dress our selves when we come to the Table of some Great
Monarch. We should think with our selves, we are going to the Table of the
Lord, therefore should dress our selves by Holy Meditation and
Heart-Consideration. Many think it is enough to come to the Sacrament, but mind
not whether they come in Due Order 1 Chronicles. 15.13.
. Perhaps they had scarce a serious Thought before whither they were going: All
their Dressing was by the Glass, not by the Bible. Chrysostom calls it, The
dreadful Table of the Lord: So it is to such as come unworthily. (2.) The The
Sacrament is called Coena Domini, the Lord's Supper, 1 Cor. 11.20. to import,
it is a Spiritual Feast: It is indeed a Royal Feast, God is in this Cheer.
Christ in both Natures, God and Man, is the matter of this Supper. (3.) The
Sacrament is called (...), a Communion, 1 Cor. 10.16. The Bread which we break,
is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? The Sacrament being called a
Communion, shows,

1. That this Ordinance is only for Believers, because none else can have
Communion with Christ in these Holy Mysteries. -- Communio fundatur in ^nione:
Faith only gives us Union with Christ, and by Virtue of this we have Communion
with him in his Body and Blood. None but the Spouse communicates with her
Husband. A Stranger may drink of his Cup, but she only has his Heart, and
communicates with him in a Conjugal manner: So Strangers may have the Sign,
drink of the Cup, but only Believers drink Christ's Blood, and have Communion
with him in his Privileges.

2. The Sacrament being a Communion, shows, That it is Symbolum Amoris, a Bond
of that Unity and Charity which should be among Christians. 1 Cor. 10.17. We
being many are one Body. As many Grains make One Bread, so many Christistians
are one Body. A Sacrament is a Love-Feast. The Primitive Christians (as Justin
Martyr notes) had their Holy Salutations at the Blessed Supper, in token of
that Dearness of Affection which they did bear each to other. It is a
Communion, therefore there must be Love and Union. The Israelites did eat the
Passover with Bitter Herbs, so must we eat the Sacrament with bitter Herbs of
Repentance, but not with bitter Hearts of Wrath and Malice. The Hearts of the
Communicants should be knit together with the Bond of Love. Thou braggest of
thy Faith, (says Austin) but show me thy Faith by thy Love to the Saints. For
as in the Sun, Light and Heat are inseparable, so Faith and Love are twisted
together inseparably. Where there are Divisions, the Lord's Supper is not
properly a Communion, but a Disunion.

Quest. 2. What is the Lord's Supper?

Resp. It is a visible Sermon, wherein Christ crucified is set before us; or it
is a Sacrament of the New Testament, wherein by receiving the Holy Elements of
Bread and Wine, our Communion with Christ is signified and sealed up to us. Or
thus: It is a Sacrament Divinely Instituted, wherein by giving and receiving
Bread and Wine, Christ's Death is showed forth, and the worthy Receivers are by
Faith made Partakers of his Body and Blood, and all the Benefits flowing from
thence. For the further explaining of the Nature of the Lord's Supper, I shall
look back to to the Institution.

1. Iesus] took Bread. Here is the Master of the Feast, or the Institutor of
the Sacrament. The Lord Jesus he took Bread. He only is fit to Institute a
Sacrament, who is able to give Virtue and Blessing to it.

2. He took Bread.] Christ's Taking of the Bread was one Part of his
Consecration of the Elements, and setting them apart for an Holy Use. And as
Christ did consecrate the Elements, so we must labor to have our Hearts
consecrated before we receive these Holy Mysteries in the Lord's Supper. How
unseemly a Sight is it to see any come to these Holy Elements, having Hearts
leavened with Pride, Covetousness, Envy! These do with Judas receive the Devil
in the Sop, and are no better than Crucifyers of the Lord of Glory.

3. And Blessed it.] This is another Part of the Consecration of the Element,
Christ blessed it: He blesses, and it shall be blessed. Viz. He looked up to
Heaven for a Benediction upon this Ordinance newly founded.

4. And Brake it.] The Bread broken, and the Wine poured out, was to signify
to us the Agony and Ignominy of Christ's Sufferings, the Rending of Christ's
Body on the Cross, and that Effusion of Blood which was distilled from his
blessed Sides.

5. And gave it] to them. Christ's giving the Bread, denotes Christ's giving of
himself and all his Benefits to us freely. Tho Christ was sold, yet given.
Judas did sell Christ, but Christ gave himself to us.

6. He gave it to Them,] viz. The Disciples. This is Childrens Bread; Christ
does not cast these Pearl before Swine. Whether Judas were present at the
Supper is controverted, I rather incline to think he was not: For Christ said
to the Disciples, This is my Blood which is shed for you, Luke 22.20. Christ
knew his Blood was never shed effectually and intentionally for Judas. In
eating the Passover Christ gave Judas a Sop, which was a Bit of Unleavened
Bread dipped in a Sauce made with bitter Herbs; Judas having received the Sop,
went immediately out, John 13. But suppose Judas were there, tho he received
the Element, yet not the Blessing.

7. Take, Eat.] This Expression of Eating denotes Four things. (1.) The near
mystical Union between Christ and his Saints. As the Meat which is eaten
incorporates with the Body, and becomes one with it; so by eating Christ's
Flesh, and drinking his Blood Spiritually, we partake of Christ's Merits and
Graces, and are mystically one with him. John 17.23. I in them. (2.) Take, eat.
Eating shows the infinite Delight the believing Soul has in Christ. Eating is
grateful and pleasing to the Pallat: So feeding on Christ by a lively Faith is
delicious. Nullus animae suavior cibus. Lactantius. No such sweet feeding as on
Christ crucified. This is a Feast of Fat things, and Wine on Lees w^ll refined.
(3.) Take, eat. Eating denotes Nourishment. Meat, as it is delicious to the
Pallat, so it is nourishing to the Body. So eating Christ's Flesh, and drinking
his Blood, is nutritive to the Soul. The new Creature is nourished at the Table
of the Lord to everlasting Life. John 6.54. Whosoever eats my Flesh, and drinks
my Blood, has eternal Life. (4.) Take, eat, shows the Wisdom of God, who
restores us by the same means by which we fell. We fell by Taking and Eating
the Forbidden Fruit, and we are recovered again by Taking and Eating of
Christ's Flesh. We died by eating the Tree of Knowledge, and we live by eating
the Tree of Life.

8. This is my Body.] These Words, Hoc est Corpus meum, have been much
controverted between us and the Papists. This is my Body, that is, by a
Metonymy, It is a Sign and Figure of my Body. The Papists hold
Transubstantiation, that the Bread is after Consecration turned into the very
Substance of Christ's Body. We say we receive Christ's Body Spiritually, they
say they receive Christ's Body Carnally, which is contrary to Scripture. The
Scripture affirms, that the Heavens must receive Christ's Body until the times
of the restitution of all things, Acts 3.21. Christ's Body cannot be at the
same time in Heaven and in the Host. Aquinas says, It is not possible by any
Miracle that a Body should be locally in two places at once. Besides, it is
absurd to imagine, that the Bread in the Sacrament should be turned into
Christ's Flesh, and that his Body which was hung before, should be made again
of Bread. So that This is my Body, is as if Christ had said, This is a Sign and
Representation of my Body.

9. And he took the Cup.] The Cup is put by a Metonymy of the Subject for the
Adjunct, for the Wine in the Cup; it signifies the Blood of Christ shed for our
Sins. The taking of the Cup, denotes the Redundancy of Merit in Christ, and the
Fullness of our Redemption by him. He not only took the Bread, but the Cup.

10. And when he had given Thanks.] (...). Christ gave Thanks that God had
given these Elements of Bread and Wine to be Signs and Seals of Man's
Redemption by Christ. Christ's giving of Thanks, shows his Philanthropy, or
Love to Mankind, who did so rejoice and bless God, that Lost Man was now in a
way of Recovery, and that he should be raised higher in Christ than ever he was
in Innocence.

11. He gave the Cup to them.] Why then dare any withold the Cup? This is to
pollute and curtail the Ordinance, and alter it from its Primitive Institution.
Christ and his Apostles administered the Sacrament in both Kinds, the Bread and
the Cup, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. And the Cup was received in the ancient Church for
the space of 1400 Years, as is confessed by Two Popish Councils. Christ says
expressly, Drink ye all of this. He does not say, Eat ye all of this: But, Drink
ye all; as foreseeing the Sacrilegious Impiety of the Church of Rome in keeping
back the Cup from the People. The Popish Council of Constance speaks plainly,
but impudently, That although Christ instituted and administered the Sacrament in
both Kinds, the Bread and the Wine, yet the Authority of the Holy Canons, and
the Custom of the Mother Church, think good to deny the Cup to the Laity. Thus
as the Popish Priests make Christ but half a Savior, so they administer to the
People but half a Sacrament. The Sacrament is Christ's Last Will and Testament,
in the Text, This is my Blood of the New Testament. Now to alter or take away
any thing from a Man's Will and Testament, is a great Impiety. What is it then
to alter and mangle Christ's Last Will and Testament? Sure it is an high Affront
to Christ.

Quest. 3. What are the Ends of the Lord's Supper?

Resp. 1. It is an Ordinance appointed to confirm our Faith. John 4.48. Except
ye see Signs ye will not believe. Christ sets the Elements before us, that by
these Signs our Faith may be strengthened. As Faith comes by hearing, so it is
confirmed by seeing Christ crucified. The Sacrament is not only a Sign to
represent Christ, but a Seal to confirm our Interest in him.

Object. But it is the Spirit confirms Faith, therefore not the Sacrament.

Answ. This is no good Logic. The Spirit confirms Faith, therefore not the
Sacrament, is as if one should say, God feeds our Bodies, therefore Bread does
not feed us; whereas God feeds us by Bread: So the Spirit confirms our Faith by
the Use of the Sacrament.

2. The End of the Sacrament is to keep up the Memory of Christ's Death. 1 Cor.
11.25. This do ye (...), in remembrance of me. If a Friend give us a Ring at
his Death, we wear it to keep up the Memory of our Friend. Much more then ought
we to keep up the Memorial of Christ's Death in the Sacrament! Christ's Death
lays a Foundation for all the magnificent Blessings which we receive from
Christ. The Covenant of Grace was agreed on in Heaven, but sealed upon the
Cross. Christ has sealed all the Articles of Peace in his Blood. Remission of
Sin flows from Christ's Death, Matthew. 26.28. This is my Blood of the New
Testament shed for many for the Remission of Sins. Consecration, or making us
Holy, is the Fruit of Christ's Death. Heb. 9.14. How much more shall the Blood
of Christ purge your Conscience! Christ's Intercession is made available to us
by Virtue of his Death. Christ could not have been admitted an Advocate, if he
had not been first a Sacrifice. Our entering into Heaven is the Fruit of
Christ's Blood, Heb. 10.19. Christ could not have prepared Mansions for us, if
he had not first purchased them by his Death: So that we have a great deal of
cause to commemorate Christ's Death in the Sacrament.

Quest. In what Manner are we to remember the Lord's Death in the Sacrament?

Answ. It is not only an Historical Remembrance of Christ's Death and Passion:
Thus Judas remembers Christ's Death, and how he betrayed him: And Pilate
remembers Christ', Death, and how he crucified him: But our remembering Christ's
Death in the Sacrament, must be,

(1.) A Mournful Remembrance. We must not be able to look on Christ crucified
with dry Eyes. Zech. 12.10. They shall look on him whom they have pierced, and
mourn over him. O Christian, when thou look on Christ in the Sacrament,
remember how often thou have crucified him! The Jews did it but once, thou often.
Every Oath is a Nail with which thou piercest his Hands: Every unjust sinful
Action is a Spear with which thou woundest his Heart. O remember Christ with
Sorrow, to think thou should make his Wounds bleed afresh!

Mark XIV.22, 23, 24. Jesus took Bread, etc.


(2.) It must be a Joyful Remembrance, John 8.56. Abraham saw my Day and
rejoiced. When a Christian sees a Sacrament Day approach he should rejoice.
This Ordinance of the Supper is an Earnest of Heaven; it is the Glass in which
we see him whom our Souls love: It is the Chariot by which we are carried up to
Christ. When Jacob saw the Wagons and Chariots which were to carry him to his
Son Joseph, his Spirit revived, Genesis 45.27. God has appointed the Sac^^ment,
on purpose to cheer and revive a sad Heart. When we look on our Sins, ^e have
cause to mourn; but when we see Christ's Blood shed for our Sins, this may make
us rejoice. In the Sacrament our Wants are supplied, our Strength is renewed:
Here we meet with Christ, and does not this call for Joy? A Woman that has
been long debarred from the Society of her Husband, how glad is she of his
Presence! At the Sacrament the believing Spouse meets with Christ: He says to
her, All I have is thine. My Love is thine to pity thee, my Mercy is thine to
save thee. How can we think in the Sacrament on Christ's Blood shed, and not
rejoice. Sanguis Christi clavis Paradisi. Christ's Blood is the Key which opens
Heaven, else we had been all shut out.

3. End of the Sacrament is, to work in us an endeared Love to Christ. When
Christ bleeds over us, well may we say, Behold how he loved us! Who can see
Christ die, and not be Sick of Love? That is an Heart of stone, whom Christ's
Love will not melt.

4. End of the Sacrament; the mortifying of Corruption. To see Christ crucified
for us, is a means to crucify sin in us. Christ's Death (like the Water of
Jealousy) makes the Thigh of Sin to rot, Numb. 5.27. How can a Wife endure to
see that Spear which killed her Husband? How can we endure those sins which
made Christ vail his Glory, and lose his Blood? When the People of Rome saw
Caesar's bloody Robe, they were incensed against them that slew him. Sin has
rent the White Robe of Christ's Flesh, and died it of a crimson Color: The
Thoughts of this will make us seek to be avenged on our sins.

5. End, the Augmentation and Increase of all the Graces, Hope, Zeal, Patience.
The Word Preached begets Grace, the Lord's Supper nourishes it: The Body by
feeding increases Strength, so does the Soul by feeding on Christ
Sacramentally. Cum defecerit virtus mea calicem salutarem accipiam. Bern. When
my spiritual strength begins to fail, I know a Remedy, (says Bernard) I will
go the Table of the Lord, there I will drink and recover my decayed strength.
There is difference between Dead Stones and Living Plants. The Wicked who are
Stones receive no spiritual Increase, but the Godly, who are Plants of
Righteousness, being watered with Christ's Blood, grow more fruitful in Grace.

Quest. 4. Why are we to receive this Holy Supper?

Answ. Because it is a Duty incumbent, Take, Eat. And observe, it is a Command
of Love. If Christ had commanded us some great matter, would not we have done
it? 2 Kings 5.13. If the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou
not have done it? If Christ had enjoined us to have given him a Thousand of
Rams, or to have parted with the Fruit of our Bodies, would we not have done
it? Much more when he only says, Take and Eat: Let my broken Body feed you,
let my Blood poured out save you. Take and Eat: This is a Command of Love, and
shall we not readily obey?

2. We are to celebrate the Lord's Supper, because it is a provoking to Christ
to stay away. Prove. 9.2. Wisdom has furnished her Table. So Christ has
furnished his Table, set Bread and Wine (representing his Body and Blood)
before his Guests, and they wilfully turn their Backs upon the Ordinance,
Christ looks upon it as a slighting of his Love, and that makes the Fury rise
up in his Face. Luke 14.24. For I say unto you, that none of those that were
bidden shall taste of my Supper. I will shut them out of my Kingdom, I will
provide them a black Banquet, where weeping shall be the first Course, and
gnashing of Teeth the Second.

Quest. 5. Whether the Lord's Supper be often to be Administered?

Resp. Yes: 1 Cor. 11.26. As often as ye eat of this Bread. The Ordinance is not
to be celebrated once in a Year, or once in our Lives, but often. A Christians
own Necessities may make him come often hither. His Corruptions are strong,
therefore he had need come often hither for an Antidote to expel the Poison of
Sin; and his Graces are weak. Rev. 3.2.
Grace is like a Lamp, if it be not often fed with Oil, it is apt to go out.
How therefore do they sin against God, who come but very seldom to this
Ordinance! Can they thrive, who for a long time forbear their Food? And others
there are who do wholly forbear. This is a great Contempt offered to Christ's
Ordinance. Men do as it were tacitly say, Let Christ keep his Feast to himself.
What a cross-grained piece is Man, he will Eat when he should not, and he will
not eat when he should. When God said, Eat not of this forbidden Fruit, then he
will be sure to eat: When God says, Eat of this Bread, and Drink of this Cup,
then he refuses to eat.

Quest. 6. Are all to come promiscuously to this Holy Ordinance?

Resp. No, that were to make the Lord's Table an Ordinary. Christ forbids to
cast Pearls before Swine. Mat. 7.6. Exodus 19.12.
The Sacramental Bread is Children's Bread, and it is not to be cast to the
Profane. As at the giving of the Law God set Bounds about the Mount that none
might touch it: So God's Table should be guarded, that the Profane should not
come near. In the Primitive Times, after Sermon done, and they were going to
Celebrate the Lord's Supper, an Officer stood up and cried, (...), Holy things
for Holy Men: And then several of the Congregation were to depart. I would have
my Hand cut off, (says Chrysostom) rather than I would give Christ's Body and
Blood to the Profane. The wicked do not eat Christ's Flesh, but tear it; they
do not drink his Blood, but spill it. These Holy Mysteries in the Sacraments
are tremenda mysteria, Mysteries that the Soul is to tremble at. Sinners defile
the Holy things of God, they poison the Sacramental Cup. We read that the
wicked are to be set at Christ's Feet, Psalm. 110. not at his Table.

Quest. 7. How may we receive the Supper of the Lord worthily, that so it may
become effectual to us?

Resp. That we may receive it worthily, and it may become Efficacious,

(1.) We must solemnly prepare our selves before we come: We must not rush upon
the Ordinance rudely and irreverently, but come in due order. There was a great
deal of Preparation to the Passover; 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19. And the Sacrament
comes in the room of it.

Quest. Wherein does this Solemn Preparing for the Ordinance consist?

Resp. 1. In Examining our selves.

2. In Dressing our Souls before we come, which is by washing in the Water of
Repentance.

3. By exciting the Habit of Grace into Exercise.

4. In begging a Blessing upon the Ordinance.

(1.) Solemn Preparing for the Sacrament consists in Self-examining. 1 Cor.
11.28. But let a Man examine himself, and so let him eat. It is not only a
Counsel but a Charge: Let him examine himself. As if a King should say, Let it
be enacted. Jesus Christ having by his Institution consecrated these Elements
in the Supper to an high Mystery, they represent his Body and Blood: Therefore
there must be Preparation; and if Preparation, then there must be first
Examining our selves, without which there can be no Preparation. Let us be
serious in this examining our selves, our Salvation depends upon it. We are
curious in examining other things: We will not take Gold, but examine it by the
Touchstone: We will not take Land, but we will examine the Title. And shall
not we be as exact and curious in examining the state of our Souls?

Quest. 1. What is required to this Self-examining?

Resp. There must be a Solemn Retiring of the Soul. We must set our selves
apart, and retire for some time from all Secular Employment, that we may be
more serious in this Work. There is no casting up of Accounts in a Crowd; nor
can we examine our selves when we are in a Crowd of Worldly Businesses. We read,
a Man that was in a Journey might not come to the Passover, Numb. 9.13. because
his Mind was full of Secular Cares, and his Thoughts were taken up about his
Journey. When we are upon Self-examining-work, we had not need be in an Hurry,
or have any distracting Thoughts, but retire and lock up our selves in our
Closet, that we may be more intent in the Work.

Quest. 2. What is Self-examination?

Resp. It is a setting up a Court in Conscience, and keeping a Register there,
that by a strict Scrutiny a Man may see how Matters stand between God and his
Soul. Self-examination is a Spiritual Inquisition, an Heart-Anatomy, whereby a
Man takes his Heart as a Watch, all in pieces, and sees what is defective
there. It is a Dialogue with ones self. Psalm. 77.7. I commune with my own
Heart. David called himself to Account, and put Interrogatories to his own
Heart. Self-examining is a critical Descant or Search; as the Woman in the
Parable did light a Candle, and search for her lost Groat, Luke 15.8. So
Conscience is the Candle of t^^ Lord. Search with this Candle what thou can
find wrought by the Spirit in thee?

Quest. 3. What is the Rule by which we must Examine our selves?

Resp. The Rule or Measure we must Examine our selves by, is, the Holy
Scripture: We must not make Fancy, or the good Opinion which others have of us,
the Rule by which we judge of our selves: But as the Goldsmith brings his Gold
to the Touchstone, so must we bring our Hearts to a Scripture Touchstone: To
the Law, to the Testimony, Isa. 8.20. What says the Word? Are we divorced from
Sin? Are we renewed by the Spirit? Let the Word decide whether we are fit
Communicants or no. We judge of Colors by the Sun; so must we judge of the
state of our Souls by the Sun-light of Scripture.

Quest. 4. What are the cogent Reasons why we must Examine our selves before we
approach to the Lord's Table?

Resp. 1. It is a Duty imposed; Let him examine himself. The Passover was not
to be eaten Raw, Exodus 12.19. To come to such an Ordinance slightly, without
Examination, is to come in an undue manner, and is like Eating the Passover Raw.

2. We must examine our selves before we come, because it is not only a Duty
imposed, but opposed. There is nothing the Heart naturally is more averse from,
than Self-exemination. We may know that Duty is good, which the Heart opposes.
But why does the Heart so oppose it? Because it does cross the Tide of Corrupt
Nature; it is contrary to Flesh and Blood. The Heart is guilty; and does a
guilty Person love to be examined? The Heart opposes it, therefore the rather
set upon it. That Duty is good which the Heart opposes.

3. Because Self-examining is so needful a Work; as appears: (1.) Without
Self-examination a Man can never tell how it is with him, whether he has Grace
or no; and this must needs be very uncomfortable. He knows not if he should die
presently, what will become of him, or to what Coast he shall sail, whether to
Hell or Heaven. As Socrates said, I am about to die, and the gods know whether
I shall be happy or miserable. How needful therefore is Self-examination, that
a Man by Search may come to know the true state of his Soul, and may guess how
it will go with him to Eternity.

(2.) Self-examination is needful in respect of the Excellency of the
Sacrament. Let him eat de illo Pane, Of that Bread, 1 Cor. 11.28. That
excellent Bread, that consecrated Bread, that Bread which is not only the Bread
of the Lord, but the Bread the Lord. Let him drink de illo Poculo, Of that Cup;
that precious Cup which is perfumed and spic'd with Christ's Love; that Cup
which holds the Blood of God Sacramentally. Cleopatra put a Jewel in a Cup,
which contained the price of a Kingdom. This Sacred Cup we are to drink of,
enriched with the Blood of God, is above the Price of a Kingdom: It is more
worth than Heaven. Therefore coming to such a Royal Feast, having whole Christ,
his Divine and Humane Nature to feed on, how should we examine our selves
beforehand, that we may be fit Guests for such a Magnificent Banquet!

(3.) Self-examining is needful, because God will examine us. That was a sad
Question, Matthew. 22.12. Friend, how came thou in hither, not having a Wedding
Garment? Men are loath to ask themselves the Question, O my Soul, art thou a fit
Guest for the Lord's Table? Are there not some Sins thou have to bewail? Are
there not some Evidences for Heaven that thou have to get? Now when Persons
will not ask themselves the Question, then God will bring such a Question as
this to them, How came ye in hither to my Table not prepared? How came ye in
hither with an unbelieving or profane Heart? It will be such a Question as will
cause an Heart-trembling. God will examine a Man as the chief Captain did Paul
with Scourging, Acts 22.24. It Is true, the best Saint, if God should weigh him
in the Balance, would be sound defective. But when a Christian has made an
impartial Search, and has labored to deal uprightly between God and his own
Soul, Christ's Merits will cast in some Grains of Allowance into the Scales.

(4.) Self-examining is needful, because of that Secret Corruption in the
Heart, which will not be found out without searching. There are in the Heart
Plangendae Tenebrae, Aug. Hidden Pollutions. It is with a Christian, as with
Ioseph's Brethren, when the Steward accused them of having the Cup; they were
ready to swear they had not the Cup in their Sack, but upon Search it was found
there. Little does a Christian think what Pride, Atheism, Uncleanness is in his
Heart till he searches. Therefore if there be such hidden Wickedness, like a
Spring that runs under Ground, we had need examine our selves, that finding out
our secret Sin, we may be humbled and repent. Hidden Sins, if not searched out,
defile the Soul. If Corn lie long in the Chaff, the Chaff defiles the Corn;
hidden Sins layn long in, defile our Duties. Needful therefore it is before we
come to the Holy Supper, to search out these hidden Sins, as Israel searched
for Leaven before they came to the Passover.

(5.) Self-examining is needful, because without it we may easily have a Cheat
put upon us. Ier. 17.9. The Heart is deceitful above all things. Many a Man's
Heart will tell him, he is fit for the Lord's Table. As when Christ asked the
Sons of Zebedee, Matthew. 20.22. Are ye able to drink the Cup I shall drink of?
Can ye drink such a Bloody Cup of Suffering? They say unto him, We are able. So
the Heart will suggest to a Man, He is fit to drink of the Sacramental Cup, he
has on the Wedding Garment. Grande profundum est homo, Aug. The Heart is a
Grand Impostor. It is like a cheating Tradesman, which will put one off with
bad Wares. The Heart will put a Man off with ^^eming Grace in stead of saving.
A Tear or two shed is Repentance, a few lazy Desires is Faith. Blue and red
Flowers that grow among the Corn look like good Flowers, but they are beautiful
Weeds. The foolish Virgins Lamps looked as if they had had Oil in them, but
they had none. Therefore to prevent a Cheat, that we may not take False Grace
in stead of True, we had need make a thorough Disquisition and Search of our
Hearts before we come to the Lord's Table.

(6.) Self-examining is needful, because of those False Fears the Godly are apt
to nourish in their Hearts, which make them go sad to the Sacrament. As they
who have no Grace for want of Examining, presume; so they who have Grace, for
want of Examining, are ready to despair. Many of God's Children look upon
themselves through the black Spectacles of Fear. They fear Christ is not formed
in them, they fear they have no Right to the Promise; and these Fears in the
Heart cause Tears in the Eye: Whereas would they but search and examine, they
might find they had Grace. Are not their Hearts humbled for Sin? And what is
this but the bruised Reed? Do they not weep after the Lord? And what are these
Tears but Seeds of Faith? Do they not Thirst after Christ in an Ordinance? What
is this but the New Creature crying for the Breast? Here are, you see, Seeds of
Grace; and would Christians examine their Hearts, they might see there is
something of God in them, and so their false Fears would be prevented, and they
might approach with Comfort to these Holy Mysteries in the Eucharist.

Mark XIV.22. Jesus took Bread, etc.


(7.) Self-examining is needful, in respect of the Danger in coming unworthily
without Examination, 1 Cor. 11.27. He shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of
the Lord. Par facit quasi Christum trucidaret. Grotius. -- i. e. God reckons
with him as with a Crucifyer of the Lord Jesus. He does not Drink Christ's
Blood, but sheds it, and so brings that Curse upon him as the Jews, His Blood
be upon us and our Children. The Virtue of Christ's Blood nothing more
comfortable, the Guilt of it nothing more Formidable.

4. We must examine our selves before the Sacrament, in respect of the
Difficulty of Self-examining Work. Difficulty raises a Noble Spirit.
Self-examining is difficult: (1.) Because it is an Inward Work, it lies most
with the Heart. External Acts of Devotion are easy: To lift up the Eye, to bow
the Knee, to read over a few Prayers, this is as easy as for the Papists to
tell over a few Beads. But to examine a Man's self, to take the Heart as a
Watch, all in pieces, to make a Scripture-Trial of our Fitness for the Lord's
Supper, this is not easy. Reflexive Acts are hardest: The Eye cannot see its
self but by a Glass. We must have the Glass of the Word and Conscience to see
our own Hearts. It Is easy to spy the Faults of others, but it is hard to find
out our own. (2.) Self-examination is difficult in regard of Self-Love. As
Ignorance blinds, so Self-love flatters. What Solomon says of Love, Prove.
10.12. Love covers all Sins, is most true of Self-love. A Man looking upon
himself in the Glass of Self-love, (that flattering Glass) his Virtues appear
greater than they are, and his Sins lesser. Self-love makes a Man rather excuse
himself, than examine himself. Self-love makes one think the best of himself;
and he who has a good Opinion of himself, does not suspect himself; and not
suspecting himself, he is not forward to Examine himself. The Work therefore of
self-Examination being so difficult, it requires the more Impartiality and
Industry. Difficulty should be a Spur to Diligence.

5. We must examine our selves before we come, because of the Beneficialness of
Self-examination. The Benefit is great which way soever things turn. If upon
Examination we find that we have not Grace in Truth, then the Mistake is
discovered, and the Danger prevented. If we find that we have Grace, we may
take the Comfort of it. He who upon Search finds that he has the Minimum quod
sic, The least Degree of Grace, he is like one that has found his Box of
Evidences, he is an happy Man, he is a fit Guest at the Lord's Table, he is
Heir to all the Promises, he is as sure to go to Heaven as if he were in Heaven
already. These are the Reasons why we must examine our selves before we approach
to the Lord's Table.

Quest. 5. What must we Examine?

Answ. 1. Our Sins.

2. Our Graces.

First, Our Sins. Search if any dead Fly might spoil this sweet Ointment. When
we come to the Sacrament, we should do as the Jews did before the Passover;
they searched for Leaven, and having found it did burn it. 1. Let us search for
the Leaven of Pride: This sowres our Holy things. We are born with a Spiritual
Tympany. Will an humble Christ be received into a Proud Heart? Pride keeps
Christ out -- Intus existens prohibet alienum -- "Pride swells the Heart; and
Christ cannot come into the Heart if it be full already. To a proud Man
Christ's Blood has no Virtue, it is like Dioscordium put into a dead Man's
Mouth, which loses its Virtue. Let us search for this Leaven of Pride and cast
it away. 2. Let us search for the Levaen of Avarice. The Lord's Supper is a
Spiritual Mystery, it represents Christ's Body and Blood; what should an
earthly Heart do here? The Earth puts out the Fire. Earthliness quenches the
Fire of holy Love. The Earth is Elementum Gravissimum, it cannot ascend. A Soul
belimed with Earth cannot ascend to Heavenly Cogitations. Col. 3.5.
Covetousness which is Idolatry. Will Christ come into that Heart where there is
an Idol? Search for this Leaven before you come to this Ordinance. How can an
earthly Heart converse with that God which is a Spirit? Can a Clod of Earth
kiss the Sun? 3. Search for the Leaven of Hypocrisy. Luke 12.1. Beware of the
Leaven of the Pharisees, which is Hypocrisy. Aquinas describes it, Simulatio
Virtutis. Hypocrisy is a counterfeiting of Virtue. The Hypocrite is a living
Pageant, he only makes a show of Religion: He gives God his Knee, but no Heart;
and God gives him Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, but no Christ. Oh let us
search for this Leaven of Hypocrisy, and burn it!

Secondly, We must examine our Graces. I shall instance only in one, Our
Knowledge.

1. Whether we have Knowledge. 2. Whether it be rightly Qualified.
(1.) We are to examine whether we have Knowledge, else we cannot give God a
reasonable Service, Romans 12.1. Knowledge is a necessary Requisite in a
Communicant. Without Knowledge there can be no Fitness for the Sacrament. A
Person cannot be fit to come to the Lord's Table who has no Goodness, but
without Knowledge the Mina is not good, Prove. 19.2. Some say they have good
Hearts, tho they want Knowledge. As if one should say, His Eye is good, but it
wants Sight. Under the Law, when the Plague of Leprosy was in a Man's Head,
the Priest was to pronounce him unclean. The ignorant Person has the Plague in
his Head, he is unclean. Ignorance is the Womb of Lust, 1 Pet. 1.14. Therefore
it is requisite before we come, to Examine our selves what Knowledge we have in
the main Fundamentals of Religion. Let it not be said of us, that to this Day
the Vail is upon our Heart, 2 Cor. 3.15. But sure in this Intelligent Age we
cannot but have some Insight into the Mysteries of the Gospel. I rather fear,
we are like Rachel, who was fair and well-sighted, but barren: Therefore,

(2.) Let us examine whether our Knowledge be rightly Qualified. 1. Is it
Influential? Does our Knowledge warm our Heart? Claritas in intellectu parit
ardorem in affectu. Saving Knowledge does not only direct, but quicken: It Is
Lumen Vitae, the Light of Life, John 8.12. 2. Is our Knowledge Practical? We
hear much; do we live the Truths we know? That is the right Knowledge which
does not only adorn the Mind, but reform the Life.

Secondly, This solemn preparing for the Sacrament, as it consists in examining
our selves, so in dressing our Souls before we come. And this Soul-dress is in
two things.

1. Washing in the Laver of Repenting Tears: To come to this Ordinance with the
Guilt of any sin unrepented of, makes way for the further hardening of our
Heart, and giving Satan fuller possession of us. Zech. 12.10. They shall look
upon me whom they have pierced, and shall mourn for him. The Cloud of Sorrow
must drop into Tears. We must grieve as for the Pollution, so for the
Unkindness in every sin: To sin against Christ's Love who died for us. When
Peter thought of Christ's Love, who called him out of his Unregeneracy, made
him an Apostle, and carried him up to the Mount of Transfiguration, where he
saw the Glory of Heaven in a Vision, and then to think of his Denying Christ,
it broke his Heart, he wept bitterly, Matthew. 26.75. To think before we come to
a Sacrament of our sins against the Bowel-Mercies of God the Father, the
bleeding Wounds of God the Son, the blessed Inspirations of God the Holy Ghost,
it is enough to broach our Eyes with Tears, and put us into an Holy Agony of
Grief and Compunction: And we must be so distressed for sin, as to be divorced
from sin. The Serpent before he drinks casts up his Poison. In this we must be
wise as Serpents; before we drink of the Sacramental Cup, we must cast up the
Poison of sin by Repentance. Aug.
Ille vere plangit commissa, qui non committit plangenda -- He does truly
bewail the sins he has committed, who does not commit the sins he has
bewailed. And this is the Dressing our Souls before we come, washing in the
Waters of true Rpentance.

2. The Soul-dress is the exciting and stirring up the Habit of Grace into a
lively Exercise. 2 Timothy 1.6. I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up the
Gift of God which is in thee: i. e. The Gifts and Graces of the Spirit. The
Greek Word to stir up, (...), signifies to blow up Grace into a Flame. Grace is
often like Fire in the Embers, which needs blowing up. It is possible that even a
good Man may not come so well disposed to this Ordinance, because he has not
before taken pains with his Heart to come in Due Order: He has not stirred up
Grace into its vigorous Exercise, and so, tho he does not eat and drink
Damnation, yet he does not receive Consolation in the Sacrament. Thus you see
what this Dressing of our Souls is, before we come.

Thirdly, This Solemn preparing for the Sacrament is, in begging a Blessing
upon the Ordinance. The Sacrament is not like Physic, which has an inherent
operative Virtue: No, but the Efficacy of the Sacrament depends upon the
Cooperation of the Spirit, and a Word of Blessing. In the Institution Christ
blessed the Elements. Jesus took Bread and blessed it. In the Text, the
Sacrament, will no further do us good, then as it is blessed to us. We ought
then before we come, to pray for a Blessing on the Ordinance, that the
Sacrament may be not only a Sign to represent, but a Seal to confirm, and an
Instrument to convey Christ and all his Benefits to us. We are to pray that
this great Ordinance may be Poison to our Sins, and Food to our Graces: That as
it was with Jonathan, when he had tasted the Honeycomb, his Eyes mere
enlightened, 1 Samuel 14.27. So that by our receiving this Holy Eucharist, our
Eyes may be so enlightened, as to discern the Lord's Body. Thus should we
implore a Blessing upon the Ordinance before we come. The Sacrament is like a
Tree hung full of Fruit; but none of this Fruit will fall, unless shaken by the
Hand of Prayer.

(2.) That the Sacrament may be effectual to us, as there must be a Due
Preparing for it, so a right partaking of it: Which right Participation of the
Sacrament is in Three Things:

1. When we draw nigh to God's Table in an humble Sense of our Unworthiness. We
do not deserve one Crumb of the Bread of Life; we are poor Indigent Creatures
who have lost our Glory, and are like a Vessel that is Shipwrack'd: We smite on
our Breast as the Publican, God be merciful to us Sinners. This is a right
Partaking of the Ordinance. It Is part of our Worthiness to see our Unworthiness.

2. We rightly partake of the Sacrament, when at the Lord's Table we are filled
with Anhelations of Soul, and inflamed Desires after Christ, and nothing can
quench our Thirst but his Blood. Matthew. 5.6. (...), Blessed are they that
thirst. They are blessed not only when they are filled, but while they are
thirsting.

3. A right participation of the Supper is, when we receive in Faith. Without
Faith we get no good. What is said of the Word Preached, It profits not, not
being mixed with Faith, Heb. 4.2. is as true of the Sacrament. Christ turned
Stones into Bread: Unbelief turns the Bread into Stones, that it does not
nourish. Then we partake aright when we come in Faith. Faith has a twofold
Act, an adhering and an applying. By the first Act we go over to Christ, by the
second Act we bring Christ over to us, Gal. 2.20. This is the great Grace we
must set awork, Acts 10.43. Philo calls it, Fides Occulata, Faith is the Eagle
Eye that discerns the Lord's Body: Faith causes a virtual Contact, it touches
Christ. Christ said to Mary, Touch me not, etc. John 20.17. She was not to
touch him with the Hands of her Body. But he says to us, Touch me, Touch me
with the Hand of your Faith. Faith makes Christ present to the Soul. The
Believer has a real Presence in the Sacrament. The Body of the Sun is in the
Firmament, but the Light of the Sun is in the Eye. Christ's Essence is in
Heaven, but he is in a Believers Heart by his Light and Influence. Ephesians. 3.17.
That Christ may dwell in your Heart by Faith. Faith is the Pallat which tastes
Christ, 1 Pet. 2.3. Faith makes a Concoction; it causes the Bread of Life to
nourish Creed and manducasti. Aug.
. Faith causes a Coalition, it makes us one with Christ, Ephesians. 1.23. Other
Graces make us like Christ, Faith makes us Members of Christ.

Fourthly, Then we partake aright of the Sacrament, when we receive in Love.

(1.) Love to Christ. Who can see Christ pierced with a Crown of Thorns,
sweating in his Agony, bleeding on the Cross, but his Heart must needs be
endeared in Love to him? How can we but love him, who has given his Life a
ransom for us? Love is the Spiced Wine and Juice of the Pomgranate which we
must give Christ, Cant. 8.2. Our Love to this Superior and Blessed Jesus, must
exceed our Love to other things; as the Oil runs above the Water. Though we
cannot with Mary bring our costly Ointment to anoint Christ's Body, yet we do
more than this, when we bring him our Love, which is sweeter to him than all
Ointments and Perfumes.

(2.) Love to the Saints. This is a Love-Feast. Though we must eat this Supper
with the Bitter Herbs of Repentance, yet not with the bitter Herbs of Malice.
Were it not sad, if all the Meat one eats should turn to bad Humors? He who
comes in Malice to the Lord's Table, all he eats is to his hurt: He eats and
drinks Damnation to himself, 1 Cor. 11.29. -- Come in Love. It is with Love as
it is with Fire: You keep Fire all the Day upon the Hearth, but upon special
occasions you draw the Fire out larger. So tho we must have Love to all, yet to
the Saints who are our Fellow Members, here we must draw out the Fire of our
Love larger; and we must show the Largeness of our Affections to them, by
prizing their Persons, by choosing their Company, by doing all Offices of Love
to them; counselling them in their Doubts, comforting them in their Fears,
supplying them in their Wants. Thus one Christian may be an Eben-ezer to
another, and as an Angel of God to him. The Sacrament cannot be effectual to
him, who does not receive in Love. If a Man drinks Poison, and then takes a
Cordial, the Cordial will do him little good. He who has the Poison of Malice
in his Soul, the Cordial of Christ's Blood will do him no good: Come therefore
in Love and Charity. And thus we see how we may receive the Supper of the Lord,
that it may be Effectual to our Salvation.

Use I. From the whole Doctrine of the Sacrament, learn, How precious should a
Sacrament be to us! It is a Sealed Deed to make over the Blessings of the New
Covenant to us, [Justification, Sanctification, Glory.] A small piece of Wax
put to a Parchment is made the Instrument to confirm a rich Conveyance or
Lordship to another: So these Elements in the Sacrament of Bread and Wine, tho
in themselves of no great value, yet being consecrated to be Seals to Confirm
the Covenant of Grace to us, so they are of more value than all the Riches of
the Indies.

Use II. The Sacrament being such an Holy Mystery, let us come to this Holy
Mystery with Holy Hearts. There Is no receiving a crucified Christ but into a
consecrated Heart. Christ in his Conception lay in a pure Virgins Womb, and at
his Death his Body was wrapped in clean Linen, and put in a new Virgin-Tomb
never yet defiled with Rottenness. If Christ would not lie in an unclean Grave,
sure he will not be received into an unclean Heart. Isa. 52.11. Be ye clean
that bear the Vessels of the Lord. If they who did carry the Vessels of the
Lord were to be holy, then they who are to be the Vessels of the Lord, and are
to hold Christ's Body and Blood, ought to be holy.

Use III. Consolation. Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament is a most
Sovereign Elixir, or Comfort to a distressed Soul. Christ having poured out his
Blood, now God's Justice is fully satisfied. There is in the Death of Christ
enough to answer all Doubts. What if Sin is the Poison, here is the Flesh of
Christ an Antidote against it? What if Sin be red as Scarlet, is not Christ's
Blood of a deeper Color, and can wash away Sin? If Satan strikes us with his
Darts of Temptation, here is a precious Balm comes out of Christ's Wounds to
heal us, Isa. 53.5. What, tho we feed upon the Bread of Affliction, as long as
in the Sacrament we feed upon the Bread of Life? So that Christ received aright
Sacramentally, is an universal Medicine for the healing, and an universal
Cordial for the cheering of our distressed Souls.

III. The Benefits of our Redemption are applied to us by Prayer.

Psalm 109.4. But I give my self to Prayer.


I shall not expatiate upon Prayer at large, being to speak more fully to it in
the Lords Prayer. But to the words,

I give my self to Prayer. It is one thing to Pray, and another thing to be
given to Prayer. He who prays frequently is said to be given to Prayer; as he
who often distributes Alms, is said to be given to Charity. Prayer is a
glorious Ordinance, it is the Souls trading with Heaven. God comes down to us
by his Spirit, and we go up to him by Prayer.

Quest. 1. What Prayer is?

Answ. It is an offering up of our desires to God, for things agreeable to his
Will, in the Name of Christ.

1. Prayer is an offering up of our Desires]: Therefore it is called a making
known of our Requests, Phil. 4.6. In Prayer we come as humble Petitioners,
begging to have our Suit granted.

2. It Is offering up our Desires to God.] Prayer is not to be made to any but
God. The Papists pray to Saints and Angels, but they know not our grievances.
Isa. 63.16. Abraham is ignorant of us. And all Angel-worship is forbidden; Col.
2.18, 19. We must not pray to any but whom we may believe in; Romans 10.14. How
shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed? But we cannot believe
in an Angel, therefore we must not pray to him.

Quest. Why must Prayer be made only to God?

Resp 1. Because he only hears Prayer. Psalm. 65.2. O thou that hear Prayer.
Hereby God is known to be the true God, in that he hears Prayer. 1 Kin. 18.37.
Hear me, O Lord, hear me, that the people may know that thou art the Lord God.

2. Because God only can help We may look to second Causes, and cry as the
Woman did, 2 Kings 6.26. Help my lord, O king. And he said, if the Lord do not
help thee, whence shall I help thee? If we are in outward distress God must
send from Heaven and save; if we are in inward agonies, he only can pour in the
Oil of Joy, therefore Prayer is to be made to him only.

3. For things agreeable to his Will. When we pray for outward things, for
Riches or Children, perhaps God sees these things are not good for us; our
Prayers must comport with Gods Will. We may pray absolutely for Grace; For this
is the will of God, our Sanctification. 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. There might be no strange
incense offered. Exodus 30 9. When we pray for things which are not agreeable to
Gods Will, it is offering strange Incense.

4. In the Name of Christ. To pray in the Name of Christ is not only to mention
Christ's Name in Prayer, but to pray in the hope and confidence of Christ's
Merit. 1 Samuel 7.9. Samuel took a sucking Lamb and offered it, etc. We must
carry the Lamb Christ in the arms of our Faith, and so we prevail in Prayer.
When Vzziah would offer Incense without a Priest, God was angry and struck him
with Leprosy. 2 Chronicles. 26.16. When we do not pray in Christ's Name, in the hope
of his Mediation, we offer up Incense without a Priest, and what can we expect
but to meet with rebukes, and to have God answer us by terrible things.

Quest. 2. What are the parts of Prayer?

Answ. 1. There is the Confessory part, which is the acknowledging of Sin. 2.
The Supplicatory part, when we either deprecate and pray against some evil, or
request the obtaining of some good. 3. The Gratulatory part, when we give
thanks for Mercies received, which is the most excellent part of Prayer. In
Petition we act like Men, in giving of Thanks we act like Angels.

Quest. 3. What are the several sorts of Prayer?

Resp. 1. There is Mental Prayer, in the Mind, 1 Samuel 1.13. 2. Vocal, Psalm
77.1. 3. Ejaculatory, which is a sudden and short elevation of the heart to
God. Neh. 2.4. So I prayed to the God of Heaven. 4. Conceived Prayer; when we
pray for those things which God puts into our heart. Romans 8.26. The Spirit
helps us with sighs and groans. Both the expressions of the tongue so far as
they are right, and the impressions of the heart are from the Spirit. 5.
Prescribed Prayer: Our Savior has set us a pattern of Prayer. God prescribed
a set Form of Blessing for the Priests* Numb. 6.23. 6. Public Prayer; when we
pray in the audience of others. Prayer is more powerful when many join and
unite their forces. Vis uni^a fortior: Matthew. 18.19. 7. Private Prayer; when we
pray by our selves. Mat. 6.6. Enter into thy closet.

Quest. 4. What is that Prayer which is most like to prevail with God?

Resp. When Prayer is rightly qualified. That is a good Medicine which has the
right ingredients. That Prayer is good, and is most like to prevail with God,
which has these seven ingredients in it:

1. Prayer must be mixed with Faith; Iam. 1.6. But let him pray in faith.
Believe God hears and will in his due time grant: Believe Gods Love and Truth.
Believe that he is Love, therefore will not deny you; believe that he is Truth,
therefore will not deny himself: Faith sets God a work. Faith is to Prayer as
the Feather is to the Arrow. Faith feathers the arrow of Prayer, and makes it
fly swifter, and pierce the Throne of Grace. Prayer that is faithless is
fruitless.

2. A melting Prayer; Psalm. 51.17. The sacrifices of God are a broken heart:
The incense was to be beaten, to typifie the breaking of the heart in prayer. O
says a Christian, I cannot pray with such gifts and elocution as others; as
Moses said, I am not eloquent: But can thou weep? Does thy Heart melt in
Prayer? Weeping prayer prevails. Tears drop as pearls from the eye. Jacob wept
and made supplication, and had power over the Angel. Hos. 12.4.

3. Prayer must be fired with zeal and fervency: Iam. 5.16. Effectual fervent
Prayer prevails much. Cold Prayers like cold Suitors never speed. Prayer
without fervency, is like a Sacrifice without Fire. Prayer is called a pouring
out of the Soul, 1 Samuel 1.15. to signify vehemence. Formality starves prayer.
Prayer is compared to Incense; Psalm. 141.2. Let my prayer be set forth as
incense. Hot Coals were to be put to the Incense to make it odoriferous and
fragrant; fervency of Affection is like Coals put to the Incense, it makes
prayer ascend as a sweet perfume. Christ prayed with strong cries; Heb. 5.7.
Clamor iste penetrat nubes. Luther. Fervent prayer, like a petard set against
Heaven gates, makes them fly open. To cause holy fervor and ardency of Soul in
prayer, consider; 1. Prayer without fervency is no prayer; it is speaking not
praying. Lifeless prayer is no more prayer, than the picture of a Man is a Man.
One may say as Pharaoh, Genesis 41. I have dreamed a dream: It is dreaming not
praying. Affectus operi nomen imponit. Ambr. Life and fervency baptizeth a
Duty, and gives it a name. 2. Consider in what need we stand of those things
which we ask in prayer. We come to ask the favor of God, and if we have not
his love all we enjoy is cursed to us. We pray that our Souls may be washed in
Christ's Blood, and if he wash us not we have no part in him, John 13.8. When
will we be earnest if not when we are praying for the life of our Souls. 3. It
is only fervent prayer has the promise of Mercy affixed to it; Ier. 29.14.
Then shall ye find me when ye search for me with all your heart. It Is dead
praying without a promise; and the promise is made only to ardency. The Aediles
among the Romans had their doors always standing open, that all who had
petitions might have free access to them. Gods heart is ever open to fervent
prayer.

4. Prayer must be sincere. Sincerity is the Silver-thread, which must run
through the whole Duties of Religion. Sincerity in prayer is when we have
gracious holy ends in prayer. Our prayer is not so much for Temporal Mercies as
Spiritual. We send out our prayer as a Merchant sends out his Ship, that we may
have large returns of Spiritual Blessings: Our aim in prayer is, that our Heart
may be more holy, that we may have more Communion with God. Our design is that
by prayer we may increase the stock of Grace. Prayer which wants a good aim,
wants a good issue.

5. Prayer that will prevail with God must have fixation of mind: Psalm. 57.7. O
God my heart is fixed. Since the fall the mind is like Quicksilver which will
not fix; it has principium motus but non quietis: The thoughts will be roving
and dancing up and down in prayer: Just as if a Man that is traveling to such
a place should turn out of the road, and wander he knows not whither. In prayer
we are traveling to the Throne of Grace, but how often do we by vain
cogitations turn out of the road, which is rather wandering than praying.

Quest. But how shall we cure these vain impertinent thoughts, which do so
distract us in Prayer, and we may fear hinder the acceptance.

Answ. 1. Be very apprehensive in Prayer of the infiniteness of Gods Majesty
and Purity. Gods eye is upon us in Prayer, and we may say as David, Psalm. 56.8.
Thou tellest my wanderings: The thoughts of this would make us hoc agere, mind
the Duty we are about. If a Man were to deliver a petition to an Earthly
Prince, would he at that time be playing with a feather? Set your selves when
you pray as in Gods presence: Could you but look through the keyhole of
Heaven, and see how devout and intent the Angels are in their worshipping God,
sure you would be ready to blush at your vain thoughts and wild impertinencies
in Prayer.

2. If you would keep your Mind fixed in prayer, keep your Eye fixed; Psalm
123.1. Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou that dwell in the Heavens. Much
vanity comes in at the eye. When the eye wanders in prayer the heart wanders.
To think to keep the heart fixed in Prayer, and yet let the eye gaze, is as if
one should think to keep his house safe, yet let the windows be open.

3. If you would have your thoughts fixed in Prayer, get more love to God. Love
(...) a great fixer of the thoughts. He who is in love cannot keep his thoughts
off the Object. He who loves the World his thoughts run undisturbedly upon the
World. Did we love God more our minds would be more intent upon him in Prayer.
Were there more delight in Duty there would be less distraction.

4. Implore the help of Gods Spirit to fix our minds, and make them intent and
serious in Prayer. The Ship without a Pilot rather floats than sails: that our
thoughts do not float up and down in Prayer we need the Blessed Spirit to be
our pilot to steer us; only Gods Spirit can bound the thoughts. A shaking Hand
may as well write a line steadily, as we can keep our Hearts fixed in Prayer
without the Spirit of God.

5. Make holy thoughts familiar to you in your ordinary course of Life. David
was often musing on God; Psalm. 139.18. When I awake I am still with thee. He who
gives himself liberty to have vain thoughts out of Prayer, will scarce have
other thoughts in Prayer.

6 If you would keep your Mind fixed on God, watch your Hearts; not only watch
them after prayer, but in prayer. The Heart will be apt to give you the slip,
and have a thousand vagaries in prayer. We read of Angels ascending and
descending on Jacobs Ladder: So in Prayer, you shall find your Hearts ascending
to Heaven, and in a moment descending upon Earthly Objects: O Christians, watch
your Hearts in prayer. What a shame is it to think, that when we are speaking
to God in prayer, our Hearts should be in the Fields, or in our Compting house,
or one way or other running upon the Devils errand.

7. Labor for more degrees of Grace. The more Ballast the Ship has the better
it sails; so the more the Heart is ballasted with Grace, the steadier it will
sail to Heaven in Prayer.

6. Prayer that is likely to prevail with God must be Argumentative: God loves
to have us plead with him and use Arguments in Prayer; see how many Arguments
Jacob used in Prayer; Genesis 32.11. Deliver me I pray thee from the hand of my
Brother. The Arguments he uses are, 1. From Gods Command, ver. 9. Thou said
to me; return to thy Country: As if he had said, I did not take this Journey of
my own head, but by thy direction, therefore thou can not but in honor
protect me: And he uses another Argument; ver. 12. Thou said I will surely
do thee good. Lord, will thou go back from thy own promise? Thus he was
Argumentative in Prayer, and he got not only a new Blessing, but a new Name;
ver. 28. Thy name shall no more be called Jacob but Israel; for as a Prince
have thou had power with God and prevailed. God loves to be overcome with
strength of Argument. Thus when we come to God in prayer for Grace be
Argumentative; Lord, thou call thy self the God of all grace, and whither
should we go with our Vessel but to the Fountain: Lord, thy grace may be
imparted yet not impaired: Has not Christ purchased grace for poor indigent
Creatures? Every dram of Grace cost a drop of Blood. Shall Christ dye to
purchase Grace for us, and shall not we have the Fruit of his purchase? Lord it
is thy delight to milk out the Breast of Mercy and Grace, and will thou abridge
thy self of thy own delight? Thou have promised to give thy Spirit to implant
grace. Can truth lie? can faithfulness deceive? God loves thus to be overcome
with Arguments in prayer.

7. Prayer that would prevail with God must be joined with reformation: Job
11.13. If thou stretch out thy hands toward him; if iniquity be in thy hand,
put it far away from thee. Sin lived in makes the heart hard and Gods ear deaf.
It Is foolish to pray against Sin, and then Sin against prayer. Sin fly-blows
our prayer; Psalm. 66.18. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not
hear me. The Lodestone loses its virtue when bespread with garlic; so does
prayer when polluted with sin. The Incense of Prayer must be offered upon the
Altar of an holy Heart.

Thus you see what is that Prayer which is most likely to prevail with God.

USE I. It reproves, 1. Such as pray not at all; it is made the note of a
reprobate, he calls not upon God, Psalm 144. Does he think to have an Alms who
never asks it? Do they think to have Mercy from God who never seek it? Then God
should be friend them more than he did his own Son. Heb. 5.7. Christ offered up
prayers with strong cries. None of Gods Children are born dumb; Galat. 4.6. 2.
It reproves such as have left off prayer, a sign they never felt the fruit and
comfort of it: He that leaves off Prayer, a sign he leaves off to fear God; Job
15.4. Thou castest off fear, and restrainest prayer before God. A Man that has
left of prayer is fit for any wickedness. When Saul had given over enquiring
after God, then he went to the Witch of Endor.

USE II. Of Exhortation: Be persons given to prayer, I give my self (says
David) to prayer. Pray for pardon and purity; Prayer is the golden Key that
opens Heaven. The Tree of the Promise will not drop its Fruit unless shaked by
the hand of prayer. All the benefits of Christ's Redemption are handed over to
us by prayer.

Object. But I have prayed a long time for Mercy, and have no answer? Psalm.
69.3. I am weary of crying?

Answ. 1. God may hear us when we do not hear from him; as soon as Prayer is
made God hears it, though he does not presently answer. A Friend may receive
our Letter, though he does not presently send us an answer of it. 2. God may
delay prayer, and yet not deny.

Quest. But why does God delay an answer of Prayer?

Resp. 1. Because he loves to hear the voice of Prayer; Prove. 15.8. The prayer
of the upright is his delight. You let the Musician play a great while ere you
throw him down Money, because you love to hear his Music. Cant. 2.14. 2. God
may delay Prayer, when he will not deny, that he may humble us: perhaps God
has spoke to us a long time in his Word to leave such Sins, but we would not
hear him, therefore he lets us speak to him in Prayer, and seems not to hear
us. 3. God may delay Prayer when he will not deny, because he sees we are not
yet fit for the Mercy: perhaps we pray for deliverance, we are not fit for it;
our scum is not boiled away: We would have God swift to deliver, and we are
slow to repent. 4. God may delay prayer, when he will not deny, that the Mercy
we pray for may be the more prized, and may be sweeter when it comes: The
longer the Merchants Ships stay abroad, the more he rejoices when they come
home laden with Spices and Jewels; therefore be not discouraged, but follow God
with prayer; though God may delay, he will not deny. Luther.
Prayer vincit invincibilem, it overcomes the Omnipotent: Hos. 12.4. The Tymans
tied fast their God Hercules with a golden Chain that he should not remove: The
Lord was held by Moses prayer as with a golden Chain, Exodus 32.10. Let me
alone: Why what did Moses, he only prayed. Prayer ushers in Mercy. Be thy case
never so sad, if thou can but pray thou needst not fear, Psalm. 10.17.
therefore give thy self to prayer.

Our FATHER.
HAVING (through the good providence of God) gone over the chief Grounds and
Fundamentals of Religion, and enlarged upon the Decalogue or Ten Commandments,
I shall now at the close, speak something upon the Lords Prayer.

MATTHEW. vi.9. After this manner therefore pray ye, Our Father which art in
Heaven, Hallowed, etc.


In this Scripture are two things observable.

I. The Introduction to the Prayer. II. The Prayer it self, which consists of
three parts. 1. A Preface. 2. Petitions 3. The Conclusion.

I. The Introduction to the Lords Prayer, sic orate vos, After this manner pray
ye.] Our Lord Jesus in these words prescribed to his Disciples and us a
directory for prayer. The Ten Commandments are the rule of our Life, the Creed
is the sum of our Faith, and the Lords Prayer is the pattern of our Prayer:
As God did prescribe Moses a pattern of the Tabernacle, Exodus 25.9. so Christ
has here prescribed us a pattern of Prayer. After this manner pray ye, etc.
The meaning is, let this be the Rule and Model according to which ye frame your
prayers; Ad hanc regulam preces nostras exigere necesse est. Not that we are
tied to the words of the Lords-prayer: Calvin.
Christ says not after these words, pray ye, but after this manner; that is,
let all your petitions agree and symbolize with the things contained in the
Lords prayer; and indeed well may we make all our prayers consonant and
agreeable to this prayer, it being a most exact prayer. Tertullian calls it
breviarium totius Evangelii, a breviary and compendium of the Gospel: It is
like an heap of massy gold. The exactness of this prayer appears, 1. In the
Dignity of the Author: A piece of work has commendation from the Artificer;
and this prayer has commendation from the Author; it is the Lords Prayer. As
the Law Moral was written with the Finger of God, so this prayer was dropped
from the Lips of the Son of God. Non vox Hominem sonat, est Deus. 2. The
exactness of this prayer appears in the excellency of the matter. I may say of
this prayer, It is as silver tried in a furnace, purified seven times; Psalm.
12.6. Never was there prayer so admirably and curiously composed as this. As
Solomon's Song for its Excellency is called the Song of Songs; so may this well
be called the prayer of prayers. The matter of it is admirable; 1. For its
Succinctness, it is short and pithy, (...), multum in parvo, a great deal said
in a few words. It requires more Art to draw the two Globes curiously in a
little Map. This short Prayer is a System or Body of Divinity. 2. Its
Clearness. This prayer is plain and intelligible to every capacity: Clearness
is the grace of Speech. 3. Its Compleatness. This prayer contains in it the
chief things that we have to ask, or God has to bestow.

USE. Let us have a great esteem of the Lords prayer; let it be the model and
pattern of all our prayers: There is a double benefit arises from framing our
petitions suitable to the Lords prayer. 1. Hereby Error in prayer is prevented:
It Is not easy to write wrong Copy; we cannot easily err having our pattern
before us. 2. Hereby Mercies requested are obtained; for the Apostle assures us
God will hear us when we pray according to his Will, 1 John 5.14. and sure we
pray according to his Will, when we pray according to his pattern he has set
us. So much for the Introduction to the Lords prayer, After this manner pray ye.

II. The Prayer it self, which consists of three parts.

1. A Preface. 2. Petitions. 3. The Conclusion.
1. The Preface to the prayer: 1. Our Father, 2. Which art in Heaven. To begin
with the first words of the Preface.

(1.) Our Father.] Father is sometimes taken personally; John 14.28. My Father
is greater than I: But Father in the Text is taken essentially for the whole
Deity. This Title, Father, teaches us to whom we must address our selves in
prayer, to God alone. Here is no such thing in the Lords prayer, as, O ye
Saints or Angels that are in Heaven hear us, but our Father which art in Heaven.

Quest. In what order must we direct our Prayers to God? Here is only the
Father named, may not we direct our Prayers to the Son and Holy Ghost?

Answ. Though the Father only be named in the Lords prayer, yet the other two
persons are not hereby excluded: The Father is mentioned because he is first in
order, but the Son and Holy Ghost are included, because they are the same in
Essence: As all the three persons subsist in one Godhead, so in our prayers,
though we name but one ^^rson, we must pray to all. To come then more closely
to the first words of the Preface, [ Our Father]. Princes on Earth give
themselves Titles expressing their Greatness, as High and Mighty: God might
have done so, and expressed himself thus, Our King of Glory, Our Judge, but he
gives himself another Title, Our Father, an expression of Love and
Condescension. God that he might encourage us to pray to him, represents
himself under this sweet notion of a Father, Our Father. Dulce nomen Patris:
The Name Jehovah carries Majesty in it; the Name Father carries Mercy in it.

Quest. 1. In what sense is God a Father?

Resp. 1. By Creation; it is he that has made us; Acts 17.28. (...), we are
his Offspring, Mal. 2.10. Have we not all one Father? Has not one God Created
us? But there is little comfort in this; for so God is Father to the Devils by
Creation, but he that made them will not save them.

2. God is a Father by Election, having chosen a certain number to be his
Children, whom he will entail Heaven upon; Ephesians. 1.4. (...), He has chosen us
in him.

3. God is a Father by special Grace; he consecrates the elect by his Spirit,
and infuseth a supernatural principle of Holiness, therefore they are said to
be born of God, 1 John 3.9. Such only as are sanctified can say, Our Father
which art in Heaven.

Quest. 2. What is the difference between God being the Father of Christ, and
the Father of the Elect?

Resp. God is the Father of Christ in a more glorious transcendent manner.
Christ has the primo-geniture; he is the eldest Son, a Son by eternal
generation: Prove. 8.23. I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or
ever the earth was. Isa. 53.8. Who shall declare his generation? Christ is a
Son to the Father, yet so, as he is of the same Nature with the Father, having
all the incommunicable properties of the Godhead belonging to him: But we are
Sons of God by Adoption and Grace; Gal. 4.5. That we might receive the adoption
of Sons.

Quest. 3. What is that which makes God our Father?

Resp. Faith: Gal. 3.26. Ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ
Jesus. An Unbeliever may call God his Creator, and his Judge, but not his
Father. Faith does legitimate us, and make us of the Blood Royal of Heaven: Ye
are the children of God by faith. Baptism makes us Church Members, but Faith
makes us Children. Without Faith the Devil can show as good a Coat of Arms as
we.

Quest. 4. How does Faith make God to be our Father?

Resp. As Faith is an uniting Grace; by Faith we have Coalition and Union with
Christ, and so the Kindred comes in; being united to Christ the Natural Son, we
become Adopted Sons: God is the Father of Christ; Faith makes us Christ's
Brethren, Heb. 2.11. and so God comes to be our Father.

Quest. 5. Wherein does it appear that God is the best Father?

Resp. 1. In that he is most Ancient; Dan. 7.9. The ancient of days did sit: A
figurative representation of God who was before all time. This may cause
Veneration.

2. God is the best Father, because he is perfect; Matthew. 5.48. Your Father
which is in Heaven is perfect. He is perfectly good: Earthly Fathers are
subject to infirmities: Elias (though a Prophet) was a man of like passions.
Iam. 5.17. but God is perfectly good: All the perfection we can arrive at in
this Life is sincerity; we may a little resemble God, but not equal him: He is
infinitely perfect.

3. God is the best Father in respect of Wisdom; 1 Timothy 1.17. The only wise
God. He has a perfect Idea of Wisdom in himself: He knows the fittest Mediums
to bring about his own designs; the Angels light at his Lamp. In particular,
this is one branch of his Wisdom, that he knows what is best for us: An Earthly
Parent knows not in some intricate cases how to advise his Child, or what may
be best for him to do; but God is a most wise Father; he knows what is best for
us; he knows when Comfort is best for us; he keeps his Cordials for fainting; 2
Cor. 7.6. God who comfort them that are cast down: He knows when affliction
is best for us, and when it is fit to give a bitter potion: 1 Pet. 1.6. If need
be, ye are in heaviness. He is the only wise God; he knows how to make evil
things work for good to his Children, Romans 8:28. he can make a sovereign
treacle of poison: Thus he is the best Father for Wisdom.

4. He is the best Father because most loving; 1 John 4.16. God is love. He who
causes bowels of affection in others, must needs have more bowels himself;
quod efficit tale: The Affections in Parents are but Marble and Adamant in
comparison of Gods Love to his Children, he gives them the cream of his Love,
electing Love, saving Love; Zeph. 3.17. He will rejoice over thee with joy; he
will rest in his love, he will joy over thee with singing: No Father like God
for Love; if thou art his Child, thou can not love thy own Soul, so entirely
as he loves thee.

5. God is the best Father for Riches; God has land enough to give to all his
Children, he has unsearchable riches, Ephesians. 3.8. He gives the hidden Manna, the
Tree of Life, Rivers of Joy, Gates of Pearl: Who ever saw gates of Pearl? God
has treasures that cannot be emptied, pleasures that cannot be ended. Earthly
Fathers if they should be ever giving, they would have nothing left to give:
God is ever giving to his Children, yet has not the less; his Riches are
imparted, not impaired. Like the Sun that still shines, yet has not the less
light. He cannot be poor who is infinite. Thus God is the best Father, he gives
more to his Children than any Father, or Prince can bestow.

6. God is the best Father, because he can reform his Children. A Father when
his Son takes bad courses, knows not how to make him better, but God knows how
to make the Children of the Election better; he can change their Hearts. When
Paul was breathing out persecution against the Saints, God soon altered his
course and set him a praying; Acts 9.11. Behold he prays. None of those who
belong to the Election are so rough cast and unhewen but God can polish them
with his Grace, and make them fit for the Inheritance.

7. God is the best Father because he never dies, 1 Timothy 6 16. Who only has
immortality. Earthly Fathers dye, and their Children are exposed to many
injuries, but God lives for ever; Rev. 1.8. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning
and the last. Gods Crown has no Successors.

Quest. 6. Wherein lies the Dignity of such as have God for their Father?

Resp. They have greater Honor then is conferred on the Princes of the Earth;
They are precious in Gods esteem; Isa. 43.4. Since thou wast precious in my
eyes, thou have been honorable; the wicked are dross, Psalm. 119.119. and
chaff, Psalm. 1.4. but God numbers his Children among his Jewels, Mal. 3.17. he
writes all his Childrens names in the Book of Life, Phil. 4.3. Whose names are
in the book of life. Among the Romans the Names of their Senators were written
down in a Book, Patres conscripti; God enrolls the names of his Children, and
will not blot their names out of the Register: Rev. 3.5. I will not blot his
name out of the book of life. God will not be ashamed of his Children; Heb.
11.16. God is not ashamed to be called your God. One might think it were
something below God, and he might disdain to Father such Children as are Dust
and Sin mingled, but he is not ashamed to be called our God; and that we may
see he is not ashamed of his Children, he writes his own Name upon them; Rev.
3.12. I will write upon him the name of my God; that is, I will openly
acknowledge him before all the Angels to be my Child. I will write my Name upon
him, as the Son bears his Fathers name: What an honor and dignity is this.

2. God confers honorable Titles upon his Children: 1. He calls them the
excellent of the earth, Psalm. 16.2. or the magnificent, as Iunius renders it.
They must needs be excellent who are e Regio Sanguine nati, of the Blood Royal
of Heaven; they are the Spiritual Phenixes of the World, the glory of the
Creation. God calls his Children his glory; Isa. 46.13. Israel my glory. God
honors his Children with the Title of Kings, Rev. 1.6. And has made us Kings.
All Gods Children are Kings: though they have not Earthly Kingdoms, yet, 1.
They carry a Kingdom about them, Luke 17.21. The kingdom of God is within you:
Grace is a Kingdom set up in the hearts of Gods Children. They are Kings to
rule over their Sins: to bind those kings in chains. Psalm. 149.8. 2. They are
like Kings, they have their insignia Regalia, their ensigns of Royalty and
Majesty. 1. They have their Crown: In this Life they are Kings in a disguise:
They are not known, therefore they are exposed to poverty and reproach; they
are Kings in a disguise: 1 John 3.2. Now we are the Sons of God, and it does
not appear what we shall be. Why what shall we be? Every Son of God shall have
his Crown of Glory, 1 Pet. 5.4. and white Robes, Rev. 6.11. Robes signify
Dignity, and white, signifies Sanctity.

3. This is their honor who have God for their Father, they are all Heirs; the
youngest Son is an Heir. 1. Gods Children are heirs to the things of this Life:
God being their Father they have the best title to earthly things, they have a
sanctified right to them, though they have often the least share, yet they have
the best right, and they have a Blessing with what they have; i. e. Gods Love
and Favor. Others may have more of the Venison, but Gods Children have more of
the Blessing: Thus they are Heirs to the things of this Life. 2 They are Heirs
to the other World: Heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1.14. (...), Ioint-heirs with
Christ; Romans 8.17. They go sharers with Christ in glory. Among Men commonly the
eldest Son carries away all, but Gods Children are all Joint-heirs with Christ,
they have a copartnership with him in his Riches. Has Christ a place in the
Celestial Mansions, so have the Saints; John 14.2. In my Fathers house are many
mansions, I go to prepare a place for you* Has he his Fathers Love, so have
they; Psalm. 146.8. John 17.26. That the love wherewith thou have loved me may
be in them. Does Christ sit upon a Throne, so do Gods Children; Rev. 3.21. What
an high honor is this?

4. God makes his Children equal in honor to the Angels, Luke 20.36. They are
(...) equal to the Angels: nay, those Saints who have God for their Father, are
in some sense superior to the Angels; for Jesus Christ having taken our
Nature, Naturam nostram nobilitavit, Aug.
has enobled and honored it above the Angelical. Heb. 2.16. God has made his
Children by Adoption, nearer to himself than the Angels. The Angels are the
Friends of Christ, Believers are the Members of Christ, and this honor have
all the Saints. Thus you see the Dignity of such as have God for their Father.
What a comfort is this to Gods Children, who are here despised and loaded with
calumnies and invectives, 1 Cor. 4.14. We are made as the filth of the world,
etc. But God will put Honor upon his Children at the last day, and crown them
with Immortal Bliss, to the envy of their Adversaries.

Quest. 7. How we may know that God is our Father? All cannot say Our Father:
The Jews boasted that God was their Father; John 8.36. We have one Father,
even God. Christ tells them their pedigree, ver. 44. Ye are of your Father the
Devil. They who are of Satanical Spirits, and make use of their power to beat
down the power of Godliness, cannot say God is their Father, they may say, Our
Father which art in Hell. Well then, how may we know that God is our Father?

Resp. 1. By having a Filial disposition. This is in four things* 1. To melt in
tears for Sin: A Child weeps for offending his Father. When Christ looked on
Peter, and he remembered his Sin in denying Christ, he fell a weeping. Clemens
Alexandrinus reports of Peter, he never heard a Cock crow but he wept. This is
a sign God is our Father: When the heart of stone is taken away, and there is a
gracious thaw in the heart, it melts in tears for Sin; and he who has a
Child-like heart mourns for Sin in a Spiritual manner, as it is Sin: He grieves
for it, 1. As it is an Act of Pollution. Sin deflours the Virgin-Soul; it
defaceth Gods Image; it turns beauty into deformity; it is called the plague of
the heart, 1 Kings 8.38. It is the spirits of evil distilled. A Child of God
mourns for the defilement of Sin; Sin has a blacker aspect than Hell. 2. He
who has a Child-like heart grieves for Sin, as it is an Act of Enmity. Sin is
diametrically opposite to God: It is called a walking contrary to God; Lev.
26.40. If they shall confess their iniquity, and that they have walked contrary
to me. Sin does all it can to spite God: If God be of one mind, Sin will be of
another. Sin would not only unthrone God, but it strikes at his very Being; if
Sin could help it God should be no longer God. A Child-like heart grieves for
this, O says he, that I should have so much enmity in me, that my Will should
be no more subdued to the Will of my Heavenly Father, this springs a leak of
godly sorrow. 3. A Child-like heart weeps for Sin as it is an Act of
Ingratitude. Sin is an abuse of Gods Love; it is a taking the Jewels of Gods
Mercies and making use of them to sin. God has done more for his Children than
others; he has planted his grace, and given them some intimations of his
favor, and to sin against kindness, dies a sin in grain, and makes it Crimson:
Like Absalom, as soon as his Father kissed him and took him into favor,
plotted Treason against him. Nothing so melts a Child-like heart in tears, as
sins of unkindness; O that I should sin against the Blood of a Savior, and the
Bowels of a Father: I condemn ingratitude in my Child, yet I am guilty of
ingratitude against my Heavenly Father: This opens a vein of godly sorrow, and
makes the heart bleed afresh; certainly this evidenceth God to be our Father,
when he has given us this Child-like frame of heart, to weep for sin as it is
sin, an act of Pollution, Enmity, Ingratitude. A wicked Man may mourn for the
bitter Fruit of Sin, but only a Child of God can grieve for the odious Nature
of Sin. 2. A Filial (or Child-like) disposition is to be full of sympathy* We
lay to heart the dishonours reflected upon our Heavenly Father, when we see
Gods Worship adulterated, his Truth mingled with the poison of Error, it is as
a Sword in our Bones to see Gods Glory suffer; Psalm. 119.158. I beheld the
transgressors and was grieved. Homer describing Agamemnons grief when he was
forced to sacrifice his Daughter Iphigenia, brings in all his Friends weeping
and condoling with him; so when God is dishonored, we sympathize, and are as
it were clad in mourning. A Child that has any good Nature, is cut to the
heart to hear his Father reproached. An Heir of Heaven takes a dishonor done
to God more heinous than a disgrace done to himself. 3. A Filial disposition is
to love our Heavenly Father: He is unnatural that does not love his Father. God
who is crowned with excellency, is the proper object of delight, and every true
Child of God says as Peter, Lord thou know that I love thee: But who will
not say he loves God? If ours be a true genuine love to our Heavenly Father, it
may be known, 1. By the effects. 1. Then we have an holy fear: There is a fear
which arises from love to God; that is, we fear the loss of the visible tokens
of Gods presence; 1 Samuel 4.13. Elies heart trembled for the Ark. It is not said
his heart trembled for his two Sons, Hophni and Phinchas, but his heart
trembled for the Ark; because the Ark was the special sign of Gods Presence,
and if that were taken the Glory was departed. He who loves his Heavenly
Father, fears least the tokens of his Presence should be removed, least
Profaneness should break in like a flood, least Popery should get head, and God
should go from a people. The presence of God in his Ordinances is the glory and
strength of a Nation. The Trojans had the Image of Pallas, and they had an
opinion, that as long as that Image was preserved among them, they should never
be conquered. So long as Gods presence is with a people so long they are safe.
Every true Child of God fears least God should go, and the glory depart. Try by
this whether we have a Filial disposition: Do we love God, and does this love
cause fear and jealousy? Are we afraid least we should lose Gods presence?
Least the Sun of Righteousness remove out of our Horizon. Many are afraid least
they should lose some of their Worldly profits, but not least they lose the
presence of God. If they may have Peace and Trading they care not what becomes
of the Ark of God. A true Child of God fears nothing so much as the loss of his
Fathers presence: Hos. 9.12. Woe to them when I depart from them. 2. Love to our
Heavenly Father is seen by loving his Day; Isa. 58.13. If thou call the Sabbath
a delight. The Ancients called this Regina Dierum, the Queen of Days. If we
love our Father in Heaven we spend this day in Devotion, in Reading, Hearing,
Meditating: On this day Manna falls double. God sanctified the Sabbath: He made
all the other days in the Week, but he has sanctified this day; this day he
has crowned with a Blessing. 3. Love to our Heavenly Father is seen by loving
his Children; 1 John 5.1. Every one that loves him that begat, loves him also
that is begotten of him. If we love God, the more we see of God in any, the
more we love them; we love them though they are poor: A Child loves to see his
Fathers picture, though hung in a mean frame; we love the Children of our
Father though they are persecuted; 2 Timothy 1.16. Onesiphorus was not ashamed of
my chain. Constantine did kiss the hole of Paphnusius's eye, because he
suffered the loss of his eye for Christ. It appears they have no love to God,
who have no love to his Children; they care not for their company; they have a
secret disgust and antipathy against them. Hipocrites pretend great reverence
to the Saints departed, they canonize dead Saints, but persecute living: I may
say of these as the Apostle, Heb. 12.8. They are bastards, not sons. 4. Effect
of love, if we love our Heavenly Father, then we will be Advocates for him, and
stand up in the defense of his Truth. He who loves his Father will plead for
him when he is traduced and wronged. He has no Child-like heart, no love to
God, who can hear Gods name dishonored, and be silent. Does Christ appear for
us in Heaven, and are we afraid to appear for him on Earth? Such as dare not
own God and Religion in times of danger, God will be ashamed to be called their
God; it would be a reproach to him to have such Children as will not own him.
2. A Child-like love to God is known, as by the Effects, so by the Degree; it
is a superior love. We love our Father in Heaven above all other things; above
Estate or Relations, as Oil runs above the Water. Psalm. 73.25. A Child of God
seeing a super eminency of Goodness, and a constellation of all Beauties in
God, he is carried out in love to him in the highest measure: As God gives his
Children such a love as he does not bestow upon the wicked, electing love; so
Gods Children give God such a love as they bestow upon none else, adoring love;
they give him the flower and spirits of their love; they love him with a love
joined with worship; this spiced Wine they keep only for their Father to drink
of: Cant. 8.2. 4. A Child-like disposition is seen in honoring our Heavenly
Father. Mal. 1.6. A Son honors his Father.

Quest. How (...) show our honor to our Father in Heaven?

Resp. 1. By having a reverential awe of God upon us; Lev. 25.17. Thou shall
fear thy God: This reverential fear of God is when we dare do nothing that he
has forbidden in his Word; Genesis 39.9. How can I do this great wickedness and
sin against God? It is the part of the honor a Son gives to his Father, he
fears to displease him. 2. We show our honor to our Heavenly Father by doing
all we can to exalt God, and make his Excellencies shine forth; though we
cannot lift up God higher in Heaven, yet we may lift him higher in our hearts,
and in the esteem of others. When we speak well of God, set forth his renown,
display the trophies of his goodness, when we ascribe the glory of all we do to
God, when we are the trumpeters of Gods praise; this is an honoring our Father
in Heaven, and a certain sign of a Child-like heart: Psalm. 50.23 Whosoever offers
praise glorifieth me.

2. We may know God is our Father by our resembling of him: The Child is his
Fathers Picture, Judge. 8.18. Each one resembled the children of a King: Every
Child of God resembles the King of Heaven; herein Gods adopting Children and
Man's differ. A Man adopts one for his Son and Heir that does not at all
resemble him, but whosoever God adopts for his Child is like him; he not only
bears his Heavenly Fathers Name, but Image, Col. 3.10. And have put on the new
man, which is renewed (...) -- after the image of him that created him. He who
has God for his Father, resembles God in Holiness: Holiness is the glory of
the Godhead, Exodus 15.11. The Holiness of God is the intrinsic Purity of his
Essence. He who has God for his Father, partakes of the Divine Nature; though
not of the Divine Essence, yet of the Divine Likeness: As the Seal sets its
print and likeness upon the Wax, so he who has God for his Father, has the
print and effigies of his Holiness stamped upon him, Psalm. 106.16. Aaron the
Saint of the Lord. Wicked Men desire to be like God hereafter in glory, but do
not affect to be like him here in grace; they give it out to the World that God
is their Father, yet have nothing of God to be seen in them, they are unclean,
they not only want his Image but hate it.

3. We may know God is our Father by having his Spirit in us. 1. By having the
intercession of the Spirit: It Is a Spirit of Prayer: Gal. 4.6. Because ye are
Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba,
Father. Prayer is the Souls breathing it self into the bosom of its Heavenly
Father. None of Gods Children are born dumb; implet Spiritus sanctus organum
suum, and tanquam Pila chordarum tangit Spiritus Dei corda sanctorum. Prosper.
Acts 9.11. Behold he prays: But it is not every Prayer evidenceth Gods Spirit
in us. Such as have no grace may excel in gifts, and affect the hearts of
others in Prayer, when their own hearts are not affected: As the Lute makes a
sweet sound in the ears of others, but it self is not sensible; how therefore
shall we know our Prayers are indicted by Gods Spirit, and so he is our Father?

Resp. 1. When they are not only Vocal but Mental; when there are not only
gifts but groans; Romans 8.26. The best Music is in consort; the best Prayer is
when the heart and tongue join together in consort.

2. When they are zealous and fervent: Iam. 5.16. The effectual fervent Prayer
of a righteous man avails much. The eyes melt in Prayer, the heart burns:
Fervency is to Prayer, as Fire to the Incense; it makes it ascend to Heaven as
a sweet perfume.

3. When Prayer has Faith sprinkled in it: Prayer is the Key of Heaven, and
Faith is the hand that turns it; Romans 8.15. We cry, Abba, Father. We cry, there
is fervency in Prayer: Abba, Father, there is Faith. Those Prayers suffer
shipwreck which dash upon the rock of unbelief. Thus we may know God is our
Father by having his Spirit praying in us: As Christ intercedes above, so the
Spirit intercedes within. 2. By having the renewing of the Spirit, which is
nothing else but Regeneration, which is called a being born of the Spirit, John
3.5. This regenerating work of the Spirit is a transformation, or change of
Nature, Romans 12.2. (...), Be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind. He
who is born of God has a new heart: New, not for substance, but for qualities.
The strings of a Viol may be the same, but the Tune is altered: Before this
Regeneration, there are Spiritual Pangs, much heartbreaking for Sin.
Regeneration is called a circumcising of the heart, Col. 2.11. In Circumcising
there was pain in the flesh: so in this Spiritual Circumcision there is pain in
the heart; there is much sorrow arising from the sense of guilt and wrath. The
Jaylors trembling, Acts 16.30. was a pang in the new birth. Gods Spirit is a
Spirit of Bondage before it be a Spirit of Adoption. This blessed work of
Regeneration spreads over the whole Soul; it irradiates the Mind, it
consecrates the Heart, and reforms the Life: Though Regeneration be but in
part, it is in every part; 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. Regeneration is the signature and
engraving of the Holy Ghost upon the Soul. The new born Christian is bespangled
with the Jewels of the (...) which are the Angels glory: Regeneration is the
spring of all true joy. At our first birth we come weeping into the World, but
at our new birth there is cause of rejoicing; for now God is our Father, and we
are begotten to a lively hope of glory; 1 Pet. 1.3. We may try by this our
relation to God. Has a regenerating work of Gods Spirit passed upon our Souls?
Are we made of another Spirit? Humble and Heavenly? This is a good sign of
Sonship, and we may say, Our Father which art in Heaven. 3. By having the
conduct of the Spirit: We are led by the Spirit; Romans 8.14. As many as are led
by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God. Gods Spirit does not only
quicken us in our Regeneration, but leads us on till we come to the end of our
Faith, Salvation. It is not enough the Child have Life, but he must be led
every step by the Nurse. Hos. 11.3. I taught Ephraim to go, taking them by
their arms. Their Arms, as the Israelites had the Cloud and Pillar of Fire to
go before them, and be a guide to them; so Gods Spirit is a guide to go before
us, and lead us into all truth, and counsel us in all our doubts, and influence
us in all our actions: Psalm 73.24. Thou shall guide me by thy counsels. None
can call God Father but such as have the conduct of his Spirit. Try then what
Spirit you are led by? Such as are led by a Spirit of Envy, Lust, Avarice,
these are not led by the Spirit of God; it were blasphemy for them to call God
Father: These are led by the Spirit of Satan, and may say Our Father which art
in Hell. 4. By having the Witness of the Spirit; Romans 8.16. The Spirit it self
bears witness with our Spirit, that we are the Children of God. This Witness
of the Spirit, suggesting that God is our Father, is not a Vocal Witness, or
Voice from Heaven: The Spirit in the Word witnesses: The Spirit in the Word
says, he who is so qualified, who is an hater of Sin, and a lover of Holiness,
is a Child of God, and God is his Father; if I can find such qualifications
wrought, here is the Spirit witnessing with my Spirit, that I am a Child of
God. Besides, we may carry it higher, the Spirit of God witnesses to our
Spirit by making more than ordinary impressions upon our hearts, and giving
some secret hints and whispers that God has purposes of Love to us: Here is a
concurrent witness of the Spirit with Conscience, that we are Heirs of Heaven,
and God is our Father: This Witness is better felt than expressed, this Witness
scatters doubts and fears, silenceth temptations; but what shall one do that
has not this Witness of the Spirit? If we w^^t the Witness of the Spirit, let
us labor to find the Work of the Spirit; if we have not the Spirit testifying,
labor to have it sanctifying, and that will be a support to us.

4. If God be our Father we are of Peaceable Spirits: Matthew. 5.9 Blessed are
the peacemakers, they shall be called the children of God. Grace infuseth a
sweet amicable disposition; it files off the ruggedness of Men's Spirits; it
turns the Lion-like fierceness into a Lamb-like gentleness; Isa. 11.7. They who
have God to be their Father, follow Peace as well as Holiness. God the Father
is called the God of Peace, Heb. 13.20. God the Son, the Prince of Peace, Isa.
9.6. God the Holy Ghost is a Spirit of Peace: It is called the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace; Ephesians. 4.3. The more peaceable the more like God. It
is a bad sign God is not their Father; 1. Who are fierce and cruel, as if with
Romulus they had sucked the Milk of a Wolf, Romans 3.17. The way of peace have
they not known, they sport in mischief; these are they who are of a persecuting
Spirit, as Maximinus, Dioclesian, Antiochus, who (as Eusebius) took more
tedious journeys, and run more hazards in vexing and persecuting the Jews,
than any of his Predecessors had done in getting of Victories: These Furies
cannot call God Father, if they do, they will have as little comfort in saying
Father, as Dives had in Hell, when he said, Father Abraham, Luke 16.24. 2. Who
are makers of division; Romans 16.17. Mark them which cause divisions, and avoid
them: Such as are born of God are makers of Peace, what shall we think of such
as are makers of Division, will God Father these? The Devil made the first
division in Heaven; they may call the Devil Father; they may give the Cloven
Foot in their Coat of Arms; their sweetest Music is in Discord; they unite to
divide. Sampsons Fox-tails were tied together only to set the Philistians Corn
on fire, Judge. 15 4. Papists unite only to set the Churches Peace on fire^
Satan's Kingdom goes up by Divisions. St. Chrysostom observes of the Church of
Corinth, when many Converts were brought in, Satan knew no better way to dam up
the current of Religion, than to throw in an Apple of Strife, and divide them
into Parties; one was for Paul, and another for Apollos, but few for Christ.
Would not Christ have his Coat rent, and can he endure to have his Body rent?
Sure God will never Father them who are not Sons of Peace: Of all them who God
hates, he is named for one, who is a sower of discord among brethren, Prove.
6.19.

5. If God be our Father, then we love to be near God, and have converse with
him. An ingenuous Child delights to approach near to his Father, and go into
his presence. David envyed the Birds that they built their Nests so near Gods
Altars, when he was debarred his Fathers house; Psalm. 84.3. True Saints love to
get as near to God as they can: In the Word they draw near to his Holy Oracle,
in the Sacrament they draw near to his Table; a Child of God delights to be in
his Fathers presence; he cannot stay away long from God; he sees a Sabbath day
approaching and rejoices; his heart has been often melted and quickened in a
Ordinance, he has tasted the Lord is good, therefore he loves to be in his
Fathers presence, he cannot keep away long from God. Such as care not for
Ordinances cannot say Our Father which art in Heaven: Is God their Father who
cannot endure to be in his presence?

USE I. Of Instruction. See the amazing goodness of God that is pleased to
enter into this sweet relation of a Father. God needed not to adopt us, he did
not want a Son: God did not want a Son, but we did a Father; God showed Power
in being our Maker, but Mercy in being our Father: When we were enemies, and
our hearts stood out as garrisons against God, that he should conquer our
stubbornness, and of enemies make us children, and write his Name, and put his
Image upon us, and bestow a Kingdom of Glory; what a Miracle of Mercy is this?
Every adopted Child may say, Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy
sight. Mat. 11.26.

2. Br. or Infer. If God be a Father, then hence I infer, whatever he does to
his Children is Love.

(1.) If he smiles upon them in Prosperity it is Love: They have the World not
only with Gods leave, but with his love. God says to every Child of his, as
Naaman to Gehazi, 2 Kings 5.23. Be content take two talents: So says God to
his Child, I am thy Father, take two talents. Take Health and take my Love with
it; take an Estate and take my Love with it; Take two talents. Gods Love is a
sweetning ingredient into every Mercy.

Quest. How does it appear that a Child of God has Worldly things in love?

Resp. 1. Because he has a good Title to them. God is his Father, therefore he
has a good title: A wicked Man has a civil title to the Creature, but no
more; he has it not from the hand of a Father; he is like one that takes up
Cloth at the Drapers, and it is not paid for; but a Believer has a good title
to every foot of Land he has, his Father has settled it upon him.

2. A Child of God has Worldly things in love, because they are sanctified to
him. 1. They make him better, and are Loadstones to draw him nearer to God. 2.
He has his Fathers Blessing with them: A little blessed is sweet; Exodus 23.25.
He shall bless thy bread and thy water. Esau had the Venison, but Jacob got the
Blessing: While the wicked have their Meat sawced with Gods Wrath, Psalm. 78.30,
31. Believers have their Comforts seasoned with a Blessing. It was a secret
Blessing from God made Daniels Pulse nourish him more, and make him look
fairer, than they that ate of the Kings Meat, Dan. 1.15.

3. A Child of God has Worldly things in love, because whatever he has is an
earnest of more: Every bit of Bread is a pledge and earnest of glory.

(2.) God being a Father, if he frown, if he dips his pen in gall, and write
bitter things, if he corrects, it is in Love. A Father loves his Child as well
when he does chastise and discipline him, as when he settles his Land on him;
Rev. 3.19. As many as I love, I rebuke. Afflictions are sharp Arrows, says Gr.
Nazianzen, but they are shot from the hand of a loving Father. Correctio est
Virtutis gymnasium; God afflicts with the same love he gives Christ; he does it
to humble and purify: Gentle Correction is as necessary as Daily Bread; nay,
as needful as Ordinances, as Word and Sacraments. There is love in all; God
smites that he may save.

(3.) God being a Father, if he desert and hide his face from his Child, it is
in love. Desertion is sad in it self, a short Hell, Job 6.9. When the Light is
withdrawn, Dew falls: Yet we may see a Rainbow in the Cloud, the love of a
Father in all this. 1. God hereby quickens grace; perhaps grace lay dormant,
Cant. 5.2. it was as fire in the embers, and God withdraws comfort to
invigorate and exercise grace. Faith is a Star sometimes shines brightest in
the dark night of desertion; Jonah 2.4. 2. When God hides his face from his
Child, yet still he is a Father, and his heart is toward his Child; as Joseph
when he spoke roughly to his Brethren, and made them believe he would take them
for Spies, still his Heart was full of Love, and he was fain to go aside and
weep. So Gods Bowels yearn to his Children, when he seems to look strange; Isa.
54.8. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee, but with everlasting kindness
will I have mercy on thee. Though God may have the look of an enemy, yet still
he has the heart of a Father.

3. Br. or Infer. Learn hence the sad case of the wicked, they cannot say, Our
Father in Heaven; they may say Our Judge, but not Our Father; they fetch their
pedigree from Hell, John 8.44. Ye are of your Father the Devil. Such as are
unclean and profane, are the spurious blood of the Old Serpent, and it were
blasphemy for them to call God Father. The case of the wicked is deplorable, if
they are in misery, they have none to make their moan to; God is not their
Father, he disclaims all Kindred with them* Matthew. 7.23. I never knew you,
depart from me ye that work iniquity. The wicked dying in their Sins, can
expect no Mercy from God as a Father. Many say, he that made them will save
them, but Isa. 27.11. It is a people of no understanding, therefore he that
made them will not have mercy on them. Though God was their Father by Creation,
yet because they were not his Children by Adoption; therefore he that made them
would not save them.

USE II. Of Exhortation: To persuade all who are yet strangers to God, to
labor to come into this Heavenly Kindred: Never leave till you can say, Our
Father which art in Heaven.

Quest. But will God be a Father to me who have profaned his Name, and been a
great Sinner?

Resp. If thou will now at last seek to God by Prayer, and break off thy Sins,
God has the Bowels of a Father for thee, and will in no wise cast thee out.
When the Prodigal did arise and go to his Father, his Father had compassion,
and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him: Luke 15.20. Though thou have
been a Prodigal, and almost spent all upon thy Lusts, yet if thou will now give
a bill of divorce to thy Sins, and fly to God by Repentance, know that he has
the Bowels of a Father; he will embrace thee in the Arms of his Mercy, and seal
thy Pardon with a Kiss. What though thy Sins have been heinous? The Wound is
not so broad as the Plaster of Christ's Blood. The Sea covers great Rocks: The
Sea of Gods Compassion can drown thy great Sins; therefore be not discouraged,
go to God, resolve to cast thy self upon his Fatherly Bowels; God may be
entreated of thee, as he was of Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 33.13. He prayed unto the
Lord, and he was entreated of him. Manasseh made the streets run with Blood,
yet when his eyes ran with Tears, Gods Fatherly Bowels began to melt, and he
was entreated of him.

USE III. Of Comfort: To such as can upon good grounds call God Father: There Is
more sweetness in this word Father, then if we had ten thousand Worlds. David
thought it a great matter to be Son in Law to a King: 1. Sam. 18.18. What is my
Fathers family, that I should be Son in law to the King? But what is it to be
born of God, and have God for our Father.

Quest. Wherein lies the happiness of having God for our Father?

Resp. 1. If God be our Father then he will teach us; what Father will refuse
to counsel his Son? Does God command Parents to instruct their Children, Leut.
4.10. and will not he instruct his? Isa. 48.17. I am the Lord thy God, which
teaches thee to profit, Psalm. 71.17. O God thou have taught me from my youth.
If God be our Father he will give us the teachings of his Spirit: The natural
man receives not the things of God, neither can he know them; 1 Cor. 2.14. The
Natural Man may have excellent notions in Divinity, but God must teach us to
know the Mysteries of the Gospel after a Spiritual manner. A Man may see the
figures upon a Dyal, but he cannot tell how the day goes unless the Sun shine.
We may read many Truths in the Bible, but we cannot know them savingly till God
by his Spirit shine upon our Soul. God teaches not only our Ear but our Heart;
he not only informs our Mind, but inclines our Will; we never learn till God
teach us. If God be our Father he will teach us how to order our affairs with
discretion, Psalm 112.5. how to carry our selves wisely, 1 Samuel 18.5. David
behaved himself wisely; he will teach us what to answer when we are brought
before Governors, he will put words into our mouths, Matthew. 10.18, 19, 20. Ye
shall be brought before Governors and Kings for my sake, but take no thought
how or what ye shall speak: For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your
Father which speaks in you.

2. If God be our Father, then he has Bowels of Affection toward us: If it be
so unnatural for a Father not to love his Child, can we think God will be
defective in his Love? All the affections of Parents come from God, but a spark
from his flame. He is the Father of Mercies, 2 Cor. 1.3. he begets all the
Mercies and Bowels in the Creature: His Love to his Children, is a Love which
passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3.19. it exceeds all dimensions, it is higher than
Heaven, it is broader than the Sea. That you may see Gods Fatherly Love to his
Children; 1. Consider God makes a precious valuation of them; Isa. 43.4. Since
thou wast precious in my sight: A Father prizeth his Child above his Jewels;
their names are precious, for they have Gods own name written upon them; Rev.
3.12. I will write upon him the name of my God: Their Prayers are a precious
perfume, their Tears God bottles, Psalm. 56.8. God esteems his Children as a
Crown of glory in his hand; Isa. 62.3. 2. God loves the places they were born
in the better for their sakes, Psalm. 87.6. Of Sion it shall be said, this man
was born there; this and that Believer was born there: God loves the ground his
Children tread upon. Hence Judea, the seat of Gods Children and Chosen, God
calls a delightsome Land, Mal. 3.12. It was not only pleasant for Situation
and Fruitfulness, but because Gods Children, who were his Hephsibab or Delight,
lived there. 3. He charge the great ones of the World not to prejudice his
Children; their Persons are sacred: Psalm. 105.14. He suffered no man to do them
wrong; yea, he reproved Kings for their sakes, saying, Touch not mine anointed.
By Anointed, is meant the Children of the High God, who have the Unction of the
Spirit, and are set apart for God. 4. God delights in their company, he loves
to see their Countenance and hear their Voice, Cant. 2.14. he cannot refrain
long from their company: Let but two or three of his Children meet and pray
together, he will be sure to be among them, Matthew. 18.20. Where two or three
are gathered together in my name, I am in the midst of them. 5. God bears his
Children in his Bosom, as a nursing Father does the sucking Child. Numb. 11.12.
Isa. 46.4. To be carried in Gods Bosom shows how near his Children lie to his
Heart. 6. God is full of sollicitous care for them, 1 Pet. 5.7. He cares for
you. His eye is still upon them, they are never out of his thoughts. A Father
cannot always take care for his Child, he sometimes is asleep, but God is a
Father that never sleeps; Psalm. 121.4. He neither slumbereth nor sleeps. 7.
He thinks nothing too good to part with to his Children: He gives them the
Kidneys of the Wheat, and Honey out of the Rock, and Wine on the Lees well
refined, Isa. 25.6. He gives them three Jewels more worth than Heaven, the
Blood of his Son, the Grace of his Spirit, the Light of his Countenance. Never
was there such an indulgent affectionate Father. 8. If God has one Love better
than other, he bestows it upon them; they have the cream and quintessence of
his Love. He will rejoice over thee, he will rest in his love, Zeph. 3.17. God
loves his Children with such a love as he loves Christ; John 17.26. it is the
same love for the unchangeableness of it: God will no more cease to love his
Adopted Sons, then he will to love his Natural Son.

3. If God be our Father he will be full of sympathy; Psalm. 103.13. As a Father
pityeth his Children, so the Lord pityeth them that fear him. Ier. 31.20. Is
Ephraim my dear Son? my bowels are troubled for him. God pityes his Children in
Two Cases.

(1.) In Case of Infirmities. (2.) Injuries.
(1.) In Case of Infirmities: If the Child be deformed, or has any ^odily
distemper the Father pityes it: If God be our Father, he pityes our weaknesses,
and he so pityes them as to heal them; Isa. 57.18. I have seen his ways, and
will heal him. As God has Bowels to pity, so he has Balsam to heal.

(2.) In Case of Injuries. Every blow of the Child goes to the Fathers heart;
when the Saints suffer, God does sympathize; Isa. 63.9. In all their
afflictions he was afflicted: He did as it were bleed in their Wounds. Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? When the foot was trod on, the head cried out.
Judge. 10.16. Gods Soul was grieved for the children of Israel. As when one
string in a Lute is touched, all the rest of the strings sound: When Gods
Children are stricken, his Bowels sound. Zach. 2.8. He that touches you
touches the apple of my eye.

4. If God be our Father, he will take notice of the least good he sees in us;
if there be but a sigh for Sin, God hears it, Psalm. 38.9. My groaning is not
hid from thee; if there be but a penitential tear comes out of our eye, God
sees it, Isa. 38.5. I have seen thy tears. If there be but a good intention,
God takes notice: 1 Kings 8.18. Whereas it was in thy heart to build an house
to my name, thou did well that it was in thine heart. God punishes
intentional wickedness, and crowns intentional goodness; Thou did well that
it was in thy heart: God takes notice of the least scintilla, the least spark
of grace in his Children: 1 Pet. 3.6. Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him Lord.
The Holy Ghost does not mention Sarahs unbelief, or laughing at the Promise, he
puts a finger upon the scar, winks at her failing, and only takes notice of the
good that was in her, her Obedience to her Husband, She obeyed Abraham, calling
him Lord; nay, that good which the Saints scarce take notice of in themselves,
God in a special manner observes, Matthew. 25.35. I was an hungered and ye gave me
meat, I was thirsty and ye gave me drink: Then shall the Righteous say, Lord,
when saw we thee an hungered, and fed thee? They did as it were overlook and
disclaim their own Works of Charity, yet Christ does take notice, I was an
hungered, and ye fed me: What a Comfort is this, God spies the least good in his
Children; he can see a grain of Corn hid under Chaff, Grace hid under
Corruption.

5. If God be our Father, he will take all we do in good part. Those Duties we
our selves censure, God will crown. When a Child of God looks over his best
Duties, he sees so much Sin cleaving to them, that he is even confounded: Lord,
says he, there is more Sulphur than Incense in my Prayers; but for your
comfort, if God be your Father, he will crown those Duties which you your
selves censure; God sees there is sincerity in the hearts of his Children, and
this gold (though light) shall have grains of allowance: Though there may be
defects in the services of Gods Children, yet God will not cast away their
offering, 2 Chronicles. 30.20. The Lord healed the people. The Tribes of Israel
being straightened in time wanted some Legal Purifications, yet because their
Hearts were upright, God healed them, he pardoned them; God accepts of the good
Will, 2 Cor. 8.12. A Father takes a Letter from his Son kindly though there are
blots, or bad English in it: What blottings are there in our holy things, yet
our Father in Heaven accepts: Says God, it is my Child, and he would do
better; I will look upon him through Christ with a merciful eye.

6. If God be our Father then he will correct us in measure; Ier. 30.11. I will
correct thee in measure; and that two ways: 1. It shall be in measure for the
kind; God will not lay upon us more than we are able to bear, 1 Cor. 10.13. he
know, our frame, Psalm. 103.14. he knows we are not Steel or Marble, therefore
will deal gently, he will not over-afflict: As the Physician that knows the
(...) and temper of the Body, will not give Physic too strong for the Body,
nor will he give one dram or scruple too much. God has not only the Title of a
Father, but the Bowels of a Father; he will not lay too heavy burdens on his
Children, least their spirits fail before him. 2. He will correct in measure
for the duration; he will not let the affliction lie on too long: Psalm. 125.3.
The rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous: It may be
there, and not rest. Isa. 57.16. I will not contend for ever. Our Heavenly
Father will love for ever, but he will not contend for ever. The torments of
the damned are for ever, Rev. 14.11. The smoke of their torment ascends up
for ever and ever: The wicked shall drink a Sea of Wrath, but Gods Children
only taste of the Cup of Affliction, and their Heavenly Father will say,
transeat calix, let this cup pass away from them; Isa. 35.10. A sting, a wing.

7. If God be our Father he will intermix Mercy with all our Afflictions: If he
give us Wormwood to drink, he will mix it with Honey. In the Ark, the Rod was
laid up, and Manna: With our Fathers Rod there is always some Manna. Ashers
shoes were iron and brass, but his foot was dipped in oil; Genesis 33.24.
Affliction is the shoe of brass that pincheth, but there is mercy in the
affliction, there is the foot dipped in oil. When God afflicts the Body, he
gives Peace of Conscience; there is Mercy in the Affliction. An Affliction
comes to prevent falling into Sin, there is Mercy in the Affliction. Jacob had
his Thigh hurt in wrestling, there was the Affliction; but then he saw Gods
face, and received a Blessing from the Angel, Genesis 32.30. there was Mercy in
the Affliction. In every Cloud a Child of God may see a Rainbow of Mercy
shining. As the Limner mixeth dark shadows and bright colors together; so our
Heavenly Father mingles the dark and the bright together, Crosses and
Blessings; and is not this a great happiness for God thus to checker his
Providence, and mingle goodness with severity.

8. If God be our Father, the evil one shall not prevail against us. Satan is
called (...), the evil one, emphatically: He is the grand enemy of the Saints;
and that both in a Military sense, as he fights against them with his
temptations; and in a Forensical or Law-sense, as he is an accuser and pleads
against them, yet neither way shall he prevail against Gods Children; as for
his shooting his fiery darts, God will bruise Satan shortly under the Saints
feet. Romans 16.20. As for his accusing, Christ is Advocate for the Saints, and
answers all bills of indictment brought in against them. God will make all
Satan's temptations promote the good of his ^hildren: 1. As they set them more a
praying; 2 Cor. 12.8. Temptation is a medicine for security. 2. As they are a
means to humble them; 2 Cor. 12.7. Least I should be exalted above measure,
there was given me a thorn in the flesh. The thorn in the flesh was a
temptation; this thorn was to prick the bladder of pride. 3. As they establish
them more in Grace. A Tree shaken by the Wind is more settled and rooted; the
blowing of a temptation does but settle a Child of God more in Grace. Thus the
evil one, Satan, shall not prevail against the Children of God.

9. If God be our Father, no real evil shall befall us; Psalm. 91.10. There shall
no evil befall thee: It Is not said no trouble, but no evil. Gods Children are
privileged persons; they are privileged from the hurt of every thing; Luke
10.19. Nothing shall by any means hurt you. (...). Chrysostom. The hurt and
malignity of the affliction is taken away. Affliction to a wicked Man has evil
in it; it makes him worse; Rev. 16.9. Men were scorched with great heat, and
blasphemed the name of God: But no evil befalls a Child of God, he is bettered
by affliction; Heb. 12.10. That ye may be made partakers of his holiness. What
hurt does the Furnace to the Gold, it only makes it purer. What hurt does
Affliction to Grace, only refine and purify it. What a great privilege is
this to be freed, though not from the stroke of Affliction, yet the sting: No
evil shall touch a Saint. When the Dragon has poisoned the water, they say the
Unicorn with his horn does draw out the poison. Christ has drawn out the
poison of every Affliction, that it cannot prejudice a Child of God. Again, no
evil befalls a Child of God, because no condemnation: Romans 8.1. No condemnation
to them in Christ Jesus. God does not condemn them, nor Conscience does not
condemn them: Both Jury and Judge acquit them, then no evil befalls them; for
nothing is really an evil but that which damns.

10. If God be our Father this may make us go with cheerfulness to the Throne
of Grace. Were a Man to petition his enemy there were little hope; but when a
Child petitions his Father he may come with confidence to speed: The word
Father works upon God, it touches his very Bowels. What can a Father deny his
Child? If a Son ask bread will he give him a stone? Matthew. 7.9. This may
embolden us to go to God for pardon of Sin, and further degrees of Sanctity. We
pray to a Father of Mercy, setting upon a Throne of Grace; Luke 11.13. If ye
then being evil know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more
shall your heavenly Father give his Spirit to them that ask him. This did
quicken the Church, and add wings to Prayer. Isa. 63.15. Look down from heaven:
ver. 16. Doubtless thou art our Father. Who does God keep his Mercies for but
his Children? Three things may cause boldness in Prayer: We have a Father to
pray to, and the Spirit to help us to pray, and an Advocate to present our
Prayers. Gods Children should in all their troubles run to their Heavenly
Father as that sick Child, 2 Kin. 4.19. He said unto his Father, My head, my
head: So pour out thy complaint to God in Prayer, Father, my heart, my heart:
My dead heart, quicken it; my hard heart, soften it in Christ's Blood; Father,
my heart, my heart. Sure God that hears the cry of the Ravens, will hear the
cry of his Children.

11. If God be our Father he will stand between us and danger. A Father will
keep off danger from his Child. God calls himself scutum, a shield: A shield
defends the Head, guards the Vitals; God shields off dangers from his Children,
Acts 18.10. I am with thee, and none shall set on thee to hurt thee: God is an
hiding place, Psalm 27.5. God preserved Athanasius strangely; he put it into
his mind to depart out of the house he was in the night before the enemies came
to search for him: As God has a Breast to feed, so he has Wings to cover his
Children; Psalm. 91.4. He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his
wings shall thou trust. God appoints his holy Angels to be a Lifeguard about
his Children, Heb. 1.14. never was any Prince so well guarded as a Believer.
The Angels, 1. are a numerous guard, 2 Kings 6.17. The mountain was full of
horses of fire round about Elisha. The Horses and Chariots of fire were the
Angels of God to defend the Prophet Elisha. 2. A strong guard. One Angel in a
night slew an hundred and fourscore and five thousand, 2 Kin. 19.32. if one
Angel slew so many, what would an Army of Angels have done? 3. The Angels are a
swift guard; they are ready in an instant to help Gods Children; therefore they
are described with wings to show their swiftness, they fly to our help, Dan.
9.21, 23. At the beginning of thy supplication the commandment came forth, and
I am come to thee? Here was a swift motion for the Angel to come from Heaven to
Earth between the beginning and ending of Daniels Prayer. 4. The Angels are a
watchful guard, not like Saul's guard, asleep when their Lord was in danger; 1 Samuel 26.12. The Angels are a vigilant guard, they watch over Gods Children to
defend them; Psalm. 34.7. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that
fear him. There is an invisible guardianship of Angels about Gods Children.

12. If God be our Father we shall not want any thing that he sees is good for
us: Psalm. 34.10. They that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing. God is
pleased sometimes to keep his Children to hard commons, but it is good for
them; Sheep thrive best on short pasture; God sees too much may not be good;
plenty breeds surfeit; Luxuriant animi rebus secundis: God sees it good
sometimes to diet his Children and keep them short, that they may run the
Heavenly Race the better; it was good for Jacob there was a Famine in the Land,
it was a means to bring him to his Son Joseph; so it is that Gods Children
sometimes see the Worlds emptiness, that they may acquaint themselves more with
Christ's fullness; if God see it be good for them to have more of the World they
shall have it; God will not let them want any good thing.

13. If God be our Father all the Promises of the Bible belong to us: Gods
Children are called Heirs of the promise; Heb. 6.17. A wicked Man can lay claim
to nothing in the Bible but the Curses; he has no more to do absolutely with
the Promises, than a Ploughman has to do with the City Charter; the Promises
are Childrens Bread; the Promises are mulctralia Evangelii, the Breasts of the
Gospel milking out Consolation; and who are to suck of these Breasts but Gods
Children: The promise of Pardon is for them; Ier. 33.8. I will pardon all their
iniquity whereby they have sinned against me. The promise of Healing is for
them; Isa. 57.18. the promise of Salvation, Ier. 23.6. the Promises are
supports of Faith, they are Gods sealed Deed, they are a Christians Cordial. O
the Heavenly Comforts which are distilled from the Lembick of the Promises. St.
Chrysostom compares the Scripture to a Garden, the Promises are the
Fruit Trees that grow in this Garden. A Child of God may go to any Promise in
the Bible, and pluck Comfort from it: He is an Heir of the Promise.

14. God makes all his Children Conquerours: They are born of God, and are
conquerours. 1. They conquer themselves: Fortior est qui se quam qui fortissima
vincit maenia: The Saints conquer their own Lusts; they bind these princes in
fetters of iron: Psalm. 149.8. Though the Children of God may sometimes be
foiled, and lose a single battle, yet not the victory. 2. They conquer the
World. The World holds forth her two Breasts of Pleasure and Profit, and many
are overcome by it; but the Children of God have a World-conquering Faith; 1
John 5.4. This is the victory over the world, even your faith. 3. They conquer
their Enemies. How can that be, when they often take away their Lives? (1.) They
conquer by not complying with them: The three Children would not fall down to
the Golden Image, Dan. 3.18. they would rather burn than bow; here they were
Conquerours. He who complyes with another Lust is a Captive, he who refuses
to comply is a Conqueror. (2.) Gods Children conquer their enemies by heroic
Patience. A patient Christian, like the anvil, bears all strokes invincibly:
Thus the Martyrs overcame their enemies by Patience; nay, Gods Children are
more than conquerours; Romans 8.37. (...), We are more than conquerours? How are
Gods Children more than Conquerours? Because they conquer without loss, and
because they are crowned after death, which other Conquerours are not.

15. If God be our Father, he will now and then send us some tokens of his
Love. Gods Children live far from home, and meet sometimes with coarse usage
from the unkind World; therefore God to encourage his Children, sends them
sometimes tokens and pledges of his Love: What are these? He gives them a
return of Prayer, there is a token of Love; he quickens and enlarges their
Hearts in Duty, there is a token of Love; he gives them the first fruits of his
Spirit, which are Love Tokens, Romans 8.23. As God gives the wicked the first
fruits of Hell, horror of Conscience and Despair, so he gives his Children the
first fruits of his Spirit, Joy and Peace, which are foretasts of Glory. Some
of Gods Children having received these tokens of Love from their Heavenly
Father, have been so transported that they have dyed for Joy; as the Glass often
breaks with the strength of the Wine put into it.

16. If God be our Father he will indulge and spare us; Mal. 3.17. I will spare
them as a man spares his own Son that serves him: Gods sparing his Children
imports this, his clemency toward them, he does not punish them as he might;
Psalm. 103.10. He has not dealt with us according to our sins: We often do that
which merits Wrath, grieve Gods Spirit, relapse into Sin; God passes by much,
and spares us: God did not spare his Natural Son, Romans 8.32. yet he will spare
his Adopted Sons; God threatened Ephraim to make him as the Chaff driven with
the Whirlwind, but he soon repented; Hos. 13.4. Yet I am the Lord thy God: ver.
10. I will be thy King: Here God spared him as a Father spares his Son* Israel
often provoked God with their complaints, but God used clemency toward them, he
often answered their murmurings with Mercies; here he spared them as a Father
spares his Son.

17. If God be our Father he will put Honor and Renown upon us at the last
day. 1. He will clear the innocence of his Children: Gods Children in this Life
are strangely misrepresented to the World; they are loaded with invectives,
they are called factious, seditious: Elijah, the troubler of Israel; Luther was
called the trumpet of Rebellion; Athanasius was accused to the Emperor
Constantine to be the raiser of Tumults; the Primitive Christians were accused
to be infanticidii, incestus rei, killers of their Children, guilty of Incest;
as Tertullian; St. Paul reported to be a pestilent person, Acts 24.5. Famous
Wickliff called the Idol of the Heretics, and that he dyed drunk. If Satan
cannot defile Gods Children, he will disgrace them; if he cannot strike his
fiery darts into their Conscience, he will put a dead fly into their Name; but
God will one day clear his Childrens innocence, he will roll away their
reproach: As God will make a Resurrection of Bodies, so of Names; Isa. 25.8.
The Lord God will wipe away tears from off all faces, and the rebuke of his
people shall he take away: God will be the Saints compurgator. Psalm. 37.6. He
shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light. The Night casts its dark
mantle upon the most beautiful Flowers, but the light comes in the Morning and
dispells the darkness, and every Flower appears in its orient brightness; so
the wicked may by misreports darken the honor and repute of the Saints, but
God will dispel this darkness, and cause their Names to shine forth: He shall
bring forth thy righteousness as the light. As God did stand up for the honor
of Moses when Aaron and Miriam went about to eclipse his Fame; Numb. 12.8.
Wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses? So will
God say one day to the wicked, wherefore were not ye afraid to defame and
traduce my Children? They having my Image upon them how durst ye abuse my
Picture. At last Gods Children shall come forth out of all their calumnies, as
a Dove covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold; Psalm. 68.13. 2.
God will make an open and honorable recital of all their good deeds: As the
Sins of the Wicked shall be openly mentioned to their eternal infamy and
confusion, so all the good deeds of the Saints shall be openly mentioned, and
then shall every man have praise of God; 1 Cor. 4.5. Every Prayer made with
melting eyes, every good service, every work of Charity, shall be openly
declared before Men and Angels, Matthew. 25.35. I was an hungered and ye gave me
meat, thirsty and ye gave me drink, naked and ye clothed me: Thus God will set
a Trophy of Honor upon all his Children at the last day. Then shall the
righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father: Matthew. 13.43.

18. If God be our Father he will settle good land of inheritance upon us: 1
Pet. 1.4. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus, who has begotten us
again to a lively hope, to an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled. A Father
may be fallen to decay, and have nothing to leave his Son but his Blessing; but
God will settle an Inheritance on his Children, and an Inheritance no less than
a Kingdom; Luke 17.32. It is your Fathers good pleasure to give you a kingdom.
This Kingdom is more Glorious and Magnificent than any Earthly Kingdom; it is
set out by Pearls and precious Stones, the richest Jewels; Rev 21.19. What are
all the Rarities of the World to this Kingdom? The Coasts of Pearl, the Islands
of Spices, the Rocks of Diamonds? In this Heavenly Kingdom is that which is
satisfying, unparalled Beauty, Rivers of Pleasure; and this for ever: Psalm.
16.11. At thy right hand are pleasures for evermore: Heavens eminency is its
permanency; and this Kingdom Gods Children shall enter into immediately after
Death: There is a sudden transition and passage from Death to Glory: 2 Cor.
5.9. Absent from the body, present with the Lord. Gods Children shall not stay
long for their Inheritance; it is but winking and they shall see God: How may
this comfort Gods Children, who perhaps are low in the World, your Father in
Heaven will settle a Kingdom upon you at death, such a Kingdom as eye has not
seen; he will give you a Crown, not of Gold but Glory; he will give you white
Robes lined with Immortality. It is your Fathers good pleasure to give you a
kingdom.

19. If God be our Father it is Comfort: 1. In case of loss of Relations: Have
thou lost a Father, yet if thou art a Believer thou art no Orphan, thou have an
Heavenly Father, a Father that never dies, 1 Timothy 6.16. Who only has
immortality. 2. It is comfort in case of Death: God is thy Father, and at Death
thou art going to thy Father: Well might Paul say, Death is yours, 1 Cor. 3.22.
it is your friend that will carry you home to your Father. How glad are
Children when they are going home? This was Christ's comfort at Death, he was
going to his Father; Ioh. 16.28. I leave the world and go to the Father; and
John 20.17. I ascend to my Father. If God be our Father we may with comfort at
the day of death resign our Souls into his hands. So did Christ; Luke 23.46.
Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit. If a Child has any Jewel, he will
in time of danger put it into his Fathers hands, where he thinks it will be
kept most safe: Our Soul is our richest Jewel; we may at Death resign our Souls
into Gods hands, where they will be safer than in our own keeping; Father into
thy hands I commend my Spirit: What a comfort is this, Death carries a Believer
to his Fathers house, where are delights unspeakable and full of glory. How
glad was Old Jacob when he saw the Wagons and Chariots to carry him to his Son
Joseph; the Text says, His Spirit revived; Genesis 45.27. Death is a triumphant
Chariot to carry every Child of God to his Fathers Mansion house.

20. If God be our Father, he will not disinherit his Children; God may for a
time desert them, but not disinherit them: The Sons of Kings have been
sometimes disinherited by the cruelty of Usurpers; as Alexander the Great his
Son was put by his just Right, by the violence and ambition of his Fathers
Captains; but what Power on Earth shall hinder the Heirs of the Promise from
their Inheritance? Men cannot, and God will not cut off the entail. The
Arminians hold falling away from Grace, and so a Child of God may be defeated
of his Inheritance; but I shall show you that Gods Children can never be
degraded or disinherited, their Heavenly Father will not cast them off from
being Children. 1. It is evident Gods Children cannot be finally disinherited
by virtue of the Eternal Decree of Heaven. Gods Decree is the very Pillar and
Basis on which the Saints perseverance depends; Gods Decree ties the knot of
Adoption so fast, that neither Sin, Death or Hell, can break it asunder; Romans
8.30. Whom he did predestinate them he also called, etc. Predestination is
nothing else but Gods decreeing a certain number to be Heirs of Glory, on whom
he will settle the Crown; whom he predestinates he glorifies; what shall hinder
Gods electing Love, or make his Decree null and void? 2. Besides Gods Decree,
he has engaged himself by Promise, that the Heirs of Heaven shall never be put
by their Inheritance. Gods Promises are not like blanks in a Lottery, but as a
sealed Deed which cannot be reversed: The Promises are the Saints Royal
Charter; and this is one Promise that their Heavenly Father will not disinherit
them; Ier. 32.40. I will make an everlasting covenant with them that I will not
turn away from them, but I will put my fear in their hearts that they shall not
depart from me. Gods Fidelity, which is the richest Pearl of his Crown, is
engaged in this Promise for his Childrens perseverance; I will not turn away
from them. A Child of God cannot fall away while he is held fast in these two
Arms of God, his Love and his Faithfulness. 3. Jesus Christ undertakes that
all Gods Children by Adoption shall be preserved in a state of Grace till they
inherit Glory: As the Heathens feigned of Atlas that he did bear up the Heavens
from falling; Jesus Christ is that blessed Atlas that bears up the Saints from
falling away.

Quest. How does Christ preserve the Saints Graces till they come to Heaven?

Resp. 1. Influxu Spiritus. Christ carries on Grace in the Souls of the Elect
by the influence and cooperation of his Spirit. Christ does Spiritu
continually excite and quicken Grace in the Godly; his Spirit does (...) blow
up the sparks of Grace into an holy flame. Spiritus est Vicarius Christi; The
Spirit is Christ's Vicar on Earth, Tertull.
his Proxy, his Executor to see that all that Christ has purchased for the
Saints be made good: Christ has obtained an Inheritance incorruptible for
them, 1 Pet. 1.4. and the Spirit of Christ is his Executor to see that this
Inheritance be settled upon them.

2. Christ carries on Grace perseveringly in the Souls of the Elect, vi
orationis, by the prevalency of his intercession; Heb. 7.25. He ever lives to
make intercession for them. Christ prays that every Saint may hold out in
Grace till he comes to Heaven. Can the Children of such Prayers perish? If the
Heirs of Heaven should be disinherited, and fall short of Glory, then Gods
Decree must be reversed, his Promise broken, Christ's Prayer frustrated, which
were Blasphemy to imagine. 4. That Gods Children cannot be disinherited or put
by their Right to the Crown of Heaven, is evident from their Mystical Union
with Christ. Believers are incorporated into Christ, they are knit to Christ as
the Members to the Head, by the Nerves and Ligaments of Faith, so that they
cannot be broken off; Ephesians. 1.22, 23. The Church which is his Body. What was
once said of Christ's Natural Body, is as true of his Mystical; A bone of it
shall not be broken. As it is impossible to sever the leaven and the dough when
they are once mingled and kneaded together; so it is impossible when Christ and
Believers are once united, that they should ever by the power of Death or Hell
be separated. Christ and his Spiritual Members make one Christ; now is it
possible that any part of Christ should perish? How can Christ want any Member
of his Body Mystical, and be perfect? Every Member is an Ornament to the Body,
and adds to the honor of it: How can Christ part with any Mystical Member, and
not part with some of his Glory too? So that by all this it is evident that
Gods Children must needs persevere in Grace and cannot be disinherited. If they
could be disinherited then the Scripture could not be fulfilled, which tells us
of Glorious Rewards for the Heirs of Promise; Psalm. 58.11. Doubtless there is a
reward for the righteous. Now if Gods Adopted Children should fall finally from
Grace, and miss of Heaven, what Reward were there for the Righteous? And Moses
did indiscreetly to look to the recompense of reward, and so there would be a
door opened to despair.

Object. This Doctrine of Gods Children persevering, and having the Heavenly
Inheritance settled on them, may cause carnal security, and make them less
circumspect in their walking?

Resp. Corrupt Nature may as the Spider, suck poison from this Flower, but a
sober Christian who has felt the efficacy of Grace upon his Heart, dares not
abuse this Doctrine: He knows perseverance is attained in the use of means,
therefore he walks holily, that so in the use of means he may arrive at
perseverance. St. Paul knew that he should not be disinherited, and that
nothing could separate him from the love of Christ, but who more holy and
watchful than he; 1 Cor. 9.27. I keep under my Body, and Phil. 3.14. I press
toward the mark. Gods Children have that holy fear in them as keeps them from
security and wantonness; they believe the Promise, therefore they rejoice in
hope; they fear their hearts, therefore they watch and pray. Thus you see what
strong consolation there is for all the Heirs of the Promise. Such as have God
for their Father are the happyest persons on Earth, they are in such a
condition that nothing can hurt them; they have their Fathers Blessing, all
things conspire for their good; they have a Kingdom settled on them, and the
entail can never be cut off. How may Gods Children be comforted in all
conditions, let the times be what they will; their Father is in Heaven, he
rules all: If troubles arise they shall but carry Gods Children so much the
sooner to their Father. The more violently the Wind beats against the sails of
a Ship, the sooner the Ship is brought to the Haven; and the more fiercely Gods
Children are assaulted, the sooner they come to their Fathers house. 1 Thessalonians.
4.18. Wherefore comfort one another with these words.

USE IV. Of Exhortation. Let us behave and carry our selves as the Children of
such a Father. In several particulars.

1. Let us depend upon our Heavenly Father in all our straits and exigencies;
let us believe that he will provide for us. Children rely upon their Parents
for the supply of wants: If we trust God for Salvation shall we not trust him
for a Livelihood? There is a lawful provident care to be used, but beware of a
distrustful care; Luke 12.24. Consider the ravens, they neither sow nor reap,
and God seedeth them. Does God feed the Birds of the Air, and will he not feed
his Children? ver. 27. Consider the lilies how they grow, they spin not, yet
Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these. Does God cloth the
Lilies, and will he not cloth his Lambs? Even the wicked taste of Gods bounty;
Psalm. 73.7. Their eyes stand out with fatness. Does God feed his Slaves, and
will not he feed his Family? Gods Children may not have so liberal a share in
the things of this life, but little meal in the barrel; they may be drawn low,
but not drawn dry; they shall have so much as God sees is good for them; Psalm.
34.10. They that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing. If God gives them
not ad voluntatem, Aug.
he will ad sanitatem; if he gives them not always what they crave, he will
give them what they need; if he gives them not a feast, he will give them a
viaticum a bait by the way: Let Gods Children therefore depend upon Gods
Fatherly Providence; give not way to distrustful thoughts, distracting cares,
or indirect means; God can provide for you without your Sins, 1 Pet. 5.7.
Casting all your care upon him, for he cares for you: An Earthly Parent may
have affection for his Child, and would provide for him, but sometimes he is
not able; but God can create a supply for his Children; yea, he has promised a
supply, Psalm. 37.3. Verily thou shall be fed. Will God give his Children
Heaven, and will he not give them enough to bear their charges thither? Will he
give them a Kingdom and deny them Daily bread? O depend upon your Heavenly
Father, he has said he will never leave you, nor forsake you; Heb. 13.5.

2. If God be our Father let us imitate him: The Child does not only bear his
Fathers Image, but does imitate him in his Speech, Gesture, Behavior; if God
be our Father let us imitate him; (...), Gr. Nyssen. Ephesians. 5.1. Be followers of
God as dear children. 1. Imitate God in forgiving injuries; Isa. 44.22. I have
blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions. As the Sun scatters not only
thin mists, but thick clouds, so God pardons great offenses; imitate God in
this, Ephesians. 4.32. Forgiving one another. Cranmar was a Man of a forgiving
Spirit, he did bury injuries, and requite good for evil: He who has God for
his Father, has God for his Pattern. 2. Imitate God in works of Mercy: He
loses the prisoners; Psalm. 146.7. He opens his hand, and satisfies the
desire of every living thing; Psalm. 145.16. He drops his sweet Dew as well upon
the Thistle as the Rose; imitate God in Works of Mercy, relieve the wants of
others, be rich in good works; Luke 6.36. Be merciful as your Father also is
merciful. Be not so hard-hearted as to shut the poor out of the lines of
communication. Dives denied Lazarus a crumb of Bread, and Dives was denied a
drop of Water.

3. If God be our Father let us submit patiently to his Will; if he lay his
strokes on us, they are the corrections of a Father, not the punishments of a
Judge: This made Christ so patient, John 18.11. Shall not I drink the cup which
my Father has given me? He sees we need affliction, 1 Pet. 1.6. he appoints it
as a dyet-drink to purge and sanctify us, Isa. 27.9. therefore dispute not but
submit; Heb. 12.9. We had fathers of the flesh which corrected us, and we gave
them reverence: They might correct out of an humor, but God does it (...) for
our profit; Heb. 12.10. Therefore say as Eli, 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord, let
him do what seems him good. What gets the Child by struggling but more blows?
What got Israel by their murmuring and rebelling, but a longer and more tedious
march, and at last their Carcases fell in the Wilderness.

4. If God be our Father let this cause in us a Childlike Reverence; Mal. 1.6.
If I be a Father where is my honor? This is a part of the honor we give to
God when we reverence and adore him. If you have not always a Childlike
Confidence, yet always preserve a Childlike Reverence; and how ready are we to
run into extremes, either to despond or grow wanton. Because God is a Father
therefore do not think you may be secure, and take liberty to sin; if you do,
God may carry it so as if he were no Father, he may throw Hell into your
Conscience. When David presumed upon Gods Paternal Affection, and began to wax
wanton under Mercy, God made him pay dear for it, he withdrew the sense of his
Love; and though he had the heart of a Father, yet he had the look of an Enemy.
David prayed, Cause ^e to hear the voice of joy: Psalm. 51.8. He lay several
months in desertion, and it is thought he never recovered his full joy to the
day of his death. Oh keep alive holy fear; with a Childlike confidence preserve
an humble reverence: The Lord is a Father, therefore love to serve him; he is
the Mighty God, therefore fear to offend him.

5. If God be our Father let us walk obedientially; 1 Pet. 1.14. (...), As
obedient Children. When God bids you be humble and self-denying, deny yours,
part with your bosom sin, be sober in your attire, savoury in your speeches,
grave in your deportment, obey your Fathers voice: Open to God as the Flower
opens to the Sun: As you expect your Fathers Blessing obey him in whatever he
commands, First and Second Table Duties. A Lutenist that he may make sweet
Music, touches upon every String of the Lute: The Ten Commandments are like a
ten stringed Instrument, touch upon every String, obey every Command, or you
cannot make sweet Melody in Religion. Obey your Heavenly Father, though he
commands things contrary to Flesh and blood. 1. When he commands to mortify
Sin; that Sin which has been dear to you: Pluck out this right eye, that you
may see the better to go to Heaven. 2. When he commands you to suffer for him,
be ready to obey, Acts 21.13. every good Christian has a Spirit of Martyrdom
in him, and is ready rather to suffer for the Truth, than the Truth should
suffer. Luther said, he had rather be a Martyr than a Monarch. Peter was
Crucified with his Head downwards, as Eusebius. Ignatius called his Chains his
Spiritual Pearls, and did wear his Fetters as a Bracelet of Diamonds. This is
to carry it as Gods Children when we obey his voice, and count not our lives
dear so that we may show our love to our Heavenly Father; Rev. 12.11. They
loved not their lives to the death.

6. If God be your Father, show it by your cheerful looks that you are the
Children of such a Father. Too much drooping and despondency disparageth the
Relation you stand in to God. What though you meet with hard usage in the
World, you are now in a strange Land, far from home, it will be shortly better
with you when you are in your own Country, and your Father has you in his
Arms: Does not the Heir rejoice in hope? Shall the Sons of a King walk
dejected? 2 Samuel 13.4. Why art thou being the Kings Son lean? Is God an unkind
Father, are his Commands grievous? Has he no Land to give to his Heirs? Why
then do Gods Children walk so sad? Never had Children such Privileges as they
who are of the Seed-Royal of Heaven, and have God for their Father; they should
rejoice therefore who are within a few hours to be crowned with Glory.

7. If God be our Father, let us honor him by walking very holily; 1 Pet.
1.16. Be ye holy for I am holy. A young Prince asking a Philosopher how he
should behave himself, the Philosopher said, Memento te filium esse Regis,
Remember thou art a Kings Son; do nothing but what becomes the Son of a King:
So remember you are the adopted Sons and Daughters of the high God, do nothing
unworthy of such a Relation. A debauched Child is the disgrace of his Father.
Is this thy Sons Coat said they to Jacob, when they brought it home dipped in
blood? Genesis 37.32. so when we see a person defiled with Malice, Passion,
Drunkenness, we may say, is this the Coat of Gods adopted Son? Does he look as
an Heir of Glory? It Is a blaspheming the Name of God to call him Father, yet
live in Sin. Such as profess God is their Father, yet live unholily, they will
slander and defraud, these are as bad to God as Heathens: Amos 9.7. Are ye not
as children of the Ethiopians to me, O children of Israel, says the Lord? The
Ethiopians were uncircumcised, a base ill-bred People; when Israel grew wicked
they were no better to God than Ethiopians. Loose scandalous livers under the
Gospel are no better in Gods esteem than Pagans and Americans; nay, they shall
have an hotter place in Hell. O let all who profess God to be their Father,
honor him by their unspotted lives. Scipio abhorred the embraces of an Harlot
because he was the General of an Army. Abstain from all Sin because you are
born of God, and have God for your Father; 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. Abstain from all
appearance of evil* 'Twas a saying of Augustus, An Emperor should not only be
free from Crimes, but from the suspicion of them; by an holy Life you would
bring Glory to your Heavenly Father, and cause others to become his Children:
Est pellax virtutis odor --. Causinus in his Hieroglyphics, speaks of a Dove,
whose Wings being perfumed with sweet Ointments did draw the other Doves after
her: The holy Lives of Gods Children is a sweet perfume to draw others to
Religion, and make them to be of the Family of God. Justin Martyr says, that
which converted him to Christianity was the beholding the blameless Lives of
the Christians.

8. If God be our Father, let us love all that are his Children; Psalm. 133.1.
How pleasant is it for brethren to dwell together in unity. It Is compared to
Ointment, ver. 2. for the sweet fragrancy of it: 1 Pet. 2.17. Love the
brotherhood. Idem est motus animae in imaginem and rem; The Saints are the
walking pictures of God; if God be our Father we love to see his picture of
Holiness in Believers; we pity them for their Infirmities, but love them for
their Graces; we prize their Company above others; Psalm. 119.63. it may justly
be suspected that God is not their Father, who love not Gods Children; though
they retain the Communion of Saints in their Creed, yet they banish the
Communion of Saints out of their Company.

9. If God be our Father let us show Heavenly mindedness: They who are born of
God do (...), set their Affections on things that are above; Col. 3.2. O ye
Children of the high God do not disgrace your high birth by sordid
Covetousness. What a Son of God, and a slave to the World? What spring from
Heaven, and buried in the Earth. For a Christian who pretends to derive his
pedigree from Heaven, yet wholly to mind Earthly things, is to debase himself,
as if a King should leave his Throne to follow the Plough; Ier. 45.5. Seek
thou great things for thy self? As if the Lord had said, what thou Baruck, thou
who art born of God, akin to Angels, and by thy Office a Levite, do thou
debase thy self, and spot the silver wings of thy Grace, by beliming them with
earth? Seek thou great things, seek them not. The Earth choaks the Fire:
Earthliness choaks the Fire of good Affections.

10. Vlt. If God be our Father let us own our Heavenly Father in the worst
times, stand up in his cause, defend his Truths. Athanasius owned God when most
of the World turned Arrians: If Sufferings come do not deny God: He is a bad
Son who denies his Father: Such as are ashamed of God in times of danger, God
will be ashamed to own them for his Children; Mark 8.38. Whosoever therefore
shall be ashamed of me and my words in this adulterous generation, of him also
shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father, with
his holy Angels. So I have done with the First Part of the Preface, Our Father.

II. The Second Part of the Preface, (which I shall but briefly touch on) is, [
which art in Heaven.] (...). God is said to be in Heaven, not that he is so
included there that he is no where else, for the Heaven of Heavens cannot
contain him, ^ Kings 8.27. but the meaning is, God is chiefly resident in the
Empyrean Heaven, which the Apostle calls the third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12.2. there
God does most give forth his Glory to his Saints and Angels.

Quest. What may we learn from this, that God is in Heaven?

Answ. 1. Hence we learn that we are to raise our Minds in Prayer above the
Earth. God is no where to be spoken with but in Heaven. God never denied that
Soul his suit who went as far as Heaven to ask it.

2. We learn from Gods being in Heaven his Sovereign Power. Hoc vocabulo
intelligitur omnia subesse ejus imperio. Calvin. Psalm. 115.3. Our God is in the
heavens, he has done whatever he pleased. God being in Heaven governs the
Universe, and orders all Occurrences here below for the good of his Children:
When the Saints are in straits and dangers, and see no way of relief, he can
send from Heaven and help them; Psalm. 57.3. He shall send from heaven and save
me.

3. We learn Gods Glory and Majesty: He is in Heaven, therefore he is covered
with light, Psalm. 104.2. clothed with honor, Psalm. 104.1. and is as far above
all Worldly Princes as Heaven is above Earth.

4. We learn from Gods being in Heaven, his Omnisciency: All things are naked
and unmasked to his eye; Heb. 4.13. Men plot and contrive against the Church,
but God is in Heaven, and they do nothing but what our Father sees. If a Man
were on the top of an high Tower or Theater, he might thence see all the People
below: God is in Heaven as in an Tower or Theater, and he sees all the
transactions of Men. The Wicked make wounds in the backs of the Righteous, and
then pour in Vinegar; God writes down their cruelty; Exodus 3.7. I have seen the
afflictions of my people. God is in Heaven, and he can thunder out of Heaven
upon his enemies: Psalm. 18.13. The Lord thundered in the heavens; yea, he sent
out arrows and scattered them, and he shot out lightnings and discomfited them.

5. We learn from Gods being in Heaven, Comfort; for the Children of God when
they pray to their Father, the way to Heaven cannot be blocked up: One may have
a Father living in Foreign parts, but the way both the Sea and by Land may be
so blocked up that there is no coming to him; but thou Saint of God, when thou
prayest to thy Father he is in Heaven, and though thou art never so confined,
thou may have access to him. A Prison cannot keep thee from thy God; the way
to Heaven can never be blocked up.

So I have done with the word Father, I shall speak next of the Pronoun (...)
Our, Father. In the first there is an Appellation, Father; in the second an
Appropriation, Our Father. Christ by this word (Our) would teach us thus much,
That in all our Prayers to God we should act Faith. Our Father; Father, denotes
Reverence, Our Father, denotes Faith. In all our Prayers to God we should
exercise Faith, Our Father. Faith is that which baptizeth Prayer, and gives it
a name, it is called the Prayer of Faith, Iam. 5.15. without Faith it is
speaking not praying. Faith is the breath of Prayer. Prayer is dead unless
Faith breathe in it. Faith is a necessary requisite in Prayer. The Oil of the
Sanctuary was made up of several sweet Spices, pure Myrrh, Cassia, Cinnamon,
Exodus 30.23. Faith is the chief spice or ingredient into Prayer, which makes it
go up to the Lord as sweet Incense, Iam. 1.6. Let him ask in faith. Mat. 21.22.
Whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive. Invoco te
Domine quanquam languida and imbecilla fide, tamen fide; Lord, said Cruciger, I
pray, though with a weak Faith, yet with Faith. Prayer is the Gun we shoot
with, Fervency is the Fire that discharges it, and Faith is the Bullet which
pierces the Throne of Grace; Prayer is the Key of Heaven, Faith is the Hand
that turns it; Pray in faith, Our Father. Faith must take Prayer by the hand,
or there is no coming nigh to God; Prayer without Faith is unsuccessful. If a
poor Handicrafts-man, that lives by his labor, has spoiled his tools that he
cannot work, how shall he subsist? Prayer is the tool we work with, which
procures all good for us, but unbelief spoils and blunts our Prayers, and then
we can get no Blessing from God: A Prayer that is Faithless is Fruitless. As
Joseph said, You shall not see my face unless you bring your brother Benjamin
with you; Genesis 43.3. so Prayer cannot see Gods face, unless it bring its
brother Faith with it. What is said of Israel, They could not enter in because
of unbelief, Heb. 3.19. is as true of Prayer, it cannot enter into Heaven
because of unbelief. This makes Prayer often suffer shipwreck, because it
dasheth upon the rock of Unbelief: O sprinkle Faith in Prayer. We must say, Our
Father.

Quest. 1. What does praying in Faith imply?

Resp. Praying in Faith implies the having of Faith; the act implies the habit:
To walk implies a principle of Life, so to pray in Faith implies an habit of
Grace. None can pray in Faith but Believers.

Quest. 2. What is it to pray in Faith?

Answ. 1. To pray in Faith is to pray for that which God has promised; where
there is no promise we cannot pray in Faith.

2. To pray in Faith is to pray in Christ's meritorious Name; John 14.13.
Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name that will I do. To pray in Christ's Name is
to pray in the hope and confidence of Christ's Merit. When we present Christ to
God in Prayer, when we carry the Lamb slain in our Arms, when we say Lord, we
are Sinners, but here is our Surety, for Christ's sake be propitious, this is
coming to God in Christ's Name, and this is to pray in Faith.

3. To pray in Faith is in Prayer to fix our Faith on Gods faithfulness,
believing that he does hear and will help; this is a taking hold of God; Isa.
64.7. By Prayer we draw nigh to God, by Faith we take hold of him. 2 Chronicles.
13.14. The children of Judah cried unto the Lord; and this was the crying of
Faith; ver. 18. They prevailed because they relied on the Lord God of their
Fathers: Making supplication to God, and staying the Soul on God, is praying in
Faith: To pray and not rely on God for the granting our Petitions, irrisio Dei
est, says Pelican, it is to abuse and put a scorn upon God. By praying we seem
to honor God, by not believing we affront him. In Prayer we say, Almighty,
Merciful Father, by not believing, we blot out all his Titles again.

Quest. 3. How may we know that we do truly pray in Faith? We may say Our
Father, and think we pray in Faith, when it is in presumption, how therefore
may we know that we do indeed pray in Faith?

Answ. 1. When our Faith in Prayer is humble: A presumptuous person hopes to be
heard in Prayer for some inherent worthiness in himself; he is so qualified,
and has done God good service, therefore he is confident God will hear his
Prayer: See an instance, Luke 18.11, 12. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus,
God I thank thee that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust: I fast
twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I possess: This was a presumptuous
Prayer; but a sincere heart does as well act Humility in Prayer as Faith, Luke
18.13. The Publican standing afar off would not lift up so much as his eyes to
heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner. God
be merciful, there was Faith, to me a sinner, there was Humility, and a sense
of unworthiness.

2. We may know we pray in Faith, when though we have not the present thing we
pray for, yet we believe God will grant, therefore we will stay his leisure. A
Christian having a command to pray, and a promise, he is resolved to follow God
with Prayer and not give over; as Peter he knocked, yet the door was not
opened, but he continued knocking, and at last it was opened, Acts 12.16. so a
Christian prays and prays, but has no answer, but he will continue knocking
at Heaven door, knowing an answer will come; Psalm. 86.7. Thou will answer me:
Here is one that prays in Faith. Christ says, Pray and faint not; Luke 18.1.
A Believer at Christ's word lets down the net of Prayer, and though he catch
nothing, he will cast the net of Prayer again, believing that Mercy will come.
Patience in Prayer is nothing but Faith spun out.

USE I. It reproves them that pray in Formality, not in Faith: They question
whether God hears, or will grant; Iam. 4.3. Ye ask and receive not because ye
ask amiss. He does not say ye ask that which is unlawful, but ye ask amiss;
when Men pray and believe not, they ask amiss, and therefore they receive not.
Unbelief clips the wings of Prayer that it will not fly to the Throne of Grace;
the rubbish of unbelief stops the current of Prayer.

USE II. Of Exhortation. Let us set Faith a work in Prayer, [ Our Father]: The
Husbandman sowes in hope; Prayer is the seed we sow; when the hand of Faith
scatters this seed, it brings forth a fruitful crop of Blessing. Prayer is the
ship we send out to Heaven; when Faith makes an adventure in this ship, it
brings home large returns of Mercy. O pray in Faith, say Our Father; and that
we may act Faith in Prayer, consider,

Calvin.
1. Gods readiness to hear Prayer, Deus paratus ad vota exaudienda, did God
forbid all addresses to him, it would put a damp upon the trade of Prayer, but
Gods ear is open to Prayer. It is one of the Names by which God is known; Psalm.
65.2. O thou that hear prayer. The Aediles among the Romans had their doors
always standing open, that all who had petitions might have free access to
them: God is both ready to hear and grant Prayer: This may encourage Faith in
Prayer; and whereas some may say they have prayed but have had no answer. 1.
God may hear Prayer though he does not presently answer; we write a Letter to a
Friend, he may have received it, though we have yet had no answer of it.
Perhaps thou prayest for the light of Gods face, God may lend thee an ear,
though he does not show thee his face. 2. God may give an answer to Prayer when
we do not perceive it. His giving an heart to pray, and inflaming the
affections in Prayer is an answer of Prayer; Psalm. 138.3. In the day that I
cried thou answeredst me, and strengthenedst me with strength in my soul:
David's inward strength was an answer of Prayer, therefore let Gods readiness to
hear Prayer encourage Faith in Prayer.

2. That we may act Faith in Prayer, consider, we do not pray alone, Christ
prays over our Prayers again: Christ's Prayer is the ground why our Prayer is
heard. Christ takes the dross out of our Prayer, and presents nothing to his
Father but pure Gold. Christ mingles his sweet odours with the Prayers of the
Saints: Rev. 5.8. Think of the dignity of his Person, he is God; and the
sweetness of his Relation, he is a Son. O what encouragement is here to pray in
Faith. Our Prayers are put into the hand of a Mediator. Christ's Prayer is
mighty and powerful.

3. We pray to God for nothing but what is pleasing to him, and he has a mind
to grant: If a Son ask nothing but what his Father is willing to bestow, this
may make him go to him with confidence; when we pray to God for holy hearts,
there is nothing more pleasing to him; 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. This is the will of God
even your sanctification. We pray that God would give us an heart to love him,
and there is nothing he more desires than our Love. How may this make us pray in
Faith, when we pray for nothing but what is acceptable to God, and which he
delights to bestow.

4. To encourage Faith in Prayer, consider the many sweet Promises that God
has made to Prayer. The Cork keeps the Net from sinking; the Promises are the
Cork to keep Faith from sinking in Prayer. God has bound himself to us by his
Promises. The Bible is bespangled with Promises made to Prayer, Isa. 30.19. He
will be very gracious to thee at the voice of thy cry. The Lord is rich unto
all that call upon him, Romans 10.12. Ier. 29.13. Then shall ye find me when you
search for me with all your heart. Psalm. 145.19. He will fulfill the desire of
them that fear him. The Tyrians tied their God Hercules with a Golden Chain
that he should not remove; God has tied himself fast to us by his Promises*
how should these animate and spirit Faith in Prayer; Faith gets strength in
Prayer by sucking from the breast of a Promise.

5. That we may act Faith in Prayer, consider Jesus Christ has purchased that
which we pray for: We may think the things which we ask in Prayer too great for
us to obtain, but they are not too great for Christ to purchase: We pray for
pardon, Christ has purchased it in his Blood: We pray for the Spirit to
animate and inspire us, the sending down of the Holy Ghost into our hearts is
the fruit of Christ's death, John 16. This may put life into our Prayers, and
make us pray in Faith, because the things we ask in Prayer, though they are
more than we deserve, yet not more than Christ has purchased for us.

6. To make us pray in Faith, consider there is such a bountifulness in God,
that he often excells the prayers of his people; he gives them more than they
ask; as Hannah asked a Son, and God gave her not only a Son, but a Prophet;
Solomon asked Wisdom, and God gave him not only Wisdom, but Riches and Honor
besides; Jacob prayed that God would but give him Food and Raiment, and the
Lord increased his Pilgrims staff into two ^ands; Genesis 32.10. God is often better
to us than our Prayers, as when Gehazi asked but one Talent, Naaman would needs
force two upon him, 2 Kings 5.23. We ask one Talent of Mercy, and God gives two
Talents The Woman of Canaan asked but a crumb, namely, to have the life of her
Child, and Christ gave her more, he sent her home with the life of her Soul.

7. The great success the Prayer of Faith has found; like Ionathans bow it
has not returned empty. Vocula pater dicta in cord, says Luther: This little
word Father, pronounced in Faith, has overcome God; Genesis 32.11. Deliver me I
pray thee; and this was mixed with Faith in the promise, ver. 12. Thou sai^st I
will surely do thee good, and this Prayer had power with God and prevailed,
Hos. 12.4. the Prayer of Faith has opened prison doors, stopped the chariot of
the Sun, locked and unlocked Heaven, Iam. 5.17 the Prayer of Faith has
strangled the plots of enemies in the birth, it has routed their forces. Moses
Prayer against Amalek did more than Ioshuas sword, and may not this hearten and
corroborate Faith in Prayer.

8. If all this will not prevail, consider how heartless and comfortless it is
to pray, and not in Faith: The heart misgives secretly, God does not hear, nor
will he grant. Faithless praying must needs be comfortless, for there is no
promise made to unbelieving Prayer. It Is sad sailing where there is no
anchoring, and sad praying where there is no promise to anchor upon: Iam. 1.7.
The Disciples toiled all night and caught nothing; the Unbeliever toyls in
Prayer, and catches nothing; he receives not any Spiritual Blessings, pardon
of Sin or Grace: As for the Temporal Mercies the Unbeliever has, he cannot
look upon them as the fruit of Prayer, but as the over-flowings and spillings
of Gods bounty: Oh therefore labor to exert and put forth Faith in Prayer.

Object. But there is so much sin cleaves to my Prayer, that I fear it is not
the Prayer of Faith, and God will not hear it.

Resp. If thou mournest for this, it hinders not but that thy Prayer may be in
Faith, and God may hear it? Weakness in Prayer shall not make void the Saints
Prayers; Psalm. 31.22. I said in my have I am cut off. There was much unbelief
in this Prayer. I said in my have, (...), in my trembling. David's Faith did
tremble and faint, yet God heard his prayer. The Saints passions do not hinder
the Saints prayers, Iam. 5.17. therefore be not discouraged, though sin will
cleave to thy holy offering, yet these two things may comfort, thou may pray
with Faith though with weakness, and God sees the sincerity, and will pass by
the infirmity.

Quest. How shall we do to pray in Faith?

Answ. Implore the Spirit of God: We cannot say Our Father but by the Holy
Ghost. Gods Spirit helps us not only to pray with sighs and groans but with
Faith The Spirit carries us to God, not only as to a Creator but a Father; Gal.
4.6. He has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba
Father. Crying, there the Spirit causes us to pray with fervency; Abba Father,
there the Spirit helps us to pray with Faith: Prayer is the key of Heaven; the
Spirit helps Faith to turn this key, and then it unlocks Heaven.

MATTHEW. vi.9. Hallowed be thy Name.


HAving spoken of the Introduction to the Lords Prayer, After this manner pray
ye; and the Preface, Our Father which art in Heaven: I come now Thirdly to the
Prayer it self, which consists of seven Petitions. A short body of Divinity is
contained in them. I begin with the first Petition.

I. Hallowed be thy Name. In the Latin it is sanctificetur nomen tuum,
sanctified be thy Name. In this Petition, Hallowed be thy Name, we pray, that
Gods Name may shine forth gloriously, and that it may be honored and
sanctified by us in the whole course and tenor of our Lives. It was the Angels
song, Glory be to God in the highest; that i^, let his name be glorified and
hallowed. This Petition, Hallowed be thy Name, is set in the fore front, to
show, that the hallowing of Gods Name is to be preferred before all other
things; 1. It is to be preferred before Life; we pray, Hallowed be thy Name,
before we pray, Give us this day our daily bread. 2. It is to be preferred
before Salvation, Romans 9.1. Gods Glory is more worth than the Salvation of all
Men's Souls: As Christ said of love, Matthew. 22.37. This is the first and great
Commandment; so I may say of this Petition, Hallowed be thy Name, it is the
first and great Petition; it contains the most weighty thing in Religion, Gods
Glory. When some of the other Petitions shall be useless and out of date, we
shall not need pray in Heaven, Give us our daily bread, because there shall be
no hunger; nor, Forgive us our trespasses, because there shall be no sin; nor,
Lead us not into temptation, because the Old Serpent is not there to tempt: Yet
the hallowing of Gods Name shall be in great use and request in Heaven; we
shall be ever singing Hallelujahs, which is nothing else but the hallowing of
Gods Name. Every Person in the Blessed Trinity, God the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, must have this honor, to be Hallowed, their Glory being equal, and
their Majesty coeternal. Hallowed be thy Name: To admire Gods Name is not
enough; we may admire a Conqueror; but when we say, Hallowed be thy Name, we
set Gods Name above every Name, and not only admire him but adore him, and this
is proper only to the Deity. For the further explication I shall propound Three
Questions.

1. What is meant by Gods Name? 2. What is meant by hallowing Gods Name? 3.
When may we be said to hallow or sanctify Gods Name?
Quest. 1. What is meant by Gods Name?

Resp. 1. By Gods Name is meant his Essence; Psalm. 20.1. The name of the God of
Jacob defend thee; that is, the God of Jacob defend thee.

2. By Gods Name is meant any thing by which God may be known; as a Man is
known by his Name; Gods Name is his Attributes, Wisdom, Power, Holiness,
Goodness, by these God is known as by his Name.

Quest. 2. What is meant by hallowing of Gods Name?

Resp. To hallow is a communi separare, to set apart a thing from the common
use to some sacred end. As the Vessels of the Sanctuary were said to be
hallowed; so, to hallow Gods Name, is to set it apart from all abuses, and to
use it holily and reverendly: In particular, Hallowing of Gods Name is to give
him high honor and veneration, and render his Name sacred. We can add nothing
to Gods Essential Glory, but we are said to honor and sanctify his Name, when
we lift him up in the World, and make him appear greater in the eyes of others.
When a Prince is crowned there is something added really to his Honor; but
when we go to crown God with our Triumphs and Hallelujahs, there is nothing
added to his Essential Glory. God cannot be greater than he is, only we may
make him appear greater in the eyes of others.

Quest. 3. When may we be said to hallow and sanctify Gods name?

Answ. 1. When we profess his Name; our meeting in this holy assembly is an
honor done to Gods Name; this is good, but it is not enough. All that wear
Gods livery by profession are not true servants; there are some Professors
Christ will at the last day profess against; Matthew. 7.23. I will profess I
never knew you. Therefore to go a little further.

2. We hallow and sanctify Gods Name, when we have an high appretiation and
esteem of God; we set him highest in our thoughts. The Hebrew word to honor,
(...) signifies to esteem precious. We conceive of God in our minds as the most
super-excellent and infinite good; we apprehend in God a constellation of all
beauties and delights; we adore God in his Glorious Attributes, which are the
several beams by which his Divine Nature shines forth; we adore God in his
Works, which are bound up in three great Volumes, Creation, Redemption,
Providence; we hallow and sanctify Gods Name when we lift him highest in our
Souls; we esteem him (...), a super-eminent incomprehensible good.

3. We hallow and sanctify Gods Name when we trust in his Name; Psalm. 33.21.
We have trusted in his holy name. No way can we bring more revenues of Honor
to God, or make his Crown shine brighter than by confiding in him; Romans 4.20.
Abraham was strong in faith giving glory to God; there was an hallowing of Gods
Name: As unbelief stains Gods honor, and eclipseth his Name, 1 John 5.10. He
that believes not makes God a liar; so Faith does glorify and hallow Gods
Name. The Believer trusts his best Jewel in Gods hands, Psalm. 3.5. Into thy
hands I commit my Spirit: Faith in a Mediator does more honor and sanctify
Gods Name than Martyrdom, or the most sublime acts of Obedience.

4. We hallow and sanctify Gods Name when we never make mention of his name
but with the highest reverence; Gods Name is Sacred, and it must not be spoken
of but with veneration: The Scripture, when it speaks of God, gives him his
Titles of Honor; Genesis 14.20. Blessed be the most high God; Neh. 9.5. Blessed
be thy glorious name which is exalted above all praise. To speak vainly or
slightly of God is a profaning his Name, and is a taking his Name in vain. Let
his Name be Hallowed: By giving God his venerable Titles we do as it were hang
his Jewels on his Crown.

5. We hallow and sanctify Gods Name when we love his Name; Psalm. 5.11. Let
them that love thy name be joyful; and that Love which is honoring Gods Name
must be a special discriminating Love, the cream and flower of our Love; such a
Love as we give to none besides: As the Wife honors her Husband, by giving him
such a Love as she gives to none else, a Conjugal Love; so we hallow Gods Name
by giving him such a Love as we give to none else; a Love joined with Worship,
Psalm. 45.11. He is thy God and worship thou him.

6. We hallow and sanctify Gods Name when we give him an Holy and Spiritual
Worship. 1. We give him the same kind of Worship that he has appointed; Lev.
10.3. I will be sanctified of all that come nigh to me; that is, I will be
sanctified with that very Worship I have appointed. It is the purity of Worship
God loves better than the pomp. It is a dishonouring of Gods Name to bring any
thing into his Worship which he has not instituted; as if God were not wise
enough to appoint the manner how he will be served; Men will go to prescribe
him, and super-add their inventions: This God looks upon as offering strange
fire, and it is an high provocation. 2. We give God the same Heart devotion in
Worship as he has appointed, Romans 12.11. Fervent in Spirit serving the Lord.
The word for fervent, (...), is a Metaphor that alludes to Water, that seeths
and boyls over; so our Affections should boil over in holy Duties. To give God
outside Worship, and not the Devotion of the Heart, is instead of hallowing and
sanctifying him in an Ordinance, to abuse him; as if one call for Wine, and you
give him an empty Glass: It is to deal with God as Prometheus did with Jupiter,
who did eat the Flesh, and present Jupiter with nothing but Bones covered over
with Skin; then we hallow Gods name, and sanctify him in an Ordinance, when we
give him the vitals of Religion, an Heart flaming with Zeal.

7. We hallow and sanctify Gods Name when we hallow his day; Ier. 17.22.
Hallow ye the Sabbath day. Our Christian Sabbath which comes in the room of the
Jews Sabbath, is called (...), the Lords day; Rev. 1.10. This was anciently
called dies lucis, a day of light; wherein Christ the Sun of Righteousness
shines in an extraordinary manner: It is an honor done to God to hallow his
Sabbath. 1. We must rest on this day from all secular works: Ier. 17.21. Bear
no burden on the Sabbath day: As Joseph when he would speak with his Brethren
thrust out the Egyptians; so when we would have converse with God on this day,
we must thrust out all earthly employments. It is observable, Mary Magdalen
refused to anoint Christ's dead Body on the Sabbath Day; Luke 23.56. She had
before prepared her Ointment and Spices, but came not to the Sepulcher till the
Sabbath was past. She rested on that day from civil Work, though it were a
commendable and glorious Work, the anointing of Christ's dead Body. 2. We must
in a solemn manner devote our selves to God on this day: We must spend this
whole day with God. Some will hear the Word, but leave all their Religion at
Church, they do nothing at home, they do not pray or repeat the Word in their
houses, and so they rob God of a part of his day; it is to be bewailed to see
how Gods day is profaned. Let not Men think Gods Name is hallowed while his
Sabbath is broken.

8. We hallow and sanctify Gods Name when we ascribe the honor of all we do
to him: Psalm. 96.8. Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name. Herod
instead of hallowing Gods Name, stained the honor of his Name in assuming that
praise to himself which was due to God: Acts 12.23. We ought to take the honor
from our selves and give it to God: 1 Cor. 15.10. I labored more than they
all: One would think this had savoured of pride, but the Apostle pulls the
Crown from his own head, and sets it upon the head of Free Grace; Yet not I but
the grace of God which was with me. If a Christian has any assistance in Duty,
or victory over Temptation, he rears up a Pillar and writes upon it, Hucusque
adjuvabit Deus, -- Hitherto the Lord has helped me. John Baptist transferred
all the honor from himself to Christ; he was content to be eclipsed that
Christ might shine the more: John 1.15. He that comes after me is preferred
before me. I am but the Herald, the voice of one crying, he is the Prince; I
am but a lesser Star, he is the Sun; I baptize only with Water, he with the
Holy Ghost: This i^ an hallowing Gods Name when we translate all the honor
from our selves to God; Psalm. 115.1. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto
thy name give glory. The King of Sweden wrought that Motto on the Battle at
Lypswich. Ista a Domino facta sunt, The Lord has wrought this Victory for us.

9. We hallow and sanctify Gods Name by obeying him: How does a Son more
honor his Father than by Obedience; Psalm. 40.8. I delight to do thy will, O my
God. (...). Chrysostom. The Wise Men showed honor to Christ, not only by bowing the
knee to him, but by presenting him with Gold and Myrrh, Matthew. 2.11. we hallow
Gods name not only by lifting up our eyes and hands to Heaven, and bowing the
knee in Prayer, but by presenting God with golden Obedience. As the Factor
trades for the Merchant, so we trade for God, and lay out our strength in his
Service. 'Twas a saying of Reverend Doctor Jewel, I have spent and exhausted
my self in the labors of my holy Calling; To obey is better than sacrifice.
The Cherubims representing the Angels, are set forth with their Wings
displayed, to show how ready they are to do service to God. To obey is
Angelical; to pretend honor to Gods name, yet not to obey is but a devout
complement. Abraham honored God by Obedience; he was ready to sacrifice his
Son, though the Son of his Old Age, and a Son of the Promise, Genesis 22.16. By my
self have I sworn says the Lord, because thou have done this thing, and have
not withheld thy Son, thy only Son; that in blessing I will bless thee.

10. We hallow and sanctify Gods Name when we lift up Gods name in our
praises. God is said to sanctify, and Man is said to sanctify. God sanctifies
us by giving us Grace, and we sanctify him by giving him Praise. What were our
Tongues given us for, but to be Organs of Gods Praise; Psalm. 71.8. Let my mouth
be filled with thy praise, and with thy honor all the day. Rev. 5.13.
Blessing, honor, glory and power be unto him that sits upon the throne, and
unto the lamb for ever. Thus Gods name is hallowed and sanctified in Heaven The
Angels and Glorified Saints are singing Hallelujahs; let us begin the work of
Heaven here. David did sing forth Gods Praises and Doxologies in a most
melodious manner, therefore was called the sweet singer of Israel, 1 Samuel 23.1.
Praising God is an hallowing of Gods name; it spreads his renown, it displayes
the trophies of his excellency, it exalts him in the eyes of others; Psalm.
50.23. Who so offers praise glorifies me. This is one of the highest and
purest acts of Religion. In Prayer we act like Men, in Praise we act like
Angels: This is the music of Heaven, (...), Zenoph. this is a work fit for a
Saint; Psalm. 149.5, 6. Let the Saints be joyful, let the high praises of God be
in their mouths. None but Saints can in a right manner thus hallow Gods name by
praising him. As every one has not skill to play on the Viol and Organ, so
every one cannot rightly sound forth Gods harmonious Praises; only the Saints
can do it; they only can make their tongue and heart join in consort; Psalm.
111.1. I will bless thee O Lord, with my whole heart; and Psalm. 66.17. He was
extolled with my tongue: There was heart and tongue joining in consort. This
hallowing Gods name by praise is very becoming a Christian; it is unbecoming to
murmur, this is a dishonouring Gods name: But it becomes the Saints to be
Spiritual Quiristers in singing forth the honor of Gods name: It is called the
garment of praise, Isa. 61.3. how comely and handsome is this garment of praise
for a Saint to wear; Psalm. 33.1. Praise is comely for the righteous; especially
it is an high degree of hallowing Gods name, when we can speak well of God, and
bless him in an afflicted state, Job 1.21. The Lord has taken away, blessed be
the name of the Lord. Many will bless God when he gives, but to bless him when
he takes away, is in an high degree to honor God, and hallow his name: Let us
thus magnify Gods name. Has not God given us abundant matter of praising him;
he has given us the nether and upper springs; he has given us Grace, a Mercy
spun and woven out of his Bowels, and he intends to crown Grace with Glory:
This should make us hallow Gods Name by being trumpets of his Praise.

11. We hallow and sanctify Gods Name when we sympathize with him: We grieve
when his name suffers. 1. We lay to heart his dishonours: How was Moses
affected with Gods dishonor, he breaks the Tables, Exodus 32.19. We grieve to
see Gods Sabbaths profaned, his Worship adulterated, the Wine of Truth mingled
with Error. 2. We grieve when Gods Church is brought low, because now Gods name
suffers. Nehemiah lays to heart the miseries of Sion, his complexion begins to
alter, and he looks sad; Neh. 2.3. Why is thy countenance sad? What sad when
the Kings Cupbearer, and Wine so near? O but it fared ill with the Church of
God, and Religion seemed to lose ground, and Gods name suffered, therefore
Nehemiah grows weary of the Court, he leaves his Wine, and mingles his Drink
with weeping. This holy sympathy and grieving, when Gods name suffers, God
esteems an honoring and sanctifying his name. Hezekiah grieved when the King
of Assyria reproached the living God; Isa. 37.17. He went into his chamber, and
spread the letter of blasphemy before the Lord, 2 Kin. 19.14. and no doubt
watered the Letter with his tears. He seemed not to be so much troubled at the
fear of losing his own Life and Kingdom, as that God should lose his Glory.

12. We hallow and sanctify Gods Name, when we give the same honor to God the
Son, as we give to God the Father; John 5.23. That all men should honor the
Son even as they honor the Father. The Socinians deny Christ's Divinity,
saying, that he is (...), a bare Man: This is to make him below the Angels;
Psalm. 8.5. For the Humane Nature considered in se is below the Angelical; this
is to reflect dishonor upon the Lord of Glory: We must give equal honor to
the Son as to the Father; we must believe Christ's Deity, he is the picture of
his Fathers Glory, Heb. 1.3. If the Godhead be in Christ, he must needs be God,
but the Godhead shines in him; Col. 2.9. In whom dwells the fullness of the
Godhead bodily: Ergo, he is God. How could these Divine Titles be given to
Christ? Omnipotency, Heb. 1.3. Ubiquity, Mat. 28.20. a power of sealing
Pardons, Mat. 9.6. coequality with God the Father, both in power and dignity,
John 5.21, 23. how I say could these Titles of Honor be ascribed to Christ, if
he were not crowned with the Deity? When we believe Christ's Godhead, and build
our hope of Salvation on the Cornerstone of his Merit: When we see neither the
Righteousness of the Law, or of Angels can justify, but we fly to Christ's
Blood as to the Altar of Refuge, this is an honoring and sanctifying Gods
name: God never thinks his name to be hallowed, unless his Son be honored.

13. We hallow Gods Name by standing up for his Truths. Much of Gods Glory lies
in his Truths. Gods Truths are his Oracles. God intrusts us with his Truths as
a treasure. We have not a richer Jewel to trust God with than our Souls, nor
God has not a greater Jewel to trust us with than his Truths. Gods Truths set
forth his Glory; now when we are zealous Advocates for Gods Truth, this is an
honor done to Gods name. Athanasius was called, the Bulwark of Truth; he stood
up in the defense of Gods Truths against the Arrians, and so was a Pillar in
the Temple of God; better have Truth without Peace, than Peace without Truth.
It concerns the Sons of Sihon to stand up for the great Doctrines of the
Gospel; the Doctrine of the Trinity, the Hypostatical Union, Justification by
Faith, the Saints perseverance: We are bid to contend earnestly, Jude 3. (...),
to strive as in an agony for the Faith; that is, the Doctrine of Faith: This
contending for the Truth brings great revenues into Heavens exchequer; this is
an hallowing of Gods name. Contend for the Truth. Some can contend for
Ceremonies, but not for the Truth. We should count him unwise that contends
more for a box of Counters, than for his box of Evidences.

14. We hallow and sanctify Gods name by making as many Proselites as we can
to him; by all holy expedients, Counsel, Prayer, Example, we endeavor the
Salvation of others. How did Monica, St. Austins Mother, labor for his
Conversion, she had sorer pangs in travail for his new birth, than for his
natural birth: it is an hallowing Gods name when we diffuse the sweet savor of
Godliness, and propagate Religion to others; when not only we our selves honor
God, but are instruments to make others honor him. Certainly when the heart is
seasoned with Grace, there will be an endeavor to season others. Gods Glory is
dear to a Saint as his own Salvation, and that this Glory may be promoted he
endeavors the conversion of Souls, every Convert is a Member added to Christ:
Let us thus hallow Gods name by laboring to advance piety in others;
especially, let us endeavor that those who are nearly related to us, or are
under our roof, should honor God; Josh. 24.15. As for me and my house we will
serve the Lord: Let us make our houses Bethels places, where Gods name is
called upon, Col. 4.15. Salute Nymphas, and the church that is in his house:
Let the Parent endeavor that his Children may honor God, and the Master that
his Servants honor him; read the Word, drop holy Instruction, perfume your
Houses with Prayer; the Jews had Sacrifices in their Family as well as in the
Tabernacle. Exodus 12.3. this is an hallowing Gods name when we make proselites
to him, and endeavor that all under our charge should honor and sanctify his
name.

15. We hallow Gods name when we prefer the honor of Gods name before the
dearest things. 1. We prefer the honor of Gods name before our own credit. The
Saints of old have for the honor of God been willing to endure reproach; Psalm.
69.7. For thy sake I have born reproach. David cared not what reproach he
suffered, so Gods name might not suffer. The Prophet Elijah was called in
derision, the hairy Prophet, and the Prophet Isaiah, the bearer of burdens, and
the Prophet Zephany, the bitter Prophet; but they did bind these reproaches as
a crown about their head; the honor of Gods name was dearer to them than their
own honor: Moses esteemed the reproaches of Christ greater riches than the
treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11.26. The Apostles went away rejoicing that they were
counted worthy to suffer shame for the name of Christ; Acts 5.41. (...), that
they were graced so far as to be disgraced for the name of Christ: This is an
hallowing Gods name when we are content to have our name eclipsed that Gods
name may shine the more. 2. We prefer the honor of Gods Name before our
Worldly profit and interest; Mal. 19.27. We have forsaken all and followed
thee. When these two, God and Estate come in competition, we will rather let
Estate go, than Gods Love and Favor. Thus that noble Marquess of Vico parted
with a fair Estate, using these words, Let their money perish with them that
count all the Gold and Silver in the World, worth one hours communion with
Jesus Christ. 3. We prefer the honor of Gods name before our Life; Romans 8.36.
For thy sake are we killed all the day long. The honor done to Gods name, is
not by bringing that outward Pomp and Glory to him as we do to Kings, but Gods
honor comes in another way, and that is by the Sufferings of his People. When
the World sees how entirely Gods people love him, that they will dye in his
service, this exalts and honors Gods name. Gods Crown does flourish in the
ashes of his Martyrs. St. Basil speaks of a Virgin condemned to the fire, who
having her Life and Estate offered her if she would bow to the Idol, answered,
Valeat vita, pereat pecunia, Let Life and Money go, welcome Christ. When Gods
Glory weighs heaviest in the balance, and we are willing to suffer the loss of
all, rather than Gods name should suffer, now we do in an high degree hallow
Gods name.

16. Vlt. We do hallow and sanctify Gods name by an holy Conversation; 1 Pet.
2.9. Ye are a royal priesthood, a peculiar people; that ye should show forth
the praises of him who has called you. As an unholy life does dishonor Gods
name, Romans 2.24. The name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you,
so by our holy and Bible Conversation, we honor Gods name. An holy Life speaks
louder than all the Anthems and Praises in the World. Though the main work of
Religion lies in the heart, yet when our light so shines that others behold it,
now they glorify God; when our lives shine, now Gods name shines. The
Macedonians used one day in the year to wear the picture of Alexander set with
Pearl and costly Jewels; so when we carry the picture of Christ about us in our
holy Example, now we bring honor to Gods name.

USE I. See the true note and character of a Godly Person; he is a sanctifier
of Gods Name, Hallowed be thy Name. A true Saint does ambitiously endeavor to
advance Gods name. This is the Question he asks himself in every thing he is
going about; will this action tend to the honor of Gods name? Will this exalt
God? This was St. Paul's (...), his chief design, that Christ might be
magnified, Phil. 1.20. viz. that the Crown upon his Head might flourish. A
Godly Man thinks it is scarce worth the while to live, if he may not bring some
revenues of honor to Gods name.

USE II. I may here take up a sad lamentation, and speak as the Apostle Paul,
weeping, Phil. 3.18. to consider how Gods name instead of being hallowed and
sanctified, is dishonored. Gods name, which is more worth than the Salvation
of all Men's Souls, suffers deeply. We are apt to speak of our Sufferings; alas,
what are all our Sufferings? Gods name suffers most; Gods name is the dearest
thing he has; how do Men stand upon their name and honor? Gods name is this
day dishonored, it is like the Sun in an eclipse. Theodosius took it hainously
when they threw dirt upon his Statue, but now (which is far worse) disgrace is
thrown upon the glorious name of Jehovah. Gods name in stead of being hallowed
is dishonored by all sorts.

1. Heathens. 2. Turks. 3. Jews. 4. Papists. 5. Protestants.
1. By Heathens: They have a knowledge of a Godhead by the light of Nature;
Romans 1.19, 20. but they dishonor God and sin against the light of nature. The
Egyptians worship an Ox, the Persians worship the Sun, the Grecians and
Romans, Jupiter, and the Parthians worship the Devil.

2. Gods name is dishonored by the Turks; they adore Mahomet their great
Prophet as one divinely inspired; Mahomet was of an impure vicious life;
Mahomet plucks the Crown from Christ's Head, denying his Deity.

3. Gods name is dishonored by the Jews; who give not equal Honor and
Adoration to God the Son as to God the Father; they expect a Messiah yet to
come, seculum futurum; they believe not in Christ; they blaspheme him, and
slight Righteousness imputed; they vilify the Christian Sabbath.

4. Gods name is dishonored by the Papists. Popery is a God dishonouring
Religion: They dishonor Gods name.

(1.) By their Idolatry, which is spiritual* adultery, Ezekiel. 23.37. Idolatry is
to worship a false God, or the true God in a false manner; this they are guilty
of. 1. They dishonor God by their Idolatry in making graven Images, and giving
the same honor to them as is due to God, (...): Images are teachers of lies,
Hab. 2.18. they represent God in a bodily shape. 2. By their Idolatry in the
Mass; worshipping the Host, and offering it up as a Sacrifice for Sin: The
Apostle says, Heb. 10.14. By one offering Christ has perfected them that are
sanctified; but as if Christ's offering on the Cross were imperfect, they offer
him up daily in the Mass, which is a dishonor done to Christ's Priestly Office.

(2.) The Papists instead of hallowing Gods name, dishonor Gods name by
locking up the Scriptures in an unknown Tongue; they (as the Philistines) pluck
out the peoples eyes, and then make sport with them: The Bible is a shining
light, but they draw a curtain over it; they take away the key of knowledge,
Luke 11.52. and hinder Gods Glory by hindering Men's Salvation.

(3.) Instead of hallowing Gods name they dishonor it by giving Men
Indulgencies. They say the Pope, as Peter's Successor, has power to grant
Indulgencies, by virtue whereof Men are set free in the sight of God from the
guilt of Sin: This is a double dishonor to God. 1. It is to steal a Flower
from the Crown of Heaven. The Pope assumes a power to pardon, which is Gods
Prerogative Royal; Mat. 2.7 Who can forgive sin but God only? 2. The Pope by
his Indulgence encourages Men to sin. What need the Papists care what Sins
they commit, when they have a License and Patent from the Pope to bear them
harmless.

(4.) Instead of hallowing Gods name they dishonor Gods name by their
Invocation of Saints. We are to pray only to God, Matthew. 6.6. Pray to thy
Father; not pray to a Saint, or the Virgin Mary, but pray to your Father in
Heaven: We may pray to none but whom we may believe in: Romans 10.14. The Saints
in Heaven are ignorant of our grievances; Isa. 63.16. Abraham is ignorant of us.

(5.) Instead of hallowing Gods name they dishonor it by their Luxury and
Uncleanness: They allow of Stews. At Rome Fornication keeps open shop, and is
in some cases, preferred before honorable Matrimony; Vrbs est jam tota lupanar.

(6.) Instead of hallowing Gods name they dishonor it by their Blasphemies.
They give equal, nay more honor to the Virgin Mary than to Christ; they
ascribe more to her Milk than his Blood; they call her Scala Caeli, the Ladder
of Heaven, Ianna Paradisi, the Gate of Paradise. In their Doxologies they say,
Praise be to the Virgin Mary, and also to Christ. What Blasphemy is this to set
the Creature above the Creator. They say to her, O faelix puerpera, nostrae
piaris scelera, O happy Mother of a Son who purgest away our Crimes.

(7.) Instead of hallowing Gods name they dishonor it by their Lies. Their
golden Legend is an imposture, and is full of lying wonders. They show John
Baptists Forehead for a Relic in Spain, yet his whole Head they affirm to be
seen in St. Sylvester in Rome: They show St. Peter's Shadow at Rome; indeed we
read of St. Peter's shadow Acts 5.15. but its strange how the Papists could
catch his shadow, and keep it by them so long.

(8.) Instead of hallowing Gods name they dishonor it by Baptizing Sin with
the name of Virtue. Breach of Oaths is with the Papists a Virtue. If a Man has
bound his Soul to God by an Oath, yet to violate this Oath is virtuous, if it
may propagate the Catholic Cause. Killing those who are of a different
Religion, is not only Venial, but a Virtue among Catholics. Destroying Two
Hundred Thousand of the Albigenses, who were Protestants, was commended as a
glorious Action, honored with a Triumph at Rome, and crowned with his Holiness
blessing. Is not this an high dishonor to God to guild over the foulest Crimes
with the name of Virtue and Piety.

(9.) Instead of hallowing Gods name they dishonor it by their damnable
Assertions. 1. The Papists affirm that the Pope is above Scripture, that he may
dispense with it, and that his Canons bind more than the Word of God 2. They
teach merit by good Works, but if a Debtor cannot pay his Creditor, how can he
merit at his hands? 3. That the Scripture is not a perfect Rule of Faith, and
Man errs, therefore they eek it out with their Traditions, which they hold to
be of equal Authority. 4. They teach that an implicit Faith is saving, though
one may have an implicit Faith, yet be ignorant of all the Articles of
Religion. 5. They say that the inward act of the Mind is not required in Gods
Worship: Diversion of Mind in Duty, though one prays and never thinks of God
is no Sin, says Angelus and Sylvester, and other Papists. 6. The Papists make
Habitual Love to God unnecessary. It is not needful, says Bellarmine, to
perform any acts of Religion out of love to God. Stapleton and Cajetan affirm,
that the Precept of loving God with all our heart is not binding; by which they
cut asunder the Sinews and Soul of all Religion. Thus instead of honoring Gods
name, the Papists dishonor it. Let us pray heartily that this Romish Religion
may never get footing again in this Nation; God grant that this poysonful weed
of Popery may never be watered here: But that it being a Plant which our
Heavenly Father has not planted, it may be rooted up.

5. Gods Name is dishonored by Carnal Protestants How is Gods name this day
dishonored in England: His name is like the Sun in an eclipse. Christians
instead of hallowing Gods name, reproach and dishonor it.

1. By their Tongues. 2. By their Lives.
1. By their Tongues. 1. They speak irreverently of Gods name: Gods name is
sacred: Deuteronomy. 28.58. That thou may fear this glorious and fearful name, The
Lord thy God. The names of Kings are not mentioned without giving them their
Titles of Honor, High and Mighty; but Men speak irreverently of God, as if he
were like one of them, Psalm. 50.21. this is a taking Gods name in vain. 2. They
swear by his name. Many seldom name Gods name but in Oaths: How is God
dishonored when Men rend and tear his name by Oaths and Imprecations; Ier.
23.10. Because of swearing the land mourns. If God will reckon with Men for
idle Words, shall not idle Oaths be put in the Account-Book? O but says one, I
cannot help it, it is a custom of swearing I have got, and I hope God will
forgive me? Answ. Is this a good Plea, a custom of swearing? This is no excuse
but an aggravation of Sin. As if one that had been accused for killing a Man,
should plead with the Judge to spare him, because it was his custom to murder:
This were an aggravation of the offense: Will not the Judge say thou shall the
rather dye. So it is here.

2. As Men dishonor God by their Tongues, so by their Lives. What is it to
say, Hallowed be thy Name, when in their Lives they profane his name; they
dishonor God by their Atheism, Sabbath-breaking, Uncleanness, Perjury,
Intemperance, Injustice. Men hang out a Flag of Defiance against Heaven. As the
Thracians when it thunders, shoot their Arrows against Heaven; so Men shoot
their Sins as bearded Arrows against Heaven. Sinners are hardened in Sin, they
despise Counsel, they laugh at Reproof, they have cast off the vail of Modesty.
Satan has taken such full possession of them, that when they sin they glory in
their shame; Phil. 3.19. they brag how many new Oaths they have invented, how
often they have been drunk, how many they have defiled; they declare their sin as
Sodom: Such horrid impieties are committed that a modest Heathen would blush
at. Men in this Age sin at that rate, as if either they did not believe there
were an Hell, or as if they feared Hell would be full ere they could get
thither. Was Gods name ever so openly dishonored? All our Preaching will not
make them leave their Sins. What a black vail is drawn over the face of
Religion at this day? Vivimus in temporum faecibus -- Sen. We live in the dregs
of time wherein the common shore of wickedness runs; Physicians call it (...),
when there is no part of the Body free from Distemper. England has a Kakexy,
it is all over disease; The whole head is sick, the whole heart is faint: Isa.
1.6. As black Vapors rising out of the earth cloud and darken the Sun, so the
Sins of People in our Age like Hellish Vapors cast a cloud upon Gods glorious
name. O that our Eyes were like Limbecks, dropping the water of holy tears, to
consider how Gods name, instead of being hallowed, is polluted and profaned:
And may not we justly fear some heavy Judgments? Can God put up our affronts
any longer? Can he endure to have his name reproached? Will a King suffer his
Crown-Jewels to be trampled in the dust? Do not we see the symptoms of Gods
Anger, do we not see his Judgments hovering over us? Sure God is whetting his
Sword, he has bent his Bow, and is preparing his Arrows to shoot: Qualis per
arva Leo fulvam minaci front concutiens jubam. Sen. Trag. The Body Politic is
in a Paroxism, or burning Fit, and may not the Lord cause a sad Phlebotomy?
Seeing we will not leave our Sins he may make us lose our Blood. May not we
fear that the Ark should remove, the Vision cease, the Stars in Gods Church be
removed, and we should follow the Gospel to the grave? When Gods name which
should be hallowed is profaned among a People, it is just with God to write
that dismal Epitaph upon a Nations Tomb, The Glory is departed. And that I may
speak to the Consciences of all, and deal impartially, it were well if only the
profane party were guilty; but may not many Professors be called to the Bar,
and indicted of this, that they have dishonored Gods name; 2 Chronicles. 28.10. Are
there not with you, even with you, sins against the Lord your God? Are there
not the spots of Gods Children? Deuteronomy. 3^.5. If you are Diamonds have you no
flawes? Have not you your vanities? If your Discourse be not profane is it not
vain? Have not you your self-seekings, rash censures, indecent dresses? If the
wicked of the Land swear, do not you sometimes slander? If they are drunk with
wine, are not you sometimes drunk with passion? If their sin be blaspheming, is
not your sin murmuring? Are there not with you, even with you, sins against the
Lord? The sins of Gods Children go nearer to his heart than the sins of others:
Deuteronomy. 32.19. When the Lord saw it he abhorred them, because of the provoking of
his sons and daughters. The sins of the wicked anger God, the sins of his own
people grieve him; he will be sure to punish them; Amos 3.2. You only have I
known of all the families of the earth: therefore I will punish you for all
your iniquities. O that our head were waters, that we could make this place a
Bochim, a place of weepers, that Gods Children might mix blushing with tears,
that they have so little hallowed, and so much eclipsed Gods name. Truly Gods
own People have sinned enough to justify God in all his severe actings against
them.

USE III. Of Exhortation. Let us hallow and sanctify Gods Name: Did we but see
a glimpse of Gods glory, as Moses did in the Rock; the sight of this would draw
Adoration and Praise from us; could we see God face to face, as the Angels in
Heaven do, could we behold him sitting on his Throne like ^ Jasper-stone, Rev.
4.3. we should presently at the sight of this glory do as the twenty four
Elders; Rev. 4.10. They worship him that lives for ever, and cast their crowns
before the throne, saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, honor
and power. That we may be stirred up to this great Duty, the hallowing, adoring
and sanctifying Gods name; consider,

1. It is the very end of our Being: Why did God give us our Life, but that our
living may be an hallowing of his Name? Why did he give us Souls but to admire
him, and Tongues but to praise him? The excellency of a thing is, when it
attains the end for which it was made: The excellency of a Star is to give
Light, of a Plant to be Fruitful; the excellency of a Christian is to answer
the end of his Creation, which is to hallow Gods name, and live to that God by
whom he lives. He who lives, and God has no honor by him, buries himself
alive, and exposes himself to a Curse. Christ cursed the barren Fig Tree.

2. Gods Name is so excellent that it deserves to be hallowed: Psalm. 8.9. How
excellent is thy name in all the earth: Psalm. 104.1. Thou art clothed with
honor and majesty. As the Sun has its brightness whether we admire it or no,
so Gods Name is illustrious and glorious whether we hallow it or no. In God are
all shining perfections, Holiness, Wisdom, Mercy: He is worthy to be praised: 2 Samuel 22.4. God is dignus Honor, worthy of Honor, Love, Adoration. We often
bestow Titles of Honor upon them that do not deserve them; but God is worthy
to be praised; his Name deserves hallowing; he is above all the Honor and
Praise which the Angels in Heaven give him.

3. We pray Hallowed be thy Name; that is, let thy Name be honored and
magnified by us: Now if we do not magnify his Name, we contradict our own
Prayers. To say, Hallowed be thy Name, yet not to bring honor to Gods Name, it
is to take his Name in vain.

4. Such as do not hallow Gods Name, and bring revenues of honor to him, God
will get his honor upon them; Exodus 14.17. I Will get me honor upon Pharaoh.
Pharaoh would not hallow Gods Name: Who is the Lord that I should obey him?
Well says God, if Pharaoh will not honor me, I will get me honor upon him.
When God overthrew him and his Chariots in the Sea, then he got his honor upon
him. Gods Power and Justice were glorified in his destruction. There are some
whom God has raised to great Power and Dignity, and they will not honor Gods
Name, they make use of their Power to dishonor God, they cast reproach upon
Gods Name, and revile his Servants; well, they who will not honor God, he will
get his honor upon them in their final ruin. Herod did not give Glory to God,
and God did get his Glory upon him: Acts 12.23. The Angel of the Lord smote
him, because he gave not God the glory, and he was eaten of worms.

5. It will be no small comfort to us when we come to dye, that we have
hallowed and sanctified God^ Name: It was Christ's comfort a little before his
Death; Ioh. 17.4. I have glorified thee on the earth. Christ's redeeming Mankind
was an hallowing and glorifying of Gods Name; never was more Honor brought to
Gods Name than by this great undertaking of Christ: Now here was Christ's
comfort before his Death, that he had hallowed Gods Name, and brought Glory to
him. So what a Cordial will this be to us at last, when our whole Life has
been an hallowing of Gods Name; we have loved him with our Hearts, praised him
with our Lips, honored him with our Lives: We have been (...), to the praise
of his glory, Ephesians. 1.6. At the hour of death all your earthly comforts will
vanish; to think how rich you have been, or what pleasures you have enjoyed
upon earth; this will not give one dram of comfort: What is one the better for
an Estate that is spent? But now to have Conscience witnessing that you have
hallowed Gods Name, your whole Life has been a glorifying of him, what sweet
peace and satisfaction will this give? That Servant who has been all day
working in the Vineyard, how glad is he when evening comes that he shall
receive his pay! Such as have spent their Lives in honoring God, how sweet
will Death be when they shall receive the recompense of Reward. What comfort
was it to Hezekiah when he was on his Sickbed, and could appeal to God, Isa.
38.3. Remember, Lord, how I have walked before thee with a perfect heart, and
have done that which is good in thy sight. I have hallowed thy Name, I have
brought all the Honor I could to thee, I have done that which is good in thy
sight.

6. There is nothing lost by what we do for God; if we bring Honor to his Name
he will honor us. Honor is (...). Arist. As Balac said to Balaam, Numb.
22.37. Am not I able to promote thee to honor? So if we hallow and sanctify
Gods Name, is not he able to promote us to Honor? 1. He will honor us in our
Life. (1.) He will put honor upon our Persons: He will number us among his
Jewels, Mal. 3.17. he will make us a Royal Diadem in his hand, Isa. 62.3. he
will lift us up in the eyes of others; Zach. 9.16. They shall be as the stones
of a crown lifted up, as an ensign of glory: He will esteem us as the cream and
flower of the Creation; Isa. 43.4. Since thou have been precious in my sight,
thou have been honorable. (2.) God will put honor upon our Names; Prove.
10.17. The memory of the just is blessed. How renowned have the Saints been in
all Ages who have hallowed Gods Name: How renowned was Abraham for his Faith,
Moses for his Meekness, David for his Zeal, Paul for his Love to Christ, their
Names as a precious Ointment send forth a sweet perfume in Gods Church to this
day. 2. God will honor us at our Death; he will send his Angels to carry us up
with triumph into Heaven; Luke 16.22. The beggar dyed and was carried by the
Angels into Abraham's bosom. Amasis King of Egypt had his Chariot drawn with
four Kings which he had conquered in War; but what is this to the Glory every
Believer shall have at his Death, he shall be carried by the Angels of God. 3.
God will put honor upon us after Death. (1.) He will put Glory upon our
Bodies: We shall be (...) as the Angels, not for substance but quality, our
Bodies shall be agile and nimble; now our Bodies are as a weight, then they
shall be as a wing moving swiftly from place to place; our Bodies shall be full
of clarity and brightness, like Christ's glorious Body; Phil. 3.21. The Bodies
of the Saints shall be as Cloth dyed into a Scarlet color, made more
illustrious; they shall be so clear and transparent, that the Soul shall
sparkle through them as the Wine through the Glass. (2.) God will put Glory
upon our Souls: If the Cabinet of the Body shall be so illustrious, of what
orient brightness shall the Jewel be? Then will be the great Coronation-day,
when the Saints shall wear the Robe of Immortality and the Crown of
Righteousness which fades not away. O how glorious will that Garland be which
is made of the Flowers of Paradise! Who then would not hallow and glorify Gods
Name, and spread his renown in the World, who will put such immortal Honor
upon his People, as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor can it enter into the
heart of man to conceive.

7. Vlt. Such as do not hallow Gods Name, but profane and dishonor it, God
will pour contempt upon them; though they be never so great, and though
clothed in Purple and Scarlet, yet they are abhorred of God, and their name
shall rot. Though the name of Judas be in the Bible, and the name of Pontius
Pilate be in the Creed, yet their names stand there for Infamy, as being
Traitors to the Crown of Heaven; Nahum 1.14. I will make thy grave for thou art
vile. It is spoken of Antiochus Epiphanes, he was a King, and his name
signifie^ Illustrious, yet God esteemed him a vile Person; to show how base the
wicked are in Gods esteem, he compares them to things most vile; to chaff,
Psalm. 1.4. to dross, Psalm. 119.118. and the filth that fomes out of the Sea,
Isa. 57.20. and as God does thus vilely esteem of such as do not hallow his
Name, so he sends them to a vile place at last. Vagrants are sent to the House
of Correction; Hell is the House of Correction which the Wicked are sent to
when they dye. Let all this prevail with us to hallow and sanctify Gods Name.

Quest. What may we do to honor and sanctify Gods Name?

Answ. Let us get, 1. A sound Knowledge of God. 2. A sincere Love to God.

1. A sound Knowledge of God: Take a view of his superlative Excellencies; his
Holiness, his incomprehensible Goodness. The Angels know God better than we,
therefore they sanctify his Name, and sing Hallelujahs to him; and let us
labor to know him to be our God; Psalm. 48.14. This God is our God. We may
dread God as a Judge, but we cannot honor him as a Father, till we know he is
our God.

2. Get a sincere Love to God: A Love of Appretiation, and a Love of
Complacency to delight in him; John 21.15. Lord thou know I love thee: He
can never honor his Master who does not love him: The reason Gods Name is no
more hallowed, is, because his name is no more loved. So much for the First
Petition.

MATTHEW. vi.10. Thy Kingdom come.


A Soul truly devoted to God, joins heartily in this Petition, Adveniat Regnum
tuum, Thy Kingdom come: In which words this great Truth is employed, that God is
a King; he who has a Kingdom can be no less than a King; Ps. 47.7. God is King
of all the earth: And he is a King upon his Throne, Psalm. 47.8. God sits
upon the throne of his holiness. 1. He has a Regal Title, High and Mighty;
Isa. 57.15. Thus says the high and lofty one. 2. He has the Ensigns of
Royalty, his Sword; Deuteronomy. 32.41. If I whet my glittering sword: He has his
Scepter, Heb. 1.8. A scepter of Righteousness is the scepter of thy Kingdom. 3.
He has his Crown Royal; Rev. 19.12. On his head were many crowns; he has his
Iura Regalia, his Kingly Prerogatives; he has power to make Laws, to seal
Pardons, which are the Flowers and Jewels belonging to his Crown. Thus the Lord
is King.

And 2. He is a great King: Psalm. 95.3. A great King above all Gods. He is
great in and of himself, and not like other Kings, who are made great by their
Subjects. That he is so great a King appears; 1. By the immenseness of his
Being, Ier. 23.24. Do not I fill heaven and earth, says the Lord. His center
is every where; he is no where included, yet no where excluded; he is so
immensly great, That the heaven of heavens cannot contain him, 1 Kings 8.27. 2.
His greatness appears by the effects of his Power; He made heaven and earth,
Psalm. 124.8. and can unmake it. God can with a Breath crumble us to dust; with
a Word he can unpin the World, and break the Axle-Tree of it in pieces: He
pours contempt upon the mighty; Job 12.21. He cuts off the spirit of Princes;
Psalm. 76.12. He is Lord Paramount, who does whatever he will: Psalm. 115.2. He
weighs the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance. Isa. 40.12.

3. God is a Glorious King; Psalm. 24.10. Who is this King of Glory, the Lord of
Hosts he is the King of Glory. He has internal Glory; Psalm. 93.1. The Lord
reigns, he is clothed with majesty. Other Kings have Royal and Sumptuous
Apparel to make them appear glorious to the beholders, but all their Glory and
Magnificence is borrowed; but God is clothed with Majesty, his own Glorious
Essence is instead of Royal Robes: and he has girded himself with strength.
Kings have their guard about them to defend their Persons, because they are not
able to defend themselves; but God needs no guard or assistance from others. He
has girded himself with strength. His own Power is his Lifeguard; Psalm. 89.6.
Who in the heaven can be compared unto the Lord, who among the Sons of the
mighty can be likened unto the Lord? God has a prehiminence above all other
Kings for Majesty: Rev. 19.16. He has on his vesture a name written, Rex
Regum, King of Kings. He has the highest Throne, the richest Crown, the
largest Dominions, and the longest Possession; Psalm. 29.10. The Lord sits
King for ever. Though God has many Heirs, yet no Successors. He sets up his
Throne where no other King does; he rules the Will and Affections, his Power
binds the Conscience; Angels serve him; all the Kings of the Earth hold their
Crowns and Diadems by immediate tenure from this great King; Prove. 8.15. By me
Kings reign; and to this Lord Jehovah all Kings must give account, and from
Gods Tribunal there is no appeal.

USE I. Br. 1. If God be so great a King, and sits King for ever, then it is no
disparagement for us to serve him; Deo servire est regnare: It is an Honor to
serve a King. If the Angels fly swiftly upon the King of Heavens message, Dan.
9.21. then well may we look upon it as a favor to be taken into his Royal
Service. Theodosius thought it a greater Honor to be Gods Servant than to be
an Emperor. It Is more Honor to serve God than to have Kings serve us. Every
Subject of this King is Crowned with Regal Honor: Rev. 1.6. Who has made us
Kings. Therefore as the Queen of Sheba having seen the Glory of Solomon's
Kingdom, said, Happy are these thy servants which stand continually before
thee, 1 Kings 10.8. so, happy are those Saints who stand before the King of
Heaven, and wait on his Throne.

Br. 2. If God be such a Glorious King, crowned with Wisdom, armed with Power,
bespangled with Riches, then it shows us what Prudence it is to have this King
to be ours: To say as, Psalm. 5.2. My King and my God. It Is counted great Policy
to be on the strongest side; if we belong to the King of Heaven we are sure to
be on the strongest side: The King of Glory can with ease destroy his
Adversaries; he can pull down their Pride, befool their Policy, restrain their
Malice. That stone cut out of the Mountains without hands, which smote the
Image. Dan. 2.34. was an emblem (says Austin) of Christ's Monarchical Power
conquering and triumphing over his enemies. If we are on Gods side we are on
the strongest side; he can with a Word destroy his enemies, Psalm. 2.5. Then
shall he speak to them in his wrath; nay, he can with a Look destroy them; Job
40.12. Look upon every one that is proud and bring him low. It needs cost God
no more to confound those who rise up against him than a look, a cast of the
eye; Exodus 14.24. In the morning watch the Lord looked to the host of the
Egyptians through the pillar of fire, and troubled their host, and took off
their chariot-wheels. What Wisdom is it then to have this King to be ours; then
we are on the strongest side.

USE II of Exhortation.

Br. 1. If God be so Glorious a King, full of Power and Majesty, let us trust
in him; Psalm. 9.10. They that know thy name will put their trust in thee: Trust
him with your Soul; you cannot put this Jewel in safer hands; and trust him
with Church and State Affairs: He is King, Exodus 15.3. The Lord is a man of
war; he can make bear his holy Arm in the eyes of all the Nations. If means
fail, he is never at a loss, there are no impossibles with him; he can make the
dry bones live: Ezekiel. 37.10. As a King he can command, and as a God he can
create Salvation; Isa. 65.18. I create Jerusalem a rejoicing: Let us trust all
our affairs with this great King. Either God can remove Mountains, or can leap
over them; Cant. 2.8.

Br. 2. If God be so great a King, let us fear him; Ier. 5.22. Fear ye not me
says the Lord? Will ye not tremble at my presence? We have enough fear of Men.
Fear makes danger appear greater and sin lesser; but let us fear the King of
Kings, who has power to cast Body and Soul into Hell; Luke 12.5. As one wedge
drives out another, so the fear of God would drive out all base carnal fear:
Let us fear that God whose Throne is set above all Kings; they may be Mighty,
but he is Almighty. Kings have no Power but what God has given them; their
Power is limited, his is infinite. Let us fear this King whose eyes are as
lamps of fire; Rev. 1.14. The mountains quake at him, and the rocks are thrown
down by him; Nahum 1.6 If he stamps with his foot, all the Creatures are
presently up in a battalio to fight for him. O tremble and fear before this
God. Fear is Ianitor Animae, it is the Doorkeeper of the Soul, it keeps Sin
from entering; Genesis 39.9. How can I do this great wickedness and sin against God?

3 Br. If God be so Glorious a King, he has jus virae and necis, He has the
power of Life and Death in his Hand. Let all the Potentates of the Earth take
heed how they employ their Power against the King of Heaven; they employ their
power against God, who with their Scepter beat down his Truth, which is the
most Orient Pearl of his Crown; who crush and persecute his People, which are
the Apple of his Eye, Zach. 2.8. Who trample upon his Laws and Royal Edicts,
which he has set forth, Psalm. 2.3. What is a King without his Laws: Let all
that are invested with worldly Power and Grandeur, take heed how they oppose
the King of Glory: The Lord will be too hard for all that come against him, Job
40.9. Have thou an Arm like God? Will thou measure Arms with the Almighty?
Shall a little Child go to fight with an Archangel. Ezekiel. 22.14. Can thy Heart
endure, or can thy Hands be strong in the day that I shall deal with thee?
Christ will put all his Enemies at last under his Feet, Psalm. 110.1. All the
Multitude of the Wicked, who set themselves against God, shall be but as so
many Clusters of ripe Grapes to be cast into the Wine Press of the wrath of
God, and to be trodden by him till their blood comes forth. The King of Glory
will come off Victor at last; Men may set up their Standard: but God always
sets up his Trophies of Victory; the Lord has a golden Scepter and an iron
Rod, Psalm. 2.9. Those who will not bow to the one, shall be broken by the other.

4. Br. Is God so great a King, having all Power in Heaven and Earth in his
Hand; let us learn Subjection to him. Such as have gone on in Sin, and by their
Impieties hung out a Flag of defiance against the King of Heaven. Oh come in
quickly, and make your Peace, submit to God; Psalm. 2.12. Kiss the Son least he
be angry. Kiss Christ with a Kiss of Love, and a Kiss of Obedience, obey the
King of Heaven when he speaks to you by his Ministers and Ambassadors, 2 Cor.
5.20. when God bids you fly from Sin, and espouse Holiness, obey him, to obey
is better then Sacrifice: To obey God (says Luther) is better then to work
Miracles. Obey God willingly, Isa. 1.19. That is the best obedience that is
cheerful; as that is the sweetest Honey which drops out of the Comb* Obey God
swiftly. Zech. 5.9. I lift up mine eyes and behold two Women, and the wind was
in their Wings. Wings are swift, but wind in the wings denotes great swiftness;
such should our obedience to God be: Obey the King of Glory.

Use III. Comfort to those who are the Subjects of the King of Heaven; God will
put forth all his Royal Power for their Succor and Comfort.

1. The King of Heaven will plead their Cause; Ier. 51.36. I will plead thy
Cause, and take Vengeance for thee.

2. He will protect his People; He sets an invisible guard about them, Zech.
2.5. I will be a Wall of Fire to her roun^ about. A wall, that is defensive, a
wall of Fire, that is offensive.

3. When it may be for the good of his People, he will raise up deliverance to
them; 1 Chronicles. 11.14. The Lord saved them by a great deliverance. God Reigning
as King, can save any way; by contemptible means, the blowing of Trumpets, and
blazing of Lamps, Judge. 7.20. By contrary means, He made the Sea a wall to
Israel, and the waters were a means to keep them from drowning: The Fishes
B^lly was a Ship in which Jonas sailed safe to shore. God will never want ways
of saving his People: Rather then fail the very Enemies shall do his Work. 2 Chronicles. 20.23. He set Ammon and Mount-Seir one against another: And as God will
deliver his People from Temporal Danger, so from Spiritual, from Sin, and from
Hell, Jesus has delivered us from Wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10.

Use IV. Terror to the Enemies of the Church. If God be King, he will set his
^tmost strength against them who are the Enemies of his Kingdom, Psalm. 97.3. A
Fire goes before him, and burns up his Enemies round about.

1. He will set himself against his Enemies: He will set his Attributes against
them, his Power and Justice; and who knows the power of his Anger, Psalm. 90.11.

2. God will set the Creatures against them; Judge. 5 20. The Stars in their
course fought against Sisera. Tertullian observes that the Persians fighting
against the Christians a mighty Wind arose, which did make the Persians Arrows
to fly back in their own Faces. Every Creature has a Quarrel with a Sinner.
The Stone out of the Wall, Hab. 2.11. The Hail and Frost. Psalm. 78.47. He
destroyed their Vines with Hail, and their Sycamore Trees with Frost.

3. God will set Men against themselves; 1. He will set Conscience against
them; and how terrible is this Rod, when turned into a Serpent: Melancthon
calls it Erinnys Conscientiae, a Hellish Fury: It is called Vermis
Conscientiae, the Worm of Conscience, Mark 9.44. What a Worm did Spira feel in
his Conscience; he was a Terror to himself The worst Civil Wars are between a
Man and his Conscience. 2. God will set the Diseases of Men's Bodies against
them, 2 Chronicles. 21.18. The Lord smote Iehoram in his Bowels with an incurable
disease. God can raise an Army against a Man out of his own Bowels: He can set
one Humor of the Body against another, the heat to dry up the moisture, and
the moisture to drown the heat; the Lord needs not go far for Instruments to
punish the Sinner, He can make the joints of the same Body to smite one against
another; as Dan 5.6. 3. God will set Men's Friends against them; where they used
to have Honey they shall have nothing but Aloes and Wormwood. When a man's ways
please the Lord, he shall make his enemies to be his friends, Prove. 16.7. But
when he opposes God, he makes his Friends to be his Enemies. Commodus the
Emperor his own wife gave him poison in perfumed Wine. Sennacherib's two Sons
were the death of him, 2 Kings 19.37. 4. God will set Satan against them. Psalm.
109.6. Let Satan stand at his Right hand. What does Satan at the Sinners
Elbows? 1. He helps him to contrive Sin. 2. He tempts him to commit Sin. 3. He
terrifies him for Sin. He that has Satan thus standing at his Right hand, is
sure to be set at Gods Left hand. Here is the misery of such as oppose Gods
Royal Scepter, he will set every thing in the world against them: If there be
either Justice in Heaven or fire in Hell, Sinners shall not be unpunished.

Vlt. If God be such an absolute Monarch, and Crowned with such Glory and
Majesty, let us all engage in his Service, and stand up for his Truth, and
Worship; dare to own God in the worst Time; He is King of Kings, and is able to
reward all his Servants: We may be Losers for him, we shall never be Losers by
him; we are ready to say as Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25.9. What shall I do for the
Hundred Talents? If I appear for God I may lose my Estate, my Life? I say with
the Prophet, God is able to give you much more then this; He can give you for
the present inward Peace, and for the future a Crown of Glory which fades not
away.

Quest. What Kingdom does Christ mean here?

Resp. Negat. 1. He does not mean a Political, or Earthly Kingdom. The Apostles
indeed did desire, 1. Christ's Temporal Reign, Acts 1.6. When will thou restore
the Kingdom to Israel. But Christ said his Kingdom was not of this world, Ioh.
18.36. So that when Christ taught his Disciples to pray, Thy Kingdom come, he
did not mean it of an Earthly Kingdom, that he should reign here in outward
Pomp and Splendour. 2. It is not meant of Gods Providential Kingdom; Psalm.
103.19. His Kingdom rules over all; that is, the Kingdom of his Providence:
This Kingdom we do not pray for, when we say Thy Kingdom come; for this Kingdom
is already come: God exercises the Kingdom of his Providence in the World,
Psalm. 75.7. He puts down one, and sets up another: Nothing stirs in the
World, but God has an Hand in it; He sets every wheel a working; He humbles
the Proud, and raises the Poor out of the Dust, to set them among Princes, 1 Samuel 2.8. The Kingdom of Gods Providence rules over all; Kings do nothing but
what his Providence permits and orders, Act. 4.27. This Kingdom of Gods
Providence we do not pray should come, for it is already come: What Kingdom
then is meant here, when we say, Thy Kingdom come? Answ. Positively, there is a
twofold Kingdom meant here. 1. The Kingdom of Grace, which Kingdom God
exercises in the Consciences of his People; this is Regnum Dei (...), Gods
lesser Kingdom, Luke 17.21. The Kingdom of God is within you. 2. The Kingdom of
Glory, which is sometimes called the Kingdom of God, Luke 6.20. and the Kingdom
of Heaven, Mat. 5.3. When we pray thy Kingdom come, (1.) Here is something
tacitly implied, That we are in the Kingdom of Darkness; 1. We pray that we may
be brought out of the Kingdom of Darkness. 2. That the Devils Kingdom in the
World may be demolished. (2.) Something positively intended, Adveniat Regnum
Gratiae and Gloriae, 1. We pray that the Kingdom of Grace may be set up in our
Hearts, and increased. 2. When we pray Thy Kingdom come, we pray that the
Kingdom of Glory may hasten, and that we may in Gods good time be translated
into it: These two Kingdoms of Grace and Glory, differ not specifically, but
gradually, they differ not in nature, but only in degree; The Kingdom of Grace
is nothing but the inchoation or beginning of the Kingdom of Glory; the Kingdom
of Grace is Glory in the Seed, and the Kingdom of Glory is Grace in the Flower;
the Kingdom of Grace is Glory in the Daybreak, and the Kingdom of Glory is
Grace in the full Meridian; the Kingdom of Grace is Glory Militant, and the
Kingdom of Glory is Grace Triumphant: There is such an inseparable Connection
between these two Kingdoms Grace and Glory, that there is no passing into the
one Kingdom, but by the other. At Athens there were two Temples, a Temple of
Virtue, and a Temple of Honor, and there was no going into the Temple of
Honor, but through the Temple of Virtue: So the Kingdom of Grace and Glory are
so close joined together, that we cannot go into the Kingdom of Glory, but
through the Kingdom of Grace. Many People aspire after the Kingdom of Glory,
but never look after Grace; but these two which God has joined together may
not be put asunder: The Kingdom of Grace leads to the Kingdom of Glory.

1. I begin with the first thing employed in this Petition, Thy Kingdom come: It
is employed that we are in the Kingdom of Darkness; and we pray, that we may be
brought out of the Kingdom of Darkness; the state of Nature is a Kingdom of
Darkness: It Is a Kingdom; Sin is said to reign, Romans 6.12. and it is a Kingdom
of Darkness. It is called (...), The power of darkness, Col. 1.13. Man before
the Fall was illuminated with perfect knowledge, but this light is now
eclipsed, and he is fallen into the Kingdom of Darkness.

Quest. How many ways is a Natural Man in the Kingdom of darkness?

Answ. 1. He is under the darkness of Ignorance; Ephesians. 4.18. (...), Having the
understanding darkened. Ignorance is a black vail drawn over the Mind. Men by
Nature may have a deep reach in the things of the World, but ignorant in the
things of God. Nahash the Ammonite would make a Covenant with Israel to thrust
out their right eyes; 1 Samuel 11.2. since the Fall our left eye remains a deep
insight into Worldly matters, but our right eye is thrust out, we have no
saving knowledge of God: Something we know by Nature, but nothing as we ought
to know; 1 Cor. 8.2. Ignorance draws the curtains round about the Soul: 1 Cor.
2.14.

2. A Natural Man is under the darkness of Pollution: Hence sinful actions are
called works of darkness, Romans 13.12. Pride and Lust darken the Glory of the
Soul: A sinners heart is a dark conclave, it looks blacker than Hell.

3. A Natural Man is under the darkness of Misery; he is exposed to Divine
Vengeance; and the sadness of this darkness is, that Men are not sensible of
it; they are blind, yet they think they see: The darkness of Egypt was such
thick darkness as might be felt, Exodus 10.21. Men are by Nature in thick
darkness, but here is the misery, the darkness cannot be felt, they will not
believe they are in the dark, till they are past recovery.

USE I. See what the state of Nature is; it is a kingdom of darkness, and it is
a bewitching darkness; John 3.19. Men loved darkness rather than light: As the
Athlantes in Aethiopia curse the Sun: Such as are still in the kingdom of
darkness tremble to think of this condition; this darkness of sin leads to the
chains of darkness, Jude 6. what comfort can such take in earthly things? The
Egyptians might have Food, Gold, Silver, but they could take but little
comfort in them while they were in such darkness as might be felt; so the
Natural Man may have Riches and Friends to delight in, yet he is in the kingdom
of darkness, and how dead are all these comforts. Thou who art in the kingdom
of darkness know not whither thou go. As the Ox is driven to the
shambles, but he knows not whither he goes; so the Devil is driving thee
before him to Hell, but thou know not whither thou go. Should thou dye
in thy Natural estate while thou art in the kingdom of darkness, blackness of
darkness is reserved for thee; Jude 13. To whom is reserved blackness of
darkness for ever.

USE II. Let us pray that God will bring us out of this kingdom of darkness.
Gods Kingdom of Grace cannot come into our hearts, till first we are brought
out of the kingdom of darkness: Col. 1.13. Why should not we strive to get out
of this kingdom of darkness? Who would desire to stay in a dark dungeon: O fear
the chains of darkness; Jude 6. these chains are Gods Power, binding Men as in
chains under wrath for ever. O pray that God will deliver us out of the Kingdom
of darkness. 1. Be sensible of thy dark damned estate, that thou have not one
spark of fire to give thee light. 2. Go to Christ to enlighten thee; Ephesians. 5.14.
Christ shall give thee light. He will not only bring thy light to thee, but
open the eyes to see it. That is the first thing employed, Thy Kingdom come, we
pray that we may be brought out of the Kingdom of Darkness.

2. The second thing employed in Thy Kingdom come, we do implicity pray against
the Devils Kingdom, we pray that Satan's Kingdom may be demolished in the World.
Satan's Kingdom stands in opposition to Christ's Kingdom, and while we pray, Thy
Kingdom come, we pray against Satan's Kingdom. Satan has a Kingdom; he got his
Kingdom by Conquest; he conquered Mankind in Paradise. He has his Throne; Rev.
2.13. Thou dwell where Satan's throne is; and his Throne is set up in the
hearts of Men; he does not care for their Purses but their Hearts, Ephesians. 2.2.
Satan is served upon the knee, Rev. 13.4. They worshipped the dragon, that is,
the Devil. Satan's Empire is very large; the most Kingdoms in the World pay
Tribute to him. Satan's Kingdom has two qualifications or characters.

1. It is Regnum Nequitiae, a Kingdom of Impiety. 2. Regnum Servitutis, a
Kingdom of Slavery.
1. The Kingdom of Satan is a Kingdom of Impiety: Nothing but Sin goes up in
his Kingdom, Murder and Heresy, Lust and Treachery, Oppression and Division
are the constant trade driven in Satan's Kingdom: Satan is called the unclean
Spirit, Luke 11.24. what else is propagated in his Kingdom but a mystery of
iniquity.

2. Satan's Kingdom is a Kingdom of Slavery: Satan makes all his Subjects
slaves; Peccati reus dura Daemonis tyrannide tenetur, Muis. Satan is an Usurper
and a Tyrant, he is a worse Tyrant than any other. 1. Other Tyrants do but rule
over the Body, but Satan's Kingdom rules over the Soul; Satan rides some Men as
we do Horses. 2. Other Tyrants have some pity on their Slaves; though they make
them work in the Galleys, yet they give them meat and let them have their hours
for rest; but Satan is a mercyless Tyrant, he gives his Slaves poison in stead
of meat, he gives them hurtful lusts to feed on: 1 Timothy 6.9. Nor will he let
his Slaves have any rest, he tires them out in doing his drudgery; Ier. 9.5.
They weary themselves to commit iniquity. When the Devil had entered into Judas,
he sends him to the High Priests, and from thence to the Garden, and never let
him rest till he had betrayed Christ, and hanged himself. Thus Satan is the
worst Tyrant; when Men have served him to their utmost strength, he will
welcome them to Hell with Fire and Brimstone.

USE. Let us pray that Satan's Kingdom set up in the World may be thrown down.
It Is sad to think that though the Devils Kingdom be so bad, yet that it should
have so many to support it. Satan has more to stand up for his Kingdom than
Christ has for his. What a large harvest of Souls has Satan, and God only a
few gleanings. The Pope and the Turk give their power to Satan. If in Gods
visible Church the Devil has so many Loyal Subjects that serve him with their
Lives and Souls, then how do his Subjects swarm in places of Idolatry and
Paganism, where there is none to oppose him, but all vote on the Devils side.
Men are willingly slaves to Satan; they will fight and dye for him; therefore
Satan is not only called the Prince of this world, John 14.30. but the God of
this world, 2 Cor. 4.4. to show what power Satan has over Men's Souls. O let us
pray that God will break the Scepter of the Devils Kingdom, that Michael may
destroy the Dragon, that by the help of a Religious Magistracy and Ministry the
Hellish Kingdom of the Prince of Darkness may be beaten down. Satan's Kingdom
must be thrown down before Christ's Kingdom can flourish in its Power and
Majesty.

2. When we pray, Thy Kingdom come, here is something positively intended: 1.
We pray that the Kingdom of Grace may be set up in our hearts and increased. 2.
That the Kingdom of Glory may hasten, and that we may in Gods due time be
translated into it.


I begin with the First, The Kingdom of Grace. When we pray, Thy Kingdom come,
we pray, 1. That the Kingdom of Grace may come into our hearts: This is Regnum
Dei (...), Gods lesser Kingdom; Romans 14.17. The Kingdom of God is
righteousness. Luke 17.21. The kingdom of God is within you.

Quest. 1. Why is Grace called a Kingdom?

Answ. Because where Grace comes there is a Kingly Government set up in the
Soul. Grace rules the Will and Affections, and brings the whole Man in
subjection to Christ. Grace does king it in the Soul; it swayes the Scepter, it
subdues mutinous Lusts, and keeps the Soul in a Spiritual Decorum.

Quest. 2. Why is there such need that we should pray that this Kingdom of
Grace come into our hearts?

Resp. 1. Because till the Kingdom of Grace come, we have no right to the
Covenant of Grace. The Covenant of Grace is sweetened with Love, bespangled with
Promises; the Covenant of Grace is our Magna Charta, by virtue of which God
passes himself over to us to be our God: But who are Heirs of the Covenant of
Grace? only such as have the kingdom of Grace in their hearts; Ezekiel. 36.26. A
new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you; there is the
kingdom of Grace set up in the Soul; then it follows, ver. 28. I will be your
God. The Covenant of Grace is to an ungracious Person a sealed Fountain, it is
kept as Paradise with a Flaming Sword, that the Sinner may not touch it;
without Grace you have no more right to it, than a Farmer to the City Charter.

2. Unless the Kingdom of Grace be set up in our hearts, our purest Offerings
are defiled; they may be good as to the matter but not as to the manner, they
want that which should meliorate and sweeten them under the Law. If a Man who
was unclean by a dead body did carry a piece of holy flesh in his skirt, the
holy flesh could not cleanse him, but he polluted that: Hag. 2.12. Till the
kingdom of Grace be in our hearts, Ordinances do not purify us, but we pollute
them; the Prayer of an ungracious person becomes sin; Prove. 15.8. In what a sad
condition is a Man before Gods kingdom of Grace be set up in his heart; whether
he comes or comes not to the Ordinance, he sins: If he does not come to the
Ordinance he is a contemner of it, if he does come he is a polluter of it. A
Sinners works are opera mortua dead works, Heb. 1.6. and those works which are
dead cannot please God; a dead Flower has no sweetness.

3. We had need pray that the kingdom of Grace may come, because till this
kingdom come into our hearts we are loathsome in Gods eyes; Zech. 11.8. My soul
loathed them. Quanta est faeditas vitiosae mentis. Tully. An heart void of
Grace looks blacker than Hell: Sin transforms one into a Devil; John 6.70. Have
not I chosen twelve, and one of you is a devil. Envy is the Devils eye,
hypocrisy is his cloven-foot; thus it is before the kingdom of Grace come. So
deformed is a Graceless person, that when once he sees his own filth and
leprosy, the first thing he does is to loath himself; Ezekiel. 20.43. Ye shall
loath your selves in your own sight for all your evils. I have read of a Woman
who always used flattering glasses, by chance seeing her Face in a true glass,
in insaniam delapsa est, she ran mad. Such as now dress themselves by the
flattering glass of presumption, when once God gives them a sight of their
filthiness, they will abhor themselves; Ye shall loath your selves in your own
sight for all your evils.

4. Before the kingdom of Grace comes into us we are Spiritually illegitimate,
of the Bastard brood of the Old Serpent; John 8.44. To be illegitimate is the
greatest infamy; Deuteronomy. 23.2. A bastard shall not enter into the congregation of
the Lord to the tenth generation. He was to be kept out of the holy Assemblies
of Israel as an infamous Creature: A Bastard by the Law cannot inherit; before
the kingdom of Grace come into the heart, a person is to God as one
illegitimate, and so continuing he cannot enter into the Congregation of Heaven.

5. Before the kingdom of Grace be set up in Men's hearts, the kingdom of Satan
is set up in them: They are said to be under the power of Satan; Acts 26.18.
Satan commands the Will; though he cannot force the Will, he can by his subtle
temptations draw it: The Devil is said to take men captive at his will, 2 Timothy
2.26. the Greek word (...) signifies to take them alive, as the Fowler does the
bird in the snare. The sinners heart is the Devils Mansion House, Matthew. 12.44.
I will go to my house. It is officina Diaboli, Satan's shop where he works; Ephesians.
2.2. The prince of the air now works in the children of disobedience. The
members of the Body are the tools which Satan works with: Satan possesses Men.
In Christ's time many had their Bodies possessed; but it is far worse to have
their Souls possessed: One is possessed with an unclean Devil, another with a
revengeful Devil. No wonder the Ship goes full sail when the Wind blows; no
wonder Men go full sail in sin, when the Devil the Prince of the Air blows
them: Thus it is; till the kingdom of Grace come, Men are under the power of
Satan, who like Draco writes all his Laws in blood.

6. Till the kingdom of Grace comes, a Man lies exposed to the Wrath of God;
And who knows the power of his anger? Psalm. 90.11. If when but a spark of Gods
Wrath flies into a Man's Conscience in this Life it is so terrible, what then
will it be when God stirs up all his anger. So unconceivable torturing is Gods
Wrath that the wicked call to the rocks and mountains to fall on them, and hide
them from it; Rev. 6. 1st. The Hellish torments are compared to a fiery lake,
Rev. 20.15. other fire is but painted in comparison of this: And this lake of
fire burns for ever, Mark 9.44. Gods breath kindles this fire, Isa. 30.33 and
where shall we find engines or buckets to quench it? Time will not finish it,
tears will not quench it. To this fiery Lake are Men exposed till the kingdom
of Grace be set up in them.

7. Till the kingdom of Grace come Men cannot dye with comfort; only he who
takes Christ in the arms of his Faith, can look Death in the face with joy.
But it is sad to have the king of Terrors in the Body, and not the kingdom of
Grace in the Soul. It Is a wonder every Graceless person does not dye
distracted: What will a Grace-despiser do when Death comes to him with a Writ
of Habeas Corpus? Hell follows Death; Rev. 6.8. Behold a pale horse, and his
name that sat on him was death, and hell followed him. Thus you see what need
we have to pray that the kingdom of Grace may come. He that dies without Grace,
I may say as Christ, Matthew. 26.24. It had been good for that-man he had not
been born. Few do believe the necessity of having the kingdom of Grace set up
in their hearts, as appears by this, because they are so well content to live
without it. Does that Man believe the necessity of a Pardon that is content to
be without it? Most People if they may have Trading, and may sit quietly under
their Vines and Fig Trees, they are in their kingdom, though they have not the
kingdom of God within them. If the Candle of Prosperity shine upon their head,
they care not whether the Grace of God shine in their hearts: Do these Men
believe the necessity of Grace? Were they convinced how needful it were to have
the kingdom of God within them, they would cry out as the Jailer, Acts 16.30.
What shall I do to be saved?

Quest. 3. How may we know that the Kingdom of Grace is set up in our hearts?

Answ. It concerns us to examine this, our Salvation depends upon it; and we
had need be curious in the search, because there is something looks like Grace
which is not; Gal. 6.3. If a man think himself to be something when he is
nothing, he deceives himself. Many think they have the kingdom of Grace come
into their heart, and it is only a Chimera, a golden dream: Quam multi cum vana
spe descendunt ad inferos! Aug. Zeuxis did paint grapes so lively that he
deceived the living birds. There are many Deceits about Grace.

Deceit 1. Men think they have the kingdom of Grace in their hearts because
they have the means of Grace; they live where the silver trumpet of the Gospel
sounds, they are lift up to Heaven with Ordinances; Judge. 17.13. I have a
Levite to my priest; sure I shall go to Heaven. The Jews cried, Ier. 7.4. The
temple of the Lord, The temple of the Lord; we are apt to glory in this, the
Oracles of God are committed to us, we have Word and Sacrament: Alas, this is a
fallacy, we may have the means of Grace, yet the kingdom of Grace may not be
set up in our hearts; we may have the kingdom of God come nigh us, Luke 11.20.
but not into us; the sound of the Word in our ears, and not the savor of it in
our hearts. Many of the Jews, who had Christ for their Preacher, were never
the better: Hot clothes will not put warmth into a dead Man. Thou may have
hot clothes, warm and lively Preaching, yet be Spiritually dead: Mat. 8.12. The
children of the kingdom shall be cast out.

Deceit 2. Men think they have the kingdom of Grace set up in their hearts,
because they have some common works of the Spirit.

(1.) They have great enlightnings of mind, profound knowledge, and almost
speak like Angels dropped from Heaven; but the Apostle supposes a case that
after Men have been enlightened, they may fall away. Heb. 6.

Quest. But wherein does this illumination come short?

Answ. The illumination of Hypocrites is not vertual, it does not leave an
impression of Holiness behind; it is like weak Physic that will not work. The
mind is enlightened, but the heart is not renewed. A Christian is all head, but
no feet, he does not walk in the ways of God.

(2.) Men have had convictions and stirrings of Conscience for sin, they have
seen the evil of their ways, therefore now they hope the Kingdom of Grace is
come; but I say, convictions though they are a step toward Grace, yet they are
not Grace. Had not Pharaoh and Judas convictions? Exodus 10.16.

Quest. What makes convictions prove abortive, wherein is the defect?

Answ. 1. They are not deep enough: A Sinner never saw himself lost without
Christ. The seed that wanted depth of earth withered; Matthew. 13.5. These
convictions are like blossoms blown off before they come to maturity. 2. These
convictions are involuntary; the Sinner does what he can to stifle these
convictions; he drowns them in Wine and Mirth; he labors to get rid of them;
as the Deer when it is shot runs and shakes out the arrow, so does he the arrow
of conviction: Or as the Prisoner that files off his fetters and breaks loose,
so a Man breaks loose from his convictions. His corruptions are stronger than
convictions.

(3.) Men have had some kind of humiliation, and have shed tears for their
sins, therefore now they hope the Kingdom of Grace is come into their hearts?
But this is no infallible sign of Grace: Saul wept, Ahab humbled himself.

Quest. Why is not humiliation Grace? Wherein does it come short?

Answ. 1. Tears in the wicked do not spring from love to God, but are forced by
affliction. Genesis 4.13. as water that drops from the Still is forced by the
fire. The tears of Sinners are forced by Gods fiery Judgments. 2. They are
deceitful tears; lachrymae mentiri doctae: Men weep yet go on in sin; they do
not drown their sins in their tears.

(4.) Men have begun some reformation, therefore sure now the Kingdom of Grace
is come? But there may be deceit in this: 1. A Man may leave his Oaths and
Drunkenness, yet ^^ill be in love with Sin; he may leave Sin out of fear of
Hell, or because it brings shame and penury, but still his heart goes after it;
Hos. 4.8. They set their heart on their iniquity; as Lots Wife left Sodom, but
still her heart was in Sodom. Hypocrites are like the Snake which casts her
coat, but keeps her poison: They keep the love of sin, as one that has been
long Suitor to another, though his Friends break off the march, yet still he
has a hankering Love to her. 2. It may be a partial Reformation: He may leave
one Sin and live in another, he may refrain drunkenness and live in
covetousness, he may refrain swearing and live in the sin of slandering, one
Devil may be cast out, and an other as bad may come in the room. 3. A Man may
forsake gross sins, but have no reluctance against Heart-sins: Motus primo
primi, proud, lustful Thoughts; though he dams up the stream, he lets alone the
Fountain. O therefore if there be so many deceits, and Men may think the
kingdom of grace is come into their Heart, when it is not: How curious and
critical had we need be in our search, whether we have the kingdom of grace
really come into our hearts. If a Man be deceived in the Title of his Land, it
is but the loss of his Estate: But if he be deceived about his grace, it is the
loss of his Soul. I should now come to answer this Question, How we know, that
the kingdom of grace is set up in our Hearts?

Quest. How may we know the Kingdom of Grace is set up in us?

Answ. 1. In general, By having a Metamorphosis and Change wrought in the Soul;
This is called the New Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. The Faculties are not new, but
there is a new Nature. As the strings of the Lute are the same, but the Tune is
altered. When the Kingdom of grace is set up, there is Light in the Mind, Order
in the Affections, Pliableness in the Will, Tenderness in the Conscience. Such
as can find no change of heart, they are the same they were, as vain, as
earthly, as unclean as ever, there is no sign of Gods kingdom of grace in them.

2. More particularly, We may know the kingdom of grace is set up in our
hearts, 1. By having unfeigned desires after God: This is the smoking Flax
Christ will not quench: A true desire of grace is grace: By the beating of this
pulse, conclude there is life; Nehem. 1.11. O Lord, let thy ear be attentive to
the prayer of thy Servants, who desire to fear thy Name. But may not an
Hypocrite have good desires? Numb. 23.10. Let me dye the Death of the
Righteous. Therefore I say, unfeigned desires evidence the kingdom of God
within a Man.

Quest. But how may these unfeigned Desires be known?

1. An unfeigned desire is ingenuous, we desire God propter se, for himself,
for his intrinsecal Excellencies, and the Oriency of his Beauty which shines:
The savor of Christ's Ointments, ( i. e.) his graces, draw the Virgins desires
after him, Cant. 1.3. A true Saint desires Christ, not only for what he has,
but for what he is; not only for his Rewards, but for his Holiness. No
Hypocrite can thus desire God; he may desire him for his Jewels, but not for
his Beauty.

2. An unfeigned desire is unsatiable, it cannot be satisfied without God; let
the World heap her Honors and Riches, they will not satisfy: Not Flowers or
Music will content him who is thirsty: Nothing will quench the Souls thirst
but the blood of Christ; He faints away, his heart breaks with longing for God,
Psalm. 84.2. Psalm. 119.20.

3. An unfeigned desire is active, it flourishes into endeavor; Isa. 26.9.
With my Soul have I desired thee, yea, with my Spirit within me will I seek
these early. A Soul that desires aright says, Christ, I must have grace, I
must have, I will have Heaven though I take it by storm: He who desires water
will let down the Bucket into the Well to draw it up.

4. An unfeigned desire is superlative: We desire Christ not only more then the
world, but more then Heaven, Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee?
Heaven it self would not satisfy without Christ; Christ is the Diamond in the
Ring of glory: If God should say to the Soul, I will put thee into Heaven, but
I will hide my Face from thee, I will draw a Curtain between, that thou shall
not behold my glory; the Soul would not be satisfied, but say as Absalom, 2 Samuel 14.32. Now therefore let me see the Kings face.

5. An unfeigned desire is gradual; It increases as the Sun in the Horizon; A
little of God will not satisfy, but the pious Soul desires still more: A drop
of water is not enough for the thirsty Traveller. Though a Christian is
thankful for the least degree of grace, yet he is not satisfied with the
greatest; still he thirsts for more of Christ and his Spirit: Desire is an holy
Dropsy: A Saint would have more knowledge, more Sanctity, more of Christ's
Presence. A glympse of Christ through the Lattice of an Ordinance is sweet; and
now the Soul will never leave longing, till it sees him face to face. He
desires to have grace perfected in glory: Dulcissimo Deo totus immergi cupit
and inviscerari: He would be swallowed up in God, and be ever bathing himself
in those perfumed waters of pleasure, which run at his right hand for ever.
Sure this unfeigned desire after God is a blessed sign that the kingdom of
grace is come into our Hearts; the beating of this pulse shows life, est a Deo
ut been velimus, Aug. If iron move upward contrary to its Nature, it is a sign
some Loadstone has been there drawing it: If the Soul move toward God in
unfeigned desires, it is a sign the Loadstone of the Spirit has been drawing
it. 2. We may know the kingdom of grace is come into our Hearts by having the
Princely grace of Faith: Fides est sanctissima humani pectoris Gemma -- Faith
cuts us off from the wild Olive of Nature, and ingrafts us into Christ: Faith
is the vital artery of the Soul: Heb. 10.38. The just shall live by Faith:
Faith makes an holy adventure on Christ's Merits, When this Faith as a Princely
grace reigns in the Soul, now the kingdom of God is come into us. The Hebrew
word for Faith comes from a Radix, which signifies to nourish: Faith nourishes
the Soul, and is the Nurse of all the graces: But who will not say he is a
Believer: Simon Magus believed, Acts 8.13. yet was in the gall of bitterness.
The Hypocrite can put on Faiths Mantle, as the Devil did Samuel's. How shall we
know therefore that our Faith is ^ound? That it is the Faith of the operation
of God, Col. 2.12. and so that the kingdom of God is within us?

Answ. 1. True Faith is wrought by the Ministry of the Word; Romans 10.17. Faith
comes by hearing. Peter let down the Net of his Ministry, and at one draught
catched Three Thousand Souls. Let us examine, How was our Faith wrought? Did
God in the Ministry of the word humble us? Did he break up the fallow ground of
our heart, and then cast in the Seed of Faith? a good sign; but if you know not
how you came by your Faith, suspect your selves; as we suspect Men to have
stolen goods when they know not how they came by them.

2. True Faith is at first minute and small, like a grain of Mustard seed; it
is full of doubts and fears; it is smoking flax; it smoaks with desire, but
does not flame with comfort; it is so small, that a Christian can hardly
discern whether he has Faith or no.

3. True Faith is long in working, non sit in instanti -- It costs many
searchings of heart; many Prayers, and Tears; there is a spiritual Combat; the
Soul suffers many sore Pangs of Humiliation before the Child of Faith be born;
they whose Faith is per saltum, they leap out of sin into a confidence that
Christ is theirs; I say as Isaac concerning his Sons Venison, Genesis 27.20. How
is it that thou have found it so quickly? How is it that thou come by thy
Faith so soon? The Seed in the Parable which sprung up suddenly withered, Mark.
4.5. Solent praecocia subito flaccescere.

4. True Faith is joined with Sanctity; as a little Bezoar is strong in
operation, and a little Musk sweetens; so a little Faith purifies; 1 Timothy 3.9.
Holding the mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience. Faith though it does but
touch Christ, fetches an healing virtue from him. Justifying Faith does that
in a spiritual sense, which miraculous Faith does; it removes the Mountains of
sin, and casts them into the Sea of Christ's blood.

5. True Faith will trust God without a Pawn. Though a Christian be cut short
in Provisions, the Fig Tree does not blossom, yet he will trust in God: Fides
Famem non formidat -- Faith fears not Famine. God has given us his Promise as
his Bond, Psalm. 37.3. Verily thou shall be fed; Faith puts this Bond in suit:
God will rather work a Miracle than His promise shall fail. He has cause to
suspect his Faith, who says he trusts God for the greater, but dares not trust
him for the lesser; he trusts God for Salvation, but dares not trust him for a
livelihood

6. True Faith is Prolifical, it brings for Fruit; Faith has Rachel's Beauty,
and Leah's Fruitfulness: Fides pinguescit operibus, Luther, Faith is full of
good works; Faith believes as if it did not work, and it works as if it did not
believe; Faith is the spouslike grace which marries Christ, and good works are
the Children which Faith bears; by having such a Faith we may know the kingdom
of God is within us: Grace is certainly in our Hearts.

3. We may know the kingdom of Grace is come into our hearts, by having the
noble grace of Love: Faith and Love are the two Poles on which all Religion
turns; Cant. 1.4. The Upright love thee. True Love is to love God out of
Choice; Love turns the Soul into a Seraphin, it makes it burn in a flame of
Affection: Love is the truest Touchstone of Sincerity: Love is the Queen of the
Graces, it commands the whole Soul, 2 Cor. 5.4. If our Love to God be Genuine
and Real, we let him have the Supremacy, we set him in the highest room of our
Soul, we give him the purest of our Love; Cant. 8.2. I would cause thee to
drink of spiced wine, of the juice of my Pomgrenate. If the Spouse had any
thing better than other, a Cup more juicy and spiced, Christ should drink of
that: We give the Creature the Milk of our Love, but God the Cream. In short,
if we love God aright, we love his Laws; we love his picture drawn in the
Saints, by the Pencil of the Holy Ghost; we love his Presence in his
Ordinances. Sleidan says, the Protestants in France had a Church which they
called Paradise; as if they thought themselves in Paradise, while they had Gods
Presence in his Sanctuary. The Soul that loves God, loves his appearing, 2 Timothy
4.8. It will be a glorious appearing to the Saints, when their Union with
Christ shall be complete, then their joy shall be full. The Bride longs for the
marriage day: The Spirit and the Bride say come, Even so come Lord Jesus, Rev.
22.17. By this Sacred Love we may know the Kingdom of God is within us.

4. We may know the Kingdom of Grace is come into our hearts by Spiritualizing
the Duties of Religion; 1 Pet. 2.5. Ye are an holy priesthood to offer up
spiritual sacrifices. Spiritualizing Duty consists in three things.

1. Fixedness of Mind. 2. Fervency of Devotion. 3. Uprightness of Aim.
1. Fixedness of Mind: Then we Spiritualize Duty when our Minds are fixed on
God; 1 Cor. 7.35. That ye may attend on the Lord without distraction. Though
impertinent thoughts sometimes come into the heart in Duty, yet they are not
allowed, Psalm. 119.13. they come as unwelcome guests, which are no sooner spyed
but they are turned out.

2. Fervency of Devotion; Romans 12.11. Fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord:
(...): It Is a Metaphor alludes to Water that seeths and boyls over; so the
Affections boil over, the Eyes melt in tears, the Heart flows in holy
ejaculations. We not only bring our offering to God but our hearts.

3. Uprightness of Aim: An heart that is upright has three ends in Duty. 1.
That he may grow more like God: As Moses on the Mount had some of Gods Glory
reflected on him; his face shined. 2 That he may have more communion with God;
1 John 1.6. our (...), Our fellowship is with the Father. 3. That he may bring
more Glory to God, 1 Pet. 4.11. Phil. 1.20. That Christ may be magnified.
Sincerity aims at God in all; though we shoot short yet we take a right aim:
This is a sure evidence of Grace, the Spiritualizing Duty. The Spirits of Wine
are best; so is the Spiritual part of Duty. A little Spiritualness in Duty is
better than all the gildings of the Temple, or outward pompous Worship, which
does so dazzle carnal eyes.

5. We may know the Kingdom of Grace is come into us by antipathy and
opposition against every known sin; Psalm. 119.104. I hate every false way:
Hatred is (...), Arist. against the whole kind. Hatred is implacable. Anger may
be reconciled, hatred cannot. A gracious Soul not only forsakes sin, (as a Man
forsakes his Country never to return to it more) but hates sin; as there is an
antipathy between the Crocadile and the Scorpion. If the Kingdom of God be
within us, we not only hate sin for Hell, but we hate it as Hell; as being
contrary to Gods Holiness and our Happiness.

6. We may know the Kingdom of Grace is come into us when we have given up our
selves to God by obedience: As a Servant gives up himself to his Master, as a
Wife gives up her self to her Husband, so we give up our selves to God by
obedience; and this obedience is, 1. Free; as that is the sweetest honey which
drops from the comb. 2. Uniform; we obey God in one thing as well as another,
Psalm. 119.6. Then shall I not be ashamed; or as it is in the Hebrew (...), I
shall not blush when I have respect to all thy commandments. A good Christian
is like a pair of Compasses, one foot of the Compass stands upon the Center,
the other part of it goes round the Circle; so a Christian by Faith stands on
God the Center, and by Obedience goes round the Circle of Gods Commandments, a
sign the Kingdom of Grace is not come into the heart, when it does not reign
there by universal Obedience. Hypocrites would have Christ to be their Savior,
but they pluck the government from his shoulders, they will not have him rule;
but he who has the Kingdom of God within him, submits cheerfully to every
command of God; he will do what God will have him do, he will be what God will
have him be. He puts a blank Paper into Gods hand, and says, Lord, write what
thou will, I will subscribe. Blessed is he that can find all these things in
his Soul; He is all glorious within, Psalm. 45.13. he carries a Kingdom about
him; and this Kingdom of Grace will certainly bring to a Kingdom of Glory.

I shall answer some Doubts and Objections a Christian may make against himself.

Object. I Fear the Kingdom of Grace is not yet come into my heart?

Answ. When a Christian is under temptation, or Grace lies dormant, he is not
fit to be his own judge, but in this case he must take the witness of others
who have the Spirit of discerning: But let us hear a Christians Objections
against himself why he thinks the Kingdom of Grace is not yet come into his
heart.

Object. 1. I cannot discern Grace?

Answ. A Child of God may have the Kingdom of Grace in his heart yet not know
it. The Cup was in Benjamins sack, though he did not know it was there; thou
may have Faith in thy heart, the Cup may be in thy sack, though thou know
it not. Old Jacob wept for his Son Joseph, when Joseph was alive; thou may
weep for want of Grace when Grace may be alive in thy heart. The seed may be in
the ground when we do not see it spring up; the seed of God may be sown in thy
heart, though thou do not perceive the springing of it up; think not Grace is
lost because it is hid.

Object. 2. Before the Kingdom of Grace come into the heart there must be some
preparation for it? The fallow ground of the heart must be broken up; I fear
the plough of the Law has not gone deep enough, I have not been humbled
enough, therefore I have no Grace?

Answ. God does not prescribe a just proportion of sorrow and humiliation: The
Scripture mentions the truth of sorrow but not the measure: Some are more
flagitious ^inners than others, these must have a greater degree of
humiliation. A knotty piece of Timber requires more wedges to be driven into
it: Some Stomachs are fouler than others, therefore need stronger Physic. But
would thou know when thou have been humbled enough for sin? 1. When thou art
weary of thy sin, and sick of love to Christ. What does God require sorrow for,
but as sauce to make Sin relish bitter, and Christ sweet. 2. When thou art
willing to let go thy sins. Then the Gold has lain long enough in the Furnace
when the dross is purged out; so when the love of sin is purged out, a Soul is
humbled enough to divine acceptance, though not to divine satisfaction. Now if
thou art humbled enough, (though not so much as others) what needs more?
Frustra fit per plura, etc. If a Needle will let out the Imposthume, what needs
a Lance? Be not more cruel to thy self than God would have thee.

Object. 3. If the Kingdom of God were within me, it would be a Kingdom of
Power, it would enable me to serve God with vigor of Soul, but I have a spirit
of infirmity upon me, I am weak and impotent, and untuned to every holy action?

Answ. There is a great difference between the weakness of Grace and the want
of Grace. A Man may have Life though he be sick and weak. Weak Grace is not to
be despised, but cherished. Christ will not break the bruised reed. Do not
argue from the weakness of Grace to the nullity.

1. Weak Grace will give us a Title to Christ as well as a strong. Weak Faith
justifies as well as a strong. A weak hand of Faith will receive the Alms of
Christ's merit.

2. Weak Faith is capable of growth. The seed springs up by degrees; first the
blade and then the ear, and then the full corn in the ear; the Faith that is
strongest was once in its infancy. Grace is like the waters of the Sanctuary
which did rise higher and higher: Be not discouraged at thy weak Faith; though
it be now but blossoming it will by degrees come to more maturity.

3. The weakest Grace shall persevere as well as the strongest. A sucking Child
was as safe in the Ark as Noah. An infant-believer that is but newly laid to
the breast of a Promise is as safe in Christ as the most eminent heroic Saint.

Object. 4. I fear the Kingdom of Grace is not yet come, because I find the
Kingdom of Sin so strong in me. Had I Faith it would purify my heart, but I
find much Pride, Worldliness, Passion.

Answ. The best of the Saints have remainders of corruption; Dan. 7.12. They
had their dominion taken away, yet their lives were prolonged for a season: So
in the regenerate, though the dominion of sin be taken away, yet the life of it
is prolonged for a season. What pride was there in Christ's own Disciples, when
they strove which should be greatest. The issue of sin will not be quite
stopped till death The Lord is pleased to let the in-being of sin continue to
humble his people, and make them prize Christ the more; but because you find
corruptions stirring, do not therefore presently un-saint your selves, and deny
the Kingdom of Grace to be come into your Souls: That you feel sin is an
evidence of Spiritual Life, that you mourn for sin, what are these tears but
fruits of love to God? That you have a combat with sin argues antipathy
against it; those sins which you did once wear as a crown on your head, are now
as fetters on the leg, is not all this from the Spirit of Grace in you? Sin is
in you as poison in the body, which you are sick of, and use all
Scripture-antidotes to expel. Should we condemn all those who have the
in-dwelling of sin; nay, who have had sin (at some times) prevailing, we should
blot some of the best Saints out of the Bible.

Object. 5. Where the Kingdom of Grace comes, it softens the heart, but I find
my heart frozen and congealed into hardness, I can hardly squeeze out one tear?
Do Flowers grow on a Rock, can there be any Grace in such a rocky heart?

Answ. 1. There may be grief, where there are no tears: The best sorrow is
rational. In your judgment you esteem sin the most hyperbolical evil, you have
a disgust and displacency against sin; this is a rational sorrow, and such as
God will accept.

2. A Christian may have some hardness in his heart, yet not have an hard
heart; subjectum a praestantiori part. A field may have Tares in it, yet we
call it a field of Wheat; in the best heart is a mixture of hardness, yet
because there is some softness and melting God looks upon it as a soft heart;
therefore Christian dispute not against thy self; if thou can find but one
thing, that the frame and temper of thy Soul be holy; art thou still breathing
after God, delighting in him, is the complexion of thy Soul Heavenly? Can
thou say as David, Psalm. 139.17. When I awake I am still with thee. As Colors
laid in Oil, or a Statue carved in Gold, abide, so does an holy complexion, the
Soul is still pointing toward God: If it be thus with thee, assure thy self
the Kingdom of Grace is come into thy Soul; be not unkind to God to deny any
work of his Spirit which he has wrought in thee.

USE I. Of Exhortation, Labor to find that this Kingdom of Grace is set up in
your hearts; while others aspire after Earthly Kingdoms, labor to have the
Kingdom of God within you; Luke 17.21. The Kingdom of Grace must come into us
before we can go into the Kingdom of Glory. Motives,

1. Motive. This Kingdom of God within us is our Spiritual Beauty; the Kingdom
of Grace adorns a person, and sets him off in the eyes of God and Angels: This
makes the Kings daughter all glorious (...); Psalm. 45.13. (...). Chrysostom. Grace
sheds a glory and luster upon (...) Soul. As the Diamond to the Ring, so is
Grace to the Soul. An heart beautified with Grace, has the King of Heavens
picture hung in it.

2. Motive. The Kingdom of Grace set up in the heart is our Spiritual Defense.
Grace is called the armor of light, Romans 13.12. It is light for beauty, and
armor for defense. He who has the Kingdom of Grace within him is strengthened
with all might according to Gods glorious power, Col. 1.11. he has the shield
of Faith, the helmet of Hope, the breast plate of Righteousness: This armor
can never be shot through, it fortifies a Christian against the assaults of
Temptation, and the terrors of Hell.

3. Motive. The Kingdom of Grace set up in the heart brings Peace with it, Romans
14.17. The kingdom of God is righteousness and peace: There is a secret Peace
breeds out of Holiness. Peace is the best Blessing of a Kingdom: Pax una
triumphis innumeris melior -- The Kingdom of Grace is a Kingdom of Peace; Grace
is the root, Peace is the flower grows out of it, it is Pax in procella, such
Peace that no worldly affliction can shake. The doors of Solomon's Temple were
made of Olive Tree, carved with open flowers, 1 Kings 6.32. in a gracious heart
is the olive of Peace, and the open flowers of Joy.

4. Motive. The Kingdom of Grace enricheth the Soul: A Kingdom has its riches.
A Believer is said to be rich in faith, Iam. 2.5. how rich is he who has God
for his God, who is heir to all the Promises; Heb. 6.17. A Man may be rich in
Bills and Bonds; a Believer, though he may say as Peter, Silver and gold have I
none, Acts 3.6. yet he is rich in Bills and Bonds, he is Heir to all Gods
Promises; and to be Heir to the Promise is better than to be Heir to the Crown.

5. Motive. When the Kingdom of Grace comes it does fix and establish the
heart; Psalm. 57.7. O God my heart is fixed. Before the Kingdom of Grace comes,
the heart is very unfixed and unsettled, like a Ship without a ballast, like
Quicksilver that cannot be made to fix; but when the Kingdom of Grace comes it
does stabilire animum, it fixes the heart upon God; and when the heart is
fixed, it rests quiet as in its center.

6. Motive. This Kingdom of Grace is distinguishing; it is a sure pledge of
Gods love. God may give Kingdoms in anger, but where ever the Kingdom of Grace
is set up it is in love; God cannot give Grace in anger: The Crown always goes
with this Kingdom; let us therefore be ambitious of this Kingdom of Grace.

Quest. How shall we do to obtain this Kingdom?

Answ. 1. In General, Take pains for it: We cannot have the World without
labor, and do we think to have Grace? If thou seek her as silver, Prove.
2.3. A Man may as well expect a crop without sowing, as Grace without labor.
We must not think to have Grace as Israel had Manna, they did not plough or
sow, but it was rained down from Heaven upon them; no, we must operam dare,
take pains for Grace. Our Salvation cost Christ blood, it will cost us sweat.

2. Let us go to God to set up this Kingdom of Grace in our hearts; God is
called the God of all grace, 1 Pet. 5.10. Say, Lord, I want this Kingdom of
Grace, I want an humble believing heart, O enrich me with Grace, let thy
Kingdom come; and be importunate suitors. As Achsah said to her Father Caleb,
Josh. 15.19. Thou have given me a south-land, give me also springs of water: So
Lord, thou have given me enough of the World, here is a South-land, but Lord
give me the upper springs of Grace, let thy Kingdom come. What is the Venison
thou have given me without the Blessing: When we are importunate with God, and
will take no denial, then he will set up his Kingdom within us.

3. Keep close to the Word preached; the Word preached is virga virtutis; the
rod of Gods strength, it is the great engine God uses for the setting up the
Kingdom of Grace in the heart; Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing: Though God
could work Grace immediately by his Spirit, or by the ministry of Angels from
Heaven, yet he chooses to work by the Word preached; this is the usual means
by which he sets up the Kingdom of Grace in the heart; and the reason is,
because he has put his divine sanction upon it, he has appointed it for the
means of working Grace, and he will honor his own Ordinance: 1 Cor. 1.21. What
reason could be given why the Waters of Damascus should not have as sovereign
virtue to heal Naamans Leprosy as the Waters of Jordan, only this, because God
did appoint and sanctify the Waters of Jordan to heal and not the other:
Therefore let us keep to the Word preached, because the power of God goes along
with it.

USE II. Such as have this Kingdom of God set up in them, it calls for
gratulation and thanksgiving: What will you be thankful (...) not for a
Kingdom? Grace is the best Blessing, it is the result and product of Gods
electing love: God in setting up his kingdom of grace, has done more for you
^han if he had made you Kings and Queens; for now you are born of God, and of
the Blood Royal of Heaven. O admire and exalt free Grace; Make Gods p^^ise
glorious, Psalm. 66.2. The Apostle seldom mentions the work of Grace, but he
joins praise, Col. 1.12. Giving thanks to the Father, who has made us meet for
the inheritance of the Saints in light. If God has crowned you with the
Kingdom of Grace, do you crown him with your Praises.

2. The Second thing intended by our Savior in this Petition is, That the
Kingdom of Grace may increase, that it may come more into us: And this may
answer a Question:

Quest. Why do we pray, Thy Kingdom come, when the Kingdom of Grace is already
come into the Soul?

Answ. Though the kingdom of grace be already come into us, yet still we must
pray, Thy Kingdom come; namely, that grace may be increased, and that this
kingdom may flourish still more in our Souls. Till we come to live among the
Angels we shall need to pray this Prayer, Thy Kingdom come, Lord, let thy
kingdom of grace come in more power into my Soul, let grace be more augmented
and increased.

Quest. 1. When does the Kingdom of Grace increase in the Soul, when is it a
flourishing Kingdom?

Answ. 1. When a Christian has further degrees added to his graces, there is
more oil in the lamp; his knowledge is clearer, his love is more inflamed:
Grace is capable of degrees, and may rise higher as the Sun in the Horizon. It
is not with us as it was with Christ, who received the Spirit without measure;
John 3.34. Christ could not be more holy than he was; but our Grace is
receptive of further degrees, we may have more sanctity, we may add more cubits
to our spiritual stature.

2. Then the kingdom of Grace increases when a Christian has gotten more
strength than he had; Job 17.9. He that has clean hands shall be stronger and
stronger. Hebr. Iosiphometz, He shall add to his strength. A Christian has
strength to resist temptation, to forgive his enemies, to suffer affliction;
it is not easy to suffer, a Man must deny himself ere he take up the Cross: The
way to Heaven is like the way which Jonathan and his Armor-bearer had in
climbing up a steep place, 1 Samuel 14.4. There was a sharp rock on the one side,
and a sharp rock on the other: It requires much strength to climb up this rocky
way. That Grace which will carry us through Prosperity, will not carry us
through Sufferings: The Ship needs stronger tackling to carry it through a
storm than a calm. Now when we are so strong in Grace that we can bear up under
affliction without murmuring or fainting; here is the kingdom of grace
increased. What mighty strength of grace had he who told the Emperor
Valentinian, you may take away my Life, but you cannot take away my love to the
Truth.

3. Then the Kingdom of Grace increases, when a Christian has most conflict
with Spiritual Corruptions; he not only abstains from gross Evils, but has a
Combat with inward, hidden, close Corruptions; as Pride, Envy, Hypocrisy, vain
Thoughts, carnal Confidence, these are spiritual Wickednesses, and do both
defile, and disturb; 2 Cor. 7.1. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness
of Flesh and Spirit. Which shows there are two sorts of Corruptions, one of the
Flesh, the other of the Spirit; when we grieve for, and combat with spiritual
Sin, (as being the Root of all gross sins) Now the Kingdom of Grace increases,
and spreads its Territories in the Soul.

4. Then the kingdom of grace flourishes, when a Christian has learned to
live by Faith; Gal. 2.20. I live by the Faith of the Son of God. There is the
Habit of Faith, and the drawing of this Habit into exercise: For a Christian to
graft his hope of Salvation only upon the stock of Christ's Righteousness, and
make Christ all in Justification; to live on the Promises as the Be on the
Flower, and suck out the sweetness of them; to trust God where we cannot trace
him; to believe his Love thorough a Frown; to persuade our selves when he has
the Face of an Enemy, yet he has the Heart of a Father; when we are arrived at
this, here is the Kingdom of Grace flourishing in our Souls.

5. When a Christian is arrived at holy Zeal: Numb. 25.13 Phinehas was zealous
for his God. Zeal is the Flame of the Affections, it turns a Saint into
Seraphim: A zealous Christian is impatient when God is dishonored, Rev. 2.2.
he will wrestle with difficulties, he will swim to Christ through a sea of
blood, Act. 21.13. Zeal loves truth when it is despised and opposed: Psalm.
119.126. They have made void thy Law, therefore I love thy Law. Here is grace
increasing like the Sun in the Horizon: Zeal resembles the Holy Ghost. Acts.
2.2. There appeared cloven Tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of
them. Tongues of fire were an Emblem of that fire of zeal which the Spirit
poured upon them.

6. Then the Kingdom of Grace increases, when a Christian is as well diligent
in his particular Calling, as devout in his general. He is the wise Christian
that carries things equally, that does so live by Faith, that he lives in a
Calling: Therefore it is worth our Notice, when the Apostle had exhorted the
Thessalonians to increase in grace, 1 Thessalonians. 4.10. he presently adds, ver. 11.
And that ye do your own business, and work with your hands. This is a sign
grace is increasing, when Christians go cheerfully about their Calling: Indeed
to be all the day in the Mount with God, and to have the Mind fixed on glory,
is more sweet to a Man's self, and is an Heaven upon Earth: But to be conversant
in our Callings is more profitable to others. I may allude to that of St. Paul,
To be with Christ is best for me; yet to abide here is more needful for you,
Phil. 1.24. So to converse with God in Prayer, and sweet Meditation all the
Week long, is more for the Comfort of a Man's own Person; but to be sometimes
employed in the business of a Calling is more profitable for the Family to
which he belongs: It Is not good to be as the Lillies, which toil not, neither
do they spin. It shows the increase of grace when a Christian keeps a due
Decorum. He joins Piety and Industry, when zeal runs forth in Religion, and
Diligence is put forth in a Calling.

7. Then the Kingdom of grace increases, when a Christian is established in
the belief and love of the Truth. The heart by nature is as a Ship without
Ballast, it wavers and fluctuates. Beza writes of one Bolezius, his Religion
changed as the Moon and Planet Mercury Such as are wandering stars, will be
falling stars: But when a Soul is built on the Rock Christ, and no winds of
Temptation can blow it away; now the kingdom of grace flourishes. One calls
Athanasius, Adamas Ecclesiae, an invincible Adamant, in respect of his
stability in the Truth, Col. 2.7. rooted and built up in him; the rooting of a
Tree evidenceth the growth.

8. Then the kingdom of grace increases in a Man's own Heart, when he labors
to be instrumental, to set up this kingdom in others: Though it is the greatest
benefit to have grace wrought in our selves, yet it is the greatest honor to
be instrumental to work it in others; Gal. 4.19. of whom I travail in birth,
till Christ be formed in you. Such as are Masters of a Family should endeavor
to see the kingdom of grace set up in their Servants: Such as are godly
Parents, let not God alone by prayer, till you see grace in your Children: What
a comfort would it be to you, to be both the Natural, and the Spiritual Fathers
of your Children. Austin says his Mother Monica travailed with greater care
and Pain for his new birth, then his natural. This shows the increase of grace,
when we labor to see the kingdom of grace set up in others; then the water
abounds in the River, when it overflows, and runs into the Meadows; then grace
increases in the Soul, when it has influence upon others, and we endeavor
their Salvation.

2. Quest. Wherein appears the needfulness of this, that the Kingdom of Grace
should be increased?

1. This is Gods design in keeping up a standing Ministry in the Church, to
increase the kingdom of grace in men's hearts; Ephesians. 4.8. He gave Gifts unto Men,
that is, Ministerial Gifts: Why so? ver. 12. for the edifying of the Body of
Christ; not only for Conversion, but for augmentation: Therefore the Word
preached is compared not only to Seed, but to Milk; because by this Breast-milk
God designs our growth in grace.

2. We had need have the kingdom of grace increase, in respect we have a great
deal of work to do, and a little grace will hardly carry us through; a
Christians Life is laborious; so many Tentations to resist; so many Promises to
believe; so many Precepts to obey, that it will require a great deal of grace:
A Christian must not only pray, but pray fervently, Iam. 5.16. not only repent,
but be zealous and repent, Rev 3.19. not only love, but be sick of Love, Cant.
2.5. How had he need therefore have the kingdom of grace enlarged in his Soul,
as his work increases upon him, so his grace had need increase.

3. If the kingdom of grace does not increase, it will decay, Rev. 2.4. Thou
have left thy first love; grace for want of increasing is sometimes like a
Winter Plant, all the Sap runs to the root, and it looks as if it were dead,
Rev. 3.2. Strengthen the things that remain, which are ready to dye: Though
grace cannot expire, it may wither, and a withering Christian loses much of
his Beauty and Fragrancy; what great need then have we to pray Thy Kingdom
come, that this kingdom of grace may be increased; if grace be not improved it
will soon be impaired: A Christian for want of increasing his grace loses his
strength, he is like a sick Man, that cannot either walk, or work; his prayers
are sick and weak, he is as if he had no life in him, his Faith can hardly
fetch breath, and you can scarce feel the Pulse of his Love to beat.

4. To have grace increasing is suitable to Christianity: Christians are called
Trees of Righteousness, Isa. 61.3. The Saints are not only Jewels for sparkling
Luster, but Trees for growth, they are called the Lights of the World, Phil
2.15. Light is still increasing. First there is the Crepusculum or Daybreak,
and so it shines brighter to the Meridian. They who are the Lights of the World
must increase till they come to the Meridian of Glory. Not to grow is
suspicious; painted things grow not.

5. As the Kingdom of Grace increases, so a Christians Comforts increase.
Comfort belongs to the been esse, or well-being of a Christian; it is like
sweet-meat, delicious to the taste, Psalm. 94.19. The more grace, the more joy;
as the more Sap in the Root, the more Wine in the Grape. Who did more increase
in Grace than David, and who more in Consolation? Psalm. 4.7. Thou have put
Gladness in my heart: Grace turns to joy, as the Milk to cream.

3 Qu. How may they be comforted, who bewail their want of growth, and weep
that they cannot find the Kingdom of Grace increase?

Resp. 1. To see and bewail our decay in Grace, argues not only the life of
Grace, but growth. It Is a sign a Man recovers and gets strength, when he feels
his weakness: It is a step forward in Grace to see our Imperfections: The more
the Spirit shines in the Heart, the more evil it discovers: A Christian thinks
it worse with him then it was, whereas his Grace may not grow lesser, but his
Light greater.

2. If a Christian does not increase in one Grace, he may in another; if not in
knowledge, he may in Humility. If a Tree does not grow so much in the Branches,
it may in the Root; to grow downwards in the Root is a good growth.

3. A Christian may grow less in Affection, when he grows more in Judgment. As
a Musician when he is Old, his fingers are stiff, and not so nimble at the Lute
as they were, but he plays with more Art and Judgment than before: So a
Christian may not have so much Affection in Duty as at the first Conversion,
but he is more solid in Religion, and more settled in his Judgment than he was
before.

4. A Christian may think he does not increase in Grace, because he does not
increase in Gifts; whereas there may be a decay of natural parts, the Memory
and other Faculties, when there is not a decay of Grace. Parts may be impaired
when Grace is improved: Be not discouraged, it is better to decay in parts and
be enlarged in Grace, then to be enlarged in parts, and to decay in Grace.

5. A Christian may increase in Grace, yet not be so sensible of it: The Seed
may grow in the Earth, when we do not perceive it to spring up: The Grace may
grow in time of Desertion, and not be perceived. So I have done with the first
thing intended in this Petition, Thy Kingdom come; we pray that the Kingdom of
Grace may come into our Hearts, and that it may increase and flourish.

I should come to the second thing intended in this Petition, that the Kingdom
of Glory may hasten, and that we may in due time be translated into it.

When we pray thy Kingdom come, here is something positively intended; we pray,
1. That the Kingdom of Grace may be set up in our Hearts. 2. That it may
increase and flourish. 3. That the Kingdom of Glory may hasten, and that God
would in his due time translate us into it.

1. What this Kingdom of Glory is. 2. What are the Properties of it. 3. Wherein
it exceeds all other Kingdoms. 4. When this Kingdom comes. 5. Wherein appears
the Certainty of it. 6. Why we should pray for its coming.
1. What this Kingdom of Glory is.

Answ. By this Kingdom is meant that glorious Estate which the Saints shall
enjoy, when they shall reign with God and Angels for ever. If a Man stand upon
the Seashore, he cannot see all the Dimensions of the Sea, the length, breadth,
and depth of it; yet he may see it is of a vast Extension. So though the
Kingdom of Heaven be of that incomparable Excellency, that neither Tongue of
Man, or Angels can express, yet we may conceive of it to be an exceeding
glorious thing, such as eye has not seen.

Concerning the Kingdom of Heaven, I shall show, What, 1. It Implies. 2. It
imports.


1. What it implies.

Answ. It implies, A blessed Freedom from all Evil.

2. What it imports.

Answ. It Imports glorious Fruition of all good.

1. What the Kingdom of Heaven implies.

Resp. It implies a blessed freedom from all evil.

1. A freedom from the Necessities of Nature: We are in this Life subject to
many Necessities: We need Food to nourish us, Clothes to cover us, Armor to
defend us, Sleep to refresh us: But in the Kingdom of Heaven there is no need
of these things; and it is better not to need them then to have them; as it is
better not to need Crutches, then to have Crutches. What need will there be of
Food when our Bodies shall be made spiritual; 1 Cor. 15.44. Though not
spiritual for substance, yet for qualities. What need will there be of
Clothing, when our Bodies shall be like Christ's glorious Body; what need will
there be of Armor when there is no Enemy; what need will there be of Sleep
when there is no Night, Rev. 22.5. The Saints shall be freed in the Heavenly
Kingdom from those Necessities of Nature to which now they lie exposed.

2 In the Kingdom of Heaven we shall be freed from the Imperfections of Nature.
Since the Fall our Knowledge has suffered an Eclipse.

1. Our Natural Knowledge is imperfect, it is checkered with Ignorance. There
are many (...), hard Knots in Nature, which we cannot easily unty: Why the Sea
should be higher then the Earth, yet not drown it? What way the Light is
parted* Job 38.24. What is the reason of all the occult Qualities, Sympathies,
and Antipa^^^es? He who sees clearest has a Mist before his Eyes. Socrates
said on his Deathbed, there were many things he had yet to learn. Our
Ignorance is more then our Knowledge.

2. Our Divine Knowledge is imperfect; we know but in part, said Paul, 1 Cor.
13.9. though he had many Revelations, and was wrapped up into the third Heaven We
have but dark Conceptions of the Trinity; Job 11.7. Can thou by searching
find out God? our narrow Capacities will no more contain the Trinity, then a
little Glass-Vial will hold all the Water in the Sea; we cannot unriddle the
Mystery of the Incarnation; the Humane Nature assumed into the Person of the
Son of God; the Humane Nature not God, yet united with God: We see now in
aenigmate, in a Glass darkly: but in the Kingdom of Heaven the Vail shall be
taken off, all Imperfections of Nature shall be done away. When the Sun-light
of Glory shall begin to shine in the Heavenly Horizon, all dark shadows of
Ignorance shall fly away, our Lamp of Knowledge shall burn bright, we shall
have a full knowledge of God, though not know him fully.

3. In the Kingdom of Heaven we shall be freed from the toylsome Labors of
this Life. God enacted a Law in Paradise, In the sweat of thy Brows thou shall
eat Bread, Genesis 3.9. There is the Labor of the Hand in Manufacture, and the
Labor of the Mind in Study; Eccl. 1.8. All things are full of Labor; but in
the Kingdom of Heaven we shall be freed from our Labors.

(1.) There needs no Labor, when a Man has got to the Haven he has no more
need of failing. In Heaven there needs no Labor, because the Saints shall have
that Glory which they labored for.

(2.) There shall be no Labor, Rev. 14.13. They rest from their Labors. As
God when he had finished the Work of Creation rested from his Labors, Genesis
2.2. So when the Saints have finished the Work of Sanctification, they rest
from their Labors. Where should there be rest but in the Heavenly Center? Not
that this sweet rest in the Kingdom of Heaven excludes all Motion, for Spirits
cannot be idle; but the Saints Glorified shall rest from all wearisome
Employment; it shall be a labor full of ease, a Motion full of Delight: The
Saints in Heaven shall love God, and what labor is that? Is it any Labor to
love Beauty? They shall praise God, and that sure is delightful* When the Bird
sings, it is not so much a Labor as a pleasure.

4. In the Kingdom of Heaven we shall be freed from Original Corruption: This
is causa causati, the root of all Actual Sin. There would be no Actual Sin if
there were no Original; there would be no Water in the Stream, if there were
none in the Fountain. Original Sin is incorporated into our Nature, it is as if
the whole mass of Blood were corrupted. This makes a Christian weary of his
Life; he offends that God whom he loves. What would a Christian give to have
his Chains taken off, to be rid of vain thoughts. How did Paul (that bird of
Paradise) bemoan himself for his Sins, Romans 7.24. we cannot act either our
Duties or Graces without Sin. The Soul that is most refined and clarified by
Grace; is not without some dregs of Corruption; but in the Kingdom of Heaven
the Fountain of Original Sin shall be quite dried up; (...): What a blessed
time will that be, never to grieve Gods Spirit more. In Heaven are Virgin
Souls; there is Beauty which is not stained with Lust; nothing enters there
that defiles: Rev. 21.27.

5. In the Kingdom of Heaven we shall be freed from all sorrows, Rev. 21.4.
(...), There shall be no more sorrow. Our Life here is interlarded with
trouble, Psalm. 31.10. either Losses grieve, or Lawsuits vex, or Unkindness
breaks the heart. We may as well separate moisture from Air, or weight from
Lead, as Troubles from Man's Life; Quid est diu vivere nisi diu torqueri? Aug.
but in the Kingdom of Heaven sorrow and sighing shall fly away. Here the Saints
sit by the Rivers weeping, but one smile from Christ's Face will make them
forget all their Sufferings; their Water then shall be turned into Wine, their
Mourning into Music.

6. We shall in the Kingdom of Heaven be freed from the immodesty of
temptation. Satan is not yet fully east into Prison, but is like a Prisoner
that goes under bail, he walks about tempting, he labors to trappan us into
sin, he is either laying of snares or shooting of darts. Stat in procinctu
Diabolus. He laid a train of temptation to blow up the castle of Jobs Faith.
This is a great grief to a Believer to be followed with temptations to sin, as
it is for a Virgin to have her Chastity assaulted; but in the Kingdom of Heaven
the Saints shall be freed from the Red Dragon; he is cast out of Paradise, and
shall be for ever locked up in Chains; Jude 6:

7. In the Kingdom of Heaven we shall be freed from all vexing cares. The Greek
word for care (...), comes from a Primitive that signifies to cut the heart in
pieces. Care discruciates the Mind, it wastes the Spirits, it eats out the
comfort of Life. Care is an evil spirit that haunts us. Care to prevent future
dangers and preserve present co(...)* all care is full of fear, and fear is
full of torment; 1 John 4.18. God threatens it as a Judgment, Ezekiel. 12.19. They
shall eat their bread with carefulness. Every Comfort has its Care, as every
Rose its Prickle; but in the Kingdom of Heaven we shall shake off this viper of
Care. What needs a Saint glorified to take any Care, who has all things
provided to his hand? There is the Tree of Life, bearing all sorts of Fruit.
When the Heart shall be freed from Sin, the Head shall be freed from Care.

8. We shall in the Kingdom of Heaven be freed from all Doubts and Scruples. In
this Life the best Saint has his doubtings, as the brightest Star its
twinkling. If there were no doubtings there would be no unbelief: Assurance it
self does not exclude all doubting, Psalm. 26.3. Thy loving kindness is before
mine eyes; but at another time, Psalm. 89.49. Lord, where are thy former loving
kindnesses? A Christian is like a Ship at Anchor, which though it be safe, yet
it may sometimes be tossed upon the Water. Sometimes a Christian questions his
interest in Christ, and his title to the Promise; and these doubtings, as they
eclipse a Christians Comfort, so they are a bearing false witness against the
Spirit: But when the Saints shall come into the Kingdom of Heaven there shall
be no more doubtings; then a Christian shall say as Peter, Now I know of a
surety that the Lord has sent his Angel, and delivered me, Acts 12.11. So, now
I know that I am passed from Death to Life, now I am got beyond all Rocks, I
have shot the gulf, now I am in my Saviors embraces for ever.

9. We shall in the Kingdom of Heaven be freed from all society with the
Wicked. Here we are forced sometime to be in their company; Psalm. 120.5. Woe is
me that I dwell in Mesech, and sojourn in the tents of Kedar. Kedar was
Ishmaels Son, whose Children dwelt in Arabia, a profane, barbarous People. Here
the Wicked are still raising Persecutions against the Godly, and crucifying
their ears with their Oaths and Curses. Christ's Lilly is among Thorns, but in
the Heavenly Kingdom there shall be no more any pricking bryar; Matthew. 13.41.
The Son of man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his
kingdom all things that offend. As Moses said, Exodus 14.13. Stand still and see
the salvation of the Lord, for the Egyptians whom ye have seen to day ye shall
see them again no more for ever: So will God say, Stand still and see the
Salvation of God; these your enemies that vex and molest you, you shall see
them again no more for ever: At that day God will separate the precious from
the vile; then Christ will thoroughly purge his Floor, he will gather the Wheat
into the Garner, and the Wicked, which are the Chaff, shall be blown into Hell.

10. We shall in the Kingdom of Heaven be freed from all signs of Gods
displeasure. Here God may be angry with his People. Though he has the heart of
a Father, he may have the look of an enemy; this is sad. As when the Sun is
gone the Dew falls; when the Light of Gods Face is gone, Tears drop from the
Saints Eyes; but in the Kingdom of Heaven there shall be no spiritual eclipses,
there shall never appear any tokens of Gods displeasure; the Saints shall have
a constant aspect of Love from God, they shall never complain any more, as
Cant. 5.6. My beloved has withdrawn himself.

11. We shall in the Kingdom of Heaven be freed from all Divisions. That which
is the saddest thing in the World is to see divisions among them that are good.
It Is sad that such as have one Faith, yet should not be of one Heart; Ephraim
envies Judah, and Judah vexes Ephraim: It Is matter of tears to see those who
are united to Christ to be divided one from another. The Soldiers spear pierced
Christ's side, but the divisions of Saints wound his heart; but in the Kingdom
of Heaven there shall be no vilifying one another, or censuring: Those who
before could hardly pray together, shall praise God together, there shall not
be one jarring string in the Saints Music

12. We shall in the Kingdom of Heaven be freed from Vanity and
Dissatisfaction. What Solomon says of Wisdom, Job 28.14. The depth says, it
is not in me: and the sea says, it is not with me: The same may I say
concerning satisfaction, every Creature faith, It is not in me. Take things
most pleasing, and which we promise our selves most content from, still out the
Spirits and purest Quintessence of them, and we shall say as he did, Eccles.
2.11. And behold all was vanity. God never did or will put a satisfying virtue
into any Creature. In the sweetest music the World makes, either there is some
string wanting, or out of tune. Who would have thought that Haman, who was so
great in the Kings favor, He set his seat above all the princes of the
provinces, Esther 3.1. yet for want of the bowing of a knee, he was
dissatisfied; but in the Kingdom of Heaven we shall be freed from these
dissatisfactions. The World is like a Landscape, you may see Gardens and
Fruit Trees curiously drawn in the Landscape but you cannot enter into them, but
you may enter into the Joys of Heaven, Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord;
the Soul shall be satisfied while it bathes in those rivers of pleasure at Gods
Right Hand; I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness: Psalm. 17.15.
Thus you see what the Kingdom of Glory implies; Namely, A Blessed Freedom from
all Evil.

13. We shall in the Kingdom of Heaven be freed from the Torments of Hell, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. Jesus which delivered us from the wrath to come.

(1.) The multiplicity of these Torments. In this Life the Body is usually
exercised but with one pain, the Stone or Headache, but in Hell there is a
diversity of Torments, there is Darkness to affright, Fire to burn, a Lake of
Sulphur to choke, Chains to bind, the Worm to gnaw.

(2.) The Torments of Hell will sieze upon every part both of Body and Soul;
the Eyes shall be tortured with the sight of Devils, the Tongue that has swore
so many Oaths shall be tortured, Luke 16.24. Send Lazarus that he may dip the
tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue. The Memory shall be tormented
to remember what Mercies have been abused, what seasons of Grace neglected; the
Conscience shall be tormented with self-accusations.

(3.) In the pains of Hell there is no mitigation, no mixture of Mercy. In this
Life, God in Anger remembers Mercy, Hab. 3.2. but in Hell there is no
alleviation or lessening of the pains: As in the Sacrifice of Jealousy, Numb.
5.15. God would have no Oil or Frankincense put to it, so in Hell there is no
Oil of Mercy to lenifie the sufferings of the Damned; no Incense of Prayer to
appease Gods Wrath.

(4.) In the pains of Hell there is no intermission. The Poets feign of
Endymion that he got leave of Jupiter always to sleep. What would the damned
in Hell give for one hours sleep? Rev. 14.11. They rest not day nor night; they
are perpetually upon the rack.

(5.) In the pains of Hell there is no expiration; they must always lie
scorching in flames of Wrath; Rev. 14.11. The smoke of their torment ascends
up for ever: but in the Heavenly Kingdom the Elect shall be freed from all
infernal torments; Jesus has delivered us from the Wrath to come. A Prison is
not made for the Kings Children. Christ drank that bitter cup of Gods Wrath,
that the Saints might never drink it.

2. In the Kingdom of Heaven there is a Glorious Fruition of all Good. Had I as
many Tongues as Hairs on my Head, I could not fully describe this; I may say as
Judge. 18.9, 10. Heaven is called, The excellent Glory, 2 Pet. 1.17. I may as
well span the Firmament, or drain the Ocean, as set forth the Glory of this
Kingdom. Caelum non habet Hyperbolem, The Kingdom of Heaven is beyond all
Hyperbole Were the Sun ten thousand times brighter than it is, it could not
parallel the luster of this Kingdom; Apelles Pensil would blot, Angels Tongues
would lessen it: I can but give you the (...), or dark shadow of it, expect not
to see it in all its orient colors till you are mounted above the Stars. But
let us not stand afar off, as Moses, to behold this Canaan, but enter into it
and taste the honey. Concerning the Fruitions and Privileges of the Heavenly
Kingdom.

1. We shall have an immediate Communion with God himself, who is the
inexhausted Sea of all Happiness: This Divines call, The Beatifical Vision. The
Psalmist did triumph in that enjoyment he had of God in this Life, Psalm. 73.25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? If God enjoyed by Faith does give so much
Comfort to the Soul, how much more when he is enjoyed by immediate Vision. Here
we see God but darkly through the glass of Ordinances, but in the Kingdom of
Heaven, we shall see him face to face; 1 Cor. 13.12. we shall have an
intellectual sight of God, i. e. we shall see him with the eyes of our mind; we
shall know God as much as the Angels in Heaven do, Matthew. 18.10 1 Cor. 13.12.
We shall know as we are known. We shall have a full knowledge of God, though
not know him fully; as a Vessel in the Sea is full of the Sea, though it holds
not all the Sea. To see and enjoy God will be most delicious; in God are beams
of Majesty and bowels of Mercy; God has all Excellencies concentred in him,
bonum in quo omnia bona. If one Flower should have the sweetness of all
Flowers, how sweet would that Flower be? All the beauty and sweetness which
lies scattered in the Creature is infinitely to be found in God; therefore to
see and enjoy him will ravish the Soul with delight. We shall so see. God as to
love him, and be made sensible of his Love; and when we shall have this sweet
Communion with God, then God shall be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.28. Light to the
eye, Manna to the taste, Music to the ear.

2. We shall in the Kingdom of Heaven, with these eyes, see the Glorified Body
of Jesus Christ. This our Savior makes a great part of the Glory of Heaven, to
view the Glory of his Humane Nature, John 17.24. (...), That they may behold my
glory. When Christ was transfigured upon Earth, it is said, That his face did
shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light; Matthew. 17.2. If the
Glory of his Transfiguration was so great, what will the Glory of his
Exaltation be? Much of the Glory of God shines in Christ by virtue of the
Hypostatical Union, Col. 2.9. In whom dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily.
Through Christ's Humanity, as through a bright mirror, we may see some beams of
the Divine Majesty shine forth; put a back of Steel to a Glass, and you may see
a Face in it. Christ's Humane Nature is as a back of Steel put to the Divine
Nature; through this we may see God, and then our Capacities shall be enlarged
to a wonderful degree to receive this glorious object; and we shall not only
see Gods Glory, but some of his Glory shall be put upon us; non tantum aderit
Gloria sed inerit, Bern. A Beggar may behold the Glory of a King and not be the
happier, but Christ's Glory shall be ours; We shall be like him, 1 John 3.2. we
shall shine by his beams.

3. We shall in the Kingdom of Heaven, enjoy the society of innumerable company
of Angels, Heb. 12.22.

Quest. But is there not enough in God to fill the Soul with delight? Can the
sight of Angels add to the Souls happiness? What need is there of the light of
Torches when the Sun shines?

Answ. Besides the Divine Essence, the sight of Angels is desirable; much of
Gods curious workmanship shines in the Angels; the Angels are beautiful,
glorious Creatures; and as the several strings in a Lute make the harmony
sweeter, and the several Stars make the Firmament brighter, so the society with
Angels will make the delight of Heaven the greater, and we shall not only see
the Angels with the glorified eye of our understanding, but converse with them.

4. We shall in the Kingdom of Heaven have sweet society with Glorified Saints;
then the Communion of Saints will be illustrious. O what a blessed time will it
be, when those who have prayed, wept, suffered together, shall rejoice
together; we shall see the Saints in their white Linen of Purity, and see them
as so many Crowned Kings; in beholding the Saints Glorified we shall behold an
Heaven full of Suns. Some move the Question whether we shall know one another
in Heaven: Surely our knowledge shall not be diminished but increased. It is
the Judgment of Luther and Anselm, and many other Divines, that we shall know
one another, yea, the Saints of all Ages whose Faces we never saw; and when we
shall see the Saints in Glory without their spots, viz. their infirmities,
Pride and Passion, this will be a glorious sight. We see how Peter was
transported when he saw but two Prophets in the Transfiguration, Matthew. 17.3.
but what a blessed sight will it be when we shall see such a Glorious Company
of Prophets, and Martyrs, and Holy Men of God: How sweet will the Music be
when they shall all sing together in consort in the Heavenly Quire: And though in
this great Assembly of Saints and Angels, one Star may differ from another in
Glory, yet no such weed as Envy shall ever grow in the Paradise of God; then
there shall be perfect Love, which as it casts out Fear, so also Envy; though
one Vessel of Glory may hold more than another, yet every Vessel shall be full.

5. In the Kingdom of Heaven there shall be incomprehensible Joy. Aristotle
says, Joy proceeds from Union. When the Saints Union with Christ is perfected
in Heaven, then their Joy shall be full; all the birds of the Heavenly Paradise
sing for Joy. What Joy when the Saints shall see the great gulf shut, and know
that they are passed from Death to Life; what Joy when they are as holy as they
would be, and as God would have them to be; what Joy to hear the Music of
Angels, to see the golden banner of Christ's Love displayed over the Soul, to be
drinking that Water of Life which is quintessential, and is sweeter than all
Nectar and Ambrosia; what Joy when the Saints shall see Christ clothed in their
Flesh, sitting in Glory above the Angels, then they shall enter into the joy of
their Lord, Matthew. 25.21. Here Joy enters into the Saints in Heaven* they enter
into joy. O thou Saint of God who now hangest thy harp upon the Willows, and
minglest thy drink with weeping, in the Kingdom of Heaven thy Water shall be
turned into Wine, you shall have so much felicity that your Souls cannot wish
for more. The Sea is not so full of Water, as the Heart of a Glorified Saint is
of Joy; there can be no more Sorrow in Heaven than there is Joy in Hell.

6. In Heaven there is honor and dignity put upon the Saints: A Kingdom
imports honor. All that come into Heaven are Kings; they have 1. a Crown, Rev.
2.10. dabo tibi, the Crown of Life; Corona est insigne regiae potestatis. This
Crown is not lined with Thorns, but hung with Jewels; it is a never-fading
Crown, 1 Pet. 5.4. 2. The Saints in Heaven have their Robes; they exchange
their Sackcloth for white Robes, Rev. 7.9. I beheld a great multitude which no
man could number, clothed in white robes. Robes signify their Glory, White
their Sanctity. And 3. They sit with Christ upon the Throne: Rev. 3.21. We read
1 Kings 6.33. the doors of the Holy of Holies were made of Palm Trees, and open
Flowers covered with Gold; an emblem of that victory and that garland of Glory
which the Saints shall wear in the Kingdom of Heaven. When all the Titles and
Ensigns of Worldly honor shall lie in the dust, the Mace, the Silver Star, the
Garter, then shall the Saints honor remain.

7. We shall in the Kingdom of Heaven have a blessed Rest. Rest is the end of
motion; Heaven is Centrum quietativum animae, the blessed Center where the Soul
does acquiesce and rest. In this Life we are subject to unquiet motions and
fluctuations, 2 Cor. 7.5. (...), We are troubled on every side; like a Ship on
the Sea, having the waves beating on both sides; but in the Kingdom of Heaven
there is Rest, Heb. 4.9. How welcome is Rest to a weary Traveller? When Death
cuts asunder the string of the Body, the Soul as a Dove flies away and is at
Rest. This Rest is when the Saints shall lie on Christ's bosom, that hive of
sweetness, that bed of perfume.

8. The Saints shall in the Kingdom of Heaven have their Bodies richly
bespangled with Glory; they shall be full of Clarity and Brightness, as Moses
Face shined, that Israel were not able to behold the Glory; Exodus 34 30. The
Bodies of the Saints shall shine seven times brighter than the Sun, says
Chrysostom; they shall have such a resplendency of Beauty on them, that the
Angels shall fall in love with them; and no wonder, for they shall be made like
Christ's glorious body; Phil. 3.21. The Bodies of Saints glorified need no
Jewels, when they shall shine like Christ's Body.

9. In the Heavenly Kingdom is Eternity; it is an eternal fruition, they shall
never be put out of the Throne; Rev. 22.5. They shall reign for ever and ever.
It is called the everlasting kingdom, 2 Pet. 1.11. and an eternal weight of
Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. The Flowers of Paradise, of which the Saints Garland is
made, never wither. If there could be a cessation of Heavens Glory, or the
Saints had but the least fear or suspicion of losing their Felicity, it would
infinitely abate and cool their Joy; but their Kingdom is for ever, the Rivers
of Paradise cannot be dried up, Psalm. 16.11. At thy right hand are pleasures
for evermore. The Kingdom of Heaven was typified by the Temple which was built
with Stone, covered with Cedar, over-laid with Gold, to show the fixed
permanent state of Glory, that Kingdom abides for ever. Well may we pray, Thy
Kingdom come:

Having spoken of the Kingdom of Grace, and how we may know that Kingdom is set
up in our Hearts: I am next speaking of the Kingdom of Glory, or Heaven.

1. What is meant by the Kingdom of Heaven. 2. What are the Properties of this
Kingdom. 3. Wherein this Heavenly Kingdom excels all the Kingdoms upon Earth.
4. When this Kingdom shall be bestowed. 5. Wherein appears the Certainty and
Infallibility of it. 6. Why we should pray for the coming of this Kingdom.
1. Quest. What is meant by the Kingdom of Heaven?

Resp. 1. It imports a blessed freedom from all evil. 2. It implies a glorious
fruition of all good. (1.) Immediate communion with God, who is the inexhausted
Sea of all Happiness. (2.) A visible beholding the glorified Body of Jesus
Christ. (3.) A glorious Vision of Saints and Angels. (4.) Dignity and Honor,
the Crown and white Robes. (5.) A blessed Rest.

Quest. 2. What are the Properties or Qualifications of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Resp. 1. The Glory of this Kingdom is solid and substantial; the Hebrew word
for Glory, (...), signifies a Weight, to show how solid and weighty the Glory
of the Caelestial Kingdom is: The Glory of the worldly Kingdom is Aerie and
imaginary; like a blazing Comet, or Fancy: Act. 25.23. Agrippa and Bernice came
with a great Pomp, (...) with a great Fancy. Job. 26.7. The Earth hangs like a
Ball in the Air without any thing to uphold it: The Glory of the Heavenly
Kingdom is substantial, it has twelve Foundations, Rev. 21.14. That which God
and Angels count Glory, is true Glory.

2. The Glory of this Kingdom is satisfying, Psalm. 36.9. With thee is the
Fountain of Life. How can they choose but be full, who are at the Fountain
head? Psalm. 17.15. When I awake I shall be satisfied with thy Likeness. i. e.
When I awake in the Morning of the Resurrection, having some of the Beams of
thy Glory shining in me, I shall be satisfied. Job 28.14. The Creature says
concerning Satisfaction, It is not in me: If we go for Happiness to the
Creature, we go to the wrong Box; only Heavens Glory is commensurate to the
vast Desires of an Immortal Soul: A Christian bathing himself in these Rivers
of Pleasure, cries out in a Divine Ecstasy, I have enough: The Soul is never
satisfied till it has God for its Portion, and Heaven for its Haven;
Dissatisfaction arises from some defect, but God is an Infinite Good, and
there can be no defect in that which is Infinite.

3. The Glory of Heavens Kingdom is pure and unmixed; the Streams of Paradise
are not muddied, omnia clara, omnia jucunda; there that Gold has no alloy; no
bitter ingredient in that Glory, but pure as the Honey drops from the Comb;
there is a Rose grows without Prickles, the Rose of Sharon; there is Ease
without Pain; Honor without Disgrace; Life without Death.

4. The Glory of this Kingdom is constantly exhilarating and refreshing;
there is fullness but no surfeit. Worldly Comforts though sweet, yet in time grow
stale: A Downbed pleases a while, but within a while we are weary and would
rise. Too much Pleasure is a pain: But the Glory of Heaven does never surfeit
or nauseate; the reason is, because as there are all Rarities imaginable, so
every Moment fresh Delights spring from God into the glorified Soul.

5. The Glory of this Kingdom is distributed to every individual Saint: In an
Earthly Kingdom the Crown goes but to one, a Crown will fit but one Head; but
in that Kingdom above, the Crown goes to all; Rev. 1.6. All Elect are Kings.
The Land is settled chiefly upon the Heir, and the rest are ill provided for:
But in the Kingdom of Heaven all the Saints are Heirs; Romans 8.17. Heirs of God,
and (...) Coheirs with Christ. God has Land enough to give to all his Heirs.

6. Lucid and Transparent. This Kingdom of Heaven is adorned and bespangled
with Light: 1 Timothy 6.16. Light is (...) the Glory of the Creation, Eccl. 11.7.
The Light is sweet: Hell is a dark Dungeon, Mat. 22.13. Fire but no Light. The
Kingdom of Heaven is a Diaphanum, all imbroidered with Light, clear as
Crystal. How can there want light where Christ the Sun of Righteousness
displaies his Golden Beams; Rev. 21.23. The Glory of the Lord did lighten it,
and the Lamb is the Light thereof.

7. The Glory of this Kingdom is adequate and proportionable to the desire of
the Soul; In Creature-Fruitions, that which does commend them and set them off
to us is Suitableness: The Content of Marriage does not lie either in Beauty or
Portion, but the suitableness of Disposition. The Excellency of a Feast is when
the Meat is suited to the Pallat: This is one ingredient in the Glory of
Heaven, it exactly suits the desires of the glorified Saints; we shall not say
in Heaven, Here is a Dish I do not love! There shall be Music suits the Ear,
the Anthems of Angels; and Food that suits with the glorified Pallat, the
hidden Manna of Gods Love.

8. The Glory of this Kingdom will be seasonable; the seasonableness of a Mercy
adds to the Beauty and sweetness; it is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of
Silver. After an hard Winter in this cold Climate, will it not be seasonable to
have the Spring Flowers of Glory appear, and the singing of the Birds of
Paradise come? When we have been wearied and even tired out in battle with sin
and Satan, will not a Crown be seasonable?

3. Quest. Wherein the Kingdom of Heaven infinitely excels all the Kingdoms of
the Earth?

Resp. 1. It excels in the Architect: Other Kingdoms have Men to raise their
Structures, but God himself laid the first Stone in this Kingdom, Heb. 11.10.
This Kingdom is of the greatest Antiquity; God was the first King, and Founder
of it; no Angel was worthy to lay a Stone in this Building.

2. This Heavenly Kingdom excels in Altitude; it is higher situated than any
Kingdom; the higher any thing is, the more excellent: The Fire being the most
sublime Element is most Noble. The Kingdom of Heaven is seated above all the
visible Orbs: There is first the Aerie Heaven, which is the space from the Earth
to the Sphere of the Moon 2. The Starry Heaven, the place where are the Planets
of an higher Elevation, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars. 3. The Caelum Empyraeum the
Empyraean Heaven, which Paul calls the third Heaven: Vbi Christ is, there is
the Kingdom of Glory situated. This Kingdom is so high, that no Scaling
Ladders of Enemies can reach it; so high that the old Serpent cannot shoot up
his fiery Darts to it. If wicked Men could build their Nests among the Stars,
yet the least Believer would shortly be above them.

3. The Kingdom of Heaven excels all other in Splendour and Riches; it is
described by precious Stones, Rev. 21.19. What are all the Rarities of the
Earth to this Kingdom? Coasts of Pearl? Rocks of Diamonds? Islands of Spices?
What are the Wonders of the World to it? The Egyptian Pyramides? The Temple of
Diana? The Pillar of the Sun offered to Jupiter? What a rich Kingdom is that
where God will lay out all his cost? Those who are poor in the World, yet as
soon as they come into this Kingdom, grow rich, as rich as the Angels: Other
Kingdoms are enriched with Gold, this is enriched with the Deity.

4. The Kingdom of Heaven excels all other Kingdoms in Holiness: Kingdoms on
Earth are for the most part unholy; there is a Common Shore of Luxury and
Uncleanness running in them: Kingdoms are Stages for sin to be acted on; Isa.
28.8. All Tables are full of Vomit: But the Kingdom of Heaven is so holy that
it will not mix with any Corruption, Rev. 21.27. There shall enter into it
nothing that defiles. It Is so pure a Soil, that no Serpent of Sin will breed
there: There is Beauty which is not stained with Lust; and Honor which is not
swelled with Pride: Holiness is the brightest Jewel of the Crown of Heaven.

5. The kingdom of Heaven excels all other kingdoms in its pacifick Nature;
it is Regnum Paci^, a kingdom of Peace. Peace is the Glory of a Kingdom; Pax una
Triumphis innumeris melior. A Kings Crown is more adorned with the white Lilly
of Peace, then when it is beset with the red Roses of a bloody War; but where
shall we find an un-interrupted Peace upon Earth? Either homebred Divisions,
or Foreign Invasions; 2 Chronicles. 15.5. There was no Peace to him that went out,
or to him that came in. But the kingdom of Heaven is a kingdom of Peace; there
are no Enemiest o conflict with; all Christ's Enemies shall be under his Feet,
Psalm. 110.1. The Gates of that kingdom always stand open; Rev. 21.25. The
Gates shall not be shut at all; to show, that there is no fear of an assault of
an Enemy; the Saints when they dye are said to enter into Peace, Isa. 57.2.
There Is no beating of Drums, or roaring of Canons, but the Voice of Harpers
harping in token of Peace: Rev. 14.2. In Heaven Righteousness and Peace kiss
each other.

6. The Kingdom of Heaven excels in Magnitude; it is of vast Dimensions; though
the Gate of the kingdom be strait, we must pass into it through the strait Gate
of Mortification; yet when once we are in it is very large; though there be an
innumerable Company of Saints and Angels, yet there is room enough for them:
The kingdom of Heaven may be called by the Name of that Well, Genesis 26.22. Jacob
called the Name of it Rehoboth, for he said, now the Lord has made room for
us. Thou who art now confined to a small Cottage, when thou come into the
Caelestial kingdom thou shall not be straitened for room: As every Star has a
large Orb to move in; so it shall be with the Saints when they shall shine as
Stars in the kingdom of Heaven.

7. The Kingdom of Heaven excels in Unity; all the Inhabitants agree together
in Love: Love will be the Perfume and Music of Heaven; as Love to God will be
intense, so to the Saints: Perfect Love as it casts out Fear, so it casts out
Envy and Discord. Those Christians who could not live quietly together on
Earth, (which was the Blemish of their Profession) yet in the kingdom of Heaven
the fire of Strife shall cease; there shall be no vilifying, or censuring one
another, or raking into one another sores; but all shall be tied together with
the Heart Strings of Love; there Luther and Suinglius are agreed; Satan cannot
put in his Cloven Foot there to make Divisions; there shall be perfect Harmony
and Concord, and not one jarring String in the Saints Music: It were worth
dying to be in that kingdom.

8. This kingdom exceeds all Earthly in Joy and Pleasure; therefore it is
called Paradise, 2 Cor. 12:4. for delight: There are all things to cause
Pleasure; there is the Water of Life pure as Crystal; there is the Honeycomb
of Gods Love dropping: It Is called, entering into the Joy of our Lord, Mat.
25.23. There are two things cause Joy;

(1.) Separation from Sin: Sin creates Sorrow; but when this Viper of Sin shall
be shaken off, then Joy follows; there can be no more sorrow in Heaven, then
there is Joy in Hell.

(2.) Perfect Union with Christ: Joy, as Aristotle says, flows from Union with
the Object. When our Union with Christ shall be perfect, then our Joy shall be
full; If the Joy of Faith be so great, 1 Pet 1.8. then what will the Joy of
Sight be: Joseph gave his Brethren Provision for the way, but the full Sacks of
Corn were kept till they came at their Fathers House: God gives the Saints a
Taste of Joy here, but the full Sacks are kept till they come to Heaven; not
only the Organical Parts, the outward Senses, the Eye, Ear, Taste shall be
filled with Joy: But the Heart of a Glorified Saint shall be filled with Joy,
the Understanding, Will, and Affections are such a Triangle as none can fill
but the Trinity: There must needs be infinite Joy where nothing is seen but
Beauty; nothing is tasted but Love.

9. This kingdom of Heaven excels all Earthly in self-perfection: Other
kingdoms are defective, they have not all Provision within themselves, but are
fain to trafick abroad to supply their wants at home; King Solomon did send to
Ophir for Gold, 2 Chronicles. 8.18. But there is no defect in the kingdom of Heaven;
it has all Commodities of its own growth, Rev 21.7. there is the Pearl of
Price, the Morning Star, the Mountains of Spices, the Bed of Love; there are
those sacred Rarities wherewith God and Angels are delighted.

10. This kingdom of Heaven excels all other in Honor and Nobility; it does
not only equal them in the Ensigns of Royalty, the Throne and white Robes; but
it does far transcend them: Other Kings are of the Blood Royal; but they in
this Heavenly kingdom are born of God: Other Kings converse with Nobles; the
Saints Glorified are Fellow Commoners with Angels; they have a more Noble
Crown, it is made of the Flowers of Paradise, and is a Crown that fades not
away, 1 Pet. 5.4. they sit on a better Throne: King Solomon* 1 Kings 10.18. sat
on a Throne of Ivory overlaid with Gold; but the Saints are in Heaven higher
advanced; they sit with Christ upon his Throne, Rev. 3.21. they shall judge the
Princes and great Ones of the Earth, 1 Cor. 6.2. This honor have all the
Saints Glorified.

11. This kingdom of Heaven excels all others in healthfulness: Death is a Worm
that is ever feeding at the Root of our Gourd; kingdoms are often Hospitals of
sick persons: But the kingdom of Heaven is a most healthful Climate; Phisicians
there are out of date; no Distemper there; no passing Bell, or Bill of
Mortality; Luke 20.36. neither can they dye any more; in the Heavenly Climate
are no ill Vapors to breed Diseases; but a sweet aromatical Smell coming from
Christ; all his Garments smell of Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia.

12. This kingdom of Heaven excels in Duration, it abides for ever: Suppose
Earthly kingdoms to be more glorious then they are, their Foundations of Gold,
their Walls of Pearl, their Windows of Saphyre; yet they are corruptible and
fading; Hos. 1.4. I will cause the Kingdom to cease: Troy and Athens now lie
buried in their Ruins, jam Seges est ubi Troja fuit. Mortality is the Disgrace
of all Earthly kingdoms; but the kingdom of Heaven has Eternity written upon
it; it is an everlasting kingdom, 2 Pet. 1.1^. it is founded upon a strong
Basis, Go^s Omnipotency; this kingdom the Saints shall never be turned out of,
or be deposed from their Throne, as some Kings have been, viz. Hen. VI. etc.
But shall reign, (...), for ever and ever, Rev. 22.5.

How should all this affect our Hearts? What should we mind but this kingdom of
Heaven, which does more outshine all the kingdoms of the Earth, then the Sun
out-shines the Light of a Taper?

4. Quest. When this Kingdom shall be bestowed?

Resp. This Glory in the kingdom of Heaven shall be begun at death, but not
perfected till the Resurrection.

1. The Saints shall enter upon the kingdom of Glory immediately after death,
before their Bodies are buried their Souls shall be Crowned, Phil. 1.23. having
a desire (...), to depart and be with Christ; from this Connection departing and
being with Christ, we see clearly that there is a subitus transitus, speedy
passage from death to Glory: No sooner is the Soul of a Believer divorced from
the Body, but it presently goes to Christ, 2 Cor. 5.8. absent from the Body,
present with the Lord; it were better for Believers to stay here, if
immediately after death they were not with Christ in Glory; for here the Saints
are daily increasing their Grace; here they have many praelibamina, sweet tastes
of Gods love, so that it were better to stay here if their Soul should sleep in
their body, and they should not have a speedy sight of God in Glory: But this
is the Consolation of Believers, they shall not stay long for their kingdom;
it is but winking and they shall see God; it will be a blessed change to a
Believer; from a Desert to a Paradise, from a bloody battle to a victorious
Crown, and a sudden Change; no sooner did Lazarus dye but he had a Convoy of
Angels to conduct his Soul to the kingdom of Glory. You who now are full of
bodily Diseases, scarce a well day, Psalm. 31.10. My Life is spent with Grief;
be of good Comfort, you may be happy before you are aware, before another Week
or Month be over you may be in the kingdom of Glory, and then all tears shall
be wiped away.

2. The Glory in the kingdom of Heaven will be fully perfected at the
Resurrection and general day of Judgment; then the Bodies and Souls of
Believers will be reunited; what Joy will there be at the Reunion and meeting
together of the Soul and Body of a Saint! O what a welcome will the Soul give
to the Body! O my dear Body thou did often join with me in Prayer, and now thou
shall join with me in Praise, thou were willing to suffer with me, and now thou
shall reign with me, thou were sown a vile Body, but now thou art made like
Christ's Glorious Body, we were once for a time divorced, but now we are married
and Crowned together in a kingdom and shall mutually congratulate each others
Felicity.

5. Quest. Wherein appears the Certainty and infallibility of this Kingdom of
Glory?

Resp. That this blessed kingdom shall be bestowed on the Saints, is beyond all
Dispute.

1. God has promised it, Luke 12.32. It is your Fathers good pleasure to give
you a Kingdom, Luke 22.29. I appoint unto you a Kingdom, Gr. (...), I bequeath
it as my last Will and Testament: Has God promised a kingdom, and will he not
make it good? Gods promise is better then any Bond, Tit. 1.2. In hope of
eternal Life, which God, that cannot lie, has promised. The whole Earth hangs
upon the Word of Gods Power; and cannot our Faith hang upon the Word of his
Promise?

2. There is a Price laid down for this kingdom; Heaven is not only a kingdom
which God has promised, but which Christ has purchased: It Is called a
purchased Possession, Ephesians. 1.14. Though this kingdom is given us freely, yet
Christ bought it with the Price of his blood; Christ's blood is an
Heaven-procuring blood; Heb. 10.19. Having boldness to enter into the Holiest
(i. e. into Heaven) by the blood of Jesus. Crux Christi Clavis Paradisi,
Christ's blood is the key that opens the Gates of Heaven to us; should not the
Saints have this kingdom, then Christ would lose his Purchase: Christ on the
Cross was in hard Travail, Isa. 13.11. he travailed to bring forth Salvation to
the Elect; should not they possess the kingdom when they dye, Christ should
lose his Travail, all his Pangs and Agonies of Soul upon the Cross should be in
vain.

3. Christ prays that the Saints may have this kingdom settled upon them, John
17.24. Father I will that they also whom thou have given me be with me where I
am, i. e. in Heaven. This is Christ's Prayer that the Saints may be with him in
his kingdom, and be bespangled with some of the Beams of his Glory; now if they
should not go into this heavenly kingdom, then Christ's Prayer would be
frustrated; but that cannot be, for he is Gods Favorite, John 11.42. I know
thou hear me always; and besides what Christ prays for, he has power to
give: Observe the manner of Christ's Prayer, Father, I will; Father; there he
prays as Man, I will, there he gives as God.

4. The Saints must have this blessed kingdom by virtue of Christ's Ascension,
John 20.17. I ascend to my Father, and your Father, to my God, and to your God.
Where lies the comfort of this? here it lies, Jesus Christ ascended to take
Possession of heaven for all Believers as an Husband, takes up Land in another
Country in the behalf of his Wife, so Christ went to take possession of heaven
in the behalf of all Believers, John 14.2. I go to prepare a place for you: My
Ascension is to make all things ready against your coming: I go to prepare the
heavenly Mansions for you: The Flesh that Christ has taken into heaven is a
sure Pledge that all our Flesh and Bodies shall be where he is ere long. Christ
did not ascend to heaven as a private Person, but as a public Person for the
good of all Believers: his Ascension was a certain Forerunner of the Saints
ascending into heaven.

5. The Elect must have this blessed kingdom, in regard of the previous Works
of the Spirit in their hearts; they have the beginning of the kingdom of heaven
in them here; Grace is heaven begun in the Soul, besides God gives them
primitias spiritus, the first Fruits of the Spirit, Romans 8.23. These
First Fruits are the Comforts of the Spirit; the First Fruits under the Law
were a certain sign to the Jews of the full Crop or Vintage which they should
after receive: The First Fruits of the Spirit consisting in Joy and Peace, do
assure the Saints of the full Vintage of Glory they shall be ever reaping in
the kingdom of God; and the Saints in this Life are said to have the earnest of
the Spirit in their hearts, 2 Cor. 5.5. as an earnest is part of Payment, and
an assurance of Payment in full to be made in due Time, So Gods Spirit in the
hearts of Believers giving them his Comforts, bestows on them an earnest or
taste of Glory, which does further assure them of that full Reward which they
shall have in the kingdom of heaven, 1 Pet. 1.8. believing ye rejoice, there is
the earnest of heaven; Verse 9. receiving the end of your Faith, Salvation,
there is the full Payment.

6. The Elect must have this blessed Kingdom by virtue of their Coalition and
Union with Jesus Christ. They are Members of Christ, therefore they must be
where their Head is. Indeed, the Arminians hold that a justified person may
fall from Grace, and so his Union with Christ may be dissolved, and the Kingdom
lost; but I would demand of them, can Christ lose a Member of his body? then he
is not perfect; and if Christ may lose one Member of his Body, why not as well
all by the same reason? and so he shall be an head without a Body, but be
assured a Believers Union with Christ cannot be broken, and so long he cannot
be hindered of the kingdom, John 17.12. what was said of Christ's natural Body is
as true of his Mistical, John 10.39. A bone of him shall not be broken: Look
how every Bone and Limb of Christ's natural Body was raised up out of the Grave,
and carried into Heaven, So shall every Member of his Mistical Body be carried
up into Glory.

7. We read of some who have been translated into this Kingdom, Paul had a
sight of it, for he was caught up into the third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12. and the
converted Thief on the Cross was translated into Glory, Luke 23.43. This day
shall thou be with me in Paradise. By all that has been said it is most
evident, That Believers have a glorious Kingdom laid up for them in reversion,
and that they shall go to this Kingdom when they dye: There are none doubt of
the certainty of the Heavenly Kingdom, but such as doubt of the Verity of
Scripture.

6. Quest. Why we should so earnestly pray for this Heavenly Kingdom, Thy
Kingdom come.

Resp. 1. Because, it is a kingdom worth praying for, it exceeds the glory of
all earthly kingdoms; it has Gates of Pearl, Rev. 21.21. We have heard of a
Cabinet of Pearl, but when did we hear of Gates of Pearl? In that Kingdom is
the Bed of Love, the Mountains of Spices, there are the ^herubims not to keep
us out, but to welcome us into the Kingdom: Heaven is a Kingdom worth praying
for; there is nothing wanting in that Kingdom which may complete the Saints
happiness; for, wherein does Happiness consist? Is it in knowledge? We shall
know as we are known: Is it in Dainty Fare? We shall be at the Marriage-Supper
of the Lamb: Is it in rich Apparel? We shall be clothed in long White Robes: Is
it in delicious Music? We shall hear the Quire of Angels singing: Is it in
Dominion? We shall reign as Kings, and judge Angels: Is it in Pleasure? We
shall enter into the Joy of our Lord. Sure then this Kingdom is worth praying
for, Thy Kingdom come. Would God give us a Vision of Heaven a while, as he did
Stephen, who saw Heaven opened, Act. 7.56. We should fall into a Trance, and
being a little recovered out of it, how importunately would we put up this
Petition, Thy Kingdom come.

2. We must pray for this kingdom of Glory, because God will not bestow this
kingdom on any without Prayer; Romans 2.7. They who seek for Glory and
Immortality; and how do we seek but by Prayer? God has promised a kingdom, and
we must by Prayer put the Bond in suit; God is not so lavish as to throw away a
Kingdom on them who do not ask it; and certainly if Christ himself who had
merited Glory, did yet pray for it, John 17.5. Now O Father Glorify me with thy
own self; How much more ought we to pray for the Excellent Glory, who have this
Kingdom granted as a Charter of Gods mere Grace and Favor.

3. We must pray that the kingdom of Glory may come, that by going into it we
may make an end of sinning. I think sometimes what a blessed time it will be
never to have a sinful thought more; though we must not pray, Thy Kingdom come,
out of discontent, because we would be rid of the troubles and crosses of this
Life. This was Ionahs fault, he would dye in a pet, because God took away his
gourd, Lord, says he; take away my life too; Jonah 4.8. But we must pray, Thy
Kingdom come, out of an holy design that the fetters of corruption may be
pulled off, and we may be as the Angels, those Virgin Spirits who never sin:
This made the Church pray, Rev. 22.20. Veni Domine Jesus.

4. Because that all Christ's enemies shall be put under his feet; the Devil
shall have no more power to tempt, nor wicked Men to persecute; the
Antichristian-Hierarchy shall be pulled down, and Sions Glory shall shine as a
lamp; and the Turkish strength shall be broken.

5. We must pray earnestly that the kingdom of Glory may come, that we may see
God face to face, and have an interrupted and eternal communion with him in the
Empyrean Heaven. Moses desired but a glimpse of Gods Glory, Exodus 33.18. how
then should we pray to see him in all his embroidered Robes of Glory, when he
shall shine ten thousand times brighter than the Sun in its Meridian splendor.
Here in this Life we do rather desire God than enjoy him; how earnestly
therefore should we pray, Thy Kingdom of Glory come. The beholding and enjoying
God will be the Diamond in the Ring the very Quintessence of Glory. And must we
pray, Thy Kingdom come; how then are they ever like to come to Heaven who never
pray for it? Though God gives some profane persons Daily Bread who never pray
for it, yet he will not give them a kingdom who never pray for it. God may feed
them, but he will never crown them.

USE I. Of Information.
1. Branch, From all this you see then that there is nothing within the whole
sphere of Religion imposed upon unreasonable terms; when God bids us serve him,
it is no unreasonable request, he will out of Free Grace inthrone us in a
kingdom. When we hear of Repentance, steeping our Souls in brinish tears for
sin; or of Mortification, beheading our king sin, we are ready to grumble, and
think this is hard and unreasonable. But do we serve God for naught? Is it not
infinite bounty to reward us with a Kingdom? This Kingdom is as far above our
thoughts, as it is beyond our deserts. No man can say without wrong to God,
that he is an hard Master; though he sets us about hard work, yet he is no hard
Master: God gives double pay; he gives great vails in his service, sweet Joy
and Peace; and a great reward after, an eternal weight of Glory. God gives the
Spring flowers and a Crop; he settles upon us such a Kingdom as exceeds our
Faith, Praemium quod Fide non attingitur, Aug. Such as mortal eye has not
seen, nor can it enter into the heart of man to conceive, 1 Cor. 2.9. Alas,
what an infinite difference is there between Duty enjoined, and the Kingdom
prepared? What is the shedding of a Tear to a Crown? So that Gods commands are
not grievous, 1 Ioh. 5.3. our service cannot be so hard as a Kingdom is sweet.

2. Br. See hence the Royal Bounty of God to his Children, that he has
prepared a Kingdom for them. (...), Chrysostom* A Kingdom bespangled with Glory: It
is infinitely above the Model we can draw of it in our Thoughts. The Painter
going to draw the Picture of Helena, as not being able to draw her Beauty to
the Life, drew her Face covered with a Vail. So when we speak of the Kingdom of
Heaven, we must draw a Vail, we cannot set it forth in all its Orient Beauty
and Magnificence; Gold and Pearl do but faintly shadow it out; Rev. 21. the
Glory of this Kingdom is better felt than expressed.

1. They who inherit this Kingdom are amicti stolis alhis, clothed with white
robes, Rev. 7.9. White Robes denote three things: 1. Their Dignity; the
Persians were arrayed in white, in token of honor. 2. Their Purity; the
Magistrates among the Romans were clothed in white, ergo called candidati, to
show their integrity: Thus the Queen, the Lambs Wife, is arrayed in fine linen
pure and white, which is the righteousness of the Saints, Rev. 19.8. 3. Their
Joy: White is an emblem of Joy; Eccl. 9.7. Eat thy bread with joy, let thy
garments be always white.

2. The dwellers in this Kingdom have Palms in their hands, Rev. 7.9. in token
of Victory. They are Conquerours over the World, and being Victors they now
have Palm-branches.

3. They sit upon the Throne with Christ; Rev. 3.21. When Caesar returned from
conquering his Enemies, there was set for him a Chair of State in the Senate,
and a Throne in the Theater. Thus the Saints in Glory, after their Heroic
Victories, shall sit upon a Throne with Christ. Here is Royal Bounty in God to
bestow such an illustrious Kingdom upon the Saints. It Is a Mercy to be
Pardoned, but what is it to be Crowned? It Is a Mercy to be delivered from Wrath
to come, but what is it to be invested into a Kingdom? Behold, what manner of
love is this! Earthly Princes may bestow great gifts and donatives upon their
Subjects, but they keep the Kingdom to themselves. Though King Pharaoh advanced
Joseph to Honor, and took the Ring off his Finger and gave him, yet he would
keep the Kingdom to himself, Genesis 41.40. but God inthrones the Saints in a
Kingdom; God thinks nothing too good for his Children: We are ready to think
much of a Tear, a Prayer, or to sacrifice a Sin for him, but he does not think
much to bestow a Kingdom upon us.

3. Br. See hence, that Religion is no ignominious disgraceful thing. Satan
labors to cast all the odium and reproach upon it that he can; that it is a
devout Frenzy, Folly in grain; Acts 28.22. As for this sect, we know that it is
every where spoken against; but wise Men measure things by the end: What is the
end of a Religious Life? It ends in a Kingdom. Would a Prince regard the
slightings of a few franticks when he is going to be Crowned? You who are
beginners, bind their reproaches as a Crown about your Head, despise their
Censures as much as their Praise; a Kingdom is a coming.

4. Br. See what contrary ways the Godly and the Wicked go at Death; the Godly
go to a Kingdom, the Wicked to a Prison: The Devil is the Jailer, and they are
bound with the chains of darkness; Jude 6. but what are these Chains? Not Iron
Chains, but worse; the Chain of Gods Decree, decreeing them to torment, and the
Chain of Gods Power, whereby he binds them fast under Wrath: This is the
deplorable condition of impenitent Sinners, they do not go to a Kingdom when
they dye, but to a Prison. O think what horror and despair will possess the
Wicked, when they see themselves ingulphed in misery, and their condition
hopeless, helpless, endless; they are in a fiery Prison, and no possibility of
getting out. A Servant under the Law, who had an hard Master, yet every seventh
year was a year of release when he might go free; but in Hell there is no year
of release when the damned shall go free; the Fire, the Worm, the Prison are
eternal. If the whole World from Earth to Heaven, were filled with grains of
Sand, and once in a Thousand Years an Angel should come and fetch away one
grain of Sand, how many Millions of Ages would pass before that vast heap of
Sand would be quite spent; yet, if after all this time the Sinner might come
out of Hell there were some hope, but this word ever, breaks the Heart with
despair.

5. Br. See then that which may make us in love with holy Duties. Every Duty
Spiritually performed brings us a step nearer to the Kingdom: Finis dat
amabilitatem mediis. He whose Heart is set on Riches counts Trading pleasant
because it brings in Riches; if our Hearts are set upon Heaven we shall love
Duty because it brings us by degrees to the Kingdom; we are going to Heaven in
the way of Duty. Holy Duties increase Grace, and as Grace ripens, so Glory
hastens; the Duties of Religion are irksome to Flesh and Blood, but we should
look upon them as Spiritual Chariots to carry us apace to the Heavenly Kingdom.
The Protestants in France called their Church Paradise, and well they might,
because the Ordinances did lead them to the Paradise of God. As every Flower
has its sweetness, so would every Duty, if we could look upon it as giving us
a lift nearer Heaven.

6. Br. It shows us what little cause the Children of God have to envy the
prosperity of the wicked; Quis aerario, quis plenis loculis indiget, Sen. the
wicked have the waters of a full cup wrung out to them, Psalm. 73.10. as if they
had a monopoly of happiness; they have all they can desire; nay, they have more
than heart can wish; Psalm. 73.7. They steep themselves in pleasure; Job 21.12.
They take the timbrel, and harp, and rejoice at the sound of the organ. The
wicked are high, when Gods People are low in the World; the Goats clamber up
the Mountains of Preferment, when Christ's Sheep are below in the Valley of
Tears; the Wicked are clothed in Purple while the Godly are in Sackcloth; the
prosperity of the wicked is a great stumbling block: This made Averroes deny a
Providence, and made Asaph say, Surely I have cleansed my heart in vain, Psalm.
73.12. but there is no cause of envy at their prosperity, if we consider two
things.

1. This is all they must have; Luke 16.25. Son, remember that thou in thy life
time receivedst thy good things; thou had all thy Heaven here. Luther calls
the Turkish Empire a bone which God casts to dogs.

2. That God has laid up better things for his Children, he has prepared a
Kingdom of Glory for them; they shall have the Beatifical Vision, they shall
hear the Angels sing in Consort, they shall be Crowned with the Pleasures of
Paradise for ever. O then envy not the flourishing prosperity of the Wicked;
they go through fair way to Execution, and the Godly go through foul way to
Coronation.

7. Br. Is there a Kingdom of Glory a coming? Then see how happy all the Saints
are at Death, they go to a Kingdom; they shall see Gods Face which shines ten
thousand times brighter than the Sun in its Meridian Glory: The Godly at Death
shall be installed into their Honor, and have the Crown-Royal set upon their
Head. They have in the Kingdom of Heaven, the quintessence of all delights;
they have the Water of Life clear as Crystal; they have all Aromatic
Perfumes; they feed not on the Dew of Hermon, but the Manna of Angels; they lie
in Christ's bosom, that bed of Spices. There is such a pleasant variety in the
happiness of Heaven, that after millions of years it will be as fresh and
desirable as at the first hours enjoying. In the Kingdom of Heaven the Saints
are Crowned with all those Perfections which the Humane Nature is capable of.
The desires of the Glorified Saints are infinitely satisfied; there is nothing
absent that they could wish might be enjoyed; there is nothing present that
they could wish might be removed: They who are got to this kingdom would be
loath to come back to the Earth again, it would be much to their loss: They
would not leave the fatness and sweetness of the Olive to court the Bramble;
the things which tempt us they would scorn. What are golden bags to the golden
beams of the Sun of Righteousness? In the kingdom of Heaven there is Glory in
its highest elevation; in that Kingdom is Knowledge without Ignorance, Holiness
without Sin, Beauty without Blemish, Strength without Weakness, Light without
Darkness, Riches without Poverty, Ease without Pain, Liberty without Restraint,
Rest without Labor, Joy without Sorrow, Love without Hatred, Plenty without
Surfeit, Honor without Disgrace, Health without Sickness, Peace without War,
Contentation without Cessation. O the happiness of those that dye in the Lord,
they go into this blessed kingdom; and if they are so happy when they dye, then
let me make two Inferences.

1. Infer. What little cause have the Saints to fear Death; are any afraid of
going to a Kingdom? What is there in this World should make us desirous to stay
here? Do we not see God dishonored, and how can we bear it? Is not this World
a valley of tears, and do we weep to leave it? Are not we in a Wilderness among
fiery Serpents? And are we afraid to go from these Serpents? Our best Friend
lives above; God is ever displaying the Banner of his Love in Heaven, and is
there any Love like his? Are there any sweeter smiles, or softer embraces than
his? What news so welcome as leaving the World and going to a Kingdom.
Christian, thy dying day will be thy wedding day, and do thou fear it? Is a
Slave afraid to be redeemed? Is a Virgin afraid to be matched into the Crown?
Death may take away a few worldly Comforts, but it gives that which is better;
it takes away a Flower, and gives a Jewel; it takes away a short lease and
gives land of inheritance. If the Saints possess a Kingdom when they dye they
have no cause to fear Death. A Prince would not be afraid to cross the Sea
though tempestuous, if he were sure to be Crowned as soon as he came at shore.

2. Infer. If the Godly are so happy when they dye, they go to a Kingdom, then
what little cause have we to mourn immoderately for the death of Godly Friends;
shall we mourn for their preferment? Why should we shed tears immoderately for
them who have all tears wiped from their eyes? Why should we be swallowed up of
grief for them who are swallowed up of joy? They are gone to their Kingdom,
they are not lost, but gone a little before, not perished but translated; non
amissi sed praemissi, Cyprian. They are removed for their advantage; as if one
should be removed out of a smoaky Cottage to a Palace. Elijah was removed in a
fiery Chariot to Heaven, shall Elisha weep inordinately because he enjoyes not
the company of Elijah? Shall Jacob weep when he knows his Son Joseph is
preferred, and made chief Ruler in Egypt? We should not be excessive in grief
when we know our Godly Friends are advanced to a Kingdom: I confess when any of
our Relations dye in their impenitency, there is just cause of Mourning, but
not when our Friends take their flight to Glory. David lost two Sons, Absalom a
wicked Son, he mourned for him bitterly; he lost the Child he had by Bathsheba,
he mourned not when the Child was departed. St. Ambrose gives the reason, David
had a good hope; nay, assurance that the Child was translated into Heaven; but
he doubted of Absalom, he dyed in his Sins, therefore David wept so for him, O
Absalom, My Son, my Son; but though we are to weep to think any of our Flesh
should burn in Hell, yet let us not be cast down for them who are so highly
preferred at Death as to a Kingdom. Our Godly Friends who dye in the Lord, are
in that blessed estate, and are crowned with such infinite delights, that if we
could hear them speak to us out of Heaven, they would say, Weep not for us, but
weep for your selves; Luke 23.28. We are in our Kingdom, weep not at our
preferment, but weep for your selves, who are in a sinful sorrowful World; you
are tossing on the troublesome waves, but we are got to the Haven; you are
fighting with Temptations, while we are wearing a Victorious Crown. Weep not
for us, but weep for your selves.

8. Branch, See the Wisdom of the Godly, they have the Serpents eye in the
Doves head, wise virgins, Matthew. 25.2. their Wisdom appear, in their choice,
they choose that which will bring them to a Kingdom; they choose Grace, and
what is Grace but the seed of Glory? They choose Christ with his Cross, but
this Cross leads to a Crown. Moses chose rather to suffer affliction with the
people of God, Heb. 11.25. it was a wise rational choice, he knew if he
suffered he should reign. At the day of Judgment those whom the World accounted
foolish will appear to be wise, they made a prudent choice, they chose
Holiness, and what is Happiness but the quintessence of Holiness? They chose
affliction with the people of God; but through this purgatory of affliction
they pass to Paradise: God will proclaim the Saints Wisdom before Men and
Angels.

9. Br. See the folly of those who for vain Pleasures and Profits will lose
such a glorious Kingdom; like that Cardinal of France who said, He would lose
his part in Paradise if he might keep his Cardinalship in Paris: I may say as
Eccles. 9.3. Madness is in their heart. Lysimachus for a draught of Water lost
his Empire; so for a draught of sinful Pleasure these will lose Heaven. We too
much resemble our Grandfather Adam, who for an Apple lost Paradise; many for
trifles to get a Shilling more in the Shop or Bushel will venture the loss of
Heaven. This will be an aggravation of the Sinners torment, to think how
foolishly he was undone; for a flash of impure Joy he lost an eternal weight of
Glory. Would it not vex one who is the Lord of a Manor, to think he should
part with his stately Inheritance for a fit of Music? Such are they who let
Heaven go for a song This will make the Devil insult at the last day to think
how he has gulled Men, and made them lose their Souls and their happiness for
lying vanities. If Satan could make good his brag, in giving all the Glory and
Kingdoms of the World, it could not countervail the loss of the Celestial
Kingdom. All the tears in Hell, are not sufficient to lament the loss of Heaven.

USE II. Of Reproof.
1. Branch. It reproves such as do not at all look after this Kingdom of Glory:
As if all we say about Heaven were but a Romance, they do not mind it. That
they mind it not appears, because they do not labor to have the Kingdom of
Grace set up in their hearts. If they have some thoughts of this Kingdom, yet
it is in a dull careless manner, they serve God as if they served him not; they
do not vires exerere, put forth their strength for the Heavenly Kingdom. How
industrious were the Saints of old for this Kingdom; Phil. 3.13. Reaching forth
unto those things which are before: The Greek word is (...), stretching out the
neck; a Metaphor from Racers that strain every limb, and reach forward to lay
hold on the prize. Luther spent three hours a day in Prayer. Anna the
prophetess departed not from the temple, but served God with fasting and
prayers night and day, Luke 2.37. How zealous and industrious were the Martyrs
to get into this Heavenly Kingdom! they wore their Fetters as Ornaments,
snatched up Torments as Crowns, and embraced the Flames as cheerfully as Elijah
did the fiery Chariot, which came to fetch him to Heaven; and do not we think
this Kingdom worth our labor? The great pains the Heathens took in their
Olympic Races when they ran but for a Crown made of Olive intermixed with
Gold, will rise up in Judgment against such as take little or no pains in
seeking after the Kingdom of Glory. The dullness of many in seeking after Heaven
is such, as if they did not believe there were such a Kingdom, or as if it
would not countervail their labor, or as if they thought it were indifferent
whether they obtained this Kingdom or no, which is as much as to say, whether
they were saved or no, whether they were Crowned in Glory, or chained as Gally
slaves in Hell for ever.

2. Branch. It reproves them who spend their sweat more in getting the World,
then the Kingdom of Heaven, Phil. 3.19. (...), who mind earthly things; the
World is the great Diana they cry up, as if they would fetch happiness out of
the earth, which God has cursed: They labor for and Honor Riches; many are
like Korah and Dathan, the earth swallowed them up, Number. 16.32. So the earth
swallows up their Time and Thoughts; these, if they are not Pagans, yet they
are Infidels; they do not believe there is such a kingdom; they go for
Christians, yet question that great Article in their Faith, Life Everlasting;
these, like the Serpents, lick the dust. O what is there in the World that we
should so idolize it! when Christ and Heaven are not regarded; what has Christ
done for you? died for your sins; what will the World do for you? can it pacify
an angry Conscience? can it procure Gods Favor? can it flee death? can it
bribe your Judge? can it purchase for you a place in the kingdom of heaven? O
how are Men bewitched with worldly Profits and Honors; that for these things,
they will let go Paradise. It was a good prayer of St. Bernard, Sic possideam^u
mundana, ut non perdamus aeterna -- Lo, let us so possess things temporal, that
we do not lose things eternal.

3. Branch. It reproves such who delay and put off seeking this kingdom till it
be too late; like the foolish Virgins who came when the door was shut* Mora
trahit periculum. People let the Lamp of Life blaze out, and when the Symptoms
of death are upon them, and they know not what else to do, now will look up to
the kingdom of Heaven: Christ bids them seek Gods kingdom first, and they will
seek it last; they put off the kingdom of heaven to a Deathbed, as if it were
as easy to make their Peace as to make their Will. How many have lost the
Heavenly kingdom through Delays and Procrastinations. Plutarch reports of
Archias the Lacedemonian, being among his Cups, one delivered him a Letter and
desired him to read it presently, being of serious business, says he seria
cras, I will mind serious things to morrow, and that Night he was slain. Thou
that say thou will look after the kingdom of Heaven to morrow, know not,
but that thou may be in Hell before to morrow: Sometimes death comes
suddenly, it strikes without giving warning: What folly is it putting off
seeking the kingdom of heaven, till the day of Grace expire, till the radical
moisture be spent; as if a Man should begin to run a Race when a fit of the
Gout takes him.

4. Branch. It reproves such as were once great Zealots in Religion, and did
seem to be touched with a coal from Gods Altar; but since they have cooled in
their Devotion, and have left off the pursuing the Caelestial kingdom, Hos.
8.3. Israel has cast off the thing that is good; there is no face of Religion
to be seen, they have left off the House of Prayer and gone to Play houses;
they have left off pursuing the Heavenly Kingdom.

Quest. Whence is this?

Resp. 1. For want of a supernatural Principle of Grace: That Branch must needs
dye which has no Root to grow upon: That which moves from a Principle of Life
lasts; as the beating of the Pulse; but that which moves only from an
artificial Spring; when the spring is down the motion cease: The Hypocrites
Religion is artificial not vital, he acts from the outward spring of Applause
or Gain, and if that spring be down his motion toward Heaven cease.

2. From Unbelief, Heb. 3.12. An evil heart of Unbelief, departing from the
living God. Psalm. 78.22. They believed not in God. Verse 41. they turned back
-- Sinners have hard thoughts of God, they think they may pray and hear, yet
never the better, Mal. 3.14. they question whether God will give them the
kingdom at last, then they turn back, and throw away Christ's Colors; they
distrust Gods Love, no wonder then they desert his Service; Infidelity is the
Root of Apostasy.

3. Men leave off pursuing the heavenly kingdom; it is from some secret Lust
nourished in the Soul, perhaps a wanton or a covetous Lust: Demas for love of
the world forsook his Religion, and afterward turned Priest in an idol Temple.
One of Christ's own Apostles was caught with a silver Bait: Covetousness will
make Men betray a good Cause, and make shipwreck of a good Conscience; if there
be any Lust unmortified in the Soul, it will bring forth the bitter fruit
either of Scandal or Apostasy.

4. Men leave off pursuing the Kingdom of Heaven out of Timorousness; if they
persist in Religion they may lose their Places of Profit, perhaps their Lives.
The reason (says Aristotle) why the Camelion turns into so many Colors, is
through excessive fear. When Carnal fear prevails, it makes Men change their
Religion, as fast as the Camelion does its Colors: Many of the Jews who were
great followers of Christ, when they saw the Swords and Staves deserted him.
What Solomon says of the Sluggard, is as true of the Coward, he says, there
is a Lion in the way, Prove. 22.13. he sees dangers before him, he would go on
in the way to the Kingdom of Heaven, but there is a Lion in the way. This is
dismal, Heb. 10.38. If any Man draw back, in Greek (...), if he steals as a
Soldier from his Colors, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him.

USE III. Of Trial. Let us examine whether we shall go to this Kingdom when we
dye; Heaven is called a Kingdom prepared, Matthew. 25.
Quest. How shall we know this Kingdom is prepared for us?

Answ If we are prepared for this Kingdom.

Quest. How may that be known?

Answ. By being Heavenly persons: An earthly heart is no more fit for Heaven
than a Clod of Dust is fit to be a Star; there is nothing of Christ or Grace in
such an heart: It were a Miracle to find a Pearl in a Gold Mine; and it is as
great a Miracle to find Christ the Pearl of Price in an earthly heart: Would we
go to the Kingdom of Heaven? are we heavenly?

1. Are we heavenly in our Contemplations? do our Thoughts run upon this
Kingdom? do we get sometimes upon Mount Pisgah, and take a Prospect of Glory?
Thoughts are as Travelers; most of David's Thoughts traveled Heavens Road,
Psalm. 139.17. Are our Minds heavenl^z'd, Psalm. 48.12. walk about Sion, tell the
Towers thereof, mark ye well her Bulwarks: Do we walk into the Heavenly Mount,
and see what a glorious Situation it is? Do we tell the Towers of that
Kingdom? While a Christian fixes his Thoughts on God and Glory, he does as it
were tread upon the Borders of the Heavenly Kingdom, and he peeps within the
Vail; as Moses who had a sight of Canaan, though he did not enter into it; so
the heavenly Christian has a sight of heaven, though he be not yet entered into
it.

2. Are we heavenly in our Affections? do we, (...), set our Affections on the
Kingdom of Heaven? Col. 3.2. If we are heavenly we despise all things below, in
comparison of the Kingdom of God: We look upon the World but as a beautiful
Prison; and we cannot be much in love with our Fetters though they are made of
Gold; our heart is in Heaven. A Stranger may be in a Foreign Land to gather up
his Debts owing him, but he desires to be in his own Kingdom and Nation; so we
are here a while as in a strange Land, but our desire is chiefly after the
Kingdom of Heaven, where we shall be for ever. The World is the Place of a
Saints Abode, not of his Delight; is it thus with us? Do we like the Patriarks
of old desire a better Country? Heb. 11.16. This is the temper of a true Saint,
his Affections are set on the Kingdom of God; his Anchor is cast in Heaven, and
he is carried thither with the Sails of Desire.

3. Are we heavenly in our Speeches? Christ after his Resurrection did speak of
the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God; Act. 1.3. Are our Tongues tuned to
the Language of the heavenly Canaan. Mal. 3.16. Then they that feared the Lord
spoke often to one another. Do you in your visits season your discourses with
Heaven? There are many say, they hope they shall be saved, but you shall never
hear them speak of the Kingdom of Heaven; perhaps of their Wares and Drugs, or
of some rich Purchase they have got, but nothing of the Kingdom. Can Men travel
together in a Journey and not speak of the Place they are traveling to? are
you Travelers for Heaven, and never speak a word of the Kingdom you are
traveling to? Herein many discover they do not belong to Heaven, for you shall
never hear a good Word come from them; Verba sunt speculum Mentis, Bern. The
Words are the Looking-glass of the Mind, they show what the Heart is.

4. Are we heavenly in our Trading? Is our Traffic and Merchandise in Heaven?
Do we trade in the heavenly Kingdom by Faith? A Man may live in one place and
trade in another, he may live in Ireland and trade in the West Indies; so do we
trade in the heavenly Kingdom? They shall never go to heaven when they dye, who
do not trade in Heaven while they live. Do we send up to Heaven Vollies of
Sighs and Groans? Do we send forth the Ship of Prayer thither, which fetches
in Returns of Mercy? Is our Communion with the Father and his Son Jesus, 1 John
1.3. Phil. 3.20.

5. Are our Lives heavenly? Do we live as if we had seen the Lord with Bodily
eyes? Do we aemulate and imitate the Angels in Sanctity? Do we labor to copy
out Christ's Life in ours? 1 John 2.6. 'Twas a custom among the Macedonians on
Alexanders Birth day to wear his Picture about their Necks set with Pearl and
Diamond: Do we carry Christ's Picture about us? and resemble him in the
Heavenliness of our Conversation? If we are thus heavenly, then we shall go to
the kingdom of Heaven when we dye; and truly there is a great deal of Reason
why we should be thus Heavenly in our Thoughts, Affections, Conversation, if we
consider,

(1.) The main end why God has given us our Souls is, that we may mind the
kingdom of Heaven: Our Souls are of a Noble Extraction, they are akin to
Angels, a Glass of the Trinity, as Plato speaks. Now is it rational to imagine
that God would have breathed into us such noble Souls only to look after
sensual Objects: Were such bright Stars made only to shoot into the Earth? Were
these immortal Souls made only to seek after dying Comforts? Had this been only
the end of our Creation, to eat and drink, and converse with Earthly Objects,
worse Souls would have served us. Sensitive Souls had been good enough for us;
what need our Souls be rational and divine to do only that work which a Beast
may do?

(2.) Great reason we should be heavenly in our Thoughts, Affections,
Conversation, if we consider what a blessed kingdom Heaven is; it is beyond all
Hyperbole; Earthly Kingdoms do scarce deserve the Names of Cottages compared
with it. We read of an Angel coming down from heaven, who did tread with his
Right Foot upon the Sea, and with his Left on the Earth, Rev. 10.2. Had we but
once been in the heavenly kingdom, and viewed the superlative glory of it, how
might we in an holy scorn trample with one Foot upon the Earth, and with the
other Foot upon the Sea: There are Rivers of Pleasure, Gates of Pearl,
sparkling Crowns, white Robes, may not this make our hearts heavenly; it is an
heavenly kingdom, and only such go into it as are heavenly.

USE IV. Of Exhortation, To all in General.
1. Branch. If there be such a glorious Kingdom to come, believe this great
Truth; Socinians deny it. The Rabbis say the great dispute between Cain and
A^^l was about the world to come, Abel affirmed it, Cain denied it; this should
be engraven upon our hearts as with the point of a Diamond; there is a blessed
Kingdom in reversion, Psalm. 58.11. Doubtless there is a Reward for the
Righteous. Let us not haesitate through unbelief; doubting of Principles is the
next way to denying them: Unbelief as Sampson, would pull down the Pillars of
Religion; be confirmed in this, there is a Kingdom of Glory to come; whosoever
denies this cuts a sunder the main Article of the Creed, Life Everlasting.

2. Branch. If there be such a blessed Kingdom of Glory to come, let us take
heed least we miss of this Kingdom; let us fear least we lose Heaven by short
shooting; trembling in the Body a Malady, in the Soul a Grace; this fear is not
a fear of Diffidence or Distrust, such a fear as discourageth the Soul, for
such a fear frights from Religion, it cuts the Sinews of Endeavor; but this
holy fear least we miss of the Kingdom of Heaven, is a fear of diligence; it
quickens us in the use of means, and puts us forward that we may not fail of
our hope, Heb. 11.6. Noah being moved with fear prepared an Ark: Fear is a
watch Bell to awaken sleepy Christians; it guards against security; it is a
spur to a sluggish heart: He who fears he shall come short of his Journey rides
the faster; And indeed this Exhortation to fear least we miss of this Kingdom,
is most necessary, if we consider two things;

First. There are many who have gone many steps in the way to Heaven, yet have
fallen short of it; Mark 12.34. Thou art not far from the Kingdom of God; yet
he was not near enough.

Quest. How many steps may a Man take in the way to the Kingdom yet miss of it?

Resp. 1. He may be adorned with Civility, he may be morally righteous, he may
be prudent, just, temperate, he may be free from paenal Statutes; this is good,
but not enough to bring a Man to Heaven.

2. He may hang out the Flag of a glorious Profession* yet fall short of the
Kingdom; the Scribes and Pharisees went far, they sat in Moses Chair, were
Expounders of the Law, they prayed, gave Alms, were strict in the observation
of the Sabbath; if one had got a Thorn in his Foot, they would not pull it out
on the Sabbath day, for fear of breaking the Sabbath; they were so externally
devout in Gods worship, that the Jews thought, that if but two in the all World
went to Heaven the one should be a Scribe and the other a Pharisee; but the
Mantle of their Profession was not lined with Sincerity; they did all for the
applause of Men, therefore they missed of Heaven, Mat. 5.20. Except your
Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees ye shall in
no case enter into the Kingdom of God.

3. A Man may be a Frequenter of Ordinances, and yet miss of the Kingdom; it is
a good sight to see People flock as Doves to the Windows of Gods House; it is
good to lie in the way where Christ passes by, yet be not offended if I say,
one may be an Hearer of the word, and fall short of Glory; Herod heard John
Baptist gladly, yet beheaded John, instead of beheading his sin: the Prohpet
Ezekiel's Hearers did come with as much delight to his Preaching, as one would
do to a fit of Music, Ezekiel. 33.32. Thou art to them as a lovely Song of one
that has a pleasant Voice, and can play well on an Instrument, they hear thy
Words, but they do them not. What is it to hear ones Duty and not do it? As if
a Phisician prescribe a good Receipt, but the Patient does not take it.

4. A Man may have some trouble for sin, and weep for it, yet miss of the
Heavenly Kingdom.

Quest. Whence is this?

Answ. 1. A Sinners tears are forced by Gods Judgments; as water which comes
out of a Still is forced by the fire. 2. Trouble for sin is transient, it is
quickly over again; as some that go to Sea are Sea-sick, but when they come to
Land they are well again. So Hypocrites may be Sermon-sick, but this trouble
does not last, the sick fit is soon over. 3. A Sinner weeps but goes on in sin;
his sins are not drowned in his tears.

5. A Man may have good desires yet miss of the Kingdom; Numb. 23.10. O that I
might dye the death of the righteous.

Quest. Wherein do these desires come short?

Answ. 1. They are sluggish. A Man would have Heaven but will take no pains: As
if one should say he desires water, but will not let down the bucket into the
well; Prove. 21.25. The desire of the slothful kills him, his hands refuse to
labor. 2. The Sinner desires Mercy but not Grace; he desires Christ as a
Savior, but not as he is the ^oly One; he desires Christ only as a bridge to
lead him over to Heaven. Such desires as these may be found among the damned.

6. A Man may forsake his Sins, Oaths, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, yet come short
of the Kingdom.

Quest. Whence is this?

Answ. 1. He may forsake gross sins, yet he has no reluctance against heart
sins, Pride, Unbelief, and the first risings of Malice and Concupiscence.
Though he dams up the Stream, yet he lets alone the Fountain; though he lop and
prune the Branches, yet he does not strike at the Root of it. 2. Though he
leaves Sin (for fear of Hell, or because it brings shame and penury) yet he
still loves Sin; as if a Snake should cast her Coat, yet keep her Poison; Hos.
4.8. They set their heart on their iniquity. 3. It Is but a partial forsaking of
Sin; though he leave one Sin he lives in some other. Herod reformed very much,
Mark 6.20. (...), He did many things, but he lived in Incest. Some leave
Drunkenness and live in Covetousness; they forbear Swearing and live in
Slandering. It is but a partial reformation, and so they miss of the Kingdom of
Glory. Thus you see there are some who have gone many steps in the way to
Heaven, yet have come short. Some have gone so far in Profession that they have
been confident their estate has been good, and they should go to the Kingdom
of Heaven, yet have missed it: Luke 13.25. When once the master of the house is
risen up, and has shut to the door, and ye begin to stand without and to
knock, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us. How confident were these of Salvation,
they did not beseech but knock, as if they did not doubt to be let into Heaven;
yet to these Christ says, I know you not whence you are: Depart from me ye
workers of iniquity: Therefore fear and tremble least any of us miss of this
Kingdom of Heaven.

Secondly, This fear is necessary if we consider what a loss it is to lose the
Heavenly Kingdom. All the tears of Hell are not sufficient to lament the loss
of Heaven! They who lose the Heavenly Kingdom, lose Gods sweet Presence, the
ravishing viewes and smiles of Gods Glorious Face. Gods Presence is the Diamond
in the Ring of Glory; Psalm. 16.11. In his presence is fullness of joy. If God be
the Fountain of all Bliss, then to be separated from him is the Fountain of all
Misery. They who lose the Heavenly Kingdom lose the Society of Angels, and what
sweeter Music than to hear them praise God in Consort, they lose all their
Treasure, their white Robes, their sparkling Crowns; they lose their hopes, Job
8.14. Whose hope shall be cut off. Their hope is not an Anchor but a Spiders
Web: If hope deferred makes the heart sick, Prove. 13.12. what then is hope
disappointed? They lose the end of their being. Why were they Created but to be
enthron^d in Glory? Now to lose this is to lose the end of their being: As if
an Angel should be turned to a worm. There are many aggravations of the loss of
this Heavenly Kingdom.

1. The eyes of the Wicked shall be opened to see their loss; now they care not
for the loss of Gods Favor because they know not the worth of it. A Man that
loses a rich Diamond and took it but for an ordinary Stone, is not much
troubled at the loss of it; but when he comes to know what a Jewel he lost,
then he laments. He whose Heart would never break at the sight of his sins,
shall now break at the sight of his loss. Phinehas his Daughter, when she heard
the Ark was lost, cried out, The Glory is departed; 1 Samuel 4.21. When the
Sinner sees what he has lost, he has lost the Beatifical Vision, he has lost
the Kingdom of Heaven; now he will cry out in horror and despair, The Glory,
the everlasting Glory is departed.

2. A second aggravation of the loss of this Kingdom will be, that Sinners
shall be upbraided by their own Conscience: This is the worm that never dies,
Mark 9.44. viz. a self-accusing Mind. When Sinners shall consider they were in
a fair way to the Kingdom; they had a possibility of Salvation; though the door
of Heaven were strait, yet it was open; they had the means of Grace; the
jubilee of the Gospel was proclaimed in their ears; God called but they
refused; Jesus Christ offered them a plaster of his own Blood to heal them,
but they trampled it under foot; the Holy Spirit stood at the door of their
heart knocking and crying to them to receive Christ and Heaven, but they
repulsed the Spirit, and sent away this Dove, and now they have, through their
own folly and wilfulness, lost the Kingdom of Heaven: This self-accusing
Conscience will be terrible, like a venomous Worm gnawing at the Heart.

3. A third aggravation of the loss of Heaven will be to look upon others that
have gained the Kingdom; the happiness of the Blessed will be an eyesore; Luke
13.28. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham,
and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the kingdom of God, and you your
selves thrust out. When the Wicked shall see those whom they hated and scorned
to be exalted to a Kingdom, and shine with Robes of Glory, and they themselves
miss of the Kingdom, this will be a dagger at the heart, and make them gnash
their teeth for envy.

4. A fourth aggravation is, this loss of the Kingdom of Heaven is accompanied
with the punishment of Sense. He who leaps short of the Bank falls into the
River; such as come short of Heaven fall into the River of Fire and Brimstone;
Psalm 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into hell: And how dreadful is that? If
when but a spark of Gods Anger lights into the Conscience here, it is so
torturing, what will it be to have mountains of Gods Wrath thrown upon the
Soul? Psalm. 90.11. Who knows the power of thy anger? The Angel never poured
out his Vial but some woe followed; Rev. 16.3. when the bitter Vials of Gods
Wrath are poured out, Damnation follows. Dives cries out, O I am tormented in
this flame; Luke 16.24. In Hell there is not a drop of Mercy. There was no Oil
or Frankincense used in the Sacrifice of Jealousy, Numb. 5.15. in Hell no Oil
of Mercy to lenifie the Sufferings of the Damned, nor Incense of Prayer to
appease Gods Wrath.

5. A fifth aggravation of the loss of this Kingdom will be, to consider on
what easy and reasonable terms Men might have had this Kingdom. If indeed God
had commanded impossibles, to have satisfied his Justice in their own Persons,
it had been another matter, but what God did demand was reasonable, only to do
that which was for their good, to accept of Christ for their Lord and Husband,
only to part with that which would damn them, if they kept their Sins; these
were the fair terms on which they might have enjoyed the Heavenly Kingdom: Now
to lose Heaven, which might have been had upon such easy terms, will be a
cutting aggravation; it will rend a Sinners Heart with rage and grief, to think
how easily he might have prevented the loss of the Heavenly Kingdom.

6. It will be an aggravation of the loss of Heaven for Sinners to think how
active they were in doing that which lost them the Kingdom; they were felo de
se. What pains did they take to resist the Spirit, to stifle Conscience, they
sinned while they were out of breath; Ier. 9.5. They weary themselves to commit
iniquity. What difficulties did Men go through, what did they endure for their
Sins, how much shame and pain, how sick was the Drunkard with his cups, how
sore in his Body was the Adulterer, and what marks of his sin did he carry
about him? What dangers did Men adventure upon for their Lusts, they adventured
Gods Wrath, and adventured the Laws of the Land. O how will this aggravate the
loss of Heaven, how will this make Men curse themselves, to think how much
pains they were at to lose happiness. How will this sting Men's Consciences to
think, had they taken but as much pains for Heaven as they did for Hell they
had not lost it.

7. Aggravation of the loss of this Kingdom, it will be an eternal irreparable
loss; Heaven once lost can never be recovered. Worldly losses may be made up
again; if a Man lose his Health he may have it repaired by Physic, if a Man be
driven out of his Kingdom he may be restored to it again; as King
Nebuchadnezzar was, Dan. 4.36. My honor returned to me, and I was established
in my Kingdom. King Henry VI. was deposed from his Throne, yet restored again
to it, but they who once lose Heaven can never be restored to it again: After
millions of years they are as far from obtaining Glory as at first. Thus you
see how needful this Exhortation is, that we should fear least we fall short of
this Kingdom of Heaven.

Quest* What shall we do that we may not miss of this Kingdom of Glory?

Resp. 1. Take heed of those things which will make you miss of Heaven. 1. Take
heed of Spiritual Sloth. Many Christians are settled upon their lees, they are
loath to put themselves to too much pains. It is said of Israel, They despised
the pleasant land: Psalm. 106.24. Canaan was a Paradise of Delight, a Type of
Heaven; I, but some of the Jews thought it would cost them a great deal of
trouble and hazard in the getting, and they would rather go without it; They
despised the pleasant land. I have read of certain Spaniards that live where
there is great store of Fish, yet are so lazy that they will not be at the
pains to catch them, but buy of their Neighbors; such a sinful sloth is upon
the most, that though the Kingdom of Heaven be offered to them, yet they will
not put themselves to any labor for it. They have some faint velleities and
desires, O that I had this Kingdom; like a Man that wishes for Venison but
will not hunt for it; Prove. 13.4. The soul of the sluggard wishes and has
nothing. Men could be content to have the Kingdom of Heaven, if it would drop
as a ripe Fig into their mouth, but they are loath to fight for it. O take heed
of Spiritual Sloth; God never made Heaven to be an hive for drones. We cannot
have the World without labor, and do we think to have the Kingdom of Heaven?
Heathens will rise up in Judgment against many Christians, what pains did they
take in their Olympic Races, when they ran but for a Crown of Olive or Myrtle
intermixed with Gold, and do we stand still when we are running for a Kingdom?
Prove. 19.15. Sloathfulness casts into a deep sleep. Sloth is the Souls sleep.
Adam lost his Rib when he was asleep. Many a Man loses the Kingdom of Heaven
when he is in this deep sleep of sloth.

2. Take heed of Unbelief. Unbelief kept Israel out of Canaan; Heb. 3.19. So we
see they could not enter in because of unbelief; and it keeps many out of
Heaven. Unbelief is an enemy to Salvation, it is a damning sin, it whispers
thus, to what purpose is all this pains for the Heavenly Kingdom, I had as good
sit still, I may come near to Heaven, yet come short of Heaven; Ier. 18.12. And
they said, there is no hope. Unbelief destroys hope, and if you once cut this
sinew, a Christian goes but lamely in Religion if he goes at all. Unbelief
raises jealous thoughts of God, it represents him as a severe Judge, this
discourageth many a Soul and takes it off from Duty. Beware of unbelief,
believe the Promises; Lam. 3.25. God is good to the Soul that seeks him; seek
him earnestly and he will open both his Heart and Heaven to you. Deus
volentibus non deest; do what you are able and God will help you. While you
spread the sails of your endeavor Gods Spirit will blow upon these sails, and
carry you swiftly to the Kingdom of Glory.

3. If you would not miss of the Heavenly Kingdom take heed of mistake,
imagining the way to the Kingdom of Heaven to be easier than it is; it is but a
sigh, or Lord have Mercy. There Is no going to Heaven per saltum, one cannot
leap out of Dalilahs lap into Abraham's bosom. The Sinner is dead in trespasses,
Ephesians. 2.1. is it easy for a dead Man to restore himself to life? Is
Regeneration easy? Are there no pangs in the new birth? Does not the Scripture
call Christianity a warfare and a race? And do you fancy this easy? The way to
the Kingdom is not easy, but the mistake about the way is easy.

4. If you would not miss of the Heavenly Kingdom, take heed of delays and
procrastinations. Mora trahit periculum. It is an usual delusion, I will mind
the Kingdom of Heaven but not yet; when I have gotten an Estate, and am grown
old, then I will look after Heaven, and on a sudden Death surprizeth Men, and
they fall short of Heaven. Delay strengthens sin, hardens the heart, and gives
the Devil fuller possession of a Man. Take heed of adjourning and putting off
seeking the Kingdom of Heaven till it be too late. Caesar deferring to read a
Letter put into his hand was killed in the Senate House. Consider how short
your Life is; it is a Taper soon blown out. Animantis cujusque vita in fuga est;
The Body is like a Vessel tuned with breath, Sickness broacheth it, Death draws
it out; delay not the business of Salvation a day longer; sometimes Death
strikes and gives no warning.

5. If you would not come short of the Kingdom of Heaven, take heed of
prejudice. Many take a prejudice at Religion, and on this Rock dash their
Souls; they are prejudiced at Christ's Person, his Truths, his Followers, his
Ways.

(1.) They are prejudiced at his Person; Matthew. 13.57. And they were offended
in him; what is there in Christ that Men should be offended at him? He is the
pearl of price, Matthew. 13.46. are Men offended at Pearls and Diamonds? Christ
is the wonder of Beauty, Psalm. 45.2. Fairer than the children of men; is there
any thing in Beauty to offend? Christ is a mirror of Mercy, Heb. 2.17. why
should Mercy offend any? Christ is a Redeemer, why should a captive slave be
offended at him who comes with a sum of Money to ransom him? The prejudice
Men take at Christ is from the inbred pravity of their hearts. The eye that is
sore cannot endure the light of the Sun; the fault is not in the Sun, but in
the sore eye. There are two things in Christ Men are prejudiced at. 1. His
Means. The Jews expected a Monarch for their Messiah; but Christ came not with
outward Pomp and Splendour; His Kingdom was not of this World: The Stars which
are seated in the lightest Orbs are least seen; Christ who was the bright
Morning Star was not much seen, his Divinity was hid in the dark Lantern of
his humanity; all who saw the Man did not see the Messiah; this the Jews
stumbled at, the Means of his Person. 2. Men are prejudiced at Christ's
strictness; they look upon Christ as austere, and his Laws too severe, Psalm.
2.3. Let us break their bands, and cast away their cords from us. Though to a
Saint Christ's Laws are no more burdensome than Wings are to a Bird; yet to the
Wicked Christ's Laws are a yoke, and they love not to come under restraint;
hence it is they hate Christ. Though they pretend to love him as a Savior, yet
they hate him as he is the holy One.

(2.) Men are prejudiced at the Truths of Christ. 1. Self-denial. A man must
deny his Righteousness, Phil. 3.9. his Duties and Moralities: he would graft
the hope of Salvation upon the stock of his own Righteousness. 2. He must deny
his Unrighteousness. The Scripture seals no patents to Sin, it teaches us to
deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, Tit. 2.11. We must divorce those Sins
which bring in Pleasure and Profit. 3. Forgiving of injuries, Mark 11.25. These
Truths Men are prejudiced at; they can rather want forgiveness from God than
they can forgive others.

(3.) Men are prejudiced at the Followers of Christ. 1. Their paucity; there
are but few (in comparison) that embrace Christ; but why should this offend?
Men are not offended at Pearls and precious Stones, because they are but few.
2. Their Poverty; many that wear Christ's livery are low in the World; but why
should this give offense? (1.) Christ has better things than these to bestow
upon his Followers; the holy Anointing, the white Stones, the hidden Manna, the
Crown of Glory. (2.) All Christ's Followers are not humbled with Poverty;
Abraham was rich in Gold and Silver as well as rich in Faith: Though not many
Noble are called, yet some Noble; Acts 17.12. Honorable women which were
Greeks believed; Constantine and Theodosius were Godly Emperors; so that this
stumbling block is removed. 3. Their Scandals. Some of Christ's Followers under
a mask of Piety commit sin, this begets a prejudice against Religion; but does
Christ or his Gospel teach any such thing? The Rules he prescribes are holy:
Why should the Master be thought the worse of because some of his Servants
prove bad.

(4.) Men are prejudiced at the Ways of Christ; they expose them to
Sufferings; Matthew. 16.24. Let him take up his cross and follow me; many stumble
at the Cross. There are as Tertullian, delicaetuli, silken Christians, who love
their ease; they will follow Christ to Mount Oliver to see him transfigured,
but not to Mount Golgotha to suffer with him. But alas, what is Affliction to
the Glory that follows: The weight of Glory makes Affliction light; Adimant
Caput non Coronam. O take heed of prejudice, this has been a stumbling stone
in Men's way to Heaven, and has made them fall short of the Kingdom.

6. If you would not miss of the Kingdom of Heaven take heed of Presumption.
Men presume all is well, and take it as a principle not to be disputed that
they shall go to Heaven. The Devil has given them Opium to cast them into a
deep sleep of security. The presumptuous Sinner is like the Leviathan, made
without fear: He lives as bad as the worst, yet hopes he shall be saved as well
as the best; He blesses himself, and says he shall have peace though he goes
on in sin; Deuteronomy. 29.19. As if a Man should drink Poison yet not fear but he
should have his health. But whence does this presumptuous hope arise? Surely
from a conceit that God is made up all of Mercy. It Is true God is merciful, but
withal he is just too; Exodus 34.6, 7. Keeping mercy for thousands, and that
will by no means clear the guilty. If a King did proclaim that only those
should be pardoned who came in and submitted, should any still persisting in
Rebellion claim the benefit of that Pardon? Do thou hope for Mercy who wilt
not lay down thy Weapons, but stand out in Rebellion against Heaven? None might
touch the Ark but the Priests; none may touch this Ark of Gods Mercy, but holy,
consecrated Persons. Presumption is heluo Animarum, the great devourer of
Souls. A thousand have missed of Heaven by putting on the broad spectacles of
Presumption.

7. If you would not miss of the Heavenly Kingdom take heed of the delights and
pleasures of the Flesh; soft pleasures harden the heart. Many people cannot
endure a serious Thought, but are for Comedies and Romances, they play away
their Salvation. Homines capiuntur voluptate ut pisces hamo, Cicero. Pleasure
is the sugared bait Men bite at, but there is an hook under; Job 21.12. They
take the timbrel and harp, and rejoice at the sound of the organ: And a
parallel Scripture, Amos 6.4. That lie upon beds of ivory, that chant to the
sound of the viol, that drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the
chief ointments. The pleasures of the World do keep many from the pleasures of
Paradise* What a shame is it that the Soul, that princely thing which swayes
the scepter of Reason, and is akin to Angels, should be enslaved to sinful
pleasure. Beard in his Theater, speaks of one who had a Room richly hung with
fair Pictures, he had most delicious Music, he had the rarest Beauties, he had
all the Candies and curious Preserves of the Confectioner, thus did he gratify
his Senses with Pleasure, and swore he would live one week like a God, though
he were sure to be damned in Hell the next day. Diodorus Siculus observes, that
the Dogs of Sicily while they are hunting among the sweet Flowers lose the
scent of the Hare; so many while they are hunting after the sweet pleasures of
the World lose the Kingdom of Heaven. It Is, says Theophylact, one of the worst
sights to see a Sinner go laughing to Heaven.

8 If you would not fall short of the Kingdom of Heaven, take heed of
Worldlimindedness; a covetous Spirit is a dunghill Spirit, it choaks good
Affections, as the earth puts out the fire. The World hindered the young Man
from following Christ, abiit tristis, he went away sorrowful, Luke 18.23. which
extorted those words from our Savior, Verse 24. How hardly shall they that
have Riches enter into the Kingdom of God? Divitiae saeculi sunt laquei
Diaboli, Bern. Riches are golden Snares. If a Man were to climb up a steepy
Rock, and had Weights tied to his Legs, it would hinder him from his ascent:
Too many Golden Weights will hinder us from climbing that steepy Rock which
leads to Heaven; Exodus 14.3. They are entangled in the Land, the Wilderness
has shut them in. So it may be said of many, they are entangled in earthly
Affairs, the World has shut them in: The World is no Friend to Grace; the more
the Child sucks the weaker the Nurse is; and the more the World sucks and draws
from us, the weaker our Grace is, 1 John 2.15. Love not the world. Had a Man a
Monopoly of all the wealth of the World, were he able to empty the Western
Parts of Gold, and the Eastern of Spices; could he heap up Riches to the Starry
heaven, yet his heart would not be filled: Covetousness is a dry dropsy: Joshua
who could stop the course of the Sun, could not stop Achan in his covetous
pursuit of the Wedge of Gold: he whose heart is locked up in his Chest, will be
locked out of heaven: Some Ships that have escaped the Rocks, have been cast
away upon the Sands: Many who have escaped gross Sins, have been cast away upon
the Worlds Golden Sands.

9. If you would not come short of the Kingdom of heaven, take heed of
indulging any sin; one Millstone will drown as well as more; and one sin lived
in will damn as well as more: Vbi regnat peccatum non potest regnare Dei
regnum, Hierom. If any one sin reign, it will keep you from reigning in the
kingdom of heaven; especially keep from sins of Presumption, which wast
Conscience, vastare Conscientiam, Tertul. and the Sin of your natural
Constitution, the peccatum in delitiis, Aug. the darling Sin, Psalm. 18.23. I
have kept my self from mine iniquity. That Sin which my heart would soonest
decoy and flatter me into; as in the Hive there is one Master-Bee, so in the
heart one Master-sin: O take heed of this!

Quest. How may this sin be known?

A. 1. That Sin which a Man cannot endure the Arrow of a reproof should shoot
at, that is the bosom sin; Herod could not brook to have his Incest meddled
with, that was a noli me tangere: Men can be content to have other sins
declaimed against, but if a Minister put his Finger upon the sore, and touches
upon one special sin, then igne micant oculi, they are enraged and spit the
Venom of Malice.

2. That sin which a Man's heart runs out most to, and he is most easily
captivated by, that is the Dalilah in the Bosom: One Man is overcome with
wantonness, another by worldliness; it is a sad thing a Man should be so
bewitched by a beloved sin, that if it ask him to part with not only half the
kingdom, but the whole Kingdom of heaven, he must part with it to gratify that
Lust.

3. That sin which does most trouble a Man and fly in his Face in an hour of
sickness and distress, that is the sin he has allowed himself in, and is his
complexion sin: When Ioseph's Brethren were distressed their sin in selling
their Brother came into their Remembrance, Genesis 42.21. We were verily guilty
concerning our Brother, etc. So when a Man is upon his sickbed, and Conscience
shall say, thou have been guilty of such a sin, the sin of slandring, or
uncleanness, Conscience reads a Man a sad Lecture, it affrights him most for
one sin, that is the Complexion sin.

4. That sin which a Man is loathest to part with, that is the endeared sin:
Jacob could of all his Sons most hardly part with Benjamin, Genesis 42.36. Will ye
take Benjamin away? So says the Sinner, this and that Sin I have left, but
must Benjamin go too? must I part with this delightful sin? that goes to the
heart; as it is with a castle that has several Forts about it, the first and
second Fort are yielded, but when it comes to the main Castle the Governor
will rather fight and dye then yield that: So a Man may suffer some of his Sins
to be demolished, but when it comes to one, that is like the taking of the
Castle, he will never yield to part with that; surely that is the Master-sin;
take heed especially of this sin; the strength of sin lies in the beloved sin:
This is like an humor striking to the heart which brings Death. I have read of
a Monarch, that being pursued by the Enemy, he threw away the Crown of Gold on
his head, that he might run the faster* So that sin which thou did wear as a
Crown of Gold, throw it away that thou may run the faster to the Kingdom of
heaven: O if you would not lose Glory, mortify the beloved sin, set it as Vriah
in the Forefront of the battle to be slain; by plucking out this right eye,
you will see the better to go to heaven.

10. If you would not fall short of the kingdom of heaven, take heed of
inordinate Pashion; many a Ship has been lost in a storm; and many a Soul has
been lost in a storm of unruly Passions: Every Member of the Body is infected
with sin; as every Branch of Wormwood is bitter; but the Tongue is full of
deadly poison, Iam. 3.8. Some care not what they say in their Passion, they
will censure, slander, wish evil to others; how can Christ be in the heart when
the Devil has taken possession of the tongue? Passion disturbs reason, it is
brevis insania, a short Frenzy; Jonah in a Passion flies out against God, Jonah
4.9. I do well to be angry to the death. What to be angry with God, and to
justify it? I do well to be angry, the Man was not well in his Wits; Passion
unfits for Prayer, 1 Timothy 2.8. I will therefore that Men pray lifting up holy
hands without Wrath He that prays in wrath may lift up his hands in Prayer, but
he does not lift up holy hands. Water when it is hot soon boils over; so when
the heart is heated with Anger it soon boils over in fiery passionate Speeches.
Some curse others in their Passion: They whose tongues are set on fire, let
them take heed that they do not one day in Hell desire a drop of water to cool
their tongue O if you would not miss of the heavenly kingdom, beware of giving
way to your unbridled Passions; some say words are but wind, but they are such
a wind as may blow them to Hell.

11. If you would not fall short of the heavenly kingdom, beware of too much
indulging the sensual Appetite, Romans 13.14. Make not Provision for the flesh;
the Greek Word (...), to make Provision, signifies to be Caterers for the
flesh, Phil. 3.19. Whose God is their Belly. The Throat is a slippery place;
Judas received the Devil in the Sop; and often the Devil slides down in the
Liquor: Excess in Meat and Drink clouds the Mind, choakes good Affections,
provokes Lust; many a Man digs his own Grave with his Teeth; the Heathen could
say, magnus sum and ad mojora natus quam ut sim corporis mei mancipium, Sen. He
was higher born then to be a slave to his Body: To pamper the Body and neglect
the Soul is to feed the Slave and to starve the Wife: Take such a proportion of
food as may recruit Nature not surfeit it: Excess in things lawful has lost
many the kingdom of heaven. A Be may suck a little honey from the leaf, but
put it in a Barrel of honey and it is drowned; to suck temperately from the
Creature God allows, but excess ingulphs Men in Perdition.

12. If you would not fall short of the Kingdom of Heaven, take heed of
injustice in your dealings; defrauding lies in two things, First, mixing
Commodities; as if one mix bad Wheat with good, and sell it for pure Wheat,
this is to defraud, Isa. 1.22. Thy Wine is mixed with Water. Second, Giving
scant Measure, Amos 5.8. Making the Ephah small; Ephah was a Measure which the
Jews used in selling; they made the Ephah small, they scarce gave measure; I
wish this be not the sin of many, Hos. 12.7. He is a Merchant, the Balances of
deceit are in his hand. Can they be holy which are not just? Mic. 6.11. Shall I
count them pure with the wicked Balances? Is his heart sincere who has false
Weights? This has made many they could not reach heaven, because of their over
reaching.

13. If you would not miss of the Kingdom of Heaven, take heed of evil Company;
there is a necessary Commerce with Men in buying and selling, else, as the
Apostle says, We must go out of the World, 1 Cor. 5.10. But do not voluntarily
choose the Company of the wicked; 1 Cor. 5.11. I have written to you not to
keep Company. Do not incorporate into the Society of the wicked, or be too much
familiar with them: The wicked are (...), God haters; and 2 Chronicles. 19.2.
Should thou join with them that hate the Lord? A Christian is bound by virtue
of his Oath of Allegiance to God in Baptism, not to have intimate converse with
such as are Gods sworn Enemies; it is a thing of bad report: What does Christ's
Dove among Birds of Prey? What do Virgins among Harlots? The Company of the
wicked is very defiling, it is like going among them that have the Plague; Prove.
6.27. He that touches Pitch shall be defiled. Psalm. 106 35. They were mingled
among the heathen and learned their Works. If you mingle bright Armor with
rusty, the bright Armor will not brighten the rusty, but the rusty Armor will
spoil the bright. Such as have had religious Education, and have some
inclinations to good, yet by mixing among the wicked they will be apt to
receive hurt; the bad will sooner corrupt the good, then the good will convert
the bad; Pharaoh learned Joseph to swear, but Joseph did not learn Pharaoh to
pray. There is a strange attractive power in ill company to corrupt and poison
the best dispositions; they damp good Affections: Throw a Fire-ball into the
Snow and it is soon quenched. Among the wicked you lose your heat of zealous
affections; by holding familiar correspondence with the wicked one shall hear
them dissuading him from strict Godliness, that it will debar him of his
Liberty and Pleasure, Act. 28.2. This Sect is every where spoken against.
Hereupon he who before did look toward Heaven, begins to be discouraged, and
gradually declines from goodness.

(1.) There steals upon him a dislike of his former religious course of Life;
that he was righteous overmuch; stricter then needed.

(2.) There is instilled into his Heart a secret delight of evil; he begins to
like foolish scurrilous discourse; he can hear Religion spoken against and be
silent, nay, well pleased; he loves Vanity, and makes a sport of sin.

(3.) He is by degrees so Matamorphosed and made like the Company he converseth
with, that he now grows into a disgust and hatred of his former sober ways; he
is ill-affected toward good Men; he is transformed into scoffing Ishmael, a
breathing devil; and becomes at last as much the Child of Hell, as any of that
graceless damned Crew he conversed with; and what is the end of all? a blot in
the Name, a Moth in the Estate, a Worm in the Conscience. O if you would not
miss of the kingdom of Heaven beware of ^vil Company: Bad Company is the Bane
and Poison of the Youth of this Age: Such as were once soberly inclined, yet by
coming among the Profane they grow familiar, till at last they keep one
another Company in Hell.

14. If you would not miss of the Kingdom of Heaven take heed of parlying with
the Fleshy part; the Flesh is a Bosom Traitor. When an Enemy is gotten within
the Walls of a Castle, it is in great danger to be taken. The Flesh is an Enemy
within; the Flesh is a bad Counselor; the Flesh says there is a Lion in the
Way; it discourageth from a religious strictness; the Flesh says as Peter did
to Christ, Spare thy self; the Flesh says as Judas, What needs all this wast?
what needs this praying? why do you wast your strength and Spirits in Religion?
What needs all this wast? the Flesh cries out for ease and pleasure. How many
by consulting with the Flesh have lost the Kingdom of Heaven!

15. If you would not fall short of Heaven take heed of Carn^l Relations: Our
Carnal Friends are often Bars and Blocks in our way to Heaven; they will say
Religion is preciseness and singularity: a Wife in the bosom may be a Tempter;
Job's Wife was so, Job 2.9. Do thou still retain thy Integrity? curse God and
dye. What still pray? What do thou get by serving God? Job where are thy
Earnings? what can thou show thou have had in Gods Service, but Boyles and
Ulcers? and do thou still retain thy integrity? throw off Gods Livery,
renounce Religion. Here was a tentation handed over to him by his Wife: The
Woman was made of the Rib, the Devil turned this Rib into an Arrow, and would
have shot Job to the heart, but his Faith quenched this fiery Dart. Beware of
Carnal Relations: We read, that some of Christ's kindred laid hold on him, and
would have hindered him when he was going to Preach, Mark 3.21. They said he is
beside himself. Our kindred sometimes would stand in our way to Heaven, and
judging all zeal rashness would hinder us from being saved: Such Carnal
Relations Spira had, for advising with them whether he should remain constant
in his Orthodox Opinion, they persuaded him to recant and so abjuring his
former Faith he fell into horror and dispondency of Mind. Galeacius Marquess
of Vico found his Carnal Relations a great Block in his way, and what ado had
he to break through their Tentations? Take heed of a snare in your Bosom: It Is
a brave saying of Ierom, Si Matter mihi ubera ostendat, etc. If my Parent should
persuade me to deny Christ, if my Mother should show me her breast that gave me
suck, if my Wife should go to charm me with her Embraces, I would forsake all
and fly to Christ.

16. If you would not fall short of the Kingdom of Heaven, take heed of falling
off; beware of Apostasy; he misseth of the Prize who does not hold out in the
Race; he who makes shipwreck of the Faith cannot come to the haven of Glory. We
live in the fall of the Leaf; Men fall from that goodness they seemed to have;
some are turned to Error, others to Vice; some to drinking and dicing, others
to whoring; the very Mantle of their Profession is fallen off: It Is dreadful
for Men to fall off from hopeful beginnings: The Apostate says Tertullian
seems to put God and Satan in the Balance, and having weighed both their
Services, prefers the Devils Service and proclaims him to be the best Master,
in which respect, the Apostate is said to put Christ to open shame, Heb. 6.6.
This is sad at last, Heb. 10.38. If you would not miss of Glory take heed of
Apostasy, those who fall away must needs fall short of the Kingdom.

1. If we would not come short of this Heavenly Kingdom, let us be much in the
exercise of Self-denial; Matthew. 16.24. If any man will come after me, let him
deny himself. He who would go to Heaven must deny self-righteousness, Cavendum
est a propria justitia; Phil. 3.9. That I may be found in him not having my own
righteousness. The Spider weaves a web out of her own Bowels; an Hypocrite
would spin a web of Salvation out of his own Righteousness: We must deny our
Civility in point of Justification. Civility is a good staff to walk with among
Men, but it is a bad ladder to climb up to Heaven. We must deny our holy things
in point of Justification. Alas, how are our Duties checkered with Sin. Put
Gold in the fire and there comes out dross; our most golden services are mixed
with unbelief. Deny self-righteousness; use Duty but trust to Christ. Noah's
Dove made use of her wings to fly, but trusted to the Ark for safety. Let
Duties have your diligence but not your confidence. Self-denial is via ad
regnum; there is no getting into Heaven but through this strait gate of
self-denial.

2. The second means for the obtaining of the Kingdom is serious Consideration:
Most Men fall short of Heaven for want of Consideration.

1. Consideration. We should often consider what a Kingdom Heaven is. It Is
called Regnum paratum, a Kingdom prepared, Matthew. 25.34. which implies
something that is rare and excellent. God has prepared in his Kingdom, such
things as eye has not seen nor ear heard; 1 Cor. 2.9. Heaven is beyond all
hyperbole. In particular, in this Celestial Kingdom are two things.

(1.) A stately Palace. (2.) A Royal Feast.
(1.) A stately Palace. 1. It is large and has several stories; for the
dimensions of it, it is twelve thousand furlongs, Rev. 21.15. or as it is in
some Greek Copies, twelve times twelve thousand furlongs, a finite number put
for an infinite; no Arithmetician can number these furlongs: Though there be an
innumerable company of Saints and Angels in Heaven yet there is infinitely
enough room to receive them. 2. The Palace of this Kingdom is lucid and
transparent; it is adorned with light, (...), The light is sweet. Hell is a dark
dungeon, but the Palace above is bespangled with light; Col. 1.12. Such
illustrious beams of Glory shine from God as shed a brightness and splendor
upon the Empyrean Heaven. 3. This Palace of the Kingdom is well situated for
a good Air and a pleasant prospect. There is the best Air which is perfumed
with the odours of Christ's Ointments; and a most pleasant prospect of the
bright Morning Star. 4. The Palace is rich and sumptuous; it has Gates of
Pearl, Rev. 21.21. it is enriched with white Robes and Crowns of Glory; and
this Palace never falls to decay, and the dwellers in it never dye, Rev. 22.5.
They shall reign for ever and ever.

(2.) A Royal Feast: It is called, The marriage supper of the lamb, Rev. 19.9.
which Bullinger and Gregory the great, understand of the magnificent Supper
prepared in the Kingdom of Heaven. A Glorious Feast it will be in respect of
the Founder, God; the Glorified Saints shall feast their eyes with Gods Beauty,
and their hearts with his Love; a delicious Feast it will be in respect of the
festivity and holy Mirth. What Joy when there shall be the Anthems and Triumphs
of Glorified Spirits; when Saints and Angels shall twist together in an
inseparable union of Love, and lie in each others sweet embraces; a Royal
Banquet it shall be where there is no surfeit, because continually a fresh
course served in. The serious Consideration what a Kingdom Heaven is, would be
a means to quicken our endeavor in the pursuit after it. What causes Men to
make Voyages to the Indies, but the consideration of the Gold and Spices which
are to be had there; did we survey and contemplate the Glory of Heaven, we
should soon take a Voyage, and never leave till we had arrived at the
Celestial Kingdom.

2. Consideration, How it will trouble you if you should perish, to think you
came short of Heaven for want of a little more pains. The Prophet Elisha bid
the King of Israel smite the ground six times, and he smote but thrice and
stayed, 2 Kings 13.19. and he lost many Victories by it: So when a Man shall
think thus, I did something in Religion but did not do enough, I prayed but it
was coldly, I did not put coals to the Incense; I heard the Word, but did not
meditate on it, I did not chew the end; I smote but thrice, and I should have
smitten six times; had I taken a little more pains I had been happy, but I have
lost the Kingdom of Heaven by short shooting. The consideration how terrible
the thoughts of this will be, that we should lose Heaven for want of a little
more pains, will be a means to spur on our sluggish hearts, and make us more
diligent to get the Kingdom.

3. The third means for the obtaining this Kingdom is to keep up Daily Prayer,
Psalm. 109.4. I give my self to Prayer. Prayer inflames the affections, and oils
the wheels of the endeavor; Prayer prevails with God, it unlocks his Bowels,
and then he unlocks Heaven; all that have got to Heaven have crept thither upon
their knees: The Saints now in Heaven have been Men of Prayer; Daniel prayed
three times a day, Jacob wrestled with God in Prayer, and as a Prince
prevailed; this Prayer must be fervent, else it is thuribulum sine prunis, as
Luther, a Golden Censer without Fire. O follow God with Prayers and Tears, say
as Jacob to the Angel, Genesis 32.26. I will not let thee go except thou bless me.
Prayer vincit invincibilem, Luther, it conquers the Omnipotent; Elijah by
Prayer opened Heaven; by ardent and constant Prayer Heaven is at last opened to
us.

4. If you would obtain the Heavenly Kingdom get a love to Heaven. Love puts a
Man upon the use of all means to enjoy the thing loved. He that loves the World
how active is he, he will break his sleep and peace for it; he that loves
Honor what hazards will he run, he will swim to the crown in Blood. Jacob
loved Rachel, and what would not he do, though it were serving a two seven
years Apprenticeship, for obtaining her? Love carries a Man out violently to
the Object loved. Love is like Wings to the Bird, like Sails to the Ship; it
carries a Christian full sail to Heaven; Heaven is a place of Rest and Joy,
it is Paradise, and will you not love it? Love Heaven and you cannot miss it:
Love breaks through all opposition, it takes heaven by storm: Love though it
labor is never weary; it is like the Rod of Myrtle in the Travelers hand
which makes him fresh and lively in his travel* and keeps him from being weary.

5. If you would obtain the Kingdom of Heaven make Religion your business. What
a Man looks upon as a (...), a thing by the by, he does not much mind. If ever
we would have Heaven we must look upon it as our main concern: Other things do
but concern our livelihood, this concerns our Salvation; then we make Religion
our business when we wholly devote our selves to Gods service, Psalm. 139.18. we
count those the best hours which are spent with God; we give God the cream of
our affections, the flower of our time and strength; we traffic in Heaven
every day, we are Merchants for the Pearl of price. He will never get an Estate
who does not mind his Trade; he will never get heaven who does not make
Religion his (...), his main business.

6. If you would obtain the Kingdom of Heaven, bind your hearts to God by
sacred Vows. Vow to the Lord that (by his Grace) you will be more intent upon
heaven than ever, Psalm. 56.12. Thy vows are upon me, O God. A Vow binds the
Votary to Duty; he looks upon himself as obliged by his Vow to cleave to God.
Bees when they fly in a great Wind ballast themselves with little stones that
they may not be carried away with the Wind; so we must fortify our selves with
strong Vows, that we may not be carried away from God with the violent wind of
temptation. No question a Christian may make such a Vow, because the ground of
it is Morally good, he vows nothing but what he is bound to do by virtue of
his Baptismal Vow, namely to walk with God more closely, and to pursue heaven
more vigorously.

7. If you would obtain the Kingdom embrace all seasons and opportunities for
your Souls, Ephesians. 5.15. Redeeming the time. Opportunity is the cream of time;
the improving the seasons of Grace is as much as our Salvation is worth. The
Mariner by taking the present season while the Wind blows gets to the haven;
by taking the season while we have the means of Grace, and the wind of the
Spirit blows, we may arrive at the Kingdom of heaven. We know not how long we
shall enjoy the Gospel; the seasons of Grace like Noah's Dove, come with an
Olive Branch in their mouth, but they soon take Wings and fly. Though they are
sweet, yet swift. God may remove the Golden Candlestick from us as he did from
the Churches of Asia. We have many sad symptoms, Gray hairs are here and there
upon us, Hos. 7.9. therefore let us lay hold upon the present season; they that
sleep in Seed-time will beg in Harvest.

8. If you would go to the Kingdom of Heaven you must excubias agere keep a
daily Watch; Mark 13.37. I say unto all, watch. Many have lost Heaven for want
of watchfulness. Our hearts are ready to decoy us into sin, and the Devil lies
in ambush by his temptations; we must every day set a spy, and keep sentinel in
our Souls: Hab. 2.1. I will stand upon my watch.

(1.) We must watch our Eyes; Job 31.1. I made a covenant with my eyes. Much
Sin comes in by the eye: When Eve saw the tree was good for food, and pleasant
to the eyes, then she took; Genesis 3.6. First she looked and then she lusted; the
eye by beholding an impure Object sets the heart on fire; the Devil often creeps
in at the window of the eye. Watch your eyes.

(2.) Watch your Ear. Much Poison is conveyed through the ear. Let your ear be
open to God, and shut to Sin.

(3.) Watch your Hearts: We watch suspicious persons; The heart is deceitful,
Ier. 17.9. Watch your heart; 1. When you are about holy things; it will be
stealing out to vanity. When I am at Prayer, says S. Hierom, Aut per porticum
deambulo aut de foenore computo, either I am walking through Galleries, or
casting up Accounts. 2. Watch your heart when you are in Company. The Basilisk
poisons the herbs he breaths on; the breath of the wicked is infectious. Nay,
watch your hearts when you are in good Company; such as have some good in them,
yet may be some grains too light; they may have much levity of Discourse, and
if no scum boils up, yet too much froth. The Devil is subtle, and he can as
well creep into the Dove, as he did once into the Serpent. Satan tempted Christ
by an Apostle. 3. Watch your hearts in Prosperity; now you are in danger of
Pride. The higher the Water of the Thames rises, the higher the Boat is lifted
up; the higher that Men's Estates rise, the higher their Hearts are lifted up in
Pride In Prosperity you are in danger not only to forget God, but to lift up
the heel against him; Deuteronomy. 32.15. Iesurun waxed fat and kicked. It is hard to
carry a full Cup without spilling, and to carry a full prosperous Estate
without sinning. Turpi fregerunt saecula luxu divitiae molles. Sen. Trag.
Sampson fell asleep in Dalilahs lap; many have fallen so fast asleep in the lap
of Prosperity that they have never awaked till they have been in Hell. 4. Watch
your hearts after holy Duties. When Christ had been Praying and Fasting then
the Devil tempted him, Mat. 4.23. After our combating with Satan in Prayer, we
are apt to grow secure, and put our Spiritual Armor off, and then the Devil
falls on and wounds us. O if you would get Heaven be always upon your
Watchtower, set a spy, keep close sentinel in your Souls: Who would not watch
when it is for a Kingdom.

9. If you would arrive at the Heavenly Kingdom get those three Graces which
will undoubtedly bring you thither.

(1.) Divine Knowledge. There Is no going to Heaven blindfold. In the Creation,
Light was the first thing which was made; so it is in the new Creation,
Knowledge is the Pillar of Fire which goes before us, and lights us into the
Heavenly Kingdom. It Is light must bring us to the inheritance in light; Col.
1.12.

(2). Faith. Faith ends in Salvation; 1 Pet. 1.9. Receiving the end of your
faith, Salvation. He who believes is as sure to go to Heaven as if he were in
Heaven already; Acts 16.31. Faith touches Christ, and can he miss of Heaven
who touches Christ? Faith unites to Christ, and shall not the Members be where
the Head is? All have not the same degree of Faith; we must distinguish between
the direct act of Faith, and the reflex act, Affiance and Assurance; yet the
least seed and spark of Faith gives an undoubted title to the Heavenly Kingdom.
I am justified because I believe, not because I know I believe.

(3.) Love to God. Heaven is prepared for those that love God, 1 Cor. 2.9. Love
is the Soul of Obedience, the Touchstone of Sincerity. By our loving God we may
know he loves us, 1 John 4.19. and those whom God loves he will lay in his
bosom. Ambrose in his Funeral Oration for Theodosius, brings in the Angels
hovering about his departing Soul, and being ready to carry it to Heaven, asked
him, What that Grace was he had practiced most upon Earth, Theodosius replied,
Dilexi, dilexi, I have loved, I have loved; and strait-way he was by a convoy
of Angels translated to Glory. Love is a sacred Fire kindled in the breast, in
the flames of this Fire the devout Soul ascends to Heaven.

10. If we would obtain this Heavenly Kingdom let us labor for Sincerity;
Prove. 28.18. Whosoever walks uprightly shall be saved. The sincere Christian
may fall short of some degrees of Grace, but he never falls short of the
Kingdom; God will pass by many failings where the heart is right; Numb. 23.21.
True Gold, though it be light, has grains of allowance; Psalm. 51.6. Thou
desire truth in the inward parts. Sincerity is the sauce which seasons all
our Actions, and makes them savoury; it is the ingredient into every Grace: It
is called Faith unfeigned, 2 Timothy 1.5. and Love (...) in sincerity, Ephesians. 6.24.
Coin will not go current that wants the Kings stamp; Grace is not current if it
be not stamped with Sincerity. Glorious Duties sowred with Hypocrisy are
rejected, when great Infirmities sweetened with Sincerity are accepted. If any
thing in the World bring us to Heaven it is Sincerity: Sincerity signifies
plainness of heart, Psalm. 32.2. In whose Spirit there is no guile. The plainer
the Diamond is the richer.

(1.) Sincerity is when we serve God with our heart; we do not only worship him
but love him. Cain brought his Sacrifice, but not his Heart: This is Gods
delight, a Sacrifice flaming upon the Altar of the Heart. A sincere Christian,
though he has a double principle in him, Flesh and Spirit, yet he has not a
double heart, his heart is for God.

(2.) Sincerity is when we aim purely at God in all we do. The Glory of God is
more worth than the Salvation of all Men's Souls. A sincere Christian though he
comes short in Duty yet he takes a right aim. As the herb Heliotropium turns
about according to the motion of the Sun; so a Godly Man's actions do all move
toward the Glory of God

11. If we would obtain the Heavenly Kingdom, let us keep up fervency in Duty,
What is a dead form without the power? Rev. 3.16. Because thou art lukewarm,
neither hot nor cold, I will spue thee out of my mouth. Fervency puts life into
Duty; Romans 12.11. Fervent in Spirit serving God; (...), Boiling over. Christ
prayed (...), yet more earnestly, Luke 22.44. When the Fire on the Golden
Censer was ready to go out, Aaron was to put more Coals to the Incense. Praying
with Devotion is putting more Coals to the Incense; it is not Formality but
Fervency will bring us to Heaven: The Formalist is like Ephraim, a Cake not
turned, hot on one side and dough on the other. In the external part of Gods
Worship he seems to be hot, but as for the Spiritual part of Gods Worship he is
cold. Oh if you would have the Kingdom of Heaven keep up heat and fervor in
Duty. Eliah was carried up to Heaven in a fiery Chariot; if you would go to
Heaven you must be carried thither in a fiery Chariot of Zeal: It Is violence
takes the Kingdom of Heaven.

12. If we would arrive at the Heavenly Kingdom let us cherish the motions of
Gods Spirit in our hearts. The Mariner may spread his Sails, but the Ship
cannot get to the Haven without a gale of Wind; so we may spread the sails of
our endeavor, but we cannot get to the Haven of Glory without the North and
South Wind of Gods Spirit blow; how nearly therefore does it concern us to make
much of the motions of Gods Spirit; motions to Prayer, motions to Repentance. 2 Samuel 5.24. When thou hear the sound of a going in the tops of the
mulberry-trees, that then thou shall bestir thy self, for then shall the Lord
go out before thee: So when we hear as it were a voice within us, a secret
inspiration stirring us up to good Duties, we should then bestir our selves;
while the Spirit works in us, we should work with the Spirit. Many Men have
Gods Spirit striving with them, he puts good motions in their hearts, and holy
purposes, but they neglecting to prosecute these good motions, the Spirit is
thereby grieved, and being grieved, withdraws its assistance, and that
assistance being gone there is no getting to Heaven. Oh make much of the
motions of the Spirit, it is as much as your Salvation is worth. The Spirit of
God is compared to fire, Acts 2.2. if we are careful to blow this spark, we may
have fire to inflame our affections, and to light our feet into the way of
peace. If we quench the Spirit by our neglecting and resisting its motions, we
cut our selves off from Salvation. The Spirit of God has a drawing-power,
Cant. 1.4. The Blessed Spirit draws by attraction, as the Loadstone the Iron.
In the preaching of the Word the Spirit draws the heart up to Heaven in holy
longings and ejaculations. Now when the Spirit is about thus to draw us, let us
take heed of drawing back left it be to perdition: Heb. 10. We should do as
Noah, when the Dove came flying to the Ark, he put forth his hand and took it
into the Ark, so when this sweet Dove of Gods Spirit comes flying to our
hearts, and brings a gracious impulse as an Olive Branch of Peace in its mouth.
O take this Dove into the Ark, entertain the Spirit in your hearts, and it will
bring you to Heaven.

Quest. But how shall we know the motions of the Spirit from a delusion?

Answ. The motions of the Spirit are always agreeable to the Word. If the Word
be for Holiness so is the Spirit: The Spirit persuades to nothing but what the
Word directs; which way the tide of the Word runs, that way the Wind of the
Spirit blows.

13. We obtain the Kingdom of Heaven by uniform and cheerful Obedience;
Obedience is the Road through which we travail to Heaven; many say they love
God, but refuse to obey him; does he love the Princes Person who slights his
Commands?

(1.) Obedience must be uniform, Psalm. 119.6, Then shall I not be ashamed, Lo
Eboth, I shall not blush when I have respect to all thy Commandments; as the
Son goes through all the signs of the Zodiac, so must we through all the
duties of Religion: If a Man be to go an hundred Miles, and he goes ninety nine
Miles, and there stops, he comes short of the Place he is to travel to; if with
Herod we do many things that God commands, yet if we lie in the total neglect
of any duty we come short of the Kingdom of Heaven; for Instance, If a Man seem
to make Conscience of duties of the first Table, and not the duties of the
second; if he seem to be religious but is not just, he is a Transgressor, and
is in danger to lose Heaven; a good heart is like the Needle which points that
way which the Loadstone draws, so he moves that way which the Word draws.

(2.) Obedience must be cheerful; I delight to do thy Will O my God, yea thy
Law is within my heart, Psalm. 40.8. That is the sweetest Obedience which is
cheerful, as that is the sweetest Honey which drops from the Comb freely: God
does sometimes accept of willingness without the work, but never of the Work
without willingness; Zach. 5 9. There came out two Women and the wind was in
their wings. Wings are swift, but wind in the Wings denotes great swiftness; an
Emblem of the swiftness and cheerfulness which should be in Obedience; we go to
Heaven in the way of Obedience.

14. If we would obtain this Kingdom, be much in the Communion of Saints; one
Coal of Juniper will warm and inflame another; when the heart is dead and
frozen the Communion of Saints will help to warm it, Mal. 3.16. They that
feared the Lord spoke often one to another. Christians should never meet (says
Mr. Bolton) but speak of their meeting together in Heaven: One Christian may be
very helpful by Prayer and Conference to another, and give him a lift toward
Heaven. Old Latimer was much strengthened and comforted by hearing Mr. Bilnyes
Confession of Faith. We read that when Moses his hands were heavy, and he was
ready to let them fall, Aaron and Hur staid up his hands, Exodus 17.12. A
Christian who is ready to faint under Tentation, and lets down the hands of his
Faith, by conversing with other Christians, he is strengthened and his hands
are held up; a great benefit of holy Conference is Counsel and Advise: If a
Man, says Chrysostom, who has but one head to advise him, could make that
head an hundred heads to advise him, he would be very wise: A single Christian
has this benefit by the Communion of Saints, they are as so many heads to
advise him what to do in such a case or exigence: By Christian conference the
Saints can say, Did not our heart burn within us? Communion of Saints we have
in our Creed, but it is too little in our practice: Men usually travel fastest
in Company, we travel fastest to Heaven in the Communion of Saints.

15. If we would attain to this Kingdom of Heaven, let us be willing to come up
to Christ's terms; many will be cheapening, and bid something for the Kingdom of
Heaven, they will avoid gross sin, and will come to Church and say their
Prayers; and yet all this while they are not willing to come up to Gods Price,
that is, they will not renounce the Idol of self Righteousness, flying only to
Christ as to the Horns of the Altar; they; will not sacrifice their bosom-sin;
they will not give God Spirit-worship, serving him with zeal and intenseness of
Soul, John 4.24. they will not forgive their Enemies: they will not part with
their carnal profits for Christ; they would have the Kingdom of Heaven, but
they will not come up to the Price: If you would have this Kingdom, do not
article and indent with Christ, but accept of his Terms; say, Lord, I am
willing to have the Kingdom of Heaven whatever it cost me; I am willing to
pluck out my right eye, to part with all for the Kingdom; here is a blank paper
I put into thy hand, Lord write thy own Articles, I will subscribe to them.

16. If we would obtain the Heavenly Kingdom, let us attend to the holy
Ordinances; thus God brings Souls to heaven; Act. 27.31. Except ye abide in the
Ship ye cannot be saved. Some People would leap out of the Ship of Ordinances,
and then God knows whether they leap; but except ye abide in the Ship of
Ordinances ye cannot be saved; especially if you would get to Heaven attend to
the Word preached: It was by the Ear, by our first Parents listening to the
Serpent, that we lost Paradise; and it is by the Ear, by the hearing of the
word, that we get Heaven, Isa. 55.3. Hear and your Soul shall live. God
sometimes in the preaching of the word drops in that holy Oil into the Ear
which softens and sanctifies the heart: The word preached is called the
Ministry of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8. because the Spirit of God makes use of this
Engine to convert Souls: If the word preached does not work upon Men, nothing
will, not Judgment, or Miracles, no, nor though one should arise from the Dead,
Luke 16.31. If a glorified Saint should come out of Heaven, and assume a Body,
and tell you of all the glory of Heaven, and the joys of the blessed, and
persuade you to believe; if the preaching of the word will not bring you to
Heaven, neither would his Rhetorique do it who rose from the dead. In Heaven
there will be no need of Ordinances, but there is while we live here: The Lamp
needs Oil, but the Star needs none. While the Saints have their Lamp of Grace
burning here, they need the Oil of Ordinances to be continually dropping upon
them; but there will be no need of this Oil when they are Stars in Heaven. If
you intend to get to Heaven, be swift to hear; for faith comes by hearing, Romans
10.14, 17. Peter let down the Net of his Ministry and at one draught caught
three thousand Souls. If you would have Heavens Door opened to you, wait at the
Posts of Wisdoms Door.

17. If you would arrive at Heaven, have this Kingdom ever in your eye: Our
blessed Lord looked to the Joy which was set before him, and Moses had an eye
to the Recompense of Reward, Heb. 11.26. Let the Kingdom be much in our
thoughts; Meditation is a means to help us to Heaven.

Quest. How does it help?

Answ. 1. As it is a means to prevent sin, no Sword like this to cut asunder
the Sinews of Tentation; it is almost inpossible to sin presumptuously with the
lively thoughts and hopes of Heaven: It was when Moses was out of Sight that
Israel set up a Calf and worshipped it; so it is when the Kingdom of Heaven is
out of sight, I mean out of Men's thoughts, that they set up their Lusts and
idolize them; the Meditation of Heaven banisheth sin; he who thinks of the
weight of Glory, throws away the weights of sin.

2. The (...) on the Kingdom of Heaven would excite and quicken Obedience, we
should think we could never pray enough, never love God enough who has
prepared such a Kingdom for us, immensum Gloria calcar habet: Saint Paul had
Heaven in his eye, he was once caught up thither, and how active was he for
God, 1 Cor. 15.10. This would oil the Wheels of Obedience.

3. It would make us strive after Holiness, because none but such are admitted
into this Kingdom, only the pure in heart shall see God, Mat. 5. Holiness is
the Language of Heaven, it is the only coin will pass current in Heaven; this
considered would make us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of Flesh and
Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1.

Thus you see how the Meditation of Heaven would be a means to bring us thither.

18. The last means for obtaining the Heavenly Kingdom is, Perseverance in
Holiness, Rev. 2.10. Be thou faithful unto death, and thou shall receive the
Crown of Life. In Christians non initia sed finis laudantur, Hierom.

1. Is there such a thing as persevering? 2. How does a Christian come to
persevere? 3. What are the Encouragements? 4. What Helps?
1. Is there such a thing as persevering till we come to Heaven? The Arminians
deny it, and truly that any one holds out to the Kingdom is a wonder; if you
consider,

1. What a world of Corruption is mingled with Grace; Grace is apt to be
stifled, as the Coal to be choked with its own ashes: Grace is often like a
Spark in the Sea, it is a wonder it is not quenched: It Is a wonder sin does not
do to Grace as sometime the Nurse to the Child, overlay it that it dye; so that
this Infant of Grace is not smothered.

2. The Implacable malice of Satan; he denies that we should have a Kingdom,
when he himself is cast out; it cuts him to the heart to see a piece of dust
and clay be made a bright Star in Glory, and he himself an Angel of Darkness;
he will Acheronta movere, move all the Powers of Hell to hinder us from the
Kingdom; he spits his Venom, shoots his fiery Darts, raises a storm of
persecution, yea, and prevails against some; Rev. 12.4. There appeared a great
red Dragon, and his Tail drew the third part of the Stars of Heaven, and did
cast them to the Earth. By the Dragon is meant the Heathenish Empire; now when
his Tail cast so many to the Earth, it is a wonder that any of the Stars keep
fixed in their Orb.

3. The Blandishments of Riches: The Young man in the Gospel went very far,
thou art not far from the Kingdom of God; but he had rich Possessions, and
these golden weights hindered him from the Kingdom, Luke 18.23. Jonathan pursued
the Battle till he came at the Honeycomb, and then he stood still, 1 Samuel
14.27. Many are forward for Heaven till they taste the sweetness of the World;
but when they come at the Honeycomb, then they stand still and go no further;
Faenus pecuniae funus animae. Those who have escaped the Rocks of gross sins,
yet have been cast away upon the Golden Sands: What a wonder therefore that any
does hold on till he comes to the Kingdom.

4. A wonder any holds out in Grace, and does not tire in his march to Heaven;
if you consider the difficulty of a Christians Work, he has no time to lie
fallow, he is either watching or fighting; nay, a Christian is to do those
Duties which to the eye of sense and reason seem inconsistent: While a
Christian does one duty he seems to cross another, e. g. he must come with holy
boldness to God in Prayer, yet must serve him with fear; he must mourn for sin,
yet rejoice; he must be contented, yet covet, 1 Cor. 12.32. contemn Men's
Impieties, yet reverence their Authority: What difficult work is this; a wonder
any Saint arrives at the Heavenly Kingdom, to this I might add, the evil
Examples abroad, which are so atractive, we may say, the Devils are come among
us in the likeness of Men; what a wonder is it that any Soul perseveres till it
comes to the Kingdom of Heaven; but as great a wonder as it is, there is such a
thing as perseverance; a Saints perseverance is built upon three immutable
Pillars.

(1.) Gods Eternal Love: We are inconstant in our Love to God; but he is not so
in his Love to us, Ier. 31.9 I have loved thee with an everlasting Love; a
havath gnolam, with a Love of Eternity. Gods Love to the Elect is not like a
Kings Love to his Favorite, when it is at the highest Springtide it soon
ebbs; but Gods Love is eternized; God may desert, not disinherit; he may change
his Love into a Frown, not into hatred; he may alter his Providence, not his
decree: When once the Sunshine of Gods Electing Love is risen upon the Soul,
it never sets finally.

(2.) A Saints Perseverance is built upon the Covenant of Grace; (...) a firm
impregnable Covenant: This you have in the words of the sweet Singer of Israel,
2. Sam. 23.5. God has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all
things and sure. It Is a sweet Covenant that God will be our God; the marrow and
quintessence of all Blessing; and it is a sure Covenant, that he will put his
Fear in our heart, and we shall never depart from him, Ier. 32.40. This
Covenant is inviolable, cannot be broken; indeed sin may break the Peace of the
Covenant, but it cannot break the Bond of the Covenant.

(3.) The third Pillar Perseverance is built upon is the Mistical Union:
Believers are incorporated into Christ, they are knit to him as Members to the
Head, by the Nerve and Ligament of Faith, that they cannot be broken off, Ephesians.
5.23. What was once said of Christ's natural Body is as true of his mistical
Body, John 19.36. A bone of it shall not be broken. As it is impossible to
sever the Leaven and the Dough when they are once mingled, so it is impossible
when Christ and Believers are once united ever by the Power of Death or Hell to
be separated: How can Christ lose any Member of his Body and be perfect? You
see on what strong Pillars the Saints Perseverance is built.

2 Quest. How does a Christian hold on till he comes to the Kingdom? How does
he persevere?

Resp. 1. Auxilio Spiritus: God carries on a Christian to perseverance by the
Energy and vigorous working of his Spirit: The Spirit maintains the Essence and
Seed of Grace, it does (...) blow up the Sparks of Grace into an holy Flame;
Spiritus est Vicarius Christi, Tertul. it is Christ's Deputy and Proxy, is it
every day at work in a Believers heart, exerting Grace into Exercise, and
ripening it into perseverance: The Spirit does carve and polish the Vessels of
Mercy, and make them fit for Glory.

2. Christ causes perseverance and carries on a Saint till he comes to the
Heavenly Kingdom, vi orationis, by his Intercession: Christ is an Advocate as
well as a Surety; he prays that the Saints may arrive safe at the Kingdom, Heb.
7.25. Wherefore he is able to save them, (...), to the uttermost, (i. e.
perfectly) seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for them; that Prayer he
made for Peter on Earth he prays now in Heaven for the Saints, that their Faith
fail not, Luke 22.32. that they may be with him where he is, John 17.24. and
sure if he pray that they may be with him in his Kingdom, they cannot perish by
the way: Christ's Prayer is efficacious; if the Saints Prayers have so much
force and prevalency in them: Jacob had power with God, and as a Prince
prevailed, Hos. 12.4. By Prayer Eliah unlocked Heaven: If the Prayers of the
Saints have so much power with God, then what has Christ's Prayer? how can the
Children of such Prayers miscarry? how can they fall short of the Kingdom, who
have him praying for them who is not only a Priest but a Son? and besides what
he prays for as he is Man, that he has power to give as he is God; thus you
see how a Christian comes to Persevere till he comes to the Kingdom.

Object. But methinks I hear some Christians say, if only perseverance obtains
the Kingdom, they fear they shall not come thither, they fear they shall faint
by the way, and the weak legs of their Grace will never carry them to the
Kingdom of Heaven.

Answ. Were thou indeed to stand in thy own strength thou might fall away;
that Branch withers and dies which has no Root to grow upon; thou growest upon
the Root Christ, who will be daily sending forth vital influence to strengthen
thee; thou art imbecil and weak in Grace, yet fear not falling short of Heaven;
For,

1. God has made a promise to weak Believers; what is a bruised Reed but the
Emblem of a weak Faith, yet it has a Promise made to it, Mat. 12.20. A bruised
Reed he will not break. God has promised to supply the weak Christian with so
much Grace as he shall need, till he comes to Heaven: Beside the two Pence
which the good Samaritan left to pay for the Cure of the poor wounded Man, he
passed his Word for all that he should need beside, Luke 10.35. So, Christ does
not only give a little Grace in hand, but his Bond for more, that he will give
as much Grace as a Saint shall need till he comes to Heaven, Psalm. 84.11. The
Lord will give Grace and Glory, that is, a fresh supply of Grace till it be
perfected in Glory.

2. God has most care of his weak Saints, who fear they shall never hold out
till they come to the Kingdom; does not the Mother tend the weak Child most?
Isa. 40.11. He will gather the Lambs in his Arms, and carry them in his Bosom.
If thou think thou art so weak that thou shall never hold out till thou
come to Heaven, thou shall be carried in the Arms of the Almighty, he gathers
the Lambs in his Arms; Christ the Lion of the Tribe of Judah marched before hi^
People, and his Power is their Rear-ward, so that none of them faint, or dye in
their March to Heaven.

3. Quest. What are the Encouragements to make Christians hold on till they
come to the Kingdom of Heaven?

Answ. 1. It is a great Credit to a Christian not only to hold forth the Truth,
but to hold fast the Truth till he comes to Heaven; when Grace does flourish
into perseverance, and with the Church of Thyatira our last works are more then
our first, Rev. 2.19. This is insigne honoris a Star of Honor: It Is matter of
renown to see gray hairs shine with golden virtues: the Excellency of a thing
lies in the finishing of it: What is the excellency of a Building? not when the
first stone is laid, but when it is finished; so the beauty and excellency of a
Christian is when he has finished his Faith, having done his work is landed
safe in Heaven.

2. You that have made a progress in Religion, have not many Miles to go before
you come at the Kingdom of Heaven; Romans 13.11. Now is our Salvation nearer then
when we believed. You who have hoary hairs, your green Tree is turned into an
Almond-tree, you are near to Heaven, it is but going a little further and you
will set your Feet within Heaven Gates; Oh therefore now be encouraged to hold
out, your Salvation is nearer then when you first began to believe: Our
diligence should be greater when our Salvation is nearer: When a Man is almost
at the end of the Race will he now tire and faint? will he not put forth all
his strength, and strain every Limb that he may lay hold upon the Prize? Our
Salvation is now nearer, the Kingdom is as it were within sight; how should we
now put forth all our strength that we may lay hold upon the Garland of Glory:
Doctor Taylour when he was going to his Martyrdom, I have (says he) but two
Styles to go over and I shall be at my Fathers House. Though the way to Heaven
be up hill, you must climb the steepy Rock of Mortification, and though there
be Thorns in the way, viz. Sufferings, yet you have gone the greatest part of
your way, you are within a few days march of the Kingdom, and will not you
persevere? Christian pluck up thy Courage, fight the good fight of Faith,
pursue Holiness, it is but a while and you shall put off your Armor, and end
all your weary Marches, and receive a Victorious Crown; your Salvation is
nearer, you are within a little of the Kingdom, therefore now presevere, you
are ready to commence and take your Degree of Glory.

3. The blessed promise annexed to Perseverance; the promise is a Crown of
Life, Rev 2.10. Death is a Worm that feeds in the Crowns of Princes, but behold
here a living Crown, and a never-fading Crown, 1 Pet. 5.4. and Rev. 2.28. He
that overcomes, and keeps my works to the end I will give him Stellam
matutinam, the Morning Star: The Morning Star is brighter then the rest; this
Morning Star is meant of Christ; as if Christ had said, I will give to him that
perseveres some of my Beauty, I will put some of my illustrious Rays upon him,
he shall have the next degree of Glory to me, as the Morning Star is next the
Sun; will not this animate and make us hold out, we shall have a Kingdom, and
that which is better then the Kingdom, a bright Morning Star.

4 Quest. What are the means conducing to perseverance, or what shall we do
that we may hold out to the Kingdom?

Resp. 1. Take up Religion upon good Grounds, not in a Fit or Humor, or out of
worldly design, but be deliberate, weigh things well in the Balance, Luke
14.28. Which of you intending to build a Tower, sits not down first and
counts the cost: Think with your selves what Religion must cost you, it must
cost you the parting with your sins, and what is may cost you, it may cost you
the parting with your Lives; consider if a Kingdom will not countervail your
Sufferings; weigh things well and then make your choice, Psalm. 119.30. I have
chosen the way of thy Truth. Why do many Apostatize and fall away, but because
they did never sit down and count the cost.

2. If we would hold out to the Kingdom, let us cherish the Grace of Faith, 1
Cor. 1.24. By Faith ye stand; Faith like Hercules Club it beats down all
Oppositions before it; it is a conquering Grace.

Quest. How comes Faith to be so strong?

Resp. Faith fetches Christ's strength into the Soul, Phil. 4.13. (...). A
Captain may give his Soldier Armor, but not strength: Faith partakes of
Christ's strength, and Faith gets strength from the promise; as the Child by
sucking the Breast gets strength, so does Faith by sucking the Breast of the
Promise; hence Faith is such a wonder working Grace, and enables a Christian to
persevere.

3. If you would hold out to the Kingdom, set before your Eyes the Examples of
those Noble, Heroic Saints who have persevered to the Kingdom; Vivitur
Exemplis, Examples have more influence upon us then Precepts, Job 23.11, 12. My
Foot has held his steps: Though the way of Religion has Flints and Thorns in
it, yet my Foot has held his steps, I have not fainted in the way, nor turned
out of the way; Daniel held on his Religion, and would not intermit Prayer,
though he knew the writing was signed against him, and a Prayer might cost him
his life, Dan. 6.10. The blessed Martyrs persevered to the Kingdom through
Sufferings; Saunders that holy Man said, Welcome the Cross of Christ, my
Savior began to me in a bitter Cup, and shall I not pledge him? Another Martyr
kissing the Stake said, I shall not lose my Life, but change it for a better,
instead of Coals I shall have Pearls. What a spirit of gallantry was in these
Saints; let us learn Constancy from their Courage. A Soldier seeing his
General fight valiantly, is animated by his Example, and has new Spirits put
into him.

4. Let us add fervent Prayer to God, that he would enable us to hold out to
the Heavenly Kingdom: Psalm. 119.117. Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe. Let
us not presume on our own strength. When Peter cried to Christ on the water,
Lord save me, then Christ took him by the hand, Matthew. 14.30. but when he grew
confident of his own strength, then Christ let him fall. O pray to God for
auxiliary Grace. The Child is safe when held in the Nurses arms; so are we in
Christ's arms. Let us pray that God will put his fear in our hearts that we do
not depart from him; and that Prayer of Cyprian, Domine quod caepisti perfice,
ne in portu naufragium accidat, Lord perfect that which thou have begun in me,
that I may not suffer shipwreck when I am almost at the haven.

3. Branch. Let us press forward with the greatest diligence to this Kingdom:
And here let me lay down some powerful Perswasives, or Divine Arguments, to
make you put to all your strength for the obtaining this blessed Kingdom.

1. This is the great errand for which God has sent us into the World to
prepare for this Heavenly Kingdom; Matthew. 6.33. Seek ye first the kingdom of
God. First in time, before all things; and first in affection, above all
things. Great care is taken for the atchieving Worldly things; Matthew. 6.25. To
see people laboring for the earth, as Ants about a Molehill, would make one
think this were the only errand they came about: But alas, what is all this to
the Kingdom of Heaven? I have read of a devout Pilgrim traveling to Jerusalem,
who passing through several Cities, where he saw many stately Edifices, Ware
and Monuments, he would say, I must not stay here, this is not Jerusalem: So
when we enjoy Worldly things, Peace and Plenty, and have our presses burst out
with new Wine, we should say to our selves, this is not the Kingdom we are to
look after, this is not Heaven: It Is Wisdom to remember our errand. It will be
but sad upon a Deathbed for a Man to think he was busying himself only about
trifles, playing with a feather, and neglected the main thing he came into the
World about.

2. The seeking after the Heavenly Kingdom will be judged most prudent by all
Men at last. Those who are regardless of their Souls now, will before they dye
wish they had minded Eternity more; when Conscience is awakened, and Men begin
to come to themselves: Now what would they give for the Kingdom of Heaven? How
happy were it if Men were of the same mind now, as they will be at Death. Death
will alter Men's opinions; then those who did most slight and disparage the
ways of Religion, will wish their time and thoughts had been taken up about
the excellent Glory. At Death Men's eyes will be opened, and they will see their
folly when it is too late. If all Men, even the worst, will wish at last they
had minded the Kingdom of Heaven, why should not we do that now, which all will
wish they had done when they come to dye.

3. This Kingdom of Heaven deserves our utmost pains and diligence; it is
Glorious beyond Hyperbole. Suppose Earthly Kingdoms more magnificent than they
are, their Foundations of Gold, their Walls of Pearl, their Windows of
Sapphire, yet they are not comparable to the Heavenly Kingdom; (...), Chrysostom. If
the Pavement of it be bespangled with so many bright shining Lights, glorious
Stars, what is the Kingdom it self? 1 John 3.2. It does not yet appear what we
shall be. This Kingdom exceeds our Faith. How sublime and wonderful is that
place where the blessed Deity shines forth in his immense Glory, infinitely
beyond the comprehension of Angels.

(1.) The Kingdom of Heaven is a place of Honor; there are the glorious
Triumphs and sparkling Crowns. In other Kingdoms there is but one King, but in
Heaven all are Kings: Rev. 1.6. Every Saint glorified partaker of the same
Glory as Christ does; John 17.22. The glory thou have given me I have given
them.

(2.) This Kingdom is a place of Joy; Matthew. 25.21. Enter thou into the joy of
thy Lord. To have a continual aspect of Love from Gods face, to be crowned with
Immortality, to be (...), as the Angels of God, to drink of the Rivers of
Pleasure for ever, this will cause Raptures of Joy. Sure it deserves our utmost
pains in pursuing and securing this Kingdom. Julius Caesar coming toward Rome
with his Army, and hearing the Senate and People fled from it, said, They that
will not fight for this City, what City will they fight for? If we will not
take pains for the Kingdom of Heaven what Kingdom will we take pains for. It
was the speech of the Spies to their Brethren, Judge. 18.9. We have seen the
land, and behold it is very good, and are ye still? be not slothful to go, and
to enter to possess the land. We have had a lively description of the Glory of
Heaven, we find the Kingdom is very good, why then do we sit still? Why do we
not operam navare put forth our utmost zeal and industry for this Kingdom? The
diligence of others in seeking after Earthly Kingdoms, shames our coldness and
indifferency in pursuing after the Kingdom of Heaven.

4. The time we have to make sure of the Heavenly Kingdom is very short and
uncertain; take heed it does not slip away before you have prepared for the
Kingdom. Time passes on apace, Cito pede praeterita vita: It will not be long
before the silver cord be loosed, and the golden bowl broken, Eccles. 12. The
skin wherein the Brains are enclosed as in a bowl, this golden bowl will soon
be broken. Our Soul is in our Body as the Bird is in the Shell, which soon
breaks and the Bird flies out; the Shell of the Body breaking, the Soul flies
into Eternity. We know not whether we shall live to another Sabbath: Before we
hear another Sermon-bell go, our Passing Bell may go. Our Life runs as a swift
stream into the ocean of Eternity. Brethren, if our Time be so minute and
transient, if the taper of Life be so soon wasted, or perhaps blown out by
violent death, how should we put to all our strength, and call in help from
Heaven that we may obtain the Kingdom of Glory. If time be so short, why do we
wast it about things of less moment, and neglect the one thing needful, which
is the Kingdom of Heaven. A Man that has a great work to be done, and but one
day for the doing of it, had need work hard: We have a great work to do, we are
striving for a Kingdom, and alas we are not certain of one day to work in,
therefore what need have we to bestir our selves, and what we do for Heaven, to
do it with all our might.

5. To excite our diligence, let us consider how inexcusable we shall be if we
miss of the Kingdom of Heaven, who have had such helps for Heaven as we have
had: Indians who have Mines of Gold, have not such advantages for Glory as we;
they have the light of the Sun, Moon and Stars, and the light of R^ason, but
this is not enough to light them to Heaven: But we have had the light of the
Gospel shining in our Horizon; we have been lifted up to Heaven with
Ordinances; we have had the Word in season and out of season. The Ordinances
are the pipes of the Sanctuary which empty the golden Oil of Grace into the
Soul, they are scala ParAdisi, the Ladder by which we ascend to the Kingdom of
Heaven: Deuteronomy. 4 7. What nation is there so great who has God so nigh unto
them, as the Lord our God is in all things that we call upon him for? We have
had Heaven and Hell set before us, we have had Counsels of Friends, Warnings,
Examples, the Motions and Inspirations of the Holy Ghost, how should all these
spurs quicken us in our pace to Heaven? Should not that Ship sail apace to the
Haven which has Wind and Tide to carry it? The Tide of Ordinances, and the
Wind of the Spirit. Surely if we through negligence miss of the Kingdom of
Heaven, we shall have nothing to say for our selves; we shall be as far from
excuse as from happiness.

6. You cannot do too much for the Kingdom of Heaven; you cannot pray too much,
sanctify the Sabbath too much, love God too much; you cannot over-do. In
secular things a Man may labor too hard, he may kill himself with working; but
there is no fear of working too hard for Heaven: In virtute non est verendum ne
quid nimium sit, Seneca. The World is apt to censure the Godly, as if they were
too zealous, and did over-strain themselves in Religion. Indeed a Man may
follow the World too much, he may make too much have to be rich. The Ferry-man
may take in too many Passengers into his Boat, to the sinking of his Boat; so a
Man may heap up so much Gold and Silver as to sink himself in Perdition, 1 Timothy
6.9. but one cannot be too earnest and zealous for the Kingdom of Heaven; there
is no fear of excess here; when we do all we can for Heaven, we come short of
the Golden Rule set us, and of Christ's Golden Pattern; when our Faith is
highest, like the Sun in the Meridian, yet still (...), there is something
lacking in our Faith, 1 Thessalonians. 3.1. so that all our labor for the Kingdom is
little enough. When a Christian has done his best, yet still he has sins and
wants to bewail.

7 By this you may judge of the state of your Souls, whether you have Grace or
no, by your earnest pursuit after the Heavenly Kingdom. Grace infuseth a Spirit
of activity into a person; Grace does not lie dormant in the Soul, it is not a
sleepy habit, but it makes a Christian like a Seraphim swift and winged in his
Heavenly motion; Grace is like fire, it makes one burn in love to God, and the
more he loves him, the more he presses forward to Heaven where he may fully
enjoy him. Hope is an active Grace, it is called a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1.3. hope
is like the spring in the Watch, it sets all the wheels of the Soul a running:
Hope of a Crop makes the Husbandman sow his seed; hope of Victory makes the
Soldier fight; and a true hope of Glory makes a Christian vigorously pursue
Glory. Here is a Spiritual Touchstone to try our Grace by. If we have the
anointing of the Spirit, it will oil the wheels of our endeavor, and make us
lively in our pursuit after the Heavenly Kingdom. No sooner had Paul Grace
infused, but presently, Behold he prays; Acts 9.11. The Affections are by
Divines called the Feet of the Soul, if these Feet move not toward Heaven, it
is because there is no Life.

8. Your labor for Heaven is not lost: Perhaps you may think it is in vain
that you have served God, but know, that your pains is not lost. The Seed is
cast into the Earth and it dies, yet at last it brings forth a plentiful Crop;
so your labors seem to be fruitless, but at last they bring you to a Kingdom.
Who would not work hard for one hour, when for that hours work he should be a
King as long as he lived. And let me tell you, the more labor you have put
forth for the Kingdom of Heaven, the more degrees of Glory you shall have. As
there are degrees of Torment in Hell, Matthew. 23.14. so of Glory in Heaven. As
one Star differs from another in Glory, so shall one Saint; 1 Cor. 15.41.
Though every Vessel of Mercy shall be full, yet one Vessel may hold more than
another. Such as have done more work for God, shall have more Glory in the
Heavenly Kingdom. Could we hear the Saints departed speaking to us from Heaven,
sure they would speak after this manner, Were we to leave Heaven a while, and
live on the Earth again, we would do God a thousand times more service than
ever we did; we would pray with more Life, act with more Zeal; for now we see,
the more has been our labor the greater is our reward in Heaven.

9. While we are laboring for the Kingdom, God will help us; Ezekiel. 36.27. I
will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes. The
Promise encourages us, and Gods Spirit inableth us. A Master gives his Servant
work to do, but he cannot give him strength to work; but God as he cuts us out
work, so he gives us strength, Psalm. 86.16. Give thy strength unto thy servant.
God not only gives us a Crown when we have done running, but gives us legs to
run; he gives exciting, assisting Grace: Lex jubet, Gratia juvat. The Spirit
helping us in our work for Heaven makes it easy. If the Loadstone draw the
Iron, it is not hard for the Iron to move* If God Spirit draws the heart, now
it moves toward Heaven with facility and alacrity.

10. The more pains we have taken for Heaven the sweeter Heaven will be when we
come there. As when an Husbandman has been grafting Trees, or setting Flowers
in his Garden, it is pleasant to review and look over his labors; so when in
Heaven we shall remember our former zeal and earnestness for the Kingdom, it
will sweeten Heaven and add to the joy of it. For a Christian to think such a
day I spent in examining my heart, such a day I was weeping for Sin; when
others were at their sport, I was at Prayer, and now have I lost any thing by
my Devotion? My Tea^s are wiped away, and the Wine of Paradise chears my heart.
I now enjoy him whom my Soul loves, I am possessed of a Kingdom, my labor is
over, but my joy remains.

11. If you do not take pains for the Kingdom of Heaven now, there will be
nothing to be done for your Souls after death: This is the only fit season for
working, and if this season be lost, the Kingdom is forfeited; Eccles. 9.10.
Whatever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might, for there is no work,
nor device, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go. It was a Saying of
Charles the Fifth, I have spent my Treasure, but that I may recover again, I
have lost my Health, but that I may have again, but I have lost a great many
brave Soldiers, but them I can never have again: So other Temporal things may
be lost, and recovered again, but if the term of Life wherein you should work
for Heaven be once lost, it is past all recovery, you can never have another
season again for your Souls.

12. There is nothing else but this Kingdom of Heaven we can make sure of: We
cannot make sure of Life. Quis scit an adjiciant hodiernae crastina Vitae
tempora dii superi? Hor. When our Breath goes out we know not whether we shall
draw it in again* how many are taken away suddenly? We cannot make Riches sure,
it is uncertain whether we shall get them. The World is like a Lottery, every
one is not sure to draw a Prize: Or if we get Riches we are not sure to keep
them; Prove. 23 5. Riches make themselves wings and fly: Experience seals to the
truth of this. Many who have had plentiful Estates, yet by Fire, or losses at
Sea, they have been squeezed as spunges, and all their Estates exhausted; but
if Men should keep their Estates a while, yet Death strips them of all. When
Deaths gun goes off away flies the Estate. 1 Timothy 6.7. It is certain we can
carry nothing out of the World: So that there is no making sure any thing here
below, but we may make sure of the Kingdom of Heaven; Prove. 11.18. To him that
works righteousness is a sure reward. He who has Grace is sure of Heaven,
for he has Heaven begun in him. A Believer has an evidence of Heaven; Heb.
11.1. Faith is the evidence of things not seen; he has an earnest of Glory, 2
Cor. 1.22 Who has also given us the earnest of his Spirit; an earnest is part
of the whole sum; he has a sure hope, Heb. 6.19. Which hope we have as an
anchor; this anchor is cast upon Gods promise, Titus 1.2. In hope of eternal
life, which God that cannot lie has promised. So that here is great
encouragement to take pains for Heaven, we may make sure of this Kingdom.

13. The Kingdom of Heaven cannot be obtained without labor. Non est ad astra
mollis e terris vi^. A boat may as well get to land without oars, as we to
Heaven without labor. We cannot have the World without labor, and do we think
to have Heaven? If a Man digs for Gravel, much more for Gold: Phil. 3.14. I
press toward the mark. Heaven Gate is not like that ^^on-gate, which opened to
Peter of its own accord, Acts 12.10. Heaven is not like those ripe figs which
fall into the mouth of the eater; Nahum 3.12. No, there must be taking pains.
Two things are requisite for a Christian, a watchful eye and a working hand. We
must as Hannibal, force a way to the Heavenly Kingdom through difficulties. We
must win the garland of Glory by labor, before we wear it with triumph. God
has enacted this Law, That no man shall eat of the Tree of Paradise, but in
the sweat of his brows; how then dare any censure Christian diligence; how
dare they say, you take more pains for Heaven than needs: God says (...),
strive as in an agony, fight the good sight of Faith; and these say, you are
too strict: But who shall we believe, an holy God that bids us strive, or a
profane Atheist that says we strive too much.

14. Much of our time being already misspent, we had need work the harder for
the Kingdom of Heaven. He who has lost his time at School, and often played
truant, had need ply it the harder that he may gain a stock of Learning; he who
has slept and loytered in the beginning of his journey, had need ride the
faster in the evening, least he fall short of the place he is traveling to.
Some here present are in their Youth, others in the flower of their Age, others
have gray hairs, the Almond tree blossoms, and perhaps they have been very
regardless of their Souls or Heaven. Time spent unprofitably is not time lived,
but time lost; if there be any such here who have misspent their golden hours,
they have not only been sloathful but wastful Servants, how had you need now,
redeem the time, and press forward with might and main to the Heavenly Kingdom;
1 Pet 4.3. The time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought the will of
the Gentiles. It may suffice us that we have lost so much time already, let us
now work the harder: Such as have crept as Snails, had need now fly as Eagles
to the Paradise of God; if in the former part of your Life you have been as
Willows, barren in goodness, in the latter part be as an Orchard of
Pomegranats, with pleasant fruits, Cant. 4.13. Recompense former remisness with
future diligence.

15. How uncomely and sordid a sloathful temper of Soul is; Zeph. 1.12. I will
punish the men who are settled on their lees; Hebr. Hakkophim, Coagulatos,
curdled on their lees. Settling on the lees, is an emblem of a dull unactive
Soul. The Snail by reason of its slow motion was reckoned among the unclean;
Lev. 11.30. A slothful man hides his hand in his bosom, Prove. 19.24. he is
loath to pull it out, though it be to lay hold on a Crown: Non capit porta illa
Caelestis torpore languidos, Brugens. The Devil himself cannot be charged with
idleness, 1 Pet. 5.8. (...), He walks about. An idle Soul stands in the World
for a cipher, and God writes down no ciphers in the Book of Life; Heaven is no
hive for Drones; an idle person is fit for a temptation. When the Bird sits
still upon the bough, then it is in danger of the gun; one sits still in
sloth, then the Devil shoots him with a temptation; standing water putrifies.
Heathens will rise up in Judgment against supine Christians. What pains did
they take in the Olympic Games, they ran but for a Garland of Flowers, or
Olive, (...), says Chrys^stom, and do we sit still who run for a Kingdom? How
can he expect a Reward that never works, or a Crown that never fights? Inertia
animae somnus, sloth is the Souls sleep. Adam when he was asleep lost his Rib;
and when a person is in the deep sleep of sloth, he loses Salvation.

16. Holy activity and industry does enoble a Christian: Labor splendore
decoratur, Cicero. The more excellent any thing is, the more active. The Sun is
a glorious Creature, it is ever in motion, going its circuit: Fire is the
purest Element, and the most active, it is ever sparkling and flaming: The
Angels are the most Noble Creatures, they are represented by the Cherubims with
Wings displayed. The more active for Heaven the more illustrious, and the more
do we resemble the Angels. The Phoenix flies with a Coronet on its head; the
industrious Soul has his Coronet, his labor is his ensign of honor.

17. It is Mercy that there is a possibility of Happiness, and that upon our
pains taking we may have a Kingdom; by our Fall in Adam we forfeited Heaven;
why might not God have dealt with us as with the lapsed Angels? they had no
sooner sinned but were expelled Heaven never to come thither more; we may say
as the Apostle, Romans 11.22. Behold the Goodness and severity of God. To the
Apostate Angels behold the severity of God that he should throw them down to
Hell for ever; to us behold the goodness of God, that he has put us into a
possibility of Mercy, and if we do but take pains, there is a Kingdom stands
ready for us; how may this whet and sharpen our Industry, that we are in a
Capacity of Salvation; and if we do but what we are able, we shall receive an
eternal weight of Glory.

18. Our labor for the Kingdom of Heaven is minute and transient, it is not to
last long; our labor expires with our life; it is but a while and we shall
leave off working, for a little labor an eternal Rest: Who would think much to
wade through a little water, that were sure to be crowned as soon as he came at
shore. Christians let this encourage you, you have but a little more pains to
take, a few Tears more shed, a few more Sabbaths kept, and behold an Eternal
Recompense of Reward; what are a few Tears to a Crown? a few Minutes of time to
an Eternity of Glory?

19. What striving is there for earthly Kingdoms which are corruptible, and
subject to change: With what Vigor and Alacrity did Hannibal's Soldiers
continue their March over the Alps and craggy Rocks; and Caesar's Soldiers fight
with Hunger and Cold. Men will break through Laws and Oaths, they will swim to
the Crown in Blood; will they venture thus for earthly Promotions? and shall
not we strive more for an Heavenly Kingdom? (...), Chrysostom. This is a Kingdom
which cannot be shaken, Heb. 12.28. A Kingdom where there is unparalled
Beauty, unstained Honor, unmixed joy; a Kingdom where there shall be nothing
present, which we could wish were removed, nor nothing absent, which we could
wish were enjoyed: Sure if there be any Spark of Grace or true Generosity in
our Breasts, we will not suffer our selves to be out-striven by others, we will
not let them take more pains for earthly Honors, then we do for that excellent
Glory which will crown all our desires.

20. How much pains do some Men take to go to Hell, and shall not we take more
pains to go to Heaven? Ier. 9.5. They weary themselves to commit Iniquity.
Sinners hackny themselves out in the Devils Service: What Pains do some Men
take to satisfy their unclean Lusts! they wast their Estates, wear the shameful
marks of their sin about them; they will visit the Harlots house though it
stands the next door to hell, Prove. 7.27. Her house is the way to Hell. What
pains do others take in persecuting! Holiness is the white they shoot at: It Is
said of Antiochus Epiphanes, he undertook more tedious Journies, and went upon
greater hazards to vex and oppose the Jews, then any of his Predecessors had
done in getting of Victories. The Devil blows the horn, and Men ride Pos^ to
hell, as if they feared hell would be full ere they could get thither: When
Satan had entered into Judas, how active was Judas! he goes to the High Priests,
from them to the Band of Soldiers, and with them back again to the Garden, and
never left till he had betrayed Christ: How industrious were the idolatrous
Jews, so fiercely were they bent upon their sin, that they would sacrifice
their Sons and Daughters to their Idol Gods, Ier. 32.35. Do Men take all this
Pains for hell, and shall not we take pains for the Kingdom of Heaven? The
wicked have nothing to encourage them in their Sins, they have all the
threatenings of God as a flaming Sword against them. O let it never be said
that the Devils Servants are more active then Christ's, that they serve him
better, who rewards them only with Fire and Brimstone, then we do God who
rewards us with a Kingdom.

21. The labor we take for Heaven is a labor full of pleasure, Prove. 3.17. A
Man sweats at his Recreation, tires himself with hunting, but there is a
delight he takes in it which sweetens it: Romans 7.22. I delight in the Law of
God, in the inner Man, Gr. (...), I take pleasure. Not only is the Kingdom of
Heaven delightful, but the way thither: What delight has a gracious Soul in
Prayer, Isa. 56.7. I will make them joyful in my house of Prayer. While a
Christian weeps there is joy drops with Tears; while he is musing on God he
has such illapses of the Spirit, and as it were such Transfigurations of Soul,
that he thinks himself half in Heaven, Psalm. 63.5, 6. My Soul shall be
satisfied as with marrow and fatness, and my Mouth shall praise thee with
joyful Lips, when I remember thee upon my Bed, etc. A Christians work for
Heaven is like a Bridegrooms work on the Morning of the Marriage day, he puts
on his Vesture and wedding Robes, in which he shall be married to his Bride; so
in all the Duties of Religion we are putting on those wedding Robes, in which
we shall be married to Christ in Glory: O what solace and inward Peace is there
in close walking with God, Isa. 32.17. The Work of Righteousness shall be
Peace. Serving of God is like gathering of Spices or Flowers, wherein there is
some labor, but the labor is recompensed with delight: Working for Heaven is
like digging in a Gold Mine, the digging is labor, but getting the Gold is
pleasure: O then let us bestir our selves for the Kingdom of Heaven; it is a
labor full of Pleasure; a Christian would not part with his Joy for the most
delicious Music; he would not exchange his Anchor of Hope for a Crown of Gold:
Well might David say in keeping thy Precepts there is great Reward, Psalm.
19.11. not only after keeping thy Precepts, but in keeping them; a Christian
has both the Spring Flowers and the Crop; inward delight in serving God, there
is the Spring Flowers; and the Kingdom of Glory at last, there is the full Crop.

22. How industrious have the Saints in former Ages been, they thought they
could never do enough for Heaven; they could never serve God enough, love him
enough, minus te amavi, Domine, Austin. Lord I have loved thee too little. What
Pains did Saint Paul take for the Heavenly Kingdom, Phil. 3.13. Reaching forth
unto those things which are before; (...) the Greek Word to reach forth,
signifies to stretch out the neck, a Metaphor from Racers who strain every
Limb, and reach forward to lay hold on the Prize. Anna the Prophetess, Luke
2.37. departed not from the Temple, but served God with Fastings and Prayers
night and day. Basil the Great by much labor and watching exhausted his bodily
strength. Let Racks, Pullies, and all torments come upon me (said Ignatius) so
I may win Christ. The Industry and Courage of former Saints who are now crowned
with Glory should provoke our diligence, that so at last we may sit down with
them in the Kingdom of Heaven.

23. The more pains we take for Heaven, the more welcome will Death be to us:
What is it makes Men so loath to dye? they are like a Tenant that will not out
of the House, till the Sergeant pull him out; they love not to hear of Death;
why so? because their Conscience accuses them that they have taken little or
no pains for Heaven; they have been sleeping when they should have been
working; and now they are afraid least Death should carry them Prisoners to
Hell: Whereas he who has spent his time in serving of God, he can look Death
in the Face with comfort, he was wholly taken up about Heaven, and now he shall
be taken up to Heaven; he traded before in Heaven, and now he shall go to live
there, Phil. 1.23. Cupio dissolvi, I desire to be dissolved, and be with
Christ: Paul had wholly laid out himself for God, 1 Cor. 15.10. and now he knew
there was a Crown laid up for him, and he longed to take Possession. Thus I
have given you twenty three Perswasives or Arguments to exert and put forth
your utmost diligence for the obtaining the Kingdom of Heaven; O that these
Arguments were written in all your Hearts, as with the Point of a Diamond; and
because delays in these Cases are dangerous, let me desire you to set upon
this Work for Heaven presently, Psalm. 119.60. I made have, and delayed not to
keep thy Commandments. Many People are convinced of the necessity of looking
after the Kingdom of Glory, but they say as those, Hagg. 1.2. The time is not
yet come: They adjourn and put off, till their time is slipped away, and so they
lose the Kingdom of Heaven; beware of this fallacy; delay strengthens sin,
hardens the heart, and gives the Devil fuller possession of a Man; 1 Samuel 21.8.
The Kings business requires have; so the business of Salvation requires have;
do not put off an hour longer; volat ambiguis mobilis alis hora; what assurance
have you that you shall live another day? have you any lease of life granted?
why then do you not presently arise out of the Bed of Sloth, and put forth all
your strength and Spirits that you may be possessed of the Kingdom of Glory?
should not things of the highest importance be done first? settling a Man's
Estate, and clearing the Title to his Land, is not delayed, but done in the
first place; what is there of such grand importance as this, the saving of your
Souls, and the gaining of a Kingdom? therefore to day hear Gods Voice, now mind
Eternity, now get your Title to Heaven cleared before the Decree of Death bring
forth; what imprudence is it to lay the heaviest Load upon the weakest Horse?
so to lay the heavy Load of Repentance on thy self when thou art infeebled by
sickness, the Hands shake, the Lips quiver, the Heart faints: O be wise in
time, now prepare for the Kingdom: He who never begins his Voyage to Heaven but
in the storm of Death, it is a thousand to one if he does not suffer an Eternal
Shipwreck.

USE VI. Of Exhortation.
1. Branch. If there be such a glorious Kingdom a coming, then you who have any
good hope through Grace that you are the Heirs of this Kingdom, let me exhort
you to six things.

1. Often take a Prospect of this heavenly Kingdom, climb up the Caelestial
Mount, take a turn as it were in Heaven every day by holy Meditation, Psalm.
48.12, 13. Walk about Sion, tell the Towers thereof, mark well her Bulwarks:
See what a glorious Kingdom Heaven is, go-tell the Towers, view the Palaces of
the Heavenly Jerusalem; Christian, show thy Heart the Gates of Pearl, the Bed
of Spices, the Clusters of Grapes which grow in the Paradise of God; say, O my
Soul, all this Glory is thine, it is thy Fathers good pleasure to give thee
this Kingdom: The Thoughts of Heaven are very delightful and ravishing; can Men
of the World so delight in viewing their Bags of Gold, and Fields of Corn, and
shall not the Heirs of Promise take more delight in contemplating the
Caelestial Kingdom: The serious Meditation of the Kingdom of Glory would work
these three effects.

(1.) It would put a damp and slur upon all worldly Glory: Those who stand upon
the top of the Alps the great Cities of Campania seem but small in their eye.
Could we look through the Perspective Glass of Faith, and take a view of
Heavens Glory, how small and minute would all other things appear: Moses
slighted the Honors of Pharaohs Court, having an eye to the Recompense of
Reward: Heb. 11.26. St. Paul who had a Vision of Glory, and Saint John who was
carried away in the Spirit, and saw the holy Jerusalem descending out of
Heaven, having the Glory of God in it, Rev. 21.11. how did the world after
appear in an Eclipse to them.

(2.) The Meditation of the heavenly Kingdom would much promote holiness in us:
Heaven is an holy place, 1 Pet. 1.4. an Inheritance undefiled; it is described
by Transparent Glass to denote its Purity, Rev. 21.21. The contemplating heaven
would put us upon the study of holiness, because none but such are admitted
into that kingdom: Heaven is not like Noah's Ark, into which came clean Beasts
and unclean; only the pure in heart shall see God, Mat. 5.8.

(3.) The Meditation of the heavenly Kingdom would be a Spur to diligence,
immensum Gloria Calcar habet. 1 Cor. 15.58. always abounding in the work of
the Lord, knowing that your Labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. When the
Mariner sees the haven he plies it harder with his Oars; when we have a sight
and prospect of Glory, it would make us much in Prayer, alms, watching, it
would add wings to duty, and make the Lamp of our Devotion burn brighter.

2. If you have hopes of this Kingdom* be content though you have but a little
of the World: Contentment is a rare thing, it is a Jewel that but few Christians
wear; but if you have a grounded hope of heaven, it may work your heart to
Contentation; what though you have but little in Possession, you have a Kingdom
in Reversion. Were you to take an estimate of a Man's Estate, how would you
value it? by what he has in his house, or by his Land? perhaps he has little
Money or Jewels in his house, but he is a Landed Man, there lies his Estate. A
Believer has but little Oil in the Cruse* and Meal in the Barrel, but he is a
landed Man, he has a Title to a Kingdom, and may not this satisfy him? If a
Man who lived here in England, had a great Estate befallen him beyond the Seas,
and perhaps had no more Money at present, but just to pay for his Voyage, he is
content, he knows when he comes to his Estate he shall have Money enough: Thou
who art a Believer have a Kingdom befallen thee; though thou have but little in
thy Purse, yet if thou have enough to pay for thy Voyage, enough to bear thy
Charges to heaven, it is sufficient. God has given thee Grace which is the
Fore Crop, and will give thee Glory, which is the After-Crop, and may not this
make thee content?

3. Branch. If you have hope of this blessed Kingdom, pray often for the coming
of this glorious Kingdom, Thy Kingdom come: Only Believers can pray heartily
for the hastening of the Kingdom of Glory.

1. They cannot pray that Christ's kingdom of Glory may come who never had the
kingdom of Grace set up in their Hearts: Can the guilty Prisoner pray that the
Assis^s may come?

2. They cannot pray heartily that Christ's kingdom of Glory may come, who are
Lovers of the World; they have found Paradise, they are in their kingdom
already, this is their heaven, and they desire to hear of no other; they are of
his mind who said, if he might keep his Cardinalship in Paris he would lose his
part in Paradise.

3. They cannot pray heartily that Christ's kingdom of Glory may come, who
o^^ose Christ's kingdom of Grace, who break his Laws which are the Scepter of
his kingdom, who shoot at those who bear Christ's Name and carry his Colors;
sure these cannot pray that Christ's kingdom of Glory may come, for then Christ
will judge them, and if they say this Prayer they are Hypocrites, they mean not
as they speak. But you who have the kingdom of Grace set up in your hearts,
pray much that the kingdom of Glory may hasten, Thy Kingdom come; when this
kingdom comes then you shall behold Christ in all his embroidered Robes of
Glory, shining ten thousand times brighter then the Sun in all it is Meridian
Splendour. When Christ's kingdom comes the Bodies of the Saints that slept in the
dust shall be raised in honor, and made like Christ's Glorious Body; then shall
your Souls like Diamonds sparkle with Holiness; you shall never have a sinful
thought more, you shall be as holy as the Angels, you shall be as holy as you
would be, and as holy as God would have you to be; then you shall be in a
better state than in Innocence. Adam was Created a Glorious Creature but
mutable, a bright Star but a falling Star, but in the Kingdom of Heaven is a
fixation of Happiness: When Christ's Kingdom of Glory comes you shall be rid of
all your enemies: As Moses said, Exodus 14.13. The Egyptians whom you have seen
to day, you shall see them no more for ever; so those enemies who have plough'd
on the backs of Gods people, and made deep their surrows, when Christ shall
come in his Glory, you shall see these enemies no more. All Christ's enemies
shall be put under his feet, 1 Cor. 15.25. and before the wicked be destroyed
the Saints shall judge them; 1 Cor. 6.2. Know ye not that the Saints shall
judge the World: This will cut the wicked to the heart, that those whom they
have formerly scorned and scourged shall sit as Judges upon them, and vote with
Christ in his judicial proceedings: O then well may you pray for the hastening
of the Kingdom of Glory, Thy Kingdom come.

4. Branch. If you have any good hope of this blessed Kingdom, let this make
the color come in your Faces, be of a sanguine* cheerful temper; have you a
Title to a Kingdom, and sad? Romans 5.2. We rejoice in the hope of the glory of
God. Christians, the Trumpet is ready to sound; an eternal Jubilee is at hand
when a freedom from Sin shall be proclaimed; your Coronation day is a coming;
it is but putting off your clothes, and laying your head upon a pillow of dust,
and you shall be inthroned in a Kingdom, and invested with the embroidered
Robes of Glory: Does not all this call for a cheerful Spirit? Cheerfulness
adorns Religion; it is a temper of Soul Christ loves: John 14.28. If ye loved
me ye would rejoice. It makes many suspect Heaven is not so pleasant, when they
see those that walk thither so sad. How does the heir rejoice in hope of the
Inheritance? Who should rejoice if not a Believer who is heir of the Kingdom,
and such a Kingdom as eye has not seen. When the Flesh begins to droop, let
Faith lift up its head, and cause an holy jubilation and rejoicing in the Soul.

5. Let the Saints long to be in this blessed Kingdom. A Prince that travels in
Foreign parts, does he not long to be in his own Nation, that he may be
Crowned? The Bride desires the Marriage day: Rev. 22.17. The Spirit and the
bride say, Come: Even so come Lord Jesus. Sure our unwillingness to go hence,
shows either the weakness of our Faith in the belief of the Heavenly Kingdom,
or the strength of our doubtings, whether we have an interest in it. Were our
Title to Heaven more cleared, we should need Patience to be content to stay
here any longer.

Again, Our unwillingness to go hence declares, we love the World too much, and
Christ too little. Love (as Aristotle says) desires Union; did we love Christ
as we should, we would desire to be united to him in Glory; when we might take
our fill of Love, be humbled that we are so unwilling to go hence: Let us
labor to arrive at that divine temper of Soul as Paul had, Cupio dissolvi, I
desire to depart and be with Christ; Phil. 1.23. We are encompassed with a body
of sin, should not we long to shake off this viper? We are in Meseck, and the
Tents of Kedar, in a place where we see God dishonored, should not we desire
to have our pass to be gone? We are in a valley of Tears, is it not better
being in a Kingdom? Here we are combating with Satan, should not we desire to
be called out of the bloody field where the bullets of Temptation fly so fast,
that we may receive a victorious Crown? O ye Saints, breath after the Heavenly
Kingdom. Though we should be willing to stay to do service, yet we should
ambitiously desire to be always sunning our selves in the light of Gods
Countenance. Think what it will be to be ever with the Lord, are there any
sweeter smiles or embraces than his? Is there any bed so soft as Christ's bosom?
Is there any such joy as to have the golden banner of Christ's Love displayed
over us? Is there any such honor as to sit upon the Throne with Christ; Rev.
3.21. O then long for the Caelestial Kingdom.

6. Wait for this Kingdom of Glory. It is not incongruous or improper to long
for Heaven, yet wait for it; long for it because it is a Kingdom, yet wait your
Fathers good pleasure; God could presently bestow this Kingdom, but he sees it
good that we should wait a while.

(1.) Had we the Kingdom of Heaven presently, as soon as ever Grace is infused,
then God would lose much of his Glory. 1. Where would be our living by Faith,
which is the Grace that brings in the chief revenues of Glory to God; Romans
4.20. 2. Where would be our suffering for God, which is a way of honoring him,
which the Angels in Heaven are not capable of. 3. Where would be the active
service we are to do for God? Would we have God give us a Kingdom, and we do
nothing for him before we come there? Would we have Rest before Labor, a Crown
before Victory? This were disingenuous. Paul was content to stay out of Heaven
a while, that he might be a means to bring others thither; Phil. 1.23.

(^.) While we wait for the Kingdom our Glory is increasing. Every Duty
Religiously performed adds a Jewel to our Crown. Do we desire to have our Robes
of Glory shine brighter, let us wait and work; the longer we stay for the
Principal, the greater will the Interest be. The Husbandman waits till the seed
spring up: Wait for the harvest of Glory. Some have their waiting Weeks at
Court; this is your walting time: Christ says, Pray and faint not, Luke 18.1.
so wait and faint not. Be not weary; the Kingdom of Heaven will make amends for
your waiting: I have waited for thy Salvation, O Lord, said that dying
Patriarch, Genesis 49.18.

USE V. Comfort to the people of God.
1. In all their Sufferings. The true Saint is as Luther says, Haeres Crucis,
heir to the Cross, Affliction is his Diet drink, but here is that may be as
Bezoar-stone to keep him from fainting; these sufferings bring a Kingdom. The
hope of the Kingdom of Heaven, says Basil, should indulcorate and sweeten all
our troubles; 2 Timothy 2.12. If we suffer we shall reign with him: It Is but a
short fight, but an eternal triumph; this light suffering produces an eternal
weight of Glory; 2 Cor. 4.17. 1. A weight of Glory, (...): Things which are
precious, the more weighty, the more they are worth; the more weight is in a
Crown of Gold the more it is worth It Is a weight of Glory. 2. (...), An eternal
weight of Glory: Did this Glory last but a while it would much abate and
imbitter the Joys of Heaven, but the Glory of that Kingdom runs parallel with
Eternity; God will be as a deep Sea of Blessedness, and the Glorified Saints
shall for ever bathe themselves in that Ocean. One days wearing the Crown will
abundantly pay for all the Saints sufferings, how much more then, when they
shall reign for ever and ever; Rev. 22.5. O let this support under all the
Calamities and Suffering in this Life: What a vast difference is there between
a Believers Sufferings and his Reward; Romans 8.18. The sufferings of this
present time are not worthy to be compared with the Glory which shall be
revealed in us. For a few Tears, Rivers of Pleasure; for Mourning, white Robes:
This made the Primitive Christians laugh at Imprisonment, and snatch up
Torments as so many Crowns: Though now we drink in a Wormwood Cup, here is
Sugar in the bottom to sweeten it; It Is your Fathers good pleasure to give you
a Kingdom.

2. Comfort in Death: Here is that which may take away from Gods Children the
terror of Death, they are now entering into the Kingdom. Indeed no wonder if
wicked Men be appal'd and terrified at the approach of Death, they dye
unpardoned, Death carries them to the Goal, where they must lie for ever
without ^ail or Mainprize: But why should any of Gods Children be so scared and
half-dead with the thoughts of Death? What hurt does Death do to them, but lead
them to a Glorious Kingdom? Faith gives a Title to Heaven, Death a Possession;
let this be a Gospel-antidote to expel the fear of Death. Hilarion that blessed
Man, cried out, Egredere Anima, egredere, quid times? Go forth my Soul, go
forth, what fear thou? Let them fear Death, who do not fear Sin: But let not
Gods Children be overmuch troubled at the grim Face of that Messenger which
brings them to the end of their Sorrow, and the beginning of their Joy. Death
is yours, 1 Cor. 3.22. it is part of a Believers inventory. Is a Prince afraid
to cross a narrow Sea, who shall be Crowned when he comes to Land? Death to the
Saints shall be an usher, to bring them into the Presence of the King of Glory:
This puts Lilies and Roses into the ghastly face of Death, and makes it look
amiable. Death brings us to a Crown of Glory which fades not away. The day of
Death is better to a Believer than the day of his Birth. Death is aditus ad
Gloriam, an entrance into a blessed Eternity. Fear not Death, but rather let
your Hearts revive when you think these rattling wheels of Deaths Chariot are
but to carry you home to an everlasting Kingdom.

MATTHEW. vi.10. Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.


WE come next to the Third Petition, Thy Will be done in Earth as it is in
Heaven.

This Petition consists of Two Parts.

I. The Matter, Doing of Gods Will. II. The Manner, As it is in Heaven.
I. The Matter of this Petition is, The doing of Gods Will. Thy Will be done.

Quest. 1. What is meant by the Will of God?

Answ. There is a twofold Will: 1. Voluntas decreti, Gods secret Will, or the
Will of his Decree: We pray not that Gods secret Will may be done by us. This
secret Will cannot be known, it is locked up in Gods own breast, and neither
Man or Angel has Key to open it. 2. Voluntas revelata, Gods revealed Will.
This revealed Will is written in the Book of Scripture; the Scripture is a
declaration of Gods Will, it discovers what he would have us do in order to our
Salvation.

Quest. 2. What do we pray for in these words, Thy Will be done?

Answ. We pray for two things. 1. For Active Obedience; that we may do Gods
Will actively in what he commands. 2. For Passive; that we may submit to Gods
Will patiently in what he inflicts. We pray that we may do Gods Will actively,
subscribe to all his commands, believe in Jesus the cardinal Grace, lead holy
lives. So Austin upon the Petition, Nobis a Deo precamur Obedientiam, we pray
that we may actively obey Gods Will. This is the sum of all Religion, the two
Tables epitomized, The doing of Gods Will. Thy Will be done. We must know Gods
Will before we can do it; knowledge is the eye which must direct the foot of
Obedience. At Athens there was an Altar set up (...), To the unknown God, Acts
17.23. It is as bad to offer the blind to God as the dead. Knowledge is the
Pillar of Fire to give light to practice; but though knowledge is requisite,
yet the knowing of Gods Will is not enough without doing of his Will: Thy Will
be done. If one had a System of Divinity in his head, if he had (...), all
knowledge, 1 Cor. 13.2. yet if Obedience were wanting, his knowledge were lame,
and would not carry him to Heaven. Knowing Gods Will may make a Man admired,
but it is doing Gods Will that makes him blessed; knowing Gods Will without
doing it, will not crown us with happiness.

1. The bare knowledge of Gods Will is inefficacious, it does not better the
heart. Knowledge alone is like a Winter-Sun which has no heat or influence; it
does not warm the Affections, or purify the Conscience. Judas was a great
Luminary, he knew Gods Will, but he was a Traitor.

2. Knowing without doing Gods Will will make ones case worse, 'twill heat Hell
the hotter; Luke 12.47. The servant which knew his Lords will, and did not
according to his will shall be beaten with maeny stripes. Many a Man's knowledge
is a torch to light him to Hell. Thou who have knowledge of Gods Will but do
not do it, wherein do thou excel an Hypocrite? Nay, wherein do thou excel
the Devil? who transforms himself into an Angel of light? It Is improper to call
such Christians who are knowers of Gods Will, but not doers of it. It Is
improper to call him a Tradesman who never wrought in his Trade; so to call him
a Christian who never wrought in the Trade of Religion. Let us not rest in the
knowing of Gods Will. Let it not be said of us as Plutarch speaks of the
Grecians, They knew what was just but did it not. Let us set upon this, the
doing of Gods Will. Thy Will be done.

Quest. 3. Why is the doing of Gods Will so requisite?

Answ. 1. Out of Equity. God may justly claim a right to our Obedience; he is
our founder; we have our being from him; and it is but equal that we should do
his Will at whose word we were Created. God is our Benefactor; it is just that
if God give us our Allowance we should give him our Allegiance.

2. The great design of God in the World is to make us doers of his Will. 1.
All Gods Royal Edicts and Precepts are to bring us to this, to be doers of his
Will; what needed God been at the pains to give us the copy of his Law, and
write it out with his own Finger else. The Word is not only a Rule of
Knowledge, but of Duty; Deuteronomy. 13.4. Deuteronomy. 26.16. This day the Lord thy God has
commanded thee to do these statutes, thou shall therefore keep and do them. If
you tell your Children what is your mind, it is not only that they may know
your Will, but do it. God gives us his Word as a Master gives a Scholar a Copy
to write after it; he gives it as his Will and Testament, that we should be the
Executors to see it performed. 2. This is the end of all Gods Promises to draw
us to do Gods Will; the Promises are loadstones to Obedience, Deuteronomy. 11.27. A
blessing if ye obey; as a Father gives his Son Money to bribe him to Obedience.
Deuteronomy. 28.1. If thou shall hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, and do all
his commandments, the Lord thy God will set thee on high above all the nations
of the earth; Blessed shall thou be in the city, and in the field. The Promises
are a Royal Charter settled upon Obedience. 3. The Minatory part of the Word,
the threatenings of God stand as the Angel with a Flaming Sword to deter us from
Sin, and make us doers of Gods Will; Deuteronomy. 11.28. A curse if ye will not obey.
Psalm. 68.21. God shall wound the hairy scalp of every one that goes on still in
his trespasses. These threatenings do often take hold of Men in this Life; they
are made examples, and hung up in chains to scare others from Disobedience. 4.
All Gods Providence are to m^ke us doers of his Will. As God makes use of all
the seasons of the Year for Harvest, so all his various Providence are to
bring on the Harvest of Obedience.

1. Afflictions are to make us do Gods Will; 2 Chronicles. 33.12. When Manasseh was
in affliction, he besought the Lord, and humbled himself greatly. The Rod has
this voice, Be doers of Gods Will. Affliction is called a Furnace; Isa. 48.10.
The furnace melts the metal, and then it is cast into a new mould. Gods Furnace
is to melt us and mould us into Obedience.

2. Gods Mercies are to make us do his Will; Romans 12.1. I beseech you by the
mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice. Body is by a
Synecdoche put for the whole Man. If the Soul should not be presented to God as
well as the Body, it could not be a reasonable service. Now says the Apostle,
I beseech you by the mercies of God present your selves a living sacrifice.
Mercies are the strongest obligations to Duty. Hos. 11.4. I drew them with the
cords of a man; that is, with the golden cords of my Mercy. In a word, all that
is written in Law or Gospel, tends to this, that we should be doers of Gods
Will, Thy Will be done.

3. By doing the Will of God we evidence Sincerity; as Christ said in another
sense, John 10.25. The works which I do, bear witness of me: So it is not all
our golden words, if we could speak like Angels, but our works, our doing of
Gods Will, which bears witness of our Sincerity. We judge not of the health of
a Man's Body by his high Color, but by the Pulse of the Arm, where the Blood
chiefly stirs; so a Christians soundness is not to be judged by his Profession;
what is this high Color? but the estimate of a Christian is to be taken by his
Obediential acting, his doing the Will of God; this is the best Certificate and
Letters Testimonial to show for Heaven.

4. Doing Gods Will much propagates the Gospel; this is the Diamond that
sparkles in Religion. Others cannot see what Faith is in the Heart, but when
they see we do Gods Will on Earth, this makes them have a venerable opinion of
Religion, and become Proselites to it. Julian in one of his Epistles writing to
Arsatius, says, That the Christian Religion did much flourish by the Sanctity
and Obedience of them that professed it.

5. By doing Gods Will we show our Love to Christ; John 14.21. He that has my
commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me. What greater Love to
Christ than to do his Will, though it cross our own. Every one would be thought
to love Christ; but how shall that be known but by this, do you do his Will on
Earth? Neque principem veneramur si odio ejus Leges habemus, Isid. It Is a vain
thing for a Man to say he loves Christ's Person, when he slights his Commands.
Not to do Gods Will on Earth is a great evil, it is, (1.) Sinful. (2.) Foolish.
(3.) Dangerous.


(1.) It is Sinful. 1. We go against our Prayers; we pray, Fiat voluntas tua,
thy will be done, and yet we do not obey his will, we confute our own Prayer.
2. We go against our Vow in Baptism; we have vowed to fight under the Lords
Banner, to obey his Scepter, and this Vow we have often renewed in the Lords
Supper; if we do not Gods will on Earth we are forsworn, and God will indite us
of Perjury.

(2.) Not to do Gods will on Earth is Foolish; 1. Because there is no standing
it out against God. If we do not obey him we cannot resist him: 1 Cor. 10.^2
Are we stronger than he? Job. 40.9. Have thou an arm like God? Can thou
measure Arms with him? To oppose God is as if a Child should fight with an
Archangel; as if an heap of Briars should put themselves into a battalia
against the Flame. 2. Not to do Gods will is foolish, because if we do not Gods
will we do the Devils will. Is it not folly to gratify an enemy? To do his
will that seeks our ruin?

Quest. But are any so wicked as to do the Devils will?

Answ. Yes; John 8.44. Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your
Father ye will do. When a Man tells a lie does he not do the Devils will? Acts
5.3. Ananias, Why has Satan filled thy heart to lie to the Holy Ghost?

(3.) Not to do Gods Will is dangerous; it brings a Spiritual Praemunire. If
Gods Will be not done by us, he will have his will upon us; if we obey not Gods
will in commanding, we shall obey his will in punishing, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. The Lord
Jesus shall be revealed with his mighty Angels in flames of fire, taking
vengeance on them that obey not his gospel. Either we must do Gods will, or
suffer it.

6. Whatever God wills us to do is for our benefit: Behold here self-interest.
As if a King commands his Subject to dig in a Mine of Gold, and then gives him
all the Gold he has dug. God bids us do his will, and this is for our good;
Deuteronomy. 10.13. And now O Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but
to fear the Lord thy God, and keep the commandments of the Lord, which I
command thee this day for thy good. It is Gods will that we should repent, and
this is for our good; Repentance ushers in remission; Acts 3.9. Repent that
your sins may be blotted out. It is Gods will that we should believe; and why
is it but that we should be crowned with Salvation; Mark 16.16. He that
believes shall be saved. What God wills is not so much our Duty as our
Privilege; he bids us obey his voice, and it is greatly for our good; Ier.
7.23. Obey my voice and I will be your God. I will not only give you my Angels
to be your guard, but my self to be your portion; my Spirit shall be yours to
sanctify you, my Love shall be yours to comfort you, my Mercy shall be yours
to save you. I will be your God.

7. To do Gods will is our Honor. A Person thinks it an Honor to have a King
speak to him to do such a thing; the Angels count it their highest Honor in
Heaven to do Gods will; Servire Deo regnare est, To serve God is to reign. Non
onerant nos sed ornant, Salvian. How cheerfully did the Rowers row the Barge
that carried Caesar; to be employed in his Barge was an Honor, to be employed
in doing Gods will, is insigne Honoris, the highest ensign of Honor that a
Mortal Creature is capable of. Christ's Precepts do not burden us but adorn us.

8. To do Gods Will on Earth makes us like Christ, and akin to Christ. 1. It
makes us like Christ: Is it not our Prayer that we may be like Christ. Jesus
Christ did his Fathers will; John 6.38. I came down from Heaven not to do my
own will, but the will of him that sent me. God the Father and Christ, as they
have but one Essence, so but one Will; Christ's will was melted into his
Fathers; John 4.34. My meat is to do the will of him that sent me. By our doing
Gods will on Earth, we resemble Christ; nay, we are akin to Christ, and are of
the Blood Royal of Heaven. Alexander called himself Cousen to the Gods; what
Honor is it to be akin to Christ. Matthew. 12.50. Whosoever shall do the will of
my Father which is in Heaven, the same is my Brother, and Sister, and Mother.
Did King Solomon arise off his Throne to meet his Mother, and set her on a
Throne by him, 1 Kings 3.19. such Honor will Christ bestow on such as are
doers of Gods will, he will salute them as his Kindred, and set them on a
Glorious Throne in the Amphitheatre of Heaven.

9. Doing Gods will on Earth, brings Peace in Life and Death. 1. In Life; Psalm.
19.11. In keeping thy precepts there is great reward; not only after keeping
them but in keeping them; when we walk closely with God in Obedience, there is
a secret Joy let into the Soul, and how swiftly and cheerfully do the wheels of
the Soul move when they are oyled with the Oil of Gladness. 2. Peace in Death.
When Hezekiah thought he was about to dye, what gave him Comfort? this, that
he had done the will of God: Isa. 38.3. Remember, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I
have walked before thee in truth, and have done that which is good in thy
sight. 'Twas Augustus his wish, that he might have an (...), an easy Death
without much pain. If any thing make our pillow easy at Death, it will be
this, we have endeavored to do Gods will on Earth. Did you ever hear any cry
out on their Deathbed, that they have done Gods will too much; no, has it not
been that they have done his will no more, that they come so short in their
Obedience. Doing Gods will will be both your Comfort, and your Crown.

10. If we are not doers of Gods will, we shall be looked upon as contemners of
Gods will: Let God say what he will, yet Men will go on in Sin, this is to
contemn God; Psalm. 10.13. Wherefore does the wicked contemn God? To contemn God
is worse than to rebel. The Tribes of Israel rebelled against Rehoboam because
he made their Yoke heavier, 1 King. 12.16. But to contemn God is worse, it is to
slight him; to contemn God is to put a Scorn upon him, and affront him to his
Face, and an Affront will make God draw his Sword. Thus I have answered that
Question why doing Gods will on Earth, is so requisite: It Is as necessary as
Salvation.

4. Quest. In what manner are we to do Gods will that we may find acceptance?

The manner of doing Gods Will is the chief thing; the Schoolmen say well,
Modus rei cadit sub praecepto, the manner of a thing is as well required as the
thing it self: If a Man build an House, if he does not do it according to the
mind of the Owner, he likes it not, but thinks all his Charges lost; so if we
do not Gods will in the right manner, it is not accepted; we must not only do
what God appoints, but as God appoints; here lies the very Lifeblood of
Religion. So I come to answer this great Question, in what manner are we to do
Gods will that we may find acceptance.

Answ. 1. We do Gods Will acceptably when we do Duties Spiritually, Phil. 3.3.
We worship God, (...), in the Spirit. To serve God spiritually is to do duties
ab interno principio, from an inward Principle: The Pharisees were very exact
about the external part of Gods worship; how zealous were they in the outward
observation of the Sabbath, charging Christ with the breach of it; but all this
was but outward Obedience, there was nothing of Spirituality in it; then we do
Gods will acceptably, when we serve him from a renewed Principle of Grace; a
Crab-tree may bear as well as a Pear-main, but it is not so good fruit as the
other, because it does not come from so sweet a Root: An unregenerate Person
may do as much external obedience as a Child of God, he may pray as much, hear
as much, but his Obedience is harsh and sour, because it does not come from
the sweet and pleasant Root of Grace; the inward principle of Obedience is
Faith, therefore it is called the Obedience of Faith, Romans 16.26. But why must
this silver thread of Faith run through the whole work of Obedience?

Answ. Because Faith looks at Christ in every Duty, it touches the Hem of his
Garment, and through Christ both the Person and the Offering are accepted,
Ephesians. 1.6.

2. We do Gods Will acceptably when we prefer his Will before all other; if God
wills one thing, and Man wills the contrary, we do obey Man's will rather than
Gods, Act. 4.19. Whether it be right to hearken unto you more then unto God,
judge ye. God says, thou shall not make a graven Image; King Nebuchadnezzar
set up a Golden Image to be worshipped; but the three Children (or rather
Champions) resolve Gods Will shall take place, and they would obey him, though
with the loss of their Lives, Dan. 3.18. Be it known unto thee, O King, that we
will not serve thy Gods, nor worship the Golden Image which thou have set up.

3. We do Gods Will acceptably when we do Gods Will as it is done in Heaven,
that is, as the Angels do it: To do Gods Will as the Angels, similitudinem
notat non aequalitatem, Brugensis, denotes thus much, that we are to resemble
them and make them our Pattern; though we cannot equal the Angels in doing Gods
Will, yet we must imitate them; a Child cannot write so well as the Scrivener,
yet he imitates the Copy in particular.

1. We do Gods Will as the Angels do it in Heaven, when we do Gods Will
Regularly, sine deflexu, we go according to divine Institutions, not Decrees of
Councils, or Traditions, this is to do Gods Will as the Angels; they do it
regularly, they do nothing but what is commanded; Angels are not for
Ceremonies; as there are Statute-Laws in the Land, which bind; so the Scripture
is Gods Statute Law, which we must exactly observe; the Watch is set by the
Dial: then our Obedience is right when it goes by the Sun-dial of the Word. If
Obedience has not the Word for its Rule, it is not doing Gods Will but our
own, it is (...), Will Worship, Deuteronomy. 12.32. The Lord would have Moses make the
Tabernacle, (...), according to the Pattern, Exodus 25.40. If Moses had left out
any thing in the Pattern, or added any thing to it, it would have been very
provoking; to mix any thing of our own devising in Gods worship, is to go
beside, yea, contrary to the Pattern: Gods worship is the Apple of his Eye,
that which he is most tender of, and there is nothing he has more showed his
displeasure against, then the corrupting his worship. How severely did God
punish Nadab and Abihu for offering up strange Fire, Lev. 10.2. that is, such
Fire as God had not sanctified on the Altar; whatever is not divinely
appointed, is offering up strange Fire: There is in many a strange itch after
Superstition; they love a gaudy Religion, and are more for the Pomp of Worship
then the Purity; this cannot be pleasing to God, for, as if God were not wise
enough to appoint the manner how he will be served; Men will be so bold as to
prescribe him. To thrust humane Inventions into sacred things, is a doing our
own will not Gods, and he will say, quis quaesivit hoc? who has required this
at your hand? Isa. 1.12. Then we do Gods Will as it is done in Heaven* when we
do it regularly we reverence Gods Institutions, and observe that Mode of
Worship which has the Stamp of divine Authority upon it.

2. We do Gods Will as it is done by the Angels in Heaven, when we do it
entirely, sine mutilatione, we do all Gods Will; the Angels in Heaven do all
that God commands, they leave nothing of his Will undone, Psalm. 103.20. Ye his
Angels that do his Commandments. If God send an Angel to the Virgin Mary, he
goes on Gods Errand; if he gives his Angels a Charge to Minister for the Saints
they obey, Heb. 1.14. It cannot stand with Angelical Obedience to leave the
least Iota of Gods Will unfulfilled: This is to do Gods Will as the Angels,
when we do all his Will, quicquid propter Deum fit aequaliter fit. This was
Gods Charge to Israel, Numb. 15.40. Remember to do all my Commandments. And it
was spoken of David, Act. 13.22. I have found David a Man after mine own heart,
who shall perform all my Will, Greek, (...), all my Wills. Every Command has
the same Authority, and if we do Gods Will uprightly, we do it uniformly, we
obey every part and Branch of his Will, we join first and second Table; surely
we owe that to God our Father, which the Papists say, we owe to our Mother, the
Church, unlimited Obedience; we must incline to every Command, as the Needle
moves that way which the Loadstone draws.

(2.) This discovers the unsoundness of many, who do Gods will by halves, they
pick and choose in Religion, they in some things comply with Gods will, but not
in other; like a foundred Horse who sets but some of his Feet on the Ground, he
favors one Foot. He who is to play upon a Lute must strike upon every Sring or
he spoils all the Music: Gods Commandments may be compared to a ten-string'd
Lute, we must obey Gods will in every Command, strike upon every string, or we
can make no good Melody in Religion: The Badger has one Foot shorter then the
other; Hypocrites are shorter in some duties then other; some will pray, not
give alms, hear the word, not forgive their Enemies, receive the Sacrament, not
make Restitution, how can they be holy who are not just? Hypocrites profess
fair, but when it comes to sacrificing the Isaac, crucifying the beloved sin,
or parting with some of their Estate for Christ, here they stick, and say as
Naaman, 2 King. 5.18. In this thing the Lord pardon thy Servant. This is far
from doing Gods will as the Angels do; God likes not such as do his will by
halves; if your Servant should do some of your work which you set him about,
but not all, how would you like that?

Object. But who is able to do all Gods will?

Answ. Though we cannot do all Gods will legally, yet we may Evangelically;
which is,

1. When we mourn that we can do Gods will no better, when we fail we weep,
Romans 7.24.

2. When it is the desire of our Soul to do Gods whole Will, Psalm. 119.5. O
that my ways were directed to keep thy Precepts. What a Child of God wants in
strength, he makes up in desire, in magnis voluisse sat est.

3. When we endeavor, quoad conatum, to do the whole Will of God: A Father
bids his Child lift such a burden, the Child is not able to lift it, but he
tries, and does his endeavor to lift it, the Father accepts of it, as if h^
had done it; this is to do Gods Will Evangelically, and God is pleased to take
it in good part, though it be not to satisfaction, yet it is to acceptance.

3. We do Gods Will as it is done in Heaven by the Angels, when we do it
sincerely, sine fuco. To do Gods Will sincerely lies in two things.

1. To do it out of a pure respect to Gods Command. 2. With a pure Eye to Gods
Glory.
1. To do Gods Will out of a pure respect to Gods Command. Abraham's
sacrificing Isaac was contrary to Flesh and Blood, to sacrifice the Son of his
Love, the Son of the Promise, and that no other hand but the Fathers own should
do this, here was hard Service; but because God commanded it, out of pure
respect to the Command, Abraham obeyed: This is to do Gods will aright, when,
though we feel no present Joy or Comfort in Duty, yet because God commands we
obey; not Comfort, but the Command is the Ground of Duty; thus the Angels do
Gods will in Heaven; Gods Command is the weight sets the wheels of their
Obedience a going.

2. To do Gods will sincerely, is to do it with a pure Eye to Gods Glory. The
Pharisees did the will of God in giving Alms, but that which was a dead Fly in
the Ointment, was, that they did not aim at Gods Glory, but vainglory; they
blew a Trumpet* Iehu did the will of God in destroying the Baal worshippers,
and God commended him for doing of it: but because he aimed more at settling
himself in the Kingdom, then the Glory of God, therefore God looked upon it no
better then Murder, and said he would avenge the blood of Iezreel upon the
house of Iehu, Hos. 2.4. Let us look to our ends in Obedience; though we shoot
short, let us take a right aim; one may do Gods will yet not with a perfect
heart: 2 Chronicles. 25.2. Amaziah did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord, but not with a perfect Heart; the Action was right for the matter, but
his aim was not right; that Action which wants a good aim, wants a good issue;
he does Gods Will rightly, that does it uprightly, his end is to honor God,
and lift up his Name in the world. A gracious Soul makes God his Center, as
Ioab when he had taken Rabbah sent for King David, that he might carry away the
glory of the Victory, 2 Samuel 12.27. So when a gracious Soul has done any duty,
he desires that the glory of all may be given to God, 1 Pet. 4.11. That in all
things God may be glorified. This is to do Gods will as the Angels, when we not
only advance Gods Glory, but design his Glory; the Angels are said to cast
their Crowns before the Throne, Rev. 4.10. Crowns are signs of greatest Honor,
but these Crowns the Angels lay at the Lords Feet, to show that they ascribe
the glory of all they do to him.

4. We do Gods will as it is done in Heaven by the Angels, when we do it
willingly, sine murmuratione: The Angels love to be employed in Gods Service;
it is the Angels Heaven to serve God, they willingly descend from Heaven to
Earth; when they bring Messages from God, and glad Tidings to the Church; now
Heaven being a place of such Joy, the Angels would not leave it a Minute of an
Hour, only that they take such infinite delight in doing Gods will; we do
resemble the Angels when we do Gods will willingly, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. And thou
Solomon my Son, serve the Lord with a willing mind. Gods People are called a
willing People, Psalm. 110.3. in Hebrew, Gnam nedaebot, a People of
willingnesses; they give God a free will Offering, though they cannot serve him
perfectly, they serve him willingly; an Hypocrite though he does facere bonum,
yet not velle, he has no delight in duty, he does it rather out of fear of
Hell, then Love to God, when he does do Gods will, yet it is against his will,
Virtus nolentium nulla est. Cain brought his Sacrifice but grudgingly, his
worship was rather a Task, then an Offering, rather Penance then Sacrifice, he
did Gods will, but against his will; we must be carried upon the wings of
Delight in every Duty; Israel were to blow the Trumpets when they offered
Burnt-Offerings, Numb. 10.10. blowing the Trumpets was to show their Joy and
Cheerfulness in serving God we must read and hear the word with Delight, Ier.
15.16. Thy Word was found and I did eat it, and it was unto me the Joy and
Rejoicing of my heart. A pious Soul goes to the word as to a Feast, or as one
would go with delight to hear Music. Sleidan reports that the Protestants in
France had a Church they called Paradise, because when they were in the House
of God, they thought themselves in Paradise: The Saints flock as Doves to the
windows of Gods House, Isa. 60.8. who are these that flock as Doves to the
windows? not that a truly regenerate Person is always in the same cheerful
temper of Obedience, he may sometimes find an indisposition and weariness of
Soul, but his weariness is his burden, he is weary of his weariness, he prays,
weeps, uses all means to regain that alacrity and freedom in Gods Service that
he was wont to have: This is to do Gods will acceptably, when we do it
willingly; it is this crowns all our Services; delight in duty is better then
duty; the Musician is not commended for playing long, but well; it is not how
much we do, but how much we love, Psalm. 119.97. O how love I thy Law! Love is
as Musk among Linen, that perfumes it; Love perfumes Obedience, and makes it
go up to Heaven as Incense; this is doing Gods will as the Angels in Heaven do
it; they are ravished with delight while they are praising God, therefore the
Angels are said to have Harps in their Hands, Rev. 15.2. as a sign of their
cheerfulness in Gods Service.

4. We do Gods will as the Angels in Heaven, when we do Gods Will fervently,
sine remissione, Romans 12.11. Fervent in spirit serving God; (...), a Metaphor
from water when it seeths and boils over; so our Affections should boil over
in zeal (...) fervency; the Angels serve God with fervor and intenseness; the
Angels are called Seraphims, from an Hebrew word which signifies to burn, to
shovv how the Angels are all on fire, Psalm. 104.4. they burn in Love and Zeal
in doing Gods will: Grace turns a Saint into a Seraphim; Aaron must put burning
Coals to the Incense, Exodus 16.12. Incense was a Type of Prayer, burning Coals
of Zeal, to show that the fire of zeal must be put to the Incense of prayer;
Formality starves Duty; when we serve God dully and coldly is this like the
Angels? Duty without fervency is as a Sacrifice without fire; we should ascend
to Heaven in a fiery Chariot of Devotion.

5. We do Gods Will as the Angels in Heaven, when we give God the best in
every Service, Numb. 18.29. Out of all your Gifts, ye shall offer of all the
best thereof. Numb. 28.7. In the holy place shall thou cause the strong Wine to
be poured unto the Lord for a Drink Offering. The Jews might not offer to the
Lord wine that was small, or mixed, but the strong wine, to imply, that we
must offer to God the best, the strongest of our affections; if the Spouse had
a Cup more juicy and spiced, Christ should drink of that, Cant. 8.2. I would
cause thee to drink of spiced Wine, of the juice of my Pomgranate. Thus the
Angels in Heaven do Gods Will, they serve him in the best manner, they give him
their Seraphick high stringed Praises; he who loves God gives him the Cream of
his Obedience; God challenged the fat of all the Sacrifice as his due, Lev.
3.16. Hypocrites care not what Services they bring to God, they think to put
him off with any thing, they put no Cost in their Duties; Genesis 4.3. Cain
brought of the fruit of the Ground. The Holy Ghost took notice of Abel's
Offering, that it was costly, he brought of the Firstlings of his Flock, and of
the Fat thereof, Genesis 4.4. b^t when he speaks of Cain's Offering, he only
says, he brought of the Fruit of the Ground. Then we do Gods Will aright,
when we do offer Pinguia, we dedicate to him the best. Domitian would not have
his Image carved in VVood or Iron, but in Gold: God will have the best we have,
golden Services.

6. We do Gods Will as the Angels in Heaven, when we do it readily and
swiftly; the Angels do not dispute or reason the Case, but as soon as they have
their Charge and Commission from God, they immediately obey, and to show how
ready they are to execute Gods Will, the Cherubims representing the Angels are
described with VVings, to show how swift and forward they are in their
Obedience, it is as if they had wings, Dan. 9.21. The Man Gabriel (that was an
Angel) being caused to fly swiftly: Thus should we do Gods Will as the Angels,
as soon as ever God speaks the Word, we should be ambitious to obey, alas! how
long is it sometimes e^e we can get leave of our hearts to go to a Duty; Christ
went more readily ad Crucem, then we to the Throne of Grace; how many disputes
and excuses have we, is this to do Gods Will as the Angels in Heaven do it? O
let us shake off this backwardness to Duty, as Paul shook of the Viper, nescit
tarda molimina Spiritus sancti gratia; Zeck. 5.9. I saw two Women and the wind
was in their wings: VVings are swift, but wind in the wings great swiftness;
such readiness should be in our Obedience; as Peter as soon as ever Christ
commanded him to let down his Net, at Christ's Word he presently let down the
Net, and you know what success he had, Luke 5.4. It was prophesied of such as
were brought home to Christ, Psalm. 18.44. As Soon as they hear of me they shall
obey me.

7. We do Gods Will as the Angels in Heaven, when we do it constantly; the
Angels are never weary of doing Gods Will, they serve God day and night, Rev.
7.17. thus must we imitate the Angels, Psalm. 106.3. Blessed is he that does
Righteousness at all times. Constancy crowns Obedience, non cepisse sed
perfecisse virtutis est, Cypr. our Obedience must be like the Fire of the Altar
which was continually kept burning, Lev. 6.13. Hypocrites soon give over doing
Gods Will; like the Chrisolite which is of a golden Color, in the Morning it
is very bright to look on, but toward Evening it grows dull, and has lost its
splendour: We should continue in doing Gods Will, because of that great loss
that will befall us if we give over doing Gods Will.

(1.) A loss of Honor, Rev. 3.11. that no man take thy Crown, implying, if the
Church of Philadelphia left off her Obedience she would lose her Crown; viz.
her Honor and Reputation; Apostasy creates Infamy; Judas from an Apostle to be
a Traitor, it was a Dishonor.

(2.) If we give over our Obedience it is a loss of all that has been already
done; as if one should work in silver, and then pick out all the stitches; all
a Man's Prayers are lost, all the Sabbaths he has kept are lost, he does
unravel all his good works, Ezekiel. 18.24. all his Righteousness that he has
done shall not be mentioned; he undoes all he has done: As if one draw a
curious Picture with the Pensil, and then come with his Sponge and wipe out all
again.

(3.) A loss of the Soul and Happiness: We were in a fair way for Heaven, but
by leaving off d^ing Gods Will we miss of the excellent Glory, and are plunged
deeper in Damnation, 2 Pet. 2.21. It had been better not to have known the way
of Righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn from the Holy
Commandment. Therefore let us continue in doing Gods Will: Constancy sets the
Crown upon the head of Obedience. Thus you see how we are to do Gods Will
acceptably.

USE I. Branch. 1. See hence our Impotency, we have no innate power to do Gods
Will: What need pray Thy Will be done, if we have power of our selves to do
it? I wonder Free-willers pray this Petition.

2. Branch. If we are to do Gods Will on Earth as it is done by the Angels in
Heaven, see then the Folly of those who go by a wrong Pattern; they do as the
most of their Neighbors do; if they talk vain on the Sabbath, they do but as
their Neighbors do; if now and then they swear an Oath, it is the Custom of
their Neighbors to do so, but we are to do Gods Will as the Angels in Heaven;
do the Angels do such things? we must make the Angels our Patterns, and not our
Neighbors: if our Neighbors do the Devils will, shall we do so too? If our
Neighbors go to Hell, shall we go thither too for Company?

3. Branch. See here that which may make us long to be in Heaven, then we shall
do Gods Will perfectly, as the Angels do; alas, how defective are we in our
Obedience here; how far do we fall short, we cannot write a Copy of Holiness
without blotting; our holy things are blemished, like the Moon which when it
shines brightest has a dark spot in it: But in Heaven we shall do Gods will
perfectly, as the Angels in Glory.

USE II. Of Reproof.

1. Branch. It reproves such as do not Gods Will; they have the knowledge of
Gods will, (Knowledge they count an Ornament) but though they know Gods Will,
yet they do it not.

(1.) They know what God would have them avoid; they know they should not
swear, Mat. 5.34. Swear not at all: For this sin the Land mourns, Ier. 23.10.
Yet though they pray, Hallowed be thy Name, they profane it by shooting Oaths
like Chain-Bullets against Heaven; they know they should abstain from
Fornication and Uncleanness, yet they cannot but bite at the Devils Hook if he
bait it with Flesh, Jude 7.

(2.) They know what God would have them practice, but they leave undone those
things which they ought to have done; they know it is the will of God they
should be true in their Promises, just in their Dealings, good in their
Relations; but they do not the Will of God; they know they should read the
Scriptures, consult with Gods Oracle, but the Bible like rusty Armor is hung
up and seldom used; they look oftener upon a Pair of Cards then a Bible; they
know their Houses should be Palestrae Pietatis, Nurseries of Piety, yet have no
Face of Religion in them; they do not perfume their Houses with Prayer; what
Hypocrites are these to kneel down in the Church, and lift up their Eyes to
Heaven and say, Thy Will be done, yet have no care at all to do Gods Will; what
is this but to hang out a Flag of Defiance against Heaven? and Rebellion is as
the sin of witchcraft.

2. Branch. It reproves those who do not Gods Will in a right acceptable manner.

(1.) They do not Gods Will entirely; all Gods Will; they will obey God in
some things, but not in other; as if a Servant should do some of your work you
set him about, but not the rest: Iehu destroyed the Idolatry of Baal, but let
the golden Calves of Jeroboam stand, 2 Kings 10.30. Some will observe the
Duties of the Second Table, but not the first: Others make an high Profession,
as if their Tongues had been touched with a Coal from Gods Altar, but live idly
and out of a Calling; these the Apostle complains of, 2 Thessalonians. 3.11. We hear
there are some which walk among you disorderly, working not at all. Living by
Faith and living in a Calling must go together: This is an evil thing, not to
do all Gods Will.

(2.) They do not Gods will ardently; they do not put Coals to the Incense; nor
cheerfully, they bring their Sacrifice, but not their heart; this is far from
doing Gods Will as the Angels; this loses the Reward; how can God like this
to serve him as if we served him not? how can God mind our Duties when we our
selves scarce mind them?

USE III. Of Examination.

Let us examine all our Actions, whether they are according to Gods will: The
will of God is the Rule and Standard, it is the Sun-dial by which we must set
all our Actions; he is no good workman that does not work by Rule; he can be no
good Christian who goes not according to the Rule of Gods will; let us examine
our Actions whether they do quadrare agree to the will of God: Are our speeches
according to Gods will? Are our words savoury, being seasoned with Grace? Is
our Apparel according to Gods will? 1 Timothy 2.9. In like manner that women adorn
themselves in modest Apparel, not wanton and garish to invite Comers. Our Diet
is it according to Gods will? Do we hold the golden Bridle of Temperance, and
only take so much as may rather satisfy Nature then surfeit it; too much Oil
choaks the Lamp: Is our whole carriage and behavior according to Gods will?
Are we patterns of Prudence and Piety? Do we keep up the Credit of Religion,
and shine as Lights in the world? We pray, Thy Will be done as it is in Heaven;
are we like our Pattern? would the Angels do thus if they were on Earth? would
Jesus Christ do this? thus is to Christianize, this is to be Saints of degrees,
when we live our Prayer, and our Actions are the Counter-pane of Gods will.

USE IV. Of Exhortation. Let us be doers of the Will of God; Thy Will be done.

1. It is our Wisdom to do Gods Will: Deuteronomy. 4.6. Keep and do these statutes,
for this is your wisdom.

2. It is our Safety. Has not Misery always attended the doing of our own
Will, and Happiness the doing of Gods Will?

(1.) Misery has always attended the doing of our own Will. Our first Parents
left Gods Will to fulfill their own, in eating the forbidden fruit; and what
came of it? The Apple had a bitter Core in it, they purchased a Curse for
themselves and all their Posterity. King Saul left Gods Will to do his own, he
spares Agag, and the best of the Sheep, and what was the issue, but the loss of
his Kingdom?

(2.) Happiness has always attended the doing of Gods Will. Joseph obeyed
Gods Will in refusing the embraces of his Mistress, and was not this his
Preferment? God raised him to be the second Man in the Kingdom. Daniel did Gods
Will contrary to the Kings Decree, he bowed his Knee in Prayer to God, and did
not God make all Persia bow their Knees to Daniel.

(3.) The way to have our Will is to do Gods Will. Would not we have a Blessing
in our Estate, then let us do Gods Will; Deuteronomy. 28.1, 3. If thou shall hearken
to the voice of the Lord thy God, to do all his commandments, the Lord thy God
will set thee on high above all the nations of the earth: Blessed shall thou be
in the city, and blessed shall thou be in the field: This is the way to have a
good Harvest. Would we not have a Blessing in our Souls, then let us do Gods
Will; Ier. 7.23. Obey my voice and I will be your God; I will entail my self
upon you as an everlasting Portion; my Grace shall be yours to sanctify you,
my Mercy shall be yours to save you: You see you lose nothing by doing Gods
Will, this is the way to have your Will. Let God have his will in being obeyed,
and you shall have your will in being saved.

Quest. How shall we come to do Gods will aright?

Answ. 1. Get sound knowledge; we must know Gods Will before we can do it.
Knowledge is the eye to direct the foot of Obedience: The Papists make
Ignorance the Mother of Devotion, but Christ makes Ignorance the Mother of
Error; Matthew. 22.29. Ye err, not knowing the Scripture. We must know Gods Will
before we can do it aright. Affection without knowledge is like an Horse full
of metal, but his eyes are out.

2. If we would do Gods Will aright, let us labor for self-denial; unless we
deny our own Will, we shall never do Gods Will. Gods Will and ours are like the
Wind and Tide when they are contrary; God wills one thing, we will another; God
calls us to be Crucified to the World, by Nature we love the World; God calls
us to forgive our Enemies, by Nature we bear malice in our Heart; Gods Will and
ours are contrary like the VVind and Tide, and till we can cross our own will,
we shall never fulfill Gods.

3. Let us get humble Hearts: Pride is the spring of disobedience; Exodus 5.2.
Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice? A proud Man thinks it below him
to stoop to Gods Will. Be humble; the humble Soul says, Lord, what will thou
have me do? He puts as it were a blank paper into Gods hands, and bids him
write what he will he will subscribe to it.

4. Beg Grace and Strength of God to do his Will; Psalm. 143.10. Teach me to do
thy will: As if David had said, Lord, I need not be taught to do my own Will, I
can do that fast enough, but teach me to do thy Will; and that which may add
wings to Prayer, is Gods gracious Promise, I will put my Spirit within you, and
cause you to walk in my statutes; Ezekiel. 36.27. If the Loadstone draw the Iron,
it is not hard for the Iron to move; if Gods Spirit enable, it will not be
hard, but rather delightful to do Gods Will.

II. In this Petition, Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven, we pray,
that we may have Grace to submit to Gods Will patiently in what he inflicts:
The Text is to be understood as well of suffering Gods Will as of doing it; so
Maldonat, and the most Judicious Interpreters. I shall speak now of patient
submission to Gods Will in whatever he inflicts: Thy Will be done. This should
be the temper of a good Christian when he is under any disastrous Providence,
to lie quietly at Gods Feet, and say, Thy Will be done.

Quest. 1. What this patient submission to Gods will is not?

Answ. There is something looks like Patience which is not; namely, when a Man
bears a thing because he cannot help it; he takes Affliction as his Fate and
Destiny, therefore he endures that quietly which he cannot avoid; this is
rather Necessity than Patience.

Quest. 2. What it is may stand with patient submission to Gods Will?

Answ. 1. A Christian may be sensible of Affliction, yet patiently submit to
Gods Will We ought not to be Stoics, insensible and unconcerned with Gods
dealings; like the Sons of Deucalion (who as the Poets say) were begotten of a
Stone. Christ was sensible when he sweat great drops of Blood, but there was
submission to Gods Will; Matthew. 26.39. Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will. We are bid to humble our selves under Gods hand, 1 Pet. 5.6. which we
cannot do unless we are sensible of it.

2. A Christian may weep under an Affliction, yet patiently submit to Gods
Will. God allows tears; it is a sin to be (...), without natural affection,
Romans 1.31. Grace makes the Heart tender, strangulat inclusus dolor; weeping
gives vent to sorrow, expletur lachrymis dolor. Joseph wept over his dead
Father; Job when he had so much ill news brought him at once, rent his Mantle,
(an expression of grief) but did not tear his Hair in anger; only Worldly grief
must not be immoderate; a Vein may bleed too much; the Water rises too high
when it overflowes the banks.

3. A Christian may complain in his Affliction, yet be submissive to Gods Will;
Psalm. 142.2. I cried to the Lord with my voice, I poured out my complaint
before him. We may (being under oppression) tell God how it is with us, and
desire him to write down our injuries. Shall not the Child complain to his
Father when he is wronged? An holy complaint may stand with patient submission
to Gods Will; but though we may complain to God, we must not complain of God.

Quest. 3. What it is cannot stand with patient submission to Gods Will?

Answ. 1. Discontentedness with Providence. Discontent has a mixture of grief
and anger in it, and both these must needs raise a storm of Passion in the
Soul. God having touched the apple of our Eye, and smitten us in that we loved,
we are touchy and sullen, and God shall not have a good look from us; Genesis 4.6.
Why art thou wroth? Like a sullen Bird that is angry, and beats her self
against the Cage.

3. Murmuring cannot stand with submission to Gods Will: Murmuring is the
height of impatience; it is a kind of mutinee in the Soul against God; Numb.
21.5. The people spoke against God. When a Cloud of Sorrow is gathered in the
Soul, and this Cloud does not only drop into Tears, but out of this Cloud come
Hailstones, murmuring word^ against God, this is far from patient submission
to Gods Will. When water is hot the scum boils up; when the Heart is heated
with anger against God, then this scum of murmuring boils up. Murmuring is very
evil, it springs, 1. From Pride; Men think they have deserved better at Gods
hands, and when they begin to swell they spit Poison. 2. Distrust; Men believe
not that God can make a Treacle of Poison, bring good out of all their
troubles, therefore they murmur; Psalm. 106.24. They believed not his word, but
murmured. Men murmur at Gods Providence because they distrust his Promises;
God has much ado to bear this Sin, Numb. 14.27. this is far from submission to
Gods Will.

3. Discomposedness of Spirit cannot stand with quiet submission to Gods Will.
When a Man says, I am so encompassed with trouble that I know not how to get
out; Head and Heart are so taken up that a Person is not fit to pray. When the
strings of a Lute are snarled, the Lute can make no good Music; so when a
Christians Spirits are perplexed and disturbed, he cannot make Melody in his
Heart to the Lord. To be under a discomposure of Mind, is as when an Army is
routed, one runs this way, and another that, the Army is put into disorder; so
when a Christian is in an hurry of Mind, his Thoughts run up and down
distracted, as if he were undone; this cannot stand with patient submission to
Gods Will.

4. Self-apology cannot stand with submission to Gods Will; instead of being
humbled under Gods hand a Person justifies himself. A proud Sinner stands upon
his own defense, and is ready to accuse God of unrighteousness, which is as if
we should tax the Sun with darkness: This is far from submission to Gods Will.
God smote Ionahs goard, and he stands upon his own vindication; Jonah 4.9. I do
well to be angry to the death: What, to be angry with God? And to justify
this, I do well to be angry. This was strange to come from a Prophet, and was
far from this Prayer Christ has taught us, Thy Will be done.

Quest. 4. What this patient submission to Gods Will is?

Answ. It is a gracious frame of Soul, whereby a Christian is content to be at
Gods dispose, and does acquiesce in his Wisdom; 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord,
let him do what seems him good: Acts 21.14. The will of the Lord be done.
That I may further illustrate this, I shall show you wherein this submission to
Gods Will lies; it lies chiefly in three things.

(1.) In acknowledging Gods hand; seeing God in the Affliction: Job 5.6.
Affliction arises not out of the dust; it comes not by chance. Job did eye God
in all that befell him; Job 1.22. The Lord has taken away: He complains not of
the Chaldeans, or the influence of the Planets, he looks beyond second Causes,
he sees God in the Affliction, The Lord has taken away. There can be no
submission to Gods Will till there be an acknowledging of Gods hand.

(2.) Patient submission to Gods Will lies in our justifying of God: Psalm.
22.2. O my God I cry unto thee, yet thou hear not, thou turnest a deaf ear
to me in my affliction; ver. 3. But thou art holy. God is Holy and Just, not
only when he punishes the Wicked, but when he afflicts the Righteous. Though
God put Wormwood in our Cup, yet we vindicate God, and proclaim his
Righteousness. As Mauritius the Emperor, when he saw his Sons slain before his
eyes, Iustus es Domine, Righteous art thou O Lord in all thy ways. We justify
God, and confess he punishes us less than we deserve; Ezra 9.13.

(3.) Patient submission to Gods Will lies in the accepting of the punishment;
Lev. 26.41. And they then accept of the punishment of their iniquity. Accepting
of the punishment; that is, taking all that God does in good part. He who
accepts of the punishment, says, Good is the Rod of the Lord; he kisseth the
Rod, yea blesses God that he would use such a Merciful severity, rather to
afflict him than lose him. This is patient submission to Gods Will.

This patient submission to Gods Will in Affliction shows a great deal of
Wisdom and Piety. The skill of a Pilot is most discerned in a storm, and a
Christians Grace in the storm of Affliction; and indeed this submission to Gods
Will is most requisite for us while we live here in this lower Re^^gion; in
Heaven there will be no need of Patience, no more than there is need of the
Star light when the Sun shines. In Heaven there will be all joy, and what need
of Patience then? It requires no Patience to wear a Crown of Gold, but while we
live here in a Valley of Tears, there needs patient submission to Gods Will,
Heb. 10.36. Ye have need of patience.

1. The Lord sometimes lays heavy Afflictions upon us; Psalm. 38.2. Thy hand
presses me sore. The word in the Original for afflicted, signifies to be
melted. God sometimes melts his People in a Furnace.

2. God sometimes lays diverse Afflictions on us: Job 19.17. He multiplies my
wound. God shoots diverse sorts of Arrows.

(1.) Sometimes God afflicts with Poverty. The Widow had nothing left her save
a pot of Oil, 1 Kings 17.12. Poverty is a great Temptation. (...), Menand. To
have an Estate boiled away almost to nothing, is hard to Flesh and Blood; Ruth
1.20. Call me not Naomi but Mara: I went out full and the Lord has brought me
home again empty. This exposes to Contempt. When the Prodigal was poor, his
Brother was ashamed to own him: Luke. 15.30. This thy Son; he said not this my
Brother, but this thy Son; he scorned to call him Brother. When the Deer is
shot and bleeds, the rest of the herd push it away; when God shoots the Arrow
of Poverty at one, others are ready to push him away. When Terence was grown
poor, his Friend Scipio cast him off. The Muses ( Jupiters Daughters) the Poets
feign, had no Suitors because they wanted a Dowry.

(2.) God sometimes afflicts with Reproach* Such as have the light of Grace
shining in them, yet may be eclipsed in their Name. The Primitive Christians
were reproached as if they were guilty of Incest, says Tertullian. Luther was
called, A Trumpeter of Rebellion. David calls reproach an heartbreaking; Psalm.
69.20. this God lets his dear Saints be often exercised with. Dirt may be cast
upon a Pearl; those Names may be blotted which are written in the Book of Life.
Sincerity though it shields from Hell, yet not from Slander.

(3.) God sometimes afflicts with loss of dear Relations; Ezekiel. 24.16. Son of
man behold I take away from thee the desire of thine eyes with a stroke: This
is like a pulling away a Limb from the Body. He takes away an holy Child;
Jacobs Life was bound up in Benjamin, Genesis 44.30. and that which puts Teeth
into the Cross, and is worse than the loss of Children, is, when they are
continued as living Crosses; where the Parents expected Honey, there to have
Wormwood. What greater cut to a Godly Parent than a Child who disclaims his
Fathers God! A Corrosive applied to the Body may do well, but a bad Child is a
Corrosive to the Heart. Such an undutiful Son had David who conspired Treason,
and would not only have taken away his Fathers Crown, but his Life.

(4.) God sometimes afflicts with a (...), infirmness of Body; scarce a well
day. Sickness takes away the Comfort of Life, and makes one in Deaths often, thus
God tryes his People with various Afflictions, so that there is need of
Patience to submit to Gods Will. He who has diverse Bullets shot at him needs
Armor; when diverse Afflictions assault, we need Patience as Armor of Proof.

3. God sometimes lets the Affliction continue long, Psalm. 74.9. as it is with
Diseases, there are some Chronical, that linger and hang about the Body several
years together; so it is with Affliction, the Lord is pleased to exercise many
of his precious ones with Chronical Afflictions, such as lie upon them a long
time; so that in all these Cases we need Patience and submissiveness of Spirit
to Gods Will.

USE I. It reproves such as have not yet learned this part of the Lords Prayer,
Thy Will be done; they have only said it, but not learned it. If things be not
according to their Mind, if the Wind of Providence crosses the Tide of their
Will, they are discontented and querulous, where is now submission of Will to
God? To be displeased with God if things do not please us, is this to lie at
Gods feet, and acquiesce in his Will? This is a very bad temper of Spirit, and
God may justly punish us by letting us have our Will. Rachel cried, Give me
Children, or I dye, Genesis 30.1. God let her have a Child, but it cost her her
Life; Genesis 35.18. Israel not content with Manna (Angels Food) they must have
Quails to their Manna, God punished them by letting them have their Will; Numb.
11.31. There went sorth a wind from the Lord, and brought quails: ver. 33. And
while the flesh was yet between their teeth, the wrath of the Lord was kindled
against them, and the Lord smote them with a great plague. They had better been
without their Quails than had such sower sauce to them. Many have importunately
desired the Life of a Child, and could not bring their Wills to Gods to be
content to part with it, and the Lord has punished them by letting them have
their Will; the Child has lived and been a burden to them. Seeing their Wills
crossed God, their Child shall cross them.

USE II. Of Exhortation. Let us be exhorted whatever troubles God does exercise
us with, aequo animo far, to resign up our Wills to God, and say, Thy Will be
done: Which is fittest, that God should bring his will to ours, or we bring our
will to his? Say as Eli, 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord, let him do what seems
him good: And as David, 2 Samuel 15.26. Behold here am I, let him do to me as
seems good unto him. It was the saying of Harpulas, Placet mihi quod. Regi
placet, that pleases me which pleases the King: So should we say, that which
pleases God pleases us: Thy Will be done. Some have not yet learned this art
of submission to God, and truly he who wants Patience in Affliction, is like a
Soldier in Battle who wants Armor.

Quest. When do we not as we ought submit to Gods Will in Affliction?

Answ. 1. When we have hard thoughts of God, and our Hearts begin to swell
against him.

2. When we are so troubled at our present Affliction that we are unfit for
Duty. We can mourn as Doves, but not pray or praise God. We are so discomposed
that we are not fit to hearken to any good Counsel; Exodus 6.9. They hearkened
not to Moses for anguish of spirit. Israel were so full of grief under their
present burdens, that they minded not what Moses said, though he came with a
Message from God to them; They hearkened not to Moses for anguish of spirit.

3. We do not submit as we ought to Gods Will, when we labor to break loose
from Affliction by indirect means. Many to rid themselves out of trouble run
themselves into Sin. When God has bound them with the cords of Affliction,
they go to the Devil to loosen their bands. Better it is to stay in Affliction,
than to sin our selves out of Affliction. O let us learn to stoop to Gods Will
in all afflictive Providence.

Quest. But how shall we bring our selves to this Christian Temper in all
Occurrences of Providence, patiently to acquiesce in Gods Will, and say, Thy
Will be done? We know not what Trials Personal or National we may be exercised
with. We seem now to be under the Planet Saturn, which has a malignant Aspect.
Our Ship is steered so strangely, that we are in danger on one hand of the
Sands, on the other hand of the Rocks. If Affliction comes how shall we keep a
Christian Decorum, how shall we bear things with equanimity of mind, and say,
Thy Will be done?

Answ. The means for a quiet resignation to Gods Will in Affliction is;

1. Judicious Consideration; Eccles. 7.14. In the day of adversity consider.
When any thing burdens us, or runs cross to our desires, did we but sit down
and consider, and weigh things in the balance of Judgment, it would much quiet
our Minds, and subject our Wills to God; In the day of adversity consider.
Consideration would be as David's Harp, to charm down the evil Spirit of
frowardness and discontent.

Quest. But what should we consider?

Answ. That which may make us submit to God in Affliction, and say, Thy Will be
done, is,

1. To consider that the present state of Life is subject to Afflictions, as a
Seamans Life is subject to storms: Far quam sortem omnes patiuntur nemo
recusat: Job 5.7. Man is born to trouble; he is heir apparent to it; he comes
into the World with a cry, and goes out with a groan. Ea lege nati sumus. The
World is a place where much Wormwood grows; Lam. 3.15. He has filled me with
bitterness, Hebr. Bammerorim, with bitternesses, he has made me drunk with
wormwood. Troubles arise like sparks out of a Furnace. Afflictions are some of
the Thorns which the Earth after the Curse brings forth. We may as well think
to stop the Chariot of the Sun when it is in its swift motion, as put a stop to
trouble; the consideration of this our Life is exposed to eclipses and
sufferings should make us say with Patience, Thy Will be done. Shall a Mariner
be angry that he meets with a storm at Sea?

2. Consideration, God has a special hand in the disposal of all Occurrences
that fall out. Job eyed God in the Affliction, chap. 1.21. The Lord has taken
away: He does not complain of the Sabeans, or the Influences of the Planets, he
looked beyond all second Causes, he saw God in the Affliction, and that made
him cheerfully submit, Blessed be the name of the Lord. And Christ looked
beyond Judas and Pilate, he looked to Gods determinate Counsel in delivering
him up to be Crucified, Acts 4.28. this made him say, Matthew. 26.39. Father, not
as I will, but as thou will: It Is vain to quarrel with instruments. Wicked Men
are but a Rod in Gods hand; Isa. 10.5. O Assyrian the rod of my anger. Whoever
brings an Affliction, God sends it: The consideration of this would make us
say, Thy Will be done; what God does he sees a reason for. We read of a wheel
within a wheel, Ezekiel. 1.15. the outward wheel which turns all, is Providence;
the wheel within this wheel, is Gods Decree; this believed would rock the Heart
quiet. Shall we mutiny at that which God does? We may as well quarrel with the
works of Creation, as the works of Providence.

3. Consideration, which may make us humbly to submit to Gods Will is, that
there is a necessity of Affliction; 1 Pet. 1.6. (If need be) ye are in
heaviness. It is needful some things be kept in brine. Afflictions are needful
upon several accounts.

(1.) To keep us Humble. Often times there is no other way to have the heart low
but by being brought low: 2 Chronicles. 33.12. When Manasseh was in affliction, he
humbled himself greatly. Corrections are Corrosives to eat out the proud flesh;
Lam. 3.19. Remembering my misery, the wormwood and the gall, my soul is humbled
in me.

(2.) It is necessary that there should be Affliction, for if God did not
sometimes bring us into Affliction, how could his power be seen in bringing us
out? Had not Israel been in the Egyptian Furnace, God had lost his glory in
their deliverance.

(3.) If there were no Affliction, then many parts of Scripture could not be
fulfilled. God has promised to help us bear Affliction, and Psalm. 37.24, 39.
how could we experience Gods supporting us in trouble, if we did not sometime
meet with it? God has promised to give us Joy in Affliction, John. 16.20. how
could we taste this honey of Joy, if we were not sometimes in Affliction?
Again, God has promised to wipe away tears from our eyes, Isa. 25.8. how could
God wipe away our tears in Heaven, if we never shed any? So that in several
respects there is an absolute necessity that we should meet with Affliction,
and shall not we quietly submit, and say, Lord, I see there is a necessity of
it; Thy Will be done.

4. Consideration, to make us submit to Gods Will in Affliction is, that
whatever we feel, it is nothing but what we have brought upon our selves; we
put a Rod into Gods hand to chastise us. Christian, God lays thy Cross on
thee, but it is of thy own making. If a Man's field be full of Tares, it is
nothing but what he has sown in it: If thou reapest a bitter crop of
Affliction, it is nothing but what thou thy self have sown. The cords that
pinch thee are of thy own twisting; Me me adsum qui feci. If Children will eat
green Fruit, they may thank themselves if they are sick; if we eat the
forbidden Fruit, no wonder to feel it gripe. Sin is the Trojan Horse that lands
an Army of Afflictions upon us; Ier. 4.15. A voice publishes affliction: ver.
18. Thy way and thy doings have procured these things unto thee, this is thy
wickedness. If we by Sin run our selves into arrears with God, no wonder if he
set Affliction as a Sergeant on our back to arrest us. This may make us
patiently submit to God in Affliction, and say, Thy Will be done. We have no
cause to complain of God, it is nothing but what our Sins have merited. Ier.
2.17. Have not thou procured this unto thy self? The Cross though it be of Gods
laying, it is of our own making; say then as Mica 7.^9 I will bear the
Indignation of the Lord because I have sinned against him.

5. Consideration, to cause submission to Gods Will in Affliction; God is now
about to make an Experiment, he does it to prove and try us; Psalm. 66.10. Thou
O God, have tried us as Silver is tried, thou laidst Affliction upon our Loins.
If there were no Affliction, how should God have an Opportunity to try Men?
Hypocrites can sail in a Pleasure-boat, serve God in Prosperity; but when we
can keep close to God in times of danger, when we can trust God when we have no
Pawn, and love God when we have no smile; here is the trial of Sincerity! This
may make us say, Thy Will be done. God is only trying us, what hurt is in that?
What is the gold worse for being tried?

6. Consideration, to make us submit to God in Affliction, and say, Thy Will be
done, is, that in all our Crosses God has a kindness for us; as there was no
Night so dark, but Israel had a Pillar of Fire to give Light; so there is no
Condition so cloudy, but we may see that which gives Light of Comfort: David
would sing of Mercy and Judgment, Psalm. 101.1. This may make our Wills
cheerfully submit to Gods, to consider, in every Path of Providence we may see
a Footstep of kindness.

Quest. What kindness is there in Affliction, when God seems most unkind?

Answ. 1. There is kindness in Affliction, in that there is love in it; (...),
Chrysostom. Gods Rod and Gods Love may stand together, Heb. 12.6. Whom the Lord
loves he chasteneth, Whom he cockereth above the rest, so Mercer: As Abraham
when he lift up his hand to sacrifice Isaac, loved him; so when God afflicts
his People, and seems to sacrifice their outward Comforts, yet loves them: The
Husbandman loves his Vine when he cuts it and makes it bleed; and shall not we
submit to God? shall we quarrel with that which has kindness in it, which
comes in love? The Chyrurgion binds the Patient, and launceth him, but no wise
Man will quarrel with the Chyrurgion, it is in Love, and in order to a Cure.

2. There is kindness in Affliction, in that God deals with us now as Children,
Heb. 12.7. If you endure Chastening, God deals with you as Sons; God had one
Son without sin, but no son without stripes. Affliction is a Badge of Adoption,
it is Dei Sigillum, says Tertullian, it is Gods Seal by which he marks us for
his own. When Munster that holy Man lay sick, his Friends asked him how he did?
he pointed to his Sores, saying, hae sunt gemme Dei, these are the Jewels with
which God decks his Children; shall not we then say? Thy Will be done. Lord,
there is kindness in the Cross, thou usest us as Children, the Rod of Discipline
is to fit us for the Inheritance.

3. There is kindness that God has in all our Afflictions left us a Promise;
in the most cloudy Providence the Promise appears as a Rainbow in the Cloud.

(1.) That we shall have Gods promise with us, Psalm. 91.15. I will be with him
in Trouble. It cannot be ill with that Man with whom God is: I will be with
him, i. e. to support, sanctify, sweeten; Gods presence is a sweetening
ingredient into every Affliction. I had rather be in a Prison and have Gods
Presence, then be in a Palace and want it.

(2.) Promise, that he will lay no more upon us then he will enable us to bear,
1 Cor: 10.13. God will not try us beyond our strength; either God will make the
Yoke lighter, or our Faith stronger; may not this make us submit our Wills to
God when Afflictions have so much kindness in them? In all our Trials God has
left us promises, which are like Manna in the Wilderness.

4. This is great kindness that all the Troubles that befall us shall be for our
profit, Heb. 12. He (...) for our profit.

Quest. But what profit is in affliction?

Answ. 1. Afflictions are disciplinary, they teach us Schola Crucis, Schola
Lucis: Many Psalms have this Inscription Maschil, a Psalm giving Instruction:
Affliction may have this Inscription upon it Maschil, an Affliction giving
Instruction, Mica. 6.9. Hear ye the Rod. Luther says he could never rightly
understand some of the Psalms till he was in Affliction, Judge. 8.16. Gideon
took Thorns of the Wilderness and Briars, and with them he taught the Men of
Succoth: God by the Thorns and Briars of Affliction teaches us.

(1.) Affliction shows us more of our own hearts then ever: Water in a
Glass-Vial looks clear, but set it on the fire and the Scum boils up: When God
sets us upon the fire, then we see that Corruption boils up which we did not
discern before. Sharp Afflictions are to the Soul as a soaking Rain to the
House, we know not that there are such holes in the House, till the shower
comes, and then we see it drop down here and there; so we before did not know
that there were such unmortified Lusts in the Soul, till the storm of
Affliction comes, then we spy unbelief, impatience, carnal fear, we see it drop
down in many places. Thus Affliction is a sacred Collyrium, it clears our
Eyesight; the Rod gives Wisdom.

(2.) Affliction brings those sins to Remembrance, which before were buried in
the Grave of Forgetfulness; Ioseph's Brethren for twenty Years together were
not at all troubled for their sin in selling their Brother, but when they came
into Egypt and began to be in straits, then their sin in selling their Brother
came into their Remembrance, and their Hearts did smite them, Genesis 42.21. They
said one to another, we are verily guilty concerning our Brother. When a Man is
in distress, now his sin comes fresh into his Mind, Conscience makes a
Rehearsal Sermon of all the Evils which have passed in his Life, now his
expense of precious time, his Sabbath-breaking, his slighting of the word, come
into his Remembrance, and he goes out with Peter and weeps bitterly. Thus the
Rod gives Wisdom, it shows the hidden evil of the heart, and brings former sins
to Remembrance.

2. There is Profit it Affliction, as it quickens a Spirit of Prayer, premuntur
justi ut pressi clament. Jonah was asleep in the Ship, but at Prayer in the
Whales Belly; perhaps in a time of health and prosperity, we prayed in a cold
formal manner, we put no coals to the Incense, we did scarce mind our own
prayers, and how should God mind them, now God sends some cross or other to
make us stir up our selves to take hold of God: When Jacob was in fear of his
life by his Brother, then he wrestles with God and weeps in prayer, and would
not leave God till he had blessed him, Hos. 12.4. It Is with many of Gods
Children as with those who formerly had the Swe^ting sickness in this Land,
'twas a sleepy disease, if they slept they died, therefore to keep them waking
they were smitten with Rosemary Branches; so the Lord uses Affliction as a
Rosemary Branch to keep us from sleeping, and to awaken a Spirit of Prayer,
Isa. 26.16. They poured out a Prayer, when thy Chastening was upon them; now
their Prayer pierced the Heaven: In times of Trouble we pray feelingly, and we
never pray so fervently as when we pray feelingly, and is not this for our
profit?

3. Affliction is for our profit, as it is a means to expectorate and purge out
our sin, Isa. 77.9. By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged;
(...), Arist. Affliction is Gods Physic to expel the noxious humor, it cures
the Imposthume of Pride, the Fever of Lust, and is not this for our profit:
Affliction is Gods File to fetch off our Rust, his flail to thresh off our
Husks: The Water of Affliction is not to drown us, but to wash off our Spots.

4. To be under the black Rod is profitable, in that hereby we grow more
serious and are more careful to clear our Evidences for Heaven: In times of
Prosperity when the Rock poured out Rivers of Oil, Job 29 6. we were careless
in getting, at least clearing our Title to Glory; had many no better Evidences
for their Land then they have for their Salvation, they were but in an ill
case; but when an hour of Trouble comes, we begin to look after our spiritual
Evidences, and see how things stand between God and our Souls; and is it not
for our profit to see our Interest in Christ more cleared then ever?

5. Affliction is for our profit, as it is a means to take us more off from the
World; the world often proves not only a Spiders Web, but a Cockatrice Egg;
pernicious worldly things are great Enchantments, they are ^etinaculaspei,
Tertul. they hinder us in our passage to Heaven; if a Clock be over-wound it
stands still; so when the heart is wound up too much to the world, it stands
still to Heavenly things; Affliction sounds a retreat to call us off the
immoderate pursuit of earthly things; when things are frozen and congealed
together the only way to separate them is by Fire; so when the heart and the
world are congealed together, God has no better way to separate them then by
the Fire of Affliction.

6. Affliction is for our profit, as it is a Refiner, it works us to further
decrees of Sanctity, Heb. 12.10. He for our profit, that we might be partakers
of his Holiness. The Vessels of Mercy are the brighter for scouring; you pour
water on your Linen when you would whiten it; God pours the waters of
Affliction upon us to lay our Souls a whitening: The Leaves of the Fig Tree and
Root are bitter, but the Fruit is sweet: Afflictions are in themselves bitter,
but they bring forth the sweet fruits of Righteousness, Heb. 12.11. This may
make us submit to God, and say, Thy Will be done; there is kindness in
Affliction, it is for our spiritual profit.

5. There Is kindness in Affliction, in that there is no condition so bad but it
might be worse; when it is duskish it might be darker; God does not make our
Cross so heavy as he might, he does not stir up all his Anger, Psalm. 78.38. He
does not put so many Nails in our Yoke, so much Wormwood in our Cup as he
might; does God chastise thy Body? he might torture thy Conscience; does he cut
thee short? he might cut thee off: The Lord might make our Chain heavier; Is it
a burning-Feaver? it might have been the burning Lake: Does God use the Pruning
Knife to lop thee? he might bring his Axe to hew thee down. Ezekiel. 47.3. The
Waters were up to the Ankles: Do the Waters of Affliction come up to the
Ankles? God might make them rise higher, nay, he might drown thee in the
Waters; this may make us submit quietly and say, Thy Will be done, because
there is so much kindness in it; whereas God uses the Rod, he might use the
Scorpion.

6. There is kindness in Affliction, in that your case is not so bad as others;
they are always upon the Rack; they spend their Years with sighing, Psalm.
31.10. Have you a gentle fit of an Ague? others cry out of the Stone and
Strangullion: Do you bear the wrath of Men? others bear the wrath of God; you
have but a single trial, others have them twisted together; God shoots but one
Arrow at you, he shoots a Shower of Arrows at others; is there not kindness in
all this? We are apt to say, never any suffered as we; was it not worse with
Lazarus, who was so full of Sores that the Dogs took pity on him, and licked
his Sores? Nay, was it not worse with Christ, who lived poor and died cursed?
May not this cause us to say, Thy Will be done; there is kindness in it; that
God deals not so severely with us as others.

7. There is kindness in Affliction, in that (if we belong to God) it is all
the Hell we shall have; some have two Hells, they suffer in their Body and
Conscience, here is one Hell, and another Hell is to come, unquenchable Fire;
Judas had two Hells, but a Child of God has but one Hell; Lazarus had all his
Hell here, he was full of sores, but had a Convoy of Angels to carry him to
Heaven when he dyed: Say then, Lo, if this be the worst I shall have, if this
be all my Hell, I will patiently acquiesce, Thy Will be done.

8. There is kindness, in that God gives gracious supports in Affliction; if he
strikes with one hand he will support with the other, Deuteronomy. 33.27. Underneath
are the everlasting Arms. There is not the least Trial, but if God did desert
us, and not assist us with his Grace, we should sink under it: The Frown of a
great Man, the fear of a Reproach; Peter was frighted at the Voice of a Maid,
Mat. 26.69. O therefore what Mercy is it to have Christ strengthen us, and as
it were bear the heaviest part of the Cross with us. One said, I have no
ravishing Joys in my sickness, but I bless God I have sweet supports: and
should not this cause submission to Gods Will, and make us say, Lo, if thou art
so kind as to bear us up in Affliction, that we do not faint, put us into what
Wine Press, thou please, Thy Will be done.

9. There is kindness in Affliction, in that it is preventive.

(1.) God by this stroke of his would prevent some sin; Paul's Thorn in the
Flesh was to prevent his being lifted up in Pride, 2 Cor. 12.7. As Affliction
is sometimes sent for the punishing of sin, so sometimes for the preventing of
sin: Prosperity exposes to much evil. It Is hard to carry a full Cup without
spilling, and a full Estate without sinning. Gods People know not how much they
are beholding to their Affliction, they might have fallen into some Scandal,
had not God set an Hedge of Thorns in their way to stop them; what kindness is
this. God lets us fall into sufferings to prevent falling into Snares; say
then, Lord do as it seems good in thy sight, Thy Will be done.

(2.) God by Affliction would prevent Damnation, 1 Cor. 11.32. We are corrected
in the World, that we may not be condemned with the World. A Man by falling
into the Briars is saved from falling into the River: God lets us fall into the
Briars of Affliction that we may not drown in Perdition: It is a great favor
when a lesser punishment is inflicted to prevent a greater: Is it not Clemency
in the Judge when he lays some light Penalty on the Prisoner, and saves his
life; so when God lays upon us light Affliction, and saves us from wrath to
come; as Pilate said, Luke 23.16. (...), I will chastise him and let him go; so
God chastises his Children and lets them go, frees them from eternal torment:
What is a drop of sorrow the Godly taste, to that sea of Wrath the Wicked shall
be drinking of to all Eternity; O what kindness is here, may not this make us
say, Thy Will be done; it is preventing Physic.

10. There is kindness, in that God does mix his Providence, Hab. 3.2. In
Anger he remembers Mercy: Not all pure Gall but some Honey mixed with it.
Ashurs Shoes were Iron and Brass, but his Foot was dipped in Oil, Genesis 33.24.
Affliction is the shoo of Brass, but God causes the Foot to be dipped in Oil.
As the Limner mixeth with his dark shadows bright Colors; so the wise God
mingles the dark, and the bright Color, Crosses and Blessings. The Body is
afflicted, but within is Peace of Conscience; there is a Blessing: Joseph was
sold into Egppt, and put in Prison; there was the dark side of the Cloud: Job
lost all that ever he had, his Skin was clothed with Boils and Ulcers; here was
a sad Providence, but God gave a Testimony from Heaven of Jobs Integrity, and
did afterward double his Estate, Job. 42.10. The Lord gave Job twice as much.
Here was the goodness of God seen toward Job. God does checquer his works of
Providence, and shall not we submit and say, Lord if thou art so kind mixing so
many bright Colors with my dark Condition, Thy Will be done.

11. There is kindness in Affliction in that God does moderate his Stroke, Ier.
30.11. I will correct thee in Measure. God will in the day of his East Wind
stay his rough wind, Isa. 27.8. The Physician that understands the Crasis and
temper of the patient, will not give too strong Physic for the Body nor will
he give one Dram or Scruple too much. God knows our frame he will not
over-afflict, he will not stretch the strings of his Viol too hard least they
break; and is there not kindness in all this? may not this work our hearts to
submission? Lord if thou usest so much gentleness and correctest in measure,
Thy Will be done.

12. There is kindness in Affliction, in that God often sweetens it with divine
Consolation, 2 Cor. 1.4. Who comfort us in all our Tribulation: After a
bitter Potion, a lump of Sugar. God comforts in Affliction,

(1.) Partly by his Word, Psalm. 119.50. This is my Comfort in my Affliction,
for thy Word has quickened me. The Promises of the word are a shop of Cordials.

(2.) God comforts by his Spirit. Philip Landtgrave of Hesse said that in his
troubles, se divinas Martyrum consolationes sensisse, he felt the divine
Consolations of the Martyrs. David had his Pilgrimage-Songs, Psalm. 119.54. and
St. Paul his Prison-Songs, Act. 16.25. Thus God candies our Wormwood with
Sugar, and makes us gather Grapes of Thorns. Some of the Saints have had such
ravishing Joys in Affliction, that they had rather endure their Sufferings,
then want their Comforts: O how much kindness is in the Cross! In the Belly of
this Lion is an Honeycomb; may not this make us cheerfully submit to Gods
Will, when God lines the Yoke with Comfort, and gives us honey at the end of
the Rod?

13. There is kindness in Affliction, in that God does curtail and shorten it,
he will not let it lie on too long, Isa. 57.16. I will not contend for ever,
least the Spirit should fail before me. God will give his People a Writ of
Ease, and proclaim a Year of Jubilee* the wicked may plow upon the backs of the
Saints, but God will cut their Traces, Psalm. 129.4. The Goldsmith will not let
his gold lie any longer in the Furnace then till it is purified. The Wicked
must drink a Sea of Wrath, but the Godly have only a Cup of Affliction, Isa.
51.17. and God will say, Let this Cup pass away. Affliction may be compared to
Frost, it will break and Spring Flowers will come on, Isa. 35. Sorrow and
sighing shall fly away. Affliction has a Sting, but withal a Wing, sorrow
shall fly away; this Land Flood shall be dried up; if then there be so much
kindness in the Cross, God will cause a Cessation of trouble, say then, Fiat
Voluntas tua, Thy Will be done.

14. Vlt. There is kindness in Affliction, in that it is a means to make us
happy, Job 5.17. Behold, happy is the Man whom God corrects. This seems
strange to flesh and blood that Affliction should make one happy; when Moses
saw the bush burning and not consumed, I will (s^ith he) turn aside and see
this strange sight, Exodus 3.3. So here is a strange sight, a Man afflicted, yet
happy: The World counts them happy who can escape Affliction, but happy is the
Man whom God corrects.

Quest. But how do Afflictions contribute to our happiness?

Resp. 1. As they are a means to bring us nearer to God; the Loadstone of
Prosperity does not draw us so near to God as the Cords of Affliction: When
the Prodigal was pinched with want, then says he, I will arise and go to my
Father, Luke 15.18. The Deluge brought the Dove to the Ark: The Floods of
Sorrow make us hasten to Christ.

2. Afflictions make us happy, as they are Manuductions to Glory. The Storm
drives the Ship into the harbor: Happy is that Storm which drives the Soul
into the Heavenly harbor; is it not better to go through affliction to glory,
then through pleasure to misery? not that afflictions merit glory, no cross
ever merited, but that which Christ endured; but they do disponere, fit, and
prepare us for glory. Think, O Christian, what Affliction leads to, it leads to
Paradise, where are Rivers of Pleasure always running; may not this make us
cheerfully submit to Gods Will, and say, Lord if there be so much kindness in
Affliction, if all thou do is to make us happy, Thy Will be done.

7. Consideration, It is Gods ordinary course to keep his People to a bitter
Diet-Drink, and exercise them with great Trials: Affliction is the beaten Road
all the Saints have gone in: The lively Stones in the Spiritual building have
been all hewn and polished: Christ's Lilly has grown among the Thorns, 2 Timothy
3.12. All that will live Godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. It Is
too much for a Christian to have two Heavens, that is more than Christ had. It
has been ever the lot of the Saints to encounter with sore trials; Both of the
Prophets, Iam. 5.10. Take my brethren the Prophets for an example of suffering
affliction: And of the Apostles, Peter was Crucified with his Head downward,
James beheaded by Herod, John banished into the Isle of Patmos, the Apostle
Thomas thrust through with a spear, (who was chosen Apostle in Judas room)
Matthias stoned to death, Luke the Evangelist hanged on an Olive Tree. Those
Saints of whom the World was not worthy did pass under the Rod, Hebr. 11.36.
Christ's Kingdom is Regnum Crucis, this is the way God has always gone in,
such as God intends to save from Hell, yet he does not save from the Cross; the
consideration of this should quiet our Minds in Affliction, and make us say,
Thy Will be done. Do we think God will alter his course of Providence for us?
Why should we look for exemption from trouble more than others? Why should we
think to tread only upon Roses and Violets, when Prophets and Apostles have
marched through the Briars to Heaven?

8. Consideration, God has done that for thee Christian, which may make thee
content to suffer any thing at his hand, and say, Thy Will be done.

(1.) He has adopted thee for his Child. David thought it no small Honor to
be the Kings Son in Law, 1 Samuel 18.18. what an Honor is it to derive thy
pedigree from Heaven, to be born of God; why then art thou troubled, and
murmurest at every slight cross? As Ionadab said to Amnon, 2 Samuel 13.4. Why art
thou, being the Kings Son, lean? So why art thou who art Son or Daughter to the
King of Heaven, troubled at these petty things? What the Kings Son, and look
lean? This may quiet thy Spirit, and bring thy Will to Gods; he has dignified
thee with Honor, he made thee his Son and Heir, and will entail a Kingdom on
thee.

(2.) God has given thee Christ. Christ is communis thesaurus, a Magazine and
Storehouse of all Heavenly Treasure; a Pearl of Price to enrich, a Tree of Life
to quicken. He is the quintessence of all Blessings, why then art thou
discontented at thy Worldly Crosses? They cannot be so bitter as Christ is
sweet, as Seneca said once to Polybius, Why do thou complain of hard Fortune,
salvo Caesare, is not Caesar thy Friend? So is not Christ thy Friend? He can
never be poor who has a Mine of Gold in his Field; nor he who has the
unsearchable Riches of Christ: Say then, Lord, Thy Will be done, though I have
my Cross, yet I have Christ with it. The Cross may make me weep, but Christ
wipes off all tears; Rev. 7.17.

(3.) God has given thee Grace. Grace is the rich embroidery and workmanship
of the Holy Ghost; it is the sacred Unction; 1 John 2.27. The Graces are a
Chain of Pearl to adorn, and Beds of Spices which make us a sweet odor to God;
Grace is a distinguishing Blessing. Christ gave Judas his Purse, but not his
Spirit; may not this quiet the Heart in Affliction, and make it say, Thy Will
be done. Lord, thou have given that Jewel which thou bestowest only on the
Elect. Grace is a seal of thy Love, it is both Food and Cordial, it is an
earnest of Glory.

9. Consideration, When God intends the greatest Mercy to any of his People, he
brings them low in Affliction. God seems to go quite cross to Sense and Reason,
when he intends to raise us highest, he brings us lowest. As Moses Hand before
it wrought Miracles* was Leprous, and Sarahs Womb, before it brought forth the
Son of the Promise, was Barren. God brings us low before he raises us; as
Water is at the lowest ebb before there is a Spring tide.

(1.) It is true in a Temporal Sense: When God would bring Israel to Canaan, a
Land flowing with Milk and Honey, he first leads them through a Sea and a
Wilderness; when God intended to advance Joseph to be the second Man in the
Kingdom, he casts him first into Prison, and the Irons entered into his Soul,
Psalm. 105.18. God usually lets it be darkest before the Morning Star of
deliverance appears.

(2.) It is true in a Spiritual Sense. When God intends to raise a Soul to
Spiritual Comfort, he first lays it low in desertion, Isa. 12.1. as the Limner
lays his dark color first, and then lays his gold color on it, so God first
lays the Soul in the dark of desertion, and then he lays his golden color of
Joy and Consolation: May not this make us cheerfully submit, and say, Thy Will
be done. Perhaps now God afflicts me, he is about to raise me, he intends me a
greater Mercy than I am aware of.

10. Consideration, The excellency of this frame of Soul to lie at Gods feet,
and say, Thy Will be done.

(1.) A Soul that is melted into Gods Will shows variety of Grace. As the holy
Ointment was made up of several Aromatic Spices, Myrrh, Cinnamon, Cassia,
Exodus 30.23. so this sweet temper of Soul, submission to Gods Will in
Affliction, has in it a mixture of several Graces. In particular it is
compounded of three Graces, Faith, Love, Humility. 1. Faith: Faith believes God
does all in Mercy, that Affliction is to mortify some Sin, or exercise some
Grace, that God corrects in Love and Faithfulness, Psalm 119.75. the belief of
this causes submission of Will to God. 2. Love: Love thinks no evil, 1 Cor.
13.5. Love takes all God does in the best sense, it has good thoughts of God,
this causes submission, Thy Will be done. Let the Righteous God smite me
(says Love) it shall be a kindness, yea, it shall be an excellent oil which
shall not break my head. 3. Humility: The humble Soul looks on its Sins, and
how it has provoked God, he says not his Afflictions are great, but his Sins
are great, this makes him lie at Gods feet and say, I will bear the indignation
of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, Micah 7.9. Thus a submissive
frame of Heart is full of grace, it is compounded of several graces, it
pleases God to see so many graces at once sweetly exercised; he says of such
a Christian, as David of Goliahs Sword, 1 Samuel 21.9. None like that, give it me.

(2.) He who puts his fiat and placet to Gods Will, and says, Thy Will be
done, shows not only variety of grace, but strength of grace. It argues much
strength in the Body to be able to endure hard weather, yet not be altered by
it; so to endure hard trials, yet not faint or fret, shows more than ordinary
strength of grace. You that can say, you have brought your Wills to Gods; Gods
Will and yours agree, as the Copy and the Original; let me assure you, you
have out-strip'd many Christians who perhaps shine in an higher orb of
knowledge than you. To be content to be at Gods dispose, to be any thing that
God will have us, shows a noble heroic Soul. It is reported of the Eagle it is
not like other Fowls, they when they are hungry make a noise, the Ravens cry
for food, but the Eagle is never heard to make a noise though it wants meat,
and it is from the nobleness and greatness of its Spirit: The Eagle is above
other Fowls, and has a Spirit suitable to its Nature; so it is an argument of
an holy gallantry and magnitude of Spirit, that whatever cross Providence
befall a Christian, he does not cry and whine as others, but is silent, and lies
quietly at Gods feet. Here Is much strength of Grace in such a Soul, nay, the
height of Grace. When Grace is crowning, it is not so much to say, Lord, Thy
Will be done, but when Grace is conflicting, and meets with crosses and trials,
now to say, Thy Will be done, is a glorious thing indeed, and prepares for the
garland of honor.

11. Consideration, Persons are usually better in Adversity than Prosperity,
therefore stoop to Gods Will. A prosperous condition is not always so safe;
it is true, it is more pleasing to the Palate, and every one desires to get on
the warm side of the hedge where the Sun of Prosperity shines, but it is not
always best: In a prosperous Estate there is more burden; many look at the
shining and glittering of Prosperity, but not at the burden; Plus oneris.

(1.) The burden of care; therefore Christ calls Riches, Cares, Luke 8.14. A
Rose has its prickles, so have Riches; we think them happy that flourish in
their Silks and Cloth of Gold, but we see not the Troubles and Cares that
attend them. A Shoe may have Silver Lace on it, yet pinch the Foot. Many a Man
that goes to his day-labour lives a more contented life than he that has his
Thousands per Annum. Disquieting Care is the malus genius, the evil Spirit that
haunts the Rich Man. When his Chests are full of Gold his Heart is full of Care
how to increase, or how to secure what he has gotten; he is sometimes full of
Care who he shall leave it to. A large Estate like a long trailing garment is
often more troublesome than useful.

(2.) In a prosperous Estate there is the burden of Account. Such as are in
high places have a far greater account to give to God than others; Luke 12.48.
Unto whomsoever much is given of him shall be much required. The more golden
Talents any are entrusted with, the more they have to answer for; the more
their Revenues, the more their Reckonings. God will say, I gave you a great
Estate, what have you done with it, how have you employed it for my Glory. I
have read of Philip King of Spain, when he was to dye, he said, O that I had
never been King, O that I had lived a private solitary Life; here is all the
fruit of my Kingdom, it has made my accounts heavier. So then may not this
quiet our Hearts in a low adverse condition, and make us say, Lord, Thy Will be
done; as thou have given me a less portion of Worldly things, so I have a less
burden of Care, and a less burden of Account.

2. A prosperous condition has plus periculi, more danger in it. Such as are
on the top of the pinnacle of Honor, are in more danger of falling, they are
subject to many temptations, their Table is often a snare. Heliogabalus made
Ponds of sweet Water to bathe in; Millions are drowned in the sweet Waters of
Pleasure. A great Sail over-turns the Vessel; how many by having too great
Sails of Prosperity have had their Souls over-turn'd. (...), Theophil. It must
be a strong Head that bears heady Wine; he had need have much Wisdom and Grace
that knows how to bear an high condition. It is hard to carry a full Cup
without spilling, and a full Estate without sinning Agar feared if he were
full, he should deny God, and say, Who is the Lord; Prove. 30.9. Prosperity
breeds, 1. Pride: The Children of Kohath were in an higher Estate than the rest
of the Levites, they were employed in the Tabernacle about the most holy things
of all, Numb. 4.4. they had the first lot, Josh. 21.10. but as they were lifted
up above others of the Levites in Honor, so in Pride, Numb. 16.3. In the
Thames when the Tide rises higher, the Boat rises higher; so when the Tide of
an Estate rises higher, many Men's Hearts rise higher in Pride. 2. Prosperity
breeds security. Sampson fell asleep in Delilahs lap, so do Men in the lap of
Ease and Plenty. The Worlds golden sands are quicksands. How hard is it for a
rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Luke 18.24. the consideration of
this should make us submit to God in adversity, and say, Thy Will be done: God
sees what is best for us; if we have less Estate we are in less danger, if we
want the Honors of others, so we want their Temptations.

12. Consideration, The having of our Wills melted into Gods, is a good sign
that the present Affliction is sanctified: Then an Affliction is sanctified,
when it attains the end for which it was sent. The end why God sends Affliction
is to calm the Spirit, to subdue the Will, and bring it to Gods Will, when this
is done, Affliction has attained the end for which it came; it is sanctified,
and it will not be long ere it be removed: When the sore is healed, the
smarting Plaster is taken off.

13. Consideration, How unworthy it is of a Christian to be froward and
unsubmissive, and not bring his Will to God.

(1.) It is below the Spirit of a Christian. The Spirit of a Christian is
Dove-like, it is meek and sedate, willing to be at Gods dispose; Not my will but
thy will be done; Luke 22.42. A Christian Spirit is not fretful, but humble,
not craving but contented. See the picture of a Christian Spirit in St Paul,
Phil. 4.12. I know (...), how to be abased, and how to abound. Paul could be
either higher or lower as God saw good; he could sail with any Wind of
Providence, either a prosperous or a boisterous gale, his Will was melted into
Gods Will; now to be of a cross Spirit that cannot submit to God, is unworthy
of the Spirit of a Christian; it is like the Bird, that because it is pent up in
the Cage, and cannot fly in the open Air, beats it self against the Cage.

(2.) A froward unsubmissive frame, that cannot submit to Gods Will, is
unworthy of a Christians Profession: He professes to live by Faith, yet
repines at his condition. Faith lives not by bread alone, it feeds on Promises,
it makes future Glory present; Faith sees all in God: When the fig tree does
not blossom, Faith can joy in the God of its salvation, Hab. 3.17. Now to be
troubled at the present Estate, because low and mean, where is Faith? Sure that
is a weak Faith, or no Faith, which must have crutches to support it. O be
ashamed to call thy self Believer if thou can not trust God, and acquiesce in
his Will, in the deficiency of outward Comforts.

(3.) To be of a froward unsubmissive Spirit, that cannot surrender its Will to
God is unworthy of the high Dignities God has put upon a Christian. 1. He is a
rich Heir; he is exalted above all Creatures that ever God made, except the
Angels; yea, in some sense, as his Nature is joined in an Hypostatical Union to
the Divine Nature, so he is above the Angels: O then how is it below his
dignity, for want of a few earthly Comforts, to be froward and ready to quarrel
with the Deity. Is it not unworthy for a Kings Son, because he may not pluck
such a Flower, to be discontented and rebel against his Royal Father. 2. A
Christian is espoused to Jesus Christ, what to be married to Christ, yet
froward and unsubmissive? Have not thou enough in him? As Elkanah said to
Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.8. Am not I better than ten Sons? Is not Christ better than a
thousand Worldly Comforts? Omnia bona in summo bono. It Is a disparagement to
Christ that his Spouse should be froward when she is matched into the Crown of
Heaven.

(4.) To be of a froward unsubmissive Spirit is unsuitable to the Prayers of a
Christian; he prays, Thy Will be done, it is the Will of God he should meet
with such troubles, whether Sickness, loss of Estate, crosses in Children, God
has decreed and ordered it, why then is there not submission? Why are we
discontented at that which we pray for? It is a saying of Latimer, speaking of
Peter who denied his Master, Peter, says he, forgot his Prayer, for that was
Hallowed be thy Name: So often we forget our Prayers, nay, contradict them, for
we pray, Thy Will be done. Now if unsubmissiveness to God be so unworthy of a
Christian, should not we labor to bring our Wills to Gods, and say, Lord, let
me not disparage Religion, let me do nothing unworthy of a Christian.

14. Consideration, Frowardness and unsubmissiveness of Will to God, is very
sinful.

(1.) It is sinful in its Nature; to murmur when God crosses us in our Will
shows much ungodliness. The Apostle Jude speaks of ungodly ones, ver. 15. and
that we may better know who these are, he sets a mark upon them, ver. 16. These
are murmurers. Some think they are not so ungodly as others, because they do
not swear, or are drunk, but you may be ungodly in murmuring: there are not
only ungodly Drunkards but ungodly Murmurers; nay, this is the height of
ungodliness, namely, Rebellion. Korah and his Company murmured against God, and
see how the Lord interprets this, Numb. 17.10. Bring Aarons rod to be kept for
a token against the rebels: To be a murmurer and a rebel is in Gods account all
one. Numb. 20.13. This is the water of Meribah, because the children of Israel
strove with the Lord: How did they strive with God? because they murmured at
his Providence, ver. 3. what will thou be a Rebel against God? It is a shame
for a Servant to strive with his Master, but what is it for a Creature to
strive with its Maker?

(2.) To quarrel with Gods Providence, and be unsubmissive to his Will is
sinful in the spring and cause; it arises from Pride. 'Twas Satan's temptation,
Ye shall be as Gods; Genesis 3.5. A proud Person makes a God of himself, he
disdains to have his Will crossed; he thinks himself better than others,
therefore he finds fault with Gods Wisdom, that he is not above others.

(3.) Quarrelsomeness and unsubmissiveness to Gods Will, is sinful in the
concomitants of it. 1. It is joined with sinful risings of Heart. (1.) Evil
Thoughts arise. We think hardly of God as if he had done us wrong, or as if we
had deserved better at his hand. (2.) Passions begin to arise; the Heart
secretly frets against God. Jonah was crossed in his Will, and Passion began to
boil in him; Jonah 4.1. He was very angry. Ionahs Spirit as well as the Sea
wrought and was tempestuous. 2. Unsubmissiveness of Will is joined with
unthankfulness, because in some one thing we are afflicted, we forget all the
Mercies we have; we deal with God just as the Widow of Sarepta did with the
Prophet: The Prophet Elijah had been a means to keep her alive in the Famine,
but as soon as her Child dies, she quarrels with the Prophet, 1 Kings 17.18. O
thou man of God, art thou come to slay my Son? So do we deal with God, we can
be content to receive Blessings at his hand, but as soon as he does in the least
thing cross us in our Will, we grow touchy, and are ready in a Passion to fly
out against him: Thus God loses all his Mercies, and is not this high
ingratitude?

(4.) Frowardness and unsubmissiveness to Gods Will is evil in the effects. 1.
It unfits for Duty: It is bad sailing in a storm, and it is ill praying when
the Heart is stormy and unquiet: It is well if such Prayers do not suffer
shipwreck. 2. Unsubmissiveness of Spirit sometimes unfits for the use of
Reason. Jonah was discontented because he had not his Will, God withered the
goard, and his Heart fretted against God, and in the midst of his Passion he
spoke no better than nonsense and blasphemy, Jonah 4.9. I do well to be angry
to the death. Sure he did not know well what he said: What to be angry with
God, and dye for anger? He speaks as if he had lost the use of his Reason. Thus
unsubmissiveness of Will is sinful in its Nature, Causes, Concomitants,
Effects; may not this martyr our Wills, and bring our Wills to God in every
thing, making us say, Thy Will be done.

15. Consideration, Unsubmissiveness to Gods Will is very impudent, we get
nothing by it, it does not ease us of our burden, but rather makes it heavier.
The more the Child struggles with the Parent, the more it is beaten; when we
struggle with God, and will not submit to his Will, we get nothing but more
blows. Instead of having our cords of Affliction loosned, we make God tie them
the straiter. Let us then submit and say, Lord, Thy Will be done. Why should I
spin out my own trouble by impatience, and make my Cross heavier? What got
Israel by their frowardness, they were within eleven days journey of Canaan,
they fall a murmuring, and God leads them a march of forty years longer in the
Wilderness.

16. Consideration, The mischief of being unsubmissive to Gods Will in
Affliction, it lays a Man open to many Temptations. When the Heart frets
against God by discontent, here is good fishing for Satan in these troubled
Waters. He usually puts discontented Persons upon indirect means. Jobs Wife
fretted (so far was she from holy submission) and she presently puts her
Husband upon cursing of God; Job 2.9. Curse God and dye. What is the reason why
some have turned Witches, and given themselves to the Devil, but out of envy
and discontent because they have not had their Will. Others being under a
Temptation of Poverty, and not having their Wills in living at such an high
rate as others, have laid violent hands upon themselves. O the Temptations that
Men of discontented Spirits are exposed to. Here (says Satan) is good fishing
for me.

17. Consideration, How far unsubmissiveness of Spirit is from that temper of
Soul which God requires in Affliction. God would have us in Patience possess
our Souls; Luke 21.19 The Greek word for Patience, (...), signifies to bear up
under a burden without fainting or ^^etting; but to be froward in Affliction,
and quarrel with Gods Will, where is this Christian Patience? God would have us
rejoice in Affliction, Iam. 1.2. Count it all joy when ye fall into diverse
temptations; that is, Afflictions. Count it joy, be as Birds that sing in
Winter: 1 Thessalonians. 1.6. Ye received the word in affliction with joy. Paul could
leap in his Fetters, and sing in the Stocks; Acts 16.25. how far is a
discontented Soul from this frame; he is far from rejoicing in Affliction that
has not learned to submit.

18. Consideration, What is it makes the difference between a Godly Man and an
Ungodly Man in Affliction, but only this, the Godly Man submits to Gods Will,
the Ungodly Man will not submit. A Wicked Man frets and fumes, and is like a
wild Bull in a Net. He in Affliction blasphemes God; Rev. 16.9. Men were
scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the name of God. Put a stone in the
fire, and it flies in your face; stony hearts fly in Gods face. A stuff that is
rotten, the more it is rubbed the more it frets and tears: When God afflicts
the Sinner, he tears himself in anger; but a Godly Man is sweetly submissive to
Gods Will, this is his speech, Shall not I drink the cup which my Father has
given me. Spices when they are bruised send out a sweet fragrant smell; when
God bruiseth his Saints they send out the sweet perfume of Patience. Servulus
an holy Man, long afflicted with the Palsy, yet this was his ordinary speech,
Laudetur Deus, Let God be praised; O let us say, Thy Will be done; let us bear
that patiently which God inflicts justly, else how do we show our Grace? What
difference is there between us and the wicked in Affliction?

19. Consideration, Not to submit to Gods Providential Will, is highly
provoking to God. Can we anger God more than by quarrelling with him, and not
let him have his Will? Kings do not love to have their Wills opposed, though
they may be unjust; how ill does God take it when we will be disputing against
his Righteous Will; it is a sin God cannot bear; Numb. 14.26, 27. How long
shall I bear with this evil congregation which murmur against me? May not God
justly say thus, How long shall I bear with this wicked Person, who when any
thing falls out cross, murmurs against me; ver. 28. Say unto them, as truly as
I live says the Lord, as ye have spoken in my ears, so will I do unto you. God
swears against a murmurer; As I live; and what will God do as he lived, ver.
29. Your carcases shall fall in the wilderness. You see how provoking a
discontented quarrelsome Spirit is to God, it may cost Men their Lives, nay,
their Souls. God sent fiery Serpents among the People for their murmuring, 1
Cor. 10.10. he may send worse than fiery Serpents, he may send Hell fire.

20. Consideration, How much does God bear at our hand, and shall not we be
content to bear something at his hand? It would tire the Patience of the Angels
to bear with us one day; 2 Pet. 3.9. The Lord is long-suffering toward us,
(...): How often do we offend in our Eye by envious impure glances; in our Tongue
by rash censuring, but God passes by many injuries, he bears with us. Should
the Lord punish us every time we offend, he might draw his sword every day;
shall God bear so much at our hands, and can we bear with nothing at his hands?
Shall God be patient with us, and we impatient with him? Shall he be meek, and
we murmur? Shall he endure our sins, and shall not we endure his strokes? Oh
let us say, Thy Will be done. Lord, thou have been the greatest sufferer, thou
have born more from me than I can from thee.

21. Consideration, Submitting our Wills to God in Affliction disappoints Satan
of his hope, and quite spoils his design. The Devils end is in all our
Afflictions to make us sin. The Reason why Satan did smite Job in his Body and
Estate was to perplex his Mind, and put him into a Passion; he hoped that Job
would have been discontented, and in a fit of anger, not only have cursed his
Birthday, but cursed his God; but Job lying at Gods Feet, and blessing him in
Affliction, disappointed Satan of his hope, and quite spoiled his plot. Had Job
murmured he had pleased Satan, had he fallen into an heat, and the sparks of
his anger flown about, the Devil had warmed himself at this fire of Jobs
Passion, but Job quietly submitted, and blessed God, here Satan's design was
frustrated, and he missed of his intent. The Devil has often deceived us, the
best way to deceive him is by quiet submission to God in all things, and
saying, Thy Will be done.

22. Consideration, It may rock our Hearts quiet in Affliction to consider,
that to the Godly, the Nature of Affliction is quite changed; to a wicked Man
it is a Curse, the Rod is turned into a Serpent; Affliction to him is but an
effect of Gods displeasure, the beginning of Sorrow; but the nature of
Affliction is quite changed to a Believer, it is by a divine Chemistry turned
into a Blessing, it is like Poison corrected, which becomes a Medicine, it is a
Love-token, a Badge of Adoption, a preparatory to glory; should not this make
us say, Thy Will be done: The poison of the Affliction is gone it is not
hurtful but healing, this has made the Saints not only patient in Affliction,
but have sounded forth Thankfulness: As Bells when they have been cast in the
Fire, do afterward make a sweeter sound; so the Godly after they have been
cast into the Fire, of Affliction have sounded forth Gods Praise, Psalm. 119.71.
It is good for me that I was afflicted. Job. 1.21. Blessed be the Name of the
Lord.

23. Consideration, To make us submit our Will to God in Affliction is, to
think how many good things we receive from God, and shall we not be content to
receive some evil? Job 2.10. Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and
shall we not receive evil? In the Hebrew, hatton meeth ha^elohim, shall we
receive good from God, and not evil? This may make us say, Thy Will be done.
How many Blessings have we received at the Hand of Gods Bounty? we have been be
miracled with Mercy; what sparing, preventing, delivering Mercy have we had!
the Honeycomb of Mercy has continually dropped upon us, Lam. 3.23. His Mercies
are new every Morning. Mercy comes in as constantly as the Tide, nay, how many
Tides of Mercy do we see in one day? we never feed but Mercy carves every bit
to us; we never drink but in the golden Cup of Mercy; we never go abroad but
Mercy sets a guard of Angels about us; we never lie down in our bed but Mercy
draws the Curtains of Protection close about us: Now, shall we receive so many
good things at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? Our Mercies far
out weigh our Afflictions, for one Affliction we have a thousand Mercies; O
then let us submit to God and say, Thy Will be done: The Sea of Gods Mercy
should swallow up a few drops of Affliction.

24. Consideration, To bring our Wills to God in Affliction does much honor
the Gospel: An unsubmissive Christian reproacheth Religion, as if it were not
able to subdue an unruly Spirit; it is weak Physic which cannot purge out ill
Humors; and sure it is a weak Gospel, if it cannot master our discontent, and
martyr our Wills: Unsubmissiveness is a Reproach, but a cheerful resignation of
our Will to God sets a Crown of Honor upon the Head of Religion, it shows the
power of the Gospel, which can charm down the Passions, and melt the Will into
Gods Will; therefore in Scripture submissive patience is brought in as an
adorning Grace, Rev. 14.12. Here is the Patience of the Saints.

25. Consideration, The Example of our Lord Jesus; how flexible and submissive
was he to his Father! He who taught us this Prayer, Thy Will be done, had
learned it himself; Christ's Will was perfectly tuned to his Fathers Will; it
was the Will of his Father that he should dye for our sins, and he endured the
Cross, Heb. 12.2. It was a painful, shameful, cursed death; he suffered the
very pains of Hell equivalently, yet he willingly submitted, Isa. 53.7. He
opened not his Mouth, he opened his sides when the blood ran out, but he opened
not his Mouth in repining, his will was resolved into the will of his Father,
John 18.11. Shall not I drink the Cup which my Father has given me? Now the
more our Wills are subject to Gods Will in Affliction, the nearer we come to
Christ our Pattern; is it not our Prayer we may be like Christ? by holy
Submission we imitate him: His Will was melted into his Fathers Will.

26 Consideration, To Submit our Will to God is the way to have our Will; every
one would be glad to have his Will; the way to have our Will is to resign it;
God deals with us as we do with froward Children; while we fret and quarrel God
will give us nothing, but when we are submissive, and say, Thy Will be done;
now God carves out Mercy to us: The way to have our Will is to submit it: David
brought his Will to God, 2 Samuel 15.26. Here am I, Let him do to me as seems
good to him. And after he resigned his Will, he had his Will; God brought him
back to the Ark, and settled him again in his Throne, 2 Samuel 19. Many a Parent
that has had a dear Child sick, when he could bring his Will to God to part
with it, God has given him the life of his Child: There Is nothing lost by
referring our Will to God, the Lord takes it kindly from us, and it is the only
way to have our Will.

27. and Vlt. Consideration, We may the more cheerfully surrender our Souls to
God when we dye, when we have surrendered our Wills to God while we live: Our
blessed Savior had all along submitted his Will to God, there was but one
Will between God the Father and Christ; now Christ having in his life time
given up his Will to his Father, at death he cheerfully gives up his Soul to
him, Luke 23.46. Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit. You that resign up
your Wills to God may at the hour of death comfortably bequeath your Souls to
him.

II. The second Means to bring our Will to God in Affliction is, Study the
Will of God.

(1.) It is a Sovereign Will, he has a supreme right and Dominion over his
Creatures, to dispose of them as he pleases: A Man may do with his own as he
list, Mat. 20.15. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with my own? A Man
may cut his own Timber as he will. Gods Sovereignty may cause submission, he
may do with us as he sees good; God is not accountable to any Creature for what
he does, Job 33.13. He gives not account of any of his matters. Who shall
call God to account? Who is higher then the Highest? Eccl. 5.8. What Man or
Angel dare summon God to his Bar? He gives not account of any of his Matters.
God will take an account of our Carriage toward him, but he will give no
account of his Carriage toward us; God has an absolute Jurisdiction over us;
the remembrance of this, Gods Will is a sovereign Will, to do with us what he
please, may silence all discontents, and charm down all unruly Passions, we are
not to dispute but submit.

(2.) Gods Will is a wise Will, he knows what is conducing to the good of his
People, therefore submit, Isa. 30.18. The Lord is a God of Judgment, that is,
he is able to judge what is best for us; therefore rest in his Wisdom, and
acquiesce in his Will: We rest in the wisdom of a Physician, we are content
he should scarify and let us blood, because he is judicious, and knows what is
most conducible to our health: If the Pilot be skilful, the Passenger says,
let him alone, he knows how best to steer the Ship; and shall we not rest in
Gods Wisdom? Did we but study how wisely God steers all Occurrences, and how
he often brings us to Heaven by a cross wind, it would much quiet our Spirits,
and make us say, Thy Will be done. Gods Will is guided by Wisdom; should God
sometimes let us have our Will, we would undo our selves; did he let us carve
for our selves, we should choose the worst piece; Lot chose Sodom because well
watered, and was as the Garden of the Lord, Genesis 13.10. but God rained fire
upon it out of Heaven, Genesis 19.24.

(3.) Gods Will is a just Will, Genesis 18.25. Shall not the Judge of all the
Earth do right? Gods Will is Regula and Mensura, it is the Rule of Justice;
the Wills of Men are corrupt, therefore unfit to give Law; but Gods Will is
an holy unerring Will, which may cause submission, Psalm. 97.2. God may cross
us, but he cannot wrong us; severe he may be, not unjust; therefore we must
strike Sail, and say, Thy Will be done.

(4.) Gods Will is a good and gracious Will; it promotes our Interest; if it
be Gods Will to afflict us, he will make us say at last, it was good for us
that we were afflicted: Gods Flail shall only thresh off our Husks: That which
is against our Will shall not be against our profit: Study what a good Will
Gods is, and we will say, Fiat Voluntas, let thy Will be done.

(5.) Gods Will is an irresistible Will; we may oppose it, but we cannot
hinder it: The rising of the VVave cannot stop the Ship when it is in full
sail; so the rising up of our Will against God cannot stop the execution of his
Will, Romans 9.19. Who has resisted his Will? Who can stay the Chariot of the
Sun in its full Career? Who can hinder the Progress of Gods Will? Therefore it
is in vain to contest with God, his Will shall take place; there is no way to
overcome God but by lying at his Feet.

3. Means to submission to God in Affliction is, Get a gracious heart; all the
Rules and Helps in the World will do but little good, till Grace be infused;
the Boul must have a good Byas, or it will not run according to our desire; so
till God puts a new Byas of Grace into the Soul, which inclines the Will, it
will never submit to God: Grace renews the Will, and it must be renewed before
it be subdued: Grace teaches self denial, and we can never submit our Will
till we deny it.

4. Means, Let us labor to have our Covenant Interest cleared, to know that
God is our God, Psalm. 48.14. This God is our God; he whose Faith does flourish
into assurance, that can say, God is his, will say, Thy Will be done. A wicked
man may say, God has laid this Affliction upon me, and I cannot help it; but a
Believer says, My God has done it, and I will submit to it. He who can call
God his, knows God loves him as he loves Christ, and designs his Salvation,
therefore he will with Saint Paul take pleasure in Reproaches, 2 Cor. 12.10.
and in every adverse Providence yield to God, as the Wax to the impression of
the Seal.

5. Means to submission to God in Affliction, get an humble Spirit: A proud Man
will never stoop to God, he will rather break then bend; but when the Heart is
humble, the Will is pliable. What a vast difference was there between Pharaoh
and Eli? Pharaeoh cries out, Who is the Lord that I should obey his Voice?
Exodus 5.2. but Eli says, It is the Lord, let him do what seems good in his
sight, 1 Samuel 3.18. See the difference between an Heart that is swelled with
Pride, and that is ballasted with Humility; Pharaoh says, Who is the Lord?
Eli, It is the Lord. An humble Soul has a deep sense of sin, he sees how he
has provoked God, he wonders he is not in Hell; therefore whatever God
inflicts, he knows it is less then his Iniquities deserve; this makes him say,
Lord, Thy Will be done. O get into an humble posture, the Will is never
flexible till the Heart be Humble.

6. Means, Get your Heart loosened from things below; be crucified to the
world: Whence is Childrens frowardness but when you take away their
Play-things; when we love the world, and God takes away these things from us,
then we grow froward and unsubmissive to Gods Will. Jonah was exceeding glad of
the Gourd, and when God smote it he grew froward, and because God had killed
his Gourd, kill me too, says he, Jonah 4.8. He who is, (...), a Lover of the
World, can never pray this Prayer heartily, Thy Will be done; his heart boils
in anger against God, and when the World is gone, his Patience is gone too. Get
mortified Affections to these sublunary things.

7. Means, for submission to Gods Will: Get some good persuasion your sin is
pardoned; feri Domine feri, quia peccata mea condonata sunt, Smite Lord, smite
where thou will, said Luther, because my sins are pardoned: Pardon of sin is a
crowning Blessing; has God forgiven my sin, I will bear any thing, I will not
murmur but admire, I will not complain of the Burden of Affliction, but bless
God for removing the Burden of sin: The pardoned Soul says this Prayer
heartily, Thy Will be done. Lord, use thy pruning Knife, so long as thou will
not come with thy bloody Axe to hew me down.

8. Means, If we would have our wills submit to God, let us not look so much on
the dark side of the Cloud, as the light side; that is, let us not look so much
on the smart of Affliction, as the good of Affliction; it is bad to pore all on
the smart, as it is bad for sore Eyes to look too much on the Fire; but we
should look on the good of Affliction: Sampson did not only look on the Lions
Carcass, but on the Honeycomb within it, Judge. 19.8. He turned to see the
Carcass of the Lion, and behold there was Honey in the Carcass. Affliction is
the frightful Lion, but see what Honey there is in it: Affliction humbles,
purifies, fills us with the Consolations of God; here is Honey in the Belly of
the Lion; could we but look upon the benefit of Affliction, Stubbornness would
be turned into submissiveness, and we should say, Thy Will be done.

9. Means, Pray to God that he would calm our Spirits, and conquer our Wills;
it is no easy thing to submit to God in Affliction, there will be risings of
heart, therefore let us pray that what God inflicts Righteously, we may bear
patiently; Prayer is the best Spell or Charm against Impatience; Prayer does to
the Heart, as Christ did to the Sea, when it was tempestuous, he rebuked the
Wind, and there was a great Calm; so when the Passions are up, and the Will is
apt to mutiny against God, Prayer makes a gracious Calm in the Soul: Prayer
does to the Heart as the Sponge to the Canon, when hot cools it.

10. Means, If we would submit to Gods Will in Affliction, let us make a good
interpretation of Gods Dealings; take all God does in the best sense: We are
apt to misconstrue Gods Dealings, and put a bad Interpretation upon them, as
Israel, Numb. 20.4. Ye have brought the Congregation of the Lord into this
Wilderness, that we should die there. So God has brought this Affliction upon
us, because he hates us, and intends to destroy us; and such hard thoughts of
God cause fullenness and stubbornness: O let us make a fair and candid
interpretation of Providence. Does God afflict us, say thus, perhaps he intends
us Mercy in this; he will try us whether we will love him in Affliction; he is
about to mortify some sin, or exercise some grace; he smites the Body that he
may save the Soul. Could we put such a good meaning upon Gods dealings, we
would say, Thy Will be done; Let the Righteous God smite me and it shall be a
kindness, it shall be an excellent Oil, which shall not break my Head, Psalm.
141.5.

11. and Vlt. Means, If you would submit to God in Affliction, believe that the
present Condition is best for you; we are not competent Judges; we fancy it is
best to have ease and plenty, and have the Rock pour out Rivers of Oil; but God
sees Affliction best; he sees our Souls thrive best upon the bare Common; the
fall of the Leaf is the Spring of our Grace. Could we believe the present
Condition is best, which God carves out to us, the Quarrel would soon be at an
end, and we should sit down satisfied with what God does, and say, Thy Will be
done. So much for this Third Petition.

MATTHEW. vi.11. Give us this Day our daily Bread.


IN this Petition there are two things observable, I. The Order. II. The Matter.


I. The Order. First, we pray, Hallowed be thy Name, before, Give us this day
our daily Bread: Hence we learn; Doct. That the Glory of God ought to be
preferred before our own personal Concerns.

First. We pray, Hallowed be thy Name, Thy Kingdom come, Thy Will be done,
before we pray, Give us this Day our daily Bread. Gods Glory ought to weigh
down all before it; it must be preferred before our dearest Concerns: Christ
preferred his Fathers Glory before his own Glory, as he was Man, John 8.49, 50.
I Honor my Father, I seek not my own Glory. Gods glory is that which is most
dear to him, it is the Apple of his Eye; all his Riches lie here, as Micah
said, Judge. 18.24. What have I more? So I may say of Gods glory, what has he
more? Gods glory is the most Orient Pearl of his Crown, which he will not part
with, Isa. 42.8. My Glory will I not give to another. Gods glory is more worth
then Heaven, more worth then the Salvation of all Men's Souls; better Kingdoms
be demolished; better Men and Angels be annihilated, then God lose any part of
his Glory. First we pray, that Gods Name may be hallowed and glorified, before
we pray, Give us our daily Bread. We are to prefer Gods glory before our
nearest concerns: Before there can be a preferring Gods glory before private
concerns, there must be a New Birth wrought. The natural Man seeks his own
secular Interest before Gods glory, John 3.31. He is of the Earth earthly. Let
him have Peace and Trading, let the Rock pour out Rivers of Oil, Job 29.6. and
let Gods glory go which way it will, he minds it not: A Worm cannot fly and
sing as a Lark: A natural Man whose heart creeps upon the Earth, cannot admire
God, or advance his glory, as a Man elevated by grace does.

USE. Of Trial. Do we prefer Gods glory before our private Concerns? Does Gods
glory take place? Minus te amat qui aliquid tecum amat quod non propter te
amat, Aug. 1. Do we prefer Gods glory before our own Credit? Fama pari passu
ambulat cum Vita. Credit is a Jewel highly valued, like precious Ointment it
casts a fragrant smell; but Gods glory must be dearer then Credit and Applause:
We must be willing to have our Credit trampled upon, if Gods glory may be
raised higher, Acts 5.41. The Apostles rejoiced that they were counted worthy
to suffer shame for his Name, (...), that they were graced so far as to be
disgraced for Christ. 2. Do we prefer Gods glory before our Relations?
Relations are near, they are of our Flesh and Bone, but Gods glory must be
dearer, Luke 14.26. If any Man come after me and hate not Father and Mother, he
cannot be my Disciple. Here odium in suos is Pietas in Deum. If my Friends
(says Jerome) should persuade me to deny Christ, if my Wife should hang about
my Neck, if my Mother should show me her Breasts that gave me suck, I would
trample upon all and fly to Christ. 3. We must prefer Gods glory before estate:
gold is but shining dust, Gods glory must weigh heavier: If it comes to this, I
cannot keep my place of Profit, but Gods glory will be eclipsed; here I must
rather suffer in my Estate, then Gods glory should suffer; Heb. 10 34. 4. We
must prefer Gods Glory before our life. Rev. 12.11. They loved not their own
lives to the Death. Ignatius called his Fetters, (...), his Spiritual Jewels,
he wore them as a Chain of Pearl. Gordius the Martyr said, it is to my Loss if
you bate me any thing of my Sufferings: This Argues grace Crescent, and
elevated in an high Degree. Who but a Soul inflamed in love to God can set God
highest in the Throne, and prefer him above all private Concerns.

II. The second thing in the Petition is the Matter of it: Panem nostrum
quotidianum da nobis hodie, Give us this day our daily Bread. The sum of this
Petition is, that God will give us such a Competency in these outward things,
as he sees most expedient for us; it is much like that Prayer of Agur, Prove.
30.8. Feed me with Food convenient for me; give me a Viaticum, a Bait by the
way, enough to bear my Charges till I come to Heaven, and it suffices. Let me
explain the Words; Give us this day our daily Bread, [Give,] hence note, that
the good things of this life are the gifts of God; He is the Donor of all our
Blessings: Give us, not only Faith is the gift of God, but Food; not only daily
Grace is from God, but daily Bread; every good thing comes from God; Iam. 1.17.
Every good Gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of Lights. Wisdom
is the gift of God, Isa. 28.26. His God does instruct him to Discretion. Riches
are the gift of God, 2 Chronicles. 1.12. I will give thee riches; Peace is the gift
of God, Psalm. 147.14. He makes peace in thy borders; Health, which is the cream
of Life, is the gift of God, Ier. 30.17. I will restore health to thee; Rain is
the gift of God, Job 5.10. Who gives rain on the earth; all comes from God. He
makes the Corn to grow, and the Herbs to flourish.

USE I. See our own poverty and indigence, we live all upon alms, and upon free
gift, Give us this day: All we have is from the hand of Gods Royal Bounty. We
have nothing but what God gives us out of his Storehouse; we cannot have one
bit of Bread but from God. The Devil persuaded our first Parents that by
disobeying God, they should be as Gods, Genesis 3.5. but we may now see what
goodly Gods we are, that we have not a bit of bread to put in our mouths,
unless God give it us: Here is an humbling Consideration.

Br. 2. Is all a gift? then we are to seek every Mercy from God by Prayer, Give
us this day. The Tree of Mercy will not drop its Fruit unless shaken by the
hand of Prayer. Whatever we have, if it does not come in the way of Prayer, it
does not come in the way of Love; it is given as Isreal's Quails in anger. If
every thing be a gift we do not deserve it, we are not fit for it, unless we
ask for this alms; and must we go to God for every Mercy? How wicked are they
who instead of going to God for food when they want, they go to the Devil, they
make a compact with him, and if he will help them to a livelihood they will
give him their Souls: Better starve than go to the Devil for provender. I wish
there be none in our Age guilty of this, who when they are in want, use
indirect means for a livelihood, they consult with Witches, who are the Devils
Oracles; the end of these will be fearful as that of Saul was, whom the Lord is
said to have killed, because he asked counsel at a familiar spirit.

3. If all be a Gift, then it is not a Debt; we cannot say to God as that
Creditor said, Matthew. 18.28. Pay me what thou owe. Who can make God a Debtor,
or do any Act that is obliging and meritorious? Whatever we receive from God is
a gift. We can give nothing to God but what he has given us; 1 Chronicles. 29.14.
All things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee. David and his
People offered to the building of Gods House Gold and Silver, but they offered
nothing but what God had given them; Of th^ne own have we given thee. If we
love God, God it is that has given us an Heart to love him; if we praise him,
he both gives us the Organ of the Tongue, and puts it in Tune; if we give Alms
to others God has given Alms to us first, so that we may say, We offer, O
Lord, of thine own to thee. Is all of Gift, how absurd then is the Doctrine of
Merit? That was a proud speech of a Friar that said Read mihi Vitam Aeternam
quam debes; Give me Lord Eternal Life which thou owe me. We cannot deserve a
bit of Bread, much less a Crown of Glory. If all be a Gift then Merit is
exploded, and shut out of doors.

4. If all be a Gift, Give us this day, then take notice of Gods goodness;
there is nothing in us can deserve or requite Gods kindness, yet such is the
sweetness of his Nature, he gives us rich Provision, and feeds us with the
finest of the Wheat. Pindar says, it was an opinion of the People of Rhodes,
that Jupiter rained down Gold upon the City. God has rained down golden
Mercies upon us; he is upon the giving hand. Observe three things in Gods
giving.

(1.) He is not weary of giving; the springs of Mercy are ever running: God did
not only dispense Blessings in former Ages, but he still gives gifts to us As
the Sun not only inricheth the World with its Morning light, but keeps Light
for the Meridian. The Honeycomb of Gods bounty is still dropping.

(2.) God delights in giving; Micah 7.18. He delights in mercy. As the Mother
delights to give the Child the breast, God loves we should have the breast of
Mercy in our mouth.

(3.) God gives to his very Enemies. Who will send in Provisions to his Enemy?
Men use to spread Nets for their Enemies, God spreads a Table. The dew drops on
the Thistle as well as the Rose; the dew of Gods bounty drops upon the worst.
Those who have their mouths opened against God, yet God puts bread in those
mouths. O the Royal Bounty of God; Psalm. 52.1. The goodness of God endures
continually. Swinish sinners God puts Jewels upon, and feeds them every day.

5. If all be gift, see then the odious ingratitude of Men who sin against
their giver. God feeds them, and they fight against him; he gives them their
Bread, and they give him affronts. How unworthy is this, would we not cry shame
of him who had a Friend always feeding him with Money, and he should betray
and injure that Friend. Thus ungratefully do Sinners deal with God, they do not
only forget his Mercies but abuse them: Ier. 5.7. When I had fed them to the
full, they then committed adultery. O how horrid is this, to sin against a
bountiful God, to strike (as it were) those hands that relieve us: This gives a
dye and tincture to Men's sins, and makes them crimson. How many make a dart of
Gods Mercies and shoot at him; he gives them Wit, and they serve the Devil with
it; he gives them Strength, and they waste it among Harlots; he gives them
Bread to eat, and they lift up the heel against him; Deuteronomy. 32.15. Iesurun waxed
fat and kicked: These are like Absalom, who as soon as David his Father kissed
him, plotted Treason against him, 2 Samuel 15.10. like the Mule who kicks the Dam
after she has given it Milk. These who sin against their giver, and abuse Gods
Royal Favors, the Mercies of God will come in as witnesses against them. What
smoother than Oil, but if it be heated what more scalding? What sweeter than
Mercy, but if it be abused, what more dreadful? It turns to fury.

6. If God gives us all, let Gods giving excite us to Thanksgiving; he is the
founder and donor of all our Blessings, let him have all our Acknowledgments.
All the rivers come from the sea, and thither they return again, Eccl. 1.7. All
our gifts come from God, and to him must all our Praises return. We are apt to
burn incense to our own drag, Hab. 1.16. to attribute all we have to our own
Skill or second Causes.

(1.) Our own Skill and Industry. God is the giver; he gives daily Bread, Psalm.
136.35. he gives Riches, Deuteronomy. 8.18. He it is that gives thee power to get
wealth.

Or, (2.) We often ascribe the praise to second Causes, and forget God. If
Friends have bestowed an Estate, to look at them and admire them, but not God
who is the great giver: As if one should be thankful to the Steward, and never
take notice of the Master of the Family that provides all. O if God gives all,
our Eyesight, our Food, our Clothing, let us sacrifice the chief Praise to
him; let not God be a loser by his Mercies. Praise is a more illustrious part
of Gods Worship. Our wants may send us to Prayer. Nature may make us beg
Daily-bread, but it shows an Heart full of Ingenuity and Grace to be rendering
Praises to God. In Petition we act like Men, in Praise we act like Angels. Does
God sow seeds of Mercy, let Thankfulness be the crop we bring forth. We are
called the Temples of God, 1 Cor. 3.16. and where should Gods Praises be
sounded forth but in his Temples? Psalm. 146.2. While I live will I bless the
Lord, I will sing praises to my God while I have any being. God gives us daily
Bread, let us give him daily Praise. Thankfulness to our Donor is the best
policy; there is nothing lost by it: To be thankful for one Mercy is the way to
have more. Musicians love to sound their Trumpets where there is the best
echo, and God loves to bestow his Mercies where there is the best echo of
Praise: And it is not only offering the calves of our Lips is enough, but we
must show our thankfulness by improving the gifts which God gives us, and as it
were putting them out to use. God gives us an Estate, and we honor the Lord
with our substance, Prove. 3.9. he gives us the staff of Bread, and we lay out
the strength we receive by it in his service: This is to be thankful; and that
we may be thankful be humble. Pride stops the current of gratitude: A proud Man
will never be thankful; he looks upon all he has, either to be of his own
procuring or deserving. Let us see all we have is Gods gift, and how unworthy
we are to receive the least favor, and this will make us much in doxology and
gratitude, we will be Silver Trumpets sounding forth Gods Praise.

First, Give.] Hence I note, 1. That the good things of this Life are the gifts
of God; he is the founder and donor. 2. From this word give, I note, that it is
not unlawful to pray for Temporal things; we may pray for daily Bread, Prove.
30.8. Feed me with food convenient for me; we may pray for Health, Psalm. 6.2. O
Lord heal me, for my bones are vexed. As these are in themselves good things,
so they are useful for us. They are as needful for the preserving the Comfort
of Life, as the Oil is needful for preserving the Lamp from going out. Only let
me insert two things.

1. There is a great difference between our praying for Temporal things and
Spiritual. In praying for Spiritual things we must be absolute. When we pray
for pardon of Sin, and the favor of God, and the sanctifying graces of the
Spirit, these are indispensibly necessary to Salvation, and here we must take
no denial: But when we pray for Temporal things, here our Prayers must be
limited, we must pray conditionally, so far as God sees them good for us. God
sometimes sees cause to withold Temporal things from us: They may be snares,
and draw our Hearts from God; therefore we must pray for these things with
submission to Gods Will. This was Isreal's sin; they would be peremptory and
absolute in their desire of Temporal things: Gods bill of fare did not please
them, they must have dainties; Numb. 11.18. Who shall give us flesh to eat? God
had given them Manna, he fed them with a Miracle from Heaven, but their wanton
Pallats craved more, they must have Quails; God let them have their desire, but
they had sower sauce to their Quails; Psalm. 78.31. While the meat was yet in
their mouths, the wrath of God came upon them and slew them. Rachel was
importunate in her desires for a Child, Genesis 30.1. Give me children or I dye:
God let her have a Child, but it was a Benoni, a Son of Sorrow, it cost her her
Life in bringing forth; Genesis 35.18. We must pray for outward things with
submission to Gods Will, else they come in anger.

2. When we pray for things pertaining to this Life, we must desire Temporal
things for Spiritual ends; we must desire these things to be as helps in our
journey to Heaven. If we pray for Health, it must be that we may improve this
talent of Health for Gods Glory, and may be fitter for his Service. If we pray
for a competency of Estate, it must be for an holy end, that we may be kept
from the temptations which Poverty usually exposes to, and that we may be in a
better capacity to sow the golden seeds of Charity, and relieve such as are in
want. Temporal things must be prayed for, for Spiritual ends. Hannah prayed for
a Child, but it was for this end, that her Child might be devoted to God; 1 Samuel 1.11. O Lord, if thou will remember me, and wilt give unto thine handmaid
a man child, then I will give him unto the Lord all the days of his life. Many
pray for outward things, only to gratify their sensual appetite: The ravens
cry for food; Psalm. 147.9. To pray for outward things only to satisfy Nature,
is to cry rather like Ravens than Christians. We must have an higher end in our
Prayers, we must aim at Heaven, while we are praying for Earth: And must we
pray for Temporal things for Spiritual ends, that we may be fitter to serve
God, then how wicked are they, who beg Temporal Mercies that they may be more
enabled to sin against God; Iam. 4.3. Ye ask that ye may consume it upon your
lusts. One Man is sick and he prays for Health that he may be among his Cups
and Harlots; another prays for an Estate, he would not only have his Belly
filled but his Barns, and why would he be rich, that he may raise his Name, or
that having more power in his hand, he may now take a fuller revenge on his
enemies. This is impiety joined with impudence; to pray to God to give us
Temporal things that we may be the better enabled to serve the Devil.

USE. If we are to pray for Temporal good things, then how much more for
Spiritual; if we are to pray for Bread, then how much more for the Bread of
Life; if for Oil, then how much more for the Oil of gladness; if we pray to
have our hunger satisfied, much more should we pray to have our Souls saved.
Alas, what if God should hear our Prayers, and grant us these Temporal things,
and no more, what were we the better? What is it to have Food and want Grace;
what is it to have the back clothed and the Soul naked; to have a South land
and want the living springs in Christ's Blood, what comfort could that be? O
therefore let us be earnest for Spiritual Mercies. Lord, do not only feed me,
but sanctify me, rather an Heart full of Grace than an House full of Gold: If
we are to pray for daily Bread, the things of this Life, much more for the
things of the Life that is to come.

3. From this word give, I note, That they who God has given a large measure
of outward things to, yet we must pray, Give us daily Bread. And this may
answer a Question.

Quest. Some may say, we have an Estate already, and what need we pray, Give us
daily Bread?

Answ. Supposing we have a plentiful Estate, yet we need make this Petition,
Give us Bread: And that upon a double account.

(1.) That we may have a Blessing upon our Food, and all that we enjoy: Psalm
132.5. I will bless her provision. Man lives not by bread alone, but by every
word which proceeds out of Gods mouth; Matthew. 4.4. what is that but a word of
Blessing? Though the Bread is in our hand, yet the Blessing is in Gods hand,
and it must be fetched out of his hand by Prayer: Well therefore may rich Men
pray, Give us our Bread, let it be seasoned with a Blessing. If God should
withold a Blessing, nothing we have would do us good; our Cloths would not
warm us, our Food would not nourish us: Psalm. 106.15. He gave them their
request, but sent leanness into their soul; that is, they pined away, and their
Meat did not nourish them. If God should withold a Blessing, what we eat
would turn to bad humors, and hasten Death. If God does not bless our Riches
they will do us more hurt than good: Eccl. 5.13. Riches kept for the owners
thereof to their hurt. So that granting we have plentiful Estates, yet we had
need pray, Give us our Bread; let us have a Blessing with what we have.

(2.) Though we have Estates, yet we had need pray, give, that we may hereby
engage God to continue these Comforts to us. How many Casualties may fall out?
How many have had Corn in their Barn, and a fire has come on a sudden and
consumed all! How many have had losses at Sea, and great Estates boiled away to
nothing; Ruth 1.21. I went out full, and the Lord has brought me home again
empty. Therefore though we have Estates yet we had need pray, Give us, Lord, give
a continuance of these Comforts, that they may not before we are aware, take
wings and fly from us. So much for this first word in the Petition, Give.

Secondly, Us.] Give us.

Quest. Why do we pray here in the plural? Why give us? Why is it not said,
Give me?

Answ. To show that we are to have public Spirits in Prayer; we must not only
pray for our selves but others; both the Law of God, and the Law of Love bind
us to this. We must love our Neighbors as our selves; therefore we must pray
for them as well as for our selves. Every good Christian has a fellow-feeling
of the wants and miseries of others, and he prays that God would extend his
bounty to them; especially he prays for the Saints, Ephesians. 6.18. Praying always
for all Saints. These are Children of the Family.

USE I. Should we have public Spirits in Prayer, Give us; it reproves such
narrow-spirited Men as move only within their own sphere, they look only at
themselves but mind not the case of others; they leave others out of their
Prayers; if they have daily Bread they care not though others starve; if they
are clothed, they care not though others go naked. Christ has taught us to
pray for others, Give us; but selfish persons are shut up within themselves, as
the Snail in the shell, and never speak a word in Prayer for others: These have
no commiseration or pity, they are like Judas whose Bowels fell out.

USE II. Let us pray for others as well as for our selves, Give us: Vir bonus
aliis prodest aeque ac sibi. Spiders work only for themselves, but Bees work
for the good of others; the more excellent any thing is, the more it operates
for the good of others. The Springs refresh others with their crystal streams;
the Sun inlightens others with its golden beams; the more a Christian is
enobled with Grace, the more he besieges Heaven with his Prayers for others.
If we are Members of the Body Mystical, we cannot but have a sympathy with
others in their wants, and this sympathy sets us a praying for them. David had
a public Spirit in Prayer, Psalm. 125.4. Do good, O Lord, unto those that be
good: Though he begins the Psalm with Prayer for himself, Psalm. 51.1. Have
Mercy upon me, O God, yet he ends the Psalm with Prayer for others, ver. 18. Do
good in thy good pleasure unto Sion.

USE III. It is matter of Comfort to the Godly, who are but low in the World,
yet they have the Prayers of Gods people for them, they pray not only for the
increase of their Faith, but their Food, that God will give them Daily Bread.
He is like to be rich who has several stocks going; so are they in a likely
way to thrive who have the Prayers of the Saints going for them in several
parts of the World. So much for this second word in the Petition, Give us.

Thirdly, The thi^^ word in the Petition is, (...), This day.] We pray not give
us Bread for a month, or a year, but a day; Give us this day.

Quest. Is it not lawful to lay up for afterward? Does not the Apostle say, He
who provides not for his Family is worse than an Infidel; 1 Timothy 5.8.

Answ. It Is true, it is lawful to lay up for Posterity, but our Savior has
taught us to pray, Give us this day our bread, for two Reasons: 1. That we
should not have carking care for the future. We should not set our Wits upon
the tenter, or torment our selves how to lay up great Estates; if we do vivere
in diem, if we have but enough to supply for the present it may suffice; Give
us this day: Take no thought for to morrow, Matthew. 6.34. God fed Israel with
Manna in the wilderness, and he fed them from hand to mouth; sometimes all
their Manna was spent, and if any one had asked them where they would have
their breakfast next morning, they would have said, our care is only for this
day, God will rain down what Manna we need: If we have Bread this day, do not
distrust Gods Providence for the future. 2. Our Savior will have us pray, Give
us bread this day, to teach us to live every day as if it were our last. We are
not to pray give us Bread to morrow, because we do not know whether we shall
live while to morrow; but Lord give us this day, it may be our last day we
shall live, and then we shall need no more.

USE. If we pray for Bread only for a day, Give us this day, then you who have
great Estates have cause to be thankful, you have more than you pray for; you
pray but for Bread for one day, and God has given you enough to suffice you
all your life. What a bountiful God do you serve! Two things may make rich Men
thankful, 1. God gives them more than they deserve: 2. God gives them more than
they pray for.

Fourthly, The fourth thing in the Petition is, Our bread.]

Quest. Why is it called our Bread, when it is not ours but Gods?

Answ. 1. We must understand it in a qualified sense; it is our Bread being
gotten by honest industry. There are two sorts of Bread that cannot properly be
called our Bread. (1.) The Bread of Idleness. (2.) The Bread of Violence.

(1.) The Bread of Idleness: Prove. 31.27. She eats not the bread of idleness.
An idle Person does vivere aliena quadra, he lives at another bodies cost, and
is at their finding, Prove. 1.25. His hands refuse to labor. We must not be as
the Drones which eat the honey that other Bees have brought into the hive: If
we eat the bread of Idleness, this is not our own bread: 2 Thessalonians. 3.11, 12.
There are some that walk disorderly, working not at all, such we command that
they work, and eat their own bread. The Apostle gives us this hint, that such
as live idly do not eat their own Bread.

(2.) The Bread of Violence. We cannot call this our Bread, for it is taken
away from others. That which is gotten by stealth or fraud, or any manner of
extortion, is not our Bread, it belongs to another. He who is a bird of prey,
who takes away the Bread of the Widow and Fatherless, he eats that Bread which
is none of his, nor can he pray for a Blessing upon it: Can he pray God to
bless that which he has gotten unjustly?

2. It is called our Bread by virtue of our Title to it. There is a twofold
title to Bread. (1.) A Spiritual Title: In and by Christ we have a right to the
Creature, and may call it our Bread. As we are Believers we have the best Title
to Earthly things, we hold all in capite, 1 Cor. 3.22. All things are yours; by
what Title? Ye are Christ's. (2.) A Civil Title, which the Law confers on us: To
deny Men a Civil Right to their Possessions, and make all common, it opens the
door to Anarchy and Confusion.

USE. See the privilege of Believers, they have both a Spiritual and a Civil
Right to what they possess: They who can say Our Father, can say our Bread.
Wicked Men though they have a Legal right to what they possess, yet not a
Covenant right; they have it by Providence not by Promise; with Gods leave, not
with his Love. Wicked Men are in Gods eye no better than usurpers, all they
have, their Money and Land, is like Cloth taken up at the Drapers which is not
paid for; but this is the sweet privilege of Believers, they can say, our
Bread: Christ being theirs, all is theirs. O how sweet is every bit of Bread
dipped in Christ's Blood! How well does that Meat relish which is a pledge and
earnest of more! The Meal in the barrel is an earnest of our Angels food in
Paradise. Here is the privilege of Saints, they have a right to Earth and
Heaven.

Fifthly, The fifth and last thing in this Petition is, the thing we pray for,
Daily Bread.]

Quest. What is meant by Bread?

Answ. Bread here by a Synechdoche speciei pro genere, is put for all the
Temporal Blessings of this Life, Food, Fuel, Clothing; Quicquid nobis conducit
ad been esse, Aust. whatever may serve for Necessity, or sober Delight.

USE. Learn to be contented with that allowance God gives us. If we have Bread,
a competency of these outward things, let us rest satisfied. We pray but for
Bread, Give us our daily Bread, we do not pray for superfluities, not for
Quails or Venison, but for Bread, that which may support Life. Though we have not
so much as others, so full a Crop, so rich an Estate, yet if we have the staff
of Bread to shore us up from falling, let us be content; most people are herein
faulty. Though they pray that God would give them Bread (so much as he sees
expedient for them) yet they are not content with Gods allowance, but
over-greedily covet more, and with the daughters of the Horsleach, cry, Give,
give, Prove. 30.15. this is a vice Naturally ingrafted in us. Many pray Agurs
first Prayer, Give me not Poverty, but few pray his last Prayer, Give me not
Riches, Prove. 30.8. they are not content with daily Bread, but have the dry
dropsy of Covetousness, they are still craving for more; Hab. 2.5. Who
enlarges his desire as hell, and is as death, and cannot be satisfied. There
are, says Solomon, four things say, it is not enough, Prove. 30.15. the grave,
the barren womb, the earth, the fire; and I may add a fifth thing, the Heart of
a covetous Man. Such as are not content with daily Bread, but thirst insatiably
after more, will break over the hedge of Gods Command, and to get Riches will
stick at no sin; Cui nihil satis est, eidem nihil turpe, Tacitus; therefore
Covetousness is called a Radical Vice, 1 Timothy 6.10. The root of all evil. Quid
non mortalia pectora cogit, auri sacra fames? The word for Covetousness (...),
signifies an inordinate desire of getting* Covetousness is not only in getting
Riches unjustly, but in loving them inordinately: This is a key opens the door
to all sin. It causes 1. Theft: Achans covetous humor made him steal that
wedge of Gold which cleft asunder his Soul from God; Josh. 7.21. 2. It causes
Treason: What made Judas betray Christ? It was the thirty pieces of Silver,
Matthew. 26.15. 3. It produces Murder: It was the inordinate love of the
Vineyard made Ahab conspire Naboths death, 1 Kings 21.13. 4. It is the root of
Perjury: 2 Timothy 3.3. Men shall be (...), covetous, and it follows (...),
truce breakers: Love of Silver will make Men take a false-Oath, and break a
just Oath. 5. It is the spring of Apostasy: 2 Timothy 4.10. Demas has forsaken
me, having loved this present world. He did not only forsake Paul's company, but
his Doctrine. Demas afterward became a Priest in an Idol Temple, says
Dorotheus. 6. Covetousness will make Men Idolaters: Col. 3.5. Covetousness
which is idolatry. Though the covetous Man will not worship graven Images in the
Church, yet he will worship the graven Image in his Coin. 7. Covetousness makes
Men give themselves to the Devil. Pope Sylvester the Second did sell his Soul
to the Devil for a Popedom. Covetous persons forget this Prayer, Give us daily
Bread, that which may satisfy Nature, but they are insatiable in their desire.
O let us take heed of this dry Dropsy, Heb. 13.5. Be content with such things
as ye have. Natura parvo dimittitur, Sen. That we may be content with daily
Bread, that which God in his Providence carves out to us, and not covet or
murmur* let me propose these things.

1. God can bless a little, Exodus 23.24. He will bless thy Bread and thy Water:
A Blessing put sweetness into the least Morsel of Bread, it is like Sugar in
Wine, Psalm. 132.15. I will bless her Provision. Daniel and the three Children
eat Pulse (which was a coarse Fare) yet they looked fairer then those which did
eat of the Kings Meat, Dan. 1.15. whence was this? God did infuse a more then
ordinary Blessing into the ^ulse; Gods Blessing was better then the Kings
Venison, a piece of Bread with Gods Love is Angels Food.

2. God who gives us our allowance, knows what quantity of these outward things
is fittest for us; a smaller provision may be fitter for some, Bread may be
better then Dainties; every one cannot bear an high Condition, no more then a
weak Brain can bear heady wine; has one a larger proportion of worldly things,
God sees he can better manage such a Condition; he can order his Affairs with
discretion, which pe^haps another cannot; as he has a large Estate, so he has
a large heart to do good, which perhaps another has not; this should make us
content with a shorter Bill of Fare; Gods Wisdom is that we must acquiesce in,
he sees what is best for every one, that which is good for one may be bad for
another.

3. In being contented with daily Bread, that which God carves to us, though it
be a lesser piece, much grace is seen in this; all the Graces act their part in
a contented Soul; as the holy Ointment was made up of several Spices, Myrrh,
Cinnamon, Cassia, Exodus 30.23. so contentment has in it a mixture of several
Graces, there is Faith, a Christian believes God does all for the best; and
Love, which thinks no evil, but takes all God does in good part; and Patience,
submitting cheerfully to what God orders wisely: God is much pleased to see so
many graces at once sweetly exercised, like so many bright Stars shining in a
Constellation.

4. To be content with daily Bread: The allowance God gives, though but
sparingly, does keep us from many Temptations, which discontented Persons fall
into, when the Devil sees a Person just of Isreal's humor, not content with
Manna, but must have Quails, says Satan, here is good fishing for me; Satan
often tempts discontented ones to murmuring, and to unlawful means, cozening and
defrauding; and he who increases an Estate by indirect means, fluffs his
Pillow with Thorns, and his head will lie very uneasy when he comes to dye: If
you would be freed from the Temptations which discontent exposes to, be
content with such things as ye have, bless God for daily Bread.

5. What a rare and admirable thing it is to be content with daily bread,
though it be coarse, and though there be but little of it; a Christian though
he has but a viaticum, a little meal in the barrel, yet he has that which
gives him content; what he has not in the Cupboard, he has in the Promise;
that bit of bread he has is with the love of God, and that sauce makes it
relish sweet, that little Oil in the Cruse is a Pledge and Earnest of those
Dainties he shall taste of in the Kingdom of God; this makes him content: What a
rare and wonderful thing is this, it is no wonder to be content in Heaven, when
we are at the Fountainhead, and have all things we can desire; but to be
content when God keeps us to short Commons, and we have scarce daily bread,
this is a wonder: When grace is crowning, it is no wonder to be content, but
when grace is conflicting with straits now to be content is a glorious thing
indeed, and deserves the Garland of Praise.

6. To make us content with daily Bread: Though God straitens us in our
allowance, think seriously of the danger that is in an high prosperous
Condition; some are not content with daily bread, but desire to have their
Barns filled, and heap up Silver as dust; this proves a snare to them, 1 Timothy
6.10. They that will be rich fall into a snare. (...), Theophilact. Pride,
Idleness, VVantonness, are the three worms that usually breed of Plenty;
Prosperity often deafens the ear against God, Ier. 22.21. I spoke to thee in thy
Prosperity, but thou said, I will not hear. Soft pleasures harden the heart:
In the Body the more fat, the less blood in the Veins, and the less Spirits;
the more outward plenty often the less Piety. Prosperity has its Honey, and
also its Sting: Prosperity like the full of the Moon makes many Lunatic: The
Pastures of Prosperity are rank and surfeiting. Anxious care is the malus
Genius, the evil Spirit that haunts the rich Man, and will not let him be
quiet; when his Chests are full of Money his heart is full of care, either how
to manage, or how to increase, or how to secure what he has gotten: Sunshine
in pleasant, but sometimes it scorcheth: Should not this make us content with
that allowance God gives; if we have daily bread though not dainties; think of
the Danger of Prosperity; the spreading of a full Table may be the spreading of
a snare: Many have been sunk to Hell with golden Weights: The ferry Man takes
in all Passengers, that he may increase his Fare, and sometimes to the sinking
of the boat. 1 Timothy 6.9. They that will be rich fall into many hurtful Lusts,
which drown them in Perdition. The Worlds golden Sands are Quicksands; this may
make us take our daily bread, though it be but coarse, contentedly; what if we
have less food, we have less snare, if less dignity, less danger; as we want
the rich Provisions of the World, so we want the Temptations.

7. If God keeps us to a spare diet, if he give us less Temporals, he has made
it up in Spirituals; he has given us the Pearl of Price, and the holy
anointing. 1. The Pearl of Price, the Lord Jesus, he is the quintessence of all
good things; to give us Christ is more then if God had given us all the world;
God can make more worlds, but he has no more Christ's to bestow; he is such a
golden mine that the Angels cannot dig to the bottom; Ephesians. 3.8. From Christ we
have Justification, Adoption, Coronation: The Sea of Gods Mercy in giving us
Christ (says Luther) should swallow up all our wants. 2. The holy Unction, God
has anointed us with the graces of his Spirit: Grace is a seed of God, a
blossom of Eternity; the graces are (...), Damascen, the impressions of the
divine Nature, Stars to enlighten us, Spices to perfume us, Diamonds to enrich
us; and if God has adorned the hidden Man of the heart with these sacred
Jewels, it may well make us content, though we have but short Commons, and that
coarse too. God has given his People better things then Corn and Wine, he has
given them that which he cannot give in anger, and which cannot stand with
Reprobation, and they may say as David, Psalm. 16.6. The lines are fallen to
them in pleasant places, and they have a goodly heritage. I have read of
Didimus and Anthony, Didimus was a blind Man, but very holy; Anthony asked him
if he was not troubled for the want of his eyes, he told him he was; why said
Anthony, are you troubled you want that which Flies and Birds have, when you
have that which Angels have: So I say to Christians, if God has not given you
the Purse, he has given you his Spirit, if you want that which rich Men have,
God has given you that which Angels have, and are you not content?

8. If you have but daily bread enough to suffice nature, be content, consider
it is not having abundance makes the life always comfortable; it is not a great
Cage will make the Bird sing; a competency may breed contentment, when having
more may make one less content: A staff may help the Traveller, but a bundle of
staffs will be a burden to him. A great Estate may be like a long trayling
garment, more burdensome then useful: Many that have great incomes and revenues
have not so much comfort in their Lives, as some that go to their hard labor.

9. If you have less daily bread, you will have less account to give: The
Riches and Honors of the World like Alchimy make a great show, and with their
glistering dazzle Men's eyes; but they do not consider the great account they
must give to God, Luke 16.2. Give an account of thy Stewardship. What good have
thou done with thy Estate? have thou as a good Steward traded thy golden
Talents for Gods glory? have thou honored the Lord with thy Substance? the
greater Revenues the greater Reckonings; this may quiet and content us, if we
have but little daily bread, our account will be less.

10. You that have but a small competency in these outward things, your
provisions are short, yet you may be content, to consider how much you look for
hereafter: God keeps the best Wine till last: What though now you have but a
small pittance, and are fed from hand to mouth, you look for an eternal Reward,
white Robes, sparkling Crowns, Rivers of Pleasure: A Son is content though his
Father gives him but now and then a little Money, as long as he expects his
Father should settle all his land upon him at last. If God give you but a
little at present, yet you look for that glory which eye has not seen; may not
you be content? The World is but a Diversorium, a great Inn; if God give you
but sufficient to pay for your Charges in your Inn, you may be content, you
shall have enough when you come to your own Country.

Quest. How may we be content though God cut us short in these Externals;
though we have but little daily bread, and coarse?

Resp. 1. Think with our selves some have been much lower then we, who have
been better then we: Jacob an holy Patriarch goes over Jordan with his Staff,
and lived in a mean condition a long time, he had the Clouds for his Canopy,
and Stone for his Pillow: Moses that might have been rich, some Historians say,
Pharaoh's Daughter adopted him for her Son, because King Pharaoh had no Heir,
and so Moses was like to have come to the Crown, yet leaving the Honors of the
Court, in what a low mean condition did he live in when he went to Iethro his
Father-in-Law? Musculus famous for Learning and Piety was put to great Straits,
he was put to dig in a Town ditch, and had scarce daily bread, yet content.
Nay, Christ, who was Heir of all, yet for our sakes became poor, 2 Cor. 8.9.
Let all these Examples make us content.

2. Let us labor to have the Interest cleared between God and our Souls; he
who can say, My God, has enough to rock his heart quiet in the lowest
condition; what can he want who has El-Shaddai, the all-sufficient God for his
portion; though the nether-Springs fail, yet he has the upper-Springs; though
the bill of fare grow short, yet an Interest in God is a Pillar of Support to
us, and we may with David encourage ourselves in the Lord our God.

Mat. 6.12. And forgive us our Debts, as we forgive our Debtors.


BEfore I speak strictly to the Words, I shall take notice, 1. That in this
Prayer there is but One Petition for the Body, Give us our daily Bread, but two
Petitions for the Soul. Forgive us our Trespasses, lead us not into Temptation,
but deliver us from Evil; Hence observe, that we are to be more careful for our
Souls, than for our Bodies. More careful for Grace, than daily Bread, more
desirous to have our Souls saved, than our Bodies fed: in the Law, the Weight
of the Sanctuary was twice as big as the common weight: to typify, that
Spiritual Things must be of far greater Weight with us than Earthly. The
Excellency of the Soul, may challenge our Chief Care about it.

1. The Soul is an immaterial Substance, it is an heavenly Spark, lighted by
the Breath of God. It is the more refined spiritual Part of Man, it is of an
Angelical Nature; it has some faint resemblance of God. The Body is the more
dreggish part, it is but the Cabinet which (though curiously wrought) the Soul
is the Jewel; the Soul is near akin to Angels, it is Capax beatitudinis,
capable of Communion with God in Glory.

2. It is immortal; it does never expire. It can act without the Body, though the
Body dissolve into Dust, the Soul lives, Luke 12.4. The Essence of the Soul is
Eternal, it has a beginning, but no end: It is a Blossom of Eternity. Sure
then if the Soul be so Ennobled and Dignified, more care should be taken about
the Soul than the Body. We make but One Petition for the Body, but Two
Petitions for the Soul.

Use. 1. It reproves them that take more care for their Bodies, than their
Souls. The Body is but the brutish part, yet they take more care, 1. about
dressing their Bodies, than their Souls. They put on their best Clothes, are
dressed in the Richest Garb, but care not how naked or undrest their Souls are;
they do not get the Jewels of Grace, to adorn their inner Man. 2. About feeding
their Bodies, than their Souls, they are Caterers for the Flesh, they do (...),
make Provision for the Flesh, Romans 13.14. they have the best Diet, but let
their Souls starve. As if one should feed his Hawk, but let his Child starve.
The Body must sit in the Chair of State, but the Soul, that princely thing, is
made a Lacky to run on the Devil's Errand.

Use 2. Let us be more careful for our Souls. -- Omnia si perdas animam servare
memento. If it be well with the Soul, it shall be well with the Body. If the
Soul be gracious, the Body shall be glorious, for it shall shine like Christ's
Body. Therefore it is Wisdom to look chiefly to the Soul, because in saving the
Soul, we secure the Happiness of the Body. And, we cannot show our Care for the
Soul more, than in taking all Seasons for our Souls, Reading, Praying, Hearing,
Meditating. O look to the Main Chance, let the Soul be chiefly tended, the loss
of the Soul would be fatal, other Losses may be made up again. If one loses
his Health, he may recover it again, if he lose his Estate, he may get it up
again, but if he lose his Soul, this Loss can never be made up again. The
Merchant that ventures all he has in one ship if that ship be lost, he is
quite broken.

2. From the Connection in the Text, as soon as Christ had said, Give us daily
Bread, he adds, and forgive us. Christ joins this Petition of Forgiveness of
Sin immediately to the other of Daily Bread, to show us, that though we have
daily Bread, yet all is nothing without Forgiveness. If our sins be not
pardoned, we can take but little comfort in our Food. As it is with a man that
is condemned, though you bring him meat in Prison, yet he takes little comfort in
it without a pardon. So though we have Daily Bread, yet it will do us no good,
unless Sin be forgiven. What though we should have Manna, which was called Angels
Food, though the Rock should pour out Rivers of Oil, Job 29.6. all is nothing
unless sin be done away. When Christ had said, give us our Daily Bread, he
presently adds, and forgive us our Trespasses. Daily Bread may satisfy the
Appetite, but forgiveness of sin* satisfies the Conscience.

Use 1. It condemns the Folly of most People: If they have Daily Bread, the
delicious things of this Life, they look no further, they are not sollicitous
for the pardon of sin. If they have that which feeds them, they look not after
that which should Crown them. Alas, you may have Daily Bread, and yet perish.
The Rich man in the Gospel had Daily Bread, nay, he had Dainties, he fared
deliciously every day, but in Hell he lift up his Eyes, Luke 16.19.

Use 2. Let us pray that God would not give us our Portion in this Life, that
he would not put us off with daily Bread, but that he would give us
Forgiveness. This is the sauce that would make our Bread Relish the sweeter. A
Speech of Luther, Valde protestatus sum me nolle si^ satiari ab illo. I did
solemnly protest, that God should not put me off with outward things. Be not
content with that which is common to the bruit Creatures, the Dog or Elephant
to have your Hunger satisfied, but besides daily Bread, get pardon of Sin. A
drop of Christ's Blood, a dram of forgiving Mercy, is infinitely more valuable,
than all the Delights under the Sun. Daily Bread may make us live comfortably,
but forgiveness of Sin will make us die comfortably. So I come to the words of
the Petition, Forgive us our Debts, etc.

1. Here is a Term given to Sin, it is a Debt. 2. The confessing the Debt, Our
Debts. 3. A Prayer, forgive us. 4. A Condition on which we desire Forgiveness,
as we forgive our Debtors.

I shall speak of the Term given to Sin, it is (...), a Debt, that which is
here called a Debt, is called Sin* Luke 11.4. forgive us our sins. So then sin
is a Debt, and every sinner is a Debtor. Sin is compared to a Debt of ten
thousand Talents, Mat. 18.24

1. Why is sin called a Debt? 2. Wherein sin is worse than other Debts we
contract? 3. Wherein sinners have the property of bad Debtors?

Q. 1. Why is Sin called a Debt?

Answ. Because it so fitly resembles it.

1. A Debt arises upon non-payment of Money, or the not paying that which is
ones due. So we owe to God exact Obedience, and not paying what is due, thus we
come to be in debt. 2. As in case of non-payment, the Debtor goes to Prison. So
by our sin, we become guilty, and stand obliged to God's Curse and Damnation.
Though God does a while grant a sinner a Reprieve, yet he stands bound to eternal
Death, if the Debt be not forgiven.

2. In what sense sin is the worst Debt?

Answ. 1. Because we have nothing to pay; if we could pay the Debt, what need
we pray, forgive us? We cannot say, as he in the Gospel, Have patience with me,
and I will pay thee all, we can pay neither Principal nor Interest. Adam made
us all Bankrupts; in Innocence Adam had a stock of Original Righteousness to
begin the world with, he could give God personal and perfect Obedience; but by
his sin, he is quite broke, and has beggared all his Posterity. We have
nothing to pay, all our Duties are mixed with sin, and so we cannot pay God in
current Coin.

2. Sin is the worst Debt, because it is against an Infinite Majesty. An
Offense against the Person of a King, is Crimen laesae Mojestatis, it does
inhance and aggravate the Crime. Sin wrongs God, and so it is an Infinite
Offense. The schoolmen say, Omne peccatum contra conscientiam est quasi
Deicidium. Every known sin strikes at the Godhead. The sinner would not only
unthrone God, but un-God him, this makes the Debt infinite.

3. Sin is the worst Debt, because it is not a single, but a multiplied Debt.
(...), forgive us our Debts; we have debt upon debt, Ps. 40 12. Innumerable
Evils have compassed me about. We may as well reckon all the drops in the Sea,
as reckon all our spiritual Debts; we cannot tell you how much we owe. A man
may know his other debts, but we cannot number our spiritual Debts. Every vain
Thought is a sin, Prove. 24.9. the thought of Foolishness is sin, and what
swarms of vain Thoughts have we? The first rising of Corruption, though it never
blossom into outward Act, is a sin, then who can understand his Errors? we do
not know how much we owe to God.

4. Sin is the worst Debt, because it is an inexcusable Debt in two Respects.
1. There is no denying the Debt. 2. There is no shifting it off.

1. There is no denying the Debt, other debts men may deny, if Money be not
paid before Witness, or if the Creditor lose the Bond, the Debtor may say he
owes him nothing; but there is no denying this debt of Sin. If we say we have no
Sin, God can prove the Debt, Psalm. 50.21. I will set thy sins in order before
thee. God writes down our Debts in his Book of Remembrance, and God's Book, and
the Book of Conscience do exactly agree, so that this Debt cannot be denied.

2. There is no shifting off the Debt: other Debts may be shifted off.

1. We may get Friends to pay them; but neither Man nor Angel can pay this Debt
for us. If all the Angels in Heaven should go to make a Purse, they cannot pay
one of our Debts.

2. In other Debts, men may get a Protection, so that none can touch their
Persons, or sue them for the Debt; but who shall give us a Protection from
God's Justice? Job 10.7. there is none that can deliver out of thine Hand.
Indeed the Pope pretends, that his Pardon shall be men's Protection, and now
God's Justice shall not sue them, but that is only a Forgery, and cannot be
pleaded at God's Tribunal.

3. Other Debts, if the Debtor dies in Prison, cannot be recovered, death frees
them from debt. But if we die in debt to God, He knows how to recover it; as
long as we have Souls to strain on, God will not lose his Debt. Not the death
of the Debtor, but the death of the Surety pays a sinners Debt.

4. In other debts, men may fly from their Creditor, leave their Country, and
go into foreign Parts, and the Creditor cannot find them: but we cannot fly
from God. God knows where to find all his Debtors* Ps. 139.7. Whether shall I
fly from thy Presence? If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the
utmost parts of the Sea, there shall thy right hand hold me.

5. Sin is the worst debt, because it carries men in case of non-payment, to a
worse Prison than any upon Earth, to a fiery Prison, and the sinner is laid in
worse Chains, Chains of Darkness, where the sinner is bound under Wrath for
ever.

Quest. 3. Wherein we have the properties of bad Debtors?

1. A bad debtor does not love to be called to Account. There Is a day comeing,
when God will call all his Debtors to Account, Romans 14.12. so then every man
shall give an Account for himself to God, but we play away the time, and do not
love to hear of the day of Judgment. We love not that Ministers should put us
in mind of our debts, or speak of the day of Reckoning. What a confounding Word
will that be to a secure sinner, read Rationem, Give an Account of your
Stewardship.

2. A bad debtor is unwilling to confess his debt, he will put it off, or make
less of it. So we are more willing to excuse sin, than confess it. Aristot.
How hardly was Saul brought to Confession, 1 Samuel 15.20. I have obeyed the
voice of the Lord, but the People took of the spoil. He rather excuses his
sin, Romans 1.30.
than confesses it.

3. A bad debtor is apt to hate his Creditor. (...). Debtors wish their
Creditors dead. So wicked men naturally hate God, because they think he is a
just Judge, and will call them to Account, (...), God-Haters The debtor does
not love to see his Creditor.

Use 1. It reproves them who are loath to be in debt, but make no reckoning of
sin, which is the greatest Debt; they use no means to get out of it, but run
still further in debt to God. We would think it strange, if Writs or Warrants
were out against a man, or a Judgment granted to seize his Body and Estate, yet
he is secure and regardless, as if he were unconcerned. God has a Writ out
against a sinner, nay many Writs, for Swearing, Drunkenness, Sabbath-breaking,
yet the sinner eats and drinks, and is quiet, as if he were not in debt; what
Opium has Satan given men?

Use 2. Exh. If Sin be a Debt, 1. Let us be humbled. The name of Debt (says
St. Ambrose) is Grave Vocabulum, grievous.

Men in debt are full of Shame, they lie hid, and do not care to be seen. A
Debtor is ever in fear of Arrest. Canis latrat, and Cor palpitat. O let us
blush and tremble, who are so deeply indebted to God. A Roman dying in debt,
Augustus the Emperor sent to buy his Pillow, because (says he) I hope it has
some Virtue in it, to make me sleep, on which a man so much in debt could take
his Ease: we that have so many spiritual Debts lying upon us, how can we be at
rest, till we have some hope that they are discharged.

2. Let us Confess our Debt. Let us acknowledge that we are run in Arrears with
God, and deserve that he should follow the Law upon us, and throw us into
Hell-Prison. By Confession we give Glory to God, Josh. 7.19. My Son, give Glory
to the God of Israel, and make Confession to him. Say that God were Righteous,
if he should strain upon all we have; If we confess the debt, God will forgive
it. 1 Ioh. 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is just to forgive; do but confess
the Debt, and God will cross the Book, Ps. 32.5. I said I will confess my
Transgression to the Lord, and thou forgavest me.

3. Labor to get our spiritual Debts paid, that is, by our Surety Christ. Say,
Lord, have patience with me, and Christ shall pay thee all. He has laid down
an infinite Price. The Covenant of Works would not admit of a Surety, it
demanded Personal Obedience. But this Privilege we have by the Gospel, which
is a Court of Chancery to relieve us, that if we have nothing to pay, God will
accept of a Surety. Believe in Christ's Blood, and the debt is paid.

Luk 11.4. And forgive us our sins, for we also forgive every one that is
indebted to us.


IN the Words are two Parts. 1. A Petition, forgive us our Sins. 2. A
Condition, for we also forgive every one that is indebted to us. Our forgiving
others is not a Cause of God's forgiving us, but it is a Condition, without
which God will not forgive us.

1. I begin with the first, the Petition, Remitte nobis peccata nostra, Forgive
us our Sins. A Blessed Petition! the ignorant world say, who will show us any
good? Ps. 4.6. meaning, a good Lease, a good Purchase; but our Savior here
teaches us to pray for that which is more noble, and will stand us in more
stead, the pardon of sin, Forgive us our Sins. Forgiveness of sin, is a Primary
Blessing, it is one of the first Mercies God bestows, Ezekiel. 36.25. I will
sprinkle clean water upon you, that is, Forgiveness. When God pardons there is
nothing he will stick at to do for the Soul. He will Adopt, Sanctify, Crown.

Quest. 1. What Forgiveness of Sin is?

Resp. It is God's passing by Sin, Micah 7.18. his wiping off the score; and
giving us a Discharge.

The nature of Forgiveness will more clearly appear, 1. By opening some
Scripture-phrases. 2. By laying down some divine Aphorisms and Positions.

1. By opening some Scripture-phrases. 1. To forgive Sin is to take away
Iniquity, Job 7.21. Why do not thou take away mine Iniquity? The Hebrew Word
Vethagnabir, signifies to lift off. It Is a Metaphor taken from a man that
carries an heavy Burden ready to sink him, and another comes and lifts off this
Burden. So when the heavy burden of sin is on us, God in pardoning, lifts off
this burden from the Conscience, and lays it upon Christ. Isa. 53.6. He has
laid on him the Iniquity of us all.

2. To forgive sin is to Cover sin. Ps. 85.2. Thou have covered all their sin.
This was typifi'd by the Mercy seat covering the Ark. To show God's covering of
sin through Christ. God does not cover sin in the Antinomian Sense, so as he
sees it not, but he does so cover it, as he will not impute it.

3. To forgive sin is to blot it out, Isa. 43.25. I am he that blotteth out thy
Transgressions. The Hebrew Word Mecha, to blot out, alludes to a Creditor, who
when his Debtor has paid him, blots out the debt, and gives him an
Acquittance. So God when he forgives sin, blots out the Debt, he draws the red
Lines of Christ's Blood over our sins, and so crosses the Debt-Book.

4. To forgive sin, is for God to scatter our sins as a Cloud, Isa. 44.22. I
have blotted out as a thick Cloud your Transgressions. Sin is the Cloud
interposeth, God dispels the Cloud, and breaks forth with the light of his
Countenance.

5. To forgive sin, is for God to cast our sins into the depths of the Sea.
Micah 7.19. which implies Gods burying, them out of sight, that they shall not
rise up in judgment against us. Thou will cast all their sins into the depths
of the Sea. God will throw them in not as Cork that rises again, but as Lead
that sinks to the bottom. 2. The nature of Forgiveness will appear by laying
down some Divine Aphorisms or Positions.

Aphorism 1. Every sin is Mortal, and needs Forgiveness; I say Mortal, that is,
deserves death. God may relax the Rigor of the Law, but every sin merits
Damnation. The Papists distinguish of Mortal Sins and Venial. Some sins are ex
Surreptione, they creep unawares into the mind, (as vain Thoughts, sudden
Motions of Anger and Revenge) these says Bellarmine, are in their own nature
venial; it is true, the greatest sins are in one sense Venial, that is, God is
able to forgive them, but the least sin is not in its own nature Venial, but
deserves Damnation. We read of the Lusts of the Flesh, Romans 13.14. and the
Works of the Flesh, Gal. 5.19. the Lusts of the Flesh are sinful, as well as
the Works of the Flesh. That which is a Transgression of the Law, merits
damnation, but the first stirrings of Corruption are a breach of the Royal Law,
Rom 7.7. Prove. 24.9. therefore they merit damnation. So that the least sin is
mortal, and needs Forgiveness.

Aphorism 2. It is God only that forgives sin. To pardon sin is one of the Iura
Regalia, the Flowers of God's Crown, Mark 2.7. Who can forgive sins, but God
only? It is most proper for God to pardon sin, only the Creditor can remit the
debt. Sin is an Infinite Offense, and no finite Power can discharge an infinite
Offense. That God only can forgive sin, I prove thus.

No man can take away sin, unless he be able to infuse Grace, (for as Aquinas
says) with Forgiveness is always infusion of Grace; but no man can infuse
Grace, therefore no man can forgive sin. He only can forgive sin, who can remit
the Penalty, but it is only God's Prerogative-Royal to forgive sin.

Object. 1. But a Christian is charged to forgive his Brother, Col. 3.13.
Forgiving one another.

Answ. In all second table sins, there are two distinct things. 1. Disobedience
against God. 2. Injury to Man. That which man is required to forgive, is the
wrong done to himself: but the wrong done to God* he cannot forgive. Man may
remit a Trespass against himself, but not a Transgression against God.

Object. 2. But the Scripture speaks of the Power committed to Ministers to
forgive sin, John 20.23. Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto
them.

Answ. Ministers cannot remit sin authoritatively, and effectively, but only
declaratively. They have a special Office and Authority, to apply the Promises
of pardon to broken Hearts. When a Minister sees one humbled for sin, yet is
afraid God has not pardoned him, and is ready to be swallowed up of Sorrow, in
this case a Minister for the easing of this man's Conscience, may in the Name
of Christ declare to him, that he is pardoned, the Minister does not forgive
sin by his own Authority, but as an Herald in Christ's Name* pronounces a
man's pardon; as it was with the Priest in the Law, God did Cleanse the Leper,
the Priest only did Pronounce him clean: so it is God who by his Prerogative
does forgive sin, the Minister only pronounces forgiveness to the sinner being
Penitent.

Power to forgive sin authoritatively in ones own name, was never granted to
any mortal man. A King may pardon a man's Life, but not pardon his sin. Popes
Pardons are insignificant, like Blanks in a Lottery, good for nothing but to be
torn.

Aphorism 3. Forgiveness of sin is purely an Act of God's Free Grace. There are
some Acts of God, which declare his Power, as making and governing the World,
other Acts that declare his Justice, as punishing the Guilty, other Acts that
declare his Free Grace, as pardoning of sinners, Isa. 43.25. I am He that
blotteth out sin for my own name sake. As when a Creditor freely forgives a
Debtor, 1 Timothy 1.15. I obtained mercy. Gr. (...), I was all over besprinkled
with Mercy. When God pardons a sin, he does not pay a debt, but give a Legacy.
Forgiveness is spun out of the Bowels of God's Mercy. There is nothing we can
do, can deserve it. It is not our Prayers or Tears or good Deeds, can purchase
pardon. When Simon Magus would have bought the Gift of the Holy Ghost with
Money; Thy Money (says Peter) perish with thee, Acts 8.20. So they, who think
they can buy pardon of sin with their Duties and Alms, their money perish with
them: Forgiveness is an Act of God's Free Grace, here he displays the Banner of
Love. This is that will raise the Trophies of God's Glory, and will cause the
Saints Triumph in Heaven, that when there was no Worthiness in them, when they
lay in their Blood, God took pity on them, and held forth the Golden Scepter of
Love in forgiving: Forgiveness is a golden Thread spun out of the Bowels of
Free Grace.

Aphorism or Position 4. Forgiveness is through the Blood of Christ. Free Grace
is the inward Cause moving, Christ's Blood is the outward Cause meriting
Pardon. Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have Redemption through his Blood. All Pardons
are sealed in Christ's Blood, the Guilt of sin was infinite, and nothing but
that Blood which was of infinite Value could procure Forgiveness.

Object. But if Christ laid down his Blood as the (...), the price of our
Pardon, then how can we say, God freely forgives sin? if it be by purchase, how
is it by Grace?

Answ. It was God's Free grace that found out a way of Redemption through a
Mediator. Nay, God's Love appeared more in letting Christ die for us, than if
he had forgiven us without exacting any satisfaction.

2. It was Free Grace moved God to accept of the price paid for our sins. That
God should accept a Surety, that one should sin, and another suffer, this was
Free Grace. So that forgiveness of sin, though it be purchased by Christ's
Blood, yet it is by Free Grace.

Aphorism 5. In Forgiveness of sin, God remits the guilt and penalty, Remissa
culpa remittitur poena. Guilt is an Obligation to Punishment, Guilt cries for
Justice. Now God in forgiving does indulge the sinner as to the Penalty. God
seems to say to the sinner thus; Though thou art fallen into the hands of my
Justice, and deservest to die, yet I will take off the Penalty, whatever is
charged upon thee, shall be discharged. When God pardons a Soul, he will not
reckon with him in a purely vindictive way, he stops the Execution of Justice.

Aphorism 6. By virtue of this Pardon, God will no more call sin into
remembrance, Heb. 8.12. Their Sins and Iniquities will I remember no more. God
will pass an Act of Oblivion, he will not upbraid us with former Unkindnesses.
When we fear God will call over our sins again after pardon, look into this Act
of Indemnity, their Iniquities will I remember no more. God is said therefore
to blot out our Sin. A man does not call for a debt, when he has crossed the
book. When God pardons a man, his former Displeasure cease, Hos. 14.4. Mine
Anger is turned away.

Object. But God is angry with his pardoned ones?

Answ. Though a Child of God after pardon, may incur God's fatherly Displeasure,
yet God's Judicial Wrath is removed, though God may lay on the Rod, yet he has
taken away the Curse: Correction may befall the Saints, but not Destruction, Ps.
89.31. My loving kindness I will not take away.

Aphorism or Position 7. That sin is not forgiven, till it be repented of.
Therefore they are put together, Luke 24.47. Repentance and Remission; Domine
da poenitentiam, and postea indulgentiam. Fulgentius. 9. Now in Repentance,
there are three main Ingredients, and all these must be before Forgiveness. 1.
Contrition. 2. Confession. 3. Conversion. 1. Contrition, or brokenness of
Heart. Ezekiel. 7.16. They shall be like Doves of the Valleys, all of them
mourning every one for his Iniquity. This Contrition or rending of the Heart,
is expressed, sometimes by smiting on the Breast, Luke 18.13. sometimes by
plucking off the Hair, Ezra 9.3. sometimes by watering the Couch, Ps. 6.6. but
all Humiliation is not Contrition. Some have only pretended Sorrow for sin, and
so have missed of Forgiveness. Ahab humbled himself, his Garments were Rent,
not his Heart.

Quest. What is that Remorse and Sorrow, which goes before Forgiveness of sin?

Answ. It is an Holy Sorrow, it is a grieving for sin Quatenus sin, as it is
sin, as it is a dishonouring of God, and a defiling of the Soul. Though there
were no Sufferings to follow, yet the true penitent would grieve for sin, Ps
51.3. My sin is ever before me. This Contrition goes before Remission. Ier.
31.18, 19. I repented, I smote upon my Thigh, is Ephraim my dear Son? my Bowels
are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him. Ephraim is troubled
for sinning, and God's Bowels were troubled for Ephraim, the Woman in the
Gospel stood at Iesus's feet weeping, and a pardon followed, Luke 7.47.
Wherefore I say, her sins which are many, are forgiven her. The Seal is set
upon the Wax when it melts, God seals his Pardons upon melting Hearts.

2. The second Ingredient into Repentance is Confession. Ps. 51.4. Against
thee, thee only have I sinned: this is not Auricular Confession. This the
Papists make a Sacrament, and affirm, that without Confession of all ones sins
in the Ears of a Priest, no man can receive forgiveness of sin; the Scripture is
ignorant of it, nor do we read of any General Council, til the Lateran Council,
which was about twelve hundred Years after Christ, did ever decree Auricular
Confession.

Object. But does not the Scripture say, Iam. 5.15. Confess your sins one to
another?

Resp. This is absurdly brought for auricular Confession, for by this, the
Priest must as well confess to the people, as the people to the Priest. The
Sense of that place is, in case of public Scandals, or private Wrongs; here
Confession is to be made to others: But chiefly, Confession is to be made to
God, who is the Party offended. Against thee, thee only have I sinned;
Confession gives vent to Sorrow. Confession must be free without Compulsion,
ingenuous, without Reserve, cordial, without Hypocrisy, the Heart must go along
with the Confession. This Confession makes way for Forgiveness, Psalm. 32.5. I
said I would confess my sin, and thou forgavest me. When the Publican and Thief
on the Cross* confessed they had that Pardon. The Publican smote upon his
Breast, there was Contrition, and said, God be merciful to me a sinner, there
was Confession; he went away justified, there was Forgiveness: And the Thief on
the Cross, we indeed suffer justly, there was Confession; and Christ absolved
him before he died, Luke 23.41. This day shall thou be with me in Paradise.
Which words of Christ, might occasion that Saying of St. Austin, Confession
shuts the mouth of Hell, and opens the Gate of Paradise.

3. The third Ingredient in Repentance is Conversion, or turning from sin,
Judge. 10.15. We have sinned, there was Confession, ver. 16. They put away their
strange gods, there was Conversion, and it must be an universal Turning from
sin, Ezekiel. 18.31. Cast away from you all your Transgressions. You would be loath
God should forgive only some of your sins. Would you have God forgive all, and
will not you forsake all? He that hides one Rebel, is a Traitor to the Crown:
He that lives in one known sin, is a traitorous Hypocrite, and it must not only
be a Turning from sin, but a Turning unto God. Therefore it is called
Repentance, (...). Act. 20.20. Toward God. The Heart points toward God as the
Needle to the North Pole. The Prodigal did not only leave his Harlots, but did
arise and go to his Father, Luke 15.17. This Repentance is the ready way to
pardon, Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and turn to the Lord, and he
will abundantly pardon. A King will not pardon a Rebel, whilst he continues in
open Hostility. Thus you see Repentance goes before Remission. They who never
repented, can have no ground to hope that their sins are pardoned.

7. Aphorism or Position is, that sin is not forgiven, till it be repented of.

Caution, Not that Repentance does merit the forgiveness of sin. To make
Repentance satisfactory is popish, by Repentance we please God, but we do not
satisfy him: Alas, Christ's Blood must wash our Tears. Repentance is a
Condition, not a Cause; God will not pardon for Repentance, nor yet without it.
God Seals his pardons on melting Hearts. Repentance makes us prize pardon the
more. He who cries out of his broken Bones, will the more prize the mercy of
having them set again; when there is nothing in the Soul but Clouds of Sorrow,
and now God brings a pardon, (which is a setting up a Rainbow in the Cloud, to
tell the Soul the Flood of God's Wrath shall not overflow) O what Joy, at the
sight of this Rainbow! the Soul now burns in love to God.

8. Aphorism or Position; The greatest Sins come within the compass of
Forgiveness, Incest, Sodomy, Adultery, Theft, Murder, which are Sins of the
first magnitude* yet these are pardonable. Paul was a Blasphemer, and so sinned
against the first Table, a Persecutor, and so he sinned against the second
Table; yet he obtained Mercy, 1 Timothy 1.13. (...), I was all besprinkled with
Mercy. Zacheus an Extortioner, Mary Magdalen an unchaste woman, out of whom
seven Devils were cast. Manasseh who made the streets run with Blood, yet had
their pardon. Some of the Jews, who had a hand in Crucifying of Christ were
forgiven. God blots out not only the Cloud, but the thick Cloud, Isa 44.22.
Enormities as well as Infirmities; the King in the Parable, forgave his Debtor
that owed him ten thousand Talents, Mat. 18.27. a Talent weighed three thousand
Shekels, ten thousand Talents, contained almost twelve Tun of Gold. This was an
Emblem of God's forgiving great Sins; Isa. 1.18. Though your Sins were as
Scarlet, yet they shall be as white as Snow. Scarlet in the Greek is called
(...), twice dipped, and the Art of Man cannot wash out the dye again. But though
our sins are of a Scarlet-dye, God's Mercy can wash them away. The Sea can as
well cover great Rocks, as little Sands. This I mention, that sinners may not
despair: God counts it a Glory to him to forgive great Sins; now Mercy and Love
ride in Triumph, 1 Timothy 1.14. The Grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant;
(...), it was exuberant, it did overflow as Nilus. We must not measure God by
our selves. God's Mercy excels our sins, as much as Heaven does Earth, Isa.
55.9. If great sinners could not be forgiven, then great sinners should not be
preached to, but the Gospel is to be preached to all. If they could not be
forgiven, it were a dishonor to Christ's Blood, as if the wound were broader
than the Plaster. God has first made great sinners broken Vessels, he has
broken their heart for sin, and then he has made them golden Vessels, he has
filled them with the Golden Oil of pardoning Mercy. This may encourage great
sinners to come in and repent. Indeed the sin against the Holy Ghost is
unpardonable, not but that there is Mercy enough in God to forgive it, but
because he who has committed this sin, will have no pardon. He despights God,
scorns his Mercy, spills the Cordial of Christ's Blood, and tramples it under
foot, he puts away Salvation from him; but else the greatest sins are
pardonable. When a poor sinner looks upon himself, and sees his Guilt, and when
he looks upon God's Justice and Holiness, he falls down confounded, but here is
that may be as Cork to the Net, to keep him from despair, if thou will leave
thy sins and come to Christ, Mercy can seal thy pardon.

Aphorism 9. When God pardons a sinner, he forgives all sins, Ier. 33.8. I will
pardon all their Iniquities. Col. 2.13. Having forgiven you all Trespasses. The
Mercy-Seat covered the whole Ark. The Mercy-Seat was a Type of Forgiveness, to
show that God covers all our Transgressions. He does not leave one sin upon the
score. He does not take his Pen, and for fourscore sins write down fifty, but
blots out all sin, Psalm. 103.3. Who forgiveth all thine Iniquities. When I say,
God forgives all sins, I understand it of sins Past, but sins to Come are not
forgiven till they are Repented of. Indeed, God has decreed to pardon them,
and when God forgives one sin, he will in time forgive all, but sins future are
not actually pardoned, till they are repented of. It is absurd to think sin
should be forgiven, before it is committed.

1. If all sins past and to come are at once forgiven, then what need a man
pray for the pardon of sin? It Is a vain thing to pray for the pardon of that
which is already forgiven.

2. This opinion that sins to come (as well as past) are forgiven, does take
away and make void Christ's Intercession: Christ is an Advocate to interceed
for daily Sins, 1 John 2.1. but if sin be forgiven before it be committed, what
need is there of Christ's daily Intercession? What need have I of an Advocate,
if sin be pardoned before it be committed? So that, God though he forgives all
sins past to a Believer, yet sins to come are not forgiven, till Repentance be
Renewed.

Aphorism 10 Faith does necessarily antecede Forgiveness, there must be
Believing on our part, before there is forgiving on God's part, Acts 10.43. To
him give all the Prophets witness, that through his Name whosoever believes in
him, shall receive remission of Sins. So that Faith is a necessary Antecedent
to Forgiveness. There are two Acts of Faith, to accept Christ, and to trust in
Christ, to accept of his Terms, to trust in his Merits; and he who does neither
of these can have no Forgiveness; he who does not accept Christ, cannot have
his Person, he that does not trust in him, cannot have benefit by his Blood. So
that without Faith, no Remission.

Aphorism 11. Though Justification and Sanctification are not the same, yet God
never pardons a sinner, but he does Sanctify him, Justification and
Sanctification are not the same.

1. Justification is without us, Sanctification is within us. The one is by
Righteousness imputed, the other is by Righteousness imparted.

2. Justification is equal, Sanctification is gradual. Sanctification does
recipere maegis and minus, one is sanctified more than another, but one is not
justified more than another. One has more Grace than another, but he is not
more a Believer than another.

3. The matter of our Justification is perfect, viz. Christ's Righteousness,
but our Sanctification is imperfect, there are the spots of God's Children,
Deuteronomy. 32.5. Our Graces are mixed, our Duties are defiled. Thus Justification
and Sanctification are not the same: yet, for all that, they are not separated.
God never pardons and justifies a sinner, but he does sanctify him, 1 Cor.
6.11. but ye are justified, but ye are sanctified. 1 John 5.6. This is he that
came by Water and Blood, even Jesus Christ. Christ comes to the Soul by Blood,
that denotes Remission, and by Water, that denotes Sanctification. Let no man
say he is pardoned that is not made Holy. And This, I the rather urge against
the Antinomians, who talk of being forgiven their sin* and having a part in
Christ, and yet remain unconverted, and live in the grossest sins. Pardon and
Healing go together, Isa. 57.19. I create the fruit of the lips, peace, and I
will heal him. Peace is the fruit of pardon, and then it follows, I will heal
him. Where God pardons he purifies. As in the Inauguration of Kings, with the
Crown there is the Oil to anoint: So when God crowns a man with Forgiveness,
there he gives the anointing Oil of Grace to sanctify, Revel. 2.17. I will
give him a white Stone* and in the Stone a new Nam^. A white Stone, that is,
Absolution, and a new Name in the Stone, that is, Sanctification^

1. If God should pardon a man and not sanctify him, this would be a Reproach
to him, then he should love and be well pleased with men in their sins, which
is diametrically contrary to his Holy Nature.

2. If God should pardon and not sanctify, then he could have no Glory from
us. God's people are formed to show forth his Praise, Isa. 43.21. but if he
should pardon and not sanctify us how could we show forth his Praise? how
could we glorify him? what Glory can God have by a proud, ignorant profane
Heart?

3. If God should pardon and not sanctify, then that should enter into Heaven
that defiles, but Revel. 21.27. Nothing shall enter that defiles. Then God
should settle the Inheritance upon men before they are fit for it, contrary to
that Col. 1.12. He has made us meet for the Inheritance; how is that but by
the Divine Unction? so that whoever God forgives, he Transforms. Let no man say
his sins are forgiven, who does not find an inherent Work of Holiness in his
Heart.

Aphorism 12. Where God remits sin, he imputes Righteousness. This
Righteousness of Christ imputed, is a Salvo to God's Law, and makes full
satisfaction for the breaches of it* This Righteousness procures God's favor,
God cannot but love us, when he sees us in his Sons Robe, which both covers and
adorns us. In this spotless Robe of Christ, we Outshine the Angels. Theirs is
but the Righteousness of Creatures, this is the Righteousness of God himself, 2
Cor. 5.21. That we might be made the Righteousness of God in him. How great a
Blessing then is Forgiveness? With remission of sin is joined imputation of
Righteousness.

Aphorism 13. They whose sins are forgiven, must not omit praying for
forgiveness. Forgive us our Trespasses. Believers who are pardoned, must be
continual Suitors for pardon. When Nathan told David, The Lord has put away
thy sin, 2 Samuel 12.13. yet David after that composed a penitential Psalm for
the pardon of his sin. Sin after pardon Rebels. Sin like Sampson's Hair, though
it be cut will grow again. We sin daily, and must as well ask for daily pardon,
as for daily bread. Besides, a Christian's pardon is not so sure, but he may
desire to have a clearer Evidence of it.

Aphorism 14. A full Absolution from all sin is not pronounced, till the day of
Judgment. They day of Judgment is called a time of Refreshing, when sin shall
be completely blotted out, Acts 3.19. Now God blots out sin Truly, but then it
shall be done in a more public way. God will openly Pronounce the Saints
Absolution before Men and Angels, their Happiness is not completed till the
day of Judgment, because then their Pardons shall be solemnly Pronounced, and
there shall be the Triumphs of the heavenly Host. At that day it will be true
indeed, that God sees no sin in his Children. They shall be as pure as the
Angels, then the Church shall be presented without wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.27. She
shall be as free from Stain as Guilt, then Satan shall no more accuse, Christ
will show the Debt-book crossed in his Blood. Therefore the Church does so pray
for Christ's coming to Judgment, Rev. 22.17. the Bride says, Come Lord Jesus,
Light the Lamps, then burn the Incense.

Use 1. Informaet. From this word forgive, we learn, that if the debt of sin be
no other way discharged but by being forgiven, then we cannot satisfy for it.
Among other damnable Opinions of the Church of Rome, this is one, Man's power
to satisfy for sin. The Council of Trent holds, that God is satisfied by our
undergoing the Penalty imposed by the Censure of Priests. And again, we have
Works of our Own, by which we may satisfy for the wrong done to God; by these
Opinions let any judge what the Popish Religion is. They intend to pay the debt
they owe God themselves, to pay it in part, and do not look to have it all
forgiven. But why did Christ teach us to pray, forgive us our sins, if we can
of our selves satisfy God for the wrong we have done him? This Doctrine robs
God of his Glory, Christ of his Merit, and the Soul of Salvation. Alas, is not
the lock cut where our Strength lay? are not all our Works fly-blown with sin?
and can sin satisfy for sin? this Doctrine makes men their own Saviors; it is
most absurd to hold: for can the Obedience of a finite Creature satisfy for an
infinite Offense? Sin being forgiven clearly implies we cannot satisfy for it.

2. From this word Us, forgive us, we learn that pardon is chiefly to be sought
for our selves. For, though we are to pray for the pardon of others, Iam. 6.16.
Pray one for another, yet in the first place we are to beg pardon for our
selves. What will another pardon do us good? every one is to endeavor to have
his own name in the pardon. A Son may be made free by his Fathers Copy, but he
cannot be pardoned by his Fathers pardon, he must have a pardon for himself. In
this sense, selfi^hness is lawful, every one must be for himself, and get a
pardon for his own sins. Forgive Us.

3. From this word (...), OUR, Our sins, we learn how just God is in punishing
us; the Text says, Our Sins; we are not punished for other men's sins, but our
own. Nemo habet de proprio nisi peccatum -- Augustine. There Is nothing we can
call so properly ours as sin. Our daily bread we have from God, our daily sins
we have from our selves. Sin is our own Act, a web of our own spinning. How
righteous therefore is God in punishing of us? we sow the seed, and God only
makes us reap what we sow, Ier. 17.10. I give every man the fruit of his own
doings. When we are punished, we do but taste the fruit of our own grafting.

4. From this word (...), Sins, see from hence, the multitude of sins we stand
guilty of; we pray not forgive us our Sin, (as if it were only a single debt)
but sins in the plural; so vast is the Catalogue of our sins, that David cries
out, Who can understand his Errors? Ps. 19.12. Our sins are like the drops in
the Sea, like the atoms in the Sun, they exceed all Arithmetic. Our debts we
owe to God, we can no more number, than we can satisfy. Which, as it should
humble us to consider how full of black Spots our Souls are, so it should put
us upon seeking after the pardon of our sins, and this brings to the second Use.

Exhort. To labor to have the forgiveness of sin sealed up to us. How can we
eat, or drink, or sleep without it? It Is sad dying without a pardon. This is to
fall into the Labyrinth of Despair; of this the next time.

Use 2. Let us labor for the forgiveness of sin. If ever this was needful,
then now, when the Times ring Changes, and Dangers seem to be marching toward
us. Labor I say, for the Forgiveness of sin; this is a main Branch of the
Charter, or Covenant of Grace, Heb. 10.12. I will be merciful to your
Unrighteousness, and your Sins and Iniquities I will remember no more. It is
Mercy to feed us, but it is rich Mercy to pardon us; this is spun and woven out
of the Bowels of Free Grace. Earthly things are no signs of God's love; he may
give the Venison, but not the Blessing, but when God seals up Forgiveness, he
gives his Love and Heaven with it, Psalm. 21.3. Thou set a Crown of pure
Gold on his head. A Crown of Gold was a Mercy, but if you look into 103. Psalm,
you shall find a greater Mercy, v. 3, 4. Who forgiveth all thine Iniquities,
who crowns thee with loving kindness. To be crowned with Forgiveness and
Loving kindness, is a far greater Mercy, than to have a Crown of pure Gold set
upon the Head; it was a Mercy when Christ cured the palsy man, but when Christ
said to him, Thy sins are forgiven, Mar. 2.5. this was more than to have his
palsy healed; forgiveness of Sin is the Chief thing to be sought after, and
sure if conscience be once touched with a sense of Sin, there is nothing a man
will thirst after more than forgiveness, Ps. 51.3. My Sin is ever before me,
this made David so earnest for pardon, Ps. 51.1. Have Mercy upon me, O God,
blot out my Transgressions. If one should have come to David, and asked him,
David where is thy pain? what is it troubles thee? is it the fear of shame
which shall come upon thee in thy Wives? is it the fear of the Sword which God
has threatened shall not depart from thy House? 2 Samuel 12.11.
he would have said* No, it is only my sin pains me; My Sin is ever before me.
Were but this removed by forgiveness, though the Sword did ride in circuit in my
Family I should be well enough content. When the Arrow of Guilt sticks in the
Conscience, nothing is so desirable as to have this Arrow plucked out by
forgiveness. Oh therefore seek after the Forgiveness of Sin, can you make a
shift to live without it? but how will you do to die without it? will not death
have a sting to an unpardoned Sinner? how do you think to get to Heaven without
forgiveness? as at some solemn Festivals, there is no being admitted unless you
bring a Ticket: so unless you have this Ticket to show, Forgiveness of Sin,
there is no being admitted into the Holy Place of Heaven. Will God ever Crown
those that he will not forgive? O be ambitious of pardoning Grace. When God had
made Abraham great and large Promises, Abraham replies, Lord what is all,
seeing I go Childless? Genesis 15.2. so when God has given thee Riches, and all
thy heart can wish, say to him, Lord, what is all this, seeing I want
Forgiveness? let my pardon be sealed in Christ's Blood. A Prisoner in the Tower
is in an ill Case, notwithstanding his brave Diet, great Attendance, soft Bed
to lie on* because being Impeached, he looks every day for his Arraignment, and
is afraid of the Sentence of Death. In such a Case, and worse is He, that swims
in the Pleasures of the World, but his sins are not forgiven. A guilty
Conscience does impeach him, and he is in fear of being Arraigned and Condemned
at God's Judgment Seat. Give not then sleep to your Eyes, or slumber to your
Eye lids, till you have gotten some well-grounded hope that your sins are
blotted out. Before I come to press the Exhortation to seek after forgiveness
of Sin* I shall propound one question.

Quest. If pardon of Sin be so absolutely necessary, without it no Salvation,
what is the Reason that so few in the world seek after it? If they want health
they repair to the Physician, if they want Riches they take a Voyage to the
Indies, but if they want forgiveness of Sin, they seem to be unconcerned, and
do not seek after it, whence is this?

Answ. 1. Inadvertency or want of Consideration, they do not look into their
spiritual Estate, or cast up their Accounts to see how Matters stand between
God and their Souls, Isa. 1.3. My people does not consider, they do not
consider they are indebted to God in a Debt of ten thousand Talents, and that
God will ere long call them to account, Romans 14.12. So then every one of us
shall give account of himself to God. But people shun serious Thoughts, my
people does not consider. Hence it is they do not look after pardon.

2. Men do not seek after forgiveness of Sin, for want of Conviction. Few are
convinced what a deadly Evil Sin is, it is the spirits of Mischief distilled*
it turns a man's Glory into shame, it brings all plagues on the Body, and curses
on the Soul. Unless a man's Sin be forgiven, there is not the vilest creature
alive, the Dog, Serpent, Toad, but is in a better Condition than the Sinner,
for when they die, they go but to the Earth, but he dying without pardon, goes
into Hell Torments for ever. Men are not convinced of this, but play with the
Viper of Sin.

3. Men do not seek earnestly after Forgiveness, because they are seeking other
things: they seek the World immoderately. When Saul was seeking after the
Asses* he did not think of a Kingdom. The World is a golden Snare, Divitiae
Saeculi sunt laquei Diaboli, Bern. The Wedge of Gold hinders many from seeking
after a pardon. Ministers cry to the people, get your pardon sealed, but if you
call to a man that is in a Mill, the noise of the Mill drowns the voice that he
cannot hear* so when the Mill of a Trade is going, it makes such a noise, that
the people cannot hear the Minister when he lifts up his Voice like a Trumpet,
and cries to them to look after the sealing of their pardon. He who spends all
his time about the World, and does not mind Forgiveness, will accuse himself of
Folly at last. You would judge that Prisoner very unwise, that should spend all
his time with the Cook to get his dinner ready, and should never mind getting a
pardon.

4. Men seek not after the forgiveness of Sin, through a bold Presumption of
Mercy, they conceit God to be made up all of Mercy, and that he will indulge
them, though they take little or no pains to sue out their pardon. It is true,
God is Merciful, but withal he is Just, he will not wrong his Justice by
showing Mercy; read the Proclamation, Exodus 34.6. The Lord, the Lord God
merciful, ver. 7. and that will by no means clear the guilty. Such as go on in
Sin, and are so slothful or wilful that they will not seek after Forgiveness,
tho there be a whole Ocean of Mercy in the Lord, not one drop shall fall to
their share, he will by no means clear the guilty.

5. Men seek not earnestly after Forgiveness out of hope of Impunity, they
flatter themselves in sin, and because they have been spared so long, therefore
sure God never intends to reckon with them, Ps. 10.11. He has said in his
Heart God has forgotten, he hides his Face, he will never see it. Atheists
think either the Judge is blind, or forgetful; but let Sinners know, that long
forbearance is no forgiveness. God did bear with Sodom a long time, but at last
rained down Fire and Brimstone upon them, the adjourning of the Assizes does
not acquit the Prisoner, the longer God is taking his blow, the heavier it will
be at last if sinners repent not.

6. Men do not seek earnestly after Forgiveness through Mistake; they think
getting a pardon is easy, it is but repenting at the last hour, a sigh or a
Lord have Mercy, and a pardon will drop into their Mouths. But is it so easy
to repent and have a pardon? tell me O Sinner, is Regeneration easy, are there
no Pangs in the new Birth? is Mortification easy? is it nothing to pluck out
the right Eye? is it easy to leap out of Dalilahs Lap into Abraham's Bosom?
This is the Draw-net by which the Devil drags Millions to Hell, the facility of
Repenting and getting a Pardon.

7. Men do not look after Forgiveness through Despair. Oh, says the desponding
Soul, it is a vain thing for me to expect pardon, my Sins are so many and
heinous, that sure God will not forgive me, Ier. 18.12. And they said, There is
no hope. My Sins are huge Mountains, and can they ever be cast into the Sea?
Despair cuts the Sinews of Endeavor, who will use means that despairs of
Success? The Devil shows some men their sins at the little end of the
Perspective-Glass, and they seem little or none at all: but he shows others
their Sins at the great end of the Perspective, and they fright them into
Despair. This is a Soul-damning Sin, Iudas's Despair was worse than his
Treason. Despair spills the Cordial of Christ's Blood, this is the Voice of
Despair, Christ's Blood cannot pardon me. Thus you see whence it is that men
seek no more earnestly after the forgiveness of sin. Having answered this
Question, I shall now come to press the Exhortation upon every One of us to
seek earnestly after the forgiveness of our Sins.

1. Our very Life lies upon the getting of a Pardon, it is called the
Justification of Life, Romans 5.18. Now if our Life lies upon our Pardon, and we
are dead and damned without it, does it not concern us above all things to
labor after forgiveness of Sin? Deuteronomy. 32.47. For it is not a vain thing for
you, because it is your Life. If a man be under a Sentence of Death, he will
set his Wits a work, and make use of all his friends to get the King to grant
His pardon, because his Life lies upon it. So we are by reason of Sin, under a
Sentence of Damnation, now there is one friend at Court, we may make use of to
procure our Pardon, namely, the Lord Jesus. How earnest then should we be with
him to be our Advocate to the Father for us, and that he would Present the
Merit of his Blood to the Father, as the Price of our Pardon?

2. There is that in Sin, may make us desire Forgiveness. Sin is the only thing
that disquiets the Soul* 1. Sin is a Burden, it burdens the Creation, Romans
8.22. it burdens the Conscience, Ps. 38.4. A wicked man is not sensible of Sin;
he is dead in Sin, and if you lay a thousand weight upon a dead man, he feels
it not. But to an awakened Conscience, there is no such Burden as Sin, when a
man seriously weighs with himself the Glory and Purity of that Majesty which
Sin has offended, the preciousness of that Soul which Sin has polluted, the
loss of that Happiness which sin has endangered, the greatness of that Torment
which Sin has deserved, to lay all this together, sure must make sin
burdensome, and should not we labor to have this Burden removed by pardoning
Mercy. 2. Sin is a Debt, Mat. 6.12. Forgive us our Debts, and every Debt we
owe, God has written down in his Book, Isa. 65.6. Behold* it is written before
me, and one day God's Debt-Book will be opened, Rev. 20.12. The Books were
opened. And is not this that which may make us look after Forgiveness? Sin
being such a debt as we must eternally lie in the Prison of Hell for, if it be
not discharged, shall not we be earnest with God to cross the Debt-book with
the Blood of his Son? There is no way to look God in the face with Comfort, but
by having our debts either paid or pardoned.

3. There is nothing but Forgiveness can give Ease to a troubled Conscience;
there is a great difference between having the Fancy pleased and having the
Conscience eased. Worldly things may please the Fancy, but not ease the
Conscience. Nothing but pardon can relieve a troubled Soul, it is strange what
shifts men will make for Ease when Conscience is pained, and how many false
Medicines they will use before they will take the right way for a Cure. When
Conscience is troubled, they will try what merry Company can do, they may
perhaps drink away trouble of Conscience, perhaps they may play it away at
Cards, perhaps a lent whipping will do the deed. Perhaps multitude of Business
will so take up their time, that they shall have no leisure to hear the
Clamours and Accusations of Conscience. But how vain are all these Attempts!
still their Wound bleeds inwardly, their Heart trembles, their Conscience
roars, and they can have no peace. Whence is it? Here is the Reason, they go
not to the Mercy of God, and the Blood of Christ, for the pardon of their Sins,
and hence it is they can have no ease. Suppose a man has a Thorn in his Foot,
which puts him to pain, let him anoint it, or wrap it up and keep it warm; yet
till the Thorn be plucked out, it aches and swells and he has no ease. So when
the Thorn of Sin is gotten into a Man's Conscience, there is no ease till the
Thorn be pulled out, when God removes Iniquity, now the Tho^n is plucked out.
How was David's Heart finely quieted when Nathan the Prophet told him, the Lord
has put away thy Sin, 2. Sam. 12.13. How should we therefore labor for
Forgiveness! till then we can have no ease in our Mind, nothing but a pardon
sealed in the Blood of a Redeemer can ease a wounded Spirit.

4. Forgiveness of sin is feasible, it may be obtained, Impossibility destroys
Endeavor, but as Ezra 10.2. There is hope in Israel concerning this; the
Devils are past hope, a sentence of death is passed upon them, which is
irrevocable, but there is hope for us of obtaining a Pardon, Psalm. 130.4. There
is Forgiveness with thee. If pardon of sin were not possible, then it were not
to be prayed for, but it has been prayed for, 2 Samuel 24.10. I beseech thee, O
Lord, take away mine Iniquity; and Christ bids us pray for it, Forgive us our
Trespasses. That is possible which God has promised, but God has promised
pardon upon Repentance, Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and return
to the Lord, and he will have Mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will
abundantly pardon. Hebr. Ki Iarbe lisloac. He will multiply to pardon. That is
possible which others have obtained, but others have arrived at Forgiveness,
therefore it is haveable, Psalm. 32.5. Isa. 38.17. Thou have cast all my Sins
behind thy back; this may make us endeavor after pardon, because it is
feasible, it may be had.

5. Consideration, to persuade to it, is, forgiveness of Sin is a Choice
Eminent Blessing, to have the Book canceled and God appeased is worth
obtaining; which may whet our Endeavor after it. That it is a rare
Transcendent Blessing, appears by three Demonstrations.

1. If we consider how this Blessing is purchased, namely, by the Lord Jesus;
there are three things in reference to Christ, which set forth the Choiceness
and Pretiousness of Forgiveness.

1. No mere created Power in Heaven or Earth could expiate one Sin, or procure
a Pardon; only Jesus Christ, 1 John 2.2. He is (...), the propitiation for our
Sins, no Merit can buy out a Pardon. Paul had as much to boast of as any man.
His high Birth, his Learning, his legal Righteousness, but he disclaims all in
point of Justification, and lays them under Christ's Feet to tread upon. No
Angel could with all his Holiness lay down a price for the pardon of one Sin, 1 Samuel 2.25. If a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? What Angel
durst be so bold, as to open his Mouth to God for a delinquent sinner? Only
Jesus Christ who is God-Man could deal with God's Justice and purchase
Forgiveness.

2. Christ himself could not procure a Pardon but by Dying; every Pardon is the
Price of Blood. Christ's Life was a Rule of Holiness, and a Pattern of
Obedience. Mat. 3.15. He fulfilled all Righteousness. And certainly, Christ's
Active Obedience was of great Value and Merit; but here is that which raises
the worth of Forgiveness, Christ's active Obedience had not fully procured a
Pardon for us with the shedding of his Blood. Therefore our Justification is
ascribe^ to his Blood, Romans 5.9. Being justified by his Blood. Christ did bleed
out our Pardon. There is much ascribed to Christ's Intercession, but his
Intercession had not prevailed with God for the forgiveness of one sin, had not
he shed his Blood. It Is worth our notice, that when Christ is described to John
as an Intercessor for his Church, he is represented to him in the likeness of a
Lamb slain, Revel. 5.6. To show that Christ must die and be slain before he can
be an Intercessor.

3. Christ by dying had not purchased Forgiveness for us, if he had not dyed an
Execrable Death, he endured the Curse, Gal. 3.13. All the Agonies Christ
endured in his Soul, all the Torments in his Body, could not purchase a Pardon,
except he had been made a Curse for us. Christ must be cursed before we could
be blessed with a pardon.

2. Forgiveness of Sin is a choice Blessing, if we consider what glorious
Attributes God puts forth in the pardoning of sin. 1. God puts forth infinite
Power; when Moses was pleading with God for the pardon of Isreal's Sin, he
speaks thus, Let the Power of my Lord be great, Numb. 14.17. Gods forgiving of
Sin is a Work of as great Power, as to make Heaven and Earth. Nay, a Greater;
for when God made the World, he met with no Opposition, but when he comes to
pardon, Satan opposes, and the Heart opposes. A Sinner is desperate, and
slights, yea, defies a pardon till God by his mighty Power convinces him of
his Sin and Danger, and makes him willing to accept of a pardon. 2. God in
forgiving sin puts forth infinite Mercy, Numb. 14.19. Pardon, I beseech thee,
the Iniquity of this people, according to the Greatness of thy Mercy. It is
Mercy to have a Reprieve, and if there be Mercy in sparing a sinner, what Mercy
then is in pardoning him? This is the Flos lactis, the Cream of Mercy. For God
to put up so many Injuries, to wipe so many debts off the score, this is
infinite Favor; forgiveness of sin is spun out of the Bowels of God's Mercy.

3. Forgiveness of sin is a choice Blessing, as it lays a Foundation for other
Mercies. It is a leading Mercy. 1. It makes way for Temporal Good Things. 1. It
brings Health, when Christ said to the palsy man, Thy sins are forgiven, this
made way for a bodily Cure, Arise, take up thy Bed and walk, Mat. 9.6. The
pardon of his sin, made way for the healing of his Palsy. 2. It brings
Prosperity, Ier. 33.8, 9. 2. It makes way for Spiritual good Things.
Forgiveness of Sin never comes alone, but has other spiritual Blessings
attending it. Whom God pardons He sanctifies, adopts, crowns. It is a
voluminous Mercy, it draws the silver Link of Grace, and the golden Link of
Glory after it. It is an high Act of Indulgence, God seals the sinners pardon
with a Kiss. And should not we above all things seek after so great a Blessing,
a forgiveness.

6. Consideration, That which may make us seek after forgiveness of sin, is
God's Inclinableness to pardon, Nehem. 9.17. Thou art a God ready to pardon. In
the Hebrew it is Eloha Selicoth, a God of Pardons. We are apt to entertain
wrong Conceits of God, that he is inexorable and will not forgive, Mat. 25.24.
I knew thou were an hard man. But God is a sin pardoning God, Exodus 34.6. The
Lord, merciful and gracious, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin. Here is
my Name (says God) if you would know how I am called, I tell you my Name, The
Lord, the Lord God merciful; forgiving Iniquity. A Pyrat or Rebel that knows
there is a Proclamation out against him, will never come in, but if he hears
that the Prince is full of Clemency, and there is a Proclamation of Pardon to
him if he submit, this will be a great incentive to him to lay down his Arms,
and become Loyal to his Prince. See God's Proclamation to repenting Sinners,
Ier. 3.12. Go and proclaim these words and say, Return thou backsliding Israel
says the Lord, and I will not cause my Anger to fall upon thee, for I am
merciful. God's Mercy is a Tender Mercy, the Hebr. word for Mercy Rakem,
signifies Bowels, God's Mercy is full of Sympathy, He is of a most sweet
Indulgent Nature, Psalm. 86 5. Thou Lord art Good and ready to forgive; the Be
does not more naturally give Honey, than God shows Mercy.

Object. 1. But does not God seem to delight in Punitive Acts, or Acts of
Severity? Prove. 1.26. I will laugh at your Calamity.

Resp. Who does God say so to? see ver. 25. Ye have set at naught all my
Counsel, and would none of my Reproof. God delights in their Destruction who
despise his Instruction, but an humble penitentiary breaking off sin, and suing
out his Pardon, the Lord delights in showing Mercy to such an one, Micah 7.18.
He delights in Mercy.

Object. 2. But though God be so full of Mercy and ready to forgive, yet his
Mercy reaches not to all; he forgives only such as are Elected, and I question
my Election?

Resp. 1. No man can say he is not Elected, God has not revealed this to any
particular man that he is a Reprobate, excepting him only who has sinned the
Sin against the Holy Ghost; which sin thou art far enough from, who mournest
for sin and seek after Forgiveness.

2. These thoughts of Non-Election, that we are not Elected; and that there is
no pardon for us, come from Satan, and are the poisoned Arrows he shoots. He is
the Accuser, he accuses us to God, that we are great sinners; and he accuses
God to us, as if he were a Tyrant: one that did watch to destroy his Creature.
These are diabolical Suggestions; say, Get thee behind me, Satan.

3. It Is sinful for any to hold, that he is not Elected; it would take him off
from the Use of Means, from praying and repenting; it would harden him and make
him desperate. Therefore pry not into the Arcana Coeli, the Secrets of Heaven.
Remember what befell the men of Bethshemesh, for looking into the Ark, 1 Samuel
6.19. Know that we are not to go by Gods Secret Will, but by his Revealed Will;
look into God's Revealed Will, and there we shall find enough to cherish Hope,
and Encourage us to go to God for the pardon of our sins. God has revealed in
his Word, That he is rich in Mercy, Ephesians. 2.4. That he does not delight in the
Destruction of a sinner, Ezekiel. 18.32. Jurat per Essen^iam, Musculus, he swears
by his Essence. Ezekiel. 33.11. As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure
in the death of the wicked. Hence it is God waits so long, and puts off the
Sessions from time to time* to see if sinners will repent and seek to him for
pardon. therefore let God's tender Mercies and precious Promises encourage us
to seek to him for the forgiveness of our sins.

Consideration 7. To seek earnestly for Pardon, is the unspeakable Misery of
such as want Forgiveness; it must needs be ill with that Malefactor that wants
his Pardon.

1. The unpardoned sinner (that lives and dies so) is under the greatest Loss
and Privation. Is there any Happiness like to the enjoying of God in Glory?
This is the Joy of Angels, the Crown of Saints glorified; but the unforgiven
sinner shall not behold God's smiling Face; he shall see God as an Enemy, not
as a Friend; he shall have an affrighting sight of God, not beatifical; he
shall see the Black Rod, not the Mercy-Seat. Sins unpardoned are like the Angel
with a flaming Sword, who stopped the passage to Paradise. Sins unpardoned stop
the way to the Heavenly Paradise; and how doleful is the Condition of that
Soul, which is banished from the place of Bliss* where the King of Glory keeps
his Court?

2. The unpardoned sinner has nothing to do with any Promise, the Promises
M^lctralia Evangelii, the Breasts that hold the sincere Milk of the Word which
fills the Soul with precious Sweetness, they are the Royal Charter. But wh^t
has a stranger to do to meddle with the Charter? 'Twas the Dove plucked the
Olive Branch. It Is only the Believer plucks the Tree of the Promise; till the
Condition of the Promise be performed, no man can have right to the Comfort of
the Promise; and how sad is that not to have one promise to show for Heaven?

3. An unpardoned sinner is continually in danger of the Outcry of an accusing
Conscience* An accusing Conscience is a little Hell; Siculi non invenere
Tyranni tormentum majus; we tremble to hear a Lion roar. How terrible are the
roarings of Conscience? Judas hanged himself to quiet his Conscience; a sinners
Conscience at present is either asleep or seared, but when God shall awaken
Conscience, either by Affliction or at Death; how will the unpardoned sinner be
affrighted? When a man shall have all his sins set before his Eyes, and drawn
out in their bloody Colors, and the worm of Conscience begins to gnaw; sinner
here are thy Debts, and the Book is not canceled, thou must to Hell; O what a
trembling at heart will the sinner have!

4. All the Curses of God stand in full force against an unpardoned sinner, his
very Blessings are cursed* Mal. 2.2. I will curse your Blessings. His Table is
a Snare; he eats and drinks a Curse. What comfort could Dionisius have at his
Feast, when he imagined he saw a naked Sword hanging by a twine thread over his
head? This is enough to spoil a sinners Banquet; a Curse like a naked Sword
hangs over his Head: Caesar wondered to see one of his Soldiers so merry that
was in debt. One would wonder that man should be merry who is Heir to all God's
Curses; he does not see these Curses, but is blinder than Balaams Ass, who saw
the Angels Sword drawn.

5. The unpardoned sinner is in an ill case at Death. Luther professed there
were three things which he durst not think of without Christ; of his sins, of
Death, of the Day of Judgment. Death to a Christless Soul is the King of
Terrors, as the Prophet Ahijah said to Ieroboams Wife, 1 Kin. 14.6. I am sent
to thee with heavy Tidings. So death is sent to the unpardoned Soul with heavy
Tidings; It Is God's Jailer to arrest him; death is a prologue to Damnation. In
particular,

1. Death is a Voyder to take away all his earthly Comforts* it takes away his
sugared Morsels; no more drinking Wine in Bowls, no more Mirth or Music,
Revel. 18.22. The Voice of Harpers and Musicians shall be heard no more at all
in thee. The sinner shall never taste of luscious Delights more to all Eternity.
His Honey shall be turned to the Gall of Asps, Job 20.14.

2. At Death there shall be an end put to all Reprieves. Now God reprieves a
sinner; he spares him such a fit of Sickness; he respites him many years, the
sinner should have died such a drinking bout, but God granted him a Reprieve;
he lengthened out the silver Thread of Patience to a Miracle. But the sinner
dying without Repentance unpardoned, now the Lease of God's Patience is run
out, and the sinner must appear in person before the Righteous God to receive
his Sentence; after which there shall be none to bail him, nor shall he hear of
a Reprieve any more.

6. The unpardoned sinner dying so, must go into Damnation; this is the second
Death, Mors sine morte. The unpardoned Soul must for ever bear the Anger of a
Sin-revenging-God; as long as God is God, so long the Vial of his Wrath shall
be dropping upon the damned Soul. This is an Helpless Condition; there is a
time when a sinner will not be helped. Christ and Salvation are offered to him,
but he slights them, he will not be helped; and there is a time shortly coming,
when he cannot be helped. He calls out for Mercy, O a pardon, a pardon; but
then it is too late, the date of Mercy is expired; O how sad then is it to live
and die unpardoned? You may lay a Gravestone upon that man, and write this
Epitaph upon it; It had been good for that man, he had never been born. Now, if
the misery of an unpardoned State be so unexpressible; how should we labor for
Forgiveness, that we may not be ingulph'd in so dreadful a Labyrinth of Fire
and Brimstone to all Eternity.

7. Such as are unpardoned must needs lead uncomfortable lives; Deuteronomy. 28.66.
Thy Life shall hang in doubt before thee, and thou shall be in continual fears.
Thus the unpardoned sinner must needs have a palpitation and trembling at
Heart; he fears every Bush he sees, 1 Ioh. 4.18. Fear has Torment in it, the
Greek word for Torment (...), is used sometimes for Hell; fear has Hell in it.
A man in debt fears every step he goes, lest he should be arrested: so the
unpardoned sinner fears, what if this night Death which is God's Sergeant
should arrest him? Job 7.21. Why do not thou pardon my Sin, for now shall I
sleep in the dust; As if Job had said, Lord I shall shortly die, I shall sleep
in the dust, and what shall I do if my sin be not pardoned? What comfort can an
unpardoned Soul take in any thing? Sure no more than a Prisoner can take in
Meat or Music that wants his pardon. Therefore by all these powerful Motives
let us labor for the forgiveness of sin.

Object. 1. But I am discouraged from going to God for pardon, for I am
unworthy of forgiveness; what am I, that God should do such a Favor for me?

Resp. God forgives not because we are worthy, but because he is Gracious,
Exodus 34 6. The Lord, the Lord, Merciful and Gracious. God forgives out of his
Clemency; Acts of Pardon are Acts of Grace. What worthiness was there in Paul
before Conversion? He was a Blasphemer, and so he sinned against the first
Table; he was a Persecutor, and so he sinned against the second Table; but
Free Grace Sealed his Pardon, 1 Timothy 1.13. I obtained Mercy, (...). I was all
bestrowed with Mercy. What Worthiness was in the Woman of Samaria? She was
Ignorant, Ioh. 4.22. she was Unclean, ver 18. she was Morose and Churlish, she
would not give Christ so much as a Cup of cold water, ver. 9. How is it that
thou being a Jew, ask drink of me which am a woman of Samaria? What
worthiness was here? Yet Christ over-looked all, and pardoned her Ingratitude;
and though she denied him water out of the Well, yet he gave her the Water of
Life. Gratia non invenit dignos, sed facit. Free Grace does not find us worthy,
but makes us worthy. Therefore notwithstanding unworthiness, seek to God, and
your sins may be pardoned.

Object. 2. But I have been a Great Sinner, and sure God will not pardon me?

Answ. David brings it as an Argument for pardon, Psalm. 25.11. Pardon mine
Iniquity, for it is great. When God forgives great Sins, now he does a Work
like himself. The desperateness of the Wound does the more set forth the Virtue
of Christ's Blood in curing it. Mary Magdalen a great sinner, out of whom seven
Devils were cast; yet she had her pardon. Some of the Jews who had an hand in
Crucifying of Christ, upon their Repentance, the very Blood they shed did seal
their pardon. Consider sins either for their number as the sands of the Sea, or
for their weight, as the Rocks of the Sea; yet there is Mercy enough in God to
forgive them, Isa. 1.18. Though your sins be as Scarlet, they shall be white as
Snow. Scarlet (...), signifies Twice dipped; which no art of man can get out: yet
God can wash out this scarlet Dye. There is no sin excepted from pardon, but
that sin which despises pardon, viz. the sin against the Holy Ghost, Mat.
12.31. Therefore O sinner, do not cast away thy Anchor of Hope, but go to God
for forgiveness. The vast Ocean has Bounds set to it; but God's
pardoning-Mercy is Boundless. God can as well forgive Great Sins, as less: as
the Sea can as well cover great Rocks as little Sands. Nothing hinders pardon,
but the sinners not asking it.

That a Great Sinner should not despair of forgiveness, consult that Scripture,
Isa. 43.25. I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy Transgressions: If you look
on the foregoing words, you would wonder how this verse comes in, ver. 24. Thou
have made me to serve with thy sins, thou have wearied me with thy Iniquities;
and then it follows, I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy Transgressions. One
would have thought it should have run thus, Thou have wearied me with thy
Iniquities; I, even I am he that will punish thy Iniquities; but God comes in a
mild, loveing strain; Thou have wearied me with thy Iniquities, I am he that
blots out thy Iniquities. So that the greatness of our sins should not
discourage us from going to God for forgiveness. Though thou have committed Acts
of Impiety, yet God can come with an Act of Indemnity, and say; I, even I, am
he that blotteth out thy Transgressions. God counts it his Glory to display
Free Grace in its Orient Colors, Rom 5.20. Where sin abounded, Grace did much
more abound. When Sin becomes exceeding sinful, Free Grace becomes exceeding
glorious. God's pardoning-Love can conquer the sinner, and triumph over the
sin. Consider, thou almost-despairing Soul, there is not so much sin in man as
there is Mercy in God. Man's sin in comparison of God's Mercy, is but as a
spark to the Ocean, and who would doubt whether a spark could be quenched in an
Ocean?

Object. 3. But I have relapsed into the same sins, and how can I have the face
to come to God for the pardon of those sins which I have more than once fallen
into?

Answ. I know the Novatians held, that after a Relapse no forgiveness by the
Church. But doubtless that was an Error, Abraham did twice equivocate; Lot
committed Incest twice; Peter sinned thrice by carnal Fear, but these repenting
had their Absolution.

There is a twofold Relapse, 1. a wilful Relapse, when after a man has
solemnly vowed himself to God, he falls into a league with sin, and returns
back to it, Ier. 2.25. I have loved Strangers, and after them will I go.

2. There is a Relapse through Infirmity, when the Bent and Resolution of a
man's Heart is against sin, but through the Violence of Temptation, and the
withdrawing of God's Grace, he is carried down the stream against his Will. Now
though wilful continued Relapses are desperate, and do vastare Conscientiam (as
Tertull.) waste the Conscience, and run men upon the Precipice of damnation;
yet if they are through Infirmity, and we mourn for them we may obtain
forgiveness. A godly man does not march after sin as his General, but is led
captive by it; and the Lord will pity a captive Prisoner. Christ commands us to
forgive a trespassing Brother seventy times seven, Mat. 18.22. If he bids us do
it, much more will he forgive a relapsing Sinner in case he repent, Ier. 3.12.
Return thou backsliding Israel, for I am merciful, says the Lord. It is not
falling once or twice into the Mire that drowns, but lying there; it is not
once relapsing into sin, but lying in sin impenitently that damns.

Object. 4. But God requires so much Sorrow and Humiliation before Remission,
that I fear I shall never arrive at it.

Answ. God requires no more Humiliation than may fit a Soul for Mercy. Many a
Christian thinks because he has not filled God's Bottle so full of Tears as
others; therefore he is not humbled enough to receive a Pardon. But we must
know, God's Dealings are Various; all have not the like Pangs in the New Birth.
Some are won with Love, the sense of God's Mercy abused causes ingenuous Tears
to flow; others are more flagitious and hardened, and these God deals more
roughly with. This is sure, That Soul is humbled enough to receive a Pardon who
is brought to a through Sense of sin, and sees the need of a Savior, and loves
him as the fairest of ten thousand; therefore be not discouraged, if thy Heart
be bruised for sin, and broken off from it, thy sin shall be blotted out. No
sooner did Ephraim fall a weeping, but God's Bowels fell a working, Ier. 31.20.
My Bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have Mercy upon him. Having
answered these Objections, let me beseech you above all things, labor for the
forgiveness of sin. Think with your selves, how great a Mercy it is: It is one
of the Richest Jewels in the Cabinet of the New Covenant, Psalm. 32.1. Blessed
is he whose Iniquity is forgiven; in the Hebrew it is Ashre, Blessednesses. And
think with your selves, the unparalled Misery of such, whose sins are not
forgiven; such as had not the Blood of the Paschal Lamb sprinkled on their
Door-posts* were destroyed by the Angel, Exodus 12. So they who have not
Christ's Blood sprinkled on them, to wash away the guilt of sin, will fall into
the gulf of Perdition. And if you resolve to seek after forgiveness, do not
delay.

Many say they will go about getting their pardon, but they procrastinate and
put it off so long till it be too late; when the shadows of the Evening are
stretched forth, and the night of Death aproacheth; then they begin to look
after their pardon. This has been the undoing of millions, they purpose they
will look after their Souls, but they stay so long till the Lease of Mercy be
run out; Oh therefore hasten the getting of a pardon! Think of the Uncertainty
of Life. What Security have you, that you shall live another day? Volat
ambiguis mobilis alis hora, our Life is a Taper soon blown out; it is made up of
a few flying minutes. O thou Dust and Ashes! thou may fear every hour to be
blown into thy Grave, and what if Death come to arrest thee before thy pardon
be sealed? Plutarch reports of one Archias, who being among his Cups, one
delivered to him a Letter, and desired him to read it presently, being about
serious Business, says he, Seria cras, I will mind serious things to morrow;
and that night he was slain. Thou that say, To morrow I will repent. I will
get my pardon, may suddenly be slain; therefore to day, while it is called
to day look after the forgiveness of sin; after a while all the Conducts of
Mercy will be stopped, there will not be one drop of Christ's Blood to be had;
there is no sealing of pardons after death.

2. Branch of Exhortation, Let us labor to have the Evidence of pardon, to
know that our sins are forgiven. A man may have his sins forgiven and not know
it; he may have a pardon in the Court of Heaven, when he has it not in the
Court of Conscience. David's sin was forgiven as soon as he repented, and God
sent Nathan the Prophet to tell him so, 2 Samuel 12.13. but David did not feel
the comfort of it at present; as appears by the penitential Psalm composed
after, Psalm. 51.8. Make me to hear the Voice of Joy, and ver. 12. Cast me not
away from thy Presence. It is one thing to be pardoned, and another thing to
feel it. The Evidence of pardon may not appear for a time; and this may be.

1. From the Imbecility and Weakness of Faith. Forgiveness of sin is so
strange and infinite a Blessing, that a Christian can hardly persuade himself
that God will extend such a favor to him. As it is said of the Apostles when
Christ appeared to them first; They believed not for Joy, and wondered, Luke
24.41. So the Soul is so stricken with Admiration, that the wonder of pardon
does almost stagger his Faith.

2. A man may be pardoned and not know it, from the Strength of Temptation:
Satan accuses the Godly of sin, and tells them that God does not love them.
What should such sinners think of pardon? Believers are compared to bruised
Re^ds, Mat. 12.20* and Temptations to Winds, Mat. 7.25. Now, a Reed is easily
shaken with the wind. Temptations shake the godly, and tho* they are pardoned
yet they know it not; Job in a Temptation thought God his Enemy, Job 16.9. yet
then he was in a pardoned condition.

Quest. But why does God sometimes conceal the Evidence of pardon?

Answ. Though God does pardon, yet he may withold the sense of it a while.

1. Because hereby he would lay us lower in Contrition. God would have us see
what an evil and bitter thing it is to offend him; we shall therefore lie the
longer steeping our selves in the brinish Tears of Repentance before we have
the sense of Pardon. It being long before David's broken Bones were set, and his
pardon sealed, the more contrite his Heart was, and this was a Sacrifice God
delighted in.

2. Tho God does forgive sin, yet he may deny the manifestation of it for a
time; to make us prize pardon, and make it sweeter to us when it comes. The
difficulty of obtaining a Mercy inhanceth the Value, when we have been a long
time tugging at prayer for a Pardon of Sin, and still God witholds; but at last
after many Sighs and Tears pardon comes, now we esteem it the more, and it is
sweeter, -- Quo longius defertur eo suavius laet atur, -- the longer Mercy is
in the Birth the more welcome will the Deliverance be.

Let me now reassume the Exhortation to labor for the Evidence and Sense of
pardon. He who is pardoned and knows it not, is like one who has an Estate
befallen him, but knows it not. Our comfort consists in the knowledge of
Forgiveness, Psalm. 51.8. Make me to hear the Voice of Joy. This is a
Proclaiming a Iubile in the Soul, when we are able to read our pardon; and to
the witness of Conscience God adds the witness of his Spirit; in the mouth of
these two witnesses our Joy is confirmed: O labor for this Evidence of
Forgiveness.

Quest. How shall we know that our sins are forgiven?

Answ. We must not be our own judges in this case, Prove. 28.26. He that
trusts in his own Heart is a fool: The Heart is deceitful, Ier. 17.9. and it
is Folly to trust a Deceiver. The Lord only by his Word must be Judge in this
Case, whether we are pardoned or no; as it was under the Law, no Leper might
judge himself to be clean; But the Priest was to pronounce him clean, Levit.
13.37. So we are not to judge of our selves to be clean from the Guilt of Sin,
till we are such as the Word of God has pronounced to be clean: How then shall
we know by the Word whether our Guilt is done away, and our Sins pardoned?

Answ. 1. The pardoned sinner is a great weeper. The sense of Gods Love melts
his Heart; that Free Grace should ever look upon me; that such Crimson Sins
should be washed away in Christ's Blood! this makes the Heart melt, and the
Eyes drop with Tears Never did any man read his pardon with dry Eyes, Luke
7.38. She stood at his feet weeping, her Heart was a spiritual Limbick, out of
which those Tears were distilled, Mary's Tears were more precious to Christ
than her Ointment. Her Eyes which before did sparkle with Lust, whose amorous
Glances had set on fire her Lovers. Now she makes them a Fountain and washes
Christ's feet with her Tears. She was a true penitent and had her pardon, ver.
47. Wherefore I say her sins which were many are forgiven. A pardon will make
the hardest Heart relent, and cause the stony Heart to bleed; and is it thus
with us, have we been dissolved into Tears for sin? God seals his pardons upon
melting Hearts.

2. We may know our Sins are forgiven, by having the Grace of Faith infused,
Acts 10.43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that whosoever believes in
him shall receive remission of sins. In saving Faith there are two things,
Abrenunciation and Recumbency. 1. Abrenunciation. A man renounceth all Opinion
of himself, dig'd out of his own Borough; he is quite taken off himself, Phil.
3.9 He sees all his Duties are but broken Reeds, though he could weep a sea of
Tears, though he had all the Grace of Men and Angels, it could not purchase his
pardon. 2. Recumbency. Faith is an Assent with Affiance. The Soul does (...),
it gets hold of Christ as Adonijah did of the Horns of the Altar, 1 Kin. 1.51.
Faith casts it self upon the Stream of Christ's Blood, and says. If I perish,
I perish, if we have but the Minimum quod sic, the least Dram of this precious
Faith we have something to show for pardon. To him give all the Prophets
witness that whosoever believes in him shall receive Remission of sin. This
Faith is acceptable to God, it pleases God more than offering up ten thousand
Rivers of Oil, than working Miracles, than Martyrdom or the highest Acts of
Obedience. 2. Faith is profitable to us; it is our best Certificate to show for
pardon: No sooner does Faith reach forth its Hand to receive Christ, but Christ
sets his Hand to our Pardon.

3. Sign. The Pardoned Soul is a God-admirer; Micah 7.18. Who is a God like
thee, that pardonest iniquity? O that God should ever look upon me, I was a
sinner, and nothing but a sinner, yet I obtained mercy! Who is a God like thee?
Mercy has been despised, yet that mercy should save me: Christ has been
Crucified by me, yet his Cross Crowns me. God has displayed the Ensigns of
Free Grace, he has set up his Mercy above my Sin, nay, in spite of it; this
causes admiration; Who is a God like thee? A Man that goes over a narrow
Bridge in the Night, and the next morning comes and sees the danger he was in*
and how miraculously he escaped, he is stricken with admiration: So when God
shows a Soul how near he was a falling into Hell, and how that this Gulf is
shut, all his sins are pardoned, he is amazed; and cries out, Who is a God like
thee, that pardonest iniquity? That God should pardon one, and pass by another;
One taken, another lest; this fills the soul with wonder and astonishment.

4. Wherever God pardons sin, he subdues it, Micah 7.19. He will have
compassion on us, he will subdue our iniquity, Hebr. Iickbosh, sub jugo ponet:
Where Men's persons are justified, their lusts are mortified. There is in sin
vis Imperatoria and Damnatoria, a Commanding Power, and a Condemning. Then is
the condemning power of sin taken away, when the commanding power of it is
taken away. Would we know whether our sins are forgiven, are they subdued? If a
Malefactor be in prison, how shall he know that his Prince has Pardoned him?
if the Jailor come and knock off his Chains and Fetters, and lets him out of
Prison, then he may know he is Pardoned: So, How shall we know God has
pardoned us? if the Fetters of sin be broken off, and we walk at liberty in the
ways of God, Psalm. 119.45. I will walk at liberty: this is a blessed sign we
are pardoned.

Such as are washed in Christ's blood from that guilt, are made Kings to God,
Revel. 1.6. as Kings they rule over their sins.

5. He whose sins are forgiven, is full of Love to God. Mary Magdalen's heart
was fired with love, Luke 7.47. Her sins which are many are forgiven, for she
loved much. Her love was not the cause of her Remission, but a sign of it. A
pardoned Soul is a monument of mercy, and he thinks he can never love God
enough; he wishes he had a Coal from God's Altar to inflame his heart in love;
he wishes he could borrow the Wings of the Cherubims that he might fly swifter
in Obedience: a pardoned Soul is sick of love. He whose heart is like Marble,
locked up in impenitency, that does not melt in love, a sign his pardon is yet
to seal.

6. Where the sin is pardoned, the nature is purified, Hos. 14.9. I will heal
their backslidings, I will love them. Every Man, by Nature, is both guilty and
diseased; where God remits the guilt, he cures the disease, Psalm. 103.3. Who
forgiveth all thy Iniquities, who heals all thy Diseases. Herein God's pardon
goes beyond the King's pardon; the King may forgive a Malefactor, but he cannot
change his heart; he may have a thievish heart still. But God, when he pardons,
changes the heart, Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heart also will I give you. A pardoned
Soul is adorned and embellished with holiness, 1 John 5.6. This is he that came
by water and blood. Where Christ comes with Blood to justify, he comes with
Water to cleanse, Zac. 3.4. I have caused thy iniquity to pass from thee, and I
will cloth thee with change of raiment. I will cause thy iniquity to pass from
thee, there is Pardoning Grace; and I will cloth thee with change of raiment,
there is Sanctifying Grace. Let not him say, he has pardon, that wants Grace.
Many tell us* they hope they are pardoned, but were never sanctified* Yea, but
they believe in Christ: But what Faith is it? a Swearing Faith, a Whoring
Faith? the Faith of Devils is as good.

7. Such as are in the number of God's People, forgiveness of sin belongs to
them, Isa. 40.1. Comfort ye my People, tell them their Iniquity is forgiven.

Quest. How shall we know that we are God's Elect People?

R. By Three Characters.

1. God's people are an humble people. The livery which all Christ's people
wear, is Humility, 1 Pet. 5.5. (...), be ye clothed with humility. 1. A sight
of God's Glory humbles: Elijah wrapped his Face in a Mantle when God's Glory
passed by, Job 42.5. Now mine eye sees thee, wherefore I abhor my self: The
Stars vanish when the Sun appears. 2. A sight of sin humbles. In the Glass of
the Word the godly see their spots, and these are humbling spots. Lo, says the
Soul, I can call nothing my own, but Sins and Wants; this humbles. An humble
Sinner is in a better condition than a proud Angel.

2. God's people are a willing people, Psalm. 110.3. Gnam nedabot, a people of
willingness. Love constrains them. They serve God (...), freely, and out of
choice. They stick at no service; they will run through a Sea, and a
Wilderness; they will follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes.

3. They are an heavenly people, Stars, Joh. 17.16. Ye are not of the World. As
the Primum mobile in the Heavens has a motion of its own, contrary to the
other Orbs: So God's people have an heavenly motion of Soul, contrary to the
Men of the World. They use the World as their Servant, but do not follow the
World as their Master, Phil. 3.20. Our conversation is in heaven. Such as have
these Three Characters of God's people, have a good Certificate to show that
they are pardoned. Forgiveness of sin belongs to them; Comfort my people, re^t
them, their iniquity is forgiven.

8. A sign we are pardoned, if after many storms, we have a sweet calm and
peace within, Romans 5.1. Being justified, we have peace. After many a bitter
Tear shed, and Heartbreaking, the Mind has been more sedate, and a sweet
Serenity, or Still-Musick has followed; this brings tidings, God is appeased:
Whereas before, Conscience did accuse; now it does secretly whisper comfort:
This is a blessed Evidence a Man's sins are pardoned. If the Bailiffs do not
Trouble and Arrest the Debtor, it is a sign his Debt is Compounded, or
Forgiven: So, if Conscience do not Vex* or Accuse, but, upon Good Grounds
whisper Consolation, this is a sign the Debt is Discharged, the Sin is Fo^given.

9. A si^n sin is forgiven, when we have hearts without guile, Psalm. 32.1, 2.
Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, unto whom the Lord imputes not
iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile.

Qu. What is this to be sine fuco, without Guile?

1. He who is without guile, has Plainness of heart: He is without collusion,
he has not cor dup^ex, a double heart: His heart is right with God. A Man may
do a Right Action, but not with a Right Heart, 2 Chr. 25.2. Amaziah did tha^
which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart. To have
the heart right with God, is to serve God from a Right Principle, Love; by a
Right Rule, the Word; to a Right End, the Glory of God.

2. An heart without guile dares not allow it self in the least sin: He avoids
secret sins. He dares not hide any sin as Rachel did her Fathers Images under
her, Genesis 31.34. He knows God sees him, which is more than if Men and Angels
did behold him. He avoids Complexion-sins, Psalm. 18.23. I was also upright
before him, and kept my self from my iniquity. As in the Hive there is a
Mas^er-Bee, so in the Heart there is a Master-Sin. An heart without guile takes
the Sacrificing-knife of Mortification, and runs it through his Beloved-Sin.

3. An heart without guile desires to know the whole mind and will of God. An
unsound heart is afraid of the Light, lucifuga. he is not willing to know his
Duty: A sincere Soul says, as Job 34.32. What I know not teach thou me. Lord
show me what is my Duty, and wherein I offend; let me not sin for want of
light: what I know not teach thou me.

4. An heart without guile is uniform in Religion. He has an equal eye at all
God's Commands. 1. He makes Conscience of private Duties, he worships God in
his Closet as well as in the Temple. Jacob, when he was alone, wrestled with
the Angel, Genesis 32.3, 4. So a Christian, when he is alone, wrestles with God in
Prayer, and will not let him go till he has blessed him. 2. He performs
difficu^t duties, wherein the heart and spirit of Religion lie, and which do
cross flesh and blood. His is much in self-humbling and self-examining; Vtitur
spec^lis magis quam perspicillis, Sen. He rather uses the Looking-glass of the
Word to look into his own heart, than the broad Spectacles of Censure to spy
the faults of others.

5. An heart without Guile is true to God's interest. 1. He grieves to see it
go ill with the Church. N^h^miah, though the King's Cup Bearer, and Wine so
near, yet was sad when Sion's Glory was Eclipsed, Nehem. 2.3. Like the Tree I
have read of, if any of the Leaves are cut, the rest of the Leaves begin to
shrink up themselves, and for a time to hang down the head: So a sincere Soul,
when God's Church suffers, feels himself as it were touched in his own Person.
2. He Rejoices to see the Cause of God get Ground; To see Truth Triumph, Pie^y
lift up its head, and the Flowers of Christ's Crown flourish. This is an Heart
without Guile, it is loyal and true to God's interest.

6. An heart without Guile is Just in his dealings: As he is upright in his
Words, so he is upright in his Weights. He makes Conscience of the Second Table
as well as the First: He is for Equity as well as Piety, 1 Thessal. 4.6 That no
Man go beyond and defraud his Brother in any matter. A sincere heart thinks he
may as well Rob as Defraud. His Rule is, to do to others, what he would have
them do to him, Matt. 7.12.

7. An heart without Guile is True in his Promises. His Word is as good as his
Bond: If he has made a Promise, though it be to his prejudice, and does
entrench upon his Profit, he will not go back. The Hypocrite plays fast and
loose, flies from his word; there is no more binding him with Oaths and
Promises, than Sampson could be bound with green Withs, Judge. 16.7. A sincere
Soul says as Iephtha, Judge. 11.3, 5. I have opened my mouth to the Lord, and I
cannot go back.

8. An Heart without Guile is faithful in his Friendship: He is what he
pretends; his Heart goes along with his Tongue* as a well-made Dial goes with
the Sun. He cannot Flatter and Hate, Commend and Censure. Counterfeiting of
Love is Hypocrisy. It Is too usual to betray with a Kiss, 2 Samuel 20.9. Ioab
took Abner by the beard to kiss him, and smote him in the fifth rib that he
died. Many deceive with Sugar Words. Physicians use to judge of the Health of
the Body by the Tongue; if that look well, the Body is in Health: but we cannot
judge of Friendship by the Tongue; the Words may be full of Honey, when the
Heart has the Gall of Malice. Sure his heart is not true to God, who is
Treacherous to his Friend. Thus you see what an Heart without guile is; now, to
have such an Heart, is a Sign sin is pardoned; God will not impute Sin to him
in whose Spirit is no Guile. What a blessed thing is this not to have Sin
imputed? If our Sins be not imputed, it is as if we had no Sin. Sins remitted
are, as if they had not been committed: this is the blessing belongs to a
sincere Soul. God imputes not Iniquity to him in whose Spirit is no Guile.

9. He whose sins are forgiven, is willing to forgive others who have offended
him, Ephesians. 4.32. Forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven you. An Hypocrite will Read, come to Church, give Alms, build
Hospitals, but cannot forgive Wrongs. He will rather want Forgiveness from God,
than he will forgive his Enemies. A Pardoned Soul argues thus; Has God been so
good to me, to forgive me my sins, and shall not I imitate him in this? Has he
forgiven me Pounds, and shall not I forgive Pence? It Is noted of Cranmer, Nihil
oblivisci solet praeter injurias Cicero. He was of a forgiving Spirit, and
would do Offices of Love to them that had injured him. Like the Sun, which
having drawn up black Vapors from the Earth, returns them back in sweet
Showers.

By this Touchstone we may try whether our sins are pardoned; we need not climb
up into Heaven to see whether our sins be forgiven; but let us look into our
hearts; Are we of Forgiving Spirits? Can we bury Injuries, requite Good for
Evil, a good sign we are forgiven of God. If we can find all these things
wrought in our Souls, they are happy signs that our sins are pardoned, and are
good Letters Testimonials to show for Heaven.

Use. 3. Consolation. I shall open a Box of Cordials, and show you some of the
Glorious Privileges of a pardoned condition. This is a peculiar favor, it is a
Spring shut up, broched for none but the Elect. The Wicked may have Forbearing
Mercy, but only an Elect Person has Forgiving Mercy. Forgiveness of sin makes
way for solid joy, Isa. 40.1. Comfort ye, comfort ye my People says your God,
speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem; or, as in the Hebrew, Dabberu Gnal le^;
speak to her heart -- What was this must cheer her heart? tell her that her
iniquity is pardoned. If any thing would comfort her, the Lord knew it was
this. When Christ would cheer the Palsy Man, Matt. 9.2. Son, be of good cheer*
thy sins be forgiven thee. It was a greater comfort to have his sins forgiven,
than to have his Palsy healed. This made David put on his best clothes, and
anoint himself, 2 Samuel 12.20. It was strange, his Child was newly dead, and God
had told him, the sword should not depart from his house: yet now he spruceth
up himself, he puts on his best Clothes, and Anoints himself; Whence was this?
David had heard good News; God sent him his Pardon by Nathan the Prophet, 2 Samuel 12.13. The Lord has put away thy sin. This could not but revive his
heart, and in token of joy he Anoints himself. Philo says, it was an opinion
of some of the Philosophers, that among the Heavenly Spears, there is such a
sweet Harmonious Melody, that if the sound of it could reach our ears, it would
affect us with wonder and delight. Sure he who is pardoned has such a Divine
Melody in his Soul, as does replenish him with infinite delight. When Christ
had said to Mary Magdalen, Thy sins are forgiven; he presently adds, Go in
peace* Luke 7.50. More particularly.

1. Comfort. God looks upon a pardoned Soul, as if he had never sinned. As the
Cancelling a Bond nulls the Bond, and makes it as if the Money had never been
owing. Forgiving sin makes it not to be: where Sin is Remitted, it is as if it
had not been Committed, Jerem. 50.20. So that, as Rachel wept because her
children were not; so a Child of God may rejoice because his sins are not. God
looks upon him as if he had never offended. Though sin remain in him after
pardon, yet God does not look upon him as a Sinner, but as a Just Man.

2. Comfort. God having pardoned sin, will pass an Act of Oblivion, Jer. 31.34.
I will forgive their Iniquity, and I Will remember their sin no more. When a
Creditor has crossed the Book, he does not call for the Debt again. God will
not reckon with the Sinner in a Judicial way. When our sins are laid upon the
head of Christ our Scapegoat, they are carried into a Land of forgetfulness.

3. Comfort. The pardoned soul is for ever secured from the wrath of God. How
terrible is God's wrath? Psalm. 90.11. Who knows the power of thine anger? If a
spark of God's Wrath, when it lights into a Man's Conscience, fills it with such
horror, (as in the case of Spira) then what is it to be always scorching in
that Torrid Zone, to lie upon Beds of Flames? Now, from this avenging Wrath of
God every pardoned Soul is freed: Though he may taste of the bitter Cup of
Affliction* yet he shall never drink of the Sea of God's Wrath, Romans 5.9. Being
justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. Christ's
blood quenches the flames of Hell.

4. Comfort. Sin being pardoned, Conscience has no more authority to accuse.
Conscience roars against the Unpardoned Sinner, but it has nothing to do to
Terrify or Accuse him that is pardoned. God has discharged the sinner, and if
the Creditor discharge the Debtor, what has the Sergeant to do to Arrest him?
The truth is, if God Absolve* Conscience, if rightly informed, Absolves. If
once God says, Thy sins are pardoned: Conscience says, Go in peace. If the
Sky be clear, and no storms blow there, then the Sea is calm. If all be clear
above, and God shine with pardoning Mercy upon the Soul, then Conscience is
calm and serene.

5. Comfort. Nothing that befalls a pardoned Soul, shall hurt him, (...), Psalm.
90.10 No evil shall touch thee: That is, no destructive evil. Every thing to a
wicked Man is hurtful. Good things are for his hurt. His very blessings are
turned into a curse, Mal. 2.2. I will curse your blessings. Riches and
Prosperity do him hurt. They are not m^nera, but insidiae, Sen. Golden snares,
Eccles. 5.13. Riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt. Like Haman's
Banquet, which did usher in his Funeral. Ordinances do a sinner hurt; they are
(...), a Savor of Death, 2 Cor. 2.16. Cordials themselves kill. The best
things hurt the wicked; but the worst things which befall a pardoned Soul, shall
do him no hurt: the Sting, the Poison, the Curse is gone. His Soul is no more
hurt, than David hurt Saul, when he cut off the Lap of his Garment.

6. To a pardoned Soul, every thing has a Commission to do him Good.
Afflictions shall do him good; Poverty, Reproach, Persecution, Genesis 50.20. Ye
thought evil against me, but God meant it unto good. As the Elements, though of
contrary qualities, yet God has so tempered them, that they work for the good
of the Universe: So the most cross Providence shall work for good to a
pardoned Soul. Correction shall be a Corrosive, to eat out sin; it shall cure
the swelling of Pride, the Fever of Lust, the Dropsy of Avarice: it shall be
a Refining Fire to purify Grace, and make it sparkle as Gold; ((...).)
Chrisostom. Every cross-Providence to a pardoned Soul, shall be like Paul's
Euroclidon, or cross-wind, Acts 27. which, though it broke the Ship, yet Paul
was brought to shore upon the broken pieces.

7. A pardoned Soul is not only exempted from Wrath, but invested with
Dignity; as Joseph, was not only freed from Prison, but advanced to be Second
Man in the Kingdom.

A Pardoned Soul is made a Favorite of Heaven. A King may pardon a Traitor,
but will not make him one of his Privy Council: but whom God Pardons he
receives into Favor. I may say to him, as the Angel to V. Mary, Luke 1.30.
Thou have found favor with God. Hence such as are forgiven are said to be
Crowned with Loving Kindness, Psalm. 103.3, 4. Whom God pardons he Crowns. Whom
God Absolves he marries himself to, Jer. 3.12. I am merciful, and I will not
keep anger for ever; there is Forgiveness: and, in the 14th Verse, I am Married
to you: and he who is Matched into the Crown of Heaven, is as rich as the
Angels, as rich as Heaven can make him.

8. Sin being pardoned, we may come with humble boldness to God in Prayer.
Guilt makes us afraid to go to God. Adam having sinned, Genesis 3.10. I was afraid
and hid my self. Guilt clips the wings of Prayer, it fills the Face with
blushing; but Forgiveness breeds confidence: we may look upon God as a Father
of Mercy, holding forth a Golden Scepter: he that has got his pardon can look
upon his Prince with comfort.

9. Forgiveness of Sin makes our Services acceptable. God takes all we do in
good part. A guilty person, nothing he does pleases God. His Prayer is turned
into sin; but when sin is pardoned, now God accepts our offering. We read of
Joshua standing before the Angel of the Lord. * Joshua was clothed with filthy
garments, Zach. 3.3. that is, he was guilty of diverse sins: now, says the
Lord, Verse. 4. Take away his filthy Garments, I have caused thine iniquity to
pass from thee: and then he stood and Ministered before the Lord, and his
Services were accepted.

10. Forgiveness of sin is the Sauce which sweetens all the comforts of this
life. As guilt imbitters our comforts, it puts Wormwood into our Cup; so pardon
of Sin sweetens all, it is like Sugar to Wine. Health and Pardon, Estate and
Pardon relisheth well. Pardon of sin gives a Sanctified Title, and a delicious
taste to every comfort. As Naaman said to Gehazi, 2 King. 5.23. Take two
Talents: So says God to the Pardoned Soul, Take two Talents; take the Venison,
and take a Blessing with it; Take the Oil in the Cruse, and take my Love with
it. Take two Talents. It Is observable Christ joins these two together, Give us
our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses: as if Christ would teach us,
there is little comfort in daily bread, unless sin be forgiven. Forgiveness
does perfume and drop sweetness into every earthly enjoyment.

11. If sin be forgiven, God will never upbraid us with our former sins. When
the Pro^igal came home to his Father, the Father received him into his loving
embraces, and never mentioned his former Luxury, or spending his Estate among
Harlots: So God will not upbraid us with former sins; nay, he will entirely
love us, we shall be his Jewels, and he will put us in his bosom. Mary
Magdalen, a pardoned Penitent, after Christ arose, he appeared first to her,
Mark 16.9. So far was Christ from upbraiding her, that he brings her the first
New of his Resurrection.

12. Sin being pardoned, is a pillar of support in the loss of dear Friends.
God has taken away thy Child, thy Husband, but withal he has taken away thy
sins. He has given thee more than he has taken away: He has taken aaway a
Flower, and given thee a Jewel. He has given thee Christ, and the Spirit, and
the earnest of Glory. He has given thee more than he has taken away.

13. Where God Pardons Sins he bestows righteousness. With Remission of sin
goes Imputation of Righteousness, Isa. 61.10. I will greatly rejoice in the
Lord, he has covered me with the Robe of Righteousness. If a Christian can
take any comfort in his Inherent Righteousness, which is so stained and mixed
with sin, O then what comfort may he take in Christ's Righteousness, which is a
better Righteousness than that of Adam? Adam's Righteousness was Mutable; but
suppose it had been Unchangeable, yet it was but the Righteousness of a Man:
but that Righteousness which is Imputed, is the Righteousness of him who is
God, 2 Cor. 5.21. That we might be made the Righteousness of God in Him. O
blessed privilege, to be reputed in the sight of God Righteous as Christ,
having his Embroidered Robe put upon the Soul. This is the comfort of every one
that is pardoned, he has a Perfect Righteousness; and now God says of him,
Thou art all fair, my Love, and there is no spot in thee, Cant. 4.7.

14. A pardoned Soul needs not fear death. He may look on Death with Joy, who
can look on Forgiveness with Faith. To a pardoned Soul death has lost his
Sting. Death to a pardoned sinner is like the Arresting a Man after the Debt is
paid. Death may Arrest, but Christ will show the Debt-book Crossed in his
Blood. A pardoned Soul may Triumph over Death, O Death where is thy Sting, O
Grave where is thy Victory! He who is pardoned needs not fear death; it is not
a Destruction but a Deliverance: It is to him a day of Iubilee, or Release, it
releaseth him from all his sins. Death comes to a pardoned Soul, as the Angel
did to Peter, it smote him, and beat off his Chains, and carried him out of
Prison: So does Death to him who is pardoned, it smites his Body, and the
Chains of Sin fall off. Death gives a pardoned Soul a Quietus Est; it frees him
from all his Labors, Revel. 14.13. Faelix transitus a labor ad Requiem Bern.
. Death, as it will wipe off our Tears, so it will wipe off our Sweat. Death
will do a pardoned Christian the greatest good turn, therefore it is made a
part of the Inventory, 1 Cor. 3.22. Death is yours. Death is like the Wagon
which was sent for old Jacob, it came rattling with its Wheels, but it was to
carry Jacob to his Son Joseph: So the Wheels of Death's Chariot may rattle, and
make a noise, but they are to carry a Believer to Christ. While a Believer is
here, he is absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6. He lives far from Court, and
cannot see him whom his Soul loves: But Death gives him a sight of the King of
Glory, in whose presence is fullness of Joy* To a pardoned Soul, Death is
Transitus ad regnum; it removes him to the place of Bliss, where he shall hear
the Triumphs and Anthems of Praise Sung in the Quire of Angels. No cause has a
pardoned Soul to fear Death. What needs he fear to have his Body buried in the
Earth, who has his Sins buried in Christ's Wounds? What hurt can Death do to
him? It is but his Ferry-man, to Ferry him over to the Land of Promise. The day
of Death to a pardoned Soul is his Ascension day to Heaven, his Coronation-day
when he shall be Crowned with those delights of Paradise which are unspeakable
and full of glory. (...) Chrysostom. Thus you see the the rich Consolations which
belong to a pardoned sinner. Well might David proclaim him blessed, Psalm. 32.1.
Blessed is he whose iniquity is forgiven: In the Hebrew it is in the plural,
(...), Blessednesses. Here is a Plurality of Blessings. Forgiveness of sin is
like the first link of a Chain, which draws all the links after it; it draws
these 14 Privileges after it: It Crowns with Grace and Glory. Who then would
not labor to have his sins forgiven? Blessed is he whose Iniquity is forgiven,
whose sin is covered.

Now follows the Duties of such as have their sins forgiven. -- Mercy calls
for Duty. Be much in Praise and Doxology, Psalm. 103.

1. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, who forgiveth all thy Iniquities. Has God
Crowned you with pardoning Mercy? set the Crown of your Praise upon the head of
Free Grace. Pardon of sin is a Discriminating Mercy, a Jewel hung only upon
the Elect; this calls for Acclamations of Praise. You will give thanks for
daily bread, and will you not much more for Pardon? You will give thanks for
deliverance from Sickness, and will you not for deliverance from Hell? God has
done more for you in forgiving your sin, than if he had given you a Kingdom:
And, that you may be more thankful, do but set the Unpardoned condition before
your eyes. How sad is it to want a pardon? all the Curses of the Law stand in
full force against such an one. The Unpardoned Sinner dying* he drops into the
Grave and Hell both at once. He must quarter among the Damned; and will not
this make you Thankful, that this is not your condition, but that you are
delivered from wrath to come?

2. Let God's pardoning love inflame your hearts with love to God. For God to
pardon freely, without any desert of yours, to pardon so many offenses, that he
should pardon you and pass by others; that he should take you out of the ruins
of Mankind, and of a clod of dust and sin make you a Jewel sparkling with
Heavenly Glory; Will not this make you love God much? Three Prisoners that
deserve to die, if the King pardon one of these, and leave the other two to the
severity of the Law, will not he that is pardoned love his Prince, who has
been so full of Clemency? How should your hearts be indeared in love to God?
The Schoolmen distinguish of a Twofold Love, Amor gratuitus, a Love of Bounty;
that is, God's Love to us in Forgiving: and Amor debitus, a Love of Duty; that
is, our Love to God by way of Retaliation. We should show our love, by admiring
God, by sweetly solacing our selves in him, and binding our selves to him in a
perpetual Covenant.

3. Let the Sense of God's Love in forgiving, make you more Cautious and
Fearful of sin for the future, Psalm. 130.4. There is forgiveness with thee that
thou may be feared. O fear to offend this God who has been so gracious to
you in forgiving. If a Friend has done a kindness for us, we will not
disoblige him, or abuse his Love. After Nathan had told David, The Lord has
put away thy sin: How tender was David's Conscience? How fearful was he of
staining his Soul with the guilt of more blood? Psalm. 51.14. Deliver me from
Blood-guiltiness O God. Men committing gross sin after pardon, God changes his
carriage toward them, he turns his Smile into a ^rown; they lie, as Jonah, in
the belly of hell; God's Wrath falls into their Conscience, as a drop of
scalding Lead into the Eye: the Promises are as a Fountain sealed, not a drop
of comfort comes from them. O Christians, do you not remember what it cost you
before to get your pardon? How long it was before your broken bones were set;
And will you again venture to sin? You may be in such a condition, that you may
question whether you belong to God or no; though God does not Damn you, he may
send you to Hell in this Life.

4. If God has given you good hope that you are pardoned, walk cheerfully,
Romans 5.11. We joy in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have
received the Atonement. Who should rejoice if not he that has his pardon? God
rejoiceth when he shows us Mercy; And should not we rejoice when we receive
Mercy? In the saddest times a pardoned Soul may rejoice. Afflictions have a
Commission to do him good; every cross-wind of Providence shall blow him nearer
to the Haven of Glory. Christian, God has pulled off your Prison-fetters, and
Clothed you with the Robe of Righteousness, and Crowned you with
Loving Kindness, and yet art thou sad? Romans 5.2. We rejoice in hope of the
Glory of God. Can the Wicked rejoice who have only a short Reprieve from Hell,
and not they who have a full Pardon sealed?

5. Has God pardoned you? Do all the Service you can for God. 1 Cor. 15.58.
Always abounding in the work of the Lord. Let your head study for God, let your
hands work for him, let your Tongue be the Organ of his Praise. Paul got his
pardon, 1 Timothy 1.16. I obtained Mercy: and this was as Oil to the Wheels, it
made him move faster in obedience, 1 Cor. 15.10. I labored, (...), more
abundantly than they all. Paul's obedience did not move slow as the Sun on the
Dial, but swiftly, as the Sun in the Firmament. He did spend, and was spent for
Christ. The pardoned Soul thinks he can never love God enough, or serve him
enough.

The last thing is, to lay down some Rules or Directions, how we may obtain
forgiveness of Sin.

1. We must take heed of Mistakes about pardon of Sin.

1. Mistake, That our sins are pardoned, when they are not.

Q. Whence is this Mistake?

R. From Two Grounds.

1. Because God is Merciful.

Answ. God's being Merciful shows, that a Man's sins are pardonable; but there
is a great deal of difference between sins pardonable, and sins pardoned. Thy
sins may be pardonable yet not pardoned. Though God be merciful, yet who is
God's Mercy for? not for the Presuming sinner, but the Repenting sinner. Such
as go on in sin, cannot lay claim to it. God's Mercy is like the Ark, none but
the Priests might touch the Ark: none but such as are Spiritual Priests,
Sacrificing their sins, may touch this Ark of God's Mercy.

2. Because Christ died for their sins, therefore they are forgiven.

Answ. That Christ died for Remission of sin, is true; but that therefore all
have Remission, is false: The Judas should be forgiven. Remission is limited to
Believers, Act. 13.39. By him all that believe are justified; but all do not
believe. Some slight, and trample Christ's blood under foot, Heb. 10.29. So
that notwithstanding Christ's Death, all are not pardoned. Take heed of this
dangerous mistake. Who will seek after pardon, that thinks he has it already?

2. Mistake. That pardon is easy to be had; it is but a sigh, or, Lord have
Mercy: But, How dearly has pardon cost them who have obtained it? How long was
it ere David's broken bones were set? Happy we, if we have the pardon of sin
sealed, though at the very last hour: But, Why do Men think pardon of sin so
easy to be obtained? their sins are but small, therefore Venial. The Devil
holds the small end of the Perspective-glass before their eyes. But, First,
There is no sin small, being against a Deity: Why is he punished with death,
that Clips the King's Coin, or defaceth his Statue, but because it is an abuse
offered to the Person of the King. Secondly, Little sins, when multiplied,
become great. A little sum, when multiplied, comes to Millions. What is less
than a grain of Sand, but when the Sand is multiplied, what heavier? Thirdly,
Thy sins cost no small price. View thy sins in the Glass of Christ's
Sufferings: Christ did vail his Glory, lose his Joy, and pour out his Soul an
Offering for the least sin. Fourthly, Little sins, unrepented of, will damn
thee as well as greater. Not only great Rivers fall into the Sea, but little
Brooks: Not only greater sins carry Men to Hell, but lesser; therefore do not
think pardon easy, because sin is small; beware of mistakes.

2. The Second Means for Pardon of sin, is, see your selves guilty. Come to God
as Condemned Men, 1 King. 20.32. They put Ropes upon their heads, and came to
the King of Israel: Let us come to God in profound Humility: Say not thus,
Lord, my heart is good, and my life blameless, God hates this. Lie in the dust,
be covered with sackcloth; say as the Centurion, Mat. 8.8 Lord, I am not worthy
that thou should come under my roof: I deserve not the least smile from
Heaven. This is the way for pardon.

3. The Third Means for pardon is hearty Confession of sin, Psalm. 32.5. I
confessed my sin, and thou forgavest me. Would we have God cover our sins, we
must discover them, 1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is just to forgive
them. One would have thought it should have ^un thus; If we confess our sins,
he is merciful to forgive them; nay, but he is just to forgive them. Why Just?
because he has bound himself by promise to forgive an humble Confessor of sin.
Cum accusat, excusat, Tertull. When we accuse our selves, God absolves us. We
are apt to hide our sins, Job 31.33. which is as great a folly as for one to
hide his disease from the Physician: But when we open our sins to God by
Confessing, he opens his Mercy to us by Forgiving.

4. Means, for pardon, sound Repentance: Repentance and Remission are put
together, Luke 24 47. There is a Promise of a Fountain Opened for the washing
away the guilt of sin, Zach. 13.1. But see what goes before, Zac. 12.10. They
shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and shall mourn for him, Isa. 1.16.
Wash ye, make ye clean; that is, wash in the waters of Repentance; and then
follows a promise of Forgiveness. Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be
white as snow. It Is easy to turn white into scarlet, but not so easy to turn
scarlet into white; yet, upon Repentance, God has promised to make the
scarlet-sinner of a Milk-like whiteness.

Caut* Not that Repentance merits pardon; but it prepares for it. We set our
Seal on the Wax when it melts: God seals his pardons on melting hearts.

5. Means, Faith in the blood of Christ. It Is Christ's blood washes away sin,
Rev. 1.6. but this blood will not wash away sin unless it be applied by Faith.
The Apostle speaks of the Sprinkling of the blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.2. Many
are not pardoned, though Christ's blood be shed* because it is not sprinkled:
Now it is Faith that sprinkles Christ's blood on the Soul, for the Remission of
sin. As Thomas put his hands into Christ's sides, Ioh. 20 27. So Faith puts its
hand into Christ's wounds, and takes of the blood and sprinkles it upon the
Conscience, for the washing away of guilt. Hence in Scripture we are said to
obtain pardon through Faith, Act. 13.39. By him all that believe are justified.
Luke 7.48. Thy sins are forgiven. Whence was this? Verse. 50. Thy faith has
saved thee. O let us labor for Faith: Christ is a Propitiation or Atonement,
to take away sin, But how? through Faith in his blood, Rom 3.25.

6. Means, Pray much for Pardon, Hos. 14.2. Take away all iniquity, Luke 18.13.
The Publican smote upon his breast, saying, God be me merciful to me a sinner:
and the Text says, he went away justified. Many pray for Health, Riches,
Children; but Christ has taught us what to pray for chiefly, remitte nobis
debita nostra; Forgive us our sins. And be earnest Suitors for pardon:
Consider, what guilt of sin is; it binds one over to the Wrath of God: Better
thy House were haunted with Devils, than thy Soul with guilt. He who is in the
bond of iniquity, must needs be in the Gall of bitterness, Acts 8.23. A guilty
Soul wears Cain's Mark, which was a Trembling at Heart, and a Sha^^ng in his
Flesh. Guilt makes the sinner afraid, lest every Trouble he meets with should
Arrest him, and bring him to Judgment. If guilt be so dismal, and breeds such
Convulsion fits in the Conscience, How earnest should we be in Prayer, that God
would remove this guilt, and so earnest, as to Resolve to take no denial? Plead
hard with God for Pardon, as a Man would plead with a Judge for his Life: Fall
upon thy Knees, say, Lord, hear one word. Why may God say, What can thou say
for thy self that thou should not dye? Lord, I can say but little, but I put
in my surety, Christ shall answer for me, O look upon that blood which speaks
better things than the blood of Abel; Christ is my Priest, his Blood is my
Sacrifice, his Divine Nature is my Altar. As Rahab was to show the Scarlet
thread in the Window, and when Joshua saw it, he did not destroy her, Josh.
2.18.21. Josh. 6.22, 23. So show the Lord the Scarlet thread of Christ's Blood,
and that is the way to have mercy. But, will God say, why should I pardon thee,
thou have no ways obliged me? but, Lord, pardon me because thou have promised
it; I urge thy Covenant; when a Man is to dye by the Law, he calls for his
Book; so say, Lord, let me have the benefit of my Book; thy Word says, if the
sinner forsake his evil way, thou will pardon abundantly, Isa. 55.7. Lord, I
have forsaken my sin, let me therefore have mercy, I plead the benefit of the
Book. But, for whose sake should I pardon, thou can not deserve it? Lord, for
thy own name sake, thou have said thou will blot out sin, for thy own name
sake, Isa. 43.25. 'Twill be no Eclipsing to thy Crown; how will thy mercy shine
forth, and all thy other Attributes ride in triumph, if thou shall pardon me?
Thus plead with God in Prayer, and resolve not to give him over till thy pardon
be sealed. God cannot deny importunity. He delights in Mercy, as the Mother,
says Chrysostom, delights to have her Breast milked: so God delights to Milk
out the Breast of Mercy to the sinner, these means being used will procure this
great blessedness, the Forgiveness of Sin. Thus I have done with the first part
of this fifth Petition, Forgive us our Sins, I come next to the second part of
the Petition, as we forgive our Debtors.

Mat. 6.12. As we forgive our Debtors, or, as we forgive them that trespass
against us.


I proceed to the second part of the Petition. As we forgive them that trespass
against us.

As we forgive] This word As, is not a note of Equality, but Similitude; not
that we equal God in forgiving, but imitate him.

This great Duty of forgiving others, is a crossing the stream, it is contrary
to flesh and blood. Men forget kindnesses, but remember injuries. But it is an
indispensable duty to forgive, we are not bound to trust an Enemy, but we are
bound to forgive him. We are naturally prone to revenge. Revenge (says Homer)
is sweet as dropping Honey. The Heathen Philosophers held revenge lawful.
Vlcisci te lacessitus potes. Cicero. But we learn better things out of the
Oracles of Scripture, Mar. 11.25. when ye stand praying, forgive, Mat. 5.44.
Col. 3.13. If a Man have a quarrel against any, even as Christ forgave you, so
also do ye.

Quest. 1. How can we forgive others when it is only God forgives sin?

Answ. In every breach of the second Table, there are two things; an offense
against God, and a trespass against Man: so far as it is an offense against
God, only he can forgive, but so far as it is a trespass against Man, so we may
forgive.

Quest. 2. When do we forgive others?

Answ. When we strive against all thoughts of revenge, if it be in our power to
do our enemies mischief we will not, we wish well to them, grieve at their
Calamities, we pray for them, we seek reconciliation with them, we show our
selves ready on all occasions to relieve them, this is Gospel forgiving.

Object. 1. But I have been much injured and abused, and to put it up, will be
a stain to my reputation.

Answ. 1. To pass by an injury without revenge is no eclipsing ones credit; the
Scripture says, Prove. 19.11. It is the glory of a man to pass over a
transgression. It Is more honor to bury an injury than revenge it; wrathfulness
denotes weakness, a noble Heroic Spirit overlooks a petty offense.

2. Suppose a Man's Credit should be impaired with those whose censure is not to
be valued, yet consider the folly of challenging another to a Duel; it is little
Wisdom for a Man to redeem his Credit by losing his Life, and to run into Hell
to be counted valorous.

Object. 2. But the wrong he has done me is great.

Answ. But thy not forgiving him is a greater wrong, he in injuring thee has
offended against a Man, but thou in not forgiving him offendest against God.

Object. 3. But if I forgive one injury I shall occasion more?

Answ. If the more injuries thou forgivest the more thou meetest with, this
will make thy Grace shine the more; often forgiving will add more to the weight
of his sin, and to the weight of thy glory. If any shall say, I strive to excel
in other Graces, but as for this of forgiving, I cannot do it, I desire in this
to be excused. What do thou talk of other Graces? the Graces are inter se
connexae, linked and chained together, where there is one there is all, he that
cannot Forgive, his Grace is Counterfeit, his Faith is Fancy, his Devotion is
Hypocrisy.

Quest. 3. But suppose another has wronged me in my Estate, may not I go to
Law for my Debt?

Answ. Yes, else what use were there of Law Courts. God has set judges to
decide cases in Law, and to give every one his right. It is with going to Law,
as it is with going to War, when the just rights of a Nation are Invaded, here
i^ is lawful to go to War. So when a Man's Estate is trespassed upon by another,
he may go to law to recover it. But the Law must be used in the last place,
when no entreaties or arbitrations will prevail, then the Chancery must decide
it. Yet this is no revenge, it is not so much to injure another as to right
ones self, this may be, yet one may live in Charity.

USE. 1. Here is a Bill of indictment against such as study revenge, and cannot
put up the least discourtesie. They would have God forgive them, but they will
not forgive others, they will Pray, come to Church, give Alms, but as Christ
said, Mark 10.21. Yet lackest thou One Thing, they lack a forgiving Spirit,
they will rather want forgiveness from God, than they will forgive their
Brother. How sad is it that for every slight wrong, or disgraceful word, men
should let malice boil in their Hearts. Would there be so many Duels, Arrests,
Murders, if Men had the art of forgiving. Revenge is the proper sin of the
Devil; he is no Drunkard, or Adulterer, but this old Serpent is full of the
Poison of Malice; and what shall we say to them who make profession of
Religion. yet instead of forgiving pursue others despightfully; it was
Prophesied the Wolf should dw^ll with the Lamb, Isa. 11.6. but what shall we
say when such as profess to be Lambs become Wolves? These open the mouths of
the profane against Religion, they will say, these are as full of rancour as
any. O whither is Love and Mercy fled? if the Son of Man did come should he
find Charity on the Earth? I fear but a little. Such as cherish Anger and
Malice in their Hearts, and will not Forgive, how can they pray, Forgive us as
we forgive others? either they must omit this Petition, (as Chrysostom says
some did in his Time) or else they pray against themselves.

Use. 2. Let it persuade us all as ever we hope for Salvation, to pass by petty
injuries and discourtesies, and labor to be of forgiving Spirits, Col. 3.13.
Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another.

1. Herein we resemble God. He is ready to forgive, Psalm. 86.5. He befriends
His Enemies: He opens his Hands to relieve them who open their Mouths against
Him. 'Twas Adams Pride to go to resemble God in omnisciency. But here it is
lawful to resemble God in Forgiving Enemies. This is a God-like disposition,
and what is Godliness but God-likeness?

2. To forgive is one of the highest evidences of Grace. When Grace comes into
the Heart, it makes a man as Caleb, of another Spirit, Numb. 14.24. It makes a
great Metamorphosis, it sweetens the Heart, and fills it with Love and Candor.
When a Siene is grafted into a Stock, it partakes of the Nature, and Sap of the
Tree, and brings forth the same fruit. Take a Crab, graft it into a Pepin, it
brings forth the same fruit as the Pepin. So he who was once of a sour crabby
disposition, given to revenge, when he is once ingrafted into Christ, he
partakes of the Sap of this Heavenly Olive, and bears sweet and generous fruit,
he is Full of Love to his Enemies, and requites Good for Evil. As the Sun draws
up many thick noxious Vapors from the Earth, and returns them in sweet
showers: so a gracious Heart returns the unkindnesses of others, with the sweet
influences of love and mercifulness, Psalm. 35.13. They rewarded me Evil for
Good; but as for me;, when they were sick, my clothing was Sackcloth: I humbled
my Soul with Fasting. This is a good Certificate to show for Heaven.

3. The blessed example of our Lord Jesus, He was of a Forgiving Spirit, His
Enemies reviled him, but he did pity them. Their words were more bitter than
the Gall and Vinegar they gave him, but Christ's words were smoother than Oil.
They spat upon him, Peirced him with the Spear and Nails, but he prayed for
them, Father forgive them, he wept over his Enemies, he shed tears for them
that shed his Blood; never such a pattern of amazing kindness. Christ bids us
learn of him, Mat. 11.29. he does not bid us learn of him to work Miracles, but
he would have us learn of him to forgive our Enemies. If we do not imitate
Christ's Life, we cannot be saved by his Death.

4. The danger of an implacable unforgiving Spirit. It hinders the efficacy of
Ordinances. It is like an obstruction in the Body which keeps it from thriving.
A revengeful Spirit poisons our Sacrifice: our prayers are turned into sin;
will God receive prayer mingled with this strange Fire? Our coming to the
Sacrament is sin. We come not in charity: so that ordinances are turned into
sin. It were sad if all the Meat one did eat should turn to Poison. Malice
poisons the Sacramental Cup, men Eat and Drink their own Damnation, Judas came
to the Passover in malice, and after the Sop Satan entered, John 13.27.

5. God has tied his Mercy to this condition, if we do not forgive neither
will he forgive us, Mat 6.15. If ye forgive not men their Trespasses, neither
will your Heavenly Father forgive your Trespasses. A man may as well go to Hell
for not forgiving, as for not believing. How can they expect mercy from God
whose Bowels are shut up, and are merciless to their trespassing Brethren? Jam.
2.13. He shall have Judgment without Mercy, that has showed no Mercy. I cannot
Forgive said one, tho I go to Hell.

6. The examples of the Saints who have been of forgiving Spirit. Joseph
Forgave his Brethren, tho they put him into a Pit and sold him, Genesis 50.21.
Fear not, I will nourish you, and your little ones. Stephen prayed for his
Persecutors. Moses was of a forgiving Spirit. How many injuries and affronts
did he put up* The People of Israel dealt unkindly with him, they murmur^d
against him at the Waters of Marah, (the Water was not so bitter as their
Spirits,) but he fell to prayer for them* Exodus 15.24. He cried unto the Lord,
and the Lord showed him a Tree, which when he had cast into the Waters, they
were made sweet. When they wante^ Water they fell a chiding with Moses, Exodus
17.3. Why have thou brought us out of Egypt to kill us with thirst? As if they
had said, if we dye we will lay our Death to thy charge, here was enough to
have made Moses call for Fire from Heaven upon them, but he passes by this
injury, and to show he forgave them, he becomes an intercessor for them, ver.
4. and set the Rock abroach for them, ver. 6. The Prophet Elisha feasted his
Enemies, 2 Kin. 6.23. He prepared a Table for them who would have prepared his
Grave. Cranmer was famous for forgiving injuries. When Luther had reviled
Calvin, says Calvin, Etiamsi millies me diabolum vocet, tho he call me Devil a
thousand times, yet I will love and honor him as a precious Servant of Christ.
When one had abused and wronged a Christian, asking him, What wonders has your
Master Christ wrought? says he, He has wrought this wonder, that tho you have
so injured me, yet I can forgive you, and pray for you.

7. Forgiving and requiting good for evil, is the best way to conquer and melt
the Heart of an Enemy. Saul having pursued David with Malice, and hunted him as
a Partridge upon the Mountains, yet David would not do him a mischief when it
was in his power. David's kindness melted Saul^ Heart, 1 Samuel 24.16, 17. Is this
thy voice, my Son David? and Saul lift up his Voice and Wept, and said, Thou
art more righteous than I, for thou have rewarded me good. This forgiving is
heaping Coals, which melts the Enemies Heart, Romans 12.20. This is the most
noble Victory, to overcome an Enemy without striking a blow, to conquer him
with love. Philip of Macedon when it was told him that one Nicanor did openly
rail against him, the King instead of putting him to death, sent him a rich
present, which did so overcome the man, and make his Heart relent, that he went
up and down to recant what he had said against the King, and did highly extol
the Kings Clemency.

8. Forgiving others, is the way to have forgiveness, from God, and is a sign
of forgiveness.

1. It is the way to have forgiveness, Mat. 6.14. If ye forgive men their
trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also forgive you. But one would think
other things should sooner procure forgiveness from God, than our forgiving
others. No surely, nothing like this to procure forgiveness, for all other acts
of Religion may have leaven in them. God forbad Leaven in the Sacrifice, Exodus
34.25. One may give Alms* yet there may be the leaven of Vainglory in this.
The Pharisees sounded a Trumpet, they did not give Alms, but sell them for
applause, Mat. 6.2. one may give his Body to be burned, yet there may be leaven
in this, it may be a false zeal, there may be Leaven in many acts of Religion,
which soures the whole lump, but to forgive others that have offended us, this
can have no Leaven in it, no Sinister aim, this is a Duty wholly Spiritual, and
is done purely out of love to God* hence it is God rather annexeth forgiveness
to this, then to the highest and most renowned works of Charity which are so
cried up in the World.

2. It is a sign of Gods forgiving us. It is not a cause of Gods forgiving us,
but a sign. We need not climb up into Heaven to see whether our sins are
Forgiven, let us look into our Hearts, and see if we can Forgive others, then
we need not doubt but God has forgiven us. Our loving others is nothing but
the reflection of Gods love to us. Oh therefore by all these arguments, let us
be persuaded to the forgiving others. Christians how many offenses has God
passed by in us? Our sins are innumerable, and Heinous; is God willing to
forgive us so many offenses, and cannot we forgive a few? no man can do so much
wrong to us all our life as we do to God in one day.

Quest. But how must we Forgive?

Answ. As God Forgives us.

1. Cordially, God does not only make a show of forgiving, and keeps our sins
by him, but does really forgive; He passes an act of Oblivion, Ier. 31.34. so
we must not only say we Forgive, but do it with the Heart, Mat. 18.35. If ye
from your Hearts forgive not.

2. God forgives Fully; he forgives all our sins. He does not for fourscore
write down fifty, Psalm 103.3. who Forgiveth all thy iniquities. Hypocrites
pass by some offenses but retain others. Would we have God deal so with us? to
remit only some trespasses and call us to account for the rest.

3. God forgives often, we run afresh upon the score, but God multiplies
pardon, Isa. 55.7. Peter asks the question, Mat. 18.21. Lord how often shall my
Brother sin against me, and I forgive him? Till seven times? Ie^us says to
him, I say not, until seven times, but until seventy times seven. If he say, I
Repent, you must say, I Remit.

Quest. But this is one of the highest acts of Religion, Flesh and Blood cannot
do it? how shall I attain to it?

Answ. 1. Let us consider, how many wrongs and injuries we have done against
God; What Volume can hold our Errata? Our sins are more than the Sparks in a
Furnace.

2. If we would forgive, see Gods hand in all that men do or say against us Did
we look higher than Instruments, our Hearts would grow calm, and we would not
meditate revenge. Shimei reproached David and Cursed him, David looked higher 2 Samuel 16 11. Let him alone, let him curse, for the Lord has bidden him. What
made Christ that when he was reviled he reviled not again? He looked beyond
Iud^s and Pilate, he saw his Father putting the bitter Cup into his Hand, and
as we must see Gods hand, in all the affronts and Incivilities we receive from
men, so we must believe God will do us good by all if we belong to him, 2 Samuel
16.12. It may be the Lord will requite me good for his cursing this day;
quisquis de^rahit famae meae addet mercedi meae* Aug. He that inju^es me shall
add to my reward, he that Clips my name to make it weigh lighter, shall make my
Crown weigh heavier. Well might Stephen pray For his Enemies, Lord lay not this
sin to their charge, Act. 7.60. he knew they did but increase his Glory in
Heaven, every Stone his Enemies threw at him added a Pearl to his Crown.

3. Lay up a stock of Faith, Luke 17.4 If thy Brother trespass against thee
seven times in a day, and seven times in a day, ^urn again to thee, and say, I
Repent, thou shall forgive him. And the Apostles said to the Lord, Increase our
Faith. As if they had said, We can never do this without a great deal of Faith;
Lord increase our Faith. Believe God has pardoned you, and you will pardon
others, only Faith can throw dust upon injuries, and bury them in the Grave of
forgetfulness.

4. Think how thou have sometimes wronged others, and may it not be just with
God* that the same measure you mete to others should be measured to you again?
have not thou wronged others, if not in their Goods, yet in their Name? If thou
have not born false witness against them, yet perhaps thou have spoken falsely
of them; the consideration of this may make Christians bury injuries in silence.

5. Get humble Hearts. A proud Man thinks it a disgrace to put up an injury.
What causes so many Duels and Murders as Pride? Be clothed with humility, 1
Pet. 5.5. He who is low in his own Eyes will not be troubled much, tho others
lay him low. He knows there is a day a coming, when there shall be a
Resurrection of Names as well as Bodies, and God will avenge him of his
Adversaries, Luke 18.7. And shall not God avenge his own Elect? the humble Soul
leaves all his wrongs to God to requite, who has said vengeance is mine, Romans
12.19.

Use of Comfort. Such as Forgive, God will forgive them. You have a good
argument to plead with God for Forgiveness, lo, I am willing to Forgive him who
makes me no sactisfaction and wilt not thou Forgive me, who have received
satisfaction in Christ my surety: so ends the fifth Petition.

Mat. 6.13. And lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from Evil.


THIS Petition consists of two parts.

First, Deprecatory, Lead us not into Temptation.

Second, Petitory, But deliver us from evil.

First, Nenos inducas in tentationem, Lead us not into temptation. Does God
lead into Temptation? God tempts no man to sin, Jam. 1.13. Let no man say when
he is Tempted, I am tempted of God, for God tempts not any man. God does
permit sin, but not promote it. He who is an encourager of holiness cannot be a
Patron of sin. God does not Tempt to that which he has an antipathy against*
what King will tempt his Subjects to break those Laws which he himself has
establi^hed?

Quest. But is it not said God tempted Abraham? Genesis 22.1.

Answ. Tempting there was no more than trying. God tried Abraham's Faith, as a
Goldsmiths tries Gold in the Fire, but there is a great deal of difference
between Gods trying his Peoples Grace, and exci^ing their corruption* he tries
their Grace, but does not excite their corruptions, man's sin cannot be justly
fathered on God. God tempts no man.

Quest. What then is the meaning of this, Lead us not into temptation?

Answ. When we pray, Lead us not into Temptation, the meaning is we desire of
God, that he would not suffer us to be overcome by temptation; that we may not
be given up to the power of a Temptation, which is when we are trapann'd into
sin.

Quest. 2. Whence do temptations come?

Answ. 1. Ab intra* from our selves, the Heart is Fomes peccati, the breeder of
all evil; our own Hearts are the greatest Tempters; quisque sibi Satan est,
Iam. 1.14. Every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust, the
Heart is a perfect decoy.

2. Temptations come ab extra, from Satan he is called (...) the Tempter. Mat.
4.3. he lies in Ambush to do us mischief, stat in procinctu Diabolus, the Devil
lays a Train of Temptation, to blow up the Fort of our Grace. The Devil is not
yet fully cast into Prison, but is like a Prisoner that goes under Bail, the
World is his Diocese where he visits, we are sure to find Satan whatever we are
doing, reading, praying, meditating; we find him within, how he came there we
know not; we are sure of his company, uncertain how we came by it. A Saints
whole Life (says Austin) is a Temptation; Elias who could shut Heaven by
Prayer, could not shut his Heart from a Temptation. This is a great molestation
to a Child of God; as it is a trouble to a Virgin to have her Chastity daily
assaulted: the more one is tempted to evil, the more he is hindered from good;
we are in great danger of Satan, the Prince of the Air, and we had need often
pray, leads us not into Temptation, that we may see in what danger we are of
Satan's Temptations.

Consider 1. His Malice in tempting.

This Hellish Serpent is swelled with the Poison of malice. Satan envies man's
happiness. To see a clod of Dust so near to God, and himself (once a glorious
Angel) cast out of the Heavenly Paradise, this makes him pursue mankind with
inveterate hatred, Rev. 12.12. The Devil is come down to you having great
wrath: If there be any thing this Infernal Spirit of Hell can delight in, it is
to ruin Souls, and bring them into the same condemnation with himself, this
malice of Satan in tempting must needs be great, if we consider three things.

1. That when Satan is so full of Torment, yet, that at such a time he should
tempt* one would think Satan should scarce have a thought free from thinking of
his own misery; yet such is his rage and malice, that when God is punishing him
he is tempting.

2. Satan's Malice is great, that he will tempt where he knows he cannot
prevail. He will put forth his sting tho he cannot hurt; he tempted Christ,
Mat. 4.3. If thou be the Son of God. He knew well enough Christ was God as well
as Man, yet he would tempt him. Such was his malice against Christ, that he
would put an Affront upon Christ, though he knew he could not conquer him. He
tempts the Elect to Blasphemy, he knows he cannot prevail against the Eelect;
yet such is his Malice, that though he cannot storm the Garrison of their Hearts,
yet he will plant his Pieces of Ordnance against them.

3. Satan's Malice is great, that though he knows his tempting men to sin will
increase his own Torment in Hell, yet he will not leave off tempting; every
Temptation makes his Chain heavier, and his fire hotter, yet he will tempt.
Therefore Satan being such a malicious revengeful Spirit, had not we need pray
that God would not suffer him to prevail by his Temptations? Lead us not into
Temptation.

2. Consider Satan's Diligence in tempting, 1 Pet 5.8. (...), He walks about.
He neglects no time, he who would have us Idle, yet himself is always busied.
This Lion is ever hunting after his Prey, he compasses Sea and Land to make a
Proselyte; he walks about, he walks not as a Pilgrim, but a Spy, he watches
where he may throw in the Fire-ball of a Temptation. He is a restless Spirit,
if we repulse him, yet he will not defist, but come again with a Temptation.
Like Marcellus, a Roman Captain Hannibal speaks of; whether he was conquered or
did conquer, he was never quiet. More particularly, Satan's Diligence in
tempting is seen in this.

1. If he gets the least Advantage by Temptation, he pursues it to the utmost.
If his Motion to sin begins to take, he follows it close, and presses to the
Act of sin. When he tempted Judas to betray Christ, and found that Judas was
inclinable, and began to bite at the Bait of thirty Pieces of silver; he
hurries him on, and never leaves him till he had Betrayed his Lord and Master.
When he had tempted Spira to Renounce his Religion, and saw Spira began to
yield, he follows his Temptation close, and never left till he had made him go
to the Legate at Venice, and there Abjure his Faith in Christ.

2. Again* Satan's Diligence in tempting is seen in this, The Variety of
Temptations he uses. He does not confine himself to one sort of Temptation, he
has more Plots than one; if he finds one Temptation does not prevail he will
have another; if he cannot tempt to Lust, he will tempt to Pride. If a
Temptation to Covetousness does not prevail, he will tempt to Profuseness* If
he cannot fright men into Despair, he will see if he can draw them to
Presumption. If he cannot make* them Profane, he will see if he can make them
Formalists. If he cannot make them Vicious, he will tempt them to be Erroneous.
He will tempt them to leave off Ordinances, he will pretend Revelations. Error
damns as well as Vice, the one pistols, the other poisons; thus Satan's
Diligence in tempting is Great, he will turn every Stone, he has several Tools
to work with; if one temptation will not do, he will make use of another. Had
not we need then pray, Lead us not into Temptation?

3. Consider Satan's Power in tempting. He is called the Prince of the World,
John 12 31. and (...), the strong Man, Luke 11.21. and the Great Red Dragon who
with his Tail cast down the third part of the Stars, Rev. 12.4. He is full of
Power, being an Angel; tho Satan has lost his Holiness, yet not his Strength.
The Devils Power in tempting is seen several ways. 1. He as a Spirit having an
intellectual Being, can convey himself into the Fancy, and poison it with bad
Thoughts. As the Holy Ghost does cast in good Motions, so the Devil does bad.
He put it into Judas Heart to betray Christ, John 13, 2. -- 2. Satan though he
cannot compel the Will, yet he can present pleasing Objects to the Senc^^*
which have a great Force in them. He set a Wedg of Gold before Achan, and so
enticed him with that Golden Bait. 3. The Devil can excite and stir up the
Corruption within, and work some Inclinableness in the Heart to embrace the
Temptation. Thus he stirred up Corruption in David's Heart, and provoked him to
number the People, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. Satan can blow the spark of Lust into a Flame.

4. Herein lies much of his Power, that he being a Spirit, can so strangely
convey his Temptations into our Minds, that we cannot easily discern whether
they come from Satan or from our selves. Whether they are his Suggestions, or
the natural Births of our own Hearts. A Bird may hatch the Egg of another Bird,
thinking it is her own. Often we hatch the Devils Motions, thinking they come
from our own Hearts. When Peter dissuaded Christ from Suffering, sure Peter
thought it came from the good Affection which he did bear to his Master, Matt.
16.22. little did Peter think Satan had an hand in it. Now if the Devil has
such a Power to instill his Temptations that we hardly know whether they be His
or Ours, we are in a great deal of danger; and had need pray, not to be led
into Temptation. Here I know some are desirous to move the Question.

Quest. How shall we perceive when a Motion comes from our Own Hearts, and when
from Satan?

Resp. It is hard (as Bernard says) to distinguish, Inter morsum Serpentis and
morbum Mentis, between those Suggestions which come from Satan, and which breed
out of our own Hearts. But I conceive there is this threefold difference.

1. Such Motions to Evil as come from our own Hearts, spring up more leasurely
and by degrees. A sin is long concocted in the Thoughts ere consent be given.
But usually we may know a Motion comes from Satan by its Suddenness. Therefore
Temptation is compared to a Dart, Ephesians. 6.16. because it is shot suddenly.
David's Numbering the people was a Motion which the Devil did inject suddenly.

2. The Motions to Evil which come from our own Hearts are not so Terrible. Few
are frighted at the sight of their own Children. But Motions coming from Satan
are more ghastly and frightful, as Motions to Blasphemy and self-Murder. Hence
it is Temptations are compared to fiery Darts, Ephesians. 6. For their
Terribleness, because they do as flashes of fire startle and affright the Soul.

3. When Evil Thoughts are thrown into our Mind, which we loath, and have
Reluctance against, when we strive against them and fly from them, as Moses did
from the Serpent; this shows, they are not the Natural Birth of our own Heart,
but the Hand of Ioab is in this. Satan has injected these impure Motions.

4. Satan's Power in tempting, appears by the long Experience he has gotten in
the Art. He has been a Tempter well nigh as long as he has been an Angel. Who
are fitter for Action than Men of Experience? Who is fitter to steer a Ship,
than an old Experienced Pilot? Satan has gained much Experience by his being
so long versed in the Trade of Tempting. He having such Experience knows what
are the Temptations which have foiled others, and are most likely to prevail:
The Fowler lays those snares which have caught other Birds. Satan having such
Power in tempting, we are in danger, and had need pray, Lead us not into
Temptation.

5. Consider Satans's Subtilty in tempting. The Greek word to Tempt, (...)*
signifies to Deceive. Satan in tempting uses many subtle Policies to deceive,
we read of the Depths of Satan, Rev. 2.24. and his (...), his Devices or
Stratagems, 2 Cor. 2.11. we read of his Snares and his Darts, his Snares are
worse than his Darts: He is called a Lion for his Cruelty, and an old Serpent
for his Subtilty, he has several sorts of subtilty in tempting.

1. Subtilty. The Devil observes the Natural Temper and Constitution, Omnium
discutit mores -- the Devil does not know the Hearts of men, but he may feel
their Pulse, know their Temper, and so accordingly can apply himself. As the
Husbandman knows what seed is proper to sow in such a soil; so Satan finding
out the Temper, knows what temptation is proper to sow in such an heart. That
way the Tide of a man's Constitution runs, that way the wind of Temptation
blows. Satan tempts the Ambitious Man with a Crown, the Sanguine Man (...)
Beauty, the Covetous Man with a Wedge of Gold. He provides Savory Meat such as
the sinner loves.

2. Subtilty. Satan chooses the fittest Season to tempt in. As a cunning
Angler casts in his Angle when the fish will bite best. The Devil can hit the
very joint of Time, when a Temptation is likest to prevail; there are several
seasons he tempts in.

1. In our first Initiation and Entrance into Religion, when we have newly
given up our names to Christ. Satan will never disturb his Vassals, but when we
have broke his Prison in Conversion, now he pursues us with violent
Temptations. Solet inter primordia Conversionis acrius insurgere. Bern. When
Israel were got a little out of Egypt, then Pharaoh pursues them. Herod as soon
as Christ was born sent to destroy him. So when the Child of Grace is newly
born, the Devil labors to strangle it with Temptation. When the first Buddings
and Blossoms of Grace begin to appear, the Devil would nip these tender Buds
with the sharp blasts of his Temptations. Indeed at first Conversion, Grace is
so weak, and Temptation so strong, that one would wonder how the young Convert
scapes with his Life; Satan has a spite at the New Creature.

2. Season. The Devil tempts when he finds us idle and unimploy'd. We do not
sow seed in fallow Ground; but Satan sows most of his seed in a person that
lies fallow; when the Fowler sees a Bird sit still and perch upon the Tree,
now he shoots it. So when Satan observes us to sit still, now he shoots his
fiery Darts of Temptation at us, Mat. 13.25 While men slept the Enemy sowed
Tares. So while men sleep in Sloth Satan sows his Tares. When David was
walking on the Leads, and unimploy'd, now the Devil set a tempting Object
before him, and it prevailed, 2 Samuel 11.3.

3. Season. When a Person is reduced to outward wants and straits, now is the
Devils tempting time. When Christ had fasted forty days and was hungry, then
the Devil comes and tempts him with the Glory of the World, Mat. 4.8. When
Provisions grow short, now Satan sets in with a Temptation. What, will thou
starve rather than steal? Reach forth thy hand, pluck the forbidden Fruit. How
often does this Temptation prevail? How many do we see who instead of living by
Faith, live by their shifts, and will steal the Venison though they lose the
Blessing.

Season 4. Satan tempts after an Ordinance. When we have been at hearing of the
Word, or Prayer, or Sacrament; now Satan casts in the Angle of a Temptation.
When Christ had been Fasting and Praying, then came the Tempter, Mat. 4.3.

Quest. Why does Satan choose this time to tempt in after an Ordinance? One
would think this were the most disadvantagious time, for now the Soul is raised
up to an heavenly Frame?

Answ. 1. Malice puts Satan upon it. The Ordinances that cause Fervor in a
Saint, cause Fury in Satan. He knows in every Duty we have a design against
him. In every Prayer we put up a Suit in Heaven against him. In the Lord's
Supper we take the Sacrament upon it, to fight under Christ's Banner against
the Devil; therefore now Satan is more enraged, he now lays his Snares, and
shoots his Darts against us.

2. Satan tempts after an Ordinance, because he thinks he shall now find us
most secure. After we have been at the Solemn Worship of God we are apt to grow
remiss, and leave off former Strictness: Like a Soldier, that after the Battle
leaves off his Armor: Now Satan watches his time, he does as David did the
Amalekites; after they had taken the Spoil and were secure, they did eat and
drink, and dance; now David fell upon them and did smite them, 1 Samuel 30.17. So
when we grow remiss after an Ordinance, and perhaps too much indulge our selves
in carnal Delights; now Satan falls upon us by a Temptation, and often foils us.
As after a full Meal, men are apt to grow drowsy: So after we have had a full
meal at an Ordinance, we are apt to slumber and grow secure; and now Satan
shoots his Arrow of Temptation and hits us between the joints of our Armor.

Season 5. Satan tempts after some Discoveries of God's Love. Satan like a
Pyrat, sets on a ship that is richly laden: So when a Soul has been laden with
spiritual Comforts; now the Devil will be shooting at him to rob him of all.
The Devil envies to see a Soul feasted with spiritual Joy. Joseph's
party-colored Coat made his Brethren envy him, and plot against him. After
David had the good news of the Pardon of his sin, (which must needs fill him
with Consolation) Satan presently tempted him to a new sin in numbering the
people; and so all his Comfort leak'd out and was spilt.

Season 6. ^atan tempts when he sees us weakest. He breaks over the Hedge where
it is lowest. As the Sons of Jacob came upon the Shechemites when they were
sore, and could make no Resistance, Genesis 34.25. At two times Satan comes upon
us in our weakness.

1. When we are alone. So he came to Eve when her Husband was away, and the
less able to resist his Temptation. Satan has this Policy, he gives his Poison
privately, when no body is by; others might discover his Treachery. Satan is
like a cunning Suitor, that wooes the Daughter when the Parents are from home.
So when one is alone, and none near; now the Devil comes a wooing with a
Temptation, and hopes to have the Match struck up.

2. When the hour of Death approaches. As the poor sheep when it is sick and
weak and can hardly help it self, now the Crows lie pecking at it. So when a
Saint is weak on his Deathbed; now the Devil lies pecking at him with a
Temptation, he reserves his most furious Assaults till the last. The people of
Israel were never so fiercely assaulted, as when they were going to take
Possession of the promised Land; then all the Kings of Canaan combined their
Forces against them: So when the Saints are leaving the World, and going to set
their foot into the Heavenly Canaan; now Satan sets upon them by Temptation, he
tells them they are Hypocrites, all their Evidences are Counterfeit. Thus like
a Coward he strikes the Saints when they are down. When Death is striking at
the Body, he is striking at the Soul* This is his second Subtilty, Satan
chooses the fittest season when to throw in a Temptation.

Subtilty 3. A third subtle Policy of Satan in tempting is, He baits his Hook
with Religion, the Devil can hang out Christ's Colors, and tempt to sin under
pretenses of Piety. Now he is the White Devil, and transforms himself into an
Angel of Light. Celsus wrote a Book full of Error, and he Entitled it; Liber
Veritatis, The Book of Truth. So Satan can write the Title of Religion upon his
worst Temptations. He comes to Christ with Scripture in his Mouth, It is
written, etc. So he comes to many and tempts them to sin under the pretense of
Religion; he tempts to Evil that Good may come of it. He tempts men to such
unwarrantable Actions, that they may be put into a Capacity of honoring God
the more. He tempts them to accept of Preferment against Conscience, that
hereby they may be in a condition of doing more good; He put Herod upon killing
John Baptist, that hereby he might be kept from the Violation of his Oath. He
tempts many to Oppression and Extortion, telling them they are bound to provide
for their Families. He tempts many to make away with themselves, that they may
live no longer to sin against God; thus he wraps his poisonous Pills in sugar.
Who would suspect him when he comes as a Divine, and quotes Scripture?

4. Subtilty of Satan is to tempt to sin Gradually. The old Serpent winds
himself in by degrees. He tempts first to lesser sins, that so he may bring on
greater. A small Offense may occasion a great Crime; as a little prick of an
Artery may occasion a mortal Gangrene. Satan first tempted David to an impure
glance of the Eye, to look on Bathsheba, and that unclean look occasioned
Adultery and Murder. First the Devil tempts to go into the Company of the
wicked, then to twist into a Cord of Friendship, and so by degrees to be
brought into the same Condemnation with them; This is a great Subtilty of Satan
to tempt to lesser sins first; for these harden the Heart, and fit men for the
committing of more horrid tremendous. Sins.

5. Subtilty. Satan's Policy is to hand over Temptations to us by those whom we
least suspect.

1. By near Friends; he tempts us by them who are near in Blood. He tempted Job
by a Proxy, he handed over a Temptation to him by his Wife, Job 2.9. Do thou
still retain thy Integrity? As if he had said, Job thou see how for all thy
Religion God deals with thee. His hand is gone out sore against thee, what and
still pray, and weep? Cast off all religion, turn Atheist? Curse God and die.
Thus Satan made use of Job's Wife to do his work: the woman was made of the
Rib, and Satan made a Bow of this Rib, out of which he shot the Arrow of his
Tentation. Per costam petit Cor, the Devil often stands behind the Curtain, he
will not be seen in the Business; but puts others to do his work. As a man
makes use of a Sergeant to arrest another: so Satan makes use of a Proxy to
tempt; as he did creep into the Serpent, so he can creep into a near Relation.

2. He tempts sometimes by religious Friends. The Devil keeps still out of
sight, that his Cloven Foot may not be seen. Who would have thought to have
found the Devil in Peter? When he dissuaded Christ from suffering. Master,
spare thy self. Christ spied Satan in the Temptation. Get thee behind me,
Satan. When our religious Friends would dissuade us from doing our Duty, Satan
is a lying spirit in their Mouths; and would by them entice us to Evil.

6. Subtilty, Satan tempts some Persons more than others: some are like wet
Tinder, who will not so soon take the fire of Temptation as others. Satan
tempts most where he thinks his Policy's will more easily prevail; some are
fitter to receive the impression of Temptations: as soft Wax is fitter to take
the stamp of the Seal. The Apostle speaks of Vessels filled for Destruction,
Romans 9.22. so there are Vessels fitted for Temptation. Some like the sponge
suck in Satan's Temptations. There are five sorts of persons that Satan does
most sit brooding upon by his Temptations.

1. Ignorant Persons. The Devil can lead them into any snare; you may lead a
blind man any whither. God made a Law that the Jews should not put a stumbling
block in the way of the blind, Levit. 19.14. Satan knows it is easy to put a
Temptation in the way of the blind* at which they shall stumble into Hell. When
the Syrians were smitten with Blindness, the Prophet Elisha could lead them
whither he would into the Enemies Country, 2 Kin. 6.20. The bird that is blind
is soon shot by the Fowler. Satan the God of this World blinds men and then
shoots them. An ignorant man cannot see the Devils snares; Satan tells him such
a thing is no sin, or but a little one, and he will do well enough. It Is but
repent.

2. Satan tempts Unbelievers. He who with Diagoras doubts of a Deity, or with
the Photinians denies Hell; what sin will not this man be drawn to. He is like
metal that Satan can cast into any Mould; he can dye him of any color. An
Unbeliever will stick at no sin, Luxury, Perjury, Injustice. Paul was afraid of
none so much as them that did not believe, Romans 15.31. That I may be delivered
from them that do not believe in Judea.

3. Satan tempts proud Persons; these he has more power of: none is in greater
danger of falling by a Temptation, than he who stands high in his own Conceit.
When David's Heart was lifted up in pride, then the Devil stirred himself up to
Number the people, 2 Samuel 24.2. Celsae graviore casu decidunt Turres,
feriuntque summos fulmina montes, Hor. Satan made use of Hamans pride to be his
shame.

4. Melancholy Persons. Melancholy is atra bilis, a black Humor seated chiefly
in the Brain. Melancholy clothes the Mind in Sable, it does disturb Reason*
Satan works much upon this Humor. There are three things in Melancholy which
give the Devil great Advantage. 1. It unfits for Duty, it pulls off the
Chariot-Wheels, it dispirits a man. Lute-strings when they are wet will not
sound. When the spirit is sad and melancholy, a Christian is out of tune for
spiritual Actions. 2. Melancholy sides often with Satan against God; the Devil
tells such a person, God does not love him, there is no Mercy for him; and the
Melancholy Soul is apt to think so too, and sets his hand to the Devils Lies.
3. Melancholy breeds Discontent; and Discontent is a cause of many sins;
Unthankfulness* Impatience, and often it ends in self-murder. Judge then what an
Advantage Satan has against a melancholy Person, and how easily he may prevail
with his Temptations. A melancholy person tempts the Devil to tempt him. 4.
Idle Persons; He who is idle, the Devil will find him work to do. Ierom gives
his Friend this Counsel to be ever well employed, that when the Tempter came he
might find him working in the Vineyard. If the Hands be not working, the Head
will be plotting sin, Micah 2.1.

7. Subtilty. Of Satan is to give some little Respite, and seem to leave off
tempting a while that he may come on after with more Advantage. As Israel made
as if they were beaten before the Men of Ai, and fled; but it was a Policy to
draw them out of their fenced Cities, and ensnare them by an Ambush, Josh.
8.15. The Devil sometimes raises the Siege, and feigns a flight that he may
the better obtain the Victory. He goes away for a time, that he may return when
he sees a better season, Luke 11.24. When the unclean Spirit is gone out of a
man, he walks in dry places, seeking rest and finding none, he says, I will
return to my House whence I came out. Satan by feigning a flight, and leaving
off tempting a while, causes Security in persons, and they think they are
safe, and are become Victors, when on a sudden Satan falls on and wounds them.
As one that is going to leap runs back a little, that he may take the greater
Jump. Satan seems to retire and run back a little, that he may come on again
with a Temptation more furiously and successfully. Therefore we need always to
watch and have on our spiritual Armor.

8. Subtilty Of the old Serpent is either to take men off from the use of
means, or to make them miscarry in the use of means.

First, He labors to take men off from Duty, from praying and hearing; his
design is to Discourage them, and to do that he has two Artifices.

1. He discourageth them from Duty, by suggesting to them their Unworthiness,
they are not worthy to approach to God, or have any signals of his Love and
Favor. They are sinful, and God is Holy, how dare they presume to bring their
impure Offering to God? This is a Temptation indeed; that we should see our
selves unworthy is good, and argues Humility; but to think we should not
approach to God because of unworthiness, is a conclusion of the Devils making.
God says, Come, though unworthy. By this Tentation the Devil takes off many from
coming to the Lords Table. O (says he) this is a solemn Ordinance, and
requires much Holiness; how dare thou so unworthily come, lest thou eatest
and drinkest unworthily? Thus as Saul kept the people from eating Honey, so the
Devil by this Temptation scares many from this Ordinance, which is sweeter than
honey and the honeycomb.

Secondly, Satan endeavors to discourage from Duty by objecting want of
Success. When men have waited upon God in the use of Ordinances* and yet find
not that Comfort they desire; now Satan disheartens them and, (...) them upon
resolves of declining all Religion; they begin to say as that wicked King, 2
Kings 6.33. Why should I wait on the Lord any longer? When Saul saw God
answered him not by Dreams and Visions, Satan tempted him to leave God's
Worship, and seek to the Witch of Endor, 1 Samuel 28.6. No answer of Prayer
comes, therefore says Satan leave off praying; who will sow seed, where no
Crop comes up? Thus the Devil would by his subtle Logic dispute a poor Soul
out of Duty. But if he sees he cannot prevail this way to take men off from the
use of means, then he labors,

2. To make them miscarry in the use of means. By this Artifice he prevails
over multitudes of Professors. The Devil stands as he did at Joshua's right
Hand, to resist men, Zach. 3.1. If he cannot hinder them from Duty, he will be
sure to hinder them in Duty two ways.

First, By causing Distraction in the Service of God, and this he does by
proposing Objects of Vanity, or by whispering in men's Ears that they can scarce
mind what they are doing.

Secondly, Satan hinders by putting men upon doing Duties in a wrong manner. 1.
In a dead formal manner, that so they may fail of the success. Satan knows
duties done superficially were as good be left undone. That Prayer which does
not pierce the Heart will never pierce Heaven. 2. He puts them upon doing
duties for wrong ends, Finis specificat actionem; He will make them look
a-squint and have by-ends in Duty, Mat. 6.5. Be not as the Hypocrites, for they
love to pray standing in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of
men. Prayer is good, but to pray to be seen of men, this was a dead fly in the
Box of Ointment; the Oil of vainglory fed their Lamp, sinister Aims corrupt
and fly-blow our Holy Things. Here is Satan's Policy, either to prevent Duty or
pervert it; either to take men off from the use of means, or make them miscarry
in the use of Means.

9. Subtilty, Satan can color over sin with the name and pretense of Virtue.
Alcibiades hung a Curtain curiously Embroidered over a foul Picture full of
Satyrs: so Satan can put the Image of virtue over the foul Picture of sin.
Satan can cheat men with false Wares, he can make them believe that Presumption
is Faith, that intemperate Passion is Zeal; Revenge is Prudence, Covetousness
is Frugality and Prodigality, good Hospitality. Come see my Zeal for the Lord,
says Iehu. Satan persuaded him it was a Fire from Heaven, when it was nothing
but the Wildfire of his own Ambition; 'Twas not Zeal, but State Policy. This
is a subtle Art of Satan to deceive by tempting, and put men off with the dead
Child instead of the live Child, to make men believe that is a Grace which is a
Sin; as if one should write Balm-water upon a Glass of Poison. If Satan has
all these subtle Artifices in tempting, are not we in great Danger of this
Prince of the Air, and had not we need often pray, Lord suffer us not to be led
into Temptation? as the Serpent beguiled Eve with his Subtilty, 2 Cor. 11.2.
Let us not be beguiled by the Snares and Policies of this hellish Machiavel.

Satan is (...), he has a Dexterity in subtle Contrivances. He does more hurt
as a Fox, than a Lion. His Snares are worse than his Darts, 2 Cor. 2.11. We are
not ignorant of his Devices.

10. The next Subtilty of Satan is, He labors to ensnare us by Lawful Things.
In licitis perimus omnes; more are hurt by lawful things than unlawful, as more
are killed with Wine than Poison; Gross Sins affright, but how many take a
surfeit and die in using lawful things inordinately? Recreation is lawful,
Eating and Drinking is lawful, but many offend by Excess, and their Table is a
Snare. Relations are lawful, but how often does Satan tempt to over-love? how often
is the Wife and Child laid in God's Room? Excess makes things lawful become
sinful.

11. Subtilty of Satan is to make the Duties of our General and Particular
Calling hinder and justle out one another. Our General Calling is serving God,
our Particular Calling is minding our Employments in the World. It Is Wisdom to
be regular in both these, when the Particular Calling does not eat out the time
for God's Service; nor the Service of God hinder Diligence in a Calling. The
Devil's Art is to make Christians defective in one of these two. Some spend all
their time in Hearing, Reading, and under a pretense of living by Faith, do not
live in a Calling: others Satan takes off from Duties of Religion under a
pretense that they must provide for their Families. He makes them so careful
for their Bodies, that they quite neglect their Souls. This is the Subtilty of
the old Serpent, to make men negligent in the Duties either of the first Table
or the second.

12. Subtilty of Satan in Tempting is, to misrepresent true Holiness, that he
may make others out of love with it. He paints the Face of Religion full of
Scars, and with seeming Blemishes, that he may create in the Minds of Men
prejudice against it. Satan misrepresents Religion as the most Melanch^ly
Thing, and that he who embraces it, must banish all Joy out of his Diocese.
Though the Apostle says, Joy in Believeng, Romans 15.13. Satan suggests that
Religion exposes men to Danger, he shows them the Cross, but hides the Crown
from them. He labors to put all the Disgrace he can upon Holiness, that he may
tempt men to the Renouncing of it. Satan abuses the Good Christian and gives
him a wrong Name. The truly Zealous Man Satan calls hotheaded and factious.
The patient man that bears Injuries without Revenge, Satan represents him as a
Coward. The humble man is low-spirited, the heavenly-man, Satan calls fool, he
lets go things that are seen, for things that are not seen. Thus the Devil
mis-represents Religion to the World. As John Husse that Holy Man was painted
with Red Devils: So Satan paints Holiness with as deformed, misshapen a Face as
he can, that he may by this Temptation draw men off from solid Piety; and make
them rather scorn than embrace it. The hand of Ioab is in this. Satan is
tempting persons to Atheism, to cast off all Religion.

13. Subtilty of Satan in tempting is, to draw men off from the Love of the
Truth to embrace Error, 2 These. 2.11. That they should believe a Lie. Satan is
called in Scripture not only an Unclean Spirit, but a Lying Spirit. As an
Unclean Spirit, so he labors to defile the Soul with Lust, and as a Lying
Spirit, so he labors to corrupt the Mind with Error. And indeed this is
dangerous, because many Errors do look so like the Truth, as Alchimy
represents true Gold; Satan thus beguiles Souls. Though the Scripture blames
Heretics for being the Promoters of Error; Yet it charge Satan with being
the chief Contriver of it. They spread the Error, but the Devil is a lying
Spirit in their Mouths. This is Satan's great Temptation, he makes men believe
such are glorious Truths which are dangerous Impostures, thus he transforms
himself into an Angel of Light. What is the meaning of Satan's sowing Tares in
the Parable, Mat. 13.25. but Satan sowing Error instead of Truth. How quickly
had the Devil broached false Doctrine in the Apostles times. That it was
necessary to be Circumcised, Acts 15.1. that Angel-Worship was lawful, and that
Christ was not yet come in the Flesh, 1 Ioh. 4.3. Now the Devil tempts by
drawing Men to Error, because he knows how deadly this snare is; and the great
Mischief Error will do where it comes. 1. Error is of a spreading Nature, it
is compared to Leaven, because it sowres, Mat. 16.11. and to a Gangrene,
because it spreads, 2 Timothy 2.17. 1. One Error spreads into more, like a Circle
in the water that multiplies into more Circles. One Error seldom goes alone.
2. Error spreads from one person to another, it is like the Plague which
infects all round about. Satan by infecting one person with Error, infects
more. The Error of Pelagius did spread on a sudden into Palestine, Africa,
Italy; the Arrian Error was at first but a single spark, but at last it set
almost all the World on fire. 2. The Devil lays this snare of Error, because
Error brings Divisions into the Church, and Divisions bring an Opprobrium and
Scandal upon the ways of God. The Devil danceth at Discord; Division destroys
Peace, which was Christ's Legacy, and Love, which is the Bond of Perfection.
Not only Christ's Coat has been Rent, but his Body, by the divisions which
Error has caused; in Churches or Families where Error creeps in, what
Animosities and Fractions does it make? it sets the Father against the Son, and
the Son against the Father. What Slaughters and Bloodshed have been occasioned
by Errors broached in the Church? 3. The Devils Policy in raising Errors is to
hinder Reformation; the Devil was never a friend to Reformation. In the
Primitive Times after the Apostles days, the Serpent cast out of his Mouth
Water as a flood after the Woman, Rev. 12.15. which was a deluge of Heresies,
that so he might hinder the Progress of the Gospel. 4. Satan tempts to Error,
because Error devours Godliness. The Gnostics, as Epiphanius observes, were
not only corrupted in their Judgments, but in their Morals; they were loose in
their Lives, Jude 4. Ungodly men turning the Grace of our God into
Lasciviousness. The Familists afterward turned Ranters, and gave themselves
over to Vices and Immoralities, and this they did boasting of the Spirit and
Perfection. 5. The Devils design in seducing by Error is, he knows Error is
pernicious to Souls; Error damns as well as Vice. Poison kills as well as
Pistol, 2 Pet. 2.1. They shall privily bring in damnable Heresies. Now if Satan
be thus subtle in laying snares of Error to deceive, had not we need pray that
God would not suffer us to be led into Temptation; that he would make us wise
to keep out of the snare of Error, or if we have fallen into it, that he would
give us to recover out of the snare by Repentance?

14. Another Subtilty of Satan is, to bewitch and ensnare men by setting
Pleasing Baits before them; the Riches, Pleasures, Honors of the World, Mat.
4.9. All this will I will give thee; how many does Satan tempt with this Golden
Apple? Pride, Idleness, Luxury are the three Worms which breed of Plenty, 1 Timothy 6.9. They that will be rich fall into Temptation and a Snare. Satan kills
with these silver Darts; how many surfeit on Luscious Delights? The Pleasures
of the World are the great Engine by which Satan batters down men's Souls. His
Policy is to tickle them to death, to damn them with Delights. The Flesh would
fain be pleased, and Satan prevails by this Temptation. He drowns them in the
sweet Waters of Pleasure; such as have abundance of the World walk in the midst
of Golden Snares. We had need watch our Hearts in Prosperity, and pray not to
be led into Temptation. We have as much need to be careful that we are not
endangered by Prosperity, as a man has to be careful at a Feast, where there
are some poisoned Dishes of Meat.

15. Subtilty of Satan in tempting is to plead Necessity. Satan's Policy in
tempting men under a Plea of Necessity is this, he knows that Necessity may in
some Cases seem to palliate and excuse a sin. It may seem to make a lesser Evil
good to avoid a Greater. As Lot offered to expose his Daughters to the
Sodomites, and was willing that they should defile them, that he might preserve
the Angel-strangers that were come into his House, Genesis 19.8. Doubtless Satan
had an Hand in this Temptation, and made Lot believe that the necessity of this
Action would excuse the sin. The Tradesman pleads a necessity of unlawful Gain,
else he cannot live. Another pleads a Necessity of Revenge, else his Credit
will be impaired; thus Satan tempts men to sin by telling them of the
Necessity. Nay, the Devil will quote Scripture for it, that in some Cases
extraordinary, there may be a Necessity of doing that which is not justifiable.
Did not David in case of Necessity eat the Shewbread, which was not lawful for
him, but only the Priests? Mat. 12.4. nor do we read he was blamed; then will
Satan say, Why may not you in Cases Extraordinary trespass a little, and take
the forbidden Fruit: O beware of this Temptation, see Satan's Cloven Foot in it:
Nothing can warrant a thing in its own nature sinful. Necessity will not
justify Impiety.

16. Subtilty of Satan in tempting is, to draw men to Presumption. Presumption
is a Confidence without Ground: it is made up of two Ingredients, Audacity and
Security; this Temptation is common. There is a twofold Presumption* 1. Satan
tempts men to presume of their own Hearts, that they are better than they are;
they presume they have Grace when they have none. They will not take Gold on
trust, but they will take Grace upon trust; the foolish Virgins presumed that
they had Oil in their Vessels when they had none. Here that Rule of Epicharmus
is good, (...), distrust a fallacious Heart. 2. Satan tempts men to presume of
God's Mercy: though they are not so good as they should be, yet God is merciful.
They look upon God's Mercy with the broad Spectacles of Presumption. Satan
sooths Men up in their sins; he Preaches to them all Hope, no Fear; and so
deludes them with these Golden Dreams: Quam multi cum vana spe descendunt ad
inferos. Aug. Presumption is Satan's draw-net, by which he drags Millions to
Hell. Satan, by this Temptation, often draws the Godly to sin; they presume upon
their Privileges, or Graces, and so venture on occasions of sin. Iehoshaphat
twisted into a League of Amity with K. Ahab, presuming, his Grace would be
Antidote strong enough against the infection, 2 Chronicles. 18.3. Satan tempted
Peter to presume upon his own strength, and when it came to a trial, he was
foiled, and came off with shame. We had therefore need Pray, That we may not be
led into this Temptation; and with David, Keep back thy servant from
presumptuous sins, Psalm. 19.13.

17. Subtilty of Satan in tempting, is, to carry on his designs against us,
under the highest pretenses of Friendship. He thus puts Silver upon his bait,
and dips his poisoned Pills in Sugar. Satan does as some Courtiers, make the
greatest pretenses of Love where they have the most deadly hatred. Ioab's Sword
was ushered in with a Kiss; He kissed Abner, and then smote him under the fifth
rib. Satan puts off his Lions skin, and comes in sheeps clothing; he pretends
kindness and friendship: He would consult what might be for our good. Thus
Satan came to Christ, Command that these stones be made bread* Mat. 4. As if he
had said to Christ, I see thou art hungry, and here is no Table spread for thee
in the Wilderness; I therefore pitying thy condition, wish thee to get
something to eat; Turn stones to bread, that thy hunger may be satisfied: but
Christ spied the Temptation, and with the Sword of the Spirit wounded the Old
Serpent. Thus Satan came to Eve, and tempted her under the notion of a Friend;
Eat, says he, of the forbidden Fruit, for the Lord knows, that in the day ye
eat thereof ye shall be as Gods. As if he had said, I persuade you only to
that which will put you into a better condition than now you are; eat of this
Tree and it will make you Omniscient, ye shall be as Gods. What a kind Devil
was here? but it was a subtle Temptation, she greedily swallowing the bait, it
undid her and all her Posterity. Let us fear his fallacious flatteries. Timeo
Danaos and Dona ferentes.

18. Subtilty, is, When Satan has tempted Men to sin, he persuades them to
keep his Counsel: Like them that have some foul Disease, they will rather die
than tell the Physician. It were wisdom in case of sore temptation, to open
ones Mind to some experienced Christian, whose Counsel might be an Antidote
against the Temptation. But the danger of a Temptation lies in the concealing
of it; It Is like the concealing of Treason, which may prove Mortal. How had we
need renew this Petition, Lead us not? etc.

19. Subtilty Of Satan in Tempting, is to make use of fit tools and engines,
for the carrying on of his Work; That is, he makes use of such persons as may
be likely means to promote his tempting designs. The Devil lays the plot of a
Temptation, and as it were cuts out the Work, and then he imploys others to
finish it.

1. Satan makes use of such as are in places of Dignity, Men of Renown. He
knows if he can get these on his side, they may draw others into Snares: When
the Princes and Heads of the Tribes joined with Corah, they presently drew a
Multitude into the Conspiracy, Numb. 16.2.10.

2. The Devil makes use of such to carry on his Tempting Designs, as are Men of
Wit and Parts; such, as if it were possible, should deceive the very Elect. He
must have a great deal of cunning that shall persuade a Man to be out of love
with his Food: The Devil can make use of such Heretical Spirits as shall
persuade Men to be out of love with the Ordinances of God, which they profess
they have found comfort in. Many who once seemed to be strict frequenters of
the House of God, are now persuaded, by Satan's cunning Instruments, to leave
off all* and follow an Ignis Fatuus, the Light within them. This is a great
subtilty of the Devil to make use of such cunning subtil-pated Men, as may be
fit to carry on his Tempting Designs.

3. Satan makes use of bad company to be instruments of tempting: They draw
Youth to sin. First they persuade them to come into their Company, then to
Twist into a Cord of Friendship; then to Drink with them; and, by degrees,
debauch them: These are the Devils Decoys to tempt others.

20. Subtilty of Satan is, He, in his Temptation, strikes at some Grace more
than other: As in tempting, he aims at some Persons more than others; so he
aims at some Grace more than other; and if he can prevail in this, he knows
what an advantage it will be to him. If you ask what Grace it is that Satan in
his Temptations does most strike at? I Answer, it is the Grace of Faith: He
lays the Train of his Temptation to blow up the Fort of our Faith, Fidei scutum
percutit. Why did Christ pray more for Peter's Faith, than any other Grace?
Luke 22.32. Because Christ saw that his Faith was most in danger, the Devil was
striking at this Grace. Satan in Tempting Eve, did labor to weaken her Faith,
Genesis 3.1. Yea, has God said, ye shall not eat of every Tree of the Garden? The
Devil would persuade her, that God had not spoken Truth; and when he had once
wrought her to distrust, then she took of the Tree. It Is called Scutum fidei,
the Shield of Faith, Ephesians. 6.16. Satan in Tempting, strikes most at our
Shield, he assaults our Faith. True Faith, though it cannot be wholly lost, yet
it may suffer a great Eclipse. Though the Devil cannot, by Temptation, take
away the Life of Faith, yet he may the lively acting: He cannot Gratiam
diruere, but he may debilitare.

Quest. But why does Satan, in Tempting, chiefly set upon our Faith? A. 1 King.
22.31. Fight neither with small nor great, save only with the King. So Faith
is as it were the King of the Graces; it is a Royal Princely Grace, and puts
forth the most Majestic and noble Acts, therefore Satan fights chiefly with
this Kingly Grace. I shall show you the Devils Policy in assaulting Faith most.

First, Because this is the Grace does Satan most Mischief: it makes the most
resistance against him, 1 Pet. 5.9. Whom resist, steadfast in Faith. No Grace
does more bruise the Serpents Head than Faith. Faith is both a Shield and a
Sword, defensive and offensive. 1. It is a Shield. A shield guards the Head,
defends the Vitals; the shield of Faith causes that the fiery darts of
Temptation do not pierce us thorough. 2. Faith is a Sword, it wounds the Red
Dragon.

Quest. How comes Faith to be so strong that it can resist Satan, and put him
to flight?

Answ. 1. Because Faith brings the strength of Christ into the Soul: Sampson's
strength lay in his Hair, ours lies in Christ: If a Child be assaulted, it runs
and calls to its Father for help: So, when Faith is assaulted, it runs and
calls Christ, and in his Strength overcomes.

2. Faith furnishes it self with store of Promises; the Promises are Faith's
Weapons to fight with. Now, as David, by Five Stones in his Sling, wounded
Goliath, 2 Samuel 17.40. So Faith puts the Promises, as Stones, into its Sling, I
will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5. He will not break the
bruised reed, Matt. 12.20. He will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye
are able, 1 Cor. 10.13. The Lord will shortly bruise Satan under your feet,
Romans 16.20. None shall pluck you out of my Fathers hands, Joh. 10.29. Here are
Five Promises, like five Stones put in the Sling of Faith, and with these a
Believer wounds the Red Dragon. Now Faith being such a Grace, that does so
resist and wound Satan, he will watch his opportunity that he may batter our
shield, though he cannot break it.

2. Satan strikes most at our Faith, and would weaken and destroy it, because
Faith has a great influence upon all the other Graces: Faith sets all the
Graces a-work. Like some rich Clothier, that gives out a stock of Wool to the
Poor, and sets them all a Spinning: So Faith gives out a stock to all the other
Graces, and sets them a working. Faith sets Love a-work, (...)^ Gal. 5.6. Faith
which works by love. When once the Soul believes God's Love, this kindles
Love to God. The believing Martyrs burned hotter in Love, than in Fire. Faith
sets Repentance a-work. When the Soul believes there is Mercy to be had, and
that this mercy is for him, this sets the eyes a Weeping. O says the Soul,
that ever I should offend so gracious a God. Repenting tears drop from the eye
of Faith, Mark 9.24. The Father of the Child cried out with tears, Lord I
believe. Faith set his eyes abroach with Tears; therefore the Devil has most
spite at Faith, and by his Temptations would undermine it, because it is such
an Operative Grace, it sets all the other Graces on work. If the Devil cannot
destroy our Faith, yet if he can disturb it, if he can hinder and stop the
actings of Faith, he knows all the other Graces will be lame and unactive. If
the Spring in a Watch be stopped, it will hinder the motion of the Wheels: If
Faith be down, all the other Graces are at a stand.

21. Subtilty of Satan in Tempting, is, In broaching those Doctrines that are
Flesh-pleasing. Satan knows the Flesh loves to be gratified, it cries out for
ease and liberty: it will not endure any yoke, unless it be lined and made
soft. The Devil will be sure so to lay his bait of Temptation, as to please and
humor the flesh. The Word says, (...), Strive, as in an Agony, to enter into
Glory; Crucify the Flesh; Take the Kingdom of Heaven by holy Violence. Now
Satan, to enervate and weaken these Scriptures, comes with Temptations and
flatters the Flesh. He tells Men, there needs no such Strictness; Why so much
zeal and violence? a softlier pace will serve; sure there is an easier way to
Heaven: There needs no breaking the heart for Sin; do but confess to a Priest,
or tell over a few Beads, or say some Ave Mary's, and this will procure you a
Pardon, and give you admission into Paradise: Or, the Devil can go another way
to work; if he sees Men startle at Popery, then he stirs up the Flattering
Antinomian, and he comes in another Disguise, and says, What needs all this
cost? What needs Repenting Tears? These are legal. What need you be so strict
in your Obedience? Christ has done all for you; you may make use of your
Christian Liberty. This Temptation draws away many; it takes them off from
strictness of life. He who sells cheapest shall have most Customers. The Devil
knows this is a cheap, easy Doctrine, which will please the flesh, and he does
not doubt but he shall have Customers enough.

22. Subtilty of Satan in Tempting, is in Reference to Holy Duties. His policy
is either to hinder from duty, or discourage in duty, or put Men on too far in
duty.

I. To hinder from Duty, as 1 These. 2.18. I would have come once and again, but
Satan hindered me. So many Duties of Religion had been performed, but Satan
hindered. The hand of Ioab is in this. There are Three Duties which the Devil
is an enemy to, and labors to keep us from.

1. Meditation. He will let Men Profess, or Pray and Hear in a formal manner;
This does him no hurt, nor them no good: but he does oppose Meditation, as
being a means to compose the heart, and make it serious. Satan can stand your
small shot, so you do not put in this Bullet. He cares not how much you Hear,
nor how little you Meditate: Meditation is a chewing of the cud, it makes the
Word digest, and turn to nourishment. Meditation is the Bellows of the
Affections. The Devil is an enemy to this. When Christ was alone in the
Wilderness, giving himself to Divine Contemplations, then the Devil comes and
tempts him, to hinder him. He will thrust in Worldly Business, something or
other to keep Men off from Holy Meditation.

2. Duty, which Satan, by his tempting, would keep us from, is Mortification.
This is as needful as Heaven, Col. 3.5. Mortify your Members which are upon
the Earth, uncleanness, inordinate affection. Satan will let Men be angry with
sin, exchange sin, restrain sin, which is keeping sin Prisoner, that it does
not break out; but when it comes to the taking away the Life of Sin, Satan
labors to stop the Warrant, and hinder the Execution. When Sin is Mortifying,
Satan is Crucifying.

3. Self-examination, 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, (...), a Metaphor from
Metal, that is pierced through, to see if it be Gold within. Self-examination is
a Spiritual Inquisition, set up in ones Soul: a Man must search his heart for
sin, as one would search an house for a Traitor; or, as Israel sought for
Leaven to burn it. Satan, if it be possible, will by his Temptations keep Men
from this Duty. He uses a great deal of subtilty.

1. Here, First he tells them, Their Estate is good, and what need they put
themselves to the trouble of Examination? Though Men will not take their Money
on Trust, but will examine it by the Touchstone; yet Satan persuades them to
take their Grace on trust. The Devil persuaded the Foolish Virgins they had Oil
in their Lamps.

2. Satan has another Policy, he will show Men the Faults of others, to keep
them from searching their own: See what a Proud Covetous Man goes there. He
will allow them Spectacles to see what is amiss in others, but not a
Looking-glass to behold their own Faces, and see what is amiss in themselves.

II. Satan's Policy is, to discourage us in Duty. When one has been about the
performing of Holy Duties, then the Devil stands up and tells him, He has
played the Hypocrite; he has served God for a Livery; he has had sinister
ends. His Duties have been full of distraction; they have been Fly-blown with
Pride. He has Offered the blind and lame* and can he expect a reward from God?
Satan tells a Christian, He has increased his sin by Prayer; and by this
Temptation he would make a Child of God quite out of conceit with his Duties,
he knows not whether he had best Pray or no.

III. Or Thirdly, if this Plot will not take, Satan labors by Temptation to
put a Christian on too far in duty: If he cannot keep a Child of God from duty,
he will run him on too far in it. For instance, humiliation and mourning for
sin is a duty; but Satan will put one on too far in it; Thou art not (says he)
humbled enough. And indeed, Satan never thinks a Man is humbled enough till he
despairs. He would make a Christian wade so far in the Waters of Repentance,
that he should wade beyond his depth, and be drowned in the Gulf of Despair.
Satan comes thus to the Soul; Thy sins have been great, and thy sorrow should
be proportionable to your sin. But is it so? Can thou say thou have been as
great a Mourner as thou have been a Sinner? Thou did for many years drive no
other Trade but sin; And is a drop of Sorrow enough for a Sea of Sin? No: thy
Soul must be more humbled, and lie steeping longer in the brinish waters of
Repentance. Satan would have a Christian weep himself blind, and in a desperate
mood throw away the Anchor of Hope: Now, lest any here be troubled with this
Temptation, let me say this; This is a mere Fallacy of Satan, for sorrow
proportionable to sin is not attainable in this Life, nor does God expect it.
It is sufficient for thee (Christian) if thou have a Gospel-sorrow, if thou
grievest so far, as to see Sin hateful, and Christ precious. If thou grievest
so, as to break off Iniquity; if thy Remorse end in Divorce, this is to be
humbled enough. Then the Gold has lain long enough in the fire, when the Dross
is purged out: then a Christian has lain long enough in Humiliation, when the
Love of Sin is purged out. This is to be humbled enough to Divine Acceptance.
God for Christ's sake will accept of this Sorrow for Sin; therefore let not
Satan's Temptations drive to despair. You see how subtle an Enemy he is, to
hinder from Duty, or discourage in Duty, or put Men on too far in Duty, that he
may run them upon the Rock of Despair. Had we not then need (having such a
subtle Enemy) Pray, Lord, lead us not into temptation: As the Serpent beguiled
Eve, let us not be beguiled by this Hellish Machiavel.

23. Subtilty of Satan, in Tempting to the act of sin, is the hopes of
returning out of it by speedy Repentance. But this is a fallacy; it is easy
for the Bird to fly into the Snare, but it is not so easy to get out of the
Snare. Is it so facile a thing to Repent? Are there no pangs in the New Birth?
Is it easy to leap out of Dalilah's Lap into Abraham's Bosom? How many has
Satan flattered into Hell by this policy, that if they sin, they may recover
themselves by Repentance? Alas, Is Repentance in our Power? A Spring lock can
shut of it self, but it cannot open without a Key: We can shut of our selves to
God, but we cannot open by Repentance, till God open our heart, who has the
Key of David in his hand.

24. Subtilty of Satan in Tempting, is to put us upon doing that which is good
unseasonably.

1. To Mourn for sin is a duty. The Sacrifices of God are a broken heart, Psalm.
51.17. but yet there is a time when it may not be so seasonable. After some
eminent Deliverance, which calls for Rejoicing, now to have the Spirits dyed of
a Sad Color, and to sit Weeping, is not seasonable. There was a Special Time
at the Feast of Tabernacles, when God called his People to Cheerfulness. Deuteronomy.
16.15. Seven days shall thou keep a Solemn Feast to the Lord thy God, and thou
shall surely rejoice. Now if at this time the Israelites had hung their Harps
upon the Willows, and been Disconsolate, it had been very unseasonable, like
Mourning at a Wedding. When God, by his Providence, calls us to Thanksgiving,
and we sit Drooping, and, with Rachel, refuse to be comforted; this is very
evil, and savours of Ingratitude. This is Satan's Temptation, the hand of Ioab
is in this.

2. To Rejoice is a Duty, Psalm. 33.1. Praise is comely for the Upright. But
when God by his judgments calls us to Weeping, now Joy and Mirth is
unseasonable, Isa. 22.12. In that day did the Lord call to weeping, and behold
joy and gladness. Oecolampadius, and other Learned Writers think, it was in the
time of King Ahaz, when the Signs of God's Anger, like a Blazing-Star, did
appear; now to be given to Mirth was very unseasonable.

3. To Read. The Word is a Duty; but Satan will sometimes put Men upon it when
it is unseasonable. To Read at home, when God's Word is Preaching, or the
Sacrament Administering, is unseasonable, yea sinful. As Hushai said, 2 Samuel
17.7. The Counsel is not good at this time: There was a Set-time enjoined for
the Passover, when the Jews were to bring their Offering to the Lord, Numb.
9.2. Had the People been Reading the Law at home, in the time of the Passover,
it had not been in season, and God would have punished it for a contempt. This
is the Devil's subtle Temptation, either to keep us from duty, or to put us
upon it when it is least in season. Duties of Religion not well timed and done
in season, are dangerous. Snow and Hail are good for the ground when they come
in their season; but in Harvest, when the Corn is ripe, then a Storm of Hail
would do hurt.

25. Subtilty of Satan in Tempting, is, to persuade Men to delay their
repenting and turning to God. He says, as Hag. 1.2. The time is not yet come.
Now youth is budding, or you are but in the flower of your age, it is too soon
to repent, the time is not yet come. This Temptation is the Devil's draw-net by
which he drags Millions to Hell. It is a dan^erous Temptation. Sin is Dulce
venenum, Bern. a Poison; the longer Poison lies in the Body, the more mortal By
delay of Repentance, sin strengthens, and the heart hardens. The longer Ice
freezeth, the harder it is to be broken. The longer a Man freezeth in
impenitency, the more difficult it will be to have his heart broken. When sin
has gotten an haunt, it is not easily shaken off. Besides, the danger of this
Temptation to delay Repentance, appears in this, because life is hazardous, and
may on a sudden expire. What security have you that you shall live another day?
Life is made up of a few flying Minutes; it is a Taper soon blown out* Jam.
4.14. What is your life? It is but a vapor. The body is like a Vessel, tuned
with a little breath; Sickness broacheth this Vessel, Death draws it out: How
dangerous therefore is this Temptation to procrastinate and put off turning to
God by repentance. Many now in Hell did purpose to Repent, but Death surpised
them.

26. Subtilty of Satan in Tempting, is, to infringe and weaken the Saints
peace: If he cannot Destroy their Grace, he will Disturb their Peace. Satan
envies a Christian should have a good day; and if he cannot keep him from
Heaven, he will keep him from an Heaven upon Earth. There is nothing (next to
Holiness) a Christian prizeth more, than Peace and Tranquillity of Mind. This
is the Cream of Life, a Bunch of Grapes by the way: Now it is Satan's great
policy to shake a Christian's Peace; that if he will go to Heaven, he shall go
thither through Frights, and plenty of Tears. The Devil throws in his Fireballs
of Temptation, to set the Saints Peace on fire. Of such great concern is
Spiritual Peace, that no wonder if Satan would, by his Intricate subtilties,
Rob us of this Jewel.

Spiritual Peace is a Token of God's Favor. As Joseph had a special testimony
of his Fathers Kindness in the Party-colored Coat he gave him; so have the
Saints a special token of God's Good Will to them, when he gives them inward
Peace, which is, as it were, the party-colored Coat to wear. No wonder then if
Satan so much rage against the Saints Peace, and would tear off this
comfortable Robe from them.

The Devil troubles the waters of the Saints Peace, because hereby he hopes to
have the more advantage of them.

1. By this perplexing of their Spirits, Satan takes off their Chariot-wheels;
unfits them for the Service of God: Body and Mind are both out of temper, like
an Instrument out of Tune. Sadness of Spirit prevailing, a Christian can think
of nothing but his Troubles; his Mind is full of doubts, fears, surmises; that
he is like a person distracted, and is scarce himself: Either he neglects the
duties of Religion, or his mind is taken off from them while he is doing them.
Especially, there is one Duty, that melancholy and sadness of spirit unfits
for, and that is Thankfulness. Thankfulness is a Tribute, or Quit-rent due to
God, Psalm. 149.3. Let the Saints be joyful, let the high praises of God be in
their mouth. But when Satan has disturbed a Christian's spirit, and filled his
Mind full of black, and almost despairing thoughts, how can he be Thankful. It
rejoices Satan to see how his Plot takes, by making God's Children Unquiet, he
makes them Unthankful.

2. Satan, by troubling the Saints Peace, has this advantage, of laying a
stumbling block in the way of others: By this policy the Devil gets an occasion
to render the ways of God unlovely to those who are looking Heavenward. He
sets before new beginners the perplexing Thoughts, the Tears, the Groans of
them who are wounded in Spirit, to scare them quite off from all seriousness in
Religion. He will object to new beginners; Do you not see how these sad Souls
torture themselves with melancholy Thoughts, and will you change the comforts
and pleasures of this life to sit always in the house of mourning? Will you
espouse that Religion, which makes you a terror to your selves, and a burden to
others? Can you be in love with such a Religion, as is ready to fright you out
of your wits? This advantage the Devil gets by troubling the Saints Peace, he
would discourage others who are looking toward Heaven; he would beat them off
from Praying, and hearing all Soul-awakening Sermons, lest they fall into this
black humor of Melancholy, and end their days in despair.

3. By this subtle policy of Satan, in disturbing the Saints Peace, and making
them believe God does not love them, he has this advantage, he sometimes so
far prevails over them, as to make them begin to entertain hard thoughts of
God. Through the black Spectacles of Melancholy, God's dealings look sad and
Ghastly. Satan tempts the Godly to have strange thoughts of God; to think he
has cast off all pity, and has forgotten to be gracious, Psalm. 77. and to
make sad conclusions, Isai. 38.13. I reckoned that as a Lion, so will he break
all my bones; from day even to night will thou make an end of me. The Devil
setting in with Melancholy, causes a sad Eclipse in the Soul; it begins to
think, God has shut up the Springs of Mercy, and there is no Hope. Hereupon,
Satan gets farther advantage of a troubled Spirit, sometimes he puts the
troubled Soul upon sinful wishes and execrations against it self: Job, in
distemper of Mind, Cursed his Birthday, Job 3.3. Job, though he did not curse
his God, yet he cursed his Birthday. Thus you see what advantages the Devil
gets by raising storms, and troubling the Saints Peace: and let me tell you, if
the Devil is capable of any delight, it is to see the Saints disquiets; their
Groans are his Music: It Is a sport to him to see them torture themselves upon
the wrack of Melancholy, and almost drown themselves in tears. When the Godly
have unjust surmises of God, question his Love, deny the Work of Grace, and
fall to wishing they had never been Born; now Satan is ready to clap his hands
and shout for a Victory.

Having shown you the advantages the Devil gets by this Temptation of
disturbing the Saints Peace, I shall Answer a Question, by what Arts and
Methods does Satan in Tempting disturb the Saints Peace?

Answ. 1. Satan slily conveys evil thoughts, and then makes a Christian believe
they come from his own heart. The Cup was found in Benjamin's sack, but it was
of Ioseph's putting in: So a Child of God often finds Atheistical Blasphemous
Thoughts in his mind, but Satan has cast them in. The Devil does, as some, lay
their children at another door: So Satan lays his Temptations at our door,
fathers them upon us, and then we trouble our selves about them, and Nurse them
as if they were our own.

2. Satan disturbs the Saints Peace, by drawing forth their sins in the most
black colors, to affright them, and make them ready to give up the Ghost.
Satan is called the Accuser of the Brethren; not only because he accuses them
to God, but accuses them to themselves: He tells them, they are guilty of such
sins, and they are Hypocrites. Whereas the sins of a Believer show only, that
Grace is not perfect, not, that he has no Grace: When Satan comes with this
Temptation, show him that Scripture, 1 John 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ his
Son cleanses us from all sin.

27. Subtilty of Satan, is, by plausible Arguments, to tempt Men to be felo de
se, to make away themselves. This Temptation does not only cross the current
of Scripture, but is abhorring to Nature, to be ones own Executioner. Yet such
cunning artifices has Satan, that he persuades many to lay violent hands upon
themselves; which the Bills of Mortality witness.

1. He tempts some to this in terror of Conscience; telling them, All the Hell
they shall have is in their Conscience, and Death will give them present ease.

2. He tempts others to make away themselves, that they may live no longer to
sin against God.

3. Others he tempts to make away themselves, that they may presently arrive at
happiness: he tells them, The best of the Saints desire Heaven, and the sooner
they are there the better.

Austin speaks of Cleombratas, who hearing Plato Read a Lecture of the
Immortality of the Soul, and the Ioys of the other World, se in praecipitium
dejecit; threw himself down a steep Precipice, or Rock, and killed himself.
This is Satan's Plot, but we must not break prison, by laying Violent hands
upon our selves; but stay, till God send and open the door. Let us Pray, Lead
us not into temptation. Still bear in mind that Scripture, Exodus 20.13. Thou
shall not kill. Clamitat in Coelum vox sanguinis -- if we may not kill another,
much less our selves; and take heed of discontent, which often opens the door
to self-murder.

Thus I have shown you 27 Subtilties of Satan in Tempting, that so you may the
better know them and avoid them.

There is a Story of a Jew that should have Poisoned Luther, but a Friend sent
to Luther the Picture of this Jew, warning him to take heed of such a Man when
he saw him, by which means he knew the Murderer, and escaped his hands. I have
told you the subtle devices of Satan in tempting; I have shown you (as it were)
the Picture of him that would Murder you; I beseech you, being forewarned, take
heed of the Murderer.

1. Use. From this subtilty of Satan in Tempting, let me draw two Inferences.

1. It may administer matter of wonder to us how any soul is saved. How may we
admire, that Satan, this Abaddon, or Angel of the Bottomless Pit, Rev. 9.11.
This Apollyon, this Soul-devourer, does not ruin all Mankind? What a wonder is
it that some are preserved, that neither Satan's hidden snares prevail, nor his
fiery darts: that neither the Head of the Serpent, nor the Paw of the Lion
destroys them? Sure it will be matter of admiration to the Saints when they
come to Heaven, to think how strangely they came thither; that notwithstanding
all the force and fraud, the power and policy of Hell, yet they should arrive
safe at the Heavenly Port: This is through the safe Conduct of Christ, the
Captain of our Salvation; Michael is too hard for the Dragon.

2. Is Satan so subtle; see then what need we have to pray to God for wisdom,
to discern the snares of Satan, and strength to resist them; we cannot of our
selves stand against Temptation, if we could, this Prayer were needless, Lead
us not, etc. Let us not think we can be too cunning for the Devil, we can
escape his wiles and darts. If David and Peter who were Pillars in God's
Temple, fell by Temptation, how soon should such weak Reeds as we, be blown
down, ^id God leave us? Take Christ's Advice, Mat. 26.41. Watch and pray, that
ye enter not into Temptation.

Inference. 3. See what the end of all Satan's subtilties in tempting is, He is
a Tempter that he may be an accuser. He lays the plot, enticeth men to Sin, and
then brings in the Indictment; as if one should make another drunk, 2 Samuel 18.2.
and then complain of him to the Magistrate for being drunk. The Devil is first
a Tempter and then an Informer, first a Liar, and then a Murderer.

Having shown you the subtilties of Satan in tempting, I shall answer two
questions.

Quest. 1. Why does God suffer his Saints to be so hurried and buffeted by
Satan's Temptations?

Answ. The Lord does it for many wise and holy ends.

1. He lets them be tempted to try them. The Hebrew word Nissa in Pyhil
signifies both to Tempt and to Try. Temptation is a Touchstone to try what is
in the Heart. The Devil tempts that he may deceive, but God lets us be tempted
to try us. Qui non tentatur non probatur. Aug.

1. Hereby God tries our sincerity; Jobs sincerity was tried by Temptation, the
Devil told God that Job was an Hypocrite, and served God only for a Livery, but
says he, Touch him, (that is, let me tempt him) and then see if he will not
curse thee to thy Face? Job 1.11. well, God did let the Devil touch him by a
Temptation, yet Job remains holy, he worships God, and blesses God, ver.
20.21. Here Jobs sincerity was proved, Job had Fiery Temptations, but he came
out of the Fire a Golden Christian, (...). Chrysostom. Temptation is a touchstone of
sincerity.

2. By Tentation God tries our Love, the Wife of Tigranes did never so show her
chastity and love to her Husband, as when she was tempted by Cyrus, but did not
yield. So our love to God is seen in this, when we can look a Temptation in the
Face, and turn our back upon it; though the Devil come as a Serpent subtly, and
offers a Golden Apple, yet we will not touch the forbidden fruit. When the
Devil showed Christ all the Kingdoms of the World and the glory of them: such
was Christ's love to his Father, that he abhorred the Temptation. True love will
not be bribed. When the Devils Darts are most fiery, a Saints love to God is
most Fervent.

3. By Temptation God tries our courage, Hos. 7.11. Ephraim is a silly Dove
without an Heart. So it may be said of many, they are excordes, without an
Heart* they have no Heart to resist a temptation, no sooner does Satan come
with his solicitations but they yield; like a Coward as soon as the thief
approaches he delivers his Purse. But he is the valorous Christian that
brandisheth the Sword of the Spirit against Satan and will rather die than
yield; the courage of the Romans was never more seen than when they were
assaulted by the Carthaginians; the Heroic Spirit of a Saint is never more
seen than in a Field Battle when he is fighting with the Red-Dragon, and by the
power of faith puts the Devil to flight. Fidei robur potest esse concussum, non
excussum Tertul. This is one reason why God lets his People be tempted, that
their metal may be tried, their sincerity, love, magnanimity; when Grace is
proved, the Gospel is honored.

2. God suffers his Children to be tempted, that they may be kept from Pride,
quos non Gula, (...) superavit, Cypr. Pride crept once into the Angels, and
into the Apostles, when they disputed which of them should be greatest, and in
Peter, though all men forsake thee, yet I will not, as if he had had more Grace
than all the Apostles. Pride keeps Grace low, that it cannot thrive, as the
Spleen swells, so the other parts of the body consume. As Pride grows, so Grace
consumes. God resists Pride, and that he may keep his Children humble he
suffers them sometimes to fall into temptation, 2 Cor. 12.7. lest I should be
exalted, there was given to me a Thorn in the Flesh, a Messenger of Satan to
buffet me. When Paul was lifted up in Revelations, he was in danger to be
lifted up in Pride. Now came the Messenger of Satan to Buffet him, that was,
some sore temptation to humble him. The Thorn in the Flesh was to prick the
Bladder of Pride. Better is that temptation that humbles me, than that duty
which makes me Proud. Rather than a Christian shall be Proud, God lets him fall
into the Devils Hands a while, that he may be cured of his Imposthume.

3. God lets his People be tempted, that they may be fitter to comfort others,
as are in the same distress: they can speak a word in due season to such as are
weary. St. Paul was trained up in the Fencing School of temptation, 2 Cor.
2.11. and he was able to acquaint others with Satan's Wiles and Stratagems. A
Man that has rid over a place where there are Quick sands, is the fittest to
guide others through that dangerous way. He who has been buffeted by Satan,
and has felt the Claws of this Roaring Lion, is the fittest Man to deal with
one that is tempted.

4. God lets his Children be tempted to make them long more for Heaven, where
they shall be out of Gunshot; there they shall be freed from the hissing of the
old Serpent. Satan is not yet fully cast into Prison, but is like a Prisoner
that goes under Bail, he does vex and molest the Saints, (...), Chr. He lays
his snares, throws his Fireballs, but this is only to make the People of God
long to be gone from hence, and that they may pray that they had the Wings of a
Dove, to fly away beyond Satan's temptations. God suffered Israel to be vexed
with the Egyptians, that they might long the more to be in Canaan. Heaven is
centrum, a place of rest, centrum quietativum, no Bullets of temptation fly
there, the Eagle that Soars aloft in the Air, and sits pearching upon the tops
of high Trees, is not troubled with the stinging of Serpents; so, when
believers are gotten above into the Empyrean Heaven, they shall not be stung
with the Old Serpent. The Devil is cast out of the Heavenly Paradise. Heaven is
compared to an exceeding high Mountain, Rev. 21.10. it is so high, that Satan's
fiery Darts cannot reach up to it. Nullus ibi hostium metus, nullae insidiae
daemonum, Bern.

The Temptations here are to make the Saints long till Death sound a Retreat,
and call them off the Field where the Bullets of Temptation fly so thick, that
they may receive a victorious Crown. Thus I have answered this question, why
God lets his dear Servants be tempted.

Quest. 2. What Rocks of support are there, or what comfort for tempted Souls?

Answ. 1. That it is not our case alone, but has been the case of Gods eminent
Saints. 1 Cor. 10.13. There has no temptation taken you, but that which is
(...), common to man, yea, to the Best: Men Christ's Lambs which have had the
ear mark of Election upon them, have been set upon by the Wolf. Elijah that
could shut Heaven by Prayer, could not shut his Heart from a temptation, 1 Kin.
19.4. Job was tempted to Curse God, Peter to deny Christ; hardly ever any Saint
has got to Heaven, but has met with a Lion by the Way, sortem quam omnes
sancti patiuntur nemo recusat, nay, Jesus Christ himself, tho he were free from
sin, yet not from Temptation, we read of Christ's Baptism, Mat. 3.16. and Mat.
4.1. Then was he led into the Wilderness to be tempted of the Devil. No sooner
was Christ out of the Water of Baptism, but he was in the Fire of Temptation,
and if the Devil would set upon Christ, no wonder if he set upon us. There was
no sin in Christ, no Powder for the Devils fire. Temptation to Christ was like
a Bur on a Crystal Glass which glides off, or like a spark of fire on a marble
Pillar which will not stick; yet Satan was so bold as to tempt Christ; this is
some comfort, such as have been our Betters have wrestled with Temptations.

2. Rock of support that may comfort a tempted Soul is, that temptations (where
they are burdens) evidence Grace. Satan does not tempt Gods Children because
they have sin in them, but because they have Grace in them. Had they no Grace,
the Devil would not disturb them, where he keeps possession all is in peace,
Luke 11.21. his Temptations are to rob the Saints of their Grace, a Thief will
not assault an empty House, but where he thinks there is Treasure. A Pyrate
will not set upon an empty Ship, but that is full fraught with Spices and
Jewels: so the Devil most assaults the people of God because he thinks they
have a rich treasure of Grace in their Hearts, and he would rob them of that.
What makes so many Cudgels be thrown at a Tree but because there is so much
fruit hanging upon it? the Devil throws his temptations at you, because he sees
you have so much fruit of Grace growing upon you. Tho to be tempted is a
trouble, yet to think why you are tempted is a comfort.

3 The third Rock of support or comfort is, that Jesus Christ is near at hand,
and stands by us in all our temptations. Here take notice of two things, 1.
Christ's sympathy in temptation. 2. Christ's succor in temptation.


1. Christ's Sympathy in our temptations. Nobis compatitur Christus. Heb. 4.15.
We have not an High Priest who cannot be touched with the feeling of our
Infirmities. Jesus Christ does (...), sympathise with us, he is so sensible of
our Temptations, as if he himself lay under them, and did feel them in his own
Soul. As in Music when one string is touched all the rest sound: So Christ's
Bowels sound; we cannot be Tempted* but he is touched. If you saw a Wolf worry
your Child; would you not pity your Child? You cannot pity it so as Christ does
tempted ones. Christ had a fellow feeling when he was upon Earth, much more now
in glory.

Quest. But how can it stand with Christ's glory now in Heaven, to have a
fellow-feeling of our miseries and temptations?

Answ. This fellow-feeling in Christ arises not from any infirmity or passion,
but from the mystical union between him and his Members, Zach. 2.8. He that
touches you, touches the Apple of mine Eye. Every injury done to a Saint,
Christ takes as done to him in Heaven; every temptation is a striking at
Christ, and he is touched with the feeling of our temptations

2. Christ's succor in temptation; as the good Samaritan first had compassion
on the wounded Man, there was Sympathy, then he poured in Wine and Oil, there
was succor, Luke. 10.34. So when we are wounded by the Red Dragon* Christ is
first touched with compassion, and then he pours in Wine and Oil, Heb. 2.18. in
that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them that
are tempted. The Greek word to succor, (...) signifies to run speedily to ones
help; so fierce is Satan, so frail is Man, that Christ who is God-man runs
speedily to his help. When Peter was ready to sink, and said, Lord save me,
Christ presently stretched forth his hand and caught him. So when a poor Soul
is tempted, and cries to Heaven for help, Lord save me, Christ comes in with
his Auxiliary Forces: Noscit Christus, our Lord Jesus knows what it is to be
tempted, therefore is so ready to succor such as are tempted; it has been an
observation, that childbearing Women are more pitiful to others in their
Travails, than such Women as are Barren. So the Lord Jesus having been in
Travail by Temptations and Sufferings, is more ready to pity and succor such
as are tempted.

Concerning Christ's succouring the Tempted, consider two things.

1. Christ's Ability to succor. 2. His Agility to succor.
1. Christ's Ability to succor, Heb. 2.18. (...) he is able to succor them
that are tempted. Christ is called Michael, Rev. 12.7. which signifies, Who is
like God? Though the Tempted Soul is weak, yet he fights under a good Captain;
The Lion of the Tribe of Judah. When a tempted Soul fights, Christ comes into
the Field as his Second. Michael will be too hard for the Dragon; when the
Devil lays the Siege of a Temptation, Christ can raise the Siege when he
please. He can beat through the Enemies quarters, and can so rout Satan, that
he shall never be able to rally his forces any more. Jesus Christ is on the
Saints side, and who would desire a better Live-guard than Omnipotency?

2. Christ's Agility in succouring. As Christ is able to succor the tempted, so
he will certainly succor them. Christ's power inables him, his love inclines
him, his faithfulness engages him to succor tempted Souls. This is a great
comfort to a Soul in Temptation, he has a succouring Savior, as God did
succor Israel in the Wilderness among fiery Serpents, they had the Rock set
abroach, the Manna, the Pillar of Cloud, the Brazen Serpent; what was this but
a Type of Gods succouring a poor Soul in the Wilderness of Temptation, stung
with the Devil that fiery Serpent? Alexander being asked how he could sleep so
securely when his Enemies were about him, said, Antipater is awake, who is
always vigilant. So when our tempting Enemy is near us, Jesus Christ is awake,
who is a Wall of Fire about us. There is a great deal of succor to the tempted
in the Names given to Christ. As Satan's names may terrify, so Christ's names
may succor. The Devil is called Apollyon, the Devourer, Rev. 9.11. Christ is
called a Savior, the Devil is called (...) the Strong man; Mat. 12.29. Christ
is called el Gibbor, the mighty God, Isa. 9 6. the Devil is called the Accuser,
Rev. 12.10. Christ is called the Advocate, 1 Ioh. 2.1. The Devil is called the
Tempter, Mat. 4.3. Christ is called the Comforter, Luke 2.25. The Devil is
called the Prince of Darkness, Christ is called the Sun of Righteousness: The
Devil is called the Old Serpent, Christ is called the Brazen Serpent that
Heals, John 3.15.

Thus the very names of Christ have some succor in them for Tempted Souls.

Quest. How, and in what manner does Christ succor them that are tempted.

Answ. Several ways.

1. Christ succors them by sending his Spirit, whose works it is to bring
those promises to their mind, which are fortifying, John 14.26. he shall bring
all things to your remembrance. The Spirit furnishes us with promises, as so
many Weapons to fight against the old Serpent, Romans 16.20. the Lord will
shortly bruise Satan under your feet, 1 Cor. 10.13. God will not suffer you to
be tempted (...) above that ye are able, Genesis 3.15. The Seed of the Woman shall
break the Serpents Head. We are often in times of Temptation as a Man that has
his House beset, and cannot find his Weapons, he has his Sword and his Gun to
seek: now, in this case Christ sends his Spirit, and he brings things to our
remembrance that help us in our Combat with Satan. The Spirit of Christ does to
one that is tempted as Aaron and Hur did to Moses, they put a Stone under him,
and held up his Hands, and then Israel prevailed. So Gods Spirit puts the
Promises under the Hand of Faith, and then a Christian overcomes the Devil that
spiritual Amalek. The Promise is to the Soul as the Anchor is to a Ship, which
keeps it steady in a Storm.

2. Christ succors them that are tempted, by his blessed interceeding for
them. When the Devil is tempting, Christ is praying.

Of this the next timer

2. Christ succors his Saints by interceeding for them, when Satan is tempting
Christ is praying. That prayer Christ put up for Peter, when he was tempted,
extend^ to all the Saints, Luke 22.32. Lord, says Christ, it is my Child that
is tempted, Father pity him, when a poor Soul lies bleeding of his wounds the
Devil has given him. Christ presents his Wounds to his Father, and in the
virtue of those pleads for Mercy. How powerful must Christ's Prayer needs be. He
is a Favorite, John. 11.42. He is both an High Priest and a Son, if God could
forget that Christ were a Priest, yet he cannot forget that he is a Son;
besides, Christ prays for nothing but what is agreeable to his Fathers Will, if
a Kings Son Petitions only for that which his Father has a Mind to grant, his
suit will not be denied.

3. Christ succors his People by taking of the Tempter, a Shepherd when the
Sheep begins to straggle, may set the Dog on the Sheep to bring it nearer the
Fold, but then he calls off the Dog again. God will take of the Tempter, 1 Cor.
10.13. He will with the Temptation make a way to escape, (...), he will make an
Outlet. Christ will rebuke the Tempter, Zach. 3.2. The Lord rebuke thee, O
Satan. This is no small support, that Christ succors the Tempted. The Mother
succors the Child most when it is sick: she sits by its Bedside, brings it
Cordials. So when a Soul is most assaulted it shall be most assisted.

Object. But I have dealt unkindly with Christ, and sinned against his Love,
and sure he will not succor me, but let me perish in the Battle.

Answ. Christ is a merciful High Priest, and will succor thee notwithstanding
thy failings. Joseph was a Type of Christ. His Brethren sold him away, and the
Irons entered into his Soul, yet afterward when his Brethren were ready to die
in the Famine, he forgot their injuries and succored them with Money and Corn.
I am, says he, Joseph your Brother, so will Christ say to a tempted Soul, I
know thy unkindnesses, how thou have distrusted my Love, grieved my Spirit, but
I am Joseph, I am Jesus, therefore I will succor thee when thou art tempted.

4. Rock of support. The best Men may be most tempted. A rich Ship may be
violently set upon by Pirates. He who is rich in Faith yet may have the Devil
(that Pyrate) set upon him by his battering pieces. Job an eminent Saint, yet
how fiercely was he assaulted. Satan did smite his body, that he might tempt
him either to question Gods Providence or quarrel with it, St. Paul was a
chosen vessel, but how was this vessel battered with Tentation, 2 Cor. 12.7.

Object. But is it not said, he who is born of God the Wicked one touches him
not? 1 John 5.18.

Answ. It is not meant that the Devil does not tempt him, but, he touches him
not, that is, tactu lethali Cajetan, with a deadly touch, 1 John 5.16. There is
a sin unto Death; now Satan with all his Temptations does not make a Child of
God sin a sin unto Death. Thus he touches him not.

5. Rock of support. Satan can go no further in tempting than God will give him
leave. The power of the Tempter is limited. A whole Legion of Devils could not
touch one Swine till Christ gave them leave. Satan would have sifted Peter, to
have sifted out all his Grace, but Christ would not suffer him, I have prayed
for thee, etc. Christ binds the Devil in a Chain, Rev. 20.1. If Satan's power
were according to his malice, not one Soul should be saved, but he is a Chained
Enemy; this is a comfort, Satan cannot go an Hairs breadth beyond Gods
permission. If an Enemy could not touch a Child further than the Father did
appoint, sure he should do the Child no great hurt.

6. Rock of support. It is not the having a Tentation makes guilty, but the
giving consent. We cannot hinder a Tentation, Elijah that could by Prayer shut
Heaven, could not shut out a Temptation, but if we abhor the Temptation, it is
our burden, not our sin. We read in the old Law if one went to force a Virgin,
and she cried out, she was reputed innocent. If Satan would by temptation
commit a Rape upon a Christian, and he cries out, and will not give consent,
the Lord will charge it upon the Devils score. It is not the laying the Bait
hurts the Fish, if the Fish does not bite.

7. Rock of support. Our being tempted is no sign of Gods hating us. A Child of
God often thinks God does not love him, because he lets him be haunted with the
Devil, non sequitur, this is a wrong conclusion, was not Christ himself
tempted, yet by a Voice from Heaven proclaimed, This is my beloved Son, Mat.
3.17. Satan's tempting and Gods loving may stand together. The Goldsmith loves
his Gold in the Fire, God loves a Saint tho shot at by fiery Darts.

8. Rock of support. Christ's Temptation was for our consolation, aqua-ignis.
Jesus Christ is to be looked upon as a public person, as our Head and
Representative, and what Christ did he did for us. His prayer was for us, his
suffering was for us, when he was tempted and overcame the temptation, he
overcame for us. Christ's conquering Satan, was to show that every Elect Person
shall at last be a Conqueror over Satan; when Christ overcame Satan's
temptations, it was not only to give us an example of Courage, but an assurance
of Conquest. We have overcome Satan already in our Head, and we shall at last
perfectly overcome.

9. Rock of support, the Saints Temptations shall not be above their strength.
The Lutenist will not stretch the strings of his Lute too hard, lest they
break, 1 Cor. 10.13. God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted
(...), above that ye are able. God will proportion our strength to the stroke.
2. Cor. 12.9. My Grace is sufficient for thee* The Torch-light of Faith shall
be kept burning, notwithstanding all the Winds of Temptation blowing.

10. Rock of support, these temptations shall produce much good.

1. They shall quicken a Spirit of Prayer in the Saints, they shall pray more
and better. Temptation is orationis flabellum, the exciter of Prayer! perhaps
(before) the Saints came to God as cold suitors in Prayer, they prayed as if
they prayed not; temptation is a Medicine for security. When Paul had a
Messenger of Satan to buffet him, he was more earnest in Prayer, 2 Cor. 12.8.
Three times I besought the Lord; the Thorn in the Flesh was a Spur in his sides
to quicken him in Prayer. The Deer being shot with the Dart, runs faster to the
Water, when a Soul is shot with the fiery Darts of Temptation, he runs the
faster to the Throne of Grace, now he is earnest with God either to take off
the Tempter, or to stand by him when he is tempted.

2. God makes the temptation to sin a means to prevent sin. The more a
Christian is tempted, the more he Fights against the temptation, the more a
chaste Woman is assaulted, the more she abhors the motion. The stronger Joseph's
temptation was, the stronger was his opposition. The more the Enemy attempts to
storm a Castle, the more he is repelled and beat back.

3. Godly temptations causes the increase of Grace. Vnus Christianus temptatus
mill. One tempted Christian, says Luther, is worth a thousand. He grows more
in Grace. As the Bellows increases the flame; So the Bellows of a Temptation
does increase the flame of Grace.

4. By these temptations God makes way for comfort. As Christ after he was
tempted, the Angels came and ministered unto him, Mat. 4.11. As when Abraham had
been warring, Mechisedeck brought him Bread and Wine to revive his Spirits,
Genesis 14* 18. so after the Saints have been warring with Satan, now God sends
His Spirit to comfort them, which made Luther say, that temptations were
Amplexus Christi, Christ's embraces, because he does then most sweetly manifest
himself to the Soul. Thus you see what Rocks of support there are for tempted
Souls.

That I may further comfort such as are tempted, let me speak to two cases of
the tempted.

1. Case. I have horrid temptations to blasphemy?

Ans. Did not the Devil tempt Christ after this manner? Mat. 4.9. All this will
I give thee if thou will fall down and worship me. What greater Blasphemy can
be imagined, than that the God of Heaven and Earth should worship the Devil?
yet Christ was tempted to this. If when Blasphemous thoughts are injected you
tremble at them, and are in a cold sweat, they are not yours, Satan shall
answer for them. Let him that plots the Treason suffer.

2. Case. But my case is yet worse* I have been tempted to such sins and have
yielded; the Tempter has overcome me?

Ans. I grant that through the withdrawing of Gods Grace, and the force of a
temptation a Child of God may be overcome. David was overcome by temptation in
case of Bathsheba and numbering the people. There is a party of Grace in the
Heart, true to Christ, but sometimes it may be over-voted by corruption, and
then a Christian yields; it is sad thus to yield to the Tempter, but yet let not
a Child of God be wholly discouraged, and say there is no hope, let me pour in
some Balm of Gilead into this wounded Soul. Though a Christian may fall by a
temptation, yet the Seed of God is in him, 1 John 3.9. His Seed remains in
him. Gratia concutitur, non excutitur, Aug. A Man may be bruised by a fall, yet
there is Life in him; a Christian being foiled by Satan, may be like him who
going to Jericho, fell among Thieves wounded and half dead, Luke 10.30. but
still there is (...), a vital principle of Grace, his Seed remains in him. Though
a Child of God may be overcome in praelio, in a skirmish, yet not in bello in
the main Battle, an Army may be worsted in a Skirmish, but overcomes at last.
Though Satan may foil a Child of God in a Skirmish by Tentation, yet the Believer
shall overcome at last. A Saint may be foiled, not conquered; he may lose
Ground, not lose the Victory.

3. God does not judge of his Children by one action, but by the frame of their
Heart, as God does not judge of a Wicked Man by one good action, so neither of
a Godly Man by one bad action; a Holy person may be worsted by a temptation,
but God does not measure him by that, who measures milk when it seeths and
boils up? God does not take the measure of a Saint, when the Devil has boiled
him up in a passion, but God judges of him by the Pulse and Temper of his
Heart, he would fear God, when he fails he weeps; God looks which way the Biass
of his Heart stands: If his Heart be set against Sin, God will Pardon.

4. God will make a Saints being foiled by Temptation, turn to his spiritual
Advantage.

1. He may let a Regenerate Person fall by a Temptation, to make him more
Watchful. Perhaps he walks loosly, and so was decoyed into sin; but for the
future he grows more curious and cautious in his walking: The foiled Christian
is a vigilant Christian. He will have a care of coming within the Lions Chain
any more, he will be shy and fearful of the Occasions of sin; he will not go
abroad without his spiritual Armor, and he girds on his Armor by Prayer. When
a wild Beast gets over the Hedge and hurts the Corn, a Man will make his Fence
the stronger. So when the Devil gets over the Hedge by a Temptation, and foils
a Christian, he will be sure to mend his Fence, and be more vigilant against a
Temptation afterward.

2. God lets his Children be sometimes foiled by a Temptation, that they may
see their Continual Dependence on God, and may go to him for strength. We need
not only habitual Grace to stand against Temptation, but Auxiliary Grace. As
the Boat needs not only the Oars, but Wind to carry it against a strong Tide.
God lets his Children sometimes fall by a Temptation that seeing their own
Weakness, they may rest more on Christ and Free Grace, Cant. 8.5.

3. God by suffering his Children to be foiled by a Temptation, will settle
them the more in Grace; they shall get strength by their Foils. The Poets
feign, that Antaeas the Giant in Wrestling with Hercules got Strength by every
fall to the ground; it is true here. A Saint being foiled in wrestling with
Satan gets more spiritual Strength. Peter had never such a strengthening in his
Faith, as after his being foiled in the High-Priest's Hall. How was he fired
with Zeal, steeled with Courage? He who before was dashed out of Countenance by
the Voice of a Maid; now dares openly confess Christ before the Rulers and the
Councils* Acts 2.14. The shaking of the Tree settles it the more; God lets his
Children be shaken with the Wind of Temptation, that they may be more settled in
Grace afterward. This I have spoken that such Christians as God has suffered
to be foiled by Temptation, may not cast away their Anchor, or give way to sad
despairing Thoughts.

Object. But this may seem to make Christians careless whether they fall into a
Temptation or no; if God can make their being foiled by a Temptation
advantageous to them?

Answ. We must distinguish between one who is foiled through Weakness, and
through Wilfulness. If a Soldier fights, but is foiled for want of Strength,
the General of the Army will pity him and bind up his Wounds. But if he be
wilfully foiled, and proves treacherous, he must expect no Favor. So if a
Christian fight it out with Satan, but is foiled for want of Strength, (as it
was with Peter,) God will pity him, and do him good by his being foiled. But if
he be foiled wilfully and runs into a Temptation, (as it was with Judas,) God
will show him no Favor, but will execute Martial Law upon him.

The Uses Remain.

Use 1. See in what continual Danger we are. Satan is an exquisite Artist, a
deep Headpiece, he lies in Ambush to ensnare; he is (...), the Tempter, it is
his Delight to make the Saints sin, and he is subtle in tempting; he has
(...), Ways and Methods to deceive.

First. He brings a Saint into sin, by making him Confide in his habitual
Graces. Satan makes him believe he has such a stock of Grace, as will Antidote
him against all Temptations. Thus Satan deceived Peter, he made him trust in
his Grace; he had such a Cable of Faith, and strong Tacklings, that though the
Winds of Temptation did blow never so fierce, he could weather the Point. Tho
all men forsake thee, yet, I will not; as if he had more Grace than all the
Apostles: thus he was led into Temptation and fell in the Battle; a man may
make an Idol of Grace. Habitual Grace is not sufficient without Auxiliary. The
Boat needs not only Oars, but a Gale of Wind to carry it against Tide; so we
need not only habitual Grace but the blowing of the Spirit to carry us against
a strong Temptation.

Secondly. Satan tempts to sin by the Baits and Allurements of the World.
Foenus Pecuniae funus Animae -- one of Christ's own Apostles was caught with a
silver Bait. Such as the Devil cannot debauch with Vice, he will corrupt with
Money. All this will I give thee, was his last Temptation, Mat. 4.9. Achan was
deluded by a Wedge of Gold. Silvester the Second did sell his Soul to the Devil
for a Popedom.

Thirdly. Satan tempts to sin sub specie boni, under a mask and show of good;
his Temptations seem gracious Motions.

1. He tempts Men to Duties of Religion; you will think this strange that Satan
should tempt to duty, but it is so. 1. he tempts Men to duty out of sinister
Ends. Thus he tempted the Pharisees to Pray and give Alms, That they might be
seen of men, Mat. 6.5. Prayer is a Duty, but to look a squint in Prayer, to do
it for Vainglory, this Prayer is turned into sin. 2. He tempts to duty when it
is not in season, Numb. 28.2. My Offering and my Bread for my Sacrifices shall
ye offer unto me in their due season. Satan tempts to duty when it is out of
season. He tempts to read the Word at home, when we should be hearing the Word.
He will so tempt to one duty as it may hinder another. 3. He tempts some to
duty, out of design that it may be a Cloak for sin. He tempts them to frequency
in duty that they may sin and be less suspected. He tempted the Pharisees to
make long Prayers, That they might devour widows houses under this pretense,
Mat. 23.14. Who would suspect him of false Weights, that so often holds a Bible
in his hand? Thus cunning is Satan, he tempts to duty.

2. He tempts men to sin out of a show of Love to Christ. You will think this
strange, but there is truth in it. Many a good Heart may think what he does is
in love to Christ, and all this while he may be under a Temptation. Christ told
Peter, he must suffer at Jerusalem, Peter took him and rebuked him, Be it far
from thee, Lord, Mat. 16.21. as if he had said to Christ, Lord thou have
deserved no such shameful death, and this shall not be unto thee. Peter as he
thought did this out of love to Christ, but Peter was all this while under a
Temptation. What had become of us if Christ had hearkened to Peter, and had not
suffered? So when Christ washed his Disciples Feet, Peter was so mannerly, that
he would not let Christ wash his Feet, Ioh. 13.8. Thou shall never wash my
Feet. This Peter did (as he thought) out of Love and Respect to Christ; Peter
thought Christ was too good to wash his Feet, and therefore would have put
Christ off; but this was a Temptation, the Devil put Peter upon this sinful
Modesty; he struck at Peter's Salvation, insomuch that Christ says, If I wash
thee not, thou have no part in me. So again, when the Samaritans would not
receive Christ, the Disciples, James and John said, Lord, will thou that we
command fire from Heaven to consume them? Luke 9.54. They did this as they
thought out of Love to Christ* they would wish for fire to consume his Enemies.
But they were under a Temptation, it was not Zeal, but the Wildfire of their
own Passion; Ye know not (says Christ) what spirits ye are of.

Fourthly. Satan tempts to that sin which a man's Heart is naturally most
inclinable to; he will not tempt a civil Man to Gross sin, this is abhorring to
the light of Nature. Satan never sets a dish before men that they do not love?
but he will tempt a civil man to Pride, and to trust in his own Righteousness;
and to make a Savior of his Civility. The Spider weaves a Web out of her own
Bowels; the civil Man would weave a Web of Salvation out of his own
Righteousness. See then in what danger we are when Satan is continually lying
in Ambush with his Temptations.

Inference 2. See man's Inability of himself to resist a Temptation. Could he
stand of himself against a Temptation, this Prayer were needless, Lead us not
into Temptation; no man has Power of himself to resist a Temptation further
than God gives him Strength, Ier. 10.23. O Lord, I know that the way of man is
not in himself. If Peter who had True Grace, and Adam who had Perfect Grace
could not stand against Temptation; much less can any stand by the Power of
Nature, which Confutes the Doctrine of Free Will; what freedom of Will has
man, when he cannot resist the least Temptation?

Infer. 3. Here is Matter of Humiliation that there is in us such an Aptitude
and proneness to yield to Temptation -- Nitimur in vetitum -- we are as ready
to swallow a Temptation as the fish to swallow the Bait. If the Devil tempt to
Pride, Lust, Envy, Revenge; how do we symbolize with Satan, and embrace his
snares. Like a Woman that has a Suitor come to her, and she does not need much
wooing, she presently gives her Consent. Satan comes a wooing by Temptation,
and we soon yield; he strikes fire and we are as dry Tinder that catches the
first spark. He knocks by temptation, and (it is sad to think how) soon we open
the door to the Devil, which is as if one should open the door to a Thief, this
may cause a spring of Tears.

Infer. 4. See hence a Christians Life is no easy life, it is Military; he
has a Goliath in the field to Encounter with, one that is armed with Power and
Subtilty; he has his Wiles and Darts. A Christian must be continually Watching
and Fighting; Satan's Designs carry death in the Front, 1 Pet. 5.8. Seeking whom
he he may devour. Therefore we had need be always with our Weapons in our hand.
How few think their Life a warfare? Though they have an Enemy in the field that
is always laying of Snares or shooting of Darts, yet they do not stand Sentinel
or get their spiritual Artillery ready? They put on their Jewels, but not their
Armor, Job 21.12. They take the Tymbrel, and Harp, and rejoice at the sound of
the Organ, as if they were rather in Music than in Battle. Many are asleep in
sloth when they should be fighting against Satan, and no wonder the Devil
shoots them when he finds them asleep.

Use 2. It reproves them who pray, Lead us not into Temptation, yet run
themselves into Temptation. Such are they who go to Plays and Masquerades, and
hunt after strange Flesh. Some go a slower pace to Hell, but such as run
themselves into Temptation, these go galloping thither; we have too many of
these in this debauched Age, who as if they thought they could not sin fast
enough, tempt the Devil to tempt them.

Use 3. Exhortation. Let us labor that we be not overcome by temptation.

Quest. What means may be used that Satan's Temptations may not prevail against
us?

Resp. 1. Avoid Solitariness. It is no Wisdom in fighting with an Enemy to give
him the Advantage of the Ground; we give Satan Advantage of the Ground, when we
are alone. Eve was foiled in the Absence of her Husband; a Virgin is not so
soon set upon in company, Eccles. 4 10. Two are better than one. Get into the
Communion of Saints, and that is a good Remedy against Temptation.

2. If you would not be overcome of Temptation, beware of the Predominancy of
Melancholy. This is Atra bilis, a black Humor seated chiefly in the Brain;
Melancholy disturbs Reason, and exposes to Temptation. One calls Melancholy
Balneum Diaboli, the Devils Bath; he baths himself with Delight in such a
Person. Melancholy clothes the Mind in Sable, it fills it with such dismal
Apprehensions, as often end in self-murder.

3. If you would not be overcome of Temptation, study Sobriety. 1 Pet. 5.8. Be
sober, because your Adversary walks about. Sober-mindedness consists in the
moderate use of earthly Things; an immoderate desire of these things often brings
men into the snare of the Devil. 1 Timothy 6.9. They that will be rich fall into a
Snare. He who loves Riches inordinately, will purchase them unjustly. Ahab
would swim to Nabo^hs Vineyard in Blood. He who is drunk with the Love of the
World is never free from Temptation, he will pull down his Soul to build up an
Estate. Quid non mortalia pectora cogis auri sacra fames? -- Be sober, take
heed of being drunk with the love of the World, lest ye fall into Temptation.

4. Be always upon your Guard, watch against Satan's Wiles and Subtilties, 1
Pet. 5.8. Be vigilant* because your Adversary the Devil walks about. A
Christian must Excubias agere, keep Watch and Ward. See where Satan labors to
make a Breach, see what Grace he most strikes at, or what sin he most tempts
to, Mark 13.37. I say to you all Watch. Watch all the Senses, the Eye, the Ear,
the Touch; Satan can creep in here. O how needful is the spiritual Watch! shall
Satan be watchful and we drowsy? Does he watch to devour us, and shall not we
watch to save our selves? Let us see what sin our Heart most naturally inclines
to, and watch against this.

5. Beware of Idleness. Satan sows most of his seed in fallow Ground; it was
Hieroms Counsel to his Friend to be ever busied, that if the Devil did come he
might find him working in the Vineyard. Idleness tempts the Devil to tempt; the
Bird that sits still is shot, he that wants Employment, never wants Temptation.
When a man has nothing to do, Satan will bring Grist to the Mill, and find him
work enough.

6. Make known thy Case to some godly Friend. The hiding a Serpent in the
Bosom, is not the way to be safe. When the old Serpent has gotten into your
Bosom by a Temptation, do not hide him there by keeping his Counsel. If a spark
be got into the Thatch, it is not Wisdom to conceal it, it may set the House on
fire; conceal not Temptation. The keeping of Secrets is for familiar Friends:
be not so great a friend to Satan as to keep his secrets; Reveal your
Temptations, which is the way to procure others Prayer and Advice. Let all see
that you are not true to Satan's Party, because you tell all his Plots, and
reveal his Treasons. Besides, the telling our Case to some Experienced
Christian, is the way to have ease; as the opening a Vein gives ease; so the
opening our Case to a Friend, gives ease to the Soul, and a Temptation does not
so much inflame.

7. Make use of the Word. This the Apostle calls the Sword of the Spirit,
Ephesians. 6.17. a fit Weapon to fight against the Tempter. This Sword of the
Spirit is Gladius anceps, a Two-edged Sword; it wounds carnal Lust, and it
wounds Satan. He who travels a Road where there is Robbing, will be sure to
ride with his Sword. We are traveling to Heaven, and in this Road there is a
Thief will always beset us. Satan is in every place where we go. He meets us at
Church, he does not miss a Sermon, he will be tempting us there, sometimes to
Drowsiness; when you sleep at a Sermon the Devil rocks you a-sleep, sometimes
he tempts by distracting the Mind in Hearing. Sometimes he tempts to question
the Truth of what you hear, thus we meet with the Tempter at Church; and he
tempts in the shop, he tempts you to use Collusion and Deceit, Hos. 12.7. The
Balances of Deceit are in his Hand. So that we meet with the Tempter every
where; therefore, this Thief being in the Road, we had need ride with a Sword;
we must have the Sword of the Spirit about us We must have skill to use this
Sword, and have an Heart to draw it out, and this Sword will put the Devil to
flight. Thus our Blessed Savior when Satan tempted him to Distrust and
Blasphemy, he used a Scripture Weapon* It is written. Three times Christ
wounded the old Serpent with this Sword. Christ could with his Power and
Authority have rebuked the Prince of the Air, as he did the Winds, but he stops
the Devils Mouth with Scripture, It is written. It is not our Vows or
Resolutions will do it, it is not the Papists Holy Water or Charms will drive
away the Devil, but let us bring the Word of God against him; this is such an
Argument as he cannot answer. It was a saying of Luther, I have had great
Troubles of Mind, but so soon as I laid hold on any place of Scripture, and
staid my self upon it, as upon my chief Anchor; straightway my Temptations
vanished away; there is no Temptation but we have a fit Scripture to answer it.
If Satan tempts to Sabbath-Breaking answer him, It is written, Remember to keep
the Sabbath Day Holy. If he tempts to Uncleanness, answer him, It is written,
Whore-Mongers and Adulterers God will judge. If he tempts to Carnal Fear, say,
It is written, Fear not them that kill the Body, and after that have no more
that they can do. No such way to confute Temptation as by Scripture. The Arrows
which we shoot against Satan must be fetched out of this Quiver. Many People
want this Sword of the Spirit, they have not a Bible; others seldom make use of
this Sword, but let it rust, they look seldom into the Scripture; therefore no
wonder they are overcome by Temptations. He who is well skilled in the Word, is
like one who has a Plaster ready to lay upon the Wound as soon as it is made,
and so the danger is prevented. Oh study the Scripture and you will be too hard
for the Devil; he cannot stand against this.

8. Let us be careful of our own Hearts, that they do not DECOY us into sin.
The Apostle says, A Man is drawn away of his own Heart and enticed, Iam. 1.14.
Quisque sibi Satan est, B^rn. Every man has a Tempter in his own Bosom. A
Traitor within the Castle is dangerous. The Heart can bring forth a Temptation,
though Satan does not Midwife it into the World. If Satan were dead and buried,
the Heart could draw us to Evil. As the Ground of all Diseases lies in the
Humors of the Body; so the Seed of all sin lies in Original Lust. Look to your
Hearts.

9. If you would not be overcome of Temptation, fly the Occasions of sin.
Occasions of sin have a Great Force in them to awaken Lust within. He that
would keep himself free from Infection, will not come near an infected House,
if you would be sober avoid drunken Company. Joseph when he was enticed by his
Mistress shunned the Occasion, the Text says, he would not be with her, Genesis
39.10. If you would not be ensnared by Popery, do not hear the Mass. The
Nazarite who was forbid Wine, might not eat Grapes; which might occasion
intemperance. Come not near the Borders of a temptation. Suppose one had a body
made of Gunpowder, he would not come near the least spark of Fire, lest he
should be blown up: Many Pray, Lead us not into Temptation, and they run
themselves into temptation.

10. If you would not be overcome by temptation, make use of Faith above all
things. Take the Shield of Faith, Ephesians. 6.16. Faith wards off Satan's fiery
darts, that they do not hurt, 1 Pet. 5.9. Whom resist, steadfast in Faith
Mariners in a storm fly to their Anchor. Fly to your Anchor of Faith: Faith
brings Christ along with it. Duellers bring their Second with them into the
Field: Faith brings Christ for its Second. Faith puts us into Christ, and then
the Devil cannot hurt us. The Chicken* is safe from the Birds of Prey under the
Wings of the Hen; and we are secure from the Tempter under the Wings of the
Lord Jesus. Though other Graces are of use to resist the Impulsions of Satan,
yet Faith is the Conquering Grace: Faith takes hold of Christ's Merits, Value
and Virtue, and so a Christian is too hard for the Devil. The Stars vanish when
the Sun appears: Satan vanishes when Faith appears.

11. If you would not be overcome of temptation, be much in Prayer. Such as
walk in infectious places, carry Antidotes about them. Prayer is the best
Antidote against temptation. When the Apostle had exhorted to put on the whole
Armor of God, Ephesians. 6.11. he adds, Verse. 18. ^raying with all Prayer. Without
this Reliqua arma parum prosunt. Zanchy. All other Weapons will do little good.
Christ prescribes this Remedy, Watch and pray, lest ye enter into temptation,
Mark 14.38. A Christian fetches down strength from Heaven by Prayer. Let us
Cry to God for help against the Tempter, as Sampson cried to Heaven for help,
Judge. 16.28. O Lord God, remember me, and strengthen me I pray thee, that I may
be avenged of the Philistines: and, verse. 30. The house fell upon the Lords,
and upon all the People.

Prayer is stagellum diaboli, it whips and torments the Devil: The Apostle bids
us Pray, (...), without ceasing, 1 These. 5.17. It was Luther's advice to a
Lady, when temptation came, to fall upon her knees by Prayer. Prayer does
assuage the force of a temptation. Prayer is the best Charm or Spell we can use
against the Devil. Temptation may bruise our Heel, but by Prayer we wound the
Serpents Head. When Paul had a Messenger of Satan to buffet him, what remedy
does he use? He betook himself to Prayer, 2 Cor. 12.8. For this thing I
besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me. When Satan assaults
furiously, let us Pray fervently.

12. If you would not be overcome of temptation, be Humble in your own eyes:
Such are nearest falling who presume of their own strength. Penelton who said,
his fat flesh should melt in the fire; instead of his fat melting, his heart
melted, and he turned from the Truth. When Men grow into a big conceit, God
lets them fall, to prick the Bladder of Pride. O be humble! Such are like to
hold out best in a temptation, who have most Grace: but God gives more Grace to
the humble, James 4 6. Beware of Pride; an Imposthume is not more dangerous in
the Body, than Pride in the Soul. The Doves (says Pliny) take a pride in their
Feathers, and in their flying high; at last they fly so high that they are a
prey to the Hawk: When Men fly high in Pride and Self-confidence, they become
a prey to the Tempter.

13. If you would not be foiled by temptation, do not enter into a Dispute with
Satan. When Eve began to argue the Case with the Serpent, the Serpent was too
hard for her. The Devil, by his Logic, disputed her out of Paradise: Satan can
mince sin, and make it small, and varnish it over, and make it look like
Virtue; Satan is too subtle a Sophister to hold an Argument with him. Dispute
not, but Fight. If you enter into a Parley with Satan, you give him half the
Victory.

14. If we would not be overcome of Satan, let us put on Christian Fortitude.
An Enemy we must expect, who is either shooting of darts, or laying of snares,
therefore let us be armed with courage, 2 Chr. 19.11. Deal courageously, and
the Lord shall be with the good. The Coward never won Victory: And, to animate
us in our Combat with Satan,

1. We have a good Captain that Marches before us. Christ is called the
Captain of our Salvation, Heb. 2.10.

2. We have good Armor; Grace is (...), Armor of God's making, Ephesians. 6.11.

3. Satan is beaten in part already: Christ has given him his Deaths-wound
upon the Cross, Col. 1.15.

4. Satan is a Chained Enemy, his Power is limited. He cannot Force the Will:
It was all Eve complained of, that the Serpent deceived her, not constrained
her, Genesis 3.13. Satan has astutiam Suadendi, not potentiam Cogendi; he may
persuade, not compel.

5. He is a Cursed Enemy, and God's Curse will blast him: Therefore put on Holy
Gallantry of Spirit and Magnanimity. Fear not Satan. Greater is he that is in
you, than he that is against you.

15. If we would not be overcome of a Temptation, let us call in the help of
others. If an House be set on fire, would you not call in help? Satan tempts
that he may rob you of your Soul; acquaint some Friends with your Case, and beg
their Counsel and Prayers: Who knows but Satan may be cast out by the
joynt-prayer of others? In case of Temptation, how exceeding helpful is the
Communion of Saints.

16. If we would not be overcome of Temptation, let us make use of all the
Encouragements we can. If Satan be a Roaring Lion, Christ is the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah; if Satan Tempts, Christ Prays: If Satan be a Serpent to Sting,
Christ is a Brazen-Serpent to Heal: if the Conflict be hard, look to the Crown,
James 1.12. Whilst we are fighting, Christ will Succor us, and when we
overcome he will Crown us. What makes the Soldier endure a bloody fight, but
hope of a Golden Harvest? Think, that shortly God will call us out of the
Field, where the Bullets of Temptation fly so fast, and he will set a Garland
of Glory upon our head. How will the case be altered? Instead of Fighting,
Singing; instead of an Helmet, a Diadem; instead of a Sword, a Palm-branch of
Victory; instead of Armor, White Robes; instead of Satan's Skirmishes, the
Kisses and Embraces of a Savior? The viewing these eternal Recompenses would
keep us from yielding to Temptation. Who would to gratify a Lust, lose a Crown.

Use 4. A word of Counsel to such as are Tempted; Be so wise as to make good
use of your Temptations; as we should labor to improve our Afflictions, so to
improve our Temptations. We should pick some good out of Temptation, as Sampson
got Honey out of the Lion.

Quest. What Good comes out of a Temptation? Can there be any good in being set
upon by an Enemy? Can there be any good to have fiery darts shot at us? Yes,
God that can make a Treacle of Poison, can make his People get much good by
their Temptations. First, Hereby a Christian sees that Corruption in his heart,
which he never saw before: Water in a Glass looks pure, but set it on the fire,
and the Scum boils up: So in Temptation, a Christian sees that Scum of Sin boil
up, that Passion and Distrust of God as he thought had not been in his heart.
Secondly, Hereby a Christian sees more of the Wiles of Satan, and is better
able to withstand them. St. Paul had been in the Fencing School of Temptation,
and he grew expert in finding out Satan's Stratagems, 2 Cor. 2.11. We are not
ignorant of his devices. Thirdly, Hereby a Christian grows more humble; God
will rather let his Children fall into the Devil's hands than be Proud;
Temptation makes the Plumes of Pride fall, 2 Cor. 12.7. Lest I should be
exalted above measure, there was given me a thorn in the flesh. Better is that
Temptation that Humbles, than that Duty which makes one Proud. Thus you see how
much good a Christian may get by Temptation; which made Luther say, Three
things make a good Divine, Prayer, Meditation, Temptation.

Use 5. To such as have been under sore Temptations and Buffetings of Satan, to
(Lust, Revenge, Self-murder,) but God has stood by them, and given them
strength to overcome the Tempter.

1. Be very thankful to God; say as, 1 Cor. 15.57. Thanks be to God who gives
us the Victory. Be much in Doxology. Why were we kept more than others from
falling into sin? Was it because Temptation was not so strong? No: Satan shoots
his darts with all his Force. Was the Cause in our Will? No: such a broken
Shield would never have conquered Satan's Temptations; know, that it was
Free Grace that beat back the Tempter, and brought us off with Trophies of
Victory. O be thankful to God: had you been overcome by Temptation, you might
have put black-spots in the face of Religion, and given occasion to the Enemies
of God to blaspheme, 2 Samuel 12.14. Had you been overcome, you might have lain
sick of a Wounded Spirit, and cried out with David of Broken Bones. After David
yielded temptation, he lay for above three quarters of a year in horror of
Mind; and some Divines think, he never recovered his full joy to the day of his
Death. O therefore, what cause have they to stand upon Mount Gerizim, blessing
of God, who, in a Field-battel, have got the better of Satan, and been more
than Conquerours. Say as the Psalmist, Psalm. 124.6. Blessed be the Lord who
has not given us as a prey to their Teeth: So blessed be God who has not
given us as a prey to Satan that Roaring Lion. When God puts Mercy in the
Premises, we must put Praise in the Conclusion.

2. You that have been tempted and come off Victors, be full of Sympathy, pity
tempted souls; show your Piety in your Pity. Do you see Satan's darts sticking
in their sides, do what you can to pull out these darts; communicate your
experiences to them; tell them how you broke the Devils snare, and your Savior
was your Succourer -- The Apostle speaks of restoring others in the Spirit of
meekness, Gal. 1.6. The word (...), to restore, alludes to Chirurgians, who set
Bones out of joint: So when we see such as are tempted, and Satan has, as it
were, put their bones out of joint, labor to set them in joint again with all
love, meekness and compassion. A word spoken in season may relieve a Soul
fainting in Temptation; and you may do, as the good Samaritan, drop in oil and
wine into the wound, Luke 10.34. Vir spiritualis consilia magis quam convitia
meditatur. Aug.

3. You that have got a Conquest of Satan, be not Secure. Think not that you
shall never be troubled with the Tempter more: He is not like the Syrians, 2
King. 6 23. The bands of Syria came no more into the Land of Israel. A Cock if
he be made once to run away, he will fight no more: But it is not so with Satan;
He is a Restless enemy; and if you have beaten him back, he will make a fresh
onset. Hannibal said of Marcellus, a Roman Captain, That whether he did beat,
or was beaten, he was never quiet.

When Christ had worsted Satan he went away from Christ; but, ad Tempus, for a
Season, Luke 4.13. as if he meant to come again. When we have gotten the better
of Satan, we are apt to grow secure, to lay aside our Armor, and leave off our
Watch; which, when Satan perceives, then he comes upon us with a new Temptation
and wounds us: He deals with us as David did with the Amalekites, when they had
taken the spoil, and were secure, 1 Samuel 30.16. They were spread upon the
Earth, eating and drinking and dancing: then, Verse. 17. David smote them, and
there escaped not a man of them. Therefore, after we have got the better of the
Tempter, we must do, as Mariners in a Calm, mend our Tackling, as not knowing
how soon another storm may come. Satan may, for a time, retreat, that he may
afterward come on more fiercely. He may go away a while, and bring seven other
Spirits with him, Luke 11.26.

Therefore be not Secure, but stand upon your Watchtower. Lie in your Armor;
always expect a Fight. Say, as he that has a short respit from an Ague, I look
every day when my Fit should come: So say, I look every day when the Tempter
should come; I will put my self into a Warlike posture. Satan, when he is
beaten out of the Field, is not beaten out of heart, he will come again. He had
little hope to prevail against Christ; Christ gave him three deadly wounds, and
made him retreat; yet he departed only for a Season. If the Devil cannot
conquer us, yet he knows he shall molest us: if he cannot destroy us, he will
disturb us. Therefore we must, with the Pilot, have our Compass ready, and be
able to turn our Needle to any Point where Temptation shall blow. If the
Tempter come not so soon as we expect, yet by putting our selves into a
posture, we have this advantage, we are always Prepared.

To conclude all; Let us often make this Prayer, Lead us not into Temptation: If
Satan wooes us by a temptation, let us not give Consent. But in case a
Christian has, through weakness, (and not out of design) yielded to a
temptation, yet let him not cast away his Anchor. Take heed of Despair, this is
worse than the fall it self.

Christian, steep thy soul in the brinish Waters of Repentance, and God will be
appeased. Repentance gives the Soul a Vomit. Christ loved Peter after his
denial of him, and sent the first news of his Resurrection to him; Go tell the
Disciples and Peter. It Is an Error, to think that one act of sin can destroy
the Habit of Grace. It Is a wrong to God's Mercy and a Christian's Comfort, to
make this despairing conclusion, that after one has fallen by temptation, his
Estate is irrecoverable. Therefore Christian, if thou have fallen with Peter,
repent with Peter, and God will be ready to seal thy Pardon.

Matt. 6.13. But deliver us from Evil.


2. THe Second Branch of this Sixth Petition, is, Libera nos a malo; Deliver us
from evil. There is more in this Petition than is expressed: The thing
Expressed is, that we may be kept from Evil: The thing farther intended is,
that we may make a Progress in Piety, Titus 2.11. Denying ungodliness and
worldly lusts; there is, being delivered from Evil; that we should live
soberly, righteously and godly; there is a progress in Piety.

I begin with the first thing in this Petition Expressed, Deliver us from Evil.

Quest. What Evil do we Pray to be delivered from?

Answ. 1. In General, from the evil of sin.

2. More particularly, we Pray to be delivered,

First, From the Evil of our own Heart; it is called an Evil Heart, Heb. 3.12.

Secondly, From the Evil of Satan; He is called, (...), the Evil One, Matt.
13.19.

Thirdly, From the Evil of the World; it is called the present evil World, Gal.
1.4.

1. In General; Deliver us from evil: We Pray to be delivered from the evil of
sin. Not that we pray to be delivered immediately from the Presence and
In-being of sin, for that cannot be in this life. We cannot shake off this
Viper: but we Pray that God will deliver us more and more from the Power and
Practice, from the Scandalous Acts of Sin, which cast a Reflection upon the
Gospel.

Sin then is the Deadly Evil we pray against; Deliver us from Evil: With what
Pencil shall I be able to draw the deformed face of sin. The Devil would
Baptize sin with the Name of Virtue: It Is easy to lay fair Colors on a Black
Face.

But I shall endeavor to show you what a Prodigious Monster sin is; and there
is great reason we should pray, Deliver us from evil.

Sin is, (as the Apostle says) (...), exceeding sinful, Romans 7.13. Sin is the
very Spirits of Mischief distilled; it is called, (...), the Accursed thing,
Josh. 7.13. That sin is the most execrable evil, appears several ways.

1. Look upon Sin in its Original. 2. Look upon Sin in its Nature. 3. Look upon
Sin in the Judgment and Opinion of the Godly. 4. Look upon Sin in the
Comparative. 5. Look upon Sin in the manner of cure. 6. Look upon Sin in its
direful effects, and when you have seen all these you will apprehend, what an
horrid evil sin is, and what great reason we have to pray, Deliver us from
evil.
1. Look upon sin in its Original; it fetches its pedigree from Hell: Sin is
of the Devil, John 8.44. Sin calls the Devil Father, it is Serpentis venenum,
as Austin says, it is the Poison the Old Serpent has spit into our Virgin
Nature.

2. Look upon Sin in its Nature, and so it is evil.

1. See what the Scripture compares it to. Sin has got a bad name, it is
compared to the Vomit of Dogs, 2 Pet. 2.22. to a menstruous Cloth, Isa. 30.22.
which as Ierom says, was the most unclean thing under the Law, it is compared
to the Plague, 1 Kin. 8.38. to a Gangrene, 2 Timothy 2.17. persons under these
diseases we would be loath to Eat and Drink with.

2. Sin is evil in its Nature as it is injurious to God three ways.

1. It is (...) a breach of Gods Royal Law, 1 John 3.4. Sin is a transgression
of the Law: It is Crimenlaesae Majestatis, High Treason against Heaven. What
greater injury can be offered to a Prince, than to trample upon his Royal
Edicts? Neh. 9.26. They have cast thy Laws behind their Backs.

2. Sin is a contumacious affront to God, 'its a walking contrary to him, Lev.
26.40. the Hebrew word for sin, Pashang, signifies Rebellion; sin flies in the
Face of God, Job 15.25. He stretches out his hand against God; we ought not to
lift up a thought against God, much less to lift up an hand against him; but
the sinner does so; Sin is Deicidium, it would not only un-throne God, but
Ungod him, if Sin could help it God should be no longer God.

3. Sin is injurious to God as it is an act of high ingratitude. God feeds a
sinner, Screens off many evils from him, yet he not only forgets Gods Mercies,
but abuses them, Hos. 2.8. I gave her Corn and Wine and Oil, and multiplied
her Silver, which they prepared for Baal. God may say, I gave thee Wit, Health,
Riches, which thou have employed against me. A sinner makes an Arrow of Gods
Mercies, and shoots at him, 2 Samuel 16 17. Is this thy kindness to thy friend?
did God give thee life to sin? Did he give thee Wages to serve the Devil? O
what an ungrateful thing is sin! Ingratitude forfeits Mercy, as the Merchant
does his Goods by not paying custom.

3. Sin is evil in its nature, as it is a foolish thing, Luke 12.20. (...),
Thou Fool, this night shall thy Soul be required of thee. 1 Samuel 13.13. Is it
not foolish to prefer a short Lease before an Inheritance? a sinner prefers the
pleasures of sin for a season, before those pleasures which run at Gods right
hand for evermore. Is it not folly to gratify an Enemy? Sin gratifies Satan.
Mortalium errores epulae sunt daemonum. Men's sins feast the Devil. Is it not
folly for a Man to be felo de se, guilty of his own destruction, to give
himself Poison? a Sinner has an hand in his own Death, Prove. 1.18. They lay
wait for their own blood, no creature did ever willingly kill it self but Man.

4. Sin is a polluting thing. Sin is not only a defection, but a pollution, it is
as rust to Gold, as a stain to Beauty, it is called filthiness of Flesh and
Spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. it makes the Soul red with guilt, and black with filth,
quanta saeditas vitiosae mentis! Cicero. This filth of sin is inward. A spot in
the Face may easily be wiped off, but to have the Liver and Lungs tainted is
far worse; sin has got into the Conscience, Tit. 1.15. sin defiles all the
faculties, the Mind, Memory, Affections, as if the whole Mass of Blood were
corrupted, sin pollutes and fly-blows our holy things: the Leper in the Law if
he had touched the Altar, the Altar had not cleansed him, but he had polluted
the Altar; an Emblem of sins Leprosy spotting our holy things.

5. Sin is a debasing thing, it degrades us of our honor, Dan. 11.25. In those
days shall stand up a vile person; this was spoken of Antiochus Epiphanes who
was a King, and his name signifies illustrious, but sin had made him vile; sin
blots a Man's name, nothing so turns a Man's Glory into shame as sin does, sin
makes one like a Beast, Psalm. 49.20. it is worse to be like a Beast, than to be
a Beast, it is no shame to be a Beast, but it is a shame for a Man to be like a
Beast, Lust makes a Man Brutish, and Wrath makes him Devilish.

6. Sin is an enslaving thing. A sinner is a Slave when he sins most freely.
Grave servitutis jugum, Cicero. Sin makes Men the Devils Servants. Satan bids
them sin, and they do it, he bid Judas betray Christ, and he did it; he bid
Ananias tell a Lie, and he did it, Act. 5.3. when a Man commits a sin he is the
Devils Lacky, and runs on his errand, they who serve Satan have such a bad
Master, that they will be afraid to receive their Wages.

7. Sin is an unsavory thing, Psalm. 14.3. They are altogether become filthy, in
the Hebrew, neelachu they are become stinking! sin is very noisome to God, that
person who shall Worship in Gods House, yet live in the sin of uncleanness, let
him be perfumed with all the Spices of Arabia his Prayers are unsavory, Isa.
1.13. Incense is an abomination to me; therefore God is said to behold the
Proud afar off, Psalm. 138.6. He will not come near the Dunghill sinner, that
has such noisome Vapors coming from him.

8. Sin is a painful thing, it costs Men much labor and pains to accomplish
their wicked designs* Jer. 9.5. They weary themselves to commit iniquity.
Peccatum est sui ipsius paena. What pains did Judas take to bring about his
Treason? He goes to the High Priest, and then after to the Band of Soldiers,
and then back again to the Garden: What pains did the Powder-traiters take in
digging through a thick Stone Wall? what pains in laying their Barrels of
Powder, and then covering them with Crows of Iron? How did they tire out
themselves in sins Drudgery, Chrysostom says Virtue is easier than Vice. It Is
easier to be sober than intemperate. It Is easier to serve God than to follow
sin. A wicked man sweats at the Devils Plough, and is at great pains to Damn
himself.

9. Sin is a disturbing thing. Whatever defiles disturbs. Sin breaks the peace
of the Soul. Isa. 57.21. No peace to the Wicked. When a Man sins presumptuously
he stuffs his Pillow with Thorns, and his head will lie very uneasy when he
comes to dye. Sin causes a Trembling at the Heart. When Spira had sinned he
had a Hell in his Conscience, he was in that horror that he professed he envied
Cain and Judas. Charles the ninth who was guilty of the Massacre in Paris, was
afterward a terror to himself, he was frighted at every noise, and could not
endure to be waked out of his sleep without Music. Sin breaks the peace of the
Soul. Cain in killing Abel stabbed half the World at a blow, but could not kill
the Worm of his own Conscience. Thus you see what an evil sin is in the nature
of it, and had not we need pray, Deliver us from Evil.

3. Look upon sin in the Judgment and opinion of the Godly, and it will appear
to be the most prodigious evil.

1. Sin is so great an evil, that the Godly will rather do any thing than sin,
Heb. 11.24. Moses chose rather to suffer with the People of God, than to enjoy
the pleasures of sin. The Primitive Christians said, Ad leonem potius quam
lenonem, they chose rather to be devoured by Lions without, than Lusts within.
Irenaeus was carried to a place where was a Cross on one side and an Idol on
the other, and he was put to his choice either to bow to the Idol or suffer on
the Cross, and he chose the latter; a Wise Man will choose rather to have a rent
in his Coat than in his Flesh. The Godly will rather endure outward sufferings,
than a rent in their Conscience. So great an evil is in sin, that the Godly
will not sin for the greatest gain, they will not sin though they might purchase
an estate by it; nay, though they were sure to promote Gods Glory by it.

2. The Godly testify sin is a great evil, in that they desire to die upon no
account more than this, that they may be rid of sin; they are desirous to put
off the clothing of the Flesh, that they may be uncloathed of sin. It is their
greatest grief that they are troubled with such Inmates, they have the
stirrings of Pride, Lust, Envy. It was a cruel Torment Mezentius used, he tied
a dead Man to a living: Thus, a Child of God has corruption joined with Grace,
here is a dead Man tied to the living. So hateful is this, that a believer
desires to die for no other reason more than this, that death shall free him
from sin. Sin brought death into the World, and death shall carry sin out of
the World. Thus you see in the opinion of the Godly, sin is the most
hyperbolical and execrable evil.

4. Look upon sin in the comparative, and it will appear to be the most deadly
evil. Compare what you will with it; 1. Affliction, 2. Death, 3. Hell;
And still sin is worse.

First, Compare sin with affliction; there is more evil in a drop of sin than
in a Sea of affliction.

1. Sin is the Cause of affliction, the cause is more than the effect. Sin
brings all mischief, (...), etc. Chrysostom. Sin has sickness, Sword, Famine,
and all Judgments in the Womb of it. Sin rots the name, consumes the estate,
wastes the radical moisture, as the Poets ^ain of Pandora's Box, when it was
opened, it filled the World full of Diseases: when Adam broke the Box of
Original Righteousness, it has caused all the Penal evils in the World. Sin is
the Phaeton that sets the World on Fire. Sin turned the Angels out of Heaven,
and Adam out of Paradise; (...). Chrysostom. Sin causes Mutinies, Divisions,
Massacres, Jer. 47.6. O thou Sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou be
quiet? the Sword of Gods justice lies quietly in the Scabbard, till sin draws
it out, and whets it against a Nation, so that sin is worse than affliction, it
being the cause of it; the cause is more than the effect.

2. God is the author of affliction, Amos 3.6. Is there any evil in a City and
the Lord has not done it? it is meant of the evil of affliction. God has an
hand in affliction, but no hand in sin! God is the cause of every action, so
far as it is Natural, but not as it is Sinful. He who makes an instrument of
Iron is not the cause of the Rust or Canker which corrupts the Iron. So God
made the Instrument of our Souls, but the Rust and Canker of sin which corrupts
our Souls God never made; Peccatum Deus non fecit, Austin. God can no more act
evil than the Sun can darken. In this sense sin is worse than affliction; God
has an hand in affliction, but disclaims having any hand in sin.

3. Affliction does but reach the Body and make that miserable, but sin makes
the Soul miserable. The Soul is the most noble part, (...), Macar. The Soul is
a Diamond set in a ring of Clay; it is excellent in its Essence, a Spiritual,
immortal substance; excellent in the Price paid for it, redeemed with the Blood
of God, Act. 20.28. it is more worth than a World, the World is of a courser
make, the Soul of a finer spinning, in the World we see the Finger of God, in
the Soul the Image of God. To have the precious Soul endangered, is far worse
than to have the Body endangered. Sin wrongs the Soul, Prove. 8.36. Sin casts
this Jewel of the Soul overboard. Affliction is but Skin deep, it can but take
away the Life, but sin takes away the Soul, Luke 12.20. the loss of the Soul is
an unparalleled loss, it can never be made up again. God (says St.
Chrysostom) has given thee two Eyes, if thou losest one thou have another, but
thou have but one Soul, and if that be lost, it can never be repaired. Thus sin
is worse than affliction, one can but reach the Body, the other ruins the Soul;
is there not great reason then, that we should often put up this Petition,
deliver us from evil?

4. Afflictions are good for us, Psalm. 119.71. It is good for me that I was
afflicted; many can bless God for affliction. Affliction humbles, Lam. 3.19.
remembering my affliction, the Wormwood and the Gall, my Soul has them still in
remembrance, and is humbled in me; afflictions are compared to thorns, Hos.
2.8. these Thorns are to prick the Bladder of Pride. Affliction is the School
of Repentance, Jer. 31.18. Thou have chastised me and I was chastised, I
Repented. The Fire being put under the Still, makes the Water drop from the
Roses: the fire of Affliction makes the Water of Repentance drop from the Eyes.
Affliction brings us nearer to God. The Loadstone of Mercy does not draw us so
near to God, as the Cords of Affliction. When the Prodigal was pinched with
want, then says he, I will arise and go to my father, Luke 15.18. Afflictions
prepare for glory. 2 Cor. 4.17. This light affliction works for us an eternal
weight of glory; the Limner lays his Gold upon dark colors: so God lays first
the dark colors of affliction, and then the Golden color of Glory. Thus
Affliction is for our good, but sin is not for our Good; it keeps good things
from us, Jer. 5.25. Your sins have withheld good things from you; sin stops
the current of Gods Mercy, it precipitates men to ruin. Manassehs affliction
brought him to humiliation, but Judas his sin brought him to desperation.

5. A man may be afflicted, and his Conscience may be quiet. Paul's feet were in
the stocks, yet he had the Witness of his Conscience, 2 Cor. 1.12. the Head may
ache, yet the Heart may be well, the outward Man may be afflicted, yet the Soul
may dwell at ease, Psalm. 25.13. the Hail may beat upon the Tiles of the House,
when there is Music within, in the midst of outward pain, there may be inward
peace. Thus in affliction Conscience may be quiet: but when a Man commits a
presumptuous scandalous sin, Conscience is troubled; (...), by defiling the
purity of Conscience, we lose the peace of Conscience, when Spira had sinned,
and abjured the Faith, he was a terror to himself, he had an Hell in his
Conscience.

Tiberius the Emperor, felt such a sting in his Conscience that he told the
Senate he suffered death daily.

6. In Affliction we may have the Love of God. Afflictions are love tokens,
Rev: 3.19. as many as I love I rebuke. Afflictions are sharp arrows, but shot
from the Hand of a loving Father. If a Man should throw a Bag of Money at
another, and it should bruise him a little, and raise the Skin, he would not be
offended, but take it as a fruit of love: so when God bruiseth us with
affliction, it is to enrich us with the Golden Graces of his Spirit, all is
love, but when we commit sin God withdraws his love; it is like the Sun overcast
with a Cloud, nothing appears but anger and displeasure. When David had sinned
in the matter of Vriah, 2 Samuel 11.27. the thing that David had done displeased
the Lord.

7. There are many encouragements to suffer affliction. God himself suffers
with us, Isa. 63.9. In all their afflictions he was afflicted; God will
strengthen us in our sufferings, Psalm. 37.39. He is their strength in the time
of trouble. Either God makes our burden lighter, or our Faith stronger. He will
compensate and recompense our sufferings, Mat. 19.29. Every one that has
forsaken Houses or Lands for my name sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and
inherit Life everlasting. Here are encouragements to suffer affliction, but
there is no encouragement to sin! God has brandished a flaming Sword of
threatenings to deter us from sin, Psalm. 68.21. God shall wound the Hairy scalp
of such an one as goes on still in his trespasses. There is a flying Roll of
Curses which enter into the House of a sinner, Zac. 5.4. if a Man sin, be it at
his peril, Deuteronomy. 32.42. I will make mine Arrows drunk with Blood. God will make
Men weary of their sins or he will make them weary of their Lives. Thus sin is
worse than Affliction, there are Encouragements to suffer Affliction, but no
Encouragement to sin.

8. When a Person is afflicted, only he himself suffers, but by sinning openly
he does hurt to others.

1. He does hurt to the Unconverted; one man's sin may lay a stone in another
man's way, at which he may stumble and fall into Hell; O the Evil of scandalous
Sin! some are discouraged, others hardened; thy sinning may be a cause of
another damning, Mal. 2.7, 8. The Priests going wrong caused others to stumble.

2. He does hurt to the Converted; by an open scandalous sin he offends weak
Believers, and so sins against Christ, 1 Cor. 8.12. Thus sin is worse than
Affliction, because it does hurt to others.

9. In Afflictions the Saints may Rejoice, 1 These. 1.6. Ye received the Word in
much Affliction with Joy, Heb. 10.34. Ye took joyfully the spoiling of your
Goods. Aristotle speaks of a Bird that lives among Thorns, yet sings sweetly;
so a Child of God can rejoice in Affliction, St. Paul had his Prison-songs,
Romans 5.3. We glory in Tribulation, (...), the Word, signifies an Exuberancy of
Joy, a Joy with Boasting and Triumph. God does often pour in those Divine
Consolations as cause the Saints to rejoice in Afflictions; they had rather
have their Afflictions, than want their Comforts; God does candy their Wormwood
with Sugar, Romans 5.5. You have seen the Sun shine when it rains. The Saints
have had the shining of Gods Face, when Affliction has rained and dropped upon
them. Thus we may rejoice in Affliction, but we cannot rejoice in sin, Hos 9.1.
Rejoice not O Israel, for Joy, as other people, for thou have gone a Whoring
from thy God. Sin is Matter of Shame and Grief, not of Joy. David having sinned
in numbering of the people, His Heart smote him, 2 Samuel 24.10. as the pricking
of a Vein lets out the Blood: so when sin has pricked the Conscience, it lets
out the Joy.

10. Affliction is a Magnifying of a Person, Job 7.17. What is Man that thou
should magnify him, and visit him every morning? That is, visit him with
Affliction.

How do Afflictions magnify us?

Answ. 1. As they are signs of Sonship, Heb. 12.7. If ye endure Chastening,
God deals with you as Sons. Every Print of the Rod is a Badge of Honor.

2. As the sufferings of the Godly have raised their Fame and Renown in the
World* the Zeal and Constancy of the Martyrs in their Suffering have Eternized
their Name: O how Eminent was Job for his Patience! Iam. 5.11. Ye have heard of
the Patience of Job. Job the Sufferer was more Renowned than Alexander the
Conqueror. Thus Afflictions Magnify a Person, but sin does not magnify, but
vilify him. When Eli^s Sons had sinned, and profaned their Priesthood, they
turned their glory into shame; the Text says, They made themselves Vile, 1 Samuel 3.13. Sin casts an indelible Blot on a man's Name, Prove. 6.32, 33. Whosoever
commits Adultery with a Woman, a Wound and Dishonor shall he get, and his
Reproach shall not be wiped away.

11. A man may suffer Affliction and bring Honor to Religion. Paul's Iron
Chain, made the Gospel wear a Gold Chain; suffering Credits, and propagates the
Gospel: but committing of sin brings a Dishonor and Scandal upon the ways of
God. Cyprian says when in the Primitive Times a Virgin who vowed her self to
Religion, had defiled her Chastity, Totum Ecclesiae Caetum erubescere, Shame
and Grief filled the face of the whole Congregation. When scandalous sins are
committed by a few, they bring a Reproach upon all that profess. As three or
four brass shillings in a sum of Money make all the rest suspected.

12. when a man's Afflictions are upon a good Account, that he uffers for
Christ, he has the Prayers of God's People. It Is no small privilege to have a
stock of Prayer going; it is like a Merchant that has a part in several Ships:
Suffering Saints have a large share in the Prayers of others, Acts 12.5. Peter
was in Prison, but Prayer was made without ceasing of the Church to God for
him. What greater Happiness than to have God's Promises* and the Saints
Prayers? But when a Man sins presumptuously and scandalously, he has the
Saints bitter Tears, and just Censures; he is a burden to all that know him, as
David speaks in another Case, Psalm. 31.11. They that did see me without fled
from me. So a scandalous sinner, the People of God fly from him; he is like an
infected person, every one shuns and avoids him.

13. Affliction can hurt a Man only while he is living, but sin does hurt when
he is dead; as a Man's Virtues and Alms may do good when he is dead: so a Man's
sin may do Mischief when he is dead. When a Spider is killed, the Poison of it
may do hurt: so the Poison of an Evil Example may do much hurt, when a man is
in his Grave. Affliction at most can but last a Man's Life, but his sin lives
and does hurt when he is gone. Thus you see sin is far worse than Affliction.

2. Sin is worse than Death, Aristotle calls Death (...), the Terrible of
Terribles, and Job calls it The King of Terrors, Job 18.14. but sin is more
deadly than Death it self.

First, Death though it be painful, yet it were not hurtful but for sin. It is
sin that imbitters Death, and makes it sting, 1 Cor. 15.56. The Sting of Death
is sin. Were it not for sin, though Death might kill us, it could not curse us.
Sin poisons Deaths Arrow, so that sin is worse than death, because it puts a
sting into Death.

Secondly, Death does but separate between the Body and the Soul: but sin
(without Repentance) separates between God and the Soul, Judge. 18.24: Ye have
taken away my Gods, and what have I more? Death does but take away our Life
from us; but sin takes away our God from us. So that sin is worse than Death.

Thirdly, Sin is worse than Hell. In Hell there is the Worm and the Fire, but
sin is worse.

1. Hell is of God's making, but sin is none of his making. It Is a Monster of
the Devils Creating.

2. The Torments of Hell are a burden only to the sinner; but sin is a burden
to God, Amos 2.13. I am pressed under you, as a Cart is pressed that is full of
Sheaves.

3. In Hell Torments there is something that is Good. There is the Execution of
God's Justice; there is justice in Hell, but sin is the most unjust thing: It
would rob God of his Glory, Christ of his Purchase, the Soul of its Happiness.
So that it is worse than Hell.

Fifthly, Look upon sin in the manner of its Cure; it cost dear to be done
away. The Guilt of sin could not be removed, but by the Blood of Christ, he who
was God must die and be made a Curse for us before sin could be remitted. How
horrid is sin that no Angel or Archangel, nor all the Powers of Heaven could
procure the Pardon of sin, but it cost the Blood of God. If a Man should commit
an Offense, and all the Nobles should kneel upon their Knees before the King
for him; but no Pardon could be had unless the King's Son be Arraigned and
suffer Death for him; all would conceive it was an horrible Fact that must be
the cause of this: such is the case here, the Son of God must die to appease
God's Anger for our sins. O the Agonies and Sufferings of Christ! 1. In his
Body; his Head Crowned with Thorns, his Face spit upon, his Side pierced with
the Spear, his Hands and Feet nailed, -- Totum pro vulnere Corpus. -- 2. He
suffered in his Soul, Mat 26.38. (...), My Soul is exceeding sorrowful unto
Death. He drank a bitter Cup mingled with Curses; which made him though he were
sanctified by the Spirit, supported by the Diety, comforted by Angels, sweat
great Drops of Blood, and cry out upon the Cross, My God, why have thou
forsaken me? All this was to do away our sin; view sin in Christ's Blood and it
will appear of a Crimson Color.

Sixthly, Look upon sin in the dismal Effects of it, and it will appear the
most horrid prodigious Evil, Romans 6.23. The Wages of sin is Death, that is, the
Second Death, Rev. 21 8. Sin has shame for its Companion and Death for its
Wages. A wicked man knows what sin is in the Pleasure of it, but does not know
what sin is in the Punishment of it. Sin is Scorpio pungens, it draws Hell at
the heels of it. This hellish Torment, consists of two Parts.

1. Poena damni, the Punishment of Loss, Mat. 7.23. Depart from me. It was a
great trouble to Absalom that he might not see the Kings face; to lose Gods
Smiles, to be banished from his Presence, in whose Presence is fullness of Joy,
how sad and tremendous! this word Depart says Chrysostom is worse than the
fire. Sure sin must be the Greatest Evil which separates us from the Greatest
Good.

2. Poena sensus, the Punishment of Sense, Mat 25.41. Depart from me, ye
cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Why,
might sinners plead, Lord, if we must depart from thee, let us have thy
Blessing; no, Go ye Cursed. But if we must depart from thee, let it be into
some place of Ease and Rest; no, go into fire. But if we must into the fire,
let it be but for a little time; let the fire be quickly put out; no, go into
everlasting fire. But if it be so that we must be there, let us be with good
Company; no, with the Devil and his Angels. O what an Evil is sin? All the
Torments of this Life are but Ludibrium and Risus, a kind of sport to
Hell Torments; what is a burning Fever, to the burning in Hell? It is called
the Wrath of the Almighty, Rev. 19.15. The Almighty God inflicts the
Punishment, therefore it will be heavy; a Child cannot strike very hard, but if
a Giant strike he kills with a Blow. To have the Almighty God to lay on the
stroke, it will be intolerable. Hell is the EMPHASIS of Misery. The Body and
Soul which have sinned together, shall suffer together; and these Torments
shall have no Period put to them, Rev. 9.6. They shall seek Death, and shall
not find it. Rev. 24.11. And the Smoke of their Torment ascends for ever and
ever. Here the wicked thought a Prayer long, a Sabbath long; but how long will
it be to lie upon Beds of Flames for ever; this word ever breaks the Heart.
Thus you see sin is the most deadly and execrable Evil; look upon it in its
Original, in its Nature, in the Judgment and Estimate of the Wise; look upon it
comparatively, it is worse than Affliction, Death, Hell; look upon it in the
manner of Cure, and in the dismal Effect, it brings Eternal Damnation; is there
not then a great deal of Reason that we should make this Prayer, Deliver us
from Evil?

Use 1. Branch I. Is Sin such a deadly, pernicious Evil, the Evil of Evils? See
then what it is we are to pray most to be delivered from, and that is from Sin.
Our Savior has taught us to pray, Deliver us from Evil. Hypocrites pray more
against Temporal Evils than Spiritual. Pharaoh prayed more to have the Plague
of Hail and Thunder to be removed, than his hard Heart should be removed, Exodus
9.28. The Israelites prayed, Toll Serpents, Take away the Serpents from us
more than to have their sin taken away, Numb. 21.8. The Hypocrites prayer is
Carnal, he prays more to be cured of his Deafness and Lameness than of his
Unbelief. More that God would take away his Pain, than take away his sin. But
our Prayer should be, Deliver us from Evil. Spiritual Prayers are best; have
thou a diseased Body? Pray more that the Disease of thy Soul may be removed
than thy Body, Psalm. 41.4. Heal my Soul, for I have sinned. The Plague of the
Heart is worse than a Cancer in the Breast. Have thou a Child that is crooked?
Pray more to have its Unholiness removed than its Crookedness; spiritual
Prayers are more pleasing to God, and are as Music in his Ears. Christ has
here taught us to pray against sin, Deliver us from Evil.

II. Branch. If sin be so great an Evil, then admire the Wonderful Patience of
God that bears with Sinners. Sin is a breach of God's Royal Law, it strikes at
his Glory; now, for God to bear with sinners who so provoke him, it shows
admirable Patience; well may he be called, The God of Patience, Romans 15.4. It
would tire the Patience of the Angels to bear with men's sins one day; but what
does God bear? How many Affronts and Injuries does he put up? God sees all the
Intreagues and horrid Impieties committed in a Nation, Ier. 29.23. They have
committed Villainy in Israel, and have committed Adultery, even I know, and am a
Witness, says the Lord. God could strike men dead in their sins, but he
forbears and respites them. My thinks I see the Justice of God with a flaming
Sword in his Hand ready to strike the Stroke, and Patience steps in for the
sinner; Lord Spare him a while longer. My thinks I hear the Angels saying to
God, as the King of Israel to the Prophet, 2 King. 6.21. Shall I smite them,
shall I smite them? Lord, here is such a sinner, shall I smite him? Shall I
take off the Head of such a Drunkard, Swearer, Sabbath-breaker? And Gods
Patience says as the Dresser of the Vineyard, Luke 13.8. Let him alone this
year, O the infinite Patience of God, that sin being so Great an Evil, and so
Contrary to God, he should bear with sinners so long, 1 Samuel 24.19. If a man
find his enemy, will he let him go well away? God finds his Enemies, yet he
lets them go, he is not presently avenged on them? Every sin has a voice to
cry to God for Vengeance. Sodom's sin cried, Genesis 18.20. yet God spares men;
But let not sinners presume upon God's Patience* if they repent not, long
forbearance is no forgiveness; Gods Patience abused will leave men more
inexcusable.

III. Branch. If Sin be so great an Evil, then there is no sin little. There Is
no little Treason; every sin strikes at God's Crown and Dignity; and in this
sense it may be said, as Job 22.5. Are not thy Iniquities infinite? The least
sin (as the Schoolmen say) is infinite objective, because it is committed
against an infinite Majesty. And besides, nothing can do away sin, but that
which has an Infiniteness in it. For though the Sufferings of Christ (as Man)
were not infinite, yet the Divine Nature did shed forth an Infinite Value and
Merit upon his Sufferings, So that no sin is little, there is no little Hell
for sin; as we are not to think any of Gods Mercies little, because they are
more than we can deserve: so neither are we to think any of our sins little,
because they are more than we can answer for. That sin we esteem lightest,
without Christ's Blood will be heavy enough to sink us into Perdition.

IV. Branch. If Sin be so great an Evil, then see whence all personal or
national Troubles come; they come from the Evil of Sin; our Sins grow high,
that makes our Divisions grow wide: Sin is the Achan that troubles us, it is
the Cockatrice's Egg, out of which comes a fiery flying Serpent. Sin is like
Phaeton, who (as the Poets fain) driving the Chariot of the Sun, set the World
on fire. Sin like the Planet Saturn has a Malignant Influence; Sin brings us
into straits, 2. Sam. 24.14. David said unto Gad, I am in a great Straight,
Ier. 4.17. As Keepers of a field are they against her round about: As Horses or
Deer in a field are so enclosed with Hedges, and so narrowly watched, that they
cannot get out: so, Jerusalem was so close besieged with Enemies, and watched
that there was no escape for her. Whence was this? Ver. 18. This is thy
Wickedness. All our Evils are from the Evil of Sin. The Cords that pinch us are
of our own twisting. Flagitium and flagellum sunt tanquam Acus and Filum. Sin
raises all the Storms in Conscience; the Sword of God's Justice lies quiet
till Sin draws it out of the scabbard, and makes God whet it against a Nation.

V. Br. If sin be so great an Evil, then how little Reason has any one to be
in Love with sin? Some are so infatuated with sin, that they delight in it. The
Devil can so cook and dress sin, that it pleases the sinners Palate, Job
20.12. Though Wickedness be sweet in his Mouth. Sin is as delightful to corrupt
Nature as Meat to the Taste. Sin is a Feast on which Men feed their Lusts? but
there is little cause to be so in love with sin, Job. 20.14. Though Wickedness be
sweet in his Mouth, it is the Gall of Asps within him. To love sin is to hug an
Enemy. Sin puts a Worm into Conscience, a Sting into Death, a Fire into Hell.
Sin is like those Locusts, Rev. 9.7. On their Heads were as it were Crowns like
Gold, and they had Hair as the Hair of Women; and their Teeth were as the Teeth
of Lions; and they had Tails like Scorpions, and they had Stings in their
Tails; after the Women's Hair comes the Scorpions Sting.

VI. Br. If sin be so great an Evil, then what may we judge of them who make
light of sin? as if there were no danger in it; as if God were not in earnest
when he threatens sin; or as if Ministers were about a needless Work, when they
Preach against sin. Some people make nothing of breaking a Commandment; they
make nothing of telling a Lie, of Couzening, of Slandering, nothing of living
in the sin of Uncleanness; if you weigh sin in the Balance of some men's
Judgments, it weighs very light; but who are those that make so light of sin?
Solomon has described them, Prove. 19.9. Fools make a mock of sin, Stultus in
vitia cito dilabitur, Isidor. Who but Fools would make light of that which
grieves the Spirit of God? who but Fools would put such a Viperous sin in their
Bosoms? Who but fools would laugh at their own Calamity, and make sport while
they give themselves Poison.

VII. Br. If sin be so great an Evil, then I infer that there is no good to be
gotten by Sin; of this Thorn we cannot gather Grapes. If Sin be so deadly an
Evil, then we cannot get any profit by it; no man did ever thrive upon this
Trade: Those Atheists said, Mal. 3 14. It is in vain to serve God, and what
profit is it? But we may say more truly, what profit is there in Sin? Romans
6.21. What Fr^^t had ye in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? Where are
your Earnings? what have you gotten by Sin? It has shame for its Companion,
and death for its Wages. What profit had Achan of his Wedge of Gold? That wedge
seemed to cleave asunder his Soul from God: What profit had Ahab of the
Vineyard he got unjustly? the Dogs licked his Blood, 1 King. 21.19. What profit
had Judas of his Treason? For thirty pieces he sold his Savior and bought his
own Damnation. All the Gain men get by their Sins, they may put in their Eye;
nay, they must, and weep it out again.

VIII. Br. If Sin be so great an Evil, see then the Folly of those who venture
upon sin, because of the Pleasure they have in it, 2 These. 2.12. (...), Who
have Pleasure in Unrighteousness. As for the Pleasure of sin, 1. It is but
Seeming, it is but a pleasant Fancy, a golden Dream. 2. And besides, it is a
mixed Pleasure, it has Bitterness intermingled, Prove. 7.17. I have (says the
Harlot) perfumed my Bed with Myrrh, Aloes and Cinnamon. For one sweet here are
two bitters. Cinnamon is sweet, but Myrrh and Aloes are bitter; the Harlots
Pleasure is mixed. There are those inward Fears, and Lashes of Conscience, as
imbitter the Pleasure. 3. If there be any Pleasure in sin, it is only to the
Body, the brutish Part; the Soul is not at all gratified by the Pleasure, Luke
12.19. Soul, take thy Ease. He might more properly have said, Body take thy
Ease. The Soul cannot feed on sensual Objects. 4. In short, that Pleasure men
talk of in sin, is their Disease; some take pleasure in eating Chalk, or Coals,
this is from their Disease. So when men talk of Pleasure in eating the
Forbidden Fruit, it is from the Sickness and Disease of their Souls; they put
bitter for sweet, Isa. 5.20. O what folly is it for a Cup of Pleasure to drink
a Sea of Wrath? Sin will be bitter in the end, Prove. 23.31, 32. Look not on the
Wine when it is red, when it gives his Color in the Cup; at last it bites like
a Serpent. Sin will prove like Ezekiels Roll, sweet in the Mouth, but bitter in
the Belly, Mel in Ore, Fell in Cord; ask Cain now how he likes his Murder?
Achan how he likes his golden Wedge? O remember that saying of Austin,
Momentaneum est quod delectat, aeternum quod Cruciat. The Pleasure of sin is
soon gone, but the sting remains.

IX. Branch. If Sin be so great an Evil, then what Wisdom is it to depart from
Evil? Job 28.28. To depart from Evil is Understanding. To sin is to do
foolishly: therefore to depart from sin is to do wisely, Solomon says, Prove.
29.6. In every Transgression there is a Snare. Is it not Wisdom to avoid a
Snare? Sin is a Deceiver, it cheated our first Parents; instead of being as
Gods, they became like the Beasts that perish, Psalm. 49.20. Sin has cheated
all that have meddled with it; is it not Wisdom to shun such a Cheater? Sin has
many fair pleas, and tells you how it will gratify all the Senses with
Pleasure: But says a gracious Soul* Christ's Love is sweeter; Peace of
Conscience is sweeter; what are the Pleasures of Sin* to the Pleasures of
Paradise? Well may the Saints be called Wise Virgins, because they spy the
Deceits that are in sin and avoid the Snares. The Fear of the Lord that is
Wisdom, and to depart from Evil is Understanding.

X. Branch.. If Sin be so great an Evil, then how justifiable and commendable
are all those Means which are used to keep Men from sin. How justifiable are a
Ministers Admonitions and Reproofs? Titus 1.13. Rebuke them sharply. (...),
Cuttingly; a Metaphor from a Surgeon that searches a Wound and cuts out the
Proud Flesh, that the Patient may be sound: So God's Minister comes with a
cutting Reproof, but it is to keep you from sin, and to save your Souls, Si
Merito objur gaverit te aliquis, scito quia profuit. Sen. Esteem them your best
Friends, who would keep you from sinning against God. If a man were going to
poison or drown himself, were not he his Friend who would hinder him from doing
it? All a Ministers Reproofs are but to keep you from sin, and hinder you from
Self-Murder; all is in Love, 2 Cor. 5.11. Knowing the Terror of the Lord, we
persuade men. It Is the Passion of most to be angry with them that would reclaim
them from sin, Amos 5.10. They hate him that rebukes in the Gate. Who is angry
with the Physician for prescribing a bitter Potion, seeing it is to purge out
the peccant Humor? It Is Mercy to Men's Souls to tell them of their sins. And
surely those are Priests for the Devil, 2 Chr. 11.15. who see men go on in sin
and ready to drop into Hell, yet never pull them back by a Reproof; nay,
perhaps flatter them in their sins. God never made Ministers as false Glasses,
to make bad Faces look Fair. Such make themselves guilty of other men's Sins.

11. Inference. If sin be so great an evil, the evil of evils; then see what a
bad choice they make, who choose sin to avoid affliction: As if to save the
Coat from being rent, one should suffer his Flesh to be rent. It was a false
charge that Elihu brought against Job, Chap. 36.21. Thou have chosen iniquity
rather than affliction. This is a bad choice. Affliction has a Promise made to
it, 2 Samuel 22.28. but sin has no Promise made to it. Affliction is for our
good, but Sin is not for our good; it would intail Hell and Damnation upon us.
Spira chose iniquity rather than affliction, but it cost him dear. He at last
repented of his choice. He who commits sin to avoid suffering, is like one that
runs into a Lions Den to avoid the stinging of a Gnat.

12. Inference. If sin be so great an evil, see then what should be a
Christians great care in this life, to keep from sin: Deliver us from evil.
Some make it all their care to keep out of trouble; they had rather keep their
Skin whole, than their Conscience pure: But our care should be chiefly to keep
from sin. How careful are we to forbear such a Dish, as the Phisician tells us
is hurtful for us; it will bring the Stone or Gout? Much more should we be
careful, that we eat not the forbidden fruit, which will bring Divine
Vengeance, 1 Timothy 5. 22. Keep thy self pure. It has been always the study of
the Saints, to keep aloof off from sin, Genesis 39.9. How can I do this great
wickedness and sin against God. Psalm. 19.13. Keep back thy Servant from
presumptuous sins. It was a saying of Anselm, If Sin were on one side, and Hell
on the other, I would rather leap into Hell, than willingly sin against my God.
O what a Mercy is it to be kept from sin? We count it a great Mercy to be kept
from the Plague and Fire; But what is it to be kept from sin?

13. Inference. Is sin so great an evil; see then that which may make us long
for Heaven, when we shall be perfectly freed from sin; not only from the
outward Acts of sin, but from the in-being of sin. In Heaven we shall not need
to pray this Prayer, Deliver us from evil. What a blessed time will it be, when
we shall never have a Vain Thought more? Then Christ's Spouse shall be sine
macula and ruga* without spot or wrincle, Ephesians. 5.27. Now, there is a Dead Man
tied to the Living; we cannot do any Holy Duty but we mix Sin; we cannot Pray
without Wandering; we cannot Believe without Doubting: But then, our
Virgin-Souls shall not be capable of the least tincture of Sin, but we shall
all be as the Angels of God.

In Heaven we shall have no Temptation to sin. The Old Serpent is cast out of
Paradise, and his fiery ^arts shall never come near to touch us.

2. Use of Exhort. And it has Two distinct Branches.

1. Branch. To all in General. If Sin be so great and prodigious an evil; Then
as you love your Souls, Take heed of sin. If you taste of the Forbidden Fruit,
it will cost you dear, it will cost you Bitter Tears, it may cost you lying in
Hell: O therefore fly from sin.

First, Take heed of sins of Omission, Matt. 23.23. It is as well dangerous not
to do things Commanded, as to do things forbidden. Some think it no great
matter to omit Reading Scripture. The Bible lies by like Rusty Armor, which
they never use: They think it no great matter to omit Family, or Closet-prayer;
they can go several Months and God never hear of them. These have nothing
sanctified to them; they feed upon a Curse; For every Creature is Sanctified by
Prayer, 1 Timothy 4.5. The Bird may shame many, it never takes a drop, but the eye
is lift up toward Heaven. Oh take heed of living in the neglect of any known
duty. It was the Prayer of a Reverend Holy Man on his Death bed, Lord, forgive
my sins of Omission.

Secondly, Take heed of Secret sins. Some are more modest than to sin openly in
a Belcony; but they will carry their sins under a Canopy, they will sin in
Secret. Rachel did not let her Fathers Images be seen, but She put them under
her, and sat upon them, Genesis 31.34. Many will be Drunk, and Unclean, if they
may do it that no body may see them. They are like one that shuts up his
Shop-windows, but follows his Trade within doors. But if sin be so great an
evil, let me warn you this day, not to sin in Secret; know, that you can never
sin so privately, but that there are Two Witnesses always by, God and
Conscience.

Thirdly. Take heed of your Complexion-sin. That sin which your Nature and
Constitution does most incline you to. As in the Hive there is a Master-Bee, so
in the Heart there is a Master-sin, Psalm. 18.23. I have kept my Self from mine
Iniquity: There is some sin that is the special Favorite, the peccatum in
deliciis; the Darling-Sin, that lies in the Bosom; and this does bewitch and
draw away the heart. O beware of this.

Quest. How may this Darling-sin be known?

Answ. 1. That Sin which a Man does most cherish, and to which all other sins
are subservient; This is the sin which is most tended and waited upon: The
Pharisees darling-sin was Vainglory, all they did was to feed this sin of
Pride, Matt. 6.2. That they may have Glory of Men: When they gave Alms, they
sounded a Trumpet. If a stranger had Asked the Question, Why does this Trumpet
sound? The Answer was, The Pharisees are going to give Alms to the Poor. Their
Lamp of Charity was filled with the Oil of Vainglory, Matt. 23.5. All their
Works for to be seen of Men. Pride was their Bosom-sin. Oftentimes Covetousness
is the darling-sin; all other sins are committed to maintain this. Why do Men
Equivocate, Oppress, Defraud, Take Bribes, all is to uphold Covetousness.

2. That sin which a Man does not love to have reproved, is the darling-sin:
Herod could not endure to have his Incest spoken against: if John Baptist
meddles with that Sin, it shall cost him his Head.

3. That Sin which has most power over one, and does most easily lead him
Captive, that is the Beloved of the Soul. There are some sins a Man can better
put off, and give a repulse to; but there is one sin, which, if it comes to be
a Suitor, he cannot deny, but is overcome by it; this is the bosom-sin. The
young Man in the Gospel had a Complexion-sin which he could not resist, and
that was the Love of the World: His Silver was dearer to him than his Savior.
It is a sad thing a Man should be so bewitched by a Lust, that he will part
with the Kingdom of Heaven to gratify it.

4. That sin which Men use Arguments to defend, is the darling sin. To plead
for sin is to be the Devil's Attorney. If the sin be Covetousness, and we
vindicate it; if it be rash Anger, and we justify it, Jonah 4.9. I do well to
be angry: This is the Complexion-sin.

5. That sin which does most Trouble one, and fly in his Face in an hour of
Sickness and Distress, that is the beloved sin. When Ioseph's Brethren were
distressed, their sin came to remembrance in selling their Brother, Genesis 12.21.
So when a Man is upon his Sickbed, and Conscience shall say, Do not thou
remember how thou have lived in such a sin, though thou have been often warned,
yet thou would not leave it. Conscience reads a Curtain Lecture: Sure that
was the Darling sin.

6. That sin which a Man is most unwilling to part with, that is the Darling
sin. Jacob could, of all his Sons, most hardly part with Benjamin, Genesis 42.36.
Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take Benjamin away. So says the
Sinner, this and that sin I have parted with, But must Benjamin go? Must I part
with this delightful sin? That goes to the Heart. This is the Dalilah, the
beloved sin. O if sin be such a deadly evil, dare not to indulge any bosom sin:
This is of all other most dangerous; like an Humor striking to the Heart,
which is mortal. Leave open but one Gap, the wild Beast may enter at it. One
darling sin lived in, is setting open a Gap for Satan to enter.

4. Take heed of the Sins which attend your particular Callings. A Calling you
must live in. Adam in Paradise Tilled the Ground: God never Sealed Warrants to
Idleness: but every Calling has its snare. As some sin in living out of a
Calling; so others sin in a Calling. Remember how deadly an evil sin is, avoid
those sins which you may be exposed to in your Trade. Take heed of all fraud
and collusion in your dealings, Matt. 7.12. Whatsoever ye would that Men should
do to you, do ye even so to them.

First, Take heed of a deceitful tongue in Selling: The Scripture makes it the
Character of one that goes to Heaven, Psalm. 15.2. He speaks the truth from
his heart. It is the Custom of many to say, The Commodity stands them in more,
yet take less. This is hardly credible.

Secondly, Beware of a deceitful Balance, Hos. 12.7. The Balances of deceit are
in his hand: Men, by making their Weights lighter, make their Account heavier.

Thirdly, Beware of sophisticating, mingling and embasing commodities, Am. 8.6.
They sell the refuse of the Wheat. They would pick out the best Grains of the
Wheat, and sell the worst at the same price as they did the best; to mix a
courser commodity with a fine, and yet sell it all for fine, is no better than
deceit, Isa. 1.22.

Fourthly. Beware of stretching your Consciences too far, or taking more a
great deal for a Commodity than it is worth, Levit. 25.14. If thou sell ought
unto thy Neighbor, ye shall not oppress one another. There is a lawful gain
allowed, yet one may not so advantage himself, as to damnifie another. Let that
be the Tradesman's Motto, Act. 24.16. A Conscience void of offense toward God,
and toward Man. He has an hard bargain, that does Purchase the World with the
loss of his Soul.

Fifthly. Sin being so deadly an evil, take heed of the Appearance of sin, 1
These. 5.22. Abstain from the appearance of evil. Abstain not only from
apparent evil, but the appearance of Evil: If it be not absolutely a sin, yet
if it looks like sin, avoid it. He who is loyal to his Prince, not only
forbears to have his hand in Treason, but he will take heed of that which has
a show of Treason. Ioseph's Mistress tempted him, and he fled and would not be
with her, Genesis 39.12. An appearance of Good is too little, and an appearance of
Evil is too much.

1. The appearance of evil is often an occasion of evil: Dalliance is an
appearance of evil, and oftentimes it occasions evil. Touching the Forbidden
Fruit, may occasion tasting. Dancing in Masquerades has often been the occasion
of Uncleanness.

2. The appearance of evil may scandalize another, 1 Cor. 8.12. when ye sin
against the Brethren, and wound their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ:
sinning against a Member of Christ, is a sinning against Christ.

Thus you see, sin being so deadly an evil, we should avoid all sin; Sins of
Omission, Secret Sins, Complexion Sins, Sins that attend our particular
Calling, yea, the appearance of evil.

Quest. What means shall we use to be kept from the Acts of Sin?

R. If you would be preserved from actual and scandalous Sins, labor to
Mortify Original Sin. If you would not have the branches bud and blossom,
smite at the root. I know Original Sin cannot in this life be removed, but
labor to have it subdued. Why do Men break forth into Actual sins, but because
they do not mortify Heart-sins. Suppress the first risings of Pride, Lust,
Passion: Original sin unmortified will prove such a Root of Bitterness, as will
bring forth the cursed fruit of Scandalous Sin.

2. If you would be kept from Actual Sins, think what an odious thing sin is.
Besides, what you have heard, remember, Sin is the Accursed thing, Josh. 7.21.
It is the abominable thing God hates, Ier. 44.4. O do not this abominable thing
that I hate. Sin is the Spirits of Witchcraft. It is the Devil's Excrement; it
is called (...), filthiness* Jam. 1.21. If all the evils in the World were put
together, and their quintessence strained out, they could not make a thing so
filthy as Sin does. So odious is a Sinner, that God loathes the sight of him,
Zec. 11.8. My Soul loathed them. He who defiles himself with Avarice, What is
he but a a Serpent licking the dust? He who defiles himself with the Lust of
Uncleanness, What is he but a Swine with a Man's Head? He who defiles himself
with Pride, What is he but a Bladder, whom the Devil has blown up? He who
defiles himself with Drunkenness, What is he but a Beast that has got the
Staggers. To consider how odious and base a thing Sin is, would be a means to
keep us from sinning.

3. If you would be kept from actual sins, get the Fear of God planted in your
hearts; (...), Chrysostom. Prove. 16.6. By the Fear of the Lord Men depart from evil.
Cavebis si pavebis; Fear is a Bridle to Sin, and a Spur to Holiness. Fear puts
an holy awe upon the heart, and binds it to its good behavior. By the Fear of
the Lord Men depart from evil. When the Emperess Eudoxia threatened to banish
Chrysostom; Tell her, says he, I Fear nothing but sin. Fear is janitor animae;
it stands as a Porter at the door of the Soul, and keeps sin from entering: All
sin is committed for want of the fear of God, Romans 3.14. Whose Mouth is full of
Cursing and Bitterness; their feet are swift to shed blood; there is no fear of
God before their eyes. Holy fear stands Sentinel, and is ever watching against
Security, Pride, Wantonness. Fear is a Christians Lifeguard, to defend him
against the fiery darts of Temptation. Si vis esse securus, semper time. The
way to be safe, is always to fear, Prove. 28.14.

4. If we would be kept from actual Sins, let us be careful to avoid all the
In-lets and Occasions of sin? Run not into Evil Company: he that would not have
the Plague, will not go into an infected House. Guard your Senses, which may be
the Inlets to sin. Keep the two Portals, the Eye, and the Ear. Especially, look
to your Eye; much sin comes in by the Eye; the Eye is often an Inlet to sin; sin
takes fire at the Eye: The first sin in the World began at the Eye, Genesis 3.6.
When the Woman saw that the Tree was good for Food, and was pleasant to the
Eyes; then she to^k of the Fruit thereof. Looking begat Lusting, Intemperance
begins at the Eye; Looking on the Wine when it is red, and gives its Color in
the Glass, causes Excess of drinking, Prove. 23.21. Covetousness begins at the
Eye, Josh. 7 21. When I saw among the Spoils, a goodly Babylonish Garment, and
a Wedge of Gold, I coveted and took them. The fire of Lust begins to kindle at
the Eye. David walking upon the Roof of his House, saw a woman washing her
self, and she was (says the Text) beautiful to look upon, and he sent
Messengers and took her, and defiled himself with her, 2 Samuel 11.2. O therefore
look to your Eyes; Job made a Covenant with his Eyes, Job 31.1. If the Eye be
once inflamed, it will be hard to stand out long against sin. If the outworks
are taken by an Enemy, there is great danger of taking the whole Castle.

5. If you would be kept from actual gross sin, study Sobriety and Temperance,
1 Pet. 5.8. Sobrii este, Be sober. Check the inordinacy of Appetite: Sin does
frequently make its entrance this way. By gratifying the sensitive appetite,
the Soul that is akin to Angels, is enslaved to the brutish part. Many drink,
if not to Drunkenness, yet to Drowsiness. The not denying the sensitive
appetite, makes Men's Conscience so full of guilt, and the World so full of
scandal. If you would be kept from running into sin, lay restraint upon the
flesh: What has God given reason and conscience for, but to be a bridle to
check inordinate desires?

6. If you would be kept from actual sins, be continually upon your spiritual
watch: (...)^ Chrysostom.

1. Watch your Thoughts, Jer. 4.14. How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge
within thee? Sin begins at the thoughts. First Men cherish revengeful thoughts,
then they dip their hands in blood. Set a Spy over your thoughts.

2. Watch your Passions; Passions of Anger, Passions of Lust. The heart is
ready to be destroyed by its own Passions, as the Vessel is to be overturned by
the Sail. Passion transports beyond the bounds of reason; it is brevis insania,
Sen. A short frenzy. Moses, in a Passion, spoke unadvisedly with his Lips,
Psalm. 106.33. The Disciples, in a Passion, called for fire from Heaven. A man
in a Passion is like a Ship in a Storm, that has neither Pilot nor Sails to
help it, but it is exposed to the Waves and Rocks.

3. Watch your Temptations. Satan continually lies in ambush, and watches to
draw us to sin; Stat in procinctu diabolus; he is fishing for our Souls: he is
either laying of snares, or shooting of darts, therefore we had need watch the
Tempter, that we be not decoyed into sin. Most sin is committed for want of
watchfulness.

7. If you would be kept from the evil of sin, consult with the Oracles of God,
be well versed in Scripture, Psalm. 119.11. Thy word have I hid in my heart,
that I might not sin against thee. The word is Anceps gladius, a two-edged
Sword, to cut asunder men's lusts. When the Fogs and Vapors of sin begin to
arise, let but the Light of Scripture shine into the Soul, and it dispels those
Fogs: Let the word of Christ dwell richly in you, Col. 3.16. Alphonsus King of
Arragon read over the Bible Fourteen times. The word shows the damnable evil of
sin; it furnishes us with Precepts, which are so many Receipts and Antidotes
against sin. When Christ had a Temptation to sin, he beat back the Tempter, and
wounded him Three times with this Sword of the Spirit, It is written.

Why do men live in sin, but because they either do not Read the Word, or do
not believe it.

8. If you would be preserved from gross, presumptuous sin, get your hearts
fired with love to God. Love has a great force in it, it is strong as death;
it breaks the league between the heart and sin.

Two things in God cause Love.

First, His Orient Beauty: Moses desired to see some glimpse of it; Lord, show
me thy glory.

2. His Amazing Love; What a Prodigy of Love was it, to give his Son out of his
Bosom, and lay such a Jewel to pawn for our Redemption. These two, the Orient
of God's Beauty, and the Magnitude of his Love, may, like two Loadstones, draw
our Love to God; and if we love him, we will not sin against him. He that loves
his Friend, will not by any means displease him. I have read of four men
meeting together, who asked one another, What it was that kept them from
sinning? One said, The Fear of Hell; Another said, The Joys of Heaven; The
Third said, The Odiousness of Sin; The Fourth said, That which keeps me from
sin, is, Love to God: Shall I sin against so good a God? Shall I abuse Love?
Love to God is the best Curben-bit to keep from sin.

9. If you would be kept from the evil of sin, be diligent in a Calling. Du^
laboribus omnia vendunt -- Adam in Paradise must till the Ground. Such as live
idly expose themselves to sin: if we have no work to do, Satan will find us
work. He sows most of his seed in Fallow ground. A Woman being much tempted to
sin, came to Reverend Mr. Greenham for Advice, What she should do to resist the
Temptation? He gave her this Answer; Be always well employed, that so when
Satan comes, he may find thee busied in thy Calling, and thou may not be at
leisure to listen to his Temptations.

10. If you would be kept from sin, fix the eye of your Mind upon the Beauty of
Holiness: Holiness consists in our Conformity to God; Holiness is the sparkling
of the Divine Nature; a beam of God shining in the Soul. How lovely is Christ's
Bride, when decked and bespangled with the Jewels of Holiness? What makes the
Seraphims Angels of Light but their Holiness? Do but think with your selves
what a splendid glorious thing Holiness is, and it will cause a disgust and
hatred of sin, which is so contrary to it. The beholding of Beauty, makes one
out of love with Deformity.

11. If you would keep from the evil of sin, meditate frequently of Death,
First, The unavoidableness of it, Heb. 9.27. Statutum est, It is appointed for
all once to die. We are not so sure to lie down this night in our Bed, as we
are to lie down in our Grave. Secondly, The uncertainty of the Time. We are but
Tenants at will; we hold our Life at the Will of our Landlord; And how soon may
God turn us out of this house of clay? Death often comes when we least look for
it. The Flood (as some Learned Writers observe) came in the Month Zif, or
April, in the Spring, when the Trees were Blossoming, and the Birds Singing;
then came the Flood, when they least looked for it. So often in the Spring of
Youth, when the Body is most healthy, and the Spirits most sprightly and
vigorous, and Death is least thought on, then it comes. Could we think often
and seriously of Death, it would give a Death's-wound to sin. Nihil sic
revocato peocata quam crebra mortis contemplatio. Aug. No stronger Antidote
against sin than this: Am I now Singing, and to morrow may be Dying? What if
Death should take me doing the Devil's work? Would it not send me to him to
receive my Wages? Would but the Adulterer think, I am now in the Act of Sin,
but how soon may Death come; and then I who have burned in lust, must burn in
Hell. This sure would strike a damp into him, and make him afraid of going
after strange Flesh.

12. If you would be kept from Gross Scandalous Sins, beware of a Covetous
Heart. Covetousness is a dry Drunkenness. He who thirsts insatiably after the
World, will stick at no sin, he will betray Christ and a Good Cause for Money:
Cui nihil satis eidem nihil turpe. Tacitus. 1 Timothy 6.10. The love of Money is
the root of all evil. From this Root comes, First, Theft. Achan's covetous
humor made him steal the Wedge of Gold, Josh. 7.21. Covetousness makes the
Jayls so full. Secondly, From this root comes Murder. Why did Ahab Stone
Naboth to death, but to possess his Vineyard? 1 King. 21.13. Covetousness has
made many swim to the Crown in blood. Thirdly, From this bitter Root of
Covetousness proceeds Cousenage: It is the Covetous hand holds false weights.
Fourthly, From this Root of covetousness comes Uncleanness. You read of the
hire of a Whore, Deuteronomy. 23.18. For Money she would let both her Conscience and
Chastity be set to sale. O if you would be kept from the evil of sin, beware of
Covetousness which is the Inlet to so many sins.

13. Let us be much in Prayer to God, to keep us from Ingulphing our selves in
sin, Psalm. 19.11. Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins. We have no
power inherent to keep our selves from evil. Arnoldus says, That Man in his
corrupt estate, has Aliqua^ reliquias vitae Spiritualis -- Some Relics of
Spiritual Life left: And Arminius says, Man has a sufficiency of Grace in
himself, whereby he may, Abstinere a malo, abstain from evil. Free Will is a
sufficient curb to check and pull him back from sin. But then what needed
Christ to have Taught us this Prayer, Libera nos a malo, Deliver us from evil?
If we have power of our selves to keep from sin, What need we pray to God for
power? Alas, if David and Peter who had an Habit of Grace, fell, for want of a
fresh gale of the Spirit to hold them up, much more will they be in danger of
falling, who have only the power of Free will to hold them.

Let us therefore sue to God for strength to keep us from sinning; Pray that
Prayer of David, Psalm. 119.117. Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe: and that
other Prayer, Psalm. 17.5. Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps
slip not. Lord keep me from dishonouring thee, keep me from the defiling sins
of the Age, that I may not be worse for the Times, nor the Times the worse for
me. Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins. Lord, whatever I suffer, keep
me from sin. The Child is safe in the Nurses arms; and we are only safe from
falling into Sin, while we are held up in the Arms of Christ and Free Grace.

2. Branch Of the Exhortation has an aspect to God's Children, you that are
Professors, and carry Christ's Colors, I beseech you, above all others, to
take heed of sin; beware of any action that is scandalous and unbecoming the
Gospel. You have heard what a prodigious hyperbolical evil sin is. Come not
near the forbidden fruit, Hos. 4.15. Though Israel play the harlot, yet let not
Judah offend. So, though wicked Men run into sin, yet let not the Spouse of
Christ defile the breasts of her Virginity. Sin does ill become any, but it
does worse become Professors. Dung is unhandsome in the Street, but to see it
in the Temple, How offensive is it? Leprosy in the Foot does ill, but to see a
leprous sore in the Face is much worse. To see sin break forth in them, who
have a Face of Religion, is most to be abominated. The sins of the wicked are
not so much wondered at, Dan. 12.10. The wicked shall do wickedly. It is no
wonder to see a Toad spit Poison; it was not so much wondered to see Cain, or
Ahab sin; but to see Lot's Incest, to see David's hands stained with blood,
this was strange. When the Sun is Eclipsed, every one stands and looks upon it.
So when a Child of light is Eclipsed by scandalous sin, all stand and gaze at
this Eclipse.

The Sins of God's People, do, in some sense, more provoke God, than the sins
of the Wicked. We read of the provoking of his Sons and Daughters, Deuteronomy. 32.19.
The sins of the Wicked Anger God, but the sins of his People Grieve him. The
sins of God's People have a more malignant aspect, and are of a blacker dye
than others: There are those aggravations in the sins of God's People, as are
not to be found in the sins of the Unregenerate, in Eight Particulars.

For, First, The Godly have something which may ponere obicem, Restrain them
from sin. Wicked Men, when they sin, have no Principle to restrain them; they
have Wind and Tide to carry them, but have nothing to pull them back from sin:
but a Child of God has a Principle of Grace to give check to sin. He has the
impulses of God's Spirit dissuading him from evil; Gal. 5.17.
therefore for him to commit sin is far worse than for others. This is to sin
more desperately; it is as if a Woman should go about to kill the Child in her
Womb. Christian, this thou art going to do, when thou sinnest Presumptuously,
thou do what in thee lies to kill the Babe of Grace in thy Soul.

Secondly. The sins of God's People are greater than others, because they sin
against more Mercy. This is like a Weight put in the Scale, it makes sin weigh
heavier. God has given Christ to a Believer, he has cut him off from the wild
stock of Nature, and grafted him into the True Olive; and for him to abuse all
this Mercy, it is to outdo the Wicked, and to sin with an higher aggravation,
because it is to sin against greater love. How was Peter's sin inhaunced and
accented, that when Christ had done more for him than others, he had dropped
some of the Holy Oil upon him; He had taken him into the number of the
Apostles, he had carried him up into the Mount of Transfiguration, and shown
him the Glory of Heaven in a Vision; now that Peter should deny Christ after
all this Mercy, this was heinous, and could not be forgiven but by a Prodigy
and Miracle of Love.

Thirdly, The Sins of the Godly are worse, and have this aggravation in them,
that they Sin against more clear illuminations than the Wicked, Job 24.13. They
are of those that rebel against the Light: Light is there taken figuratively
for knowledge. It cannot be denied but the Wicked Sin knowingly; but the Godly
have a light beyond them, such a divine, penetrating light, as no Hypocrite can
attain unto: They have better eyes to see Sin than others, and for them to
meddle with Sin, and embrace this Dunghill, How must this needs provoke God, and
make the Fury rise up in his Face? Oh therefore you that are the People of God
fly from Sin; your Sins are more inhanc'd, and have worse aggravations in them
than the Sins of the Unregenerate.

Fourthly, The Sins of the Godly are worse than the Sins of the Unregenerate;
for when they Sin, it is against Greater Experiences. They have felt the
bitterness of Sin in the pangs of the New Birth, and afterward God has spoken
peace, and they have had an experimental taste how Sweet the Lord is; and yet,
after these Experiences, that they should touch the Forbidden Fruit, venture
upon a Presumptuous Sin, How does this inhance and aggravate their Guilt, and
is like putting a weight more in the Scale to make their Sin weigh heavier? The
Wicked, when they Sin, never tasted the sweetness of an Heavenly Life; they
never knew what it was to have any Smiles from God; they never tasted any thing
sweeter than Corn and Wine, therefore no wonder if they Sin: But for a Child of
God, who has had such Love Tokens from Heaven, and Signal experiences, for him
to Gratify a Lust, How horrid is this! It was an aggravation of Solomon's Sin,
that his heart was turned from the Lord which had appeared to him Twice, 1
King. 11.9.

Fifthly, The Sins of the Godly are greater than others, because they Sin
against their Sonship. When Wicked Men Sin, they Sin against the Command; but
when the Godly Sin, they Sin against a Privilege, they abuse their Sonship.
The Godly are adopted into the Family of Heaven, they have a New Name: Is it a
light thing [said David] to be Son-in-Law to a King? So to be called the Sons
of God, to be Heirs of the Promises, is no small honor: Now, for such to run
into any open offense, it is a Sinning against their Adoption; they hereby make
themselves Vile; as if a King's Son should be tumbling in the Mire, or lie
among Swine.

Sixthly, The Sins of the Godly are worse than others, because they are
committed against more Vows and Engagements. They have given up their Names to
God; They have Bound themselves solemnly to God by Oath, Psalm. 119.106. I have
Sworn that I will keep thy Statutes: And, in the Supper of the Lord, they have
renewed this Sacred Vow: and, after this, to run into a Presumptuous Sin, it is a
Breach of Vow, a kind of Perjury, which dies the Sin of a Crimson Color.

Seventhly, The Sins of the Godly are worse than others, because they bring a
greater Reproach upon Religion: for the wicked to Sin, there is no other
expected from them: Swine will wallow in the Mire. But when Sheep do so, when
the Godly Sin, that redounds to the dishonor of the Gospel, 2 Samuel 12.14. By
this deed thou have given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to
blaspheme. A Stain in Scarlet, every ones eye is upon it. For the Godly to Sin,
it is like a Spot in Scarlet, it is more taken notice of, and it reflects a
greater dishonor upon the ways of God. When the Sun is Eclipsed, every one
stands and looks upon it: So when a Child of Light is Eclipsed by scandalous
Sin, all stand and gaze at this Eclipse. How does the Gospel suffer by the
miscarriages of the Godly? their Blood can never wash off the stain that they
bring upon Religion.

Eighthly, The Sins of the Godly are worse, because they are a means to
encourage and harden wicked Men in Sin: If the Wicked see the Godly to be loose
and uncircumspect in their lives, they think they may do so to. The Wicked make
the Godly their Pattern, not in imitating their Virtues, but their Vices; And
is not this fearful to be a means to damn others? These are the aggravations of
the Sins of the Godly; therefore you, above all others, beware of Presumptuous
sins: your Sins wound Conscience, weaken Grace, and do more highly provoke God
than the Sins of others: and God will be sure to punish you; whoever escapes
you shall not, Amos 3.3. You only have I known of all the Families of the
Earth, therefore I will punish you for all your Iniquities. If God does not
damn you, yet he may send you to Hell in this Life. He may cause such Agonies
and Tremblings of heart, that you may be a Terror to your selves. You may draw
nigh to despair, and be ready to look upon your selves as Cast-aways. When
David had stained himself with Adultery and Murder, he complained of his Broken
Bones, Psalm. 51.8. A Metaphor to set forth the Grief and Agony of his Soul: he
lay in sore desertion Three Quarters of a year, and it is thought he never
recovered his full joy to his Dying day. Oh therefore you, who belong to God,
and are enrolled in his Family, take heed of blemishing your Profession with
scandalous Sin; you will pay dear for it; think of the Broken Bones. Though God
does not blot you out of his Book, yet he may cast you out of his Presence,
Psalm. 51.11. He may keep you in long desertion. You may feel such lashes in
your Conscience, [that you may roar out, and think your selves half in Hell.]

So much for the First, Deliver us from evil; We Pray to be delivered from Evil
in General, that is, Sin.

2. In Special, Deliver us from Evil: We Pray to be delivered from evil, under
a Threefold Notion.

First, From the Evil of our Heart. It is called (...), an Evil Heart, Hebr.
3.12.

Secondly, From the Evil of Satan. He is called (...), The Evil one, Mat. 13.19.

Thirdly, From the Evil of the World. It Is called an Evil World, Gal. 1.4.

1. In this Petition, Deliver us from Evil; we pray to be delivered from the
evil of our Heart, that it may not decoy and trapan us into sin: The Heart is
the poisoned Fountain, from whence all actual sins flow, Mark 7.21. Out of the
Heart proceed evil Thoughts, Fornications, Murders. The Cause of all Evil lies
in a man's own Breast. All sin begins at the Heart. Lust is first conceived in
the Heart, and then it is midwifed into the World. Whence comes rash Anger? The
Heart sets the Tongue on fire. The Heart is a Shop or Workhouse where all sin
is contrived and hammered out. How needful therefore is this Prayer, Deliver us
from Devil, from the Evil of our Hearts. The Heart is the greatest Seducer,
therefore the Apostle James says, Every man is drawn away of his own Lust and
enticed, Iam. 1.14. The Devil could not hurt us, if our own Hearts did not give
consent. All that he can do is to lay the Bait, but it is our fault to swallow
the Bait.

O let us pray to be delivered from the Lusts and Deceits of our Hearts;
Deliver us from Evil. Luther feared his Heart more than the Pope or Cardinal,
and it was Austins Prayer, Libera me Domine a meipso, Lord, deliver me from my
self. It was good Advice one gave to his Friend, Caveas teipsum; beware of the
bosom-Traytor, the Flesh. The Heart of Man is the Trojan Horse, out of which
comes a whole Army of Lusts.

2. In this Petition, Deliver us from Evil, we pray to be delivered from the
Evil of Satan. He is (...) The Evil One, Mat. 13.19.

Quest. In what respect is Satan the Evil One?

Answ. 1. He is the first Inventor of Evil, Ioh. 8.44. He plotted the first
Treason.

2. His Inclination is only to Evil, Ephesians. 6.12.

His constant Practice is doing Evil, 1 Pet. 5.8.

4 All the Evils and Mischiefs that fall out in the World, he has some hand in
them.

First, He hinders from Good, Zach. 3.1. He showed me Joshua the High Priest
standing before the Angel of the Lord, and Satan at his right Hand to resist
him.

Secondly, He provokes to Evil; He put it into Ananias's Heart to lie, Act.
5.3. Why has Satan filled thy Heart to lie to the Holy Ghost? The Devil blows
the fire of Lust and Strife. When men are proud, the Old Serpent has poisoned
them, and makes them swell. Thus he is the Evil One, and well may we pray, Lord
deliver us from the Evil One. The Word Satan, in the Hebrew signifies an
Opponent or Adversary.

1. He is a Restless Adversary, he never sleeps; Spirits needs no sleep. He is
a Peripatetick, He walks about, 1 Pet. 5.8. and how does he walk? Not as a
Pilgrim, but as a Spy; he narrowly observes where he may plant his Pieces of
Battery, and make his Assaults with most Advantage against us. Satan is a
subtle Engineer; there is no place that can secure us from Satan's Assaults and
In^^des. We find him while we are Praying, Hearing, Meditating. We are sure of
his Company, uncertain how we came by it.

2. Satan is a puissant Adversary, he is armed with Power. He is called (...),
The strong Man, Luke 11.21. He takes men captive at his pleasure, 2 Timothy 2.26.
Who are taken captive by him at his Will. Gr. (...), who are taken alive by
him. It alludes to a Bird that is taken alive in the Snare; thus you see he is
the Evil one. The Devils work is to angle for men's Souls; he lays suitable
Baits. He allures the ambitious Man with Honor, the covetous Man with Riches,
he hooks his Baits with Silver, he allures the lustful Man with Beauty, he
tempts Men to Delila's Lap, to keep them from Abraham's Bosom. The Devil
glories in the Damnation of Souls; how needful then is this Prayer? Deliver us
from Evil. Lord keep us from the Evil One. Though Satan may solicit us to sin;
suffer us not to give Consent. Though he may Assault the Castle of our Hearts,
yet, let us not deliver up the Keys of the Castle to our mortal Enemy.

3. In this Petition, Deliver us from Evil; we pray to be delivered from the
Evil of the World. It Is called an Evil World, Gal. 1.4. not but that the World
(as God made it) is Good; but through our Corruption it becomes Evil, and we
had need pray, deliver us from an Evil World.

Quest. In what Sense is it Saeculum malum, an Evil World?

Answ. 1. As it is a defiling World. It Is like living in an infectious Air, it
requires an high degree of Grace to keep our selves unspotted from the World,
Iam. 1.27. It Is as hard to live in the World and not be defiled, as to go much
in the Sun and not be tanned.

1. The Opinions of the World are defiling, that a little Religion will serve
the turn; like Leaf-Gold, it must be spread but thin. That Morality runs
parallel with Grace; that to be Zealous, is to be Righteous overmuch. That it
is better to keep the skin whole, than the Conscience Pure. That the Flesh is
rather to be gratified, than mortified. These Opinions of the World are
defiling.

2. The Examples of the World are defiling Examples, have a great Force in them
to draw us to Evil. -- Princeps imperio magnus exemplo major, Princes are
Looking-Glasses which we dress our selves by; if they do Evil, we are apt to
imitate them. Great Men are Copies we set before us, and usually we write most
like the Copy when it is blotted; there is a great Proneness in us to follow the
Examples of the World. Therefore God has put in a Caveat against it, Exodus
23.2. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do Evil. How easily are we hurried
to sin, when we have the Tide of Natural Corruption, and the wind of Example to
carry us. Lot was the worlds Wonder, the Complexion of his Soul kept Pure in
Sodoms infectious Air. The River of Peru in America, after it has run into the
main Sea, keeps fresh, and does not mingle with the salt Waters: To this River
might Lot be compared, whose Piety kept fresh in Sodoms salt Water. Bad
Examples are catching, Psalm. 106.35. They were mingled among the Heathen, and
Learned their Works. Had not we need then pray, Lord deliver us from this Evil
World? Living in the World is like traveling in a dirty Road.

2. It is an evil World, as it is an insnaring World. The World's full of
Snares. Company is a snare, Recreation a snare, Oaths are snares, Riches are
golden snares; -- Opes irritamenta malorum. The Apostle speaks of the Lust of
the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, 1 Ioh. 2.16. The Lust of
the Flesh is Beauty, the Lust of the Eye is Money, the Pride of Life is Honor;
these are the natural Man's Trinity. In mundo splendour Opum, Gloriae Majestas,
Voluptatum illecebrae ab amore Dei nos abstrahunt. The World is a flattering
Enemy; whom it kisses, it often betrays; it is a silken Halter: the Pleasures of
the World like Opium, cast men into the sleep of Security. Lysimachus sold his
Crown for a draught of Water; so many part with Heaven for the World. It is an
ensnaring World; the King of Armenia was sent Prisoner to Queen Cleopatra in
Golden Fetters. Too many are inslaved with the worlds golden Fetters; the World
bewitched Demas, 2 Timothy 4.10. One of Christ's own Apostles was caught with a
silver Bait. It Is hard to drink the Wine of Prosperity and not be giddy. Thus
the World through our innate Corruption is Evil, as it is a Snare, 1 Timothy 6.9.
They that will be rich, fall into Temptation and a Snare. If an Angel were to
live here, there were no danger of the Worlds insnaring him, because he has no
Principle within to receive the Temptation: but we have a Corrupt Principle
that suits with the Temptation, and that makes us always in Danger.

3. It is an evil World, as it is a discouraging World. It casts Scorn and
Reproach upon them who live virtuously; what, you will be holier than others?
Wiser than your Ancestors? The World deals with the Professors of Religion, as
Sanballat did with the Jews when they were building, Nehem. 4.1. He mocked the
Jews, and said, What do th^se feeble Jews, will they Fortify themselves? will
they revive the Stones out of the heaps of Rubbish that are burnt? So the
wicked World casts out Squibs of Reproach at the godly, what will ye build for
Heaven? What needs all this Cost? What Profit is it to serve the Almighty? Thus
the World would pluck off our Chariot-Wheels when we are driving toward
Heaven: they are called Cruel Mockings, Heb. 11.36. It requires a great measure
of Sanctity to with-stand the Discouragements of the World, to dance among
Serpents, to laugh at Reproaches, and bind them as a Crown about our Head.

4. It is an evil World, as it is a deadning World. It dulls and deadneth the
Affections to Heavenly Objects. The World cools Holy Motions, like a Damp in a
silver Mine which puts out the Light; Earthly things choke the Seed of the
Word. A man entangled in the World, is so taken up about secular Concerns, that
he can no more mind the things above, than the earth can ascend, or the
Elephant fly in the Air. And, even such as have Grace in them; yet, when their
Affections are belimed with the Earth, they find themselves much indisposed to
Meditation and Prayer, it is like swimming with a Stone about the Neck.

5. It Is an evil World, as it is a maligning World. It does disgust and hate
the people of God, John 15.19. Because ye are not of the World, therefore the
World hates you. Hatred is (...), (as Aristotle says) against the whole Kind.
Hamans hatred was against the Seed of the whole Jews. When you can find a
Serpent without a Sting, or a Leopard without Spots, then you may expect to
find a wicked World without Hatred. the White that is shot at is Piety, Psalm.
38.20. They are mine Adversaries, because I follow the thing that Good is. The
World pretends to hate the Godly for something else, but the ground of the
Quarrel is Holiness. The Worlds Hatred is Implacable; Anger may be reconciled,
Hatred cannot. You may as well reconcile Heaven and Hell as the two Seeds. If
the World hated Christ, no wonder it hates us, John 15.18. The World hated me
before it hated you Why should any hate Christ? This Blessed Dove had no Gall,
this Rose of Sharon did send forth a most sweet Perfume; but this shows the
worlds Baseness, it is a Christ-hating and a Saint-eating World. Had not we
need pray, Deliver us from this evil World?

6. It is an evil World, as it is a Deceitful World.

First. There is Deceit in dealing, Hos. 12.7. He is a Merchant, the Balances
of Deceit are in his Hand. The Hebrew word Rimmah in Pyhil, signifies both to
deceive and to oppress. He who dares use Deceit will not spare to oppress.

Secondly, There is Deceit in Friendship, Prove. 20.6. But a faithful Man who
can find? -- Trita frequensque via est per amici fallere Nomen. -- Some use too
much Courtship in Friendship: they are like Trumpets which make a great noise,
but within they are hollow. Some can flatter and hate, commend and censure. Mel
in Ore, Fell in Cord. Dissembled Love is worse than Hatred.

Thirdly, There is Deceit in Riches, Mat. 13.22. (...), The Deceitfulness of
Riches. The World makes us believe it will satisfy our Desires, and it does
but increase them; it makes us believe it will stay with us, and it takes
wings, Prove. 23.5.

7. It is an Evil World, as it is a disquieting World. It Is full of Trouble,
John 16.33. The World is like a Bee-hive, when we have tasted a little Honey, we
have been stung with a thousand Bees. St. Basil was of opinion, that before the
Fall, the Rose did grow without prickles; but now, every sweet flower of our
Life has its prickles. There are many things cause disquiet; loss of Friends,
Lawsuits, Crosses in Estate: Relations are not without their Troubles. Some
are troubled that they want Children, others troubled that they have Children;
the World is a vexing Vanity. If a man be poor, he is despised by the Rich; if
he be rich, he is envied by the poor. If we do not find it an insnaring World,
we shall find it an afflicting World; it has more in it to mean us than tempt
us. The World is a Sea, where we are tossed upon the surging Waves of Sorrow,
and often in danger of Shipwreck; the World is a Wilderderness, full of fiery
Serpents. [What storms of Persecution are raised against the Righteous? 2 Timothy
3.12.] The wicked are Briars, Micah 7.4. where Christ's sheep lose some of
their Golden Fleece. Then had not we need pray, Lord deliver us from being hurt
by this Evil World? Why should we Love the World? Though we are commanded to love
our Enemies, yet this Enemy we must not love, 1 John 2.15. Love not the World.

I have been all this while opening the first Sense of this Petition, Liber a
nos a malo, Deliver us from Evil; we pray to be delivered from Sin in general,
and to be delivered from Evil under this threefold Notion, from the Evil of
our Heart, from the Evil of Satan, from the Evil of the World; ere I leave
this, let me insert a Caution.

Caution. Not that our abstaining from, or forbearing the external Acts of Sin
is sufficient to entitle us to Salvation; but when we pray, Deliver us from
Evil, there is more employed in it* namely, that we make a progress in Holiness.
Being divorced from sin is not enough, unless we are espoused to Virtue;
therefore in Scripture, these two are joined, Psalm. 34.14. Depart from Evil,
and do Good. Rom 12.9. And Isa. 1.16. Cease to do Evil Learn to do well. 2 Cor.
7.1. Let us cleanse our selves from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit,
perfecting Holiness. Leaving sin is not enough, unless we embrace
Righteousness. Virtutis est magis honesta agere quam non Turpia, as it is in
the Body, it is not enough that the Disease be stopped, but it must grow in
health. So it is in the Soul; it is not enough Acts of sin be forborne, (which
is the stopping a Disease) but it must be healthy, that is, grow in Holiness.

Use, Which reproves those who labor only to suppress the Outward Acts of sin,
but do not press on to Holiness. They cease from doing Evil, but do not learn
to do well; their Religion lies only in Negatives. They glory in this, that
they are given to no Vice, none can charge them with any foul Miscarriages,
Luke 18.11. God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are; Extortioners,
Unjust, Adulterers. This is not enough; you must advance a step further in
solid Piety. It is not enough, that a field be not sown with Tares or Hemlock;
but it must be sown with good Seed. Consider two things.

1. If this be the best Certificate you have to show, that you are not guilty
of gross Sins, God makes no Account of you. A piece of Brass though it be not so
bad as Clay, yet not being so good as Silver, it will not pass for current
Coin. So though you are not grossly profane, yet not being of the right Metal,
wanting the stamp of Holiness, you will never pass current in Heaven.

2. A Man may abstain from Evil, yet he may go to Hell for not doing good, Mat
3.10. Every Tree that brings not forth good Fruit, is hewn down and cast into
the fire. Why were the foolish Virgins shut out? They had done no hurt, they
had not broke their Lamps; Yea but their fault was, there was no goodness in
them, they had no Oil in their Lamps. Oh! therefore let us not content our
selves in being free from gross Acts of Sin, but let us launch forth further in
Holiness. Let us cleanse our selves from all Pollution perfecting Holiness.

Secondly, Deliver us from Evil; that is, from Temporal Evil; we pray that God
will either prevent temporal Evils, or deliver us out of them.

1. We pray that God will prevent Temporal Evils; That he will be our Screen to
stand between us and Danger, Psalm. 7.1. Save me from them that persecute me. We
may lawfully pray against the Plots of the wicked, that they may prove
abortive. That though they have a design upon us, they may not have their desire
upon us, Psalm. 141.9. Keep me from the snare which they have laid for me.

2. We pray, that God will deliver us out of Temporal Evils. That he will
remove his Judgments from us, whether Famine, Sword, Pestilence, Psalm. 39.10.
Remove thy Stroke away from me. Yet with this Caution.

Caution. We may pray to be delivered from Temporal Evils, only so far as God
sees it good for us. We may pray to be delivered from the Evil of Sin
absolutely, but we must pray to be delivered from Temporal Evils conditionally,
so far as God sees it fitting for us, and may stand with his Glory.

Use. In all the Troubles that lie upon us, let us look up to God for Ease and
Succor; Deliver us from Evil, Isa. 8.19. Should not a people seek unto their
God? To blame then are the Papists, who knock at the wrong door. When they are
in any Trouble, they pray to the Saints to deliver them. When they are in
danger of Shipwreck, they pray to St. Nicholas; when they are in the fit of a
Fever, they pray to St. Petronelle; when they are in Travel, they pray to St.
Margaret. How unlawful it is to invocate Saints in Prayer, I will prove from
one Scripture, Romans 10.14. How then shall they call on him, in whom they have
not believed? We may pray to none but such as we may believe in, but we ought
not to believe in any Saint, therefore we may not pray to him. The Papists have
in their Ladies Psalter directed their Prayers for Deliverance to the Virgin
Mary. Deliver me O Lady, Benedicta Domina, in manibus tuis reposita est nostra
salus; O thou blessed Lady, in thy hands our Salvation is laid up. But Abraham
is ignorant of us, Isa. 63.16. The Saints and Virgin Mary are ignorant of us.

To pray to Saints is Idolatry advanced to Blasphemy. Our Savior has taught
us better, in all our Distresses to pray to God for a Cure, Deliver us from
Evil. -- He only knows what our Troubles are, and can give us help from
Trouble; he only that laid the Burden on can take it off. David went to God,
Psalm. 25.17. O bring thou me out of my Distresses. God can with a word heal,
Psalm. 107.20. He sent forth his Word and healed them. He delivered the three
Children out of the fiery Furnace, Joseph out of Prison, Daniel out of the
Lions Den. This proves him to be God, because none can deliver as he does, Dan.
3.29. There is no other God that can deliver after this sort. Let us then in
all our Straits and Exigencies seek to God, and say, Deliver us from Evil.

An Addition of some Sermons Preached by the Reverend Mr. Tho. Watson, formerly
Minister of St. Stephen's Walbrook.
Of Wisdom and Innocence.
Matthew. 10.16. Be ye therefore wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves.


THE Apostle says, All Scripture is of Divine inspiration, 2 Timothy 3.16. God's
Word is compared to a Lamp, for its enlightening quality, Psalm. 119.105. and to
Silver refined, for its enriching quality, Psalm. 12.6. Among other parts of
Sacred Writ, this in the Text, is not the least; Be ye wise as Serpents, and
innocent as Doves. This is the Speech of our Blessed Savior. His Lips were a
Tree of Life which fed many. His Works were Miracles, his Words were Oracles,
and deserve to be engraven upon our hearts, as with the point of a Diamond.

This is a golden Sentence; Be ye wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves. Our
Lord Jesus, in this Chapter,

First, Gives his Apostles their Commission.

Secondly, Foretells their Danger.

Thirdly, Gives them several Instructions.

I. Christ gives his Apostles their Commission. Before they went abroad to
preach, Christ ordains them, verse. 5. These Twelve Jesus sent forth. Those who
exercise in the Ministerial Function, must have a Lawful Call. Hebr. 5.4. No
Man takes this Honor to himself, but he who is called of God. Christ gave not
only the Apostles and Prophets a Call to their Office, (who were extraordinary
Ministers;) but even Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11.

Quest. But if one have Gifts, is not this sufficient to the Ministerial Office?

Answ. No: As Grace is not sufficient to make a Minister, so neither Gifts;
therefore it is observable, that the Scripture puts a difference between
Gifting and Sending. Romans 10.15. How shall they Preach, unless they be Sent? If
Gifts were enough to constitute a Minister, the Apostle should have said, How
shall they Preach unless they be Gifted? But he says, unless they be Sent:
Which denotes a lawful Call, or Investiture into the Office. The Attorney that
pleads at the Bar may have as good Gifts as the Judge that sits upon the
Bench; but he must have a lawful Commission before he sit as Judge. If it be
thus in Matters Civil, then much more in Church Matters, which are of an higher
Concern. Those therefore who usurp the Work of the Ministry without being
solemnly set apart for it, discover more Pride than Zeal; and they can expect
no Blessing. Ier. 23.32. I sent them not, nor commanded them, therefore they
shall not profit this People, says the Lord. So much for the First; the
Apostles Commission they received: These Twelve Jesus sent forth.

II. Christ foretells their Danger, ver. 16. Behold I send you forth as Sheep
in the midst of Wolves. The Apostles were going about a glorious Work, but an
hazardous Work; they would meet with Enemies fierce and savage, like Wolves. As
all that will live godly in Christ, shall meet with Sufferings; so commonly
Christ's Ambassadors encounter the deepest Trials. Most of the Apostles died by
the hands of Tyrants. Peter was crucified with his head downwards. Luke the
Evangelist was executed on an Olive Tree. John was cast by Domitian into a
Vessel of scalding Oil. Maximinus the Emperor (as Eusebius relates) gave charge
to his Officers to put none to death, but (...); the Governors and Pastors of
the Church. The Ministers are Christ's Antesignani, his Ensign-bearers to carry
his Colors; therefore they are most shot at: They hold forth his Truth: Phil.
1.17. I am set for the defense of the Gospel. The Greek Word (...), alludes to
a Soldier that is set in the Forefront of the Battle, and has all the Bullets
flying about his Ears. The Minister's Work is to part between Men and their
Sins; and this causes opposition. When Paul preached against Diana, all the
City was in an uproar, Acts 19. This may stir up Prayer for Christ's Ministers,
that they may be able to withstand the Assaults of the Enemy, 2 These. 3.2.

III. Christ gives the Apostles their Instructions; whereof this was one in the
Text; Be ye wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves. 1. The Exhortation: Be ye
wise. 2. The Simile, as Serpents. 3. The Qualification of this Wisdom; a Wisdom
mixed with Innocence; Harmless as Doves.

This Union of the Dove and the Serpent, is hard to find. Mat. 24.45. Who then
is a wise and faithful Servant? On which Place, says St. Chrysostom, It is an
hard matter to find one faithful and wise. Faithful, there is the Dove; Wise,
there is the Serpent. It Is hard to find both: If one would seek for a faithful
Man, questionless he may find many; if for a wise Man, he may find many; but if
he seek for one both wise and faithful, this is rara avis, hard to find: yet,
it is possible, though not common. Moses, a man learned in all the Wisdom of
the Egyptians, Acts 7.22. There was the Wisdom of the Serpent: And the meekest
man alive, Numb. 12.3. Now the Man Moses was very meek above all the men upon
the face of the Earth; there was the Innocence of the Dove. Daniel was an
excellent person, Dan. 5.14. Excellent Wisdom is found in thee; there was the
Prudence of the Serpent: And, Dan. 6.4. The Presidents and Princes ^ought to
find occasion against Daniel; but they could find no occasion or fault: Behold
here the innocence of the Dove. Look on St. Paul, Acts 23.6. When Paul
perceived that the one part were Sadduces, and the other Pharisees, he cried
out, I am a Pharisee; By which Speech Paul got all the Pharisees on his side:
Here was the Wisdom of the Serpent. And, ver. 1. I have lived in all good
Conscience before God until this day: Here was the innocence of the Dove. How
amiable is this, the Union of the Dove and the Serpent? The Scripture joins
these two together, Meekness of Wisdom, Jam. 3.13. Wisdom, there is the
Serpent; Meekness, there is the Dove. This beautifies a Christian, when he has
the Serpen^'s Eye in the Dove's Head. We must have Innocence with our Wisdom,
else our Wisdom is but Craftiness; and we must have Wisdom with our Innocence,
else our Innocence is but Weakness. We must have the Innocence of the Dove,
that we may not circumvent others; and we must have the Wisdom of the Serpent,
that others may not circumvent us. We must have the Innocence of the Dove, that
we may not betray the Truth; and the Wisdom of the Serpent, that we may not
betray our selves. In short, Religion without Policy, is too weak to be safe:
Policy without Religion, is too subtle to be good. When Wisdom and Innocence,
like Castor and Pollux, appear together, they presage the Soul's Happiness.

Doct. 3. That Christians must be both wise and innocent. I begin with the
first, Wise: Be ye wise as Serpents.

1. I shall speak concerning Wisdom in general. Solomon says, Wisdom is the
principal thing, Prove. 4.7. It Is better than Riches, Prove. 31.14. Happy is the
Man that finds Wisdom* for the Merchandise of it is better than the
Merchandise of Silver. If the Mountains were Pearl, if every sand of the Sea
were a Diamond, it were not comparable to Wisdom. Without Wisdom a person is
like a Ship without a Pilot, in danger to split upon Rocks. Job sets forth the
Encomium and Praise of Wisdom, Job. 28.13, 18. The Price of Wisdom is above
Rubies. The Ruby is a precious Stone, transparent, of a red fiery color. It is
reported of one of the Kings of India, that he wore a Ruby of that bigness and
splendour, that he might be seen by it in the dark: But Wisdom cast^ a more
sparkling color than the Ruby; it makes us shine as Angels. No Chain of Pearl
you wear, does so adorn you as Wisdom. Wisdom consists chiefly in three things.

1. Knowl^dge to discern. 2. Skill to judge. 3. Activity to prosecute.
1. Knowledge to discern wherein Happiness lies.

2. Skill to judge what will be the fittest Means to conduce to it.

3. Activity to prosecute those things which will certainly accomplish that
End. So much for Wisdom in general.

More particularly: Wisdom is variously distinguished. It Is either Natural, or
Moral, or Theological.

1. A Natural Wisdom: Which is seen in finding out the Arcana Naturae, the
Secrets of Nature. Aristotle was by some of the Ancients called an Eagle fallen
from the Clouds, because he was of such raised Intellectuals, and had so
profound an insight into the Causes of Things. This Natural Wisdom is adorning;
but it is not sufficient to Salvation. St. Hierom brings in Aristotle with his
Syllogisms, and Tully with his Rhetoric, crying out in Hell.

2. A Moral Wisdom: Which consists in two Things; Malum respuendo, Bonum
elegendo: Moral Wisdom lies in the rejection of those things which are
prejudicial, and the election of those things which are beneficial. This is
called PRVDENCE. Knowledge without Prudence may do hurt: Many a man's Wit has
undone him for want of Wisdom.

3. A Theological, or Sacred Wisdom: which is our knowing of God: who is the
supreme and sovereign Good. Greece was counted the Eye of the World, for
Wisdom, and Athens the Eye of Greece; but neither of them knew God. Acts 17.23.
I found an Altar with this Inscription, (...); To the unknown God. To know God,
in whom is both Verum and Bonum, Truth and Goodness, is the Masterpiece of
Wisdom. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. And thou Solomon my Son, know thou the God of thy
Father. And this knowledge of God is through Christ. Christ is the Glass in
which the Face of God is seen, Col. 1.15. And then we know God aright, when we
know him not only with a knowledge of Speculation, but Appropriation. Psalm.
48.14. This God is OUR God. This knowledge of God is the most sublime Wisdom;
therefore it is called (...); Wisdom from above, Jam. 3.17.

But to come nearer to the Text, and speak of the Wisdom of the Serpent: Be ye
wise as Serpents.

Quest. But must we in every thing be like the Serpent?

Answ. No. Our Savior meant not that in every thing we should imitate the
Serpent. I shall show you, 1. Wherein we should not be like the Serpent. 2.
Wherein we should be like the Serpent.


I. Wherein we should not be like the Serpent.

1. The Serpent eats Dust. Isa. 65.25. Dust shall be the Serpent's Meat: It was
a Curse upon the Serpent. Thus we should not be like the Serpent, to feed
immoderately on earthly Things. It is absurd for him that has an heaven-born
Soul capable of Communion with God and Angels, to eat greedily the Serpent's
Meat: A Christian has better Food to feed on; the heavenly Manna, the precious
Promises, the Body and Blood of Christ. It Is counted a Miracle to find a
Diamond in a Gold-Mine; and it is as great a Miracle to find Christ, the Pearl
of Price, in an earthly heart. The Lapwing wears a little Coronet on its head,
yet feeds on dung. To have a Crown of Profession on the head, yet feed
inordinately on these dunghil-Comforts, is unworthy of a Christian. What a poor
contemptible thing is the World? It cannot fill the Heart: If Satan should take
a Christian up to the top of the Pinnacle, and show him all the Kingdoms and
Glory of the World, what could he show him, but a (...), a Show, a pleasant
Delusion? There is a lawful Use God allows of these outward things; but the Sin
is in the Excess. The Be may suck a little Honey from the Leaf; but put it in
a Barrel of Honey, and it is drowned. The wicked are thus characterized, Ephesians.
3.19. They mind earthly things. They are like Saul, hid among the Stuff. We
should be as Eagles flying aloft toward Heaven, not as Serpents, creeping on
the Earth, and licking the Dust.

2. The Serpent is deceitful. The Serpent uses many Shifts, and glides so
cunningly, that we cannot trace him. This was one of those four things which
wise Agur could not find out, the way of a Serpent upon a Rock, Prove. 30.19.
It Is a deceitful Creature: We should not in this sense be like the Serpent, for
deceitfulness. Naturally we too much resemble the Serpent for Fraud and
Collusion* Ier. 17.9. The Heart is deceitful above all things.

1. Deceit toward Man: 1. To dissemble Friendship; to cover Malice with
pretenses of Love; to commend and censure; to flatter and hate; a Iudas-Kiss,
and a Ioab's Sword; Mel in ore, Fell in cord. 2. To dissemble Honesty; to
pretend just dealing, yet use false Weights.

2. Deceit toward God. To draw nigh to God with the Lips, and the Heart is far
from him; to serve God, and seek ourselves; to pretend to love God, and yet be
in league with Sin; we should not in this sense be like the Serpent, deceitful,
and given to Sh^fts. O be upright! Be what you seem to be: God loves Plainness
of Heart, Psalm. 51.6. The plainer the Diamond is, the more it sparkles: The
plainer the Heart is, the more it sparkles in God's Eye. What a Commendation
did Christ give Nathanael, Ioh. 1.47. Behold an Israelite indeed in whom there
is no Guile.

3. The Serpent casts the Coat, but another new Coat comes in the room; in this
we should not be like the Serpent, to cast the Coat, to cast off one Sin, and
another Sin as bad come in the room. The Drunkard leaves his Drunkenness,
because it impairs his Health, his Credit, his Purse, and falls to the Sin of
Cozenage: The Prodigal leaves his Prodigality, and turns Usurer: This is as if
one Disease should leave a Man, and he should fall into another as bad. His
Ague leaves him, and he falls into a Consumption. O be not like the Serpent,
that casts one Coat and another comes. This is like him in the Gospel, that had
one Devil go out of him, and seven worse Spirits came in the Room, Matthew. 12.45.

4. The Serpent is a Venomous Creature, it is full of Poison, Deuteronomy. 32.24. In
this be not like the Serpent. It Is said of Wicked Men, their Poison is like the
Poison of a Serpent, Psalm. 58.4. What is this Poison? it is the Poison of
Malice: Malice is the Devil's Picture. Lust makes Men brutish, and Malice makes
them Devilish: (...), Chrysostom. Malice carries in it its own punishment: A
malicious Man to hurt another will injure himself. Quintillian speaks of one
who had a a Garden of Flowers, and he poisoned his Flowers, that his Neighbors
Bees sucking from them might be poisoned and die. Oh be not venomous like the
Serpent. Malice is Mental Murder, you may kill a Man and never touch him. 1
Ioh. 3.15. Whosoever hates his Brother is a Murderer. Malice spoils all your
good Duties; the malicious Man defiles his Prayers, poisons the Sacramental
Cup; he eats and drinks his own Damnation. I have read of one who lived in
Malice, and being asked, how he could say the Lords Prayer? He answered, I
leave out those Words, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. But St.
Austin brings in God replying thus to him, because thou do not say my Prayer,
therefore I will not hear Thine. The malicious Man is not like to enjoy either
Earth or Heaven; not the Earth, for the Meek shall inherit the Earth, Matthew.
5.4. Nor is he like to enjoy Heaven, for God will beautify the Meek with
Salvation, Psalm. 149.4. So that the malicious Man is cut off both from Earth
and Heaven.

5. The Serpent is given to Hissing: So it is said of the Basilisk. In this be
not like the Serpent, to hiss out Reproaches and Invectives against the Saints
and People of God. Thy are the Seed of the Serpent that hiss at Godliness. The
Lord will one Day reckon with Men for all their hard Speeches, Jude 15. Lucian
was such an one who did hiss out and scoff against Religion, and as a just
Judgment of God, he was afterward torn in pieces by Dogs.

6. The Serpent Stops her Ear. It is an obstinate Deafness. Psalm. 58.4. They
are as the Deaf Adder which stops her Ear. In this be not like the Serpent,
obstinately to stop your Ears to the Voice of God's Word. While God calls you
to repent of Sin, be not as the Basilisk, to stop your Ear, Zach. 7.11. They
refused to hearken, and stopped their Ears, that they might not hear: the Word
denounces threatenings against Sin; but many instead of being like the
Publican, smiting on their Breast, they are as Deaf Adders stopping their Ears:
If you shut your Ear against God's Word, take heed God does not shut Heaven
against you: If God cries to you to repent, and you will not hear; when you cry
for Mercy, God will not hear. Zach. 7.13. As he cried and they would not hear,
so they cried and I would not hear, says the Lord of Hosts.

7. The Serpent casts her Coat, but keeps her Sting: In this sense be not like
the Serpent, to cast off the outward Acts of Sin, and keep the Love of Sin. He
whose Heart is in Love with any Sin, is an Hypocrite. 1. A Man may forbear Sin,
yet retain the Love of it: He may forbear the act of gross Sin, Formidine
Poenae, for fear of Hell; as a Man may forbear a Dish he loves for fear it
should bring his Disease upon him; the Stone or Gout. 2. A Man may forsake Sin,
yet keep the Love of Sin; he may forsake Sin, either out of Policy or
Necessity. 1. Policy, Vice will impair his Health, eclipse his Credit;
therefore out of Policy he will forsake it: Or, 2. Necessity. Perhaps he can
follow the Trade of Sin no longer; the Adulterer is grown old, the Prodigal
poor; either the Purse fails, or the Strength. Thus a Man may refrain the Act
of Sin, yet retain the Love of Sin: This is like the Serpent, which casts her
Coat, but keeps her Sting. Oh! take heed of this; herein be not like the
Serpent; remember that saying of Hierom, Gravius est peccatum diligere quam
perpetrare: It Is worse to love Sin than to commit it: A Man may commit Sin
through a Tentation, or out of Ignorance, and when he knows it to be a Sin he
is sorry for it; but he that loves Sin, his Will is in the Sin, and that
aggravates it, and is like the Dye which makes the Wool of a Crimson Color.

8. Serpents are chased away with sweet perfumes, the perfume of Hartshorn, or
the sweet odor of the Styrax drives the Serpent away. In this be not like the
Serpent, to be driven away with the sweet perfumes of Holiness. Carnal Hearts
are for Things only which delight the Senses, they will discourse of News or
Traffic; here they are in their Element; but let a Man bring with him the
sweet perfume of Religious discourse, let him talk of Christ, or living by
Faith, this spiritual perfume drives them away: Oh, be not in this like the
Serpent! How do you think to live with the Saints in Heaven, that cannot endure
their Company here? You hate the sweet savor of their Ointments, the fragrant
perfume of their Graces?

9. The Serpent (as is noted of the Stellio, a kind of Serpent) he does no
sooner cast his skin but he eats it up again. In this be not like the Serpent,
to forsake Sin and then take it up again. 2 Pet. 2.22. It is happened according
to the Proverb, the Dog is returned to his own Vomit again; such were Demas and
Julian. Many after a Divorce, espouse their Sins again; as if one's Ague should
leave him a while, and then come again: The Devil seemed to be cast out, but
comes the second Time, and the end of that Man is worse than his beginning,
Luke 11.24. because his Sin is greater; he sins knowingly and wilfully, and his
Damnation will be greater.

10. Serpents are great Lovers of Wine. Pliny, who writes of Natural History,
says, if Serpents come where Wine is, they drink insatiably: In this be not
like the Serpent; though the Scripture allows the use of Wine, 1 Timothy 5.23. yet
it forbids the excess, Ephesians. 5.18. Be not drunk with Wine, wherein is excess; be
not like the Serpents in this, Lovers of Wine. Because this Sin of Drunkenness
does so abound in this Age, I shall enlarge something more on this Head. It Is
said of the Old World, They eat, they drank, till the Flood came, Luke 17.27.
Drinking is not a Sin; but the meaning is, they drank to intemperance, they
disordered themselves with Drink, and God let them have Liquor enough; first
they were drowned in Wine, and then in Water.

There is no Sin which does more deface God's Image than Drunkenness, it
disguiseth a Person, and does even unman him; Drunkenness makes him have the
Throat of a Fish, the Belly of a Swine, and the Head of an Ass; Drunkenness is
the Shame of Nature, the Extinguisher of Reason, the Shipwreck of Chastity, and
the Murder of Conscience; Drunkenness is hurtful for the Body: The Cup kills
more than the Cannon; it causes Dropsies, Catarrhs, Apoplexies; Drunkenness
fills the Eyes with Fire and the Legs with Water, and turns the Body into an
Hospital; but the greatest hurt is that it does to the Soul. Excess of Wine
breeds the Worm of Conscience. The Drunkard is seldom reclaimed by repentance;
and the ground of it is, partly, because by this Sin the Senses are so
enchanted, Reason so impaired, and Lust so inflamed; and, partly, it is
judicial, the Drunkard being so besotted with this Sin, God says of him as of
Ephraim, Hos. 4.17. Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone; so this Man is
joined to his Cups, let him alone, let him drown himself in Liquor till he
scorch himself in Fire. How many Woes has God pronounced against this Sin,
Isa. 28.1. Woe to the Drunkards of Ephraim! Joel 1.5. Howl ye Drinkers of Wine!
Drunkenness excludes a Person from Heaven. 1 Cor. 6.10. Drunkards shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God: A Man cannot go to Heaven reeling. King Solomon
makes an oration full of Invectives against this Sin, Prove. 23.29. Who has
Woe? Who has Contentions? Who has Babbling? Who has redness of Eyes? they
that tarry long at the Wine. Who has Contentions? Drink when abused breeds
Quarrels, it causes Duels. Who has Babbling? When one is in Drink, his Tongue
runs, he will reveal any Secrets of his Friend. Who has redness of Eyes?
Redness of Eyes comes sometimes from Weeping, but too often from drinking; And
what is the Issue? verse 32. at last the Wine bites like a Serpent, and
stingeth like an Adder. The Wine smiles in the Glass, but stings in the
Conscience. Drunkenness is a Sin against all the Ten Commandments.

1. Drunkenness casts off the true God: Hos. 4.11. Wine takes away the Heart:
It takes the Heart off from God.

2. It makes the Belly a God, Phil. 3.19. To this the Drunkard pours
Drink Offerings; there is a breach of the Second Commandment.

3. The Drunkard in his Cups takes God's Name in Vain by his Oaths.

4. The Drunkard makes no difference of Days; he is seldom sober on a Sabbath;
he on that Day worships Bacchus.

5. The Drunkard Honors neither his Natural Father, nor the Magistrate his
Civil Father; he will be intemperate, though the Laws of the Land forbid it.

6. The Drunkard commits Murder. Alexander killed his Friend Clitus when he was
Drunk, for whom he would have given half his Kingdom when he was Sober.

7. The Drunkard's Wine provokes Lust. Austin calls Wine, Fomentum libidinis,
the Inflamer of Lust. Nunquam ego ebrium castum putavi, I never did believe a
drunken Man to be chaste, says St. Hierom.

8. The Drunkard is a Thief; he spends that Money upon his drunken Lust, which
should have been given to charitable Uses; so he robs the Poor.

9. The Drunkard is a Slanderer; he cares not, when he is on the Ale Bench, how
he does defame and belie others; when he has taken his full Cups, he is now
fit to take a false Oath.

10. The Drunkard Sins against the Tenth Commandment; for he Covets to get
another's Estate, by Circumvention and Extortion, that he may be the better
able to follow his drunken Trade. Thus he Sins against all the Ten Commandments.

If this Sin of Drunkenness be not reformed, I pray God the Sword be not made
Drunk with Blood. And whereas some will go to shift off this Sin from
themselves that they are no Drunkards, because they have not drunk away their
Reason and Senses; they are not so far gone in drink that they cannot go: He is
a Drunkard in the Scripture-sence, who is mighty to drink Wine, Isa. 5.22. He
is a Drunkard (says Solomon) that tarries long at the Wine, Prove. 23.30. He
who sits at it from Morning to Night, that drinks away his precious Time,
though he does not drink away his Reason, he is a Drunkard that drinks more
than does him good, and that though he be not himself drunk, yet he makes
another drunk: Hab. 2.15. Woe to him that gives his Neighbor drink, that
put thy Bottle to him and make him drunk. Oh! I beseech you be not in
this like the Serpent, Lovers of Wine. This I fear is one cause why the Word
Preached does so little good on many in this City, they drink away Sermons,
they do as the hunted Deer when it is wounded, runs to the Water and drinks; so
when they have been at a Sermon, and the Arrow of Reproof has wounded their
Conscience, they run presently and drink away those Convictions; they steep the
Sermon in Wine. The Tavern-Bell does more hurt, than the Sermon Bell does good.
Thus you have seen wherein we should not be like Serpents.

II. Wherein we should be like the Serpent, and that is in Prudence and Wisdom:
Be ye Wise as Serpents. The Serpent is a most prudent Creature, therefore the
Devil made use of the Serpent to deceive our First Parents, because it was such
a subtle Creature: Genesis 3.1. The Serpent was more subtle than any Beast of
the Field. There is a Natural Wisdom and Subtilty in every part of the Serpent,
and we should labor to imitate them, and be Wise as Serpents.

First, The Serpent has a subtilty in his Eye, he has a singular sharpness of
sight; therefore among the Gracians, (...), a Serpent's Eye, was a Proverbial
Speech for one of a quick Understanding; in this we should be like the Serpent.
Get the Serpent's Eye, have a quick in-sight into the Mysteries of the
Christian Religion. Knowledge is the Beauty and Ornament of a Christian, Prove.
14.18. The Prudent are Crowned with Knowledge. Get the Serpent's Eye; be
divinely illuminated. Faith without Knowledge is Presumption: Zeal without
Knowledge is Passion: Prove. 19.2. without Knowledge the Mind is not good: For
one to say he has a good Heart who has no Knowledge, is as if one should say
he has a good Eye when he has no sight; in this be like the Serpent of a
quick Understanding.

Secondly, The Serpent has a Prudence and Subtilty in his Ear; the Serpent
will not be deluded with the Voice of the Charmer, but stops its Ear: In this
we must be Wise as Serpents, stop our Ears to false Teachers, who are the
Devil's Charmers.

1. We must stop our Ears to Arminian Teachers, who place the chief Power in
the Will, as if that were the Helm that turns about the Soul in Conversion. 1
Cor. 4.7. Who makes thee to differ from another? Ego me ipsum discerno, said
Grevinchovius, I have made my self to differ. Be as the Serpent, stop your Ears
to such Doctrine.

2. We must stop our Ears to Socinian Teachers, who raze the Foundation of all
Religion, and deny Christ's Divinity. This the Apostle calls a damnable
Heresy, 2 Pet. 2.

3. We must stop our Ears to Popish Teachers, who teach Merit, Indulgencies,
Transubstantiation, who teach that the Pope is the Head of the Church. Christ
is called the Head of the Church, Ephesians. 5.23. For the Pope to be Head is to make
the Church Monstrous, to have two Heads. Popish Teachers teach the People
Nonsense and Blasphemy; they cause the People to Pray without Understanding, to
Obey without Reason, to Believe without Sense; it is a damnable Religion;
therefore worshipping the Beast, and drinking the Cup of God's Indignation are
put together, Rev. 14.9. Oh! in this be Wise as Serpents, stop your Ear to the
charming of false Teachers. God has given his People this Wisdom to stop their
Ears to Heretics: Ioh. 10.5. A Stranger will they not follow, but flee from
him.

3. The Serpent has a chief care to defend his Head; a blow there is deadly;
so in this we should be Wise as Serpents; our chief care should be to defend
our head from Error. The Plague in the Head is worst. Loose Principles breed
loose Practices. If the Head be tainted with Erroneous Opinions, That Believers
are free a Lege Morali, That there is no Resurrection, That we may do Evil that
Good may come of it; What Sin will not this lead to, or keep your Head? Error
is a Spiritual Gangrene, 2 Timothy 2.17. which spreads, and if not presently
cured, is Mortal. Heresies destroy the Doctrine of Faith, they rend the Mantle
of the Churches Peace, and eat out the Heart of Religion. The Gnostics, as
Epiphanius observes, did not only pervert the Judgments of their Proselytes,
but brought them at last to Corporeal Uncleanness. Error damns as well as Vice.
Vice is like killing with a Pistol, and Error like killing with Poison. O be
wise as Serpents, defend your Head. Be ye Wise as Serpents, and harmless as
Doves.

Our Savior Christ here commends to us the Wisdom of the Serpent, and the
Innocence of the Dove. The Elect are called wise Virgins, Mat. 25.4. Virgins,
there is the Dove: Wise, there is the Serpent. We must have Innocence with our
Wisdom, else our Wisdom is but Craftiness; and we must have Wisdom with our
Innocence, else our Innocence is but Weakness. We must have the Innocence of
the Dove, that we may not circumvent others; and we must have the Wisdom of the
Serpent, that others may not circumvent us.

Doctr. Christians must be both wise and innocent. This Union of the Dove and
the Serpent, is Hard to find, but, it is possible: Moses was learned in all the
Wisdom of the Egyptians, Acts 7.22. There was the Prudence of the Serpent; and
he was meek above all the Men upon the face of the Earth, Numb. 12.3. There was
the Innocence of the Dove. But the most famous instance of Wisdom and
Innocence, was in our Savior; When the Jews came to him with an insnaring
Question, Mark 12.14. Is it lawful to give Tribute to Caesar, or not? Christ
answers wisely, v. 17. Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to
God the things that are God's. Deny not Caesar his Civil Right, nor God his
Religious Worship: Let your Loyalty be mixed with Piety; here he showed the
Wisdom of the Serpent. And would you see Christ's Innocence? 1 Pet. 2.22. There
was no guile found in his mouth; who when he was reviled, reviled not again. He
opened his Mouth in praying for his Enemies, but not in reviling them. Behold
here the Innocence of the Dove.

Two Things I am to speak of; the Serpent, and the Dove.

I. The Serpent.

Quest. Wherein should we be like the Serpent?

Answ. In Prudence and Sagacity; Be ye wise as Serpents. The Serpent is the
most prudent Creature; therefore the Devil made use of the Serpent to deceive
our first Parents, Genesis 3.1. The Serpent was more subtle than any Beast of the
Field. There Is a natural Wisdom and Subtilty in every part of the Serpent; and
herein we should endeavor to imitate him. Be wise as Serpents.

1. The Serpent has a subtilty in his Eye; he has a singular sharpness of
sight: therefore among the Grecians, (...), a Serpent's Eye, was a Proverbial
Speech for one of a quick understanding. In this we should be like the Serpent,
have a quick in-sight into the Mysteries of the Gospel. Get the Serpent's Eye.
Prove. 10, 14. Wise men lay up knowledge. Faith without Knowledge is
Presumption; Zeal without Knowledge is Frenzy.

2. The Serpent has a Prudence and Subtilty in his Ear; the Serpent will not
be deluded with the Voice of the Charmer, but stops its Ears: In this be wise
as Serpents; stop your Ears from such as would discourage you from strict, holy
walking. Some inspired by Satan, would raise prejudices against the Ways of
God, that they are strewn with Thorns of Mortification and Persecution. If you
will be religious, you must hang your Harps upon the Willows, and bid Adieu to
all Joy. Acts 28.22. This Sect is every where spoken against: Oh, be wise as
Serpents! Stop your Ears to such as would discourage you from holy walking;
they are the Devil's Charmers. Godliness is the Root on which all true Joy
grows; solid Joy, though not wanton. Psalm. 138.5. Yea, they shall sing in the
ways of the Lord. Acts 9.31. If we leave God, whither shall we go? When Saul
left God, he went to the Witch of Endor, 1 Samuel 28.8.

3. The Serpent has a Subtilty in its Wings; For Naturalists report, such
Serpents are found in Aethiopia, as have Wings; and the Scripture mentions a
fiery flying Serpent, Isa. 14.29. Which Wings denote the subtilty of the
Serpent in the hasty prosecution of his Prey: In this be like the Serpent, in
having winged Desires after heavenly Objects. Desire is the wing of the Soul,
which sets it a flying: Have after Ordinances; they are Pabulum Animae, the
Food of the Soul; fly to them with Appetite; get the Serpent's Wing. Psalm.
122.1. Come, let us go up to the House of the Lord. We know not how long we
shall enjoy the Blessings of the Sanctuary. When Manna was to cease on the
seventh day, the People of Israel gathered twice as much on the sixth. If we
have the Wisdom from above, we shall neglect no Season wherein we may get the
Bread of Life broken to us.

4. Serpents have a Subtilty and Prudence in their drinking: before they drink,
expuunt venenum, they cast up their Poison. In this we should be wise as
Serpents; before we come to Ordinances, we should cast up the Poison of Sin by
Repentance. If a Man takes Opium or Mercury, a Cordial will do him no good: So,
as long as Men feed on their Sins, Ordinances will do them no good; nay, much
hurt; they eat and drink their own Damnation: In this therefore let us be Wise
as Serpents, cast up the Poison of Sin, before we come to drink of the Waters
of the Sanctuary.

5. The Serpent has a Subtilty in his whole Body, which he wraps together like
a Circle to defend his Head; a Blow on his Head is deadly, and his chief Policy
is to safeguard his Head: In this let us learn of the Serpent, our chief care
should be to defend our Head from Error; the Apostle calls them damnable
Heresies, 2 Pet. 2.1. they destroy the Doctrine of Faith, rend the Coat of the
Churches Peace, and eat out the Heart of Religion. Let us as the Serpent defend
our Head. Let us keep our Head from Socinian Opinions, who deny the Deity of
Christ; from Popish Opinions, Merit, Image Worship, Transubstantiation; Papists
cause the People to Pray without Understanding, to Obey without Reason, to
Believe against Sense: Have a care to defend your Head from being tainted with
Popish Aphorisms. Thus you see wherein we should be like the Serpent, in
Prudence and Sagacity.

II. The Second thing I am to speak of is the Dove; be harmless as Doves. The
Dove is an excellent Creature; it was so acceptable, that in the old Law God
would have the Dove offered in Sacrifice: The Holy Ghost, when he would appear
in a visible shape, assumed the likeness of a Dove, Matthew. 3.16. We should be
as Doves in Three Respects.

In Respect of I. Meekness. II. Innocence. III. Purity.


I. In respect of Meekness. The Dove is the Emblem of Meekness; it is sine
Fell, without Gall; we should be as Doves for Meekness, we must avoid unruly
Passion, which is brevis Insania, a short Frenzy; we must be without the Gall
of Bitterness and Revenge; we must be of mild Spirits, Praying for our Enemies:
So Stephen, Act. 7.60. Lord, lay not this Sin to their charge. This Dove like
Meekness is the best Jewel and Ornament we can wear: 1 Pet. 3.4. The Ornament
of a meek Spirit, which is in the sight of God of great Price. Passion does
disguise, Meekness adorns.

II. We should be as Doves for Innocence.

The Innocence of the Dove is seen in Two Things.

1. Not to Deceive. 2. Not to Hurt.
1. Not to Deceive. The Dove is as without Gall, so without Guile; it does not
deceive or lie at the catch. Thus we should be as the Dove, without Fraud and
Craft. There is an Holy Simplicity commendable; Romans 16.19. I would have you
Simple concerning Evil; to be a Bungler at Sin, not to have the Art to
Beguile^; this is a good Simplicity; as Nathanael, in whose Spirit there was no
guile* Joh. 1.42. Where almost is this Dove-like innocence to be found? We live
in an Age wherein there are more Foxes than Doves: Persons are full of Guile,
they study nothing but Fallacies, that one knows not how to deal with them;
Psalm. 12.2. With a double Heart do they speak.

2. Not to hurt. The Dove rostro non laedit; the Dove has no Horns or Talons
to hurt, only Wings to defend it self by flight: Other Creatures are commonly
well armed; the Lion has his Paw, the Boar its Tusk, the Stagg its Horns; but
the Dove is a most harmless Creature, it has nothing wherewith to offend. Thus
we should be as Doves for Harmlesness: We should not do wrong to others, but
rather suffer wrong. Such a Dove was Samuel, 1 Samuel 12.3. Whose Ox have I
taken, or whose Ass have I taken, or whom have I defrauded? He did not get Men's
Estates into his hands, or raise himself upon the Ruin of others. How rare is
it to find such Doves? Sure they are flown away. How many Birds of Prey are
there? Micah 7.2. They all lie in wait for Blood, they hunt every Man his
Brother with a Net. These are not Doves, but Vultures; they travel with
mischief, and are in pain till they bring forth.

III. We should be as Doves for Purity. The Dove is the Emblem of Purity; it
loves the purest Air; it feeds on pure Grain: The Raven fed on the Carcass, but
the Dove feeds pure. Thus let us be as Doves for Sanctity, cleansing our selves
from all pollution both of Flesh and Spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. Christ's Dove is pure:
Cant. 5.2. My Dove, my undefiled. Let us keep pure among dregs. 1 Timothy 5.22.
Keep thy self pure. Better have a Rent in the Flesh, than an Hell in the
Conscience. The Dove is a chaste, pure Creature: Let us be Doves for Purity.

Use 1. See here the Nature of a good Christian; he is wise and innocent: He
has so much of the Serpent, that he does not forfeit his discretion, and so
much of the Dove, that he does not defile his Conscience. A godly man is looked
upon by a carnal Eye, as weak and indiscreet, as having something of the Dove,
but nothing of the Serpent. To believe things not seen, to choose Suffering,
rather than Sin, this is counted Folly: But the World is mistaken in a
Believer; he has his Eyes in his Head; he knows what he does; he is prudent as
well as holy; he is wise that finds the Pearl of price; he is wise that
provides for Eternity; he is the wisest man that has wit to save his Soul; he
is wise that makes him his Friend who shall be his Judge. The godly man acts
both the Politician, and the Divine; he retains his Ingenuity; yet does not
part with his Integrity.

Use 2. Reproof. It reproves them who have too much of the Serpent, but nothing
of the Dove. Ier. 4.22. Wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge.
These are like the Devil, who retains his Subtilty, but not his Innocence. We
have many in this Age like the Serpent for Craftiness. Dan. 8.25. Through
policy he shall cause Craft to prosper. Men have the Headpiece of Subtilty,
but want the Breast Plate of Honesty; they are wise to contrive Sin, to forge
Plots, to study Compliance, rather than Conscience: The Port they aim at, is
Preferment; the Compass they sail by, is Policy; the Pilot that steers them, is
Satan. These have the Craftiness of the Serpent: They are wise to do evil.

2. They are like the Serpent for Mischief. You know the Fiery Serpents did
sting Israel. These have the sting of the Serpent; they have a sting in their
Tongues, stinging the People of God with bitter Slanders and Invectives,
calling them Factious and Seditious; and they sting with their Indictments and
Excommunications, Gal. 4.29. Such stinging Serpents were Nero, Dioclesian, and
Julian; and their Spirit is yet alive in the world. These have too much of the
Serpent in them, but nothing of the Dove. 2 Pet. 2.3. Their Damnation
slumbereth not.

Use 3. Exhortation. To put in practice our Savior's Counsel in the Text; join
the Serpent and the Dove together, Wisdom and Holiness: Here lies the Knot;
this is the great difficulty, to unite these two together, the Serpent and the
Dove, Prudence and Innocence: If you separate these two, you spoil all.

Quest. Wherein does a Christian join these two together, the Serpent and the
Dove, Prudence and Holiness?

Answ. This I shall answer in Twelve Particulars.

1. To be wise and innocent, consists in this; To be sensible of an injury, yet
not revenge it. A Christian is not a Stoic, nor yet a Fury; he is so wise,
that he knows when an Injury is done him; but so holy, that he knows how to
pass it by. This is (...), a most excellent temper of Soul; I had almost said,
Angelical. As the Wind does allay the heat of the Air, so Grace does allay the
heat of Revenge. Moses herein showed a mixture of the Serpent and the Dove:
Miriam murmured against him. Numb. 12.2. Has the Lord spoken only by Moses? Is
he the only Prophet* to declare God's Mind to us* Moses was so wise as to
discern her Pride, and slighting of him; yet so meek, as to bury the injury:
When God struck her with Leprosy, he prays for her. Numb. 12.13. Heal her now,
O God, I beseech thee. And upon his Prayer, she was cured of her Leprosy. A
good Christian has so much Wisdom as to discern his Enemy's Malice; but so
much Grace as to conquer his own: He knows it is the Glory of a Man to pass by
a Transgression, Prove. 19.11. Though a Christian has so much Prudence as to
vindicate himself, yet so much Goodness, as not to avenge himself. Behold here
the Serpent and the Dove united; Sagaity and Innocence.

2. The mixing Wisdom and Innocence, is seen in this; To be humble, but not
base: Humility is part of the Dove's Innocence. 1 Pet. 5.5. Be ye clothed with
Humility. St. Paul, though the chief of the Apostles, calls himself the least
of Saints.

A gracious Soul has low Thoughts of himself, and carries himself lowly toward
others; but though he be humble, he is not base; though he will not saucily
resist his Superiors, he will not sinfully humor them: Though he will not do
such proud Actions, as to make his Enemies hate him; yet he will not do such
sordid Actions as to make them despise him: Here is the Serpent and the Dove
united.

A good Christian is so humble, as to oblige others; but not so unworthy, as to
disobey God. St. Paul, as far as he could with a good Conscience, did become
all things to all, that he might save some, 1 Cor. 9.20, 22. But he would not
break a Commandment to gratify any. When God's Glory lay at stake, who more
resolute than Paul? Gal. 2.5. The Three Children were humble; they gave the
King his Title of Honor; but they were not sordidly timorous. Dan. 3.18. Be it
known unto thee, O King, we will not serve thy Gods. Though they showed
Reverence to the King's Person, yet no Reverence to the Image he set up. A good
Christian will not do any thing below himself; though he is for obeying of
Laws, yet he will not prostitute himself to Men's Lusts. He is humble; there he
shows the Innocence of the Dove; but not base, there he shows the Wisdom of the
Serpent.

3. The Prudence of the Serpent, and Innocence of the Dove is seen in this; to
reprove the Sin, yet love the Person. We are commanded to reprove; Levit 19.17.
Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy heart; thou shall rebuke him, and not
suffer Sin upon him. Not to reprove Sin, is to approve it: But this Sword of
Reproof is a dangerous Weapon if it be not well handled: To reprove, and yet
love, is to act both the Serpent and the Dove.

Quest. How may a Christian so reprove Sin, as to show Love to the Person?

Answ. 1. In taking a fit season to reprove another; that is, when his Anger is
over: As when God did rebuke Adam, he came to him in the cool of the Day, Genesis
3.8. So when we are to reprove any, we are to come to them when their Spirits
are more cool, and fit to receive a Reproof. To reprove a Man when he is in a
Passion, is to give Strong Water in a Fever; it does more hurt than good. By
observing a fit season, we show both Prudence and Holiness; we discover as well
Discretion as Affection.

2. Reproving Sin, so as to show Love to the Person, is seen in this; when,
though we tell him plainly of his Sin, yet it is in mild, not provoking Words.
2 Timothy 2.25. In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves. Peter tells
the Jews plainly of their Sin in crucifying Christ; but uses Suasive^* and
Gospel-Lenitives, to allure and encourage them to believe. Acts. 2.23. Him ye
have taken, and by wicked hands crucified. ver. 38. Repent, and be baptized in
the Name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sin; for the Promise is to you
and to your Children. Reproof is a bitter Pill, and hard to swallow; therefore
we must dip it in Sugar, use those sweet mollifying expressions, that others
may see Love coming along with the Reproof. David compares Reproof to Oil,
Psalm. 141.5. Oil supples the Joints when they are hard and stiff: Our Reproofs
being mixed with the Oil of Compassion, they work most kindly, and do most
soften stiff, obdurate Hearts.

3. Reproving Sin, yet Love to the Person, is when the End of our Reproof is
not to Revile him, but to Reclaim him. While we go to heal men's Consciences,
we must take heed of wounding their Names. The Surgeon in opening a Vein,
shows both Skill and Love; Skill, in not cutting an Artery; and Love, in
letting out the bad Blood: Here is the mixing the Serpent and the Dove; the
Wisdom of the Serpent is seen, in not reproaching the Sinner* the Innocence of
the Dove is seen in reclaiming him from Sin.

4. Prudence and Holiness is seen in this; to know what we (...)* and do what
we know. To know what we should do, there^^ the Wisdom (...) ^he Serpent; to do
what we know, there is the ^nnocency of the Dove. John (...) Knowledge is a
Jewel (...) him that wear^ (...) is the (...) and (...) of the Mind* Knowledge
i^ (...), the Eye of the Soul* to guide it in the right way; but this Knowledge
must ^e joined with holy (...)* To separate Practice from Knowledge, is to
separate the Dove from the Serpent. Many illuminated Heads can discourse
fluently in Matters of Religion; but they do not live up to their knowledge:
This is to have good Eyes, but to have the Feet cut off: They know they should
not break the Sabbath, they should not defame or defraud; but they do not
practice what they know: Here they separate the Dove from the Serpent; Virtue
from Knowledge. How vain is Knowledge without Practice! As if one should know a
Sovereign Medicine, and not apply it. Satan is a knowing Spirit, he has enough
of the Serpent; but that which makes him a Devil is, he wants the Dove, he does
not practice Holiness.

5. To mix the Serpent and the Dove is to keep two Trades going. To understand
worldly Affairs, there is the Wisdom of the Serpent; yet not neglect the Soul,
there is the Innocence of the Dove. God has said, Six Days shall thou Labor,
Exodus 20.9. Religion did never grant a Patent to idleness: There is a Lawful
Care to be had about Secular Things: To have insight into one's Calling is a
commendable Wisdom; but with this wisdom join the Dove's Innocence; so follow
your Calling as not to neglect your Soul. The Soul is a precious thing, (...),
it would beggar the Angels to give half the price of a Soul. Our greatest care
should be to get Grace. While you put Gold in your Bag, do not forget to put
Oil in your Vessel. Trade beyond the East Indies. Drive a Trade of Holiness.
This Merchandice is better than the Merchandice of Silver, Prove. 3.14. Live in
a Calling, but especially live by Faith. Look to the providing for your
Families, but especially to the saving of your Souls. The Soul is the Angelical
part; the loss of this can never be made up again. God, says Chrysostom, has
given a Man two Eyes, if he lose one Eye he has another; but he has but one
Soul, if he lose that it is irrecoverable, it can never be made up again. O
unite the Serpent and the Dove, Prudence and Holiness; use the World, but love
your Soul: Trade on Earth, but beware of breaking in your Trade for Heaven. How
many part these two, the Serpent and the Dove? they are wise for the World, but
Fools for their Souls. It Is too often seen that Men pull down their Souls to
build up an Estate.

6. To join the Serpent and the Dove, Prudence and Innocence, consists in this,
To know how to give Counsel, and how to keep Counsel. He has the Wisdom of the
Serpent that can give Counsel, he knows how to advise another in difficult
cases, and speak a Word in due season: 2 Samuel 16.23. The Counsel of Achitophel
was as if a Man had enquired at the Oracle of God. But this is not enough to
have the Wisdom of the Serpent, in being able to give Counsel; but there must
be the Innocence of the Dove too in keeping Counsel. If a Friend's secret be
imparted to us (unless in case of Blood) we are not to reveal it. A Friend is
alter idem, as one's own Soul, Deuteronomy. 13.6. And what he imparts of his Heart
should be kept under Lock and Key. Prove. 25.9. Discover not a Secret to
another, lest he that hear thee put thee to shame, etc. To disclose a Friend's
secrets, though it be not Treason, it is Treachery; it is most Unchristian; a
Word may be spoken in secret, which when it is Trumpeted out, may occasion
Quarrels or Lawsuits. He that cannot keep a Matter committed to him, is like a
Vessel that runs out, or a sick Stomach that cannot keep the Meat but brings it
up again. He that publishes his Friends secret, does publish his own shame.

7. To mix these two, Prudence and Holiness, is to know the Seasons of Grace
and improve them. To know the Seasons of Grace, there is the Wisdom of the
Serpent. It Is Wisdom in an Husbandman to know the fit time for pruning of
Trees, sowing of Seed; so it is no less Wisdom to know the Golden Seasons of
Grace: While we hear the joyful Sound, while we have praying Hours, while the
Spirit of God blows on our Hearts, here is a Gale for Heaven. The day of Grace
will not always last; the Shadows of the Evening seem to be stretched out;
Things look as if the Gospel tended a-pace to a Sunsetting. Be Wise as
Serpents to know what a prize is put in your Hands; and with the Serpent join
the Dove; that is, in improving the Seasons of Grace: The Stork and Turtle not
only know their Season, but improve it; they approach to the warmer Climate
against Spring, says Pliny: Here is the Serpent and Dove united, knowing and
improving the Day of Grace; when we profit by Ordinances, when we mix the Word
with Faith, when an Ordinance has stamped Holiness upon us, as the Seal leaves
its print upon the Wax. This is to improve the Seasons of Grace.

8. The Serpent and the Dove, Wisdom and Innocence, is to be moderate yet
zealous. Moderation is good in some cases. Phil. 4.5. Let your Moderation be
known to all.

First, Moderation is good in case of Anger. When the Passions are up,
Moderation sits as Queen and Governess in the Soul; it allays the Heat of
Passion. Moderation is Fraenum Irae, the Bridle of Anger.

Secondly, Moderation is good in case of Lawsuits; so the Greek Word for
Moderation, (...), is properly taken. If there be a Dispute in Law, between us
and others, we are not to take the Extremity of the Law, but use Christian
Equity and Mildness; nay, for Peace sake, cedere de Iure, rather part with some
of our right than oppress them; this much Honors the Gospel.

Thirdly, Moderation is good in Things indifferent. Things ought not to be
rigorously imposed in God's Worship, which are not of Divine Injunction; God
never made Governors of the Church to be like Pilots of a Ship, to steer Men's
Consciences which way they please. Moderation and Christian Forbearance in
Things indifferent, would much tend to the Peace and Unity of the Church. All
this Moderation is commendable, and shows the Wisdom of the Serpent; but
remember to join the Dove with the Serpent: We must so exercise Moderation as
withal to cherish Zeal. St. Paul in some things was moderate, he did not press
Circumcision, Act. 15.25. He was tender of laying a Yoke upon the Consciences
of the Disciples; but he had Zeal with his Moderation; when he saw their
Idolatry at Athens, the Fire of his Zeal broke forth. Acts 17.16. His Spirit
was stirred in him. 'Twas good advice Calvin gave to Melancthon, that he should
not so affect the Name of Moderate, as to lose all his Zeal. To be cool and
silent, when God's Blessed Truths are undermined or adulterated, is not
Moderation, but Luke-warmness, which is to God a most hateful temper, Rev.
3.15. I would you were cold or hot, any thing but Lukewarm. This is to show
Prudence and Holiness, when we are Moderate yet Zealous.

9. To Unite Serpent and Dove, consists in this, when we defend the Truth by
Argument, and adorn it by Life. Defending the Truth is the Serpent's Wisdom. An
intelligent Christian can (...), convince Gainsayers. This Wisdom of the
Serpent was eminently in Stephen. Act. 6.9. There arose certain of the
Synagogue, disputing with Stephen, and they were not able to resist the Wisdom
and the Spirit by which he spoke. We read in the Acts and Monuments of the
Church, John Fryth, Martyr, being opposed by three Papists, he, like another
Hercules, fighting with all three at once, did by his Wisdom so convince them,
that one of them turned from Popery and became a zealous Protestant: Herein is
the Wisdom of the Serpent, not only to love them that profess the Truth, but
silence them that oppose it: But with this Wisdom of the Serpent there must be
joined the Dove; together with defending the Truth by Argument, there must be
adorning it by Life, Tit. 2.10. That they may adorn the Doctrine of God our
Savior. There are some who can dispute for the Truth, but disgrace it by their
bad living. This is to act both the Serpent and the Dove, when we not only
plead for the Truth, but walk in the Truth; like Nazianzen; of whom it was said
he did Thunder in his Doctrine, and Lighten in his Conversation.

10. The uniting the Serpent and the Dove, is to be Serious in Religion, yet
Cheerful. Seriousness puts the Heart in an Holy Frame, it fixes it on God.
Seriousness is to the Soul, as Ballast to the Ship, it keeps the Soul from
being overturned with Vanity. The Heart is ever best when it is serious; but
this Seriousness in Religion must be mixed with Cheerfulness. Cheerfulness
conduces to Health, Prove. 17.22. it Honors Religion, it proclaims to the
World we serve a good Master. Cheerfulness is a Friend to Grace, it puts the
Heart in Tune to praise God, Psalm. 71.23. Unchearful Christians, like the
Spies, bring an evil report on the Good Land: Others suspect there is something
unpleasant in Religion, that they who profess it hang their Harps upon the
Willows, and walk so dejectedly. Be serious yet cheerful* Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in
the Lord always. Why was Christ anointed, but to give the Oil of Joy for
Mourning? Isa. 61.1. Joy is as well a Fruit of the Spirit as Faith, Gal. 5.22.
One way of grieving the Spirit (says Heinsius) is by Christians unchearful
walking: If you would render the Gospel lovely, mix the Dove and the Serpent,
be serious yet cheerful in God.

11. The uniting of the Serpent and the Dove, Wisdom and Holiness, consists in
this, when we so lay up, as we lay out. It Is a Duty to provide for our Charge;
1 Timothy 5.8. If any provide not for his own he is worse than an Infidel: To lay
up for our Family, here is the Wisdom of the Serpent; but we must lay out for
the Poor two, here is the mixture of the Dove. 1 Timothy 6.17. Charge them that are
rich in the World that they do Good, that they be rich in Good Works. The Poor
Man is as it were an Altar, if we bring our Alms and lay upon it, with such
Sacrifices God is well pleased. Faith though it has sometimes a trembling
Hand, it must not have a withered Hand; but must stretch forth it self to Works
of Mercy: There Is nothing lost by Charitableness: Prove. 11.25. The liberal Soul
shall be made fat. Psalm. 41.1. Blessed is he that considers the Poor, thou will make all his Bed in his Sickness. While Men do so remember their Family,
that they do not forget the Poor, they show both Prudence and Piety; they unite
the Serpent and the Dove.

12. The Serpent's Wisdom and the Dove's Innocence is seen in this, so to avoid
Danger, as not to commit Sin; to preserve our Liberty, yet keep our Integrity.
There Is a sinful escaping Danger, namely, when we are called to suffer for the
Truth, and we decline it: But there is an escaping Danger without Sin, as thus,
when we do not betray our selves into the Enemies Hands by rashness, nor yet
betray the Truth by Cowardice; we have a Pattern of this in our Savior, he
avoided his Enemies in one place that he might Preach the Gospel in another.
Luke 4.30. They brought him to the brow of the Hill, that they might cast him
down headlong; but he passing through the midst of them went his way: There was
Christ's Wisdom in not betraying himself to his Enemy. And ver. 43. I must
Preach to other Cities also: There was his Holiness. Christ's securing of
himself, was in order to the Preaching of the Gospel. This is to mix Prudence
and Innocence, when we so avoid Danger as we do not commit Sin.

Thus I have, as briefly and as clearly as I could, shown you how we must unite
these Two, the Serpent and the Dove, Prudence and Holiness: For want of
Coupling these two together, Religion does much suffer in the Christian World.
What Christ has joined together, let no Man put asunder. Observe these two,
Prudence and Holiness; here is the Serpent's Eye in the Dove's Head. When these
Two, Wisdom and Innocence (like Castor and Pollux) appear together, they
presage much Good and Happiness that will befall a Christian.

Who in are Christ are New Creatures.
2. Cor. 5.17. Therefore if any Man be in Christ, he is a New Creature, Old
Things are passed away, behold all Things are become New.


IN this Scripture consists the Essence and Soul of Religion.

I note here Two Things.

1. Doctr. That the true Definition of a Christian is to be in Christ: If any
Man be in Christ. He may be in the Church Visible, yet not in Christ. It Is not
to be baptized into Christ's Name, makes a true Christian; but to be in Christ;
that is, to be grafted into him by Faith: And if to be in Christ makes a
Christian, then there are but few Christians. Many are in Christ nominally not
really; they are in Christ by Profession, not by Mystical Union. Are they in
Christ that do not know him? Are they in Christ who persecute them that are in
Christ? Sure such an Holy Head as Christ will disclaim such spurious Members.

2. Doctr. That whosoever is in Christ, is a New Creature.

For Illustration I shall show, I. What a New Creature is: II. What a kind of
Work it is.


I. What a New Creature is: It is a Second Birth added to the First, Ioh. 3.3.
It may be thus described: It is a Supernatural Work of God's Spirit, renewing
and transforming the Heart into the Divine Likeness.

1. The efficient Cause of the New Creature, is the Holy Ghost; no Angel or
Archangel is able to produce it. Who but God can alter the Hearts of Men, and
turn Stones into Flesh? If the New Creature were not produced by the Holy
Ghost, then the greatest Glory in a Man's Conversion would belong to himself;
but this Glory God will not give to another; the turning of the Will to God is
from God: Ier. 31.19. After I was turned I repented.

2. The Organical Cause, or Instrument, by which the New Creature is formed, is
the Word of God: Iam. 1.18. Of his own Will begat he us by the Word of Truth.
The Word is the Seed out of which springs the Flower of the New Creature.

3. The Matter of which the New Creature consists, is the restoring God's Image
lost by the Fall.

Quest. But does God in the New Creature give a new Soul?

Answ. No, he does not bestow new Faculties but new Qualities; as in the
altering of a Lute, the Strings are not new, but the Tune is mended: So in the
New Creature, the substance of the Soul is not new, but is new tuned by Grace;
the Heart that before was Proud is now Humble; the Eyes that before were full
of Lust, are now full of Tears. Here are new Qualities infused.

II. What a kind of Work the New Creature is.

I. The New Creature is a Work of Divine Power; so much it imports, because it
is a Creation. The same Power which raised Christ from the Grave goes to the
production of the New Creature, Ephesians. 1.20. It is a Work of greater Power to
produce the New Creature, than to make a World. It Is true, in respect of God,
all things are alike possible to him: But as to our apprehension it requires a
greater Power to make a new Creature, than to make a World: For,

1. When God made the World he met with no opposition; but when God is about to
make the New Creature, he meets with opposition; Satan opposes him, and the
Heart opposes him.

2. It cost God nothing to make the World, but to make the New Creature costs
him something: Christ himself was fain to become Man. In making the World it
was but speaking a Word; but in making of the New Creature, it cost Christ the
shedding of his Blood.

3. God made the World in six Days; but he is carrying on the New Creature in
us all our Lives long. The New Creature is but begun here, it is not perfected
or drawn in all its Orient Colors till it come to Heaven.

II. The New Creature is a Work of Free Grace. There is nothing in us to move
God to make us anew; by Nature we are full of Pollution and Enmity, yet now God
forms the New Creature. Behold the Banner of Love displayed! The New Creature
may say, By the Grace of God I am what I am. In the Creation we may see the
Strength of God's Arm, in the New Creature we may see the Working of God's
Bowels. That God should Consecrate any Heart, and Anoint it with Grace, is an
Act of pure Love: That he should pluck one out of the State of Nature, and not
another, must be resolved into Free Grace: Matthew. 11.26. Even so Father, for so
it seemed good in thy sight. This will increase the Saints Triumphs in Heaven,
that the Lot of Free Grace should fall upon them, and not on others.

3. The New Creature is a Work of rare Excellency. A Natural Man is a lump of
Earth and Sin, God loathes him, Zach. 11.8. But upon the New Creature is a
Spiritual Glory: As if we should see a piece of Clay turned into a sparkling
Diamond* Cant. 3.16. Who is this that comes out of the Wilderness, like
Pillars of Smoke perfumed with Myrrh and Frankincense? That is the Natural Man
coming out of the Wilderness of Sin, perfumed with all the Graces of the
Spirit. The New Creature must needs be Glorious, for it partakes of the Divine
Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. A Soul beautified with Holiness, is like the Firmament
bespangled with glittering Stars. It is God's lesser Heaven, Isa. 57.15. In the
Incarnation God made himself in the Image of Man, in the New Creation Man is
made in the Image of God: By our being Creatures we are the Sons of Adam, by
being New Creatures we are the Members of Christ. Reason makes one live the
Life of a Man, the New Creature makes him live the Life of God. A New Creature
excells the rational Nature, and equals the Angelical, It is excellent to hear
of Christ's being Crucified for us, but more excellent to have Christ formed in
us.

Concerning the New Creature, I shall lay down Two Positions.

1 Posit. That it is not in the Power of a Natural Man to convert himself;
because it is a New Creation. As we cannot make our selves Creatures, so not
New Creatures.

Quest. But why does God command us to convert our selves, if we have no Power?
Ezekiel. 18.31. Make you a New Heart.

Answ. 1. We once had Power. God gave us a Stock of Holiness, but we lost it.
If a Master give his Servant Money to employ in his Service, and he wastes and
imbezles it, may not the Master require the Money of him? Though we have lost
our Power to Obey, God has not lost his Right to Command.

2. Though Men cannot convert themselves, and make themselves new Creatures,
yet they may do more than they do in a tendency to it; they may avoid
Temptations, they may read the Word; the same Feet that carry them to a Play
will carry them to a Sermon; they may implore Divine Grace, but they do not
what they are able; they do not improve the Power of Nature to the utmost, and
put God to the Trial, whether he will give Grace.

3. God is not wanting to them who seek to him for Grace: Deus volentibus non
deest: He is willing to put to his helping Hand. With his Command there goes a
Promise, Ezekiel. 18.31. Make you a New Heart; and there is a Promise, Ezekiel.
36.26. A New Heart will I give you.

2 Posit. When God converts a Sinner he does more than use a Moral Persuasion.

For Conversion is a New Creation, Ephesians. 4.24. The Pelagians talk much of Free
Will; they say the Will of Man is by Nature asleep, and Conversion is nothing
but the awakening a Sinner out of sleep, which is done by a Moral Persuasion:
But Man is by Nature dead in Sin, Ephesians. 2.1. And God must do more than awaken
him, he must enliven him before he be a New Creature.

1 Use. Terror, to such as are not New Creatures; such as are still growing
upon the Stock of Old Adam, who continue in their Sins, and are resolved so to
do, these are in the Gall of Bitterness, and are the most miserable Creatures
that ever God made, except the Devils. These stand in the place where all God's
Arrows fly; these are the Center where all God's Curses meet. An Unregenerate
Person is like one in Debt, that is in fear to be arrested; he is every Hour in
fear to be arrested by Death, and carried Prisoner to Hell. Can that Traitor be
happy who is fed by his Prince in Prison, only to be kept alive for Execution?
God feeds the Wicked as Prisoners, they are reserved for the Day of Wrath, 2
Pet. 2.9. How should this fright Men out of their Natural Condition, and make
them restless till they are New Creatures.

2 Use: Trial, whether we are New Creatures, our Salvation depends upon it.

1. I shall show you the Counterfeit of the New Creature, or that which seems
to be the New Creature, but is not.

1 Counterfeit. Natural Honesty, Moral Virtue, Prudence, Justice, Liberality,
Temperance; these make a Glorious show in the Eye of the World, but differ as
much from the New Creature, as a Meteor from a Star. Morality indeed is
commendable, and it were well if there were more of it. This our Savior loves.
Mark 10.21. Then Jesus beholding him loved him. It was a love of Compassion not
Election. Morality is but Nature at best, it does not amount to Grace.

1. There is nothing of Christ in Morality, and that Fruit is sour which grows
not upon the Root Christ.

2. Moral Actions are done out of a vainglorious Humor, not any respect to
God's Glory. The Apostle calls the Heathen Magistrates Unjust, 1 Cor. 6.1.
While they were doing Justice in their Civil Courts they were Unjust; their
Virtue became Vice, because Faith was wanting, and they did all to raise them
Trophies for their own Praise and Fame; so that Morality is but the wild Olive
of Nature, it does not amount to Grace. Heat Water to the highest degree, you
cannot make Wine of it, it is Water still: So let Morality be raised to the
highest, it is Nature still; it is but Old Adam put in a better dress. I may say
to a civil Man, Yet lackest thou One Thing, Mark 10.21. Moral Virtue may stand
with the hatred of Godliness. A Moral Man does as much hate Holiness as he does
Vice. The Stoics were Moralists, and had sublime Notions about Virtue, yet
were the deadliest Enemies St. Paul had, Acts 17.18. So that this is a
counterfeit Jewel.

2 Counterfeit, Religious Education is not the New Creature. Education does
much cultivate and refine Nature: Education is a good Wall to plant the Vine of
Grace against, but it is not Grace. King Ioash was good, as long as his Uncle
Iehoiada lived, but when Iehoiada died, all Ioash his Religion was buried in
his Unkle's Grave, 2 Kings 12.2. Have not we seen many who have been trained up
religiously under their Parents, and were very hopeful; yet these fair Blossoms
of Hope, have been blown off, and they have lived to be a shame to their
Friends?

3 Counterfeit. A Form of Godliness is not the New Creature. Every Bird that
has fine Feathers has not sweet Flesh. All that shine with the Golden
Feathers of Profession are not Saints: 2 Timothy 3 5. (...), Having a Form of
Godliness, but denying the Power. What is a lifeless Form? Formality is the Ape
of Piety: Formalists may perform all the external parts of Religion, Pray,
Fast, give Alms. Whatever Duties a Believer does in sincerity, the same may a
Formalist do in Hypocrisy. How devout were the Pharisees? How Humble was Ahab?
What a Reformer was Iehu? yet all this was but a formal show of Religion.
Daedalus by art made Images to move of themselves, insomuch that People thought
they were living. Formalists do so counterfeit, and play a Devotion, that
others think they are living Saints. They are Religious Mountebanks.

4 Counterfeit. Every Change of Opinion does not amount to the New Creature: A
Man may change from Error to Truth, yet no New Creature; here is a Change in
the Head, but not in the Heart: One may be Orthodox in his judgment; yet not
cordially embrace the Gospel: He may be no Papist, yet no true Believer: He who
is changed only in Opinion, is but almost a Christian, and shall be but almost
saved.

5 Counterfeit. Every sudden Passion, or stirring of the Affections, is not the
New Creature. There may be Affections of Sorrow; some upon the reading the
History of Christ's Passion may be ready to weep, but it is only a Natural
tenderness which relents at any Tragical sight. Affections of desire may be
stirred, Ioh. 6. Lord evermore give us this Bread: But these basely deserted
Christ, and would walk no more with him, ver. 66. Many desire Heaven but will
not come up to the Price. Affections of Joy may be stirred: In the Parable the
Second sort of Hearers are said to receive the Word with joy, Matthew. 13.20.
What was this but to have the Affections moved with delight in hearing: Yet
that this did not amount to the New Creature is plain. 1. Because those Hearers
are said to have no root. 2. Because they fell away, ver. 21. King Herod did
hear John Baptist gladly; he was much affected with John's Preaching; Where
then was the defect? Why was not Herod a New Creature? The reason was, because
Herod was not reformed by the Baptist's Preaching; his Affections were moved,
but his Sin was not removed. Many have sweet Motions of Heart, and seem to be
much affected with the Word, but their love to Sin is stronger than their love
to the Word; therefore all their good Affections prove abortive and come to
nothing.

6 Counterfeit. One may have trouble for Sin; yet not be a New Creature.
Trouble of Spirit may appear, while God's Judgments lie upon Men; but when
these are removed, their trouble cease, Psalm. 78.34. When he slew them, then
they sought him, nevertheless they did flatter him with their Lips. Metal that
melts in a Furnace, take it out of the Furnace and it returns to its former
hardness: Many in time of Sickness seem to be like melted Metal. What Weeping
and wringing of Hands? What Confessions of Sin will they make? Do not these
look like New Creatures? But as soon as they recover they are as bad as ever;
their Pangs go off again, and it never comes to a New Birth.

7 Counterfeit. A Man may have the Spirit, yet not be a New Creature. The
Apostle supposes a Case, that one might be made Partaker of the Holy Ghost,
yet fall away, Heb. 6.4. A Man may have some slight transient Work of the
Spirit, but it does not go to the root; he may have the common Gifts of the
Spirit, but not the special Grace; he may have the Spirit to convince him, not
to convert him; the Light he has is like a Winter Sun, which has little or no
influence; it does not make him more Holy; he has the Motions of the Spirit,
but walks after the Flesh.

8 Counterfeit. Every abstaining from Sin is not the New Creature. This
abstaining may be,

1. From Restraining Grace, not Renewing Grace: As God withheld Laban from
hurting Jacob, Genesis 31.24. The Lord may restrain Men from Sin by the Terror of
a Natural Conscience. Conscience stands as the Angel with a drawn Sword, and
says, do not this Evil. Men may be frighted from Sin, but not divorced:

2. Men may abstain from Sin for a while, and then return to it again; as Saul
left off pursuing David for some time, and then hunted him again. This is like
a Man that holds his Breath under Water, and then takes Breath again. Ier.
34.15, 16. Ye were now turned, and had done right in my sight; but ye turned
and polluted my Holy Name.

3. Men may leave gross Sin, and yet live in more Spiritual Sins; leave
Drunkenness, and live in Pride; leave Uncleanness and live in Malice: The
Pharisee boasted he was no Adulterer, but he could not say he was not Proud or
Superstitious; here he left gross Sin, and lived in Spiritual Sins.

4. Men may leave Sin partially; abstain from some Sins, not all; they feed
some Sin in a corner. Herod left many Sins, but one Sin he lived in, viz.
Incest. All this does not amount to the New Creature.

II. I shall show you wherein the Essence of the New Creature consists.

1 In General. To the constituting of the New Creature, there must be a great
Change wrought. He who is a New Creature is not the same Man he was. Alter
idem. He is of another Spirit. Numb. 14.24. My Servant Caleb, because he had
another Spirit. When the Harlot Lais came to one of her old Acquaintance, after
he was converted, and tempted him to Sin, Ego non sum Ego, says he, I am not
the same Man.

When one becomes a New Creature, there is such a visible Change, that all may
see it; therefore it is called a Change from Darkness to Light, Acts 26.18.
Paul, a Persecutor, when converted, was so altered, that all who saw him,
wondered at him, and could scarce believe that he was the same Man, Acts 9.21.
as if another Soul had lived in the same Body. Mary Magdalen, an unchaste
Sinner, when once savingly wrought upon, what a penitent Creature did she
become? Her Eyes, that were enticements of Lust, she takes Penance of them, and
washed Christ's Feet with her Tears: Her Hair, which she was so proud of, and
which was a Net to entangle her Lovers, she now takes Penance of it, and wipes
Christ's Feet with it. Thus the New Creature makes a visible change. Such as
are the same as they were, as vain and proud as ever, here is no New Creature
to be seen; for then a mighty change would appear. 1 Cor. 6.11. And such were
some of you; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, etc.

But every Change does not evidence the New Creature.

1. There is a change from one Extreme to another; from a Prodigal, to an
Usurer; from a Turk, to a Papist. This is as if one should recover of one
Disease, and die of another.

2. There is an outward change, which is like the washing of a Swine. Ahab was
much changed to outward view, when he rent his Clothes, and put on Sackcloth. 1
Kings 21.27. insomuch that God stands and wonders at him: See thou how Ahab
humbles himself? Yet for all this, he was but an Hypocrite.

Quest. What Change then is that which is requisite in the New Creature?

Answ. It is an inward Change, a change of Heart. Though the heart be not new
made, it is new molded. Ier. 4.14. Wash thy heart, O Jerusalem. Ahab's Clothes
were rent, but not his Heart. The outward change will do no good without the
inward. What will become of them then who have not so much as an outward Change?

Thus you see in General, That in the production of the New Creature, there
must be a change.

II. More particularly: The Change in the new creature consists in two things;
and they are both set down in the Text: Old things are passed away; behold all
things are become new.

I. Old Things are passed away.] Old Pride, old Ignorance, old Malice. The old
House must be pulled down, ere you can set up a new.

Object. If all old things must pass away, then there are no new creatures. Who
can be quite freed from Sin? Does not the Apostle complain of a Body of Death?

Answ. We must know that the change wrought in the new creature, though it be a
through change, yet it is not a perfect change; Sin will remain: As there is a
Principle of Grace, so of Corruption; like Wine and Water mixed, there is in
the Regenerate Flesh as well as Spirit. Here a Question arises.

Quest. If Sin in the Regenerate is not quite done away, then how far must one
put off the old Man that he may be a new creature? Of which hereafter.

Therefore if any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature; old things are passed
away, behold all things are become new. Doct. That whosoever is in Christ, is a
new Creature. We are now upon the Trial of the New Creature. In it there is a
Change wrought, and this Change consists in Two Things; which are set down in
the Text.

1. Old things are passed away. 2. All things are become new.
I. Old things are passed away.] Old Pride, old Ignorance, old Malice. The old
House must be pulled down ere you can set up a new.

Object. But if all old things must pass away, then there are no new Creatures.
Who can be quite freed from Sin? Does not Paul complain of a Body of Death?

Answ. We must know the change wrought in the new Creature is but imperfect; as
there is a Principle of Grace, so of Corruption; like Wine and Water mixed,
there is in the regenerate Flesh as well as Spirit.

Quest. If Sin in the regenerate is not quite done away, then how far must one
put off the old Man that he may be a new Creature?

Answ. 1. There must be a grieving for the Remains of corruption. Romans 7.24. O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of Death? Paul did
not cry out of his Sufferings, his being beaten with Rods, ship-wrack'd,
stoned; but (like the Bird of Paradise) he bemoaned himself for sin. In the new
Creature there must be quotidianus mugitus, a daily mourning for the
in-dwelling presence of corruption. A Child of God does not wear Sin as a
Gold-Chain, but as a Fetter.

2. In the new Creature there must be a detestation of old things; as one would
detest a Garment in which is the Plague. It is not enough to be angry with Sin;
but we must hate it. Psalm. 119, 163. I hate and abhor lying. Hatred is the
highest degree of Enmity. And we must hate Sin, not only for its hurtful
Effect, but its loathsome Nature; as one hates a Toad for its poysonful quality.

3. In the new Creature there is an opposition against all old things. A
Christian not only complains of Sin, but fights against it, Gal. 5.17.

Quest. But may not a natural man oppose Sin?

Answ. Yes; but there is a great difference between his opposing Sin, and the
new Creature's opposing it.

I. There is a difference in the Manner of Opposition.

1. The Natural Man opposes Sin only for the Shame of it, as it eclipseth his
Credit: But the new Creature opposes Sin for the Filth of it: it is the Spirit
of Mischief: It Is like Rust to Gold, or as a Stain to Beauty.

2. The Natural Man does not oppose all Sin.

1. He does not oppose inward Sins; he fights against such sins as are against
the light of a natural Conscience; but not against Heart-sins, the first
risings of vain Thoughts, the stirrings of Anger and Concupiscence, the venom
and impurity of his Nature.

2. He does not oppose Gospel-sins; Pride, Unbelief, Hardness of Heart,
spiritual Barrenness; he is not troubled that he can love God no more.

3. He opposes not Complexion-sins; such as the Bias of his Heart carries him
more strongly to; as Lust, or Avarice. He says of his Constitution-sin as
Naaman, 2 Kings 5.18. In this thing the Lord pardon thy Servant. But the new
Creature opposes all kind of sin; Odium circa speciem. As he that hates a
Serpent, hates all kind of Serpents. Psalm. 119.104. I hate every false way.

II. There is difference between the Natural Man's opposing Sin, and the New
Creature's opposing it, in regard of the Motives.

A Natural Man opposes sin from carnal Motives; to stop the Mouth of
Conscience, and to prevent Hell.

But the new Creature opposes sin upon more noble Motives; out of love to God,
and fear of dishonouring the Gospel.

4. In the new Creature there is mortifying old corrupt Lusts. Gal. 5.24. They
that are Christ's have crucified the Flesh. The new Creature is said to be dead
to Sin, Romans 6.11. He is dead as to the love of sin, that it does not bewitch;
and as to the power of it, that it does not command. The new Creature is
continually crucifying Sin. Some Limb of the old Adam every day drops off;
though Sin does not die perfectly, it dies daily.

A gracious Soul thinks he can never kill sin enough. He deals with sin as Ioab
with Absalom. 2 Samuel 18.14. He took three darts in his hand, and thrust them
through the heart of Absalom. So with the three Darts of Faith, Prayer, and
Repentance, a Christian thrusts through the Body of Sin; he never thinks this
Absalom is enough dead.

Try then if we have this first Sign of the new Creature, Old things are passed
away. There is a grieving for sin, a detesting it, an opposing it, a mortifying
it: This is the passing away of old things; though not in a legal sense, yet in
an Evangelical; and though it be not to Satisfaction, yet it is to Acceptance.

The second Trial of the New Creature, is, All things are become new. The new
Creature is new all over. Grace, though it be but in part, yet is in every part.

By nature every branch of the Soul is defiled with sin, as every part of
Wormwood is bitter; so in Regeneration, every part of the Soul is replenished
with Grace. Therefore Grace is called The new Man, Ephesians. 4.24. Not a new Eye, or
a new Tongue; but a new Man. There are new Dispositions, new Principles, new
Aims; all things are become new.

I. In the new Creature there is a new Understanding. Ephesians. 4.23. Be renewed in
the Spirit of your Mind. The first thing a Limner draws in a Picture is the
Eye. When God newly limns us, and makes us new Creatures, the first thing he
draws in our Souls, is a new Eye: The new Creature is enlightened to see that
which he never saw before.

1. He knows Christ after another manner. An unconverted Man by the Light of
common Grace may believe Christ to be the Son of God; but the new Creature
knows Christ after another-guise manner; so as to esteem him above all, to
adore him, to touch him by Faith, to fetch an healing virtue from him.

2. The new Creature knows himself better than he did. When the Sun shines into
a Room, it discovers all the Dust and Cobwebs in it; so, when the Light of the
Spirit shines into the Heart, it discovers that Corruption which before lay
hid; it shows a man his own vileness and Nothingness. Job 40.4. Behold I am
vile. A wicked man, blinded with Self-Love, admires himself; like Narcissus,
that seeing his own shadow upon the Water, fell in love with it. Saving
Knowledge works self-abasement. Lord, thou art Heaven, and I am Hell, said a
Martyr. Has this Day Star of Knowledge shined in our Mind?

II. The new Creature is renewed in his Conscience. The Conscience of a Natural
Man is either blind, or dumb, or seared: But Conscience in the new Creature, is
renewed. Let us examine, Does Conscience check for sin? The least Hair makes
the Eye weep; and the least sin makes Conscience smite. How did David's Heart
smite him for cutting off the Lap of Readiness Garment? A good Conscience is a
Star to guide, a Register to record, a Judge to determine, a Witness to accuse
or excuse; if Conscience does all these Offices right, then it is a renewed
Conscience, and speaks peace.

III. In the new Creature the Will is renewed. An old Bowl may have a new Bias
put into it: The Will having a new Bias of Grace put into it, is strongly
carried to Good. The Will of a Natural man opposes God. When the Wind goes one
way, and the Tide another, then there is a Storm; so it is when God's Will goes
one way, and ours another: But when our Will goes with God's, as the Wind with
the Tide, then there is a sweet Calm of Peace in the Soul. The sanctified Will
answers to God's Will, as the Echo to the Voice. Psalm. 27.8. When thou said,
Seek ye my face, my Heart said unto thee, Thy Face, Lord, will I seek; and the
Will being renewed, like the primum Mobile, it carries all the Affections along
with it.

IV. The new Creature has a new Conversation. Grace alters a man's walk:
Before he walked proudly, now humbly; before loosly, now holily. He makes the
Word his Rule, and Christ's Life his Pattern. Phil. 3.20. Our Conversation is in
Heaven. As a Ship that is sailing Eastward, there comes a Gale of wind and
blows it Westward; So, before a man did sail Hell-ward, and on a sudden the
Spirit of God comes upon him, and blows him Heavenward; here is a new
Conversation. It was a Speech of Oecolampadius, I would not speak or do any
thing that I thought Jesus Christ would not approve of, if he were here
corporally present. Where there is circumcision of heart, there is
circumspection of Life. If we find it thus, that all things are become n^w,
then we are new Creatures, and shall go to the new Jerusalem when we die.

Use 3. Exhortation. Labor to be new creatures. Nothing else will avail us.
Gal. 6.15. Neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but a
new Creature. We are for new Things; we love new Fashions, and why not new
Hearts? But People are full of Prejudices against the new Creature.

Object. 1. If we are new creatures, there must be so much strictness in
Religion, so much praying and watching as discourageth.

Answ. 1. Is there any thing excellent to be obtained without Labor? What
pains is taken in searching for a Vein of Silver, or seeking for Pearl? Men
cannot have the world without labor; and would they have Salvation so?

2. The Labor in Religion bears no proportion with the Reward. What are a few
tears shed, to a weight of Glory? The Soldier is content to wrestle with
difficulties, and undergo a bloody Fight for a glorious Victory. In all Labor
for Heaven there is Profit: It Is like a Man that digs in a Gold-Mine, and
carries away all the Gold.

3. Men take more pains to go to Hell: What pains does an ambitious man take to
climb to the Pinnacle of Honor? Tullia rid over the dead Body of her Father to
be made Queen. How does the covetous man tire himself, break his sleep, and his
peace, to get the World? Thus some Men take more pains in the Service of sin,
than others do in the pursuit of holiness. Men talk of pains in Religion; when
God's Spirit comes into one, it turns Labor into Delight. 'Twas Paul's Heaven
to serve God, Romans 7.22. The ways of Wisdom are pleasantness, Prove. 3.17. It Is
like walking among Beds of Spices, which cast forth a sweet Perfume.

Object. 2. But if we leave our old company, and become new creatures, we shall
be exposed to many Reproaches.

Answ. Who are they that speak evil of Religion, but such as are evil? Male de
me loquuntur sed mali, said Seneca. Besides, is it not better that Men reproach
us for being good, than that God damn us for being wicked? Mat. 5.11. Blessed
are ye when men shall revile you. Stars are nevertheless glorious, though they
have ugly Names given them, as the Bear, and the Dragon. A Saint's Reproachs
are like a Soldier's Scars, honorable. 1 Pet. 4.14. If ye are reproached for
the Name of Christ, a Spirit of God, and of Glory rests upon you. While Men
clip your Credit, to make it weigh lighter, they make your Crown heavier.

Having answered these Objections, I come now to reassume the Exhortation.
Above all things, labor to be New Creatures.

MOTIVES.
1. In this true Christianity does consist; it is not Baptism makes a
Christian: Many are no better than baptized Heathens. The essential part of
Religion lies in the new creature. Romans 2.29. Circumcision is that of the
Heart. Every thing has a Name from the better part; we call a Man a Reasonable
Creature, because of his Soul, which is the more noble part; so one is called a
Christian, because he acts from a Principle of the new creature, which the
carnal man does not.

2. It is the new creature fits us for Communion with God: We cannot converse
with God till then. Birds cannot converse with men unless they had a Rational
Nature put into them; nor can Men converse with God, unless being made new
creatures, they partake of the Divine Nature. Communion with God is a Mystery
to most. Every one that hangs about the Court, does not speak with the King:
All that meddle with holy Duties, and as it were, hang about the Court of
Heaven, have not communion with God. It Is only the new creature enjoys God's
Presence in Ordinances, and sweetly converses with him, as a Child with a
Father.

3. The necessity of being new creatures.

1. Till then we are odious to God. Zech. 11.8. My Soul loathed them. A Sinner
is to God worse than a Toad; a Toad has no Poison, but what God has put into
it; but a Sinner has that which the Devil has put into him. Acts 5.3. Why
has Satan filled thy heart to lie? A wicked Man is possessed with an evil
Spirit. One man is possessed with the Devil of Pride, another with the Devil of
Malice. This must needs make Persons odious to God, to be possessed with the
Devil. Thus it is till we become new creatures.

2. Till we are new creatures, our Duties are not accepted with God; they are
but wild Grapes.

1. Because God accepts no man but where he sees his Image. The new creature is
called the renewing of God's Image, Ephesians. 4.24. When they br^^ght Tamerlane a
Pot of Gold, he asked what stamp it had on it: And when he saw the Roman stamp
on it, he refused it: So if God does not see his own Stamp and Image on the
Soul, he rejects the most specious Services.

2. Duties of Religion are not accepted without the new Creature, because there
is that wanting which should make them a sweet Savor to God. The holy Oil for
the Tabernacle, was to be made of several Spices and Ingredients, Exodus 30.23.
Now, if any of these Spices had been left out, it had not been pleasing. The
unregenerate Man leaves out the chief Spice in his Duties, and that is Faith.
And, Heb. 11.6. Without Faith it is impossible to please God. Faith lays hold
on Christ, and so is accepted.

3. Such as are not new creatures, but grow upon the Stock of old Adam, get no
benefit by Ordinances: They are to them as Diascordium in a dead Man's Mouth;
they lose their virtue. Nay, not only Ordinances do them no good, but hurt. It
were sad if all a man did eat should turn to poison. The Word Preached is a
Savor of Death; it is not healing, but hardening. Nay, Christ himself is
accidentally a Rock of offense, 1 Pet. 2.7. The Wicked stumble at a Savior,
and suck death from the Tree of Life.

4. Without being new creatures, we cannot arrive at Heaven. Rev. 21.27. There
shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles. Heaven is not like
Noah's Ark, that received clean and unclean. A Sinner is compared to Swine, 2
Pet. 2.22. And shall a Swinish Creature tread upon the Golden Pavement of
Heaven? Indeed the Frogs came into King Pharoah's Court; but in Heaven there is
no entertainment for such Vermin.

It Is only the new creature qualifies us for Glory. This consecrates the Heart,
and only the pure in heart shall see God. The new creature elevates the Soul,
as the Loadstone elevates the Iron. A Soul renewed by Grace, is fit to ascend
to the heavenly Glory.

4. The Excellency of the new Creature.

1. the Nobility. 2. The Immortality.
I. The Nobility. The new Creature fetches its Pedigree from Heaven; it is born
of God. God counts none else of the Blood Royal; it enobles a man's Spirit; he
aspires after the Favor of God, and looks no lower than a Crown. The new
creature raises one to honor; he excells the Princes of the Earth, Psalm.
89.27. and is Fellow-Commoner with Angels.

II. The Immortality. The new creature is begotten of the incorruptible Seed of
the Word, and never dies: It lasts as long as the Soul, as Angels, as Heaven.
God has laid out much Cost upon it; and if it perish, he should lose all his
Cost. When Xerxes destroyed the Temples in Greece, he caused the Temple of
Diana to be preserved for its beautiful Structure. The new creature is God's
Temple, adorned with all the Graces, which he will not suffer to be demolished.
Riches take Wings, Kings Crowns tumble in the Dust: Nay, some of the Graces may
cease; Faith and Hope shall be no more, but the new creature abides for ever,
1 John. 2.27.

5. The Misery of the unregenerate creature: Dying so, I may say of him, as
Christ said of Judas, Mark 14.21. It were good for that Man if he had not been
born. Better have been a Toad, a Serpent, any thing, if not a new creature. The
old Sinner must go into old Tophet, Isa. 30.33.

Damned Caitiffs will have nothing to ease their Torments; not one drop of
Honey in all their Gall. In the Sacrifice of Jealousy, there was to be no Oil
put to it, Numb. 5. In Hell there is no Oil of Mercy put to the Sufferings of
the damned, to lenifie them.

Therefore get out of the Wild Olive of Nature; labor to be new creatures,
lest you curse your selves at last. A sinful Life will cause a despairing Death.

Quest. What shall we do to be new Creatures?

Answ. 1. Wait on the Ordinances. The Preaching of the Word is the Seed of
which the new Creature is formed: This is the Trumpet which must make the dead
in Sin come out of their Grave.

2. Pray earnestly for the new Creature: Lord, thou have made me once, make me
again: What shall I do with this old heart? It defiles all it touches. Urge
God with his Promise. Ezekiel. 36.26. A new Heart will I give you. Say, Lord, I am
as the dry Bones; but thou did cause Breath to come into them, Ezekiel. 37.10.
Do the same to me; breath a supernatural Life of Grace into me.

Use 4. Thankfulness. Let such as are new creatures stand upon Mount Gerizim,
blessing and praising God: Ascribe all to the Riches of God's Love* set the
Crown upon the head of free Grace. God has done more for you than if he had
made you Kings and Queens. Though you have not so much of the World as others,
you are happier than the greatest Monarchs upon Earth; and I dare say, you
would not change with them. The Apostles seldom speak of the new Creation, but
they join some thankful Praises with it. 1 Pet. 1.3. Blessed be God, who
according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again to a lively hope. Col.
1.12. Giving thanks to the Father, who has made us meet for the inheritance in
light. The new creature is a sign of Election, a badge of Adoption. What
distinguishing Love is this, that God should make any of us new creatures, when
he has left the greatest part of the World to perish in their Sins? Such as
are Paterns of Mercy should be Trumpets of Praise.

Of the Government of the Tongue.
Jam. 3.6. And the Tongue is a Fire, a World of Iniquity.


THE Apostle James in this Scripture describes the Evil of the Tongue: The
Tongue is a Fire, a World of Iniquity.

1. It is a Fire: It burns with intemperate heat; it causes the Heat of
Contention; it sets others in a Flame.

2. A World of Iniquity: It was at first made to be an Organ of God's Praise,
but it is become an Instrument of Unrighteousness. All the Members of the Body
are sinful, as there is bitterness in every Branch of Wormwood; but the Tongue
is excessively sinful, full of deadly Poison, verse. 8.

Doctr. The Tongue, though it be a little Member, yet it has a World of Sin in
it. The Tongue is an unruly Evil. We put Bitts in Horses Mouths and rule them;
but the Tongue is an unbridled Thing. It is hard to find a Curbing bitt to rule
the Tongue. There is a World of Sin in the Tongue. The Devil makes use of Men's
Tongues for the promoting most of the Wickedness which is in the World. I shall
show you some of the Evils of the Tongue.

I. The Evil Tongue (travel a little over this World) is the silent Tongue: It
is wholly mute in Matters of Religion; it never speaks of God or Heaven, as if
it cleaved to the roof of the Mouth. Men are fluent and discursive enough in
other Things, but in Matters of Religion their Lips are sealed up. If we come
into some People's Company, we do not know what Religion they are of, whether
Jews or Mahometans, for they never speak of Christ; they are like the Man in
the Gospel, who was possessed with a Dumb Devil, Mar. 9.17.

II. The Evil Tongue is the earthly Tongue: Men talk of nothing but the World,
their Wares and Drugs, or their rich Purchase. Son's of the Earth; they have
the Serpent's Curse, lick the Dust. Ioh. 3.31. He that is of the Earth,
speaks of the Earth: as if all their Hopes were here, and they looked for an
earthly Eternity; these have Brutish Minds. Seneca being asked of what Country
he was, answered, that he was (...), a Citizen of this World: So, many are
Citizens of this World, all their Discourse and Traffic is here. Their Speech
bewrays them.

III. The Evil Tongue is the hasty or angry Tongue: They have no command of
Passions, but are carried away with them, as a Chariot with wild Horses. I know
there is an Holy Anger, when we are angry with Sin: Christ had this Anger when
they made the Temple a place of Merchandice, Ioh. 2.15. That Anger is without
Sin, which is against Sin; but that is an Evil Tongue, which is presently blown
up into exorbitant Passion; this Tongue is set on Fire from Hell. Isaiah's Lips
were touched with a Coal from the Altar, Isa. 6. His Tongue was set on Fire
from Heaven; but the angry furious Tongue is set on Fire from Hell. When the
Tongue is on Fire, it is the Devil that lights the Match. Eccles. 7.9. Anger
rests in the Bosom of Fools: It may be in a Wise Man, but it rests in a Fool.
More are drunk with Passion than Wine: Hierome. Water when it is hot soon boils
over: So when the Heart is heated with Anger, it soon boils over in fiery and
passionate Speeches. 1 King. 19.12. after the Earthquake a Fire, but God was
not in the Fire: So I may say of the Fire of rash Anger, God is not in this
Fire. Grace heats the Heart but cools the Tongue; makes it meek and calm.
Passion transports it often, disturbs the use of Reason; Brevis Insania; and if
Reason cannot act, much less can Grace. Rashness of Anger hinders Holy Duties.
Hot Passions make cold Prayers. A wrathful Spirit is unsuitable to the Gospel:
It is a Gospel of Peace, and it is sealed by the Spirit, who came in the Form
of a Dove; a meek peaceable Creature. Thou who art given much to Passion, whose
Tongue is often set on Fire, take heed thou do not one Day in Hell desire a
drop of Water to cool thy Tongue.

IV. The Evil Tongue is the Vain Tongue, that vents its self in idle Words: as
if a Tree should bear nothing but Blossoms, Psalm. 10.7. under his Tongue is
Vanity; his Speaking is like a Child's Scribbling, vain and insignificant. Men
want Grace to Ballast them, and make them serious. A vain Tongue shows a light
Heart. A good Man's Words are weighty and prudent; his Lips are as a Tree of
Life to feed many; his Speech is edifying: Prove. 10.20. The Tongue of the Just
is as choice Silver. Gracious Words drop as Silver from him, to the enriching
the Souls of others: But, Prove. 15.2. the Mouth of Fools poors out foolishness:
like the Water in a Spout^ that runs out unprofitably and does no good. Many
have a Sea of W^r^s, but scarce a drop of Matter; they have Words without
Wisdom. How many idle away the Day of Grace in frivolous Discourses? A piece of
Gold sinks into the Water, but a Feather swims upon it. A Wise Man's Words are
like Gold, weighty, and will sink into the Hearts of others; but the Words of
many are light and feathery, and will make no impression. Matthew. 12.36. Every
idle Word that Men shall speak they shall give an account thereof in the Day of
Judgment. Words that are of no account will turn to an heavy account.

5. The Evil Tongue is the Censorious Tongue: Iam. 4.12. Who art thou that
judge another? Some make it a part of their Religion to judge and censure
others; they do not imitate their Graces, but censure their Failings: Such an
one is rash and indiscreet; such an one is an Hypocrite; this comes from Pride.
Were Men's Hearts more humble, their Tongues would be more charitable. The
Censurer sits in the Chair of Pride, and passes Sentence upon another, and
does reprobate him: This is to usurp God's Prerogative, and take his Work out
of his Hands; it is God's Work to judge, not ours. He who spends his Time in
censuring others, spends but little Time in examining himself; he does not see
his own faults. I fear this is the Sin of many Professors, when they meet
together to cast the Stone of Censure at others. There Is not a greater sign of
Hypocrisy, than to be overhasty in judging and censuring Persons. A Gracious
Heart censures himself, and has charitable thoughts of others; the Hypocrite e
contra.

6. The Evil Tongue is the Slanderous Tongue. Psalm. 50.20. Thou sit and
slanderest thy own Mother's Son. Slandering is when we speak to the prejudice
of another, and speak that which is not true. Worth and Eminency is commonly
blasted by Slander: Holiness it self is no Shield from Slander. The Lambs
Innocence will not preserve it from the Wolf. John Baptist came neither eating
nor drinking, yet they say he has a Devil, Matthew. 11.18. Slandering Job calls
the Scourge of the Tongue, Job 5.21. And Ier. 18.18. Come and let us smite him
with the Tongue; you may smite another and never touch him. Psalm. 64.3. Their
Tongues are Arrows shot out. A Slanderer wounds another's Fame, and no
Physician can heal these Wounds. Majora sunt lingua vulnera quam gladii, Aug.
The Sword does not make so deep a Wound as the Tongue. The Greek Word for
Slanderer signifies Devil, 1 Timothy 3.11. Some think it is no great matter to
belie and defame another; but know, this is to act the part of a Devil. The
Slanderer's Tongue is a two-edged Sword, it Wounds two at once. While the
Slanderer Wounds another in his Name, he Wounds himself in his Conscience. This
is contrary to Scripture, Iam. 4.11. Speak not Evil one of another. (...). God
takes this ill at our Hands, to speak Evil of others, especially such as are
eminently Holy, and help to bear up the Honor of Religion. Numb. 12.8. Were
not ye afraid to speak against my Servant Moses. What my Servant, who has
wrought so many Miracles, whom I have spoken with in the Mount Face to Face,
were not ye afraid to speak against him? So will God say. It is the Devils
proper Sin, he is the Accuser of the Brethren; he does not commit Adultery, but
bears False Witness. The Slanderer is still clipping the Credit of his
Neighbor, that he may make it weigh lighter: Take heed of this, it is a Sin
our Nature is very prone to; and remember it is no less Sin to rob another of
his Good Name, than to steal his Goods or Wares out of his Shop.

7. The Evil Tongue is the Unclean Tongue, that vents it self in filthy and
scurillous words. Men's Language is such as if they came out of Hell: This is
forbidden, Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt Communication proceed out of your Mouth.
Better be born Dumb, than to have the Devil in ones Tongue. A Sign of a great
Distemper, that the Fever is high, when the Tongue is black. A Sign Men's
Hearts are very Evil, when such black Words come from them. When I go in the
Streets, and hear the Language of some, I think of the Man in the Gospel, who
had the Spirit of an Unclean Devil in him, Luke 4.33. Men's Lips do not drop as
the Honycomb, but they drop Poison to the defiling of others, 1 Cor. 15.33. It
is a Sign when the Face breaks out in Sores and Pimples, that the Blood is
corrupt; so an unclean Tongue may be compared to a Sink, where all the Filth of
the House is carried forth. We read that the Lips of the Leper were to be
covered, Lev. 13.45. 'Twere well if we had such Magistrates as would by their
Authority cover the unclean Lips of those Lepers in this City.

8. The Evil Tongue is the Lying Tongue. Col. 3.9. Lie not one to another. The
Cretians were noted for Liars, Tit. 1.12. (...), etc. The Cretians are always
Liars. It becomes not Christians to be Cretians. Nothing more contrary to God
than a Lie; it shows much Irreligion: In Heart there wants the fear of God,
which should Bridle lying Lips. Lying is a Sin that does not go alone; it
ushers in other Sins. Absalom told his Father a Lie, that he was going to pay
his Vow at Hebron, 2 Samuel 15.7. and this Lie was a Preface to his Treason.
Lying is such a Sin as takes away all Society and Converse with Men: How can
you have Converse with him that you cannot trust a Word he says? It is a Sin
so sordid, that when the Liar is convicted he is ashamed. God's Children have
this Character, they are Children that will not Lie, Isa. 63.8. the New Nature
in them will not suffer them. The Liar is near a Kin to the Devil; and the
Devil will shortly claim kindred with him: Ioh. 8.44. The Devil is a Liar and
the Father of it. He seduced our First Parents by a Lie, Genesis 3.4. How does
this Sin incense God? he struck Ananias dead for telling a Lie, Act. 5.5. The
Furnace of Hell is heated to throw Liars into. Rev. 22.15. Without are Dogs,
and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and whosoever loves and tells a Lie.

9. The Evil Tongue is the Flattering Tongue: That will speak fair to ones
Face, but will defame: Pro. 26.25. He that hates dissembleth with his Lips:
When he speaks fair believe him not: Dissembled Love is worse than Hatred.
Some can commend and reproach, flatter and hate: [Honey in their Mouths, but a
sting of Malice in their Hearts:] Better are the Wounds of a Friend, than the
Kisses of such an Enemy. Hierome says, The Arrian Faction pretended
Friendship; they, says he, kissed my Hands, but slandered me and sought my
Ruin. Many have dissembling Tongues; they can say, Your Servant, and lay
Snares: Prove. 29.5. A Man that flattereth his Neighbor, spreads snares for
his Feet: You often think you have a Friend in your Bosom, but he proves a Viper.
To dissemble Love is no better than a Lie; for there is a pretense of that Love
which is not. Many are like Ioab, 2 Samuel 20.9. And Joab said to Amasa art thou
in Health my Brother, and he took him by the Beard to kiss him, and he smote
him in the Fifth Rib that he dyed. Impia sub dulci melle venena latent. For my
part, I much question his Truth toward God, that will flatter and lie to his
Friend: He who counterfeits love to his Friend, is worse than he that Coins
counterfeit Money. God will bring such an one to shame at last. Prove. 26.26.
Whose hatred is covered by deceit, his Wickedness shall be showed before the
whole Congregation.

10. The Evil Tongue is the Tongue given to Boasting. Iam. 3.5. The Tongue is a
little Member, and boasts great things. There is an Holy boasting, Psalm.
44.8. In God we boast all the Day; when we triumph in his Power and Mercy: But
it is a sinful boasting, when Men display their Trophies, boast of their own
Worth and Eminency, that others may admire and cry them up: A Man's self is his
Idol, and he loves to have this Idol worshipped: Acts 5.36. There arose up
Theudas boasting himself to be Somebody. 2. Sinful boasting is when Men boast
of their Sins: Psalm. 52. 1. Why boastest thou thy self in mischief, O mighty
Man? Some boast how wicked they have been; how many they have made drunk; how
many they have deflowered: As if a Beggar should boast of his Sores; or a Thief
boast of being burnt in the Hand: Such as boast of their sinful Exploits, will
have little cause to rejoice or hang up their Trophies when they come to Hell.

XI. The Evil Tongue is the Swearing Tongue: Matthew. 5.34. Swear not at all. The
Scripture allows an Oath for the ending of a Controversy, and to clear the
Truth, Heb. 6.16. But in ordinary discourse to use an Oath, and so to take
God's Name in Vain, is sinful. Swearing may be called the unfruitful Work of
Darkness; there is neither Pleasure nor Profit in it; it is like an Hook the
Fish comes to without a Bait. Ier. 23.10. Because of Swearing the Land Mourns.
Some think it the grace of their Speech; but will God reckon with Men for idle
Words, what will he do for sinful Oaths?

Obj. But it is only a petty Oath? they but Swear by their Faith?

Answ. Sure they which have so much Faith in their Mouth, have none in their
Heart. But it is my Custom. Is this an excuse or an aggravation of the Sin? If
a Malefactor should be Arraigned for Robbing, and he should say to the Judge,
Spare me, it is my Custom to rob on the Highway; the Judge would say, Thou
shall the rather die. For every Oath thou Swearest, God puts a drop of Wrath
into his Viol.

Obj. But may some think, what though now and then I Swear an Oath, Words are
but Wind?

Answ. But they are such a Wind as will blow thee into Hell, without repentance.

12. The Railing Tongue is an evil Tongue. This is a Plague Sore breaking out
at the Tongue, when we give opprobrious Language. When the Dispute was between
the Archangel and the Devil about the Body of Moses, Jude v. 9. the Archangel
durst not bring a railing Accusation against him; but said, The Lord rebuke
thee. The Archangel durst not rail against the Devil. Railing often ends in
Reviling, and so Men bring themselves into a Praemunire, and are in danger of
Hellfire, Matthew. 5.22.

13. The Seducing Tongue is an evil Tongue. The Tongue that by fine Rhetoric
decoys Men into Error. Romans 16.18. By fair Speechs they deceive the hearts of
the simple. A fair Tongue can put off bad Wares. Error is bad Ware, which a
seducing Tongue can put off. The Deceit lies in this; a smooth Tongue can make
Error look so like Truth, that you can hardly know them asunder: As thus; in
Justification: Christ bears infinite Love to justified Persons; this is a
glorious Truth; but under this Notion, the Antinomian presses Libertinism:
Believers may take more liberty to sin, and God sees no Sin in them: Thus, by
crying up Justification, they destroy Sanctification. Here is the Seducing
Tongue; and Error is as dangerous as Vice: One may die by Poison as well as a
Pistol.

14. The evil Tongue is the cruel Tongue, that speaks to the wounding the
hearts of others. The Tongue is made almost in the fashion of a Sword; and the
Tongue is sharp as a Sword. Psalm. 57.4. Their Tongue is a sharp Sword. Kind,
loving Words should be spoken to such as are of a heavy heart. Job 6.14. To him
that is afflicted pity should be shown. Healing Words are fittest for a broken
heart; but that is a cruel, unmerciful Tongue which speaks such Words to the
afflicted, as cut them to the heart. Psalm. 69.26. They talk to the grief of
those whom thou have wounded. Hannah was a Woman of a troubled Spirit. 1 Samuel
1.10. She was in bitterness of Soul, and wept sore. And now Eli, ver. 14. said
unto her, How long will thou be drunken? Put away thy Wine from thee. This Word
was like pouring Vinegar into the Wound. When Job was afflicted with God's
Hand, his Friends, instead of comforting him, tell him he was an Hypocrite. Job
11.2. These were cutting Words, which went to his heart. Instead of giving him
Cordials in his fainting, they use Corrosives. This is to lay more weight upon
a dying Man.

15. The evil Tongue is the murmuring Tongue. Jude 16. These are Murmurers.
Murmuring is Discontent breaking out at the Lips. Men quarrel with God, and tax
his Providence, as if he had not dealt well with them. Why should any murmur,
or be discontented at their Condition? Does God owe them any thing? Or, can
they deserve any thing at his hands? Oh, how uncomely is it to murmur at
Providence! It is fittest for a Cain to be Wroth with God. Genesis 4.6.

1. Murmuring proceeds from Unbelief. When men distrust God's Promise, then
they murmur at his Providence. Psalm. 106.24, 25. They believed not his Word,
but murmured. When Faith grows low, then Passions grow high.

2. Murmuring proceeds from Pride, men think they have deserved better; and
because they are crossed, therefore they utter discontented Expressions against
God. He who is humble bears any thing from God; he knows his Punishment is less
than his Sin; therefore says, I will bear the indignation of the Lord, Micah
7.9. But Pride conjures up this Devil of Discontent; and hence come Murmurings:
Murmuring is a Sin that God cannot bear. Numb. 14.27. How long shall I bear
with this People that murmur against me? The Murmurer discovers much
Ingratitude. A murmuring Tongue is always an unthankful Tongue: He considers
not how he is a Debtor to Free Grace; and whatever he has is more than God
owes him: He considers not that his Mercies outweigh his Afflictions; there is
more Honey in his Cup than Wormwood: He considers not what God has done for
him more than such as are better than he: He has the finest of Wheat, when
others feed as Daniel, on Pulse. The Murmurer, I say, does not consider this;
but because he is crossed in some small matter, he repines against God. Oh
Ingratitude! Israel, though they had Manna from Heaven, to satisfy their
Hunger, Angels Food; yet murmured for want of Quails; not content that God
should supply their want, but must satisfy their Lusts too. Oh unthankful!
Israel's murmuring cost many of them their Lives. 1 Cor. 10.10. Neither murmur
ye as some of them did, and were destroyed of the Destroyer. Their Speechs were
venomous, and God punished them with venomous Serpents.

16. The evil Tongue is the scoffing Tongue. The Scoffer sits in the Chair of
Scorners, and derides Religion. Surely the Devil has taken great possession of
men, when they have arrived at such a degree of Sin as to scoff at Holiness. It
was foretold as a Sin of the last Times. 2 Pet. 3.3. There shall come in the
last days Scoffers. Some scoff at the Authority of Scripture, Deity of Christ,
the Immortality of the Soul: This is the worst sort of Tongues. When Men have
laid aside the Veil of Modesty, and their Consciences are ^eared, then they
fall a scoffing at Religion; and when once they are come to this, their case is
desperate; no Reproofs will reclaim them. Tell them of their Sin, and they will
hate you the more. Prove. 9.8. Reprove not a Scorner, lest he hate thee. Such a
man is on the Threshold of Damnation.

17. The evil Tongue is the Tongue given to Cursing. Psalm. 10.7. His Mouth is
full of cursing; a wishing some great evil to befall another. Cursing is the
Scum that boils off from a wicked Heart. Though it is true, the Curse causless
shall not come; [it is not in man's power to make another cursed,] yet to wish
a Curse, is a fearful Sin. If to hate our Brother, be Murder, 1 John 3.15. then
to curse him, which is the highest degree of Hatred, must needs be Murder. To
use an Execration or Curse, is for a man to do what lies in him to damn
another. Some wish a Curse upon themselves: So the Jews; His Blood be upon us,
etc. and so do your God damme's, as if Damnation did not come fast enough.
Psalm. 109.17. As be loved cursing, so let it come to him.

18. The evil Tongue is the unjust Tongue; that will for a piece of Money open
its Mouth in a bad Cause. The Lawyer has Linguam venalem, a Tongue that will
be sold for Money. Psalm. 82.2. How long will ye judge unjustly? Some will plead
any Cause, though never so bad: Though it appears the Deeds are forged, the
Witnesses bribed, there is Perjury in the Cause; yet they will plead it. When a
man pleads a bad Cause, he is the Devil's Attorney. As God hates false weights,
so a false Cause. Better be born dumb, than open ones mouth in a bad Cause. Oh,
what times are we in! Many pervert Justice, and for enriching themselves,
overthrow a righteous Cause. These are worse than they that rob; for they
fleece men's Estates under a color of Law, and ruin them under a pretense of
doing Justice.

Use 1. Branch 1. See what a Blow we have sustained by the Fall; it has put
out of frame the whole course of Nature. Original Sin has diffused it self as
a poison into all the Members of the Body. It has made the Eye unchaste, the
Hands full of Bribes; among the rest, it has defiled the Tongue; it is a world
of iniquity: That which was made to be the Organ of God's Praise, is become a
weapon of unrighteousness.

Bran 2. If there be so much evil in the Tongue, what is in the Heart? If the
Stream be so full of Water, how full of Water is the Fountain? If there be a
world of iniquity in the Tongue, how many worlds of Sin are there in the heart?
Psalm. 5.9. Their inward part is very wickedness. If the Tongue, which is the
outward part, be so wicked, the inward part is very wickedness. Psalm. 64.6. The
Heart is deep. It is such a Deep as cannot be fathomed; deep Pride, Hypocrisy,
Atheism.

The Heart is like the Sea, where is the Leviathan, and creeping things
innumerable, Psalm. 104. If the Skin has Boils or Leprosy in it, how much
Corruption is in the Blood? If the Tongue be so bad, how diabolical is the
Heart? It is the Heart sets the Tongue a-work. Out of the abundance of the
Heart the Mouth speaks. There are the Seeds of all Atheism and Blasphemy. The
Heart is the Trojan Horse, out of which a whole Army of Sin comes. Matthew. 15.9.
Out of the Heart proceed evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries; these defile a
man. If a Branch of Wormwood be so bitter, then how bitter is the Root? Oh,
what a Root of Bitterness grows in a man's Heart! Some say they have good
Hearts, but if the Tongue be so bad, quid Cor? If I see a Smoke come out of the
top of a Chimney, what a Fire burns within? Prove. 6.12, 14. A wicked man
walks with a froward mouth: frowardness is in his Heart. Solomon shows Reason
why the Mouth is so froward; Frowardness is in his Heart. The Heart is a
Storehouse of Wickedness; therefore called the evil Treasure of the Heart,
Mat. 12.35. Original Righteousness was a good Treasure; but we were robbed of
that; and now there is an evil Treasure of Sin. The Word Treasure, denotes
Plenty; to show the fullness and abundance of Sin that is in the Heart. The
Heart is a lesser Hell; which is matter of deep Humiliation. The Heart is like
the Egyptian Temples, full of Spiders and Serpents.

Use 2. Reproof. It reproves such as abuse their Tongues in all manner of evil
speaking, Lying, Slandering, rash Anger. The Heart is a Vessel full of Sin, and
the Tongue sets it abroach. O how fast do men's Tongues gallop in Sin! They say,
they give God their hearts; but let the Devil take possession of their Tongues.
Ps. 12.4. Our Lips are our own, who is Lord over us? Who has any thing to do
with our Words? Who shall control us? Who is Lord over us? There Is no Engine
the Devil makes more use of than the Tongue. What Errors, Contentions,
Impieties have been propagated this way to the Dishonor of the high God? David
calls his Tongue his Glory. Psalm. 57.8. Awake my Glory. Why did he call his
Tongue his Glory, but because by it he did set forth God's Glory in praising
him? But a wicked man's Tongue is not his Glory, but his Shame. With his Tongue
he wounds the Glory of God; it is set on fire of Hell.

Use 3. Confutation. Bran. 1. It confutes the Catharists, and Perfectists, that
plead for Perfection in this Life. If the Tongue has so many Evils in it, how
are they perfect? Prove. 20.9. Who can say I have made my heart clean, I am pure
from Sin? He makes a challenge to all the World. But the Perfectist says, he
is pure from Sin: Like Isidore the Monk, Non hab^o, Domine, quod mihi ignoscas;
I have nothing, Lord, for thee to pardon. If pure and perfect, then they put
Christ out of Office; he has nothing to do for them as an Advocate; they have
no need of his Intercession. But, Eccles. 7.20. There is not a just man upon
Earth, that does good, and sins not. Nay, that sins not in doing good. In
the Grammar, with the Present Tense is joined the Imperfect: With the Present
State of Grace is joined Imperfection. There Is not a just man on earth, that
sins not; nay, I may say, that sins not in his tongue. Moses was noted
for the meekest man alive; yet he spoke unadvisedly with his Lips: Hear ye
Rebels. Moses could not plead Perfection. Paul was an elect Vessel; but there
fell out a sharp contention between him and Barnabas; and they grew so hot in
their Words, that they parted each from other; and we do not read that they had
any more friendly Visits, Acts 15.39. Paul himself was not perfect. Sin is like
the wild Fig Tree in the Wall; cut off the Branches, and Stump, yet some Sprig
or other will spring out again. How proud and supercilious are they who hold
they are perfect, when the holiest men alive, at some time or other offend in
their Tongue? There is no Perfection on this side the Grave. Perfection never
begins till the Life ends. Only the Death of the Body will free us from the
Body of Death.

Branch 2. It confutes the Arminians; those Patrons of Free Will: they say,
they have power to their own Salvation; they can change their Heart. The
Apostle says, The Tongue can no man tame, Jam. 3.8. If they cannot bridle
their Tongue, how can they conquer their Will? If they cannot master this
little Member, (Tongue,) how can they change their Nature? Alas, as St. Austin
says, Cathedram habet in Coelo, qui corda docet in Terra; He has his Pulpit
in Heaven, that converts Hearts. But what Reply will Men make at the last Day,
when God shall say, You had power to convert your selves, why were you not
converted? You could have come to Christ if you pleased; but why did ye not? It
was Wilfulness. Ex ore tuo, out of thy own mouth I will condemn thee.

Use 4. Caution. Take heed to your Tongue; have a care that ye offend not with
your Tongue. Psalm. 34.14. Keep thy Tongue from evil. A Sin we are very prone
to, to lash out with our Tongues. There Is the Fire of Lust in the Eye, and the
Fire of Passion in the Tongue. Psalm. 39.1. I said, I will take heed to my Ways,
that I offend not with my tongue. An hard Lesson! Pambus said he was above
twenty years learning that Scripture, not to offend with his tongue. The Tongue
is an unruly Member; God has set a double Hedge before the Tongue, the Teeth
and Lips, to keep it within its bounds, that it does not speak vainly. O, look
to your Tongue. When a City is besieged, he that keeps the Gates of the City,
keeps the whole City safe; so, if you keep the Gates or Doors of your Mouth,
you keep your whole Soul.

Rules for the well ordering and regulating your Words, or the governing of
your Tongue, that you do not dishonor God therewith. 1 Rule. If you would have
better Tongues, labor for better Hearts. It is the Heart has Influence upon
the Tongue. The Heart fills the Tongue with Words, as the Cistern is filled
from the Sponge. The way to heal the Tongue, is to better the Heart. The
Vapors that trouble the Head, come from the Stomach. If you would cure the
Head, apply something to the Stomach. If the Stomach were better, the Head
would be better; Reformation must begin at the Heart. In a Watch, when the
Wheels are out of order, they mend the Spring thereof; so when the Tongue is
like a Watch that runs too fast in vain, sinful talk, mend the Spring; let thy
Heart be bettered. If the Heart be vain and earthly, the Tongue will be so. If
the Water be foul in the Fountain, it cannot be clear in the Vessel. If the
Heart be holy, the Tongue will be so. Look to thy Heart; get a better Heart,
and a better Tongue.

Quest. How shall I get my Heart bettered?

Answ. Get a Principle of Grace infused: Grace is like the Salt cast into the
Spring: Grace changes the Heart, and sanctifies all the Members of the Body;
it sanctifies the Eyes, and makes them Chaste; it sanctifies the Tongue, and
makes it Meek and Calm. When the Holy Ghost came upon the Apostles, they began
to speak with other Tongues, Act. 2.4. When God's Spirit comes on a Man with a
sanctifying Work, he speaks with another Tongue; the Speech is Heavenly; Grace
makes the Heart Serious, and that cures the levity of the Tongue. When the
Heart is serious, the Words are savoury.

2 Rule. If you would not Sin in your Tongue, call to Mind how you have
formerly offended in your Tongue, and that will make you more watchful for the
Future. Have not you spoken Words that have savoured of Discontent or Envy?
Have not you been guilty of Censuring and Slandering? Have not you been
disguised with Passion? Has not your Tongue out run your Discretion? Have not
you spoken Words that you have been sorry for afterward, and have caused
either shame or tears? O observe former failings, how you have sinned in your
Tongue, and that will be a good help for the future. David certainly made a
Critical Observation upon some of his Words, wherein he had offended: Words of
Pride: Psalm. 30.6. In my Prosperity I said I shall never be moved. And, Psalm.
116.14. I said in my haste, All Men are Liars: Even Samuel and all the
Prophets, who promised me the Kingdom, they are all Liars; and I shall die
before I can come to enjoy it. David having observed how he had offended in his
Tongue, he is more careful of his Words, and made a strict Vow with himself
that he would look better them. Psalm. 39.1. I said I would take heed to my
Ways, that I offend not with my Tongue. Look to the former slips of your
Tongue, and how you have by your Words provoked God, and that will be a good
means to make you more cautious for the future. A Mariner that has twice
touched upon a Rock, and been like to be cast away, will be more careful how he
comes there again.

3 Rule. Watch your Tongue: Most Sin is committed for want of Watchfulness. As
the Tongue has a double Fence set about it, so it had need have a double
Watch. The Tongue when it is let loose will be ready to speak loosly; watch it,
lest it run beyond its Bounds, in frothy and sinful Discourse: Prove. 30.32. If
thou have thought Evil, lay thy Hand upon thy Mouth: That is (say some) lay thy
Hand upon thy Mouth in token of Repentance. But it may bear another Sense: If
thou have thought Evil, if angry malicious thoughts come into thy Mind, lay thy
Hand upon thy Mouth to stop thy Lips, that thy thoughts come not into Words; do
not speak what thou think* If thou have in thy Heart conceived Evil, let not
thy Tongue be the Midwife to bring it forth; lay thy Hand upon thy Mouth. The
Spiritual Watch must be kept daily: Watch and Pray: It Is not enough to Pray
against Sin, but you must Watch against it. Look to your Tongue that there be
no Wild Fire got into it. The Jews Sealed the Sepulcher and set a Watch: So
Seal up your Lips, by an Holy Vow, and then Watch them that they speak no Evil.

4 Rule. If you would not offend in your Tongue, ponder your Words well before
you speak, Eccles. 5.1. Be not rash with thy Mouth. Some speak vainly, because
inconsiderately; they do not weigh their Words before they speak them. He must
needs make wild Work in Printing, that should print his Letters and never mind
how he sets them. He that speaks rashly, speaks rudely, and discovers either
Indiscretion or Sin. Words spoken in haste may be repented of at leisure: As it
is with a Man's going; if he goes carelessly, and does not mind his way, his
Foot may be in a Slough ever he is aware: So with a Man's speaking, If he do
not mind his Words, but gives his Tongue liberty, he may speak not only
unadvisedly, but unholily, and give just offense.

5 Rule. If you would not offend in your Tongue, pray to God to guard your
Tongue: Psalm. 141.3. Set a Watch, O Lord, before my Mouth. Set not about this
Work in your own Strength, but implore God's help. The Tongue can no Man tame,
Jam. 3.8. Man that can tame the fiercest Creatures, Lion, Wolf, Elephant, yet
cannot tame the Tongue; but God can tame it; therefore go to him by Prayer:
Pray, Lord, set a Watch before the Door of my Lips; keep me, that I may speak
nothing to grieve thy Spirit, or that may tend to thy dishonor. God is the
great Lord Keeper, he keeps the Heart and Tongue. Pray, that his fear may be a
Golden Bridle to check us from speaking Evil; then we are safe when we have God
for our Guardian.

6 Rule. If you would be kept from evil speaking, inure your Tongues to good
speaking. If you would not have the Cask have a bad scent, put good Liquor into
it: So if you would not have your Tongue run out sinfully, let it be used to
good discourse; speak often one to another of Christ, and the things pertaining
to the Kingdom of God: The Spouses Lips dropped as an Honeycomb, Cant. 4.11.

MOTIVES. Use. To beware of Tongue-Sins.
1 Motive. If you have no care of your Tongues, all your Religion is Vain. Iam.
1.26. If any Man among you seems to be Religious, and bridleth not his Tongue,
this Man's Religion is vain. Many a one will hear the Word, and make a
profession of Religion; but cares not what Liberty he takes in his Tongue, to
reproach and vilify others. This Man's Religion is vain: That is, 1. He has
no Religion, his Religion is but a show or pretense. The Blazing Comet is no
Star. 2. It is vain, because it is ineffectual; it has not that force upon him
as Religion ought. That is a vain Thing, that does not do its Work, or Answer
its End. That Engine is vain, that will not carry the Water. That Physic is
vain, that will not Work. That Ship is vain, that will not Sail. And that
Religion is vain, which is ineffectual; it will not Bridle the Tongue, or
Master the Passions. That which does not attain the end for which it was
appointed, is a vain Thing.

2 Motive. The Tongue discovers much of the Heart. Verba sunt nuncia cordis:
Such as the Tongue is, such commonly the Heart is. A lascivious Tongue shows a
lustful Heart; an earthly Tongue a covetous Heart; a murmuring Tongue a
discontented Heart: The Tongue is often a Commentary upon the Heart. As the Face
breaking out in Sores shows the Blood is corrupt; so the Tongue breaking out in
sinful Discourse shows the Heart is corrupt.

3 Motive. To allow our selves in the abuse of the Tongue, cannot stand with
Grace. I know a good Man may sometimes speak unadvisedly with his Lips; he may
fly out in Words, be in a Passion; but he does not allow himself in it; when
his Passion is over he weeps. Romans 7.15. What I do I allow not; but for a Man
to allow himself in Sin, Censuring, Slandering, dropping Words like Coals of
Fire; sure it is not consistent with Grace. A Sheep may fall into the Dirt, but
does not lie there. A good Man may fall into a Sin of the Tongue, but does not
lie in it, he gets out again by repentance. To allow one's self in Sin, shows a
Man is overcome of it; that he regards it in his Heart, and that is
inconsistent with Grace, Psalm. 66.18.

4 Motive. The Sins of the Tongue are very defiling: (...), Iam. 3.6. The
Tongue defiles: Defiling to one's self, and chiefly defiling to others. The
Tongue conveys Poison into the Ear of another; sometimes by false Suggestions,
raising Prejudices in the Mind of another, against such a Person; sometimes by
passionate Speeches, the Spirit of another is provoked; as the firing one
Beacon causes more Beacons to be fired: So one angry Tongue makes more, and
stirs up the Fire of Contention.

5 Motive. The Evil Tongue is set on Fire of Hell. In the Text, Isaiah's Tongue
was set on Fire from Heaven; but a malicious, censorious, passionate Tongue, is
set on Fire from Hell. When Satan inflames the Tongue, then it spits Fire: How
rashly and sinfully did the Prophet Jonah speak, Chapter 4.9. I do well to be angry
to the Death. Jonah in the Hebrew signifies a Dove, which is without Gall; but
he showed too much Gall of bitterness: What! to be angry! and to be angry with
God! and to justify it! Sure his Tongue had not a Coal from God's Altar; for
that was very unseemly for a Prophet. When you find your Spirits inflamed, and
your Tongues on Fire, say as it is Deuteronomy. 29.24. What means the Heat of this
Great Anger? Whence does this Fire come? Is this Coal fetched from the Altar,
or the Infernal Pit? Does not Satan kindle this Fire in my Tongue, and then
warm himself at it?

6 Motive. The Sins of the Tongue are provoking to God, and prejudicial to us.
1. Provoking to God; they make the fury rise up in his Face, Psalm. 106.33.
Moses spoke unadvisedly with his Lips. What was this unadvised Speech? Numb.
20.10, 11. Hear now ye Rebels; must we fetch you Water out of this Rock?
Though he were a Favorite, and God had spoken with him Face to Face, yet God
gives him a check for it; it turned his smile into a frown. 2. Prejudicial to
us: Moses's rash Speech shut him out of Canaan; it may us out of Heaven, of
which that was but a Type. The Fiery Tongue often brings Men to the Fiery
Furnace. The rich Man cried for a drop of Water to cool his Tongue. Origin
notes, he had sinned most in his Tongue, and God punished him most in his
Tongue.

7 Motive. He who offends not in his Tongue is a perfect Man: An high
expression. If any Man offend not in Word, the same is a perfect Man; that is,
attained to a very high degree; in the highest Form of Christ's School: A
prudent Man, or an upright Man, or comparatively, in comparison of others, such
as have not gotten the Conquest over their Passions; he is far above them; and
in comparison of them he is a perfect Man; such an one was Holy Cranmer, that
could not be provoked by the ill carriages of others, but requited injuries
with kindness.

8 Motive. You must give an account to God, as well of your Speeches, as your
Actions, Mat. 12.36. Every idle Word that Men shall speak, they shall give
account thereof in the Day of Judgment: Words of no account will have an heavy
account; and if God will reckon with Men for every idle, angry Word, then what
will he do for sinful Oaths? O that my Words were written, Job 19.23. Truly if
many People's Words were written, they would be ashamed of them. And let me
tell you, your Words are written, Rev. 20.12. The Books were opened. In the
Book of God's remembrance all your Words are written: You had need then be
careful you offend not with your Tongues; God writes down all you speak, and
you must give an account to him. When Latimer heard the Pen going behind the
Hangings, he was careful in his Answers: And let me tell you, as your Words
are, such will your Sentence be; when the Books are opened, God will proceed
with you in Judicature, according to your Words. By your Words you shall be
saved or condemned, Matthew. 12.37. By thy Words thou shall be justified, and by
thy Words thou shall be condemned: This should Bridle our Tongues from evil
speaking. If our Words be good, the Sentence will go on our side; if evil, the
Sentence will go against us; By thy Words, etc. Treasonable Words make Men
guilty in Man's Court; and vain, sinful in God's.

Against being weary in well-doing.
Gal. 6.9. And let us not be weary in well-doing, for in due Season we shall
reap, if we faint not.


IN the Verses before the Text, the Apostle had laid down a Proposition, What a
Man sows that shall he reap, v. 7. He that sows in Sin, shall reap in Sorrow;
he that Sows the Seeds of Grace, shall reap Glory: There is the Proposition. In
the Text, the Apostle makes the application, Let us not be weary of well-doing.
We that have sown the good Seed of Repentance, and an Holy Life, let us not be
weary, for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.

First, A Dehortation; Let us not be weary. Secondly, The Argument; We shall
reap in due season.
First, A Dehortation; (...); Let us not be weary. Where there is, I. Something
implied; that we are apt to be weary in well-doing. II. Something expressed;
that we ought not to be weary in well-doing.


I. The thing implied, that we are apt to be weary in well-doing. This
lassitude and weariness is not from the regenerate part, but the fleshly; as
Peter's sinking in the Water, was not from the Faith in him, but the Fear: This
weariness in a Christian course is occasioned from four Things.

1. From the revilings of the World: Psalm. 41.5. My Enemies speak evil of me.
Innocence is no shield against reproach; But why should this make us weary of
well-doing? Will a Soldier run from his Colors, and quit the Field, because of
a little Small-shot? Did not Jesus Christ undergo reproach for us, when the
Jews put a Crown of Thorns on him, and bowed the Knee in scorn? Is it any
dishonor to us to be reproached for doing that which is Good? Is it any
disparagement to a Virgin to be reproached for her Beauty and Chastity? Our
reproaches for Christ we should bind as a Crown about our Head. Now a Spirit of
Glory rests upon us, 1 Pet. 4.14. If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ,
happy are ye; for a Spirit of God and of Glory rests upon you. Regium est
been facere and male audire: He that clips our Credit to make it weigh lighter,
makes our Crown heavier.

2. That which is apt to occasion weariness in well-doing, is the present
sufferings we are exposed to: 2 Cor. 4.8. We are troubled on every side, like a
Ship that has the Pirates shooting at it on both sides. The Cross is the
Saint's Jointure, 2 Timothy 3.12. But why should this make us weary of well-doing?
Is not our Life a Warfare? It Is no more strange to meet with Sufferings in
Religion, than for a Mariner to meet with Storms, or a Soldier to meet with
Bullets. Do not we consider upon what terms we entered into Religion? Did not we
Vow in Baptism to Fight under Christ's Banner? Does not our Lord tell us we
must take up the Cross and follow him, Matthew. 16.24. Is not this part of the
Legacy Christ has bequeathed us? Ioh. 16.33. We would partake of Christ's
Glory, but not of his Sufferings. Besides, does not many a Man suffer for his
Sins? Do not Men's Lusts bring them to an untimely end? Do Men suffer for their
Sins, and do we think much to suffer for Christ? How did St. Paul rejoice in
Sufferings! 2 Cor. 7.4. How did he rattle his Chain that he wore for Christ?
How did he Glory in it, (...), As a Woman that is proud of her Jewels:
Chrysostom. Why should Sufferings make us faint? Who would not be willing to
tread upon a few Thorns that is going to a Kingdom?

3. That which is apt to occasion weariness in well-doing, is the deferring of
the Reward. We are apt to be discouraged and grow weary, if we have not what we
desire presently; we are all for present pay. But consider,

1. Our Work is not yet done, we have not yet finished the Faith: The Servant
does not receive his pay till his Work be done. Even Christ's reward was
deferred till he had done his Work; when he had completed our Redemption, and
said upon the Cross it is finished, then he entered into Glory. God does not
think it meet we should have our pay beforehand.

2. God defers the reward to make Heaven more welcome to us. Quo longius
defertur eo suavius laetatur: After all our Praying, Weeping, Suffering, how
sweet will the Wine of Paradise taste! Nay, the longer the reward is deferred,
the greater will it be; the longest Voyages have the greatest Returns.

4. That which is apt to occasion weariness in well-doing, is the difficulty of
a Christians Work. Superas evadere ad auras, hic labor hoc opus est. A
Christian has no time to lie Fallow; he has many Precepts to obey, Promises
to believe, Temptations to resist; his whole Life is a Race; he must Watch and
Pray; he must put forth not only Diligence, but Violence for Heaven. But why
should this make us weary? Difficulty whets a generous Mind. The Soldiers Life
has its difficulties, but they raise his Spirits the more; he loves to
encounter hardship, and will endure a Bloody Fight for a Golden Harvest.

Besides, where there is the least Principle of Grace, it renders the way of
Religion easy and pleasant. When the Lodestone draws, it is easy for the
Iron to move. When God's Spirit draws, we move in the way of Religion, with
facility and delight. Spiritu Sancto accenditur renatorum voluntas. Aug.
Christ's Service is freedom. Psalm. 119.45. I will walk at Liberty: to serve
God, to love God, to enjoy God, is the sweetest Liberty in the World; besides,
while we serve God we gratify our selves: As he who digs in a Mine, while he
sweats he gets Gold; while we glorify God, we promote our own Glory.

II. The Second thing expressed is, that we should not grow weary in a
Christian course, we should not tire in our Race; Let us not be weary in
well-doing. The Greek Word to be weary, (...), signifies, to shrink back as
Cowards in War: Let it not be thus with us; let us not shrink back from
Christ's Colors. Heb. 4.14. Let us hold fast our profession: We must not only
hold forth our profession, but hold fast our profession: Our zeal in Religion
should be as the Fire on the Altar, which never went out, Lev. 6.13. Non
pugnanti sed vincenti dabitur Corona, Aug. The Crown is not given to him that
Fights, but to him that overcomes.

1 Use. R^dargution. It reproves such as are weary of well-doing. There are
Falling Stars. 2 Timothy 4.10. Demas forsook God, and afterward became a Priest
in an Idol Temple: Dorotheus. Hos. 8.3. Israel has cast off the thing that is
good. Many have thrown off Christ's Livery; they have left off an Holy course
of Life, they have turned to Worldliness or Wantonness, Gal. 5.7. Ye did run
well, who hindered you? Why did you tire in your Race? It is sad to see those
who formerly seemed to be eminent Saints; Stars of the first magnitude; yet now
are fallen away, and are ready to embrace either the Mass or the Alcoran; that
which begins in Hypocrisy ends in Apostasy. 2 Pet. 2.21. It had been better
for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than after they have known
it to turn from the Holy Commandment.

2 Use. Exhortation. Let us not be weary in well-doing. Consider,

1. The Way of Religion is of Good Report: Heb. 11.2. By Faith the Elders
obtained a Good Report. Shall we be weary of that which is our Credit? If
indeed the Christian Religion were a thing that would bring shame or loss (as
the Ways of Sin do) then we had cause to desert it, and grow weary of it; but
it brings Honor, Prove. 4.9. He shall give to thy Head an Ornament of Grace.
Besides the Credit, an Holy course of Life brings inward Joy and Delight: Prove.
3.17. All her ways are pleasantness. What sweet Music does the Bird of
Conscience make in the Breast? Act. 9.31. Walking in the fear of the Lord, and
in the Comforts of the Holy Ghost. Why then should we be weary of well-doing?

2. The Beauty of a Christian is to hold on in Piety without being weary: Act.
21.16. Mnason of Cyprus an old Disciple. It Is a beautiful sight to see Silver
Hairs crowned with Golden Virtues. The Beauty of a thing is when it comes to be
finished. The Beauty of a Picture is, when it is drawn out in its full
Lineaments, and laid in its Orient Colors. The Beauty of a Christian is when
he has finished his Faith, 2 Timothy 4.7. It was the Glory of the Church of
Thyatira, she kept her best Wine till last. Rev. 2.19. I know thy Works, and
the last to be more than the first.

3. Such as are weary of well-doing, it is a sign they never acted in Religion
from a right Principle. Things that proceed from a Principle of Life do not
cease, as the beating of the Pulse: But things that move from an artificial
Spring are soon at an end, as the Motion of a Watch. Unsound Hearts move only
from the external Spring of Applause or Preferment; and when these fail their
seeming Goodness cease. Naturalists observe of the Chelydonian Stone, that it
retains its Virtue no longer than it is enclosed in Gold, take it out of the
Gold and it loses its Virtue: False Hearts retain their Goodness no longer
than they are enclosed in Golden Preferments; take them out of the Gold, and
they lose all their seeming Piety. Such as are weary of well-doing, never
served God out of choice, or from a Principle of Faith. If the Water in a
Cistern fail, it is because it is not fed from a Fountain: If Men's Religion
fails, it is because it wants that Fountain-Grace of Faith to feed it.

4. God is never weary of doing us Good; therefore we should not be weary of
serving him. The Honeycomb of Mercy is continually dropping upon us. God sends
us in fresh Provisions every Day; he gives us the finest of the Wheat; he is
not weary of watching over us, but keeps a continual Guard about us. Psalm.
21.3. God is not weary of detecting and defeating the Plots of our Enemies. And
shall we be weary of engaging in his Service? A King that is continually
obliging his Subject by Gifts and Gratituites, that Subject has no cause to be
weary of serving his Prince.

5. If we grow weary, and throw off Religion, we make all we have done null and
void. Ezekiel. 18.24. When the Righteous turns away from his righteousness, all
his righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned. He who has been
serving God, and doing Angel's Work, if once he grows weary and desists, he
unravels all his Work, and misseth of the recompense of reward: He that runs
half a Race, and then tires, loses the Garland. O what folly is it to do well
a while, and then by Apostasy to unravel all: As if a Limner should with his
Pencil draw a fair Picture, and then come with his Sponge and wipe it out again.

6. Consider the Examples of such as have continued their Progress unweariably
in a Christian course. The Apostle sets before our Eyes a Cloud of Witnesses:
Heb. 12.1. Being compassed about with so great a Cloud of Witnesses, let us run
the Race that is set before us; let us run it with celerity and constancy. How
many Noble Martyrs and Confessors of old, have walked in the ways of God,
though they have been strewn with Thorns? they scorned Preferments, laughed at
imprisonments, and their love to Christ burned hotter than the Fire. Polycarp,
when he came before the Proconsul, and he bad him deny Christ; he replied,
Octoginta fexannos illi inservii, etc. I have served Christ these 86 years, and
he has not once hurt me, and shall I deny him now? Tertullian says, such was
the constancy of the Primitive Saints that the Persecutors, cried out, Quae
miseria est haec? What a Misery is this, that we are more weary in tormenting
than they are in enduring Torment, Let us tread in their steps, who through
Faith and Patience inherit the Promises.

7. It will be our Comfort on our Deathbed, to review a well-spent Life. It
was Augustus's wish, that he might have an (...), a quiet, easy Death. If any
thing make our Pillow easy at Death, it will be this, that we have been
unweariable in God's Work: This will be a Deathbed Cordial. Did you ever know
any repent at Death, that they have been too Holy? Many have repented that they
have followed the World too much; not that they have prayed too much, that they
have repented too much. What has made Death sweet, but that they have finished
their Course and kept the Faith?

8. Think of the Great Reward we shall have, if we do not give over, or grow
weary, and that is Glory and Immortality.

1. This Glory is ponderous; it is called, (...), a Weight of Glory, 2 Cor.
4.17. The Weight adds to the Worth; the weightier a Crown of Gold is, the more
it is worth.

2. It is satisfying, Psalm. 17.15. I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy
likeness. This Glory will abundantly recompense all our Labors and Sufferings.
The Joy of Harvest makes amends for all the Labor in sowing. O what an Harvest
shall the Saints reap! It will be always reaping time in Heaven; and this
reaping will be in the due season: So the Apostle says in the Text, we shall
reap, (...), in due Season. The Husbandman does not desire to reap till the
Season; he will not reap his Corn while it is green, but when it is ripe: So we
shall reap the Reward of Glory in due Season: When our Work is done, when our
Sins are purged out, when our Graces are come to their full growth, then is the
Season of reaping: Therefore let us not be weary of well-doing, but hold on in
Prayer, Reading, and all the Exercises of Religion, we shall reap in due
season, if we faint not. To keep us from fainting, know, that the Reward
promised is very near: Romans 13.11. Our Salvation is nearer than when we
believed. We are but within a few Days March of the Heavenly Canaan. It is but
a few more Prayers, and Tears shed, and we shall be perfected in Glory; as that
Martyr, Dr. Tailor, said, I have but one Style more to go over, and I shall be
at my Father's House. Stay but a while, Christians, and your Troubles will be
over, and your Coronation-Day shall come. Christ, who is the Oracle of Truth,
has said, Behold I come quickly, Rev. 22.20. And yet Death's coming is sooner
than Christ's Personal coming; and then begins the Saints Blessed Iubile.

Quest. What Means shall we use, that we may not wax weary in a Christian
course.

Answ. 1. Let us, otium excutere, shake off Spiritual Sloth. Sloth says,
there is a Lion in the way. He who is sloathful, will soon grow weary; he is
fitter to lie on his Couch, than to run a Race. It is a strange Sight, to see a
busy Devil, and an idle Christian.

Answ. 2. If we would not grow weary, let us pray for persevering Grace: It was
David's Prayer, Psalm. 119.117. Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe: And it was
Beza's Prayer, Domine, quod Coepisti perfice, etc. Lord, perfect what thou have
begun in me, that I may not suffer Shipwreck within sight of the Haven. That we
may hold on a Christian Course, let us labor for Three persevering Graces.

1. Faith. Faith keeps from Fainting; Faith gives a Substance to Things not
seen, and makes them to be as it were present, Heb. 11.1. As a
Perspective-Glass makes those things which are at a distance near to the Eye;
so to Faith, Heaven and Glory seem near. A Christian will not be weary of
Service, that has the Crown in his Eye.

2. The Second persevering Grace is Hope. Credula vitam spes fovet: Hope
animates the Spirits; it is to the Soul, as the Cork to the Net, which keeps it
from sinking. Hope breeds Patience, and Patience breeds Perseverance. Hope is
compared to an Anchor, Heb. 6.19. The Christian never sinks, but when he casts
away his Anchor.

3. Persevering Grace is Love. Love makes a Man that he is never weary. Love
may be compared to the Rod of Myrtle in the Traveller's Hand, which refreshes
him and keeps him from being weary in his Journey. He who loves the World is
never weary of following the World; he who loves God will not be weary of
serving him: That is the Reason, why the Saints and Angels in Heaven, are never
weary of Praising and Worshipping God; because their Love to God is perfect; and
Love turns Service into Delight. Get the Love of God in your Hearts, and you
will run in his Ways, and not be weary.

Of knowing to do Good, and not to do it.
James 4.17. To him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is Sin.


THE Apostle in the former Verses had met with a Sin common in those days, a
sinful Boasting among Men. Ver. 13. Go to now ye that say to day or to morrow
we will go into such a City, and buy and sell, and get gain; whereas ye know
not what shall be on the morrow: you may be in your Graves before to morrow;
for what is your Life? it is even a Vapor. A Vapor being an Exhalation, it
cannot continue long; as it is raised by the Sun, so it is dispersed by the
Wind: Such is your Life; a Vapor, a short Breath, a flying Shadow: it appears
(...), for a little time, and then vanishes. Well might they say, what need we
be taught such a plain Lesson? who knows not all this, that Life is a Vapor,
and that we ought not to boast what we will do to morrow? The Apostle seems in
the Text to meet with them by way of Answer: Do ye know all this? Then the
greater is your Sin, that you do it not. To him that knows to do good, and
does it not, to him it is Sin. I shall only explain this Phrase, (...), to him
it is Sin; that is, it is an heinous Sin, it is Sin with a witness; every
infirmity, every thing that falls short of the Rule, is Sin; much more that
which contradicts the Rule; this man's Sin has an Emphasis, it is a crimson
Sin, and it shall have a greater punishment. He that knew his Master's Will,
and did it not, shall be beaten with many stripes, Luke 12.47. If he that sins
ignorantly be damned, then he that sins knowingly shall be double damned.

1. Doct. implied; That we ought to know to do good: know our Duty.

2. That we ought not only to know to do good, but to do it.

3. That he that knows to do good, and does it not, is of all others most
guilty.

1. Doct. implied; That we ought to know to do good; we ought to be well
informed of those things which are to be done by us in order to Salvation. The
Word written is a Rule of Knowledge, and the Word preached is a Commentary upon
the Word written; and both of them are to enrich our understanding, and to
nurse us up in the knowledge of that which is good.

The Reasons why we should know to do good, are,

1. Knowledge is our Lamp and Star to guide us in the Truth. It shows us what
we are to do, and what we are to leave undone. If we do not know that which is
good, we can never practice it. Without Knowledge we cannot do any thing in
Religion aright; we offer up the Blind; we cannot give God a reasonable
Sacrifice. He that does not know his Trade, is like to make but bad Work of it.

2. Knowledge is the Foundation of all Grace: Every Grace borrows its Light
from this Lamp; it is the radical Virtue; it is the Seed out of which the
Flower of Grace grows; it ushers in Faith. They that know thy Name, will put
their trust in thee, Psalm. 9.10. Knowledge carries the Torch before Faith. A
blind Faith is as bad as a dead Faith. It inflames Love* Phil. 1.9. This I pray
that your Love may abound yet more and more in Knowledge. The Knowledge of
Christ's Beauty enticeth our Love; it breeds Perseverance; it is like the
Mariner's Lanthorn, to direct the Ship, and as the Anchor, that holds it steady
in Storms and Tempests. The Apostle joins these two together; unlearned and
unstable, 2 Pet. 3.16. Such as are unlearned will be unstable.

3. The chief Work in Conversion consists in Knowledge. Romans 12.2. Be ye
transformed by the renewing of your Mind. The Mind being renewed, the Man is
transformed. The first thing in the Creation, was Light; so in Conversion, the
first thing is Illumination: The first part of God's Image consists in
Knowledge, Col. 3.10. The first thing a Limner draws in a Picture is the Eye;
so the first thing God draws in the Soul, is the Eye of Knowledge. Psalm 51.6.
In the hidden part thou shall make me to know Wisdom.

4. There is nothing in Religion, though never so excellent, can do us good
without Knowledge. The Blessed Sacrament, which is one of the highest
Ordinances; yet if we come to it without Knowledge, it can do us no good: What
Benefit can he receive, that is not able to discern the Lord's Body? If one
come to a Physic Garden, and knows not the Nature of the Herbs, he may gather
Poison instead of the Physical Herb; as he who went into the Field, and
gathered wild Gourds, and then there was Death in the Pot, 2 Kings 4.39. So, if
one understand not the Mystery of the Lord's Supper, there is Death in the Cup;
he eats and drinks his own Damnation.

Use. See how necessary it is to get the knowledge of what is good. It ushers
in Salvation, 1 Timothy 2.4. We must know to do good before we can do it. Omne
Peccatum fundatur in ignorantia: Ignorance of God is the cause of all Sin. Ier.
9.3. They proceed from evil to evil, and know not me, says the Lord. Ignorance
of God damns. Hos. 4.6. My People are destroyed for want of Knowledge. It Is sad
to be ignorant in Gospel Times, to be blind in the Sun. How many go to Hell
blindfold? And which is worse, not only nescire, but nolle scire; they do not
only not know Good, but they are not willing to know. Ier. 9.6. They refuse to
know me, says the Lord.

II. Doct. That we ought not only to know to do Good, but to do it. This the
Apostle implies: To him that knows to do good, and does it not;] he implies,
that he who knows to do Good, should do it. The End of Knowledge is Practice.
Search from one end of the Bible to the other, and you will find that it is the
practick part of Religion is chiefly intended. The Crown is not set upon the
Head of Knowledge but Practice. Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his
Commandments, that they may have right to the Tree of Life. The Eye is to
direct the Foot: Knowledge is the Eye that is to direct the Foot of Obedience.

Use 1. It shows us wherein most Christians are defective in the Times of
Gospel, viz. In the doing part of Religion, they know how to do Good, but do it
not: They have good Eyesight, but are lame on their Feet; they are like
Rachel, beautiful, in regard of Knowledge; but barren. We are like our first
Parents, greedy of the Tree of Knowledge: Knowledge is an Ornament, and People
love to hang this Jewel on their Ear; but though they know what they ought to
do, yet they do it not. They know they should abstain from evil, and pursue
Holiness; they know to do Good, but do it not.

1. They know they should abstain from evil. They know they should not swear.
Matthew. 5.34. Swear not all; yet they do it; they are more free of their Oaths,
than their Alms. They know uncleanness to be a Sin; it wastes the Body, wounds
the Conscience, blots the Name, damns the Soul, Gal. 5.19. Yet they will go on
in that Sin, and for a Cup of Pleasure drink a Sea of Wrath. They know
Drunkenness to be a Sin; it does brutifie them, take away their Reason; they
cannot think to go reeling to Heaven. God is brewing a Cup for the Drunkard.
Rev. 16.19. The Cup of the Wine of the fierceness of his Wrath; Wormwood-Wine,
yet he will not leave his drunken Fits. Men know that rash censuring is a Sin.
Iam. 4.11. Speak not evil one of another, Brethren. Yet they are guilty of
this; they will not swear, but they will slander, and speak to the prejudice of
others: They can never make them Recompense for this. No Physician can heal the
Wounds of the Tongue. Thus they know that Covetousness is a Sin; yea, the root
of all evil; yet the World ingrosseth all their Time and Thoughts. They are
like Midas, who wished every thing that he touched might be Gold: They have
this dry Dropsy; thirsting after Gold more than Grace, and laboring more to
have a full Purse, than a good Conscience. They know they should not vent their
Passions, Iam. 1.26. If any man among you seems to be religious, and bridleth
not his Tongue, this Man's Religion is vain. Origin observes of the Rich Man in
the Gospel, he had no Water to cool his Tongue. He had sinned most in his
Tongue, therefore was punished most in it. How unworthy is it for Men to have
their Eyes and Hands lift up to Heaven, and their Tongues set on fire from
Hell; at one time praying, and another time cursing? The Devil rejoices in
this, he warms himself at the Fire of Men's Passions. How can such pray in a
Family, that are possessed with an angry Devil? Hot Passions make cold Prayers.
Thus men know they should abstain from evil, but they do it not.

2. They know they should pursue Holiness, but they do it not. They know they
should read the Word, sanctify the Sabbath, use holy Conference, pray in their
Families, redeem the Time, walk circumspectly; they know to do Good, but do it
not.

Quest. Whence is it that Men know to do Good, yet do it not?

Answ. 1. It is for want of sound Conviction. Men are not thoroughly convinced
of the necessity of practick Godliness: They think there is a necessity of
Knowledge, because else there is no Salvation, they will get some Notions of
Christ, that he is a Savior, and has satisfied Divine Justice, and they hope
they believe in him: Well then; we tell them that Faith and Obedience go
together, then God is merciful, and though they are not so good as they should
be, yet Free Grace will save them. Thus Men content themselves with general
Notions of Religion, but are not convinced of the Practick Part of Godliness.

2. Men know to do Good, yet do it not, because they are not awakened out of
their Spiritual Sloth. It is easy to get the Knowledge of a Truth, to give
assent to it, to commend it, to profess it; but to digest Knowledge into
Practice, is difficult; and men are lying upon the Bed of Sloth, and are not
willing to put themselves to too much trouble; they know they should deny
themselves; but the Work of Self-denial is hard, so that the Plough stands
still, and nothing of the practick part of Religion goes forward. Prove. 19.24.
A slothful man hides his hand in his bosom, and will not pull it forth though
it be to lay hold on a Crown.

3. Men know to do Good, but do it not, through Incredulity; they are in part
Atheists. Did they believe that Sin were so bitter, that Wrath and Hell
followed it, would they not leave off their Sins? Did they believe, that to do
the Will of God, were a privilege, Religion were their Interest, that there is
Joy in the way of Godliness, and Heaven at the end, would they not espouse
Holiness? But People, though they have some slight transient thoughts of these
things, yet they are not brought to the Belief of them; therefore though they
know to do good, yet they do it not. The Reason why there are so few Doers of
the Word, is, because there are so few Believers.

4. Men know to do Good, but do it not; because the Knowledge in their Head,
never works into their Hearts; it does not quicken them, or warm their
Affections with Love to the Truth. Their Light is greater than their Love;
their Knowledge does not work upon their Conscience; like a few Heat-drops that
wet the leaf, but never go to the Root of the Tree. Men are not transformed by
their Knowledge, therefore they are not reformed; their Hearts never took the
full impression of the Word; like Wool that has had only a slight Tincture,
but not a deep Dye.

5. Men know to do Good, but do it not, because of prejudicate Opinion.
Prejudice is a Bar in the way of Men's Salvation. He who has an ill opinion of
the Physic will not take it. The things to be done in Religion, are judged to
be too strict and severe; they restrain Sin too much, or they press too much to
Holiness. When Christ had been preaching to the young Man, that he must sell
all, and give to the Poor, and he should have Treasure in Heaven, it is said,
Mark 10.22. he was sad at that Saying, and went away grieved. Many, though they
know the Truth, yet do disgust it, and have a secret hatred at the Spirituality
of it. As Michal looked out at a Window, see to David when he danced before the
Ark; but the Text says, she despised him in her Heart, 1 Chronicles. 15.29. So many
go out to meet a Sermon, but hate it in their Heart.

6. Men know to do Good, yet do it not, because they love their Sin more than
they love the Word. Hos. 4.8. They set their Heart on their Iniquity. Though
Sin be a Meat that breeds the Worm of Conscience, yet they love it; and the
more Sin is loved, the more the Word is loathed. The Word Preached calls for
plucking out the right Eye; it comes to separate between Men and their Lusts,
and they cannot endure to hear of a Divorce. When John Baptist comes to break
off the Match between Herod and his Incest, rather than he will behead his Sin,
the Prophet himself shall be beheaded. This is much to be lamented, and laid to
heart, that Men know to do Good, but do it not. Some content themselves with
having Means of Knowledge. Judge. 17.13. Then said Micah, now know I that the
Lord will do me good, seeing I have a Levite to my Priest. But what is one the
better to know what Physic he should take, if he does not take it. It will be
but poor Comfort on a Deathbed, for a Man to remember what glorious Ordinances
he has had, and what a deal of Knowledge he has gained, when his Conscience
shall tell him, this is his Condemnation, that he knew to do Good, but did it
not.

Use 2. Exhortation. Let me beseech you all who have been Hearers of the Word,
and have been lighting your Lamps at the Sanctuary, and have gotten a great
measure of Knowledge, that as you know to do Good, you would do it. This is the
Soul of Religion. Luther says, Mallem obedire quam Miracula facere; I had
rather do the Will of God, than be able to work Miracles.

1. To do what you know, evidenceth your Relation to Christ. You count ^t a
great Honor to be near allied to the Crown; but it is more Honor to be akin
to Christ. It was much to be of Christ's Line and Race: Romans 9.5. Of whom
concerning the Flesh Christ came: But would you see whom Christ counts his best
Kindred, such as do what they know: Matthew. 12.50. Whosoever shall do the Will
of my Father in Heaven, the same is my Brother and Sister: That is, he is dear
to me, as if he had a Natural Alliance in Blood: nay, far dearer; for many of
Christ's Kindred in the Flesh are in Hell; but where there is a Spiritual
Consanguinity, there is no fear of perishing. Such as know Christ's Will and do
it not, are Strangers to Christ, and he will say, I know you not: But if you
that know to do good, do it, Christ will know you; sure he will know his
kindred, his Sisters and Brothers.

2. To know to do good, and do it, sets a Crown upon the Gospel: Romans 16.19.
Your Obedience is come abroad unto all Men; not your Knowledge, but your
Obedience. When Christians do what they know, are eminent in Humility and
Charity, when they walk exemplarily, this adorns Religion. To know to do good,
and not to do it, hardens others in Sin, scandalizeth Religion, and makes
People ready to turn Atheists. When some of the Spaniards came into Hispaniola,
the Spaniards carriage being loose and profane, the Indians asked them, What
God they served? they answered, the God of Heaven; the Indians replied, Sure
your God is not a good God that has such bad Servants: Thus to know to do
good, yet not do it, puts a scar in the Face of Religion, and brings an evil
report upon it; but to do what we know, Trumpets forth the Fame of the Gospel,
and makes them that oppose it to admire it.

3. To know to do good, and to do it, entitles you to Blessedness. Iam. 1.25.
He shall be Blessed in the Deed; not for the deed, but in the deed. God will
not only pour golden Oil of Temporal Blessings on you, give you Corn and Wine;
but he will bless you with Salvation: Heb. 5.9. He became the Author of
Salvation to all them that obey. And that you may do what you know, beg the
Holy Spirit. God has promised to give us his Spirit, to make us walk in his
Statutes, Ezekiel. 36.27. Lex jubet, gratia juvat: The Word commands, the Spirit
inables. The Word is a Star to direct us, the Spirit is a Lodestone to draw
us. The Word Anoints our Eyes, the Spirit Guides our Feet into the Path of
God's Commandments.

3 Doct. That he who knows to do good, and does it not, is of all others most
guilty; to him it is Sin, Crimson Sin; that is, it is heinous Sin, Capital Sin,
Sin emphatically, Sin with a Witness, and punished with a Vengeance. Such an
one is a notorious, desperate Sinner; he knows he should abstain from such
Sins, because the Law of God forbids them, yet he goes on in those Sins; he
knows he should do such Duties, because the Law of God enjoins them: Sanctify
the Sabbath, be just in his Dealings; but though he knows to do good, yet he
does it not; such a one is a desperate, prodigious Sinner, he Sins with a
Witness: And the Reason is, because he that knows to do good, yet does it not,
he Sins presumptuously. Under the Law there was a Sacrifice for Sins of
Ignorance, but for presumptuous Sins there was no Sacrifice. Numb. 15.30. The
Soul that does ought presumptuously, the same reproacheth the Lord, and that
Soul shall be cut off from among his People.

Quest. What is it to Sin presumptuously?

Answ. To Sin presumptuously, is to Sin against the Light which shines into a
Man's Conscience; i. e. A Man is convinced, those things he does are Sin:
Conscience says, O do not this great Evil: Conscience, like the Cherubims,
has a flaming Sword in its Hand to afright and deterr the Sinner, yet he will
pluck the Forbidden Fruit: This is to Sin presumptuously. To Sin ignorantly,
does something extenuate and take off from the Sin; it excuses a tanto; Ioh.
15.22. He had had no Sin. It may be supposed, that if the Man had known the
thing had been so Evil, he would not have done it; but he that Sins knowingly
is a Presumptuous Sinner; he Sins with his Eyes open; he is like one that has
a Torch in his Hand, and yet runs into the Pond and drowns himself. Job 24.13.
They are of those that Rebel against the Light: This is desperate; this is to
be worse than Balaam; for when he saw the Angel before him with a naked Sword,
he durst not go on; but the presumptuous Sinner, though he sees the Flaming
Sword of God's Wrath before him, yet he will go on in Sin. O Sinner, thou art
making way for thy own Torment, thou that sinnest against the Light of
Conscience, thou stuffest the Pillow of Conscience with Thorns, on which thy
Head must lie to all Eternity. If a Man Sins out of Ignorance (says Aristot.)
when he knows it he repents; if out of Passion, when the Passion is over he
weeps; but he that Sins knowingly against his Conscience, he is set upon Sin,
and he will hardly be reclaimed. Now there are two aggravations of this
presumptuous Sin, viz. Sinning against the Light of Conscience: And, to know to
do good, yet not to do it.

1. This sinning presumptuously against Conscience, is after Councils,
Admonitions, Warnings. Such an one cannot say, he was never told of his Sin; he
has had Ministers rising up early, who have told him what a damnable Thing Sin
was, yet he would venture on; so that now he has no excuse: John 15.22. Now
you have no Cloak for your Sin. After Reproofs and Caveats, now to persist in
Sin, it gives a Dye and Ticture to the Sin. Thou that live in Malice,
Uncleanness, and neglect of Family Duty, think how often thou have been warned
of Sin. We read if the Prophet had warned another, Ezekiel. 33.9. If thou warn the
Wicked of his way, to turn from it, if he do not turn from his way, he shall
die in his Iniquity; this made Readiness Sin Presumptuous, and it is called
Rebellion, because the Prophet had warned him, and given him express charge
utterly to destroy Amaleck; yet he spared Agag, and the best of the Sheep and
Oxen, 1 Samuel 15.9. This was Rebellion, and for it he lost his Kingdom. To Sin
against Conscience, and to do it after warning, does give an Accent to Sin, as
the Dye to Wool, or as a Weight put in the Scale, which makes it weigh heavier:
Oh! take heed all you that go on in Sin presumptuously; there has been a
Trumpet blown in your Ears; you have been told what Sin would cost you; God
himself will draw up the Charge against you, and this will be put in your
Indictment, It was after warning. If a Sea-mark be set up to give notice, that
there are Shelves and Rocks in isto loco; yet if the Mariner will Sail there,
and split his Ship, he is presumptuous, and none will pity him, because there
was a Sea-mark set up to give him warning of the danger.

2. It Is an aggravation to sin presumptuously against Conscience, when it is
after Afflictions. After God has made him hear the Voice of the Rod, he has
made him to feel Sin bitter, to read his Sin in his Punishment, yet he Sins;
his Sin was following Evil Company, and God has punished him for it; he has
almost wasted his Estate with riotous living, or he has almost drunk himself
Blind, yet he will not leave his Sin; his Sin was Uncleanness, and his Body is
diseased, and full of noxious Humors; yet though he feels the smart of Sin, he
retains the love of Sin; the Arrow sticks in his sides, yet he Sins; though God
makes him sick with smiting, yet he is not sick of sinning: Here is an
aggravation of Sin: 2 Chronicles. 28.22. In the time of his distress, did he
Trespass yet more against the Lord: This is that King Ahaz.

Use. 3. To know what is good, yet not to do it, is to Sin presumptuously, it
is full of obstinacy and pertinaciousness; it is so because Men can say nothing
for their Sins, can bring no Reason, they can make no defense for themselves,
yet they are resolved to hold fast their Iniquity: This is desperate
wilfulness. Voluntas est regula, and mensura actionis: The more of the Will in
a Sin, the greater the Sin. The Will gives a Dye to the Sin: Ier. 18.12. And
they said there is no hope, but we will walk after our own Devices, and we will
every one do after the Imagination of his own Evil Heart: We are resolved upon
it, though there be Death and Hell every step, we will march on under Satan's
Colors: This made the Sin of the Devils so heinous, for which they are locked
up in Chains for ever, because they were wilful in their Sin, they had no
Ignorance in their Mind, no Passion to stir them up, there was no Tempter to
deceive them; but they sinned obstinately and out of pure choice. This is
desperate, when Men will have the other Game at Sin, though it cost them their
Souls.

Use. 4. Take heed of Presumptuous Sin. To Sin against the Light shining in
your Conscience; to know what is good, yet not to do it; to know what is evil,
yet not to avoid it. Take heed, I say, of sinning presumptuously after this
manner. David prayed, Keep back thy Servant from presumptuous Sins, Psalm.
19.13. If God has been so terrible against Sins of Infirmity and Passion, as
we see in Moses and Vzzah: O how fierce will his Anger be against the
Presumptuous Sinner! Better never have known the Ways of God, than to know to
do good, yet not to do it. Pilate sinned presumptuously, in condemning Christ;
he knew he did not well in it; he knew that of envy the Jews delivered him,
Matthew. 27.18. He confessed he found no fault with him, Luke 23.14. And God
would have stopped him in his Sin; he admonished him by his own Wife; She sent
to him, have nothing to do with that Just Man, Matthew. 27.19. And yet for all
this he gave the Sentence against Christ: While he condemned Christ, his own
Conscience condemned him. Oh! as you love your Souls, take heed of presumptuous
Sins. Knowing what is good, yet not to do it; knowing what is evil, yet not to
avoid it; this is very desperate: For,

1. Such kind of presumptuous sinning is ex consilio; it is committed with much
premeditation and fore-thoughts. The presumptuous Sinner does not sin unawares;
but he does project and cast in his Mind how to bring his Sin about; just as
Ioseph's Brethren did consult, and lay their Heads together how to betray the
innocent. Sinners are said to plot Sin. Psalm. 36.4. He devises Mischief on his
Bed. This does put an Emphasis upon Sin, and make it (...), out of measure
sinful, because the presumptuous Sinner, that knows to do Good, and does it
not, that sins against the light of this Conscience, is a deliberate Sinner, a
Student in wickedness; he beats his brains in the cunning contrivance of Sin,
as Judas in betraying Christ, and as those Jews that laid in wait for Paul.
They were witty in the contrivance of Sin. Acts 23.15. Signify to the chief
Captain, that he bring Paul down to you to morrow, as though you would enquire
something of him more perfectly, and we ere he come near, are ready to kill him.

2. To know to do Good, yet not to do it, to sin presumptuously, against
Conscience, is desperate, because this kind of sinning is accompanied with
Pride. The Sinner knows the Mind of God, yet will act contrary to it: This
shows Arrogance; he sets his Will above God's Will. Who is the Lord, says
Pharaoh? So says the presumptuous Sinner; Who is God? What is the Word, that I
should obey it? A proud Sinner will not endure to be controlled; he slights the
Precept, scorns the Threatening. No Toad swells so with Poison, as the
presumptuous Sinner with Pride; Pride of Judgment, to approve that Sin which
God has branded; and Pride of Will, to eat of that Tree which God has
forbidden.

3. To sin presumptuously, to know what is good, yet not to do it; to know what
is evil, yet persist in it, is accompanied with Impudency. Such a Sinner lays
aside all fear of God; he is worse than brutish. The Lion fears Fire; but he
fears not Hellfire; like the Leviathan, he is made without fear, Job 41.33. He
lays aside the Veil of Modesty, he has sinned away Shame. Zeph. 3.5. The
unjust knows no shame, he has a Forehead of Brass. Jer. 6.15. Nesciunt
erubescere; they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush. He lays
aside all Arguments. Mercy cannot be heard to speak; the Judgments of God set
themselves in Battle array, yet they cannot stop him, let what will come on it;
let God take it well or ill, yet he will go on in Sin. Here Is Impudency! Judas
knew Christ was the Messiah, he was convinced of it, by an Oracle from Heaven,
and by the Miracles he wrought; and yet he impudently entertains a Treasonable
Plot against him: Nay, when Christ said, He that dips his hand in the Dish with
me, he shall betray me; and Judas knew that he was the Person Christ meant; and
Christ, when Judas was going about his Treason, pronounced a Woe to him, Luke
22.22. yet for all this he proceeded in his Treason. Thus sinning
presumptuously is accompanied with Impudency. Such are so far from blushing,
that they glory in their shame, Phil. 3.19.

4. To sin presumptuously, to know what is Good, yet not to do it, is heinous,
because it is Ingratitude: It Is an high abuse of God's Kindness; and God cannot
endure, of all things, to have his Kindness abused. God's Kindness is seen in
this, that he has acquainted the Sinner with his Mind and Will; that he has
not only instructed him, but persuaded him, made Mercy stoop and kneel to the
Sinner; he has wooed him by his Spirit, that he would sly from Sin, and pursue
Holiness. Kindness is seen in this, that God has spared the Sinner so long,
and not struck him dead in the Act of Sin. Kindness in this, that though the
Sinner has sinned against his Conscience, yet now if he will repent of Sin,
God will repent of his Judgments, and the white Flag of Mercy shall be held
forth. Ier. 3.1. Thou have played the Harlot with many Lovers; yet return again
to me, says the Lord. But the Sinner is of a base, morose Spirit; he is not
melted with all this Love; but his Heart, like Clay, hardens under the Sun.
Here Is an apparent Abuse of God's Kindness; and God cannot endure to have his
Kindness abused. The Vulture draws Sickness from Perfumes; so the Sinner
contracts Wickedness from the Mercy of God. Here Is high Ingratitude!

5. To sin presumptuously, to know what is good, yet not to do it, is a
Contempt done to God. A Noble Spirit cannot bear a contempt: It is bad enough
for a Sinner to forget God; but it is worse to contemn him. He that knows to do
Good, yet does it not, he slighteth God: he cares not whether God he pleased or
no; he will have his Sin. Therefore the presumptuous Sinner is said to reproach
God. Numb. 15.30. The Soul that does ought presumptuously, the same reproacheth
the Lord; every Sin displeases the Lord. To contemn the Authority of a Prince,
is a Reproach done to him. The presumptuous Sinner, who knows to do Good, but
does it not, reproacheth the Lord; though not explicitly, yet interpretatively;
by his presumptuous Sin, he makes as if God were either ignorant, and did not
know his Wickedness; or impotent, and were not able to punish him. How horrid
is this to reproach the Lord? There Is a kind of Blasphemy against God in every
presumptuous Sin. The Sinner that knows what is good, yet will not do it, what
is evil, yet will do it; he contemns God; and in contemning him, blasphemes
him. Contempt is the highest Affront that we can offer to God; and an Affront
will make one draw his Sword.

6. To sin presumptuously, to know what is good, yet not to do it, is a bold
Contest with God, a daring of God to punish. The Man that sins against
Conscience presumptuously, and will not be reclaimed, does in effect say, What
care I for the Commandment; it shall be no Check upon me, but I will go on in
Sin, and let God do his worst. A godly Man is said to fear the Commandment,
Prove. 13.13. He dares not sin, because the Law of God stands in his way. He
fears the Commandment; but the presumptuous Sinner does not value the
Commandment; he will sin in spite of God's Law. This is sawcily to contest
with God, to throw down the Gantlet, and challenge God to a Duel. 1 Cor. 10.22.
Do we provoke the Lord to Anger? Are we stronger than he? Shall the Child go to
fight with an Archangel? This is the Folly and Madness of a presumptuous
Sinner; he dares God to his Face, and hangs forth the Flag of Defiance against
Heaven. O then, good reason we should take-heed of presumptuous Sin, it is so
heinous and desperate! To him that knows to do Good, yet does it not, to him it
is Sin; it is Sin with a Witness.

Use 2. Trial. Let us examine if we are not guilty of sinning thus
presumptuously, knowing to do good, yet not to do it.

1. Is it not to sin presumptuously, when we live in the total neglect of Duty?
We know we ought to pray in our Families, yet do it not. Houses that have no
Prayer in them, are the Devil's Houses; and it is a wonder they are not
haunted. Ier. 10.25. Pour out thy Wrath upon the Families that call not on thy
Name. Neglect of Family Prayer, does quasi uncover the Roof of your Houses, and
make way for a Curse to be rained down upon your Table. To live in the neglect
of Family Duties, is not this to sin presumptuously, to know to do Good, and
not to do it?

2. Is it not to sin presumptuously, when we will venture upon the same Sins
which we condemn in others? Romans 2.1. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O Man,
whosoever thou art that judge; for thou that judge, do the same things.
As Austin speaks of Seneca; He wrote a Book against Superstitions; but quod
culpabat adoravit: he worshipped those Images he reproved. Thou (Christian)
condemnest another for Pride, and yet thou live in that Sin thy self. A
Father condemns his Son for swearing; yet he himself swears: The Master
reproves his Servant for being drunk; yet he himself will be drunk. The
Snuffers of the Tabernacle were of pure Gold: Those who are to reprove and
snuff the Vices of others, had need themselves to be free from those Sins. The
Snuffers must be of Gold. Is not this to sin presumptuously, to live in those
Sins which we condemn in others?

3. Do not they sin presumptuously against Conscience, who will sin in spite
of Heaven? Though they see the Judgments of God executed on others, yet will
adventure on the same Sins? Exempla efficacius docent quam Praecepta. Dan.
5.22. And thou his Son, O Belshazar, have not humbled thy heart, though thou
know all this. Though thou saw the Judgments of God upon thy Father, God
turned him to Grass for his Pride; yet thou go on in the same Sin. Ier. 3.8.
When for all the Causes whereby Israel had committed Adultery, I had put her
away, and given her a Bill of Divorce, yet her treacherous Sister Judah feared
not; but went and played the Harlot also. He is a bold Thief indeed, who sees
his Fellow-Thief hung up in Chains, yet is not afraid to rob in that place.
This is to run upon the thick Bosses of God's Buckler, Job 15.26. To venture in
Sin against all the Judgments and Threatenings of God?

4. Do not they sin presumptuously; they know to do Good, yet do it not, who
labor to stifle the Convictions of their Conscience, and will not let
Conscience speak freely to them? They smother the Light of it; like one that
puts his Light in a dark Lanthorn, that it may not be seen. This the Scripture
calls, holding the Truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. They labor to blot out
all the common Notions of God engraven in their Minds.

5. Do not they sin presumptuously, who know to do Good, but do it not; who
after they have felt the smart of Sin, it has bred a Worm in their Conscience,
a Moth in their Estate; yet after all this, they again embrace their Sins?
Though this Viper has stung them, they will put it again in their Bosom; is
not this to sin presumptuously, and to rebel against Light? If there be any
such here who are guilty in this high degree, know to do Good, but do is not,
let them fear and tremble; their Case is sad. The Wrath of God hangs over their
Heads; and that I may show you you have cause to scar, and that I may beat you
off from presumptuous Sins, let these things be seriously laid to Heart.

1. These presumptuous Sins, knowing to do Good, and yet not to do it; knowing
what is evil, yet not forbearing, these Sins do much harden the Heart. These
are two of the greatest Blessings, a sound Judgment, and a soft Heart. But
sinning presumptuously and knowingly, does congeal the Heart; it does both wast
the Conscience, and sear it, 1 Timothy 4.2. By sinning knowingly, a Person gets a
Custom of Sin; and the Custom of sinning takes away the Sense of sinning.
Ephesians. 4.19. Being past feeling. Tell the presumptuous Sinner, there are
Treasures of Wrath laid up for him; lead him to the Brink of Hell, and bid him
hear the Roarings of the damned, and the rattling of their Chains; bid him look
upon the infernal Flames, and see the Devils, that must shortly keep him
company, he fears not; his Heart is like a piece of Marble or Adamant, that
will take no impression. When Men know to do Good, yet do it not, their Hearts
harden insensibly, and that is dangerous: Now they cannot repent; that makes
the Sin against the Holy Ghost incapable of Pardon, because he that has sinned
it, is incapable of Repentance.

2. Such as sin presumptuously, they know to do good, yet do it not, are (...),
self-condemned. Tit. 3.11. Being condemned in himself. The Sinner knows in his
Conscience he is guilty; he has sinned against Warnings, Education,
Conviction, so that his own Heart condemns him. When the Judge says to the
Malefactor, Thou have committed such things worthy of Death, and the Evidence
is clear against thee, What can thou say for thy self that thou should not
die? he is forced to cry Guilty. The presumptuous Sinner is self-condemned, and
he will clear God when God judges him. Psalm. 51.4. That thou may be clear
when thou judge. When God condemns the Prisoner, he will clear his Judge.

3. To know to do good, yet not to do it; such presumptuous Sins make deep
Wounds in the Soul. A Prick of a Pin fetches Blood; but the Thrust of a Rapier
brings Death. The least Sin fetches Blood; but presumptuous Sins are like a
stab at the Heart. It Is a Miracle if ever such recover by Repentance. Every
little Hole in the Tiling, lets in Rain; but a Crack in the Foundation,
indangers the Fall of the House. Every Sin of Infirmity is hurtful; but
presumptuous Sin cracks the Conscience, and threatens the Ruin of that Soul.
Presumptuous Sin makes way for Despair; ( a deep Wound.) Despair is the Agony
of the Soul. Spira, in Despair, was like a living Man in Hell; Despair did suck
out his Marrow and Vital Blood; it made him a very Anatomy. Now, to sin against
the Light of Conscience, will bring to despair at last. The Sinner goes on
stubbornly; yet his foolish Heart tells him, all will be well: But when God
begins to set his Sins in order before him, and Conscience, which before was
like a Lion asleep, begins to be awakened, and roars upon him, and he sees
Death and Hell before him, now his Heart faints, his Presumption is turned to
Despair, and he cries out as Cain, Genesis 4.13. My punishment is greater than I
can bear. Now the Sinner begins to think with himself thus; I would have my
Sins, and I had them; and I have the wrath of God with them. Oh, how foolish
was I to refuse Instruction! but it is too late now; the Mercy-Seat is quite
covered with Clouds; I am shut out from all hope of Mercy; my Wounds are such,
that the Balm of Gilead will not heal. The more Presumption in the Time of
Life, the more Despair at the hour of Death.

4. To know to do Good, and not to do it, to sin presumptuously, God may in
just Judgment leave such an one to himself. It is a terrible thing when God
shall say, Thou have by thy presumptuous Sin affronted me, and provoked me to
my Face, therefore I will give thee up to thine own Heart; thou shall sin
still; seeing thou will be filthy, thou shall be filthy still. It Is sad for a
Man to be left to himself: it is like a Ship without a Rudder or Pilot, driven
of the Winds, and dashing upon a Rock. Romans 1.21, 24. Because when they knew
God, they glorified him not as God; wherefore God gave them up to uncleanness.
What is the Condition of a Patient when the Physician gives him over, and
leaves him to his own sick Palate? Says he, Physic will do him no good; he
may eat what he pleases; for he will die. So God, after Men have sinned
wilfully, gives them up to their Lusts; let them do what they will, they are in
a dying condition.

5. To know what is good, yet not do to it; to sin presumptuously, is a great
degree of the Sin against the Holy Ghost. Such as sin presumptuously, sin
wilfully: Put but one Weight more into the Scale, add but Despite and Malice
against the Spirit, and it becomes the unpardonable Sin. Though Presumption is
not final Apostasy; yet it comes very near to it, and a little matter more will
make thee so guilty, that there remains no more Sacrifice for Sin. To sin
presumptuously against Light, may in time bring on Malice and Despite to the
Spirit. As it was with Julian, who threw up his Dagger in the Air, as if he
would be revenged on God: When once it is come to this, there is but one step
lower a Man can fall, and that is into Hell.

6. A presumptuous person, who knows to do Good, and does it not, is possessed
with the Devil; Satan has a great power over him: A Man that is resolved in
Sin, let God and Conscience say what they will, I may say, as Acts 5.2. Why
has Satan filled thy Heart? The Prince of the Air has blown on thee, and
filled thy Sails, that thou movest so swiftly in Sin. In Christ's time, there
were many bodily possessed; but in our time, I fear they have their Souls
possessed with the Devil; she would have her Will licet Corpus and Animam in
aeternum damnavit. May it not be said of such a Person, as Mat. 15.22. My
Daughter is grievously vexed with a Devil?

7. There is little hope for such as know to do Good, yet do it not, know what
is evil, but will not forbear. There were Sacrifices for Sins of Ignorance; but
no Sacrifices for Sins of Presumption. Numb. 15.30. Indeed presumptuous Sinners
hope all will be well. Prove. 14.16. The Fool is confident. Such a Fool is
spoken of, Deuteronomy. 29.19. When he hears the words of this Curse, he blesses
himself, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk after the imagination of my
heart, to add Drunkenness to Thirst; the Lord will not spare him, but the Anger
and Jealousy of the Lord shall smoke against that Man. Though the humble,
penitent may fly to the Mercy of God, as to an Altar of Refuge; yet God will
pluck the presumptuous Sinner from this Altar. Exodus 23.7. I will not justify
the wicked. Should God favor presumptuous Sinners, he should justify the
wicked, seem to like and approve all they have done; but he will not justify
the wicked. So that such who rebel against Light, and sin presumptuously, there
is little hope for such. The presumptuous Sinner stops his Ear to the Councels
of the Word, vexes the holy Spirit, tramples on Christ's Blood; he rejects the
Remedy, he necessitates himself to Damnation.

8. Such as sin presumptuously, that know to do Good, yet do it not; know what
is evil, yet will not forbear it, God refuses all their Services. They sin
against their Conscience, and yet come and worship God. God abhors their
Sacrifice. Isa. 1.15. When you make many Prayers I will not hear, your hands
are full of Blood. For Men to sin presumptuously, and come and pray, and hear
the Word, they do but provoke God the more. And take notice, such as live in
Sin against their Conscience, when they pray most, God will punish them most.
Hos. 8.13. They sacrifice Flesh for the Sacrifices of mine Offerings; but the
Lord accepts them not; now will he remember their iniquities, and visit their
Sins. They were highly guilty of Idolatry; they had set up one Idol in Dan, and
another in Bethel: Here they sinned presumptuously, went against Light, and now
they come and offer their Sacrifices to God: Says God, I will not accept your
Offering; now will I remember your Iniquities; and while you are worshipping
me, I will punish you. Now will I visit your Sins. Thus you see what cause you
have to tremble, who are guilty in this kind; you see your Misery.

Besides all that has been said, consider these Two Things.

2. You that sin presumptuously, that know to do Good, and do it not; that know
what is evil, yet will not forbear, you cannot sin so cheap as others; though
Sin will cost every one dear, yet it will cost you dearer. You go directly
against Conscience, and if there be either Justice in Heaven, or Fire in Hell,
you shall be sure to be punished. Some Places you use to say are dearer to live
in than others; it is dearer living in the City than the Country: Let me tell
you, it is dearer sinning in the City, than in a blind Village, where they have
not had the Means of Grace. To lie, cozen, and be drunk after the powerful
Preaching of the Word, the Convictions of Conscience, the Enlightnings of the
Holy Ghost; this will put a Weight into the Scale; it will make Sin the
heavier, and Hell the hotter.

2. You who sin presumptuously, cannot take so much Pleasure in your Sin as
another may have. One whose Conscience is less enlightened, though his Sin will
be bitter to him afterward, yet at present he may roll it as Honey under his
Tongue, and find Pleasure in it; but you that sin against your Knowledge, you
cannot have so much pleasure in Sin as he; for Conscience will put forth a
Sting; and all the Threatenings of the Word will set themselves in Battle array
against you; so that you can have no quiet. He that has the Toothache, does
not taste so much sweetness in his Meat as another. O presumptuous Sinner,
every step thou take in Sin, thou go with a Thorn in thy Foot, and that
Trouble thou feel now in thy Conscience, is but the beginning of Sorrow.

Quest. What shall we do that we may not sin presumptuously against Conscience?

Answ. Take heed of little Sins; though, (to speak properly) there are no such
things as little Sins, no little Treason; but comparatively, one Sin may be
lesser than another. Take heed of little Sins. The frequent committing of
lesser Sins, will prepare for greater. A lesser Distemper of Body, if it be let
alone, prepares for a greater Distemper. Being unjust in a little, prepares for
being unjust in much, Luke 16.10. Such as were at first more modest, yet by
accustoming themselves to lesser Sins, by degrees their Sins have boiled up to
a greater height. Jayl-Sins have begun at little Sins.

2. If you would not sin presumptuously, viz. knowingly and wilfully, then
reverence the Dictates of Conscience; get Conscience well informed by the Word,
as you set your Watch by the Sun; and then be ruled by it; do nothing against
Conscience. If Conscience says, do such a thing, though never so unpleasing,
set upon the Duty. When Conscience says, Take heed of such a thing; come not
nigh the forbidden Fruit. Conscience is God's Deputy or Proxy in the Soul. The
Voice of Conscience is the Voice of God. Do not stifle any Checks of
Conscience, lest God suffer thee to harden in Sin, and by degrees come to
presumptuous Sin.

3. Labor to have your Knowledge sanctified. Men sin against their Knowledge,
because their Knowledge is not sanctified. Knowledge is like the Moon, Light in
it, but no Heat. Sanctified Knowledge works upon the Soul; it inclines us to
Good; it makes us fly from Sin. Sanctified Knowledge is like a Breastplate,
which keeps the Arrow of presumptuous Sin from entering.

An Alphabetical INDEX of the chief Matters of this Book.
A.
ABstaining from external Acts of Sin, not sufficient to entitle us to
Salvation. Page 879 Acts of Sin, how we may keep from them. 871 Adam, how long
he continued in Paradise before he fell. 79 Adam's Sin, how made ours. 82
Adoption, what it is. 134 -- From what, and to what it is. 135
Adopted Son, how free. Ibid. Adoption, the instrumental Cause of it. ib.
Adoption, Signs of it. 137 Adultery, the heinousness of it, wherein it appears.
370 Adultery, how we may abstain from it. 372 Afflictions of the Godly, how
they differ from those of the Wicked. 261 Afflicted, how they are happy. 262
Affliction, what kindness there is in it, when God seems most unkind. 525
Affliction, what profit is in it. ib. Afflictions, how they contribute to our
Happiness. 528 Afflictions, how they magnify us. 864 Aggravation of Adam's
Sin. 81 Aggravations of the loss of the Kingdom of Heaven. 488 Angels, their
Society, how can it add to the happiness of Souls, when God is infinite to fill
the Soul with delight? 474 Anthropomorphites Objection answered. 24 Aphori^ms
about Sin and Forgiveness. 805 Apostasy from Religion, whence it proceeds. 485
Appearance of Evil, the mischief of it. 871 Arguments to persuade us to seek
after obtaining the Kingdom of Heaven. 503 Arrians Error about the H. Ghost,
refuted. 64 Arminians Objections against Perseverance. 220 Arminians deny
Saints Perseverance, and why. 493 Assurance, what it is. 201 True Assurance,
the difference between it and Presumption. 202 Assurance, its Excellency. ibid.
Assurance, how to know if we have right to it. 204 Assurance, what we must do
to get it. 203 Assurance, they that have it, how they must carry themselves.
205 Atheist, the wickedest Creature that is. 22
B.
Baptism, what it is. 409 The Benefit of it. ibid.
Believers, why they have not all the full enjoyment of Peace. 209 Believers
Privileges at Death. 225 How they come to have those Privileges. 227 What they
are. 228 How shall we know that we shall gain them at Death? 230
Believers Privilege after Death. 231 Believers, when they enter upon
possession of Glory. 233 Benefits of Believers at the Resurrection. 234
Benefits of God's Children, what they are. 138 Bodies, how shall we know they
shall be raised at the Resurrection. 236 Since they must lie long in the Grave,
what shall support us till then? ibid.
Bodies of the Saints shall be glorious at the Resurrection. 237
C.
Cain went out from the presence of the Lord, what meant by it. 28 Call
twofold. 127 Call effectual, the Means of it. 128 The Cause of it. ibid. The
Qualifications of it. ibid.
Cerinthian Heretics, their Error. 94 Change in the new Creature, wherein it
consists. 981 Charity, the excellency of it. 366 Children, wherein they are to
show their respect to their Parents. 353 Child of God, how it appears that he
has worldly things in Love. 432 Children of God, how they should behave
themselves to such a Father. 440 Christ, the several Names given him in
Scripture. 93 Christ, why called (...), the Word. 94 Christ is eternal. ibid.
Christ a Prophet, how he teaches. 96 Christ, what are the Lessons he teaches.
ib. Christ's Teaching, how it differs from others Teaching. 97 Christ, what we
shall do to have him for our Teacher. 98 Christ, the Parts of his Priestly
Office. 100 Christ, how he could suffer being God, ibid. Christ's Sufferings,
wherein the greatness of them did appear. ibid. Christ, why he did suffer. ibid
Christ, who he intercedes for, and what he does in the Work of Intercession.
103 -- How he intercedes. 104 How we may know that Christ intercedes for us.
107
Christ, how he comes to be a King. 108 In what sense he is a King, and where
he rules, and what he rules by. 108, 109 When will Christ deliver his People.
ibid.
Christ, how he came to be made Flesh. 111 Christ, why born of a Woman. ibid.
-- Why born of a Virgin. 112 How Christ thus born could be free of Sin. ib.
Christ, why made Flesh. ibid. Christ, how we shall know that he is formed in
us. 115 Christ, in what sense God exalted him, and how many ways. 118 Christ's
sitting at the Right Hand of God, what is meant by it. 119 Christ, how he does
redeem us, and from what, and to what. 121, 122 Christ, how he was made a Curse
for us. 270 Christ, how he will preserve the Saints Grace till they come to
Heaven. 439 Christ's Glory in Heaven, how it can stand with it to have a
Fellow-feeling in our Miseries. 849 Christ, how he succors them that are
tempted. 850 Commandments of God, how we must keep them. 292 -- How we shall
keep them. 295
Comforts of a pardoned Soul. 823 Comforts for those that bewail their want of
growth. 470 Convictions, what makes them prove Abortive. 462 The Covenant of
Works. 74 Covenant, why God made Man, with Adam and his Posterity in Innocence,
and what it was. ibid. -- Why he gave it to Adam, since he foresaw he would
transgress. ibid.
Covenant of Grace, what it is. 89 -- What Names are given to it. ibid. Why God
would make such a Covenant with us. ibid.
Covenant of Grace, how it differs from that made with Adam. 90 Covenant of
Grace, if Works be required in it. ibid. What we must do to be in Covenant with
God. 91
To Covet, what it is. 382 Covetousness, the danger of it. 383 -- How we may be
cured of it. 385
Creation, what it is. 65 Creation and Generation, difference between them. 66
Creation, 2 things to be considered in it. ib.
D
Darling-Sin, otherwise called, our own, how it may be known. 492, 869 Day of
Judgment, how it appears there shall be one. 238 -- Why it must be. ibid. --
Who shall be Judge. ibid.
Deceit, how many sorts of it there are. 878 Decrees of God, what they are, and
execution of them. 65 Deliverance of Israel out of Egypt, why God mentions it
in the Preface to the Commandments. 257 Deliverances of the Godly and Wicked
out of trouble, how they differ. 265 Deliverance, how it may be known that it
comes out of Love. ibid. Deliverance, when we are fitted for it. ibid. -- How
we should praise God in a right manner for it. 266
Desires unfeigned, how they may be known. 463 Desires after Heaven, wherein
they come short. 488 Dignity of such as have God for their Father, wherein it
lies. 427 Directions to obtain Pardon of Sin. 826 Directions to such as have
overcome Temptation. 858 Doing of God's Will, why so requisite. 512 Doing Duty
unseasonably, an effect of Satan's Temptation. 844 Doves, we should be like
them in three respects. 972 Drunkenness defaces God's Image as much as any Sin.
969 Duty of Christians, it is to be settled in the Doctrine of Faith. Prelim.
Disc. 1 -- This is accomplished by being well grounded. 111
Duties of such as have their Sins forgiven. 825
E
Earth, whether it did bear Thorns in Innocence. 67 Elect People, how we shall
know that we are of it. 820 Encouragements to Faith in Prayer. 444
Encouragements to Hallowing of God's Name. 453 Encouragements to Perseverance.
501 Chief End of Man, what it is. 1 Enjoying of God, two fold, and what. 9
Eternity of God. 33 -- Comfortable to the Godly, and frightning to the Wicked.
34 Evidence of Pardon, why it may not appear for a time. 818 What Evil we
should pray to be delivered from. 860 Examine we must our Sins and Graces. 417
F
Faith, why more the condition of the New Covenant, than any other Grace. 90
Faith, the Kinds of it. 124 Justifying Faith, what it is. ibid. Faith, how it
is wrought. 125 Faith, the preciousness of it, wherein it lies. ib. -- How it
justifies. ib.
Faith, why it should justify and save more than any other Grace. 126 Faith,
how to know if it be true. ibid. -- How to judge of the growth of it. 127
Faith, a most precious Grace, and how it comes to be so. 398 True Faith, how
it may be known. 400 Faith, how it comes to be strong. 502 Fallen Man could be
restored no other way but by God's assuming Flesh. 111 False Witnessing, what
is condemned under it. 379 -- The Evil of it. 381
Father, who meant by it in the Fifth Command. 350 Father in Heaven, how we
show our Honor to him. 429 Forgiveness of Sin, what it is. 804 Forgiveness of
Sin, the necessity of it. 812 Forgive others, how can we when God only forgives
Sin? 828 Forgive, how we must. 831
G
Gifts, whether sufficient for the Ministerial Office. 965 Give us this day our
daily Bread, the meaning of it. 537 Why it is said give us in the Plural 540 Why
it is called our Bread. 541 Bread, what is meant by it. 542
Glory, what is comprehended in it. 231 God's Glory, what we are to understand
by it. 1 To glorify God, wherein it consists. ibid. Glorify God, why we must
do it. 2 -- How many ways we may do it. 3
God's Glory, how we shall aim at it. 4 Glory, who bring none to God. 8 God's
Glory, who fight against it. ibid. Glory of God ought to be preferred before
our Personal Concerns. 537 God is the chief God, and how. 11 God, that he is
proved. 20 -- What he is. 24
God is a Spirit, what is meant by it. 24 God, how he differs from other
Spirits. ibid. God, how we may conceive his being a Spirit without making an
Image or Resemblance of him. 25 God, what kind of Spirit he is. 27 God, there
is but one. 59 God from what, and to what he calls men. 128 God, how we shall
see him. 231 God is a King, and how. 455 -- What it requires of us. 456 -- It Is
a Comfort to the Godly, and Terror to the Wicked. 457
God, what it is to make him a God to us. 273 What it is to cleave to him as
our God. 275 God, what it is to have other besides the true God. 276 [God spoke
all these Words] how we must understand them since he has no bodily Organs. 249
God, how he comes to be our God, and what it implies. 252 -- How we may know
it. ibid.
God, in what sense he is a Father. 426 God's being Father to Christ, and to
the Elect, how differ. ibid. What makes God our Father. ibid. God, wherein it
appears that he is the best Father. ibid. God, that he is our Father, how to
know it. 428 That God is in Heaven, what we may learn from it. 442 God's Name,
what is meant by it. 446 God's Name dishonored by all sorts of Persons, and
how. 451 Grace, how a Christian may be said to grow in it. 215 The right manner
of growing in it. ibid. Why Grace must needs grow. ibid.
Grace, why we should grow in it. ibid. -- How to know when we grow in it, and
when not. 217 -- How to comfort them that don't grow in it. 218
Grace, why called a Kingdom. 460 Greatness of Sin, an Argument for Pardon. 817
H
Happiness of having God for our Father, wherein it lies. 433 Hallowing of
God's Name, what is meant by it. 446 -- When we may be said to do it. ibid.
Hallowing God's Name the Character of a Godly Person. 450 How we may Hallow
God's Name. 455 Heart, how it may be bettered. 992 Hell, how we shall know we
are delivered from it. 269 Hell's Torments consist of two parts. 865 Holiness
of God, what it is. 47 Our Holiness wherein it consists. 48 Holiness, how we
may resemble God in it. 49 What Honor is due to Political Fathers. 350 What
Honor is due to Spiritual Fathers. ibid. Holy Ghost, what is meant by its
Power overshadowing the Virgin. 112 House of Bondage, a Type of Israel's
Deliverance from Sin. 266 House, why it is put before the Wife in the Tenth
Command. 387 Humiliation, wherein it comes short of Grace. 462
I
Idolatry, how we may be kept from it. 281 Idolatrous Places, a great Blessing
to be delivered from them. 258 Idolatry, why we are so prone to it. 258
Illumination and Conviction, how many ways a Man Sins against it. 392
Illumination, when it comes short of Grace. 462 Image Worship, the Evil of it.
299 Image of Christ, whether we may lawfully make it. 280 Image, or
resemblance, of God, if none lawful, how shall we conceive of God aright. 281
Impotency, why God suffers it to lie on Man that he cannot keep the Law. 389 In
dwelling-Presence of the Spirit, how to know if we have it. 204 Infallibility
and certainty of the Kingdom of Glory, wherein it appears. 479 Infant Baptism
proved. 410 -- The benefit thereof. ibid.
Intercession of Christ, what are the Fruits of it. 105 Invocation of Saints
unlawful. 880 Joy in the Holy Ghost, what it is. 211 Divine Joys, when God
usually gives his People them. ibid. Joys, Worldly and Spiritual, the
differences between them. 212 This Joy to be sought for, and why. 213 -- What
we shall do to obtain it. 214
This Joy, those that want it, how we shall comfort them. ibid. Judgment
general, when it will be. 238 -- How it will be performed. 239
Justice of God, what it is. 50 Justice of God, how it stands with it for Sin
committed in a Moment, to punish it with Eternal Torment. 269, 396 Justified
Persons, in what sense they are redeemed from Sin. 122 Justification, what is
meant by it. 131 -- The ground of it. ibid. The Material, Meritorious, and
Efficient Cause of Justification. ibid. -- The Essence of it. ibid. -- The
Instrument of it. ibid. -- The End of it. 132
Our Justification, whether from Eternity. ib. Justification, Positions about
it. ib. Justification and Sanctification, how they differ. 808
K
What Kingdom is meant in the Lords Prayer 458 Kingdom of Darkness, how many
ways a Natural Man is in it. 459 Kingdom of Grace, why we should pray that it
may come into our Hearts. 460 Kingdom of Grace, how we may know it is set up in
our Hearts. 462 Kingdom of Grace, what we shall do to obtain it. 467 Kingdom of
Grace, when it increases in the Soul. 468 Kingdom of Glory, what is meant by
it. 471 Kingdom of Heaven, what it implies. ibid and 476 The Blessedness of
being there. ibid.
Kingdom of Heaven, wherein it excels all other Kingdoms. 477 This Kingdom,
when it shall be bestowed. 479 Kingdom of Heaven, why we should so earnestly
pray for it. 480 Kingdom of Heaven, how we shall know it is prepared for us.
485 Kingdom of Heaven, what advances a Man may make to it, and yet miss of it,
and whence it is. 487 -- What we shall do that we may not miss of it. 489
Knowledge of God. 32 Knowledge the Chief Work of Conversion. 998 Knowledge to
do Good, why not followed with Practice. 999
L
Law, whether we may go to it for Debt. 829 Lead us not into Temptation, the
meaning of it. 832 Live to God, what it is. 5 Lord's Supper, what it is. 413 --
What are the Ends of it. 414
Lord's Death, how we are to remember it in the Sacrament. 414 -- Holy Supper,
why we are to receive it. 415 Lord's Supper, whether it be often to be
administered. 415 -- Who are to receive it. ibid. -- How we may receive it
Worthily. ibid.
Loss will befall us, if we give over doing God's Will. 519 Love, what it is.
245 -- Wherein its formal Nature consists. ibid.
Love to God, how it must be qualified. ibid. Love to God, what are the visible
Signs of it. 246 How we shall do to Love God aright. 248 To Love any thing more
than God, is to make it a God. 277
Love to God, how it must be qualified. 289 Love God, how we may know whether
we do it. ibid. Love to God, incentive to inflame it. ^90
M.
Man being in honor, abides not; how the Rabbis read it. 79 Man, why he does
not obey God, though he knows his Duty. 244 Master, how he must demean toward
his Servants. 353 Means to bring our Will to God in Affliction. 535 Means for
obtaining the Kingdom of Heaven. 494 Means conducing to Perseverance. 502
Meditation, a Means to help us to Heaven. 499 Meditation on the Kingdom of
Glory, what Effects it has. 509 Mercy of God, what it is, laid down in several
Positions. 53 Mercy of God, Properties of it. 55 Mercy of God, what we must do
to be interested in it. 56 Mercy, how many ways God is said to show it. 285
Mercy, how we may know if it belong to us. 287 How shall we do to get a share
in it. 288
Misery of Man by the Fall, twofold, and what. 86 Mistakes of Sin being
pardoned when it is not. 826 Moderation, in what Cases it is good. 975 Moral
Law, is it still in force to Believers? 270 Moral Persuasion not sufficient to
convert a Sinner. 979 Motions of the Spirit, how they may be known from a
Delusion. 498 Motion, how to know when it comes from our own Hearts, and when
from Satan. 834 Murder, how many ways it is committed. 360 Murder, the
heinousness of it. ibid.
N.
Name of God, how we may take it in vain. 295 Natural Man's opposing Sin, how
it differs from the New Creature's opposing it. 982 Necessity why the Kingdom
of Grace should be increased. 469 Neighbor, how we may be kept from coveting
what is his. 388 New Creature, what it is. 977 The several Causes in it. ibid.
New Creature, does God give a new Soul in it? 978 New Creature, what kind of
Work it is. ibid. New Creature, the Counterfeits of it. 979 New Creature, how
far one must put off the Old Man, that he may be one. 982 New Creature, the
necessity of being so. 984 What we shall do to be so. 985

O.
Obedience, how it must be qualified so as to be acceptable. 242 Arguments, or
Incentives to it. 244 Means in order to attain it. ibid.
Obedience, perfect to the Moral Law, cannot be given. 388 Original Sin, what
Names it has. 82 Original Sin has something Privative and Positive in it. ibid.
Original Sin, the Universality of it. 83 The Effects of it. ibid.
Original Sin, why God leaves it in us after Regeneration. 84
P.
Pardon of Sin, why so few seek after it. 811 Parents, how they should carry it
toward their Children. 357 Right Participation of the Sacrament is in three
things. 419 Peace, the several kinds of it. 207 Peace Spiritual, whence it
comes. ibid. Peace, whether graceless persons have it. 208 False Peace, the
Signs of it. ibid. True Peace, the Signs of it. ibid. How to attain it. 210
Perseverance, by what means effected. 219 Perseverance of Saints, how we may
prove it. ibid. Perseverance, Motives to it. 222 Means that may be used for it.
223
Perseverance of Saints built upon three unmovable Pillars. 493 People of God,
why so frequently in an afflicted state. 260 People of God, how he delivers
them out of Trouble. 263 Why he brings them out of Trouble. 264
Pleasing God, what it implies. 60 Prayer, what it is. 421 Why made to God
only. ibid. What are the Parts of it. ibid. The several sorts of it. ibid. What
Prayer is most like to prevail with God. 422
Prayers, in what order we must direct them to God. 425 Praying in Faith, what
it implies. 443 How we may know that we do so. ibid.
Pray in Faith, how we may do it. 445 Prayer a sovereign Means to elude
Temptations. 857 Power of God, how it seen. 43 Presumptuous sinning, what it
is. 392, 1001 Presumptuous Sin, how we may keep from it. 1007 Promises of God,
two things in them to comfort us. 57 Properties of bad Debtors, wherein we have
them. 803 Prosperity, the danger of it. 530 Providence of God, That and What it
is. 69 Positions about it. ibid. Providence of God, how exerted toward Sin. 70
Prudence and Holiness, wherein a Christian joins them together. 973 Punishment
of Sabbath-breaking. 348
Q.
Qualifications of our Intercessor, what they are, 103 Qualifications and
Properties of the Kingdom of Heaven. 476 Qualifications of God's Mercy. 285
R.
Redeemed, how we shall know that we are of the number. 123 Regenerate Person,
what Comfort he may have under the imperfections of his Obedience. 390
Repentance, the Counterfeits of it. 401 Repentance, the Advantages of it. 403
How we may attain a penitential Frame of Heart. 404
Repentance, the Ingredients in it. 806 Resignation to God's Will in
Afflictions, how it may be obtained. 523 Resurrection, by what Arguments may it
be proved. 235 Righteous, shall they only be raised. ibid. What Rocks of
Support there are for tempted Souls. 848 Rule of Obedience, what it is. 242
S.
Sabbath, why God appointed it. 332 Seventh-Day- Sabbath, why we do not keep
it. 332 Sabbath, why the first day of the Week substitute in place of it. 332
Sabbath, how we are to sanctify it. 334 Sacrament, what Names and Titles are
given it in Scripture. 412 Saints in Glory, whether know each other. 232
Saints, why God suffers them to be buffetted by Satan's Temptations. 847
Sanctification, what it is. 139 The Counterfeits of it. 140
Sanctification its necessity, wherein it appears. 141 What are the Signs of
it. 142 How it may be attained. 144
Sanctified Persons, have they all Assurance? 201 Sanctified Persons, whether
they have such an Assurance as excludes all doubting. ib. Sanctified Persons,
whether they have all true Peace. 209 Satan's Temptation, the Subtilty of it.
80 Satan's Malice in Temptation. 832 Satan's Diligence and Power in tempting.
833 Satan's Subtilty in tempting. 834 Satan comes upon us at two times in our
weakness. 836 Satan tempts five sort of Persons more than others. 83^ Satan,
why he sets chiefly on our Faith. 842 Satan, by what Methods he disturbs the
Saints Peace. 846 Satan, in what respect he is the evil one. 876 Scriptures,
how proved to be the Word of God. 13 Scriptures, why called Canonical. 15
Scriptures, a complete Rule. ibid. Scriptures, what is the main Scope and End
of them. ibid. -- Who shall have the Power of interpreting them. ibid.
Scriptures, how should we so search them as to find Life. 18 Seasons Satan
tempts in. 834 Seasons when God delivers his People out of Trouble, what they
are. 264 Self-Murder, how many ways one may be guilty of it. 364 Self
Examination, what is required to it. 416 What it is. ibid. By what Rule it must
be done. ibid. Why it must be done before we approach the Lord's Table. ibid.
Servant, how he must honor his Master. 351 Serpents, how we must be like
them, and wherein not. 967 Sin committed in time, why it should be punished to
eternity. 34 Sin, the Evil of it obvious in its Original and Nature. 76 -- In
the Price paid for it, and the Effects of it. 78
Sin of our first Parents, what it was. 79 Sin, why called a Debt. 802 -- In
what sense it is the worst Debt. ibid.
Sin, how we may know that it is forgiven. 819 Sin, the Evil of it. 860 Sin,
worse than Affliction. 862 Sin, how we may so reprove it, as to love the
Person. 974 Sins, how we may know they are pardoned. 286 Sins of God's People
more provoke him than those of the Wicked. 874 Sin, worse than Death and Hell.
865 What Sins we should particularly take heed of. 869 Socinians Error about
the Second Person of the Trinity. 63 What Sorrow goes before Forgiveness. 806
Soul-Murther, who are guilty of it. 365 Soul, the Excellency of it. 801
Soul-dress, for receiving the Sacrament, wherein it consists. 416 Souls
deserted, that want assurance how they may be comforted. 205 Spiritual, what it
is to be so. 25 Spirit, how it can be said to be grieved. 77 State of Nature,
is a Kingdom of Darkness. Submission to God's Will, what it is not. 520
Submission to God's Will, what may stand with it, and what not. 521 Submission
to God's Will, what it is. ibid. When we do not submit to God's Will in
Afflictions. 523. Subtilty of Satan to make Men miscarry in the use of Meat.
838
T
Temptations, whence they come. 832 Tempted, two cases of them spoke to. 852
Temptations of Satan, means to defeat them. 855 Temptation, what good may come
out of it. 858 Theft, whence it does arise. 377 -- How many sorts of it there
are. ibid. -- What are the aggravations of it. ibid.
Vain Thoughts, how they come in, in hearing the Word. 340 -- The Evil of them.
341
Vain Thoughts, how we may get help against them. 342 Vain Thoughts in Prayer,
how we may cure them. 422 Tongue, how it is Evil. 986 Evil Tongue, the several
sorts of. 986, 987. Tongue, rules for governing it. 991 Tongue, Sins, Motives
to beware of them. 993 Torments of Hell, what they are. 473 Trinity of Persons
proved. 62, 63 Truth of God. 57
U
Visiting Iniquity, what is meant by it. 282 Unchangeableness of God. 36
Unchangeable God, how to get a part in him. 38 Unpardoned Soul, how miserable
it is. 816 Vorstius Objection against God's Vbiquity answered. 27
W
Several Ways of Satan to tempt Men. 853 Weariness in well-doing, what
occasions it. 994 -- The Evil of it. 996
Means to keep us from being weary in Well-doing. 997 Will of God, what is
meant by it. 512 Will of God, how we are to do it, that we may find acceptance.
515 Will of God, how we may Evangelically do it. 516 Will of God, how we may
come to do it aright. Wisdom of God, wherein it appears. 40 Wisdom and
Innocence, necessary Qualifications of a Christian. 966 Wisdom, wherein it
chiefly consists. ibid. The Word's effectually Working, what is meant by it.
404 Word, how it may be read effectually. 405 -- How it may be heard
effectually. 406
World, why God made it. 66 World, in what sense it is Evil. 877 What Worship
is most suitable to God. 25 To Worship God in the Spirit, what it is. 26 Wrath
to come, what we shall do to escape it. 397
A Catalogue of BOOKS sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns,
near Mercers Chapel in Cheapside.
In Folio.
THE Christian Directory, or Case of Conscience. Catholic Theology. Methodus
Theologica, all three by Mr. Richard Baxter. A Sacred Poem on the Glory of
Heaven. Rushworth's first Vol. Crook's Hypocrite. Keach's Metaphors. Strong on
the Covenant. Burgess on the Corinthians. Tailor on Christ's Temptation. Horton
on the Psalms. Gell's Remains. A Dialogue between Timothy and Titus, about the
Articles of the Church of England. Isaac Ambrose's Works. Pool's Annotations on
the Bible. Pembroke's Arcadia. Manton's Third Vol. of Sermons. Dr. Lightfoot's
Works. Gurnall's Christian Armor. Dr. Horton's 100 Sermons. Nostradamus's
Prophecies. Melvill's Memoirs. Marvell's Poems. Daille on the Colossians.
Cook's Mirabilia. Clark's Martyrology. The Acts, Decisions, Decrees, and Canons
of the Reformed Churches in France; being a most Faithful and Impartial History
of the Rise, Growth, and Decay of the Reformation in that Kingdom; their
Confession of Faith, Speeches, Letters, Cases of Conscience, etc. By John
Quick, Minister in London. Dr. Owen's Discourse of the Holy Spirit. -- on the
Hebrews, Second Vol. -- on the Hebrews, Third Vol.
In Quarto.
Baxter's Saints Everlasting rest. -- Church History and Councils. -- History
of Counsels enlarged and defended. -- Apology for Nonconformists. -- Second
Defense of Nonconformists. -- Apology against Eight Men. -- Treatise of
Episcopacy. -- Disputations of Church Government. -- Life of Faith: First of
the Sermons Preached before King Charles the Second. -- English Nonconformity.
-- Naked Popery. -- against Dodwell and Shirlock. -- Which is the True Church.
-- Catholic Communion, against both Extremes, in six several Controversies. --
Moral Prognostication. -- Search for English Schismatics. -- Farewell Sermon:
Published by himself. -- Alderman Ashurst's Funeral Sermon. -- Mr. John
Corbet's Funeral Sermon. -- Glorious Kingdom of Christ. -- Reply to Mr. Tho.
Beverly's Answer. -- National Churches. -- Church Concord. -- Penitent
Confession, and necessary Vindication. -- Power of a Christian Magistrate. --
Disputations of right to Sacraments. -- Disputation of Justification. -- Church
Told against Bagshaw. Ark on the Covenant. Brown's Gospel-Churches. Brightman
on the Revelations. Bulkley on the Covenant. -- Critical Enquiries. Boyse's
Sermon. Charlton's Enquiries into Humane Nature. Child's Pilot's Sea-Mirrour.
Clarkson's Poetical Divinity of Papists. -- No Evidence for Diocesan Churches.
Corbet's Nonconformist's Plea. Clark against Postlewait. A Dialogue between a
Protestant and a Jew, and a Papist and a Jew. Doolittle's Protestant's Answer
to where was your Church before Luther. Caryl on Job. Elton on the
Commandments. Greenhill on Ezekiel: First Vol. -- Second Vol. Humphrys's
Nonconformist's Third Step. Frysell's Sermons of Grace and Temptation. Bishop
Hopkins on the Commandments. Humphrys's Middle Way. -- Peaceable Disquisition.

