A MEMORIAL Delivered to His MAJESTY (July 2^/31 1664) from the Lord VAN-GOGH,
Ambassador from the STATES GENERAL of the UNITED PROVINCES.

Translated into English.

With the ANSWER which His Sacred Majesty returned thereunto.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for R. Royston, Bookseller to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, 1664.

THE MEMORIAL OF THE DUTCH AMBASSADOR TO HIS MAJESTY.
SIR,
THE underwritten Ambassador of the States General of the United Netherlands,
Your good friends and Allies, having had the honor of several Audiences with
Your Majesty, and therein made known to You such Orders as he has from time to
time received from his Masters upon occasion of, and concerning diverse affairs,
and especially these following: To wit,

Seeing it is understood and perceived, that Vessels of War are fitting and
preparing on both sides, which if they go forth to Sea and meet there together,
might by some misunderstanding fall foul upon one another; Your Majesty would
therefore be pleased to keep back Your Fleet, and not suffer it to go to Sea,
as their Lordships offer on their part to do; the whole intent and design
tending only to the safety of both parties, and the prevention of the foresaid
sinister encounters.

Moreover, Whereas their Lordships have been informed, that Captain Holmes with
the Vessels under his Command has now again (as heretofore) done very great
and enormous injuries to the Netherlandish Company of the West Indies, by
taking diverse of their Vessels upon the Coast of Africa, as also by making
himself Master of some places and Forts belonging unto them, and namely amongst
others of Capo Verde, etc. which is directly contrary, not only to the Treaty
last concluded between Your Majesty and the States of the United Provinces, but
also to mutual Amity and good neighborhood: The said Ambassador did therefore
in the name of his Superiors, demand restitution of the same, and that
reparation might be made of the damages and interests, which the said Company
and other Subjects of their Lordships, who were concerned, have suffered
thereby; as also that the like proceedings and violences might be prevented for
the future by an express Order.

In the third place, That their Lordships being from day to day confirmed by
certain intelligence coming from that Coast, that the foresaid action of
Captain Holmes had not only been effected in the manner above specified, but
also that he was intended to carry on his design further, by making incursions
and seizing upon all the Coast, and that for his better success therein, he
expected a notable supply of Ships from England, as the whole matter may be
proved by the Testimony and Depositions of credible persons newly come from
thence: Which actions being without right, reason and equity, and which
consequently cannot be endured, nor looked upon with a good eye, Your Majesty
was entreated that it might be Your good Pleasure to command as well the said
Captain Holmes, as others who were in that engagement, or are held to have been
employed therein, not only to restore the foresaid Forts and Vessels so taken,
and to repair the damages thereby suffered (as reason requires) but also that
the Ships which by report are now ready to set Sail, or which may be fitting
for that end, may by Your Majesty's express Command be prohibited and charged
not to do or cause any other injury or damage to the said Company, or to any
other the Subjects of the United Provinces.

Fourthly, Forasmuch as the poorand afflicted Reformed Churches in the Valleys
of Piedmont have represented, that after the agreement made with his Royal
Highness the Duke of Savoy some while since, they are again overwhelmed and
ruined by exactions and charges required of them to defray the expenses of the
Army which the said Duke had commanded against them, which charges amounted to
so high a sum, that it was impossible for them to make it up, for the reasons
more at large alleged in their Remonstrance; Therefore they have desired the
intercession of the States General with Your Majesty, that Your Ambassador in
the Court of France may have order to procure from his Most Christian Majesty
(as being Mediator between his said Royal Highness and them) as much favor and
comfort to those poor afflicted Churches as can possibly by any means be
obtained.

And finally, considering that the Vessels coming from the United Provinces
into the Rivers, Streams and Roads of this Kingdom, are stopped there under
pretense that there be Persons and Commodities on board which come from places
infected with the Plague, or at least suspected to be so, by which means the
freedom of Trade and Passage is obstructed and disturbed, to the great
prejudice of the inhabitants of both Nations: The said Ambassador therefore
insisted thereupon, that the same might be remedied, or at least that the
strictness of those Orders might be mitigated in such measure as in reason
shall be found convenient; And that the rather, because, by the mercy of God,
all the Provinces in general are not infected with the Contagion.

To all that is above said, Your Majesty has been pleased to answer in effect,
to wit, upon the first point, touching keeping of the Fleet from going to Sea,
That the numbers which were fitted and prepared on Your Majesty's side being no
way extraordinary, but only for common and customary use, and without design
of bringing any damage or inconvenience upon the inhabitants of the United
Provinces, the said Vessels could not be kept from going to Sea, because Your
Majesty's Honor was engaged therein; Nevertheless that You would give such
Orders to the chief Commander of Your said Fleet, that their Lordships shall
have no cause to apprehend any sinister encounters from it.

As to the second, touching the action of Captain Holmes* Your Majesty thought
good to answer thereunto, That You had received no information of it, and that
having given no Order for his so doing, You would cause reparation to be made,
if the matter proved to be true, and that the said Captain Holmes should be
punished according as the case should require: Nevertheless adding thereunto
afterward at another Audience, that the West India Company had likewise done
much damage to Your Majesty's Subjects upon the said Coast, pretending to be
Masters thereof to themselves alone; which thing ought to be considered also in
its proper season, judging it unreasonable and unjust that the Trade of the
English upon that Coast should continually be disturbed and hindered.

And as to the third, Your Majesty was pleased to say as before, That You had
received no information of Holmes his actions in those parts; and for so much
as concerned the Ships which are ready to set Sail toward the Coast of Africa,
that they were not in a condition to make any attempt there, being only
Merchantmen, unto which there was added but one Man of War for their Convoy.

For what regards the poor Piemontoies, That You were sensibly touched with the
miserable condition of those Churches and People, and for that reason Your
Majesty had already given Order to Your Ambassador in France to contribute unto
their relief and comfort in Your name; But forasmuch as at present there occurr
some new difficulties concerning the said Churches, Your Majesty would advise
more particularly thereupon.

And lastly, concerning the Merchants Ships which come from the United
Provinces into this Kingdom, and are stopped without permission to Land any
where, because they are suspected to come from some place infected with the
Sickness, there being no distinction made between Provinces and Cities really
afflicted with the said Contagion, and those which are not so at all; That Your
Majesty having an extraordinary apprehension of that disease, had great reason
to use all possible precaution against it; Notwithstanding, that the business
should also be thought upon more fully.

All which Points abovesaid having been repeated by the said Ambassador at his
last Audience, and instance thereupon made, that according to their Lordships
desires Your Majesty would be pleased to explain Your Self in Writing, to put
the minds of his Superiors out of perplexity and disquiet; and Your Majesty
having to that purpose desired, that all should be comprised in a Memorial for^
Answer to be given thereunto in Writing: The said Memorial (May it please Your
Majesty) is here most humbly presented, with like prayer, that such Order may
be taken therein, as that by a favorable answer (which the said Ambassador
expects from Your Majesty) he may be enabled to give his Masters content.

M. Van-Gogh.
From Chelsey, July 2^/31 1664.

