Very many has been the testimonie^ of TRUTH And large has been the
Declarations that has been given forth by the servants of the Lord, both sons
and daughters the followers of the LAMB Amongst whom I having heard, believed,
and received their report, and the Lord having opened the eye within the vail,
that made manifest his living witness, that witnessed to the truth cannot but
give in my testimony to those precious truths that has been declared by them,
though many for the witnessing thereof has gone through many hardships, great
sufferings, and long Imprisonments, some even to the laying down of their
lives, and all that was near and deer unto them; I say I cannot but give in my
testimony, and chiefly concerning tithes as the Lord has brought it to me,
that for which has been the cause of so much persecution in all ages, with
something concerning Oaths, which so many snares, traps and gins, has been
laid for the righteous innocent servants of the Lord, because they cannot swear.

And these are the testimonies given forth from one that loves and fears the
Lord, M. W.

Not I, but the Scriptures of truth, says, Woe to thee that spoilest and wast
not spoiled, and did wickedly, and they did not wickedly againgst thee.When
thou shall cease to spoil thou shall be spoiled, when thou shall make an end of
doing wickedly, they shall do wickedly against thee, Isa. 10.

Printed for the Author,

The Tithes commanded of God for the Levites, for the stranger, for the
fatherless and for the widows.
At the end of three years thou shall bring forth all the Tithes of thine
increase of that year, and lay them up within thine (...) gates, and the Levite
which has no inheritance shall come, and the stranger shall come, the widows
and the fatherless, shall come and eat, and be filled, that thy God may bless
thee. Deuteronomy. 14.
HEre is a right of Tithes at three years end given to the stranger to the
fatherless and to the widows, as well as to the Levites, and this was given of
God in whose gift all things are, and so of right to them it belongs; and
cursed are they that take it from them, for cursed is he that hinders the
right of the stranger, the fatherless and the Widows, and all the people shall
say Amen, or, So be it, Deuteronomy. 27.19. Now here may be a Query whether this curse
was ever taken away, or whether it does not yet remain upon all in every
Coun^y, Sheir or Parish, or upon every man, or upon every one, both Priest that
receives Tithes, and people that pays tithes, who has or does yet hinder the
right of the stranger, the fatherless and the widows, (mark) here is no curse
for hindering from the Levites, for that priesthood was but for a time, and so
to end as well as the Mosayecal and the Aronical Priesthoods which was in that
time, and then they had the tithes for their service, and the Levite also it
was their wages for their continual waiting in the Tabernacle, and then it was
said beware thou forsake not the Levite as long as thou live upon the earth,
Deuteronomy. 12. v. 19. but now there is no such service, nor no such waiting, and all
those Priesthoods are long since ended, and the Lord has scattered all the
Tribes that none can justly say he is of Levy's tribe, and none but Levys tribe
received tithes then and since that the Lord has no where determined who shall
have the Levites portion, yet most presumptuously the covetous Priests they
take it, not only the first second and third years, bu^ go on to the 4. 5. and
6. years, and so as long as they live, and persecute and take trebble damages,
which God did never command, if they have it not, and never care for the poor
stranger, the poor fatherless children and widows, which God took care for,
that none of his poor people or helpless creatures might want, as many of their
own poor widows I have seen go a begging for a piece of bread, but this was not
so in Hezekiahs time, when chambers in the house of the Lord was prepared, and
all the people brought in their first fruits and tithes in to the chambers that
he had prepared. But some may here query and say, what did they do before
Hezekiahs time, or before the chambers were prepared, why the Scriptures tells
you how they were disposed of, for in the third year which was the year of
tything, they gave it themselves to the Levites, the stranger, the fatherless
and to the widows, and then they were to come before the Lord and show what
they had done according to the command of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 26. and there was a
command before that, for says the Lord thou shall not hinder the right of the
stranger fatherless and widows, Deuteronomy. 24. there was command upon command for
the poor, the stranger, the fatherless and widows; but now when Hezekiah had
prepared the chambers, and the people had brought in their first fruits and
tithes, Hezekiah questioned with the Priest concerning the great heaps of
tithes, and Azariah the chief Priest said since they bring in their tithes and
offerings into the house of the Lord, we have eaten and are satisfied, (mark)
here they filled their bellies and not their barns) and there is abundance
left, says he, for the Lord has blessed his people, so all had their portion,
all their children, their wives, their sons and their daughters, for by their
fidelity they were all made partakers of the then (called holy things) as you
may read in the 2 Cro. 31. to 18. then holy, the holy God commanding them them
whose commands are all pure, just, and holy, but since that, he that then
commanded them, changed the wholl law, gave a new Covenant, and made a new
will, a new testament, and so abrogated the old and disanulled, so its
vanished away, he took away the first that he might establish the second, so
that it is very necessary now for all to know and for all to see the end of
what is taken away, disanulled or changed.

Though Moses then hid it in the dark, and put a vail over his face, that the
children of Israel should not then see the end of what was to be abolished, for
they were to offer the sacrifices, and to be obedient to all the commands of
God, as they were then commanded, therefore Moses put the vail over, 2. Cor. 3.
yet nevertheless says the Apostle then, when they turn their hearts to the
Lord, the vail shall be taken away, v. 16. So now the veil is over the hearts
of all them that take tithes or trebble damage to this day, and shall not be
taken away till they turn to the Lord, the perfect guide to God, that he may
take it away: So all now either Priest, Impropriator, or people whatsoever,
that takes tithes or paies tithes to any of those Priests denies him who is our
High Priest, who came of another Tribe, not of Levi, but of Judah, for Judah
prevailed, and of him came the Prince, 1 Cro. 5. the wonderful Counselor, the
mighty God the everlasting Father, and the Prince of peace, Isai. 9.

This is he, who is, and is to be Ruler over the house of God, Heb. 10.21. now
I say again who paies or receives tithes now denies him, and are still in the
figures, types and shadows, beggarly rudaments, and are not come to Christ, the
substance, in whom they are all ended and are to end, but they are yet under
the first Testament, which had the Ordinances of Religion and the worldly
Sanctuary, which was all but of force so long as he lived, which made the New
Testament, or his last will, or so, and then they were necessary because they
were the shadows or similitudes of the heavenly things, but we who are come to
witness the substance the heavenly thing it self, or have seen the substance,
we mind no more the shadows, for those shadows could make none holy then,
concerning the conscience, nay not him that did the service, Heb. 9.9. much
less sanctify the comers thereunto, therefore those carnal rights were but to
continue until the time of reformation, if they had been to continue longer,
then would they not have ceased to have been offered, Heb. 10. but we who are
come in measure to witness Christ Jesus, who is the Ruler of the whole world,
ye he rules all Seas though the waves thereof rore they shall not overflow us,
and his Tabernacle is at Salem, and his dwelling is in Sion, Psalm. 9. he the
Lord who is the great Redeemer, and has redeemed us out of all those carnal
things, and is become our High Priest for ever, therefore we must not, cannot,
nay we dare not pay tithes to any priest, seeing there is no command of Gods
now in force for them, and if they say they have them by the earthly powers,
let both powers and they take heed they do not presumptuously blaspheme, for
the soul that does ought presumptuously Israelite or Stranger, the same
blasphemeth the Lord, and that soul shall be cut off from amongst his people,
Numb. 15. and the Lord has directly said, whatsoever I command you that do,
put nothing thereto, nor take nothing therefrom, Deuteronomy. 12.

And here you may remember Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aron the friend of God,
who offering strange fire which the Lord had not commanded, therefore a fire
from the Lord must destroy them. Levit. 10.

Also remember Elies sons, who were wicked men and sons of Belial, and know not
God, how they came and took their tithes by force, and the sin of the young
men was very great before the Lord, for men seeing that horrible abuse,
abhorred the offering of the Lord, and the wickedness of Elies house, for their
sins was so great that it was not to be purged, neither with sacrifices nor
Offerings for ever, and both his sons Haphin and Phineas were to die in one
day, as you may read 1 Samuel 2. and 3 chap. also what came upon Eli himself, for
not chastising his sons, though slightly he did reprove them.

So likewise Saul a King anointed by Gods command, yet when he offered
sacrifice when he was not to offer, and doing that he was not commanded, young
Samuel for his presumption, dirst tell him, saying, thou have done foolishly,
thou have not kept the command of the Lord, and now thy kingdom shall not
continue (mark here for doing that he was not commanded he was to lose his
kingdom) now in man's judgment this was a good thing, to offer a sacrifice to
the Lord, which he had commanded to others, but he did not command him,
therefore it turned to his destruction, 1 Samuel 13. therefore its good for all
to look to the commands of God, yea all Kings, Priests, and people, go not
beyond the command of the Lord, least he say, who required this of you? and you
all stand speechles, therefore take heed O you Priests go not beyond the
command of the Lord, with your tithes, and trebble damage any longer, lest the
Lord say who required this at your hands? and you shall not plead then, and say
such a King or such a Queen, or such a Parliament made a Law, because those
that we did or do no work for, would pay us no wages, nay but remember you must
all stand speechless, therefore fear and dread the Lord our God, for the Lord
our God whose name is jealous, is a jealous God, Ex. 34. and many times has
done and does terrible things in righteousness.

Though some have said it is true the Lord has done such terrible things then
for example of his power or so, but now he does not, ye now ye may yet remember
this one example in London, 1662. about the time you call (Christmas) how the
whole family of a house was destroyed by fire in one night, and not one left to
tell how it came, but in the true fear of the Lord I nominate this not that I
think they were greater sinners then many others nay, nay, I know that except
all repents all shall likewise perish, for the Lord is as terrible and as
righteous now as ever he was, and his power as great as ever it was, he can
overthrow the horse and his rider at his pleasure, he can call the Seas to
overflow and command them back to their bounds when he will, he is the higher
power and must be obeyed, therefore Oh Priests take heed look not to the powers
of the earth to help you in any thing that he has not commanded, for it will
be no plea for you when you are all chained up in silence, and if a man sin
against a man the Judge shall judge it, but if a man sin against God, who will
plead for him, so you see you cannot plead for your selves not none will dare
to plead for you, and remember its a fearful thing to fall into the hands of
the living God, so I say again and again, leave off your tithe and trebble
damage, and repent, and let Christ come to his house, that little Zacheus may
restore fourfold, but I say make have, make have, make speed and come in,
before the day of Gods visitation be fully over past, lest it be too late for
you and Christ then weep over you and cannot save you, at the sense of which
the Angel of the Lord has stirred the waters and they now flow. I can go no
further, at present,

M. W.

Now I would ask some few questions to those Priests to try if the can or are
but willing to answer.
1. How they came by the third years Tithes.

2. Since God gave them to the stranger, to the fatherless, and to the widows,
who was he that should take them away?

3. What was the right of the stranger, the fatherless and widows, that God
pronounced the Curse to them that hindered them of it if it were not that which
he gave them.

4. Whether they were not theives and robbers then that took them from the
stranger, fatherless and widows?

5. If they were so then, whether they be not theives and robbers now that
takes them from the stranger fatherless and widows

6. Whether any took tithes then that were not of Levies tribe.

7. What did God give the tribe of Levi the tyth for?

But it may be many of you will say as some of your brethren has done, when
they could not tell how to answer, said though it was Scripture, yet they were
foolish questions, or else it is from a woman or so, but if it be so, why Balam
answered his Ass when he asked him a question, and reproved his folly, who being
a seer, could not see what the Ass saw, and there is none of you come to that the
man after Gods own heart was, Daevid, who upon the earth was a great King, a
valient man, and had many soldiers under him, when he had vowed to destroy
Nabal and all the strength of his house, yet when Abigail the woman came and
told David he ought not to shed blood causeless, he denied not to speak to her
or to answer her, but said in the meekness of his spirit, blessed be the Lord
that sent thee, blessed be thy counsel, blessed be thou that kept me from
shadding of blood, yet God to show vengeance is his, and he will repay it when
he will and where he please, smote Nabal, that ten days after he died 1 Samuel
25. here the Lord showed what was done to his was as done to Himself.

M. W.

Also here is something concerning OATHS.
IT is true that there was a liberty given to swear by the name of the Lord, as
thus, Thou shall fear the Lord and sw^ar by his name, Deuteronomy. 6.13. it is like
this was before a Magistrate, in the fear of the Lord this was used, but this
was in old time, for says Christ, you have heard in old time, thou shall nor
forswear thy self, and so, but I say swear not at all, Mat. 5.34. but let your
yea be yea, your nay be nay, for what ever is more is evil, and so likewise in
Scripture many may be brought in that swore as Abraham swore but he that said
before Abraham was, I AM, he says swear not at all, King David swore to
Jonathan when he was endanger but he that is King of Kings he says swear not
at all, and Solomon swore, but a greater then Solomon says swear not at all,
and its like some of the Prophets might swear, but Christ jesus the end of the
Prophets and the word of the oath, which was since the Law, and since the
Prophets, and since the old time, which had the old Covenant, which was
glorious in its time, and at sundry times and in diverse manners God spoke in the
old time to our fathers by Prophets, but he has in these last days spoke to
us by his Son, as the Apostle spoke then, and it is so now and the word of the
oath which makes the Son High priest, and teacher of his people, he said swear
not at all, and this he spoke to his own Disciples whom he had called, and
chosen out of the world, and it is like they were no common swearers, for you see
how strickly own of them forbids swearing, as James 5. and to them he said you
have heard in the old time, and so, but I say, swear not at all, and God said,
This is my beloved Son bear him, Matt. 17. and God has in these last days
spoke to us by his son, and we do herch in, the son that said swear not at all,
and obey him too for he is worthy, and they that obeyed not were not to enter
into his rest, se Heb. 3.

Here some may object and say this saying, swear not at all is means in common
discourse, or so, but you may see in Lev. 24. where the Israelitish woman's son
and a man of Israel strove together, and the Israelitish woman's son swore or
cursed, and they brought him to Moses and put him in Ward, till Moses knew the
mind of the Lord, for Moses dirst do nothing till then, and then the Lord said
to Moses let him be had without the host and let all that heard him put their
hands on his head, and let the Congregation stone him to death, and this was
made a Law, not of man's but of Gods, and it wa^ as well for the stranger as for
him that was born in the land, see here was a law for the common swearer by it
self, so they plainly show they never knew the true Christ, that holds up or
pleads for oaths, for what strength is in an oath, cannot they that swear, as
soon forswear, let us go back a little but to the last state, whilst it is yet
in memory, and remember what Covenants and Declarations they put forth, and
called the great Jehovah to witness to what they promised and confirmed with
oaths, which made many a simple hearted man and woman adhere to them, and upon
that brought in of their money, Plate, horses and what they had, thinking the
wicked should only have been taken from the King, and his Throne established in
righteousness, and they gave their public faith in paper bills to pay again.
And did they not all forswear, when they went from Declarations and all that
they had put forth and swore to, which was for Gospel and liberty of
conscience, and to right all men, but oh how soon they forgot their oaths,
their promises, and Declarations, and all became as nothing, and yet is there
more trust or confidence to be put in a swearer, then in him who for conscience
sake and in obedience to him that says swear not at all, dares not take an
oath, yet is ready with yea and nay to bear witness to any known truth and to
stand a witness against all that is known to be deceit or a lie.

M. W.


