THE Great Objection Concerning the QUAKERS MEETINGS Fully Answered.

Wherein, in several Particulars, it is pro^ That although the said People do
meet toge^^^^ (...) they are not transgressors of the Law, according (...)
(...) Reason, which is the Ground and Foundation thereof; and therefore
according to Equity and good Conscience, ought not to suffer for so doing,
neither ought their MEETINGS to be suppressed.

By a lover of all righteous Laws, and just Government, and one unto whom such
Laws are not a terror, R. W.

The Law is good if a man use it lawfully; for the Law is not made for a
righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for
sinners, for the unholy and profane, etc. and against any other thing that is
contrary to sound Doctrine, 1 Timothy 1.8, 9, 10. The great Objection concerning
the Quakers Meetings, fully answered.
WHereas it is objected against the People called Quakers, That they are
transgressors of the Kings Law, and therefore the sufferings which is inflicted
upon them, is just, and the Magistrate bound by his Oath to inflict the same;
and that if they would free themselves from those sufferings, they must unform
to the Law, and that they may not call those sufferings persecution for
Conscience Sake, but execution of the Law, and Administration of Justice.

And forasmuch as the said people called Quakers, are found in the practice of
that which seems to be forbidden by the Law, and therefore by many are judged
transgressors of the Law; these following particulars being seriously weighed,
and duly considered, may serve to convince all sober-minded people, that
according to the true intent and meaning of the Law, (as it is agreeable to the
righteous end of all Government) the said people are not guilty of the
transgression thereof; and therefore in Equity and good Conscience ought not to
suffer the penalties, and undergo the punishments that are therein prescribed.

I. The just Laws of England, and all Nations, are grounded upon Right Reason;
and it has been the declared opinion of the most able Lawyers, (yea, and a
Maxim among them) That whatever Law is made, if it be not grounded upon right
Reason, and has not that for its foundation, such a Law so made, is in it self
null and void.

II. And this Right Reason has always respect to the good and well being of
all people, who are to be governed by such Laws, to protect, countenance and
encourage the good in the well-doing, and to discountenance and punish the
contrary, and to prevent men from doing evil, and from hurting, injuring and
destroying one another, and to keep all in peace and love, that people might
live a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty: And this is the
righteous End of all Government; and if any Law be made contrary to this End,
its against the very Being and End of all just Government.

III. And the Reason of the Law is expressed in the Preamble to the Law or
Statute; and the Reason so expressed ought always to be the Rule of his, or
their Judgments (both in the Exposition and Execution thereof) who are
entrusted with the Administration of the Law, and Judgment ought to be given
accordingly.

IV. And herein only does the Magistrate perform his trust and keep his Oath,
as he has respect to the Reason on which the Law is grounded, and makes that
the Rule of his Judgment in all cases, and proceeds accordingly; and not in
the strict observance of the Formalities and Punctillioes, which are but the
skirts and subburbs of the Law, Reason being the very life and substance
thereof.

V. And if any judgment be given, or Law put in execution contrary to the
Reason of the Law, such a Judgment or Execution is in it self unjust, and
contrary to the Law, and therefore may not be called Execution of Justice, or
Administration of the Law, but Injustice and Oppression on whomsoever it is
acted.

VI. And if that which is alleged as the Reason of the Law (and ought to be
the Rule of Judgment in the Administration and Execution thereof) be not so in
it self, then such a Law so made, is groundless, and without foundation; and as
its said, Where there is no Law, there is no transgression; so where there is
no cause found which is alleged as the Reason of the Law, there being no
transgression or evil committed, there is no need of a Law.

VII. Now the Reason expressed in the Preamble to the Law made against the
Meetings of the People called Quakers, is a suggestion, that under pretense of
Religious Worship, the said persons do often assemble themselves in great
numbers in several parts of this Realm, to the great endangering of the public
peace and safety, and to the terror of the people, by maintaining a secret and
strict correspendence amongst themselves, etc. These are the words in the
Preamble to the Law, as the reason thereof.

VIII. And if the case were rightly stated, and their Judgments truly informed
who made this Law, as concerning the end and intent of such Meetings, and that
they were really of such bad Consequence, and would produce such evil effects,
then it were good reason to suppress them, and this reason were a good ground
and foundation for such a Law, because it makes provision for public peace and
safety, and to prevent the contrary.

IX. But if the case be mis-stated concerning the end and intent of such their
Meetings; and that it neither has, does, or can produce such effects as is
suggested, then there is no reason for such a Law, and so no ground nor
foundation, and consequently no Law; and where there is no Law, there can be no
transgression, and in good Conscience ought to be no punishment.

X. And the Reason of the Law being the Rule of Judgment to every one, in the
Exposition, Execution and Administration of the Law, in order to the performing
their Trust, and keeping their Oaths inviolably, if they are persuaded in their
Consciences that the people called Quakers are not guilty of the crimes
suggested, nor their Meetings held to such intents, nor do produce such effects
as is alleged as the Reason of the Law; such Magistrates so persuaded, are not
obliged by their Oaths to suppress such Meetings, nor to inflict penalties and
punishments upon the persons of them which do so meet together.

XI. But we the people called Quakers, have the Testimony of a clear Conscience
in the sight of God, concerning our innocence, and the uprightness of our
hearts in this particular, that what is suggested against us, as the end or
intent of our meeting together, never entered into our hearts, neither was ever
such effects produced through any occasion by us given; and in this case we
appeal to the Consciences of all Magistrates in England, yea even to our
greatest Enemies, and to all the World, Whether ever it were known, or can be
proved against us, That we design any such things in our Meetings; or whether
such effects have at any time been produced by reason of such our Meetings.
Therefore we judge, That according to Reason and good Conscience we ought to
enjoy our Meetings, and not have them suppressed, nor we made to suffer in our
Persons or Estates for so doing.

XII. Again, the Reason of the Law (which is the very life and being thereof)
supposes, That the people called Quakers do only pretend to Religious Worship
in their said Meetings; but that the intent of their Meetings is the
disturbance of the public peace, etc. which if so, it is acknowledged it were
very just and reasonable, yea absolutely necessary to suppress them; because
the suppressing of them would tend to the preservation of the public peace and
safety.

XIII. Therefore it appears by the Reason of the Law, That it was not the
intent of them that made the Law, to suppress Meetings that are indeed for
Religious Worship, but such who only pretend thereunto, and under such
pretenses design something to the endangering of the public peace: So that
Meetings which are indeed and in truth kept for Religious Worship toward God,
free from all such evil designs and false pretenses, are not (according to the
Reason of the Law) to be suppressed, nor the persons so meeting, to be punished.

XIV. Then if the people called Quakers do really and intentionally meet in a
way of Religious Worship toward God, according to the persuasion of their
Consciences, free and clear from all such false pretenses, and evil designs,
and that their Meetings do produce no such bad effects as the Reason of the Law
provides against, then the Reason of the Law being the root and foundation, yea
the life and being thereof, is not against them, neither is the Magistrate
obliged by his oath to execute it upon them.

XV. But we the people called Quakers, are clear in our consciences in the
sight of the Lord, that our Meetings together is not under a pretense of
Religious Worship, to disturb the public peace, or to endanger the same, nor
to hurt or injure any person whatsoever, either in life, limb, liberty or
estate, nor to affright or terrify them; but in the fear of the Lord in
reallity and intention of our hearts, to worship him in the spirit and in the
truth, according to the persuasion of his holy spirit in our hearts and
consciences, whereby we are drawn in desires after him, that we might come to
the knowledge of him whom to know is life eternal, and might enjoy his presence
in our souls, which is more to us than all the glory of the World, and might
know his leadings, and follow him who is the Captain of our salvation, and
Prince of Peace, who leads his people out of darkness, and out of all
unrighteousness, and puts an end to all strife, and takes away the occasion of
Wars, by slaying the lust in the heart, from whence Wars comes; Who teaches
us to love enemies, and to endeavor the good of all people, and to seek to
save men's lives, and not destroy them. And this is the very end of our meeting
together, to wait upon the Lord to seel the operation of his holy Spirit in our
hearts, thus to order our conversation, that we might do that which is well
pleasing in his sight, and have the testimony in our hearts, that we are
accepted of him, that we might live to his praise and glory, who is over all,
God blessed for ever.

XVI. And if Magistrates are thus persuaded, and can thus believe concerning
the ground and end of our Meetings, We hope they will not then judge themselves
bound or obliged by their Oaths to execute the Law upon us, because its
contrary to the Reason thereof; and we believe many at this day are thus
persuaded concerning us; and we are consident, that for these diverse years
past, since we have been of this per^^^sion, and distinguished from other
people by the Name of ^uakers, and meet together after this manner, though
there has happened many and great revolutions in the world, and especially in
this land wherein we live, yet it cannot be proved that we have intermedled
with those things, neither has any such things been acted or designed by us,
as is suggested, and as the reason of the Law provides against, although our
provocations thereunto has been very great, and the opportunities of advantage
to free our selves from our great and innocent sufferings, very many.

XVII. Again, it is to be considered, that by the Law many times in one and the
same action, the intent and purpose of the mind, very much alters the case, and
makes it more or less heinous; and the Reason of the Law does proportion
punishments suitable thereunto; yea, in the same cases the very purpose of the
mind in one and the same action, makes it to be a transgression in a high
nature, or no transgression at all. As for instance, The killing of any person,
although the action may be one and the same, yet it is found either wilful
Murder, or Manslaughter, according to the purpose of his mind that committed
the Fact; and the Reason of the Law makes a difference in the punishment. So
also in the breaking open of a House, if it be with a Felonious intent, to
steal any thing out of the House, it is Burglary, which is death without
benefit of the Clergy. But if a person break into a House, or break down a
House to stop or prevent fire in a Town or City, it is no transgression by the
law. And here only the intent of the mind alters the case, although the action
be one and the same.

XVIII. So although the People called Quakers are found in action of meeting
together, yet forasmuch as the intent of their minds is not to do those things
which the Reason of the Law provides against, which is expressed in the Preamble
thereof; neither can those things be proved against them, nor such effects ever
produced by them; therefore the reason of the law does not condemn them for
meeting together, neither according to Equity and good Conscience ought they to
suffer for so doing.

The consideration of these things (though many more weighty Reasons might be
given to plead our justification and vindication in this m^^ter) may serve to
convince any that are entrusted with the Execution that Law, that they are no
more obliged by their Oaths, then they required by the Act it self, to put it
in execution upon us, and tha^ Objection commonly made against us, is fully
answered.

Southampton the 18th. of the 8th. Month, 1662. Robert Wastfield.


