A BRIEF RECITAL Of the unreasonable proceedings of Dr. LAUD, against T. W.
Minister of the Word of God: which he conveyed into his hands in a Letter very
lately sent to him in the Tower. Together with his absurd answer to the same.
Published to the World for the honor of his Grace.



LONDON, Printed by E. G. for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his shop in
Popes-head-alley, going into Lombard Street. 1641.

SIR,
BEing now after ten years, returned into my native country, and having
opportunity, upon even ground, to spread before your face such grievances, as
in former times I received from you, hope that, now, you will not shut your
eyes against the light, but open them to behold it without prejudice.

But that the unreasonablenesse of your dealings with me may more clearly
appear, let me premise this one thing before I proceed, viz. That from first
to last, more or less, you never had to object against me any thing that
savoured either of error in doctrine, scandal in life, or contempt of
authority, but only this, that I could not against light of conscience obey
the cruel commands of my Taskmasters, in conforming to superstitious, and
nocent ceremonies. Yea, so far was your conscience convinced of mine
integrity, that not once, but often, and that before many witnesses (when you
were come to your self) you gave such a testimony of me, as I judge not meet
(in modesty) to express. Yet behold your proceedings against me, not only to
the highest point of extremity, but far beyond all bonds of law, and justice.

For, 1. You silenced me from preaching.

2. You deprived me of my Living, and not in open Court, but in hugger, mugger,
(your Register Cook only being present,) an act most contrary to law; as I
hope, now you will be able to confess.

3. You rested not here, but passed upon me the sorest censure (had it been
rightly administered) that ever Jesus Christ ordained against the most notorious
and scandalous persons in his Church; that dreadful sentence of
excommunication. Thus being thrust out, first from the Pulpit, then from my
living, after that, from the Church, as a man unfit either to preach, or live,
or participate of the blood of Christ. Under all which burdens I lay down in
silence, and (desiring to tread the steps of my Lord) yielding my cheek to the
Smiters, and was dumb before my snearers.

4. Yet (as if the former rigor had been nothing) your next act exceeded all
the rest; for being present, upon some occasion, at one of your
Visitation-Courts, and not making the least question, but that, without the
least offense I might be present in a public assembly whereunto many hundreds
of all sorts both good and bad resorted, it seems, was mistaken, and not
enough considerate of the eminency of your person, the holiness of the place,
and the defilednesse of my self, through my late censure, and therefore was
taught better manners. For

1. Having called me before you, and fastening your eyes upon me with
disdainful fierceness, you rated and reviled me with contumelious words, as
an impudent man (or fellow) and asked me, how I dare being excommunicate, to
approach your presence to stand upon holy ground.

2. You called for Tomlins, and committed me a prisoner into his hands, and
after bound me to appear in a bond of an 100. marks, with two sufficient
sureties, at the next High Commission Court at Lambeth; there to answer for my
contempt, and impudency.

You threatened to make me an example to all Ministers in your whole Diocese, I
entreated your favor, and pleaded for my self.

1. That it was not in my purpose, to give you the least offense by my presence
there, and therefore besought you to conster it (at the most, but) as an error
of ignorance, far from contempt or impudency. And to prove, how loath I would
have been wittingly to give you any distaste, I told you that all the prayer and
sermon time, before the Court began, I had stood without the Church, and came
not in till all was ended, merely for this very reason, that I might not be
offensire.

2. I prayed you to consider how much I had suffered already, and entreated
that that might be sufficient in your eyes, and to proceed no further against
me for such a thing as this.

3. How I had silently born all those hard censures past upon me by you, and
had not gainsayed, or carried my self in any distastefull manner.

4. What testimony your self had born of me, concerning my former carriage;
and therefore, not to let one oversight so poise you against me.

5. If you nothing regarded my self, yet to tender the condition of my wife
and children, who were ready to be exposed to inconveniences enough by my
former sufferings without any new addition to the same. To which your answer
was, That you never regarded arguments of wives and children, better they
perish then you neglect that duty and charge the King has entrusted you
withal, of keeping order in the Church.

6. After this. D. Duck^, your own Chancellor, who sat by, and heard all
matters how they passed, stood up and interceded for me, and professed he
thought I spoke ingenuously. Then my Lord Maynard, who was present, of his own
accord also seconced his suit. And after him, diverse other Gentlemen, did the
like for my release. But all were flung off, and denied, with such an
incontrouleable stiffness, that all the beholders stood amazed.

7. Last of all my self, finding an opportunity after you had dined. thinking
then to find you in a calmer temper, began to renew my request; but as I was
making entrance into my suit, in great rage you cut me off, and said; Trouble
not your self, nor me, any further, for let all the friends you have in
England do their best, I am resolved not to alter my resolution one hairs
breadth.

So after all means used to no purpose, I was left a prisoner in my keepers
hands, and after that, driven to put in bond for my appearance.

Then considering with my self, your displeasure how much, your power how
great, and my self how unable to resist, and (that were my cause never so
good) I knew how I was like to speed, if it were for nothing but for refusing
that oath; I was driven (by your terror) to fly my dear native Country,
forsake my loving friends, and leave many outward comforts in this life, and
venture my life, and the lives of my dear wife, and tender children, upon the
face of the deepes, choosing rather to live amongst wild beasts, and wild men
in a wilderness, under the blessing of Heaven, then under the power of such
unreasonable men here. (Though God has been pleased to make that wilderness a
fruitful field, and a very corner of Heaven unto us, but that was no thank to
you.) Yet your self not being satisfied with all this sorrow, trouble, and
loss you had put me upon, even, (after you had taken away my means of
livelihood) made me pay the forfeiture of my bond, and fined me 20. 40. 50.
pound a day for nonappearance, and then sent your Pursevants down to my house
to seize upon all my goods I left there.

Now I beseech you, in the spirit of meekness, consider

1. The greatness and multiplicity of my sufferings you inflicted on me, most
of them (if not all) without law, reason, or mercy.

2. The smalnesse (if any at all) of mine offense.

3. The innocence of my person, by your own confession, and your chancellors.

4. The implacablenesse of your spirit incensed without ground or measure.

All which particulars, here set down, (you know) I can make sound and
undeniable proof of: and so I leave all upon your spirit to weigh and
consider, and to give me a rational answer unto, as in the sight of God, who
will shortly be our judge.

And, now I beseech the God and father of all light and grace, to open your
eyes to see the exceeding depth of those, and all your other sins; and that
God, that smote and clave the Rocks in the wilderness, smite your heart with
sound conviction and true repentance for all the evil you have done to Christ
himself, whose sides and heart you have goared; to many of his faithful
Ministers whose mouths you have stopped, and to thousands of his Saints whose
hearts you have grieved, and bodies imprisoned, all whose tears are in his
bottle; and also to ^^finite many poor ignorant, sinful souls. whose blood
you have spilt, and sent quick down to hell, which blood cries louder against
you, then Abels blood against Cain; lament in time before it be too late, and
let your repentance ring as loud, as far as your sins have done, and baffle not
your conscience with carnal pleas, subtle evasions, and flight words, least
it being not soundly healed, your wounds break open in the day of your
accounts, and bleed afresh to all eternity. And if your repentance prove true
it will show it self ( Zacheus like) by restitution to all that you have
wronged, as far as your estate will reach, you will cover or fill up the pits
you have dug in men's estates according to Moses law. Non remittatur
peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum.

THis Letter being wrote, to this effect, and sent to Dr. Laud by a faithful
messenger, who with much a do, and long waiting at his Chamber door, got
liberty to present into his hands, and after that, with more ado, prevailed
with him to read it out to the end: which being done, the bearer demanded, if
he would write an answer? he answered, I will not write. He demanded if he
would accept of another Letter from him that sent this? he answered, I will not
read it. Then he demanded, if he would admit conference with him? his answer
was, I will not speak with him nor see him. What answer then (replied the
messenger) shall I return to him that sent me? Why, God bless him (said Dr.
Laud.) So they parted.

Postscript.
IF these be not one of those unreasonable men, which the Apostle prayed to be
delivered from, let the reader consider and judge, he could speak evil, do
evil, freely, boldly, frequently; no man more: but when he is plainly dealt
withal, and put on to give answer; then, the man has lost the use of his
reason and senses too, he will neither write nor read, nor hear, nor see. Let
our prayers be poured out to Heaven, that God would at length redeem his
people, from the tyranny of such absurd and unreasonable men.

FINIS.

