THE MARKS OF THE True Church, THE Virgin and Spouse of Christ, that brings
forth by a Holy Seed the Birth that pleases GOD. And the MARKS of the False
Church, or Whore, that brings forth by an Evil Seed, the Cursed Birth, that
never could please God. Signified by a Voice from the Word of Life, or a
Certain Sound of the Trumpet that has awakened Thousands, that were asleep in
the Night of thick Darkness and Apostasy, who are come to the Judgment of the
Truth, that redeems out of BABYLON, and brings to SION. By which all are
Summoned that are yet afar off, to appear before, and stand to the Judgment of
the Ingrafted Word in their Hearts, that by it they may know, What they are
joined to. By Morgan Watkins.

What, know ye not that he which is joined to an Harlot is one Body? for two
(says he) shall be one Flesh: But he that is joined unto the Lord is one
Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.16, 17. Printed in the Year 1675.

The MARKS of the TRVE CHVRCH, the Virgin and Spouse of Christ, that brings
forth by a Holy Seed, the Birth that pleases God.
I. THey are such, who are turned from Darkness unto Christ the true Light,
that shines in their Hearts, who believe and walk in it, and are turned from
the Power of Satan unto the Power of God, that they receive (in Christ the
Light) to become his Sons, having Redemption through his Blood. the Forgiveness
of Sin, and Sanctification in and by that Life that is the Light of Men, and
made Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light.

II. Such who have received the Word in a Measure, that spoke in the Prophets,
by which they prophesied, and was their Foundation, which the Apostles were
Ministers and Preachers of, and was their Foundation, which they turned the
People to, and they that believed, it was their Foundation; and they that
believe and have received the Truth now, it is their Foundation and the Rock in
all Ages; For other Foundation can no Man lay then that is laid, which is Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. God's Foundation that he has laid for the Salvation of
every Man, which is the Word grafted in them, that is able to save the Souls of
all that receive it. Jam. 1.21. But they that reject it perish, and are but the
Chaff that the Wind blows to and fro.

III. Such who are in the Unity of the Spirit of Truth, and the Righteousness
which is of Faith; that says, The Word, is nigh thee, in thy Mouth and in thy
Heart, that is the Word of Faith (that Faith comes by the Hearing of) and the
Word which the Apostles preached, Romans 10.6, 8.

IV. Unfeigned Love to God and to the Brethren; By this shall all Men know
(says Christ) that ye are my Disciples, if ye have Love one to another, John
13, 35.

V. Such who are born again of Incorruptible Seed, by the Word of God, which
lives and abides forever, 1 Pet. 1.23. And are renewed in the Spirit of their
Minds, being by one Spirit all baptized into one Body, and have been all made
to drink into one Spirit, by which they are quickened into one Life, which is
the Flesh and Blood of Christ, that comes down from Heaven, the Children's
Bread (as Christ says) He that eats me, even he shall live by me, John 6.57.
And this is the Life that brings forth Fruit of Righteousness, and Birth of God
that overcomes the World, and is made manifest to that of God in every Man's
Conscience.

VI. Such who make a good Confession by giving up themselves to suffer for the
Righteousness sake of the Kingdom of God, and do not deny him before Men, by a
subjecting to their Wills, against the Requirings of the Spirit of God; but are
made willing to drink of the Cup, and be baptized with the Baptism their Lord
and Master was baptized with, patiently taking up his Cross, contentedly
bearing his Reproach, and continuing faithful to the Death.

VII. Humility and self Denial, hating Covetousness, Pricle, and the Pomp, vain
Glory and Honor of this World, having the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ,
without Respect of Persons; Not having Men's Persons in Admiration because of
Advantage, but doing Good unto all, especially to the Household of Faith;
Visiting the Sick and Imprisoned for Righteousness sake, the Fatherless and
Widows in their Affliction, keeping themselves unsported from the World, Jam.
1.27.

VIII. Such who are Witnesses of the Spirit's Confession; that Christ is come
in the Flesh, and has condemned Sin in it in the Hour of his Judgment, that
the Body of Sin might be destroyed by him, that is come and received, To take
away the Sin, and bring in the perfect Righteousness, that being crucified with
him, and so suffering with him in the Flesh, dying with him (that is, by the
Strength of his Power that overcomes Sin and Death) we come to be raised up
with him (by the Power that raised him up) and so come to live to God (by him
and in him) and no more to the Lusts of the Flesh, but to the Obedience of the
Spirit and Power, that gives us Victory over Death, and raises the Soul to
Life, by the quickening Spirit, that gives us a Will, Desire, Hunger, Power and
Strength, to live to the Good Will and Pleasure of our unutterable good and
gracious God, of whose Mercy and Goodness some feel more then Tongue of Man can
declare; and God is Witness, such would that all Men might feel the same; and
God is hastening his Work, that Thousands of Thousands may feel it, and sing of
it in the Glory of his Presence for evermore, Amen.

IX. Such who in their Measures witness the Reign of Sin and Death put down in
them, with all its great Power and Authority, by which it reigned from Adam
until Moses, and does still in all that have not received the free Gift of
Righteousness (in which is God's Power revealed) and such are pleading for the
Reign and Law of Sin, and for the Body of Sin to live in them till they dye,
because they are under its Reign: But, as I have said, The Members of the True
Church witness him come, whose Right it is to reign in them; who, having
received him (the Gift of God) has and is putting down all Authority, and all
Rule that is not of God, nor ought to reign and rule in Man; so casts out the
Strong Man, and spoils all his Goods: And these know him in them [mark that]
greater then he that is in the World; who has cast out the Prince of the
World, and reigns over Death and Hell. And these are not looking for the
Kingdom of Heaven to come with Outward Observations, as the Hypocrites did of
old, and still do, who look for the Reign of a Person without them, and know
not that Hell and Death reigns in them (which some of late did know to their
Sorrow, that others might be warned) who see not him that is invisible (to the
Carnal Eye) that is come and coming in the Ten Thousands of his Saints to judge
the World, and all the fallen ^ngels.

X. Such who are gathered (by the Spirit of the Lord) out of all Gatherings in
the Fall, that stand in the Will and Wisdom of Man; and these follow Christ,
the Shepherd and Bishop of their Souls, and abide in his Doctrine and Spiritual
Worship, and cannot hearken to a Stranger, who is made a Minister or a Bishop
in the Will of Man, and not made by the Holy Ghost an Overseer of the Soul, but
are climbed up another Way, and not come in through Christ the Door, by the
Gift of his Spirit, but in the Wisdom of Man, and of the Birth of the Flesh
that persecutes the Sheep for the Fleece, therefore the Sheep cannot hear them;
for he that gives the Soul Eternal Life, the Soul ought to hear, and be subject
to, and to all that come in his Name (that is, his Power) who feeds the Sheep
and Lambs with the Bread of Life, that is Meat indeed and Drink indeed, where
the Word of Life ministers through the Vessel, the Sheep that are gathered by
the Spirit, do know the Voice of the Spirit, which is the Voice of Christ, that
the Stranger knows not; but the Sheep and their Souls are greatly refreshed by
that Ministry of Life, and so is the Body of Christ edified; but where the Gift
of Life is not received, nothing but Death can preach, and that burdens, and
hurts, and defiles the Soul if it be touched or fed upon; therefore in a
Figure, he that touched the Dead was to be unclean by the Jews Law; so by the
Law of the Spirit of Life, dead Works, that are Works of Darkness, the Living
are to have no Fellowship with, but rather reprove them: So this is the
Infallible Truth, that the Children of Truth and Sheep of Christ, will hear and
obey none but the Voice of the Spirit of Christ, the Truth, the Light and the
Life, which every Member of his Body, has a Measure of in himself, which is
the Anointing that leads, guides, and teaches all his to profit: in the
Movings and Requirings of which, all may prophecy one by one, that all may be
edified, and the whole Body built up together in Love, a Habitation for the
Lord to dwell in, to walk in, work in, and speak in; and these have received
Eternal Life (dwelling in it) shall never perish.

XI. Such who have put off the Old Man with his vain Conversation, and have (in
their Measure) Crucified the Flesh with its Affections and Lusts, who walk not
after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, which is become their Leader (as ever it
was their Fathers Children) in which they find Power to do the Will of God in
Earth, as in Heaven; Being created again after the New Man in Righteousness and
True Holiness, and being become New Creatures, are in Covenant with God; Old
Things are past and passing away, and becoming and become New; a clean Heart
and a right Spirit possesses the Body, which loves the Lord wholly, and his
Neighbor and Brother as himself; true Judgment and Justice sits in his Gate,
and Goodness, Mercy, and Love within his House; his Law is come forth of Sion,
and the Word of his God from Jerusalem; in the Doctrine of which he abides, and
Statutes and Ordinances keeps, who swears not at all, nor lies; for that is
against the Truth, and under Condemnation; who is come to the End of Wars and
Fightings, and does to all as he would be done unto, that ends Swearing, Lying,
Fighting and Lusting after Evil Things, loves Enemies, serves Friends, respects
not Persons, but gives to all their Due, To Caesar the Things that are his, and
to God the things that are his; labors in Love for the Good of all, and does
Good to all; denies to hold up the Types and Shadows under the changeable
Priesthood (which are fulfilled in the unchangeable) that pointed at Christ and
his good Things; who ends the Old Things, the Old Priesthood, and the Law that
upheld it; and Christ, the Everlasting Priest, being come, the Substance of
them all, cannot deny him before Men, by holding up the Old Things that he has
abolished by his Coming, which, if now upheld, were to deny Christ come in the
Flesh, the High Priest of our Profession, Heb. 3.1. Now if we profess him to be
our High Priest, and hold up another Priesthood, by paying of Tithes, and other
Things abrogated and denied by the Holy Brethren of the Heavenly Calling in the
Apostles Days: I say then, though we do profess him in Words to be come, yet
we should deny him in Works, and so do all that hold up the Ceremonies now the
Substance is come, who is a merciful and faithful High Priest in Things
appertaining to God, to make Reconciliation for the Sins of the People, Heb.
2.17. And those that hold up or establish another Righteousness, fall short of
the Righteousness of Christ; Seeing then that we have a great High Priest, that
is passed into the Heavens, Jesus, the Son of God, let us hold fast our
Profession, Heb. 4.14. Which Profession stands in Christ, the better Hope, by
the which we draw nigh to God, whose Kingdom is not of this World, therefore
says the King, Put up the Sword, and know that Nature that could kill with the
Sword Outward, to be slain with the Sword Inward; for says Christ, My Kingdom
is not of this World, if my Kingdom were of this World, then would my Servants
fight, John 18.36. Then all you that fight, consider whose Servants you are,
seeing Christ's Servants cannot; so all these Things forbidden, are not to be
used by the Children of God's Kingdom, and Inheritors of the New Covenant, in
which the New Man enjoyes all the Promises of God, that are Yea and Amen to him
forever.

XII. As to the Ministry, they are such that the Lord of the Harvest fitteth by
his Spirit, and sends into the Harvest, being called and chosen, to be faithful
Laborers in God's Harvest, and are content with his Wages (and refuse Anti
christ's) having freely received, do freely give, according to their Master's
Command, who warch for the Souls Good (and not for the Fleece) having Food and
Raiment are contented, and are to be ready to do the Masters Will in all
Things, and go whither the Spirit requires them, and to preach the Word of
Truth he gives them, not consulting with Flesh and Blood, but with Christ
revealed in them, who teaches them to profit the People, and to divide the
Word aright, with Boldness, not fearing Man, nor the Power of Darkness, but to
show the People their Sin, that they that are yet in it, may come to repent,
and amend their Lives, by turning from Darkness to the Light, and from the
Power of Satan unto God, by receiving the Troth, in which is found Power to do
it, and then they do the Things they ought ought to do, and leave undone the
Things they ought not to do, and so calling upon the Name of the Lord (whom
they serve and obey) he answers them, and gives them more Grace, more
Strength, more Power to rule over much, because they are faithful in a little;
and this is the profiting by the Gift, the Manifestation of the Spirit, that is
given to every Man to profit withal; without which there is no profiting nor
pleasing God: And this Ministry that comes in the Name of the Lord, but few
will hear, because he comes with the Sword of the Spirit to slay that Life that
lives in the fleshly Lusts, that wars against the Soul; but they that do hear
him that comes in the Name of the Lord, they do hear the Lord, who says, Hear,
and your Souls shall live; that is, who do obey the Voice of the Lord, they
receive Power to become, the Sons of God; but he that is not sent of God, may
have the Words, but not having received the Word, has but his Dream and the
Words to tell, who comes in his own Name, that is, his own Power and Wisdom;
and the People being in the same, hear him, and receive his Doctrine, because
he spares their Life of Pleasure in the Flesh, and makes them believe they
shall receive a Life of Glory after Death (and that is his Dream he tells for
Money) and so deceives the Soul, and keeps it in Death, serving the Lust, and
so the Sin, yet persuading themselves, by the Help of the Hireling, that they
serve the Lord; But no Man (says Chrst) can serve two Masters, especially
whose Ways are so contrary one to the other; and so being taught to confess
him in Words, but deny him in Deeds, drawing nigh with their Mouths, but the
Heart is after other Lovers, these having at most but a Form of Godliness, but
denying the Power thereof; These the Children of Truth deny and turn from,
therefore are hated and persecuted by them, whose false Religion they deny, who
themselves show it to be false by their persecuting Spirit, that is of Cain;
for Cain's Spirit can bring forth no other but Cain's Religion; that is it a
Worship and Sacrifice that is out of the Truth, that can never please God, nor
ever will, but it ever pleased most Men, and so it does now; but we can say,
The Lord forgive them, they know not what they do; and so we must drink of our
Master's Cup, and be baptized with his Sufferings, and so suffering with him,
shall reign with him. World without End, Amen.

The MARKS of the FALSE CHVRCH, or Whore, that brings forth by an Evil Seed,
the cursed Birth, that never could please God.
I. SHE is made up of such Members who walk in Darkness, and love Darkness
rather then Light, because their Deeds are Evil; For every one that does Evil,
hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, Joh. 3.20. Therefore it is
clear, they that walk in Darkness, are Evildoers, and Evildoers are the
Members of the false Church or Whore: For if any that walk in Darkness say they
(are Members of the Church of Christ, and) have not Fellowship with him, they
lie, and do not the Truth, 1 John 1.6. And so all that cannot witness in
Measure Darkness to be past, are still in it, and Children of it.

II. Such who have not received the Word grafted in them, yet are professing
the Words, but will not come to the Word of Eternal Life, that gave forth the
Words; and being astray from that, Err, not knowing the Scripture nor the Power
of God, being out of the Faith of God's Elect that overcomes the Word, which
Christ (the Word) is the Author and Finisher of, and is a Mystery held in a
pure Conscience; and whosoever has not this Faith, the Gates of Hell will
prevail against him; and his House not being built upon this Rock (Christ the
Word of Life) in the Day of Trial will be overturned, and great will be the
Fall thereof; but the Foundation of God (for Salvation) stands sure, that is
the Ingrafted Word, that is able to save the Soul; that dwelt richly in the
Children of God (in all Ages, and also in this Age) who were the Household of
Faith, Members of the Church in God.

III. To be of a Faith or Belief that is not in the Unity of the Spirit of Life
but of that which Man is Author and Finisher of; which he has made and formed
in the House of his Imaginary of the Words and Confessions of the Saints in
Light, and Children of God, that were in the Faith, of that they confessed and
witnessed; and so in the Mystery, that they which have only the Words of the
History cannot see, nor does that reveal it to them.

IV. Professing Obedience to God and Christ in Words, but living in the
Disobedience of his Spirit, and so in Works deny him, doing the Things they
ought not to do, and leaving the Things undone that they ought to do; these
love not our Lord Jesus Christ, but are in the World's Love, which is selfish
and Enmity to God, from whence proceed the Lusts that war in the Members, the
Fruits of the Flesh, and being in the Flesh, cannot please God.

V. Are such, whose Head is a visible Man without them who takes in and puts
out in his own Will and Pleasure; these choose rather to obey Man then God, and
cannot suffer for Righteousness sake, because their Head is not Christ, the
Righteousness of God.

VI. Such in whom the Unregenerate Nature bears Rule, and the Seed of the
Serpent is Head, and the Government of Christ is not set up within; but Death
through the Lusts reigns, and captivates the Soul under it, that it lives not
to God, nor brings forth Fruit of Righteousness, but is the Tree that cumbreth
the Ground, that will be hewn down, and cast into the Fire.

VII. Are such, whose Weapons of their Warfare are not Spiritual, but Carnal;
therefore the strong Holds of Satan are standing in them, who are Aliens and
Strangers from the New Covenant, in which is no Fighter, Killer, Murderer nor
Envious Wicked Person, but the New Creation is witnessed, in which dwells
Righteousness, the Sword turned into a Plowshare, and the Spear into a pruning
Hook, where War is learned no more.

VIII. Such who despise and neglect the Gift of God, the Light that shines in
their Hearts, the Manifestation of the Spirit that is given to every Man to
profit withal, without which none can please God, nor worship him, as I have
said, but are unprofitable Servants, out of the Way of God, in their own Way,
the Way of Sinners, out of the Counsel of God's Spirit in the Counsel of the
Ungodly Spirit, out of the Way of Light Life, in the Way of Death and Darkness,
dead to God, but alive to the World, and in the Wickedness thereof.

IX. Such who are not turned to the Spirit of Truth, in which God is
worshipped, cannot worship him; but (as Christ said) Ye worship ye know not
what; such Worshippers are all that are astray from the Spirit of Truth, who
are all false, from the rising of the Sun to the going down of the same; for
being out of the Spirit, out of the Truth, for the Spirit is Truth.

X. Such whose Principle and Belief is, That the Ministerial Offices in the
Church of Christ, are intailed to a Succession of Persons, chosen in the Will
of Man, as if Man were to send forth Laborers into the Lord's Vineyard, and
the Lord engaged to accept their Choice; of such says the Lord, I have not
sent these Prophets, yet they ran, Jer. 23.21. It is the Lord of the Harvest
(as I have said) that is to send forth Laborers into his Harvest, and Man to
accept the Lord's Choice, because they come in his Name; and the Apostles
prayed, and said, Thou Lord which know the Hearts of all Men, show whether
of these two thou have chosen: So the Chosen of God will receive none but the
Lord's Choice.

XI. Such who have a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof, ever
learning (of the Hireling, that will ever be paid for Teaching) but never able
to bring them to the Knowledge of the Truth, because he himself is astray from
that which gives the Infallible Knowledge of it.

XII. Such who persecute and destroy Men's Lives for their Religion; thus did
Cain, who was of that Wicked One, and all that do so, are of him still; for he
that does not Righteousness but hates his Brother, is manifest to be a Child
of the Devil, 1 John 3.10. And it was ever from the Beginning, the Unrighteous
persecuted the Righteous; and to be persecuted for Righteousness sake, was ever
an Infallible Mark of God's Children; and to persecute for Righteousness sake
was ever an Infallible Mark of the Children of the Wicked One: Let none mistake
me, I do not say, that all that are persecuted, are the Children of God; for
Men have suffered, and may be persecuted, and not for the Righteousness sake of
God's Kingdom, but for their own Righteousness sake, who in their blind Zeal
and Self-Will, are laboring to set up their Idol, or false Way, in Opposition
to others; and others in the same opposing them; and here is one in the Beastly
Nature and Will, pushing at another in the same; and they that can get most
Power and Strength in the Earth, they tear and devour the others: And if a Man
give his Body to be burnt, and all his Goods to the Poor, and yet may not be
accepted of God; for the Life of all true Religion is Love (for God is Love)
and where that is wanting, Though a Man may speak with the Tongue of Men and
Angels, it is all but as sounding Brass or a tinckling Cymbal; for indeed, pure
Religion, springs from the Nature, Virtue and Operation of the pure Spirit of
God, brought forth in that Man that has received it, and denies his own Will,
that the Will of the Divine Nature may be done, which is come, to be done in
Earth, as it is in Heaven; and that is the Kingdom that all Men are required to
seek, which whosoever receives not as a little Child, can by no Means enter
into it: And blessed are all those that having received it, do suffer for its
Righteousness sake: And it was ever, and still is, the greatest Blindness and
Ignorance among the Sons of Men, to believe or think, that pure Religion is to
be forced into by Persecution; for this I declare, They that are of that
Judgment, never knew what pure Religion was; but those that will have People to
come to pure Religion, must let the Light and Glory of their Religion shine
forth before Men, that God's Works in them may be seen to others, that is, to
do Good before all, and to all, even as the Son of God did upon Earth in his
own Body, and now does the same by his Spirit, in the Bodies of those that
receive him. He that says, he abides in him, ought himself also to walk, even
as he walked, 1 John 2.6. For all such that think they ought to compel People
to their Religion, because they think it is true, must also judge that their
Spirit is Infallible, for if it may fail, then it ought not to be a Rule to the
Souls of ohers, nor a Judge of another Man's Faith or Religion, nor of the
Things of God; but the Truth is, where any Force or Compulsion is put upon the
Consciences of Men, that is an Infallible Sign of a Fallible and Antichristian
Spirit; for the Infallible Spirit of God in the Holy Men, left no such Rule nor
Example, but commanded the contrary, saying, Let every Man be fully persuaded
(or fully assured) in his own Mind, Romans 14.5. Again says, So then every one
of us shall give an Account of himself to God, Ver. 12. For in this Case, says
Paul, Have thou Faith? have it to thy self. Then what has any Man to do, to
Lord it over another Man's Faith; seeing he that doubts is damned (that is,
condemned in himself) because not done in Faith, it is Sin: And now you blind
Hypocrites, that would compel all to fall down to your Idol or Image of
Heavenly Things; can you give Men Faith to believe your Image has Life, if
not, do not you compel Men to sin against their Consciences, seeing what is not
of Faith is Sin, Romans 14.23. And the Devil is the Author of all Sin; and all
Persecutors for Righteousness sake, are his Subjects, in whom the Man of Sin is
unrevealed, who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or
that is worshipped, so that he as God (mark that is he that would rule over
Men's Consciences) sits in tqe Temple of God, showing himself that he is God
(that is, by taking that Power to himself that God never gave to any Man, that
is, to force or compel People to any Worship that is not of Faith, that is Sin;
and God that made Heaven and Earth is not the Author of Sin; but it is the Man
of Sin, whom the Lord of Life is Consuming with the Spirit of his Mouth, and
destroying with the Brightness of his Coming, 2 These. 2.3, 8.

Objection, But some may say, Did not Christ in the Parable say, Compel them to
come in.

Answer, Blessed be the Lord, many do witness that Compulsion (which is not
Outward Force) that are come into his House, and that is by the Power of his
Love (wherein he invites the Poor, who receive the Gospel) that has
constrained us to deny our selves, and take up his Daily Cross, and follow him;
for the Truth is to be received in the Love of it, and then it overcomes the
Enmity of the Fleshly Will, and covers with the Spirit and Life, the
Wedding Garment, that the Heavenly Guests at God's Feast have put on, that no
Persecutor ever knew on himself nor can be put it upon another: So they that
compel, and they that are thus compelled, are both without a Wedding Garment
and not meet for the Marriage Feast: And again, the false Church that
persecutes, is gone from the sound Doctrine of the Apostles, and cannot endure
it: Now the Spirit of Truth, that ministered in the Apostles, has opened the
Mouths of many to minister, as they have freely received the Gift and sound
Doctrine of Truth; and the Teachers that were heaped up by them (that were gone
from the Word) after their own Lusts, cannot endure the Doctrine of the Light
that manifests their Deeds of Darkness, and that which the Apostles turned the
People to, the Teachers heaped up in Men's Wills, turn the People from; and so
turn Peoples Ears from the Truth, to give Ear unto Fables, the Imaginations of
the Heart, that are gone after the Lusts; and this Paul did prophecy should
come to pass (as has been, and is fulfilled) saying, For the Time will come,
when they will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own Lusts shall they
heap to themselves Teachers, having Itching Ears, and they shall turn away
their Ears from the Truth, and shall be turned to Fables, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. Here
was an Apostasy prophesied of, that in the Light is seen to be fulfilled in its
Time.

And now by the Brightness of the Rising of the Son of Righteousness, that is
the Dayspring from on high, that has visited us, and has given Light to us
that sat in Darkness, and in the Shadow of Death, and has guided our Feet
into the Way of Peace; and the Light, sown for the Righteous, Thou ands
witness, Glory be to God on high for evermore: And the Unrighteous Works of
Darkness are denied and reproved, which the Children of Light can have no
Fellowship with, but are come out from them, in Obedience to the Heavenly
Vision the Voice from Heaven, that is the Trumpet that has awakened Thousands,
which says, Come out of her my People, come out of her, and partake not of her
Sin, lest ye partake of her Plagues: And now the Lord has according to his
Promise, in the latter Days, brought us a Way we did not know (out of her) and
led us in Paths we had not walked in; and this we can say that walk in the
Light, if it were the last Words that we should speak upon the Earth, that the
Way we are brought to walk in (and in which the Faithful do walk) is the Way
that the God of Heaven has brought us into; let all the Earth speak what they
will against it, God, that lives forever, will make it prosper to the Ends of
the Earth, and the saved in this Nation, shall and do walk in it, and so shall
the saved in all Nations, that is, in Christ the Light of the New Jerusalem, as
it is written; And the Lord God and the Lamb is the Light thereof: And all the
rotten-Principle'd Men in all Nations shall not be able to stand before, nor
abide the sound Doctrine of the Word of Life, that is Juick and powerful, and a
Discerner of the Thoughts and Intentions of the Heart, except they come to the
Hour of his Judgment, and be judged as Men in the Flesh, that they may be
quickened by the second Adam, and live to God in the Spirit: And now being led
out from among them (that are in the Filthiness of the Flesh) by the Spirit of
the Lord, and touching no unclean Thing, the Lord has received us, and is a
blessed Father unto his Sons and Daughters, that he has begotten unto himself,
by an Immortal Seed, the Word of Life, that lives and abides sorever.

And now those pretended Fathers in God, who are called Lords Spiritual, which
Title the Bishops made by the Holy Ghost, Overseers of the Flock of God, never
received, not owned, nor ever will; and had you been our Fathers indeed, who
had begotten us in God, we should have been your most dear and dutiful
Children, in all the Commands of Christ through you; but you know by whom you
were made, but not by whom we are begotten; for if you did we believe you would
not labor to destroy us, as some of you have done, and still do (but for such,
we desire that the Lord would forgive you, and show you what you do) but not to
convince us by sound Doctrine, but by the Instruments of foolish Shepherds do
you war against us, s^^h as they use whom you your selves account Anti
christian, as well as we; for such that think the Way to save Souls, is to
afflict, punish and kill the Body, have not received the Truth, as it is in
Jesus, nor the sound Wisdom from above, Which is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and good Fruits; for the Fruit
of Righteousness is sown in Peace mark that but the Fruit of Unrighteousness is
sown in Fightings, Beatings, Stockings, Stonings, Banishings, Imprisonings,
Finings, Robbing and Spoiling of Goods, destroying of Families, by making many
Widows and Fatherless-Children: Is this the Way to bring People to the Kingdom
of God? then the Apostles were much mistaken; for they never made Use of this
Way, but the contrary; for these Things were u^ed against them by those that
knew not God; but those that have received the Spirit of Christ (are Christ's)
and know the Apostles were not mistaken; but it is you that are mistaken in
suffering the Spirit of the World to bear Rule in you, and that take to it the
Honors and Preferments of the World, that are but Temporal, and so in the
World are Lords many, but in the Church of Christ one God and one Lord, the
great Shepherd and Bishop of his Soul, who gives many Bishops or Overseers, but
no Lords, as the Apostle says, But to us there is but one God, the Father, of
whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all
Things, and we by him, 1 Cor. 8.6. And those who are by him now gathered out of
the World (that lies in Wickedness) and have received the Spirit of Truth,
cannot but stand Witnesses against those that are of the World who receive and
give Honor one to another, and would be accounted sent of God, to rule in his
House, which is the Church of the Living God, 1 Timothy 3.15. But such manifest
themselves by taking the World that lies in Wickedness, to be the Church, the
House of God, and so make all the Nation to be of their Church, except such
they have cast out, which for the most Part are such that are gathered of
Christ out of the World; So that all the Thieves, Murderers, Whoremongers,
Adulterers, Whores, Drunkards, Swearers, Cursers, Liars, and all People of all
Sorts, that will hea^, and pay you, both Papists, and all Sects and Sorts, you
account are of your Church, except such you cast out, as I have said, so that
Babylon, and Egypt, and Sodom and all is here by you taken to be the Church of
Christ, the House of God; what a House have you provided for the living God to
dwell in the midst of? What a Church is here? Is this the Pillar and Ground of
the Truth? Do these hold the Mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience? Or rather,
does not the Mystery of Iniquity hold them in a defiled One? But if they will
hear the Priest, and pay him (as I have said) let them believe or hold what
they will, all is received of the Church: Oh! what a foul House is here for
those you would force to dwell in, who are called out to touch no Unclean
Thing? What a Body have you prepared for that glorious Head to be joined to,
that is separate from Sinners, and made higher then the Heavens? Was not here
sufficient Cause for the People spiritually gathered to come out from among
you? Do you put a Difference between the Precious and the Vile? Yes, you do;
for the Precious you curse out, and deliver to Satan, though some of them were
never of you, nor owned you.

And you have heaped up such a Company of your spiritual Children to reform
your Church, who are so Zealous for God Mammon, that for Non-Payment of a Groat
or two, they cast out a Man, and deliver him to Satan; so it seems, a Groat or
two by them is more prized, then the Soul of a Man (...) yea, or his Body, Life
and Family, that they can deliver them to Prisons, to the ruining of Families;
but as to their delivering to Satan, it is past their Spiritual Skill in
Reality, who are erred and strayed from the Power of God, which is the Way of
God, and that Power gives them Victory over Satan that are turned to it, and so
their Satan is some Jailer, a Member of their own Body; it is like they may be
conscious to themselves that they have not spiritual Power to bind and loose
the Souls of Men; and therefore they will be sure to bind the Body in some
nasty Hole or Prison; but if Money come, then Soul and Body and all shall be
loosed and blessed into their Church again, though he be of the worser Sort to
Men.

These Practices savor more of a Synagogue of Satan, then a Church of God; for
the Church of God, that abides in the Doctrine of Christ, and is a sweet Savor
to God and all Just Men that live by Faith; but these are a Stink in his
Nostrils, and an Ill Savor to all sober minded Men, and one of the greatest
Grievances in the Nation, that is to say, the Spiritual Courts, so called, that
are yet of the World, and cannot overcome the Flesh nor the Devil; these
pretend to cast People out of that which they were ever in themselves, to wit,
the Church of God: And some being cast out of their Church once, and delivered
to Satan (as they pretend) which in Truth is but the delivering of the Body to
the Envy and Cruelty of that persecuting oppressing Spirit that dwells in their
Adversaries) and these that could never come to them to be restored, yet have
cast them out the second Time, and some the third, for not coming to their
Church, which was contrary to their own Law: Was ever such Non-sensical Work
acted by Men pretending to reform the Church? Is not Hoseah's Prophecy
fulfilled upon them, as it was upon Israel, when they went a whoring from their
God, and loved (...) Reward, The Days of Visitation are come, the Days of
Recompense are come, Israel shall know it, the Prophet is a Fool, the Spiritual
Man is mad; for the Multitude of thine Iniquity and the great Hatred, Hosea
9.7. What Prophets were they that were Fools in Hoseah's Days? those that
prophesied, and the Lord never sent them, who had not received the Word of the
Lord, but told the People their Dream for a Reward, upon every Corn fl^or; but
the true Prophets, that had received the Word, spoke it or preached it freely,
as the Lord said, He that has my Word, let him speak my Word freely, what is
the Ch^ff to the Wheat? The Word is the Wheat; the Chaff is what he preaches
that has not received the Word, that is but the Divination of his own Brain^
and these were the Fools that had not received the Word of Wisdom from above,
that is first pure, the peaceable; but the foolish Prophets, that prophesied
for a Reward, he that resnsed to put into their Mouths, they prepared War
against them. Were these foolish and false in the Days of the Children of
Israel, and can those that walk in their Steps be true in this Age? Nay, for
the Testimony of the Spirit of God was against such in all Ages, and so it is
against them in this Age: Were they fasse then that preached or propliesied,
and had not received the Word? so they are now: Were they false then that
prophesied for a Reward in every Corn-floor? and are they not so now, that
preach for a Reward in every Corn-field? Was the false Prophet then as the
Snare of a Fowler in all his Ways, and Ha^r^ed against the House of his God?
and is he not so now? All that have escaped the Snare know, the Lord has
delivered them out of the Mouths of the false Shepherds, according to his
Premise, and has exalted the Mountain of his House above their Mountains, and
above all Hills, and thither he has gathered, and is gathering his People in
this Nation, and will gather them in all Nations into this House of the Lord,
where there is Bread enough; and the false Prophets, and foolish blind Priests
in this Age, are in Hatred against this House of the Lord of Hosts, and against
the Gatherings of his People in it, and the Flewings together of the Nations
unto it, according to the Word of the Lord; but the Work of the Lord does
prosper, and will prosper, and all Opposers of it (except they repent) will
perish; for the false Shepherds shall howl, and their Pastere shall be spoiled,
For you have despised and rejected the Counsel of the great Shepherd and Bishop
of the Soul, and are Opposers of the Work of his Spirit in his People, who have
received the Truth, the Spirit of Christ, And if any Man have not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his, as the Apostle says; and those that walk in the
Obedience of the Measure of his Spirit, you have hated and persecuted; and some
of you being filled with Envy against them, have turned informers, like Judas,
that informed against Christ for Money; after he had betrayed the Truth in
himself, the Devil entered, and fitted him with Envy, to come against Christ
and his Disciples, where they were assembled, to betray them into the Hands of
their Enemies; and has not Envy filled some of your Hearts, and so fitted you
to inform against the Assemblies gathered in the Name and Spirit of Christ, as
some of you have done, and have sworn against them; and one confessed before the
Magistrate, that he did not know that ever he had seen some of their Faces
before, and yet some time before had sworn they were at the Meeting; but all
must be construed for the Purpose, that is to spoil the Goods of those that
cannot forsake the assembling of themselves together in the true Worship of God.

And some of you have procured Warrants to spoil the Goods of your Neighbors,
and some have spoiled them over and over, and prosecuted those that would not
spoil them: Is this the Way to teach the People to Love their Neighbors as
themselves, and to do to all People as they would be done unto? this is the Way
indeed to manifest what Spirit you are of; and so People may read your Father's
Name in your Forehead's, whose Works do you do, what Spirit leads you, whether
the Spirit of Cain that wicked One, or the Spirit of Abel the Righteous One? by
your Fruits you are known: Does the Work of this Spirit confess that Christ is
come in your Flesh, that Righteous One; or Antichrist, that Wicked One, whom
Christ is Consuming with Breath of his Mouth, and the Brightness of his ^oming?
Was it ever known that a Minister of Christ was an Informer against Christian
Meetings? no, it never was, nor ever will be; for such are not in the Doctrine
of Christ, but in the Practice of those the Scripture calls Wolves in Sheeps
Clothing; but in this Work of Informing, the Wolf only appears, that comes to
devour; so that Spirit that preaches for Hire, is the same that spoils Men's
Goods for Hire; and he that takes Wages of Unrighteousness, does the Work of
Unrighteousness; Did not those that devoured Wi^dows Houses, do the Work of
Unrighteousness, though for a Pretense made long Prayers? and those were
Enemies to Christ then, and can they be Friends now? no, such are an ill Savor
to God, and a Stink in his Nostrils; what have such to do to take his Name into
their Mouths who hate to be reformed by his Spirit, and persecute those that
are? How many Souls are you guilty of the Blood of? And how many Bodies have
you cast into Prison till Death? How many Widows and Fatherless Children have
you made in this Nation, because they could not put into your Mouths, knowing
what Spirit you were of; and that the Lord never sent you, as by your Fruits
you have manifested to the View of the Nation? and Thousands see you, and will
buy your Merchandise no more; and if you cannot compel them by your Law, then
you make Merchandise and Spoil of their Goods.

But Woe is unto you, that ever you were born, because of the terrible Day that
is coming upon you, which you can no ways escape, but by coming out of her, in
whom is found all the Blood of the Saints and Martyrs, and all that have been
slain (for the Testimony of Jesus) upon the Earth.

For now the Everlasting Gospel is preaching, that shall be preached to all
Nations, Tongues and Languages, for the gathering of the Gentiles to their
Light, and Israel to the Hope of their Glory: For to him shall the Gathering of
the People be, and the Gentiles shall walk in thy Light, and Kings in the
Brightness of thy Rising; then thou shall see and shine, thy Heart shall be
astonished and enlarged, because the Multitude of the Sea shall be converted
unto thee, and the Riches of the Gentiles shall come unto thee, Isa. 60.3.5.
For the Lord shall be thy Everlasting Light, and thy God thy Glory, Ver. 19.
Thy People also shall be all Righteous, they shall possess the Land forever;
the Graft of my planting shall be the Work of mine Hands, that I may be
glorified; a little One shall become a Thousand, and a small One as a strong
Nation, I the Lord will hasten it in due Time.

And this is that Jerusalem prophesied of, that should be a Burthensom Stone
unto all Nations (which is become a burdensome Stone in this Nation) but all
that burden themselves with it shall be broken in Pieces by it; and how many
have been broken in Pieces by it, that opposed it in this Nation? and all that
yet shall oppose it in this or any other Nation, shall be broken in Pieces and
confounded by it, except they repent and be gathered into it; for God is making
his little One to become a Thousand, and his small One a strong Nation; and
these are his holy Nation, and peculiar People, and spiritual Priesthood, that
are gathered out of the Flesh, where none can please God, into the Spirit of
his Son, where all walking do please him; and these cannot please Men; for the
Gift that God has given (that Man is to receive if he please God) the Wisdom
of the Flesh did always reject in all Ages, and so it does in this; and it was
a stumbling Stone and a Rock of Offense to the Wise and Prudent of this World
among the Jews in that Age, disallowed of Men, but chosen of God, elect and
precious to those that believe, both Jews and Gentiles in all Ages, a tried
Cornerstone, the Power of God to all those that receive it, who through
Obedience of it become the Sons and Daughters of God.

And now I warn all in this Nation that profess Christianity, to consider your
Ways, whether you are entered in at the straight Gate, and whether you walk in
the narrow Way, that only leads to Life; for out of it there is no Salvation:
And God is risen to overturn every false Way in this the Day of his Power, in
which the Way of the Wicked shall be turned upside down, but the Way of the
Lord shall be exalted, which as the Apostle says, Is the New and Living Way,
the New Covenant of Light to the Gentiles, that is Israel's Hope of Glory,
which is Christ the Spirit of Truth and Word of Life in Man, that whosoever
receives and walks in, is of God, and come out of the World; but he that
receives it not, is not past from Darkness, but is under the Power of it, in
the World that lies in Wickedness, where God is not pleased; but as many as
have received the Word in their Hearts, and in it believe, are grafted by
Faith into Christ, the Root, the Vine and Power of Life, the incorruptible
Seed, the Word of God that lives and abides for ever, and because he lives,
all in him are made alive to God again; and these walk in him, that is, his
Spirit, that God the Father has given to lead them into all Truth (and out of
him none can please God, nor walk in his Truth) and these be his Disciples in
this Age, that have received him the Word, and for the Obedience of him the
World hates them, as it does him, and now persecutes him in his Members, as he
said they would, and we witness his Word fulfilled in us; but in his Spirit we
have Victory over the World and their Spirit, because he that we have received
(the Word, the Spirit of Truth) in us, is greater then he that is in in the
World; and that Spirit that is in the World is now making ^ar against the
Spirit which we have received, and is in us that are not of the World: And here
is the Lamb's War against the Beast and the false Prophet: And as sure as John
saw the Beast and the false Prophet overcome, taken alive, and cast into the
Lake of Fire, so sure shall we overcome in his Spirit, that has overcome in
his own Body the World, the Flesh and the Devil, and now is revealed in us to
overcome for us, in whom we have good Comfort, and in the Faith see that Spirit
that makes War against us (in Priests and Professors, and all persecuting
Rulers and Magistrates) shall be overcome; and all that come not out of that
Spirit, but continue in it, in the Hatred and War to the End, will be cast into
the Lake of Fire, as John saw in the Revelation of the Spirit of Truth that
cannotlye.

Therefore I warn you all, to hear the Voice of the Spirit of Truth that calls
to you from Heaven to come out of her, in whom all the Blood is found, that is,
that Spirit that persecuted the Church of God in all Ages, the Spirit of the
World that rules in the Children of Disobedience, that is he that is in the
World, and the World are in it that is, all that have not received the Spirit
of Christ, are they that are none of his; but they that have received his
Spirit, are they that the World hates, as he said it should be; for as he is
not of the World, so all in him (that is, his Spirit) are not of the World.

And now let all consider what Spirit they are joined to; For they that are
joined to the Lord are one Spirit; but they that are joined to the Harlot (the
False Spirit, or False Prophet) are one Body, whatever they do profess for a
Religion it matters not; for Hypocrites in all Ages were such that said, and
did not, and so they are now, that call themselves Christians, and are not in
Christ's Spirit; for as says the Apostle, If any Man say he is in him, he
ought himself to walk even as he walked; and he that is not in Christ's Spirit
is no Christian; but professing Christ's Life, and living after the Flesh, is
in Hypocrifie; and the Life of Christ in his People judges that, and condemns
that Religion, and declares that Life to be Antichristian, and but the Birth of
the Flesh, that persecutes him that is born of the Spirit; and though that
Birth by its great Profession may have a Name to live, and be persecuted for
its Name, yet having not the Nature of Christ to be its Life, cannot hold out
to the Death, but must give Way, and flee before their Enemies into Holes and
Corners, because they are not come to the Power of God in themselves, that is
he that is greater then he that is in the World: And therefore all you great
Professors that are against the Light of Christ in you, in which Power is
received to become the Sons of God, and over come the World, you are overcome
by him that is in the World, and he makes you leave your great licensed
Meeting houses to the Bats and the Owls, that love the Light Natural no more
then you do the Spiritual, as of late in many Places you have done; and so your
Gatherings in the Imaginations of your own Brains, come to be scattered
according to the Imaginations of your Enemies, who have not therein imagined a
vain or ineffectual Thing against you, but they see they have against those
that the Lord gathered out of Darkness into his marvelous Light: But if you
were not blind, you might see that you are not gathered in the Name, that is,
the Power of God, the Rock that God built his Church upon in all Ages, that the
Gates of Hell might not prevail against them: Cannot you see what Power it is
that scatters you, what Spirit and Power is it that leads the Informers, which
for the most Part are the wickedest of Men? Is it not he that led Judas the
Informer, whem the Rulers paid, and the Devil set at Work? and you in your
Antichristian Prudence flee before; for Christian Prudence leads to do that
which is given of Christ to do; for as it is given to believe, so also to
suffer for his sake, in whom we have believed: But where the Gift of God is not
received, there true Faith is not witnessed, but Flesh and Blood is consulted
withal, that never led to do the Will of God; but he that suffered himself, and
in it did the Will of God, is the Leader of all his that suffer for
Righteousness sake; for they that will not suffer with him, cannes reign with
him over that Spirit that makes War against him, which is to be conquered by
Suffering; for that Spirit that leads to decline a public Testimony, and to
flee from Suffering and Persecution for Righteousness sake, is one with that
Spirit which persecutes; for that Spirit that leads to persecute the Children
of Truth, can never lead to suffer for the Truth; for it is out of it: So that
it is clear, that Spirit that leads to run from Persecution, when they have
Power, will lead them to persecute, as in New England does appear, by such who
could not suffer for their Religion, but joined to the Power of Darkness, and
persecuted to Death the Children of Light that could; so they have conquered
that Spirit, and their Life does tread that Religion under Foot; for its but
Cain 's Sacrifice, without Faith that works by Love, which the Spirit of the
Lord loathes, being in that Spirit that slew his Brother, in which they
preached, that shall be ashamed of their Gospel, not being the Power of God to
Salvation; for if it were, they that hear, and they that preach it would not
flee before the Power of Satan; but where he that saves the Soul is not
received, he that kills the Body will be feared; and so the Counsel of Christ
being rejected, his Commandment comes to be transgressed; and thus the Wind
that purifies and winnows the Wheat, blows the Chaff unto the Dunghill: So they
that cannot stand in Time of Trial, declare themselves to be but Chaff, that
the Wind blows too and fro, for if the Waity Life dwell not within, such Men's
Religion is but a foolish Thing; for he that says, Without me you can do
nothing, is he that is come that all might have Life and Power to do the Will
of God, and he that has received him, has Life and Power to do the Will of
God, and so becomes a Child of God; but he that has him not, has not Life nor
Power to do the Truth, and that Man's Religion is vain: So it is clear, that all
those that deny Christ, the Light, to be come in Spirit within, are
Antichristian, as well as they that denied him come in the Flesh, and such are
not of God.

Given forth in the Love of him, who would have all Men to be saved, and to
come unto the Knowledge of the Truth This 3d of the 2d Month, 1675. M. W.

The Prophecy of John Hus; Prophesying of the Reformation of the CHVRCH.
THE Church (he says) cannot be reduced to her former Dignity and reformed,
before all Things first be made new, the Truth whereof appears by the Temple
of Solomon, as well the Clerks and Priests, as also the People and Laity; or
else except all such as now be addicted to Avarice, from the least to the most,
be first converted and renewed, as well the People, as the Clerks and Priests,
Things cannot be reformed. Albeit, as my Mind now gives me, I believe rather
the first, that is, that then shall rise a New People, formed after the New
Man, which is created after God; of the which People New Clerks and Priests
shall come forth and be taken, who all shall hate Covetousness and Glory of
this Life, laboring to an Heavenly Conversation; notwithstanding all these
Things shall be done and wrought in Continuance and Order of Time, dispensed of
God for the same Purpose; and this God does, and will do, of his own Goodness
and Mercy for the Riches of his Patience and Sufferance, giving Time and Space
of Repentance to them that have long lain in their Sins, to amend and flee from
the Face of the Lord's Fury, until at length all shall suffer together, and
until both the Carnal People, and Priests, and Clerks in Process and Order of
Time, shall fall away, and be consumed, as is the Cloth consumed and eaten of
the Moth.

THE END.

