LAMENTATION OVER ENGLAND.

FROM A true sight, and suffering sense, of the lamentable Wickedness of such
Rulers, Priests, and People, that are erred, and strayed from the way of God;
and follow too much the devices and desires of their own hearts; offending
against his holy Laws; limiting the Holy one of Israel; making the devices of
their own hearts a Law, to ensnare the Innocent, that worship the Father in
spirit and truth.

Whereby all Persecutors may (in pity to their souls) truly consider what way
they are in, and whether it leads, and whose work they are doing, and what the
Scripture says will be the reward of Oppression and Cruelty.

By M. W.

Evil shall hunt the cruel man to destruction.

I know that the Lord will avenge the afflicted, and judge the poor.

Surely the righteous shall praise thy name, and the just shall dwell in by
presence. Psalm. 140.11, 12, 13.

Printed in the Year, 1664.

Impartial Reader,
IF thy heart be upright toward God, thou can not but love his truth in the
inward parts, which teaches thee to speak the truth, and do the truth; and to
deal plainly with all men, and not to call evil good, nor good evil, nor put
light for darkness, nor darkness for light; but to deal justly with all men,
and walk humbly with thy God, and then thou needst not fear the threats nor
frowns of any man, (who is but dust) but wilt fear the Lord, and give glory to
him, (that made heaven and earth, the sea, and the fountains of water) in
exalting his name above every name, and his commands above the wills of men; in
bowing thy heart and soul to the obedience of his spirit, that his everlasting
kingdom of righteousness may be set up in thee, that the blessed government of
his Spirit thy soul may be subject to; then thou can in truth say, the
kingdom of God is come, in power, and great glory; then the Idols of gold and
silver, and the glory of the work that perishes, thou will cast to the Bats of
the night, that cannot behold the Sun, and to the Moles of the earth, that know
not him that gave them breath: then can thou declare what the Lord has
wrought, and sound forth his praise, to the ends of the earth; then will the
voice of the good shepherd of Israel be joy to thy heart, and strength to thy
sinews, and marrow to thy bones, and thy soul shall feed in the fat pastures,
and thy dwelling shall be in the hill of Gods delight, even Sion, that shall
never be removed; into which the Father of life is gathering his own seed out
of all Nations, Tongues, and Languages, to dwell with him, in the unity of his
spirit, and to have fellowship with him in his life; that his coming may be
witnessed in the ten thousands of (...) the world, and to destroy the will of
the flesh, and make his great slaughter of all that which has rebelled against
him, and cannot be subject to the law of his spirit, but resists, and is a law
warring in the flesh, and that nature which slew the Lamb from the foundation
of the world, yet offers a sacrifice, but could never please God, and they
that please God, could never please it; therefore were they, and are they
persecuted, and suffer by it, and so spiritually overcome, and reign over it;
so our kingdom is not of this world, but over the spirit of this world,
neither can it be shaken by the powers of this world, but by its power does
shake the world, and shall over turn that foundation on which the wickedness is
built; that the blessed foundation of the Prophets and Apostles may be revealed
before all Nations, which is Christ Jesus the Light, in which the saved in all
nations shall walk; and in which, if thou that read this do not walk, thou
can never witness Gods salvation; but if thou believe, and in it walk, then
will thou know this to be truth, and love to thy soul, from the friend.

A Lamentation over England, from a true sight, and suffering sense of the
lamentable wickedness of such Rulers, Priests, and People, that are Erred and
Strayed from the way of God, etc.
TEnder love to all your Souls is the subject of this ensuing Treatise. And
your refusal to accept of so great love, as the Lord God of life holds forth to
you, in this the day of his tender visitation, is cause sufficient for this my
Lamentation.

Oh England, England, and ye Rulers and Magistrates thereof! Oh that you had
prised this the day of your visitation! Oh that you had hearkened to the voice
of the truth, in the mouths of the Prophets and servants of God, who have
finished their faithful testimony (several of them) with the laying down of
their lives! And that you had not despised (and still do despise) and
persecute, those whom he has sent unto you! Oh that the blood of his precious
servants did not lie at your doors, which cries loud for vengeance in the ears
of the just God of heaven and earth, till he make Inquisition for it! How many
have been imprisoned till death, for obeying the will of God? And how has
their blood been mingled with their sacrifices, when they have been peaceably
met together in the fear of the Lord, and in the dread of his power, out of the
fear of him that kills the body? but in the love and patient nature of the Lamb
that overcomes the wrath and saves the soul, who is the highest power that the
soul ought to be subject to, who has given it life, breath and being, and who
can cast it into Hell fire if it obey him not.

And therefore you are very much mistaken in us, who think to frighten us out
of our Religion (by persecution or killing the body) it being that which the
Lord has raised up in us by his mighty power, in the denial of our own wills,
and so contrary to all men's wills that have not submitted to his power: For
when he appeared in his power, to place his fear in our hearts, then our flesh
trembled, and Immortality was brought to light through the Gospel, which was
the voice of the Son of God to our souls, by which we came to hear and live;
which life is contrary, and which voice is dreadful to the flesh, and so we
having felt the terrors of the Lord for sin and transgression, do not at all
fear the terrors of men, which can but kill the body, and when that is done,
can do no more. Therefore, friends, you knew not what you did, when you began
to meddle with us, and make laws against us, and persecute us because we could
not submit to your wills; for had you known us, you would not have begun such
an ill work, wherein you should have lost so much labor, and gained so much
dishonor, and also incurred the wrath of God.

Had Nebuchadnezzar known the three Children as well before as he did after, he
would never have forced them to worship his golden Image; but after he came to
know them, be loved them, and honored them in the sight of his Nobles,
Princes, Dukes, and Counselors, confessing them to be the servants of the high
God; commending their faithfulness in yielding their bodies (to the flames)
rather then they would serve or worship any God, save their own God. Then he
saw his vain labor in forcing the servants of the most high God, contrary to
the commands of their God.

And will you show your selves more unreasonable then a Heathen, more blinder
then those that knew not God? (and yet call your selves Christians, and the
Scriptures your Rule.) When Nebuchadnezzar had once tried the three children of
God, to the laying down of their lives, and found them faithful, he was
satisfied. How many times have you tried us, by Imprisonment till death, and
spoiling of our goods, by breaking up our Meetings, beating innocent harmless
people to death? How many Cruel, Barbarous, Unhumane dealings have been used
against us (both before your Government, and also since by you) which we have
walked through, and in the furnace of affliction, with the patience of the Son
of God, who has kept our precious lives unhurt, and brings us forth to his
praise? and yet cannot you see the Son of God with us (whom you fight against)?
Can you not see neither, how little you do prevail against him, and his
spiritual work in us? Though some of you can say, We are a very confident
people, but if you could but see him that leads us (who is the Captain of our
salvation) you would say, We had good cause to be bold and valiant, knowing our
leader is not to be overcome, nor those that follow him, who are called, and
chosen, and faithful; which faithfulness Nebuchadnezzar did commend and
honor. And did he not do well in (...) (Yes) you cannot deny: Then as you have
followed his example, by endeavoring to compel us to fall down to your
imaginary worship, (which I believe you will not justify in him) follow his
example also in justifying the faithful children of God, that would not obey
his Commands, to the dishonouring of the most high God; who having tried them,
blessed God for their faithfulness. In this will Nebuchadnezzar stand in
Judgment against all those, who make unrighteous Decrees to compel men to
disobey the commands of Christ, except they follow his example in this, that is
to say, the change of their minds, and altering of their Decrees, in Justifying
the faithful servants of God in their pure obedience to him.

Objection. But if it be said, If we knew you to be the servants of the high
God, as well as Nebuchadnezzar knew the three children, we would not make Laws
nor Decrees to compel you to our worship, being sure it would be but lost
labor.

Answer. Then all our sufferings, and persecutions, and hard usages from you,
is because you do not know us; and whose fault is that, ours or yours, that you
do not know us to be the children of God? Whose fault was it that Saul the
persecutor knew not the Church of God, but made havoc of the true worshippers,
were they to be blamed or he? If he, then you; when he hearkened to the High
Priests, he persecuted the Disciples of Jesus; but when he obeyed the voice of
Christ, he saw their deceit, and believed the truth; then he preached him, and
suffered with those he persecuted. Now if you (that persecute) knew the truth,
you would know us that walk in it. And have not we labored, even to the laying
down of our lives, that you might know it, and be saved by it? What could we
have done more for you then we have, to bring you to the knowledge of it? Have
we not suffered to the death, in obedience to it, that it might preach to you,
that we have found the kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness thereof (which
is better then our lives) for which righteousness sake we suffer, and are
blessed, if we continue faithful to the end.

And this is the only true way that can be used as to you, to convince your
understandings that we are in the truth, when we lay down our lives for it. If
we were unfaithful to our God, and disobedient to his Spirit, in obeying your
commands, that are contrary to the truth, you had no reason to judge or think
we were in the truth; for had the three children been deceitful, and obeyed the
Kings command, he had never knew them to be the servants of the high God, that
was able to deliver out of his hand. And the deliverance that he saw, was of
their bodies from the flames, that made him bless the God of their lives; but
the deliverance that we witness, is of our souls from etenel death, which is
far greater, and more glorious, yet you cannot see it; but if your spiritual
eyes were open, as his fleshly eyes was, then you might see a greater
deliverance in the spirit, then he saw in the flesh; and would have as great or
greater cause, to bless the God of those you in scorn call Quakers, as the
King Nebuchadnezzar had to bless the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego,
though he be the same God over all, blessed for ever.

Yet his appearance in this the great and notable day of the Spirit, is that in
which the riches of his love [is] and shall be made manifest, which was
promised to the ages to come, which now is come, of which the Apostles and
Disciples of Christ were the first fruits; but now is the day of the whole
Harvest of the earth begun, in which the Lord is gathering in unto himself, his
Elect seed in all Nations, Lands and Countries, even from the one end of the
earth unto the other, that they may worship in spirit and in truth, and be
established in righteousness, and the Mountain of the house of the Lord be
prepared, in the top of the mountains, and be exalted above the hills, where
all Nations shall flow unto it; out of which shall go forth the Law, and the
word of the Lord from [this] Jerusalem; and they shall break their Swords into
Plough-shares, (Mark, the day of the breaking of Swords is begun) and their
Spears into Pruning-books, and Nation shall not lift up sword against Nation,
neither learn to fight any more. And this is the day that is dawned, and
blessed are they that walk in it, but wretched and miserable are all those that
despise it, and persecute those that walk in the light of it, casting them into
Prisons, Holes, and Dungeons, because they cannot submit to their corrupt wills,
nor worship the Imaginations of their Wise men, which they teach for Doctrine,
and give forth for a Prescription of a Religious Worship, contrary to the
practice of Christ and his Apostles, whose Worship stood in the Spirit. But, I
believe, if all you that resist us knew in what our Worship did stand, you
durst not oppose that power that has gathered us, and made our souls subject,
knowing thereby you should reap Condemnation.

But we know the power that is able to deliver us out of your hands, and will
deliver us in his time (which is not earthly but heavenly) into the hands of
which power we have given up our selves, and therefore are not careful what
shall become of our mortal bodies, that the will of God may be done, and the
trial of our faith appear to his glory, who has called us out of darkness into
his mavelous light; in which we are to stand, and bear all things, and suffer
all things, that we may overcome all things that oppose themselves against the
truth; for that which is against the truth is against God, and God is against
it, and all that are acted by it, and in it, I am sure they cannot prosper.

And friends, this is my lamentation over you; Oh! that you had not chosen that
which cannot prosper; Can I do any less than mourn over you? and can I do any
more for you, than warn you (in the tender bowels of love to your souls) and
walk out of that which I warn you to depart from, and so stand a witness for
God against it; for the which, I, and many others suffer, and are persecuted
and hated because we tell you the truth; even that which God has manifested to
us, and brought us into, which comes contrary to your wills, therefore you
cannot hear us: but if your wills were subjected to the truth in your selves,
then the single eye would be open in you, and the whole body would be full of
Light, then you would see that in your selves which is contrary to God, and
also that which is one with him; and that which is contrary being cast out in
your selves, you could not own it in others wherever you saw it; and this is it
that constrains us to declare against that in others, (out of love to their
souls) which God has condemned, and cast out of us; whereby we come to be
witnesses of his power, and that he is come that does destroy the works of the
Devil, and brings forth his own work in us, and daily perfects it, through
sufferings and trials, notwithstanding all the opposition of the Devil; for the
more it is opposed, the more it shall prosper, and the more it is persecuted,
the more it shall increase, because it is the work of God, and for the glory of
his great and powerful name; he is engaged to vindicate his own work he has
begun in and among us, and we know he will do it, and never leave us nor
forsake us.

For he has been better to us already, than our natural lives, who has raised
up in us a measure of his own spiritual life, which we cannot but give
obedience to, though it be to the loss of the natural: but alas for you! can
nothing satisfy you but our destruction? because our lives are not squared by
your wisdom, must we therefore lose them? because we cannot run with others,
into the same excess of riot, must we not therefore live in the moderation?
because our liberty stands not in the flesh, must we therefore be imprisoned?
because we cannot meet in Taverns and Alehouses, to be drunk, whore, and
blaspheme the name of God, must we not therefore meet to speak good of his
name? because we cannot maintain and uphold a changeable, time serving
Priesthood, with our estates, must we therefore lose them? because we cannot
disobey the Lord, to obey man, therefore must we be banished out of the land of
our Nativity?

Alas for you! Is this your Justice and Judgment to your own Country men and
Neighbors? what will it be to strangers? is this your liberty for tender
Consciences? or is this to do as you would be done by? is this your learned
Bishops and Doctors Medicine for a soul cure, to imprison, and kill the body?
be not these the weapons of your Lords spiritual, or your spiritual weapons? in
what do they differ from the instruments of a foolish shepherd; (it is clear,
as the Scriptures of truth do testify) these are not the Instruments of the
true and wise Bishop, and shepherd of our souls; these weapons and instruments
the Apostles and Bishops of our Lord Christ did never use; but on the contrary,
these were used against them, by the unbelieving high Priests, and persecuting
Rulers of the Jews, and by the wicked, heathen Magistrates that knew not God.

Alas, poor blind men! how do you show your nakedness, and yet are not ashamed?
Do you think the old covering will hide you now? no, it is worn too thin and
too narrow; a thin covering would serve in the night, but now the day is dawned
in our hearts, the light is risen, and your covering is seen through; the
children of the light see you, therefore you hate and persecute them, and so
show forth your Wolvish nature, which is to destroy, and not to save; for the
way of salvation you persecute, and are strangers to the meek nature, and the
sheep of Christ will not hear nor follow strangers; because they (alone) know
them, that they cannot lead in the way they are ignorant of, and strangers to:
and therefore we turn from you, and that Church which is not in God, but are,
as you say, a company of miserable sinners, all polluted and spotted with the
Leprosy of fin and transgression; and, as you say, there is no health in you;
and have we not good cause to deny that Church, in which there is no saving
health? but have erred, and are strayed from the way of God like lost sheep;
and so your Members are found living in swearing, and cursing, and lying,
drunkenness and whoredom, and all manner of notorious wickedness, for the which
many are yearly put to death as Milefactors; and what a great matter you make
of it, for to proceed against us to excommunication, when you know that we have
denied, and separated from your Church (of miserable finners) long ago; for the
sheep of Christ cannot follow strangers, that are erred and strayed from the
way, in whom there is health; but the blessed and glorious Father of life has
revealed in us his saving health, and we witness his living power, and blessed
presence, that has, and does save us to the uttermost; and there is health and
soundness among us, blessed be his glorious name for ever, who has gathered us
according to his promise, out of the mouths of the false shepherds, and from
among those that are erred and strayed from the good shepherd, and Bishop of
their souls, who being from the way, are lost, and without they return must
perish: so knowing that as you are strangers to the life, and the way, so also
are you to the weapons of the Christian warfare, which are spiritual; (so are
not yours) and mighty to the pulling down the strong holds of the Devil; (so
are not yours) which many thousands are witnesses of; glory be to the great
shepherd, and bishop of our souls, for ever and ever.

And also, have we not good reason to turn from you, when you turn from Christ,
the true Light, that gives the true knowledge of the glory of God, in the face
of Jesns Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. For the want of obedience to the which Light, you
come to err and stray from the way of God, and are (as you say) in the lost
state, like lost sheep; and no marvel, when you will not hearken to the voice
of the true shepherd, and bishop of the soul, and they which do, you persecute;
and so will not receive the knowledge of the truth your selves, and enter into
the kingdom, nor suffer those that would, as much as lies in you; you shut
the kingdom of heaven against men, as did the chief Priests, and Scribes, and
Pharisees of old; therefore woe is to you, that ever you were born: alas for
you! how will you be able to stand in the dreadful, terrible day of Gods
righteous judgment, that is coming, and speedily hastens upon you, who are
found opposers of the work of the spirit of truth; even that spirit that the
Apostles and Disciples of Christ were Ministers of, that is it that leads into
all truth, into which the good shepherd is gathering his sheep, wherein is
witnessed the perfect gift, that leads out of sin and imperfection, the gift of
the spirit of faith, that overcomes the spirit of the world, that leads into
bondage, and so come to witness the glorious liberty of the sons of God, 2 Cor.
4, 13.3, 17. (which is in the spirit) for where the spirit of the Lord is,
(received) there is liberty: from what? from the bondage of sin and corruption,
(not in sin, and the lusts of the flesh, as many would have it) but in the
spirit, that leads out of sin, and mortifies the lusts of the flesh, as the
Scripture says, Walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lust of the
flesh, Galat. 5.16. which you Priests cannot believe, though the Scripture
says it; you are not come to the spirit of faith that overcomes the world, who
say, we can never be free from sin while we are upon earth; has not he
dominion over sin, that does not fulfill the lusts of the flesh? as it is
written, Galat. 5.24. they that are Christ, have crncified (mark) the flesh,
with the affections and lusts; these that are Christ's did witness a victory
over sin, who lived and walked in the spirit, and the law of the spirit of life
in Christ's Jesus, made them free from the law of sin and death; Mark, these
were such that walked in the spirit and were the sons of God, who ceased from
sin; for it is written John 8.34. he that commits sin is the servant of sin;
that is not one of the sons of God, that is made free indeed; for know ye not,
that to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom
ye obey, whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness; for
when ye were the servants of sin, (mark before Christ's words, that is,
committed sin) ye were free from righteousness, but now being made free from
sin, and become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end
everlasting life. Romans 6, 16, 20, 22. then there was a freedom from sin in the
Apostles days, as they bear testimony in the spirit of God; and we who believe
their testimony, and are come to the same spirit, and cannot but bear the same
testimony, according to our measure, receiving him in the same spirit of faith,
do receive the same power to become the sons of God. Now seeing there was a
freedom from sin in the Apostles time, who witnessed his glorious appearance
to put away sin, and that he had done in them the work he came into the world
to do, that is, to destroy the works of the Devil; how comes it to pass now
that this Doctrine of the Apostles can find no more place in this generation of
priests and people? it is because they love darkness more than light, and their
lusts and evil deeds, more than the life of righteousness; and so would
persuade the people, that there is no such life of righteousness to be brought
forth here on earth, as the Apostles spoke of and witnessed, and the Scriptures
bear testimony to; so it does clearly appear what kingdom you are of, and
whose servants you are, that cannot cease from sin, beguiling unstable souls
(mark) these the Apostle says are the false teachers, that being in damnable
heresies, who through Covetousness and feigned words, make merchandise of you;
2 Pet. 2, 14.2, 1.3. who walk after the flesh, in the lust of uncleanness, that
cannot cease from sin; (mark) but plead for it term of life; these are they
that beguile the unstable, and strayed sheep; whose hearts are exercised with
covetous practices; cursed children, which have forsaken the right way, and are
gone astray, (like lost sheep) following the way of Balaam the son of Bozor,
who loved the wages of unrighteousness; to whom the mist of darkness is
reserved for ever, because they hate the light, and love darkness more than
light, it justly becomes their portion.

And who is he that will be so wicked, as to say we ought not to turn from
these, who prove themselves to be in the way of Balaam, both in life and
Doctrine, a company of miserable sinners, that cannot cease from sin, being
erred and strayed from the right way, that leads out of sin? therefore bring
another Doctrine to plead for it, and turning the Doctrine of truth into
another meaning, to uphold your contrary practice, and cover your life, that
the Apostle bare testimony against whose Doctrine was from the gift of the
spirit of truth, which says, every good giving, and every perfect gift is from
above, and comes down from the father of lights, James 1.17. and as many as
come to this good and perfect gift, receive it, and are taught by it, are led
into the good old way of truth and righteousness; which is the perfect leadings
of the perfect spirit of God into his perfect life, by which the command of God
comes to be kept, which says, Be ye therefore perfect, as your Father which is
in heaven is perfect; Matthew. 5.4, 8. and the Apostles said, they kept his
commands, and did that which was right in his sight, but you, priests and
people, that are erred and strayed from the good and perfect way, cannot keep
his commands, nor do that which is right in his sight: for it is impossible you
should, till you come to the good and perfect gift of God, and because it is
impossible with you, you think it is so with all; but that which is impossible
with you, is possible with God; and all who do receive him, the perfect gift of
Gods power, and walk in it, are come to witness the dominion of the son of God,
which is over sin, hell, and death, and so becomes the sons of God, that can do
nothing against the truth, but for the truth.

But you that call your selves Ministers of Christ, that have not received the
perfect gift of God, that comes from above, which is for the perfecting of the
Saints, you are not sent of God, and cannot profit the people at all, and are
but intruders into that you understand nor, and cannot do the Lords work, but
are making a trade of felling the Apostles words, and Christ's words, and the
Prophets words, being ignorant of the word of faith, in the heart, and in the
mouth, which they preached; which is the Gospel, that is hid to those that are
lost, and gone astray, by erring from the way of life, which the Minister of
Christ is to turn the people to: that is, from the darkness to the light,
(which you that God never sent, hate, and say it is natural) and from the power
of Satan, unto God; which you that have not received the gift of God, cannot
believe is able to destroy the works of the Devil, while you live upon the
earth, so you are wholly ignorant of the power of the kingdom of God that is
come; (and will consume the Antichristian) wherein, the will of God is done in
earth (mark that) as in heaven; and this you pray for, yet believe against: or
else you must believe, it is the will of God, that men should live in sin, as
long as they are on the earth: but the Apostle says the contrary, in these
words, this is the will of God, even your sanctification; 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. and
they who are come to the gift of the spirit that sanctifies, cannot but bear
testimony to the salvation of God, through sanctification of the spirit, and
belief of the truth, 2.13. but you that have received your gift from your
fountains of Oxford and Cambridge, which are beneath, and comes from the
corrupt nature, that stands in the fall and degeneration, estranged from the
Covenant of life, erred and strayed from the right way, (which is the gift of
the spirit) and are in the way of fallen nature, and its gifts; and these gifts
can never lead out of the fall up to God, because they are but from beneath,
and cannot bring to the knowledge of God, nor his truth; for Pilate had the
natural gift of Tongues, as Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, and by it he could not
know the truth, but said to Christ, what is truth? John 18.38. so you that have
received your gift from beneath, knows not the mind of the spirit, which is the
mind of Christ (which the Apostles by the spirit had) but you study to make a
message of your own, according to your own mind and imagination; and when it is
made, you must have money for it, because you came not by this art of
Sermon-making without money: and although you should be but bunglets at this
trade, and not masters of this art, yet if you can get a shop and set up, the
people must be compelled to pay you, though they abhor your work; and this
makes your trade so much in request, (and truth so much persecuted:) but must
we buy your imaginations, because you bought your art? this is not equal nor
just, nor ever ordained of God, as his Ordinance; yet we submit our selves, in
suffering patiently, till the Lord take off this oppression, and break this
yoke. Was it ever heard of in any age, that people were compelled to buy chaff
to eat, when they might have wheat for nothing? had not the Prodigal more
liberty among the swine, than we have among such as accout themselves sheep of
Christ? for he might eat the husks freely, though it satisfied not his soul,
till he returned to the fathers house, where he had bread enough freely: and we
who are come to the Fathers house, and have bread sufficient, cannot spend our
money for that which is not bread, and our labor for that which perishes; but
on the contrary, to exhort all to seed upon the bread that is living, that
comes down from heaven, and gives life unto the world: Joh. 6.33. and this is
the gift the Father of life has given, and blessed are all they that do
receive it.

But from your fountains of Oxford and Cambridge does flow forth a spirit of
persecution, and strife against the truth, as we by sad experience have felt,
and witnessed for these several years, whereby many of us have lost our lives,
by long imprisonment and cruel usage, which that spirit has occasioned, by
stirring up the people, and Magistrates, to fulfill their wills: and if we
should say this spirit were of God, we should lie against the truth; but this
is the wisdom that descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual, and
devilish: this comes not down from above, and therefore it opposes that
which does.

For the Doctrine of the Apostles of truth is this, 1 Pet. 4.10. Let every man
as he has received the gift, minister the same one to another, (not for money
but) as good disposers, or stuards, of the manifold grace of God. Now if any
who have received the good and perfect gift of God, that comes down from the
Father of Lights, in obedience to the spirit of truth, goes to communicate of
his gift to others, then he is counted an offender, by that spirit which came
from Oxford and Cambridge, and the Lords of that spirit and Priesthood have
made a Law against it; even against that which the Lord Jesus does command, by
his eternal spirit in his Apostles, which they, and his Disciples did practice,
and must practice, notwithstanding all opposition. Can you be so ignorant as to
think your law shall bind his spirit, from ministering in whom, and where he
pleases? Can you stop the Sun, that it may not go its course? If not, consider
what will become of them that strive against their maker, and the work of his
eternal spirit.

Do you think, that he that has received the gift of ministration from above,
will be stopped by your Law, which is from beneath? If you measure that spirit,
with the wisdom from beneath, you may think so, but we have received another
spirit, than that of Oxford and Cambridge; for that spirit has been stopped by
the commands of men, because its commission is but from man, so man commands
them to be silent, and they are so; because they be the Ministry of the powers
of the Nation, who gives them their Wages; so the National Ministry are but the
servants of the National power, as it does appear; for when the powers
changed, the Ministry changed, except they turn with the time, as for the most
part they do, and lick up their own vomit again, as it is clear to most people
they have done of late. How did they cry out against the Common Prayer some
years ago, to be such an abominable thing, as not fit to come into their
mouths? but now, rather then lose a fat Benefice, they can swallow it down
Surplice and all. Does it not appear now who preach for money? We told you so
many years ago what you should find them; but now you see it your selves, who
they be that make no conscience what they swallow, (they swallowed so much
trebble damage in Oliver's days) that their throat is become as an open
sepulcher, and are in that spirit of covetousness (that the Prophet said)
never has enough; which is so greedy, that having one or two Parishes, yet
labors to have more; and some are so unreasonable, to require Wages for some
years before they came to the place, which, it may be, stood vacant so long,
yet they can swallow that Hire, though they never did the Work. So the light
has made manifest their deeds of darkness, the hidden things that were in
the heart (being now come to be tried and brought forth) so the evil covetous
man, out of the evil treasure of his heart, has brought forth the evil things,
and the tree comes to be known by its fruit. Now I say these things only to
those that be guilty of them; but to you that say our prinI say, Did you not
change your practice, and conceal your principle and practice is the same that
it was before the former chang, ciple? Did you nos Conform to the Commands of
those you counted not of God? Did you Preach, and hold forth your gift of
Ministration (notwithstanding the Law and Commands of men) till you were
Imprisoned? If you had received your gift from above, and your Commission from
Christ, you would have chose rather to have obeyed God then man: (as the
Apostles did, and Ministers of Christ do) for had the Prophets, and Apostles,
and servants of God in former ages, obeyed the powers of the earth Actually,
their Laws would have protected them, that they could not have suffered
Persecution, and Imprisonment, and Death as they did: But the National Law did
ever protect the National Prophets, which, for the most part, were ever
false, as the Scriptures do bear testimony.

But it is the Lambs Nature that does overcome (which you persecute) which
preaches and shows forth its perfect love through sufferings; and if you were
in this nature, and we in error as you say, then you would show forth a life
beyond ours, which is the life of truth, that keeps the commands of God, which
life dwells in love, and if we were in hatred it might overcome us; but on
the contrary, we being in the suffering life of Christ and his Apostles and
Disciples (who never persecuted, nor ever will) and you in the life that
persecutes, it is given to the suffering life to overcome you, and that spirit
by which you are acted (and this is the word of the Spirit of Truth, that shall
stand over your heads for ever.) But by that spirit, and those weapons, it is
impossible to overcome us, who stand in the obedience of the spirit of truth,
(mark that) because our strength is the power of God, and while we believe in
it, it can never fail us nor forsake us: We know him to be the Corner stone,
who is tried, Elect and precious; and the highest of you all shall know, that
he in whom we have believed in, is higher then you all, to fave and deliver us
when he has sufficiently proved and tried us; and therefore you may be
convinced of the foolishness of those Instruments and Weapons you use, which
the former Power of Professing Hypocrites used against us, before you: And what
did it profit them, who persecuted that life they did profess in words? and
would not be warned, till the Lord heard the cry of the Innocent, and arose and
took their power from them (who had abused it) and gave it unto you, and must
you needs follow their steps (whom you condemn and so much despise) and abuse
the power you are entrusted with, which is, to encourage him that obeys the
truth, and to punish him that obeys unrighteousness. And do not you
Magistrates the contrary? those that meet together in the fear of the Lord, and
worship in the measure of his holy spirit, do not you hale forth, break up
their Meetings, and carry them to Prisons, and by your Law condemn to be
banished? But those that meet together in Taverns and Alehouses, who swear,
drink till they be drunk, and whore, to the great dishonor of God, and the
Government of the Nation, yet these can be let alone in their wicked meetings,
and go unpunished, when Honest, Innocent, Harmless people are fined and sent to
prison.

What can you say to this? Is not this an abusing the power put into your hands
to do good withal? or do you think the end and intent of Gods Ordinance is, to
punish his people for obeying his command? If not, why is it done? For as sure
as Magistracy is Gods Ordinance, so sure are we his people, and suffer for well
doing: Then, If this be so, you must confess we are abused and suffer
innocently, though many of you will not believe it, for if you did, then we
should not suffer: For ever yet, in all Ages, Persecutors were blind;
therefore, as in a figure, the scales sell from Saul's eyes, Act. 9.18. For had
the Princes of this world known it, (that is, the mystery of godliness) they
would not have crucyfied the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. But though you cannot
see the mystery of our life, yet you may see the open profaneness that is
daily suffered to be acted in this Nation, and that can go unpunished. Why?
because some that should punish it, may be guilty of the same things
themselves; this mystery of iniquity is not hid from your eyes; yet your sword
is not a terror to this; is it not then born in vain? Me thinks you might see
to bit some of the wickedness at a venture, it is plentiful enough sprung up,
and easy to be found, far eafier than a meeting of harmless, innocent people
that fear the Lord, and desire to live peaceably in the Nation; but such many
of you will take great pains to search you, and go beyond the Letter of the Law
to punish: And if we were forward to take the advantage of the Law upon some of
you, all you had would hardly satisfy what the Law gives for satisfaction. But
we have committed our innocent cause to the Just God of heaven and earth, and
we do assuredly know (that except you repent, and that speedily) he will give
you weight for weight, and measure for measure, because he is Just, and will
not always suffer the rod of the wicked to remain upon the back of the
righteous.

And how comes it to pass, that your sword falls upon our backs so much? I am
sure its not for dishonouring God by profaneness, for if we did so, then we
might be safe enough from the danger of it, and we should have friends in every
place (but in the heavenly place in Christ Jesus) whereas we now have enemies
in most places: And why so? because Magistrates, Priests, and people do the
things they ought not to do; and in this I must needs say, You speak the truth
in the presence of God: but if you had done the things ye left undone, and
ought to have done, then you had as well done the truth, as spoke the truth:
then you might have brought your deeds to the light (with boldness) and it
would have been made manifest that they were wrought in God, whereas now you
must needs confess that which leads you to do the things you about not to do,
is the spirit of the Devil, that is against the truth, and leads to persecute
it; but the Lord is cur witness, that the desire of our souls is, that you
might come to that spirit that leads to do the things you ought to do, which is
the spirit that leads into all truth; then you and we should not differ, but
should be one Church in God, and one people that are blessed for ever, and till
you come here, we shall always differ from you, (though never fight with you)
both in life and Doctrine; for they that do not the will, shall not know the
Doctrine; but if we, or any of us should be so wicked, as to turn from the
spirit of truth, and do the things which we ought not to do, and leave the
things undone which we ought to do, then we should come to you, and be of your
Church, which is not in God, and then woe will be to us that ever we were born;
and then indeed we might fight, drink, and whore, and swear, and curse, and
then we should be counted good subjects to the King, but I am sure we should be
better to the Devil; but the Kings best subjects indeed are they that fear God,
who depart from evil, these honor the King, and the King will in a little
while know these to be his best friends, who cannot flatter him for their own
ends, and have men's persons in admiration for advantage; but when their earthly
ends is not answered, they can turn against him for a better advantage; for
has not money caused many to betray their trust? and oaths will not bind where
God is not feared but where he is: they must render to Caesar the things that
are Cesars, and to God, the things that are Gods: for they that are Gods
people, do only know the things that are Gods, that only belong to (...), and
they cannot give to Caesar the things that are Gods, for that were evil, and
unjust before God, and out of his fear; and therefore they that are not in his
fear, do quarrel with us about those things, who would have us to give Caesar
all; that we cannot do, but the things that are his we freely give: Tribute to
whom tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom
honor, Romans 13.7. Now all this does not belong to Caesar, for fear belongs to
God, and therefore we cannot give all to Caesar; Tribute and Custom we give,
and in that, with the obedience to all his Just commands, we honor him: And in
that which for Conscience sake we cannot do, we patiently suffer, and so we do
submit to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2.13. But it is
written, Fear God, and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of a
man, Eccles. 12.13. So our duty is, to render to God his due, that is, to keep
his commands, and do that which is right in his sight. And when Caesar commands
us to do that which God forbids, then we choose rather to obey God then man; and
so we show forth that we fear him that is able to destroy both soul and body,
if we do not obey him: So in the things that belong to our souls, we are to
hear the heavenly voice, of the Bishop and Shephard of our souls, because every
one of us shall give account of himself to God, Romans 14.12. And it is just and
Gods due, that the soul should be subject to that power that has given it
life, breath, and being, that is; the higher powers the soul ought to be
subject to, the powers that be, are ordained of God, Romans 13.14 To be Ministers
of God for good (and not for evil) but if the Ministers of the power (given for
good) turn the power against the good, they are not Ministers for God; for God
has not ordained the power against the good: So he that is against the good,
is against the ordinance of God, and God is against them that abuse the power
ordained for good, and he will avenge and execute wrath upon them that do evil.

Thus it is clear, Rulers (for God) are not a terror to good works, but to
evil; and it is as clear, that they which seek to terrify those that do that
which is good, are not Rulers for God; and so do not fear him, nor honor the
King, for it is written, 2 Samuel 23.3. He that rules over men must be just
(mark that) ruling in the fear of God; and he that rules in his fear, cannot
punish those that meet in his Name, and keep his commands, because they do the
things they ought to do; but they that rule not in Gods fear, are not just in
punishing those that keep his commands, and in doing that which they ought not
to do; these ought not to rule over men, who fear not God, nor honor the Kings
to such I say, does God (do you think) love cursing, and swearing, better then
a silent waiting upon him in his fear? if you think not, why do you punish the
one, and let the other alone? or is the Law against the fear of God, and not
against the profaneness, because it is executed upon the one, and not upon the
other? and think ye that God loves profane songs, and wicked talk, before or
better then a good exhortation, from the Spirit of truth, that people might
keep Gods holy will and commandments, and walk in the same all the days of
their lives? how can you expect to prosper that do these things, who tread in
the steps of those, whom God overthrew before you? did they accomplish their
end in persecuting of us; did they cause us to come to their worship, or submit
to their wills, or did they scatter and overcome us? did not the Lord scatter
and overcome them, who rose up against his work in us? and how do you think to
escape, doing the same things as against us, who are a people that would lay
down our lives, that your souls might be saved, in this the day of the Lords
visitation?

But alas, alas for you, you have slighted the day of Gods love to your souls,
and your misery is, you cannot believe it, but when it is too late to return
you may feel it; and then you shall confess we were your best friends, who
told you the truth, though you hated us for it; yet the reward of our love to
you, we shall receive at the hand of the Lord, and you the reward of your
hatred and cruelty toward us (its the word of the spirit of truth to you all)
for we are a people that have done you no wrong at all, and as we walk in the
truth, we do profess and own we cannot wrong you, nor any upon the face of the
whole earth; but you have wronged us, and do daily, in afflicting, punishing
and persecuting us, as evil doers, and as a people not fit to live upon the
earth; but know this from the Lord that lives for ever, what you have designed
against us in your hearts; shall be your own portion, because we are of the
seed of the spiritual Jews, whose Kingdom shall flourish for ever.

But what is the evil, and what is our crime, that we are thus reckoned as
sheep for the slaughter? is it not only, because we cannot break the commands
of God, and his son Jesus, and own your worship, which he never commanded, nor
his Apostles and Disciples ever practiced; but warned those that feared God, to
depart from them that were lovers of pleasures, more then lovers of God,
covetous proud, unholy men, despisers of those that are good, walkers in their
own ungodly lusts, speaking great swelling words, having men's persons in
admiration because of advantage, who run greedily after the error of Balaam for
reward, (and to cover all this) hold forth a form of godliness, but denying the
power thereof, from such turn away, says Paul the Apostle of Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 3.5. and because we do so, therefore are we hated, and persecuted, but if
we could put into your mouths, then we might save the spoiling of our goods,
and be accounted good Christians, though we served the devil; but we are come
to the knowledge of the truth, (everlasting praises be given to our God for
ever and ever) and to the power of godliness, that cannot bow nor creep to
deceit, but must bear testimony (with the holy Prophets and Apostles, and the
blessed company of Saints and martyrs of Jesus) against preaching for hire, and
divining for money, and spoiling men's goods, for trebble damages, casting their
bodies into prisons till death, and all for money and for gain from their
quarter: Oh blood thirsty, bloody minded men, destroyers of souls and bodies,
for your bellies; who never have enough: woe, woe from the Lord is your
portion, that ever you were born, to live to exceed the false prophets of old,
and yet profess Christianity.

For we do not read, that ever they did force any by suite of Law to pay them;
but we read, that Balaam, when he did not his work that he labored so mightily
to do for the King of Moab) which was to curse the people whom God had blessed;
(mark) when he could not do his work, he went away without his reward; and so
is it not meet that those, whom in this nation are sent by men, (pretending
authority over souls) and put into Parishes and places, to reform and bless
the people; and cannot do their work, but the people grow worse and worse,
though they take pains (yet God never sent them) and is it reason that they
should have such a great reward, as the tenth of all our labors? If they had
sown spirituals, it had been a small thing for them to have partaked of our
carnals; or if they had planted a vineyard, they ought to have eat of the fruit
thereof: But this Vineyard of Times the Pope has planted for his Priests, and
never intended it for these, who do not his work, nor the Lords neither.

And therefore, why may not they, with Balaam, return without a reward from the
King, seeing their blessing does as little good, as Balaams intended cursing
did harm? for he went away without the Kings great honor and promotion,
because the Lord would not suffer him to fulfill or satisfy the will of that
spirit, which would have had the Israel of God destroyed, Number. 24.11. but so
(says the King) the Lord shall keep thee back from honor: But woe be to that
spirit that wills the destruction of Gods Israel now, that it may keep or get
its earthly ends, and selfish fleshly honors, which God is risen in his mighty
power to bring into contempt, because it opposes it self against the work of
his spirit, which is to bring down the earthly, and exalt the heavenly: Which
work must and shall be done, when men and devils have don, and said what they
can; for he that made us for his praise, has now by his spirit quickened us up
again for his glory. And this is the Lord from heaven, that spirit, that as is
the heavenly, such they may be that are heavenly: That the heavenly Image may
be exalted above the earthly, both to rule and reign over it in the Lambs
patient nature, to overcome the earthly, which preaches forth to the heavenly
Witness in all consciences: So the long suffering and patience, leads to
repentance and newness of life.

But that spirit which turns people from the gift of God in them, is the
deceiver that strengthens the hands of the evil doer, to make War against the
appearance of God (in man) that brings salvation: and this is the false Prophet
that has and does deceive the Nations; which second appearance of Christ (the
true spiritual light) is to consume with the breath of his mouth, and the
brightness of his coming.

And this appearance of truth, in the inward parts, the false Prophet cannot
endure: [Mark,] because it is come to reveal and consume him; and therefore he
thinks to strengthen himself by the powers of the earth, in persuading them to
believe his report and Prophecy, against the spirit of truth; and they being
not come to the word of life in themselves (that was before the deceiver was)
do not discern him, and so come to be deceived by him, and to make War against
the brightness of the rising of the Son of righteousness, and the leadings of
his pure spirit of life in his Children, by making Laws and Decrees against
them, for the exercise of their pure Consciences toward God and man: And hear
is the trial of their faith made manifest to be precious, by which many comes
to be added to it, and the kingdom exalted by its own power, through opposition
and persecution, so it comes to be seen and known to be the power of life in
us, that is greater and mightier then the power of death and darkness that
comes against us, that we can of a truth say, He that is in us, is greater then
he that is in the world, who comes against us, but must be overcome by him that
is in us, whose power shall burst the bonds of wickedness, and destroy the
spirit of persecution, that makes Laws for stumbling blocks to the people that
have a desire to seek after the Lord, and come to the measure of his spirit,
that leads into all truth; that they may witness dominion over sin and the
works of the Devil destroyed in them, and they forsake him, and all his works,
and all the vain pomp of this wicked world (that both Priests and People live
in) with the filthy unclean lusts of the flesh, that they may keep Gods holy
will and Commandments (that the Priests and people, for the most part, say
they can never keep here) and walk in the same all the days of their lives:
and if this ought to be done, as you say; and is possible to be done by the
power of God, as I say, then let the Priests bring forth one out of all the
Parishes in England, that they by their ministry have taught and brought into
this perfect life, which they have made the people promise and vow, that the
Children shall perform when they come to age.

Now if they have, and still do make the people promise and vow, That the
Children shall do that which all the Priests in England cannot do, then in all
just reason the people should have the Tithes; but if the people do not
perform this vow, and bring forth this life, and the Priests and Bishops to
help them, then what is all your Religion worth, that have not God a bridle for
your tongues, that promise and break it, that vow solemnly before the Lord, and
not perform it? You may very well say, you are a generation of miserable
offenders, and there is none of you does good (as it does appear) no, not one:
And yet you Priests would have a reward for teaching the people to profit, when
you cannot bring one of all your Flock that has done that which you say (and
they promise and vow) they ought to do. First you ought to do your Work, before
you require your Wages; but you take the reward first: so you are herein more
cunning then Balaam, for you are sure of the reward, though you never do the
work; and most of you are not ashamed to say, it can never be done here, yet
you still take the Wages. Can this be any other than the wages of
unrighteousness? to be paid for deceiving the people, keeping them ever
learning, and never able to bring them to the knowledge of the truth, but ever
would be paid, though never do the work; therefore you are unprofitable
servants, and no Ministers of Christ, and therefore we cannot follow you, who
deny the light of Christ within, and so you choose the darkness, for that will
not reprove you for your unprofitable works, and they which walk there cannot
see your deceit: therefore you love the darkness more than the light, and the
wages of unrighteousness more than the truth, which is the perfect gift of
God, given to profit withal: and this is the reason you cannot profit the
people, because you have not received the perfect gift of God, that the
Apostles and Ministers of Christ did receive (and do receive) which was given
for the perfecting of the Saints, for the edifying of the body of Christ; and
they I believe spoke truth, when it was said by Paul, that he spoke wisdom
among those that were perfect; and that they that were sanctified were
perfected for ever, and the Scripture bears testimony of some that were
sanctified.

So these could show the fruits of their Ministry, that they did perform that,
which they received the gift of God to do; these did not receive the tenths of
men's labors, yet they did their work, but you receive the tenth, and say the
work can never be done here: if the work be to be done in another world, what
have you to do to take wages here? but indeed you are like to have none of us
in this world, except you can do your work in this world: but the Apostles and
Ministers of Christ, through the power of their gift, brought men to the
keeping of the commands of Christ, who said, Matthew. 5.48. Be ye therefore
perfect, as your Father in heaven is perfect: (and you priests make the people
vow and promise to perform) and is it not his will, that this command should be
kept on this side the grave? if not, why do you make the people promise to do
it? for he that forsakes the Devil and all his works, and keeps Gods holy will
and commandments, shows forth, and witnesses a perfect life.

But if you have taught the people to promise and vow that which they, nor you,
can never perform, then you have led the people into error; and if it be not
error, then you are erred from the spirit, the gift of God, by which the
people should be perfected, and the body of Christ edified, being that your
Ministry has brought forth no such fruit, and its like never will.

Therefore consider with your selves, what cause those that love your souls
have to warn you, and deal plainly with you, that if it be possible you may see
your error, and come to that spirit that leads into all truth; for its not
possible for you to cover your selves, but the eye which God has opened in the
children of Light, does see you, and the woeful, sad, miserable, lamentable
estate that you are in; woe, woe unto you, weep and howl for the misery that is
coming upon you: what an account can you give to the Lord for all the souls
that have perished under your cure? who have not made (with all your wisdom
and skill) one soul perfectly whole, but still have labored to keep them ever
learning, where they can never be able to come to the knowledge of the truth.
Woe, woe unto you, that ever you were born, to be an occasion of such a great
destruction, in undertaking that which you have no spiritual skill in; had you
received the word of Life from the Lord, the word would have healed them, so
there would have been some fruit to God: if some had perished, who had refused
to hear, or have been instructed by you, you might have been clear of their
blood: but the people have heard you, and do hear you, and if they come not,
you punish them: and yet alas! all spotted with Leprofie, and there is (as you,
and they say) no foundness in you, but all over polluted with wounds and
putrified sores: are not you judged out of your own mouths, by your own
confession before the people? and then to cover your shame and error, you make
the people believe, it is not ever possible to be otherwise here. Oh miserable
comforters to a sick soul! If the people did but see your deceit, what would
become of you? but the Lord God of Life is making your deceit manifest daily,
(by the light which you hate) and all the children of Light see it, who are
taught by his spirit, and therefore cannot but pity your poor miserable souls.
Alas! what will you do, when none shall buy your Medicine any more? how will
you look the people in the face, in that day which hastens exceedingly for
Sions sake? you must sly to the rocks and the mountains to cover you, but they
shall not be able: for the mountains shall tremble in that day, and the hills
shall melt before the Lord, and the glory of his power that is risen, and
arising to shake terribly the earth, and bring every hidden thing to the light
to be tried, and that which cannot stand in the Light, shall be cast into the
lake of fire, which is the second death.

Now again consider with your selves, you that say the Quakers (as you call
them) are in error and delusion, and persecute them as heretics; was not that
always the saying of persecutors? see the testimony of the Scriptures: was it
not always so said by them that were born after the flesh, whose wills they
have made a law, and so were never without a law to kill the just: and if that
they had be not bad enough, then the old envious nature can make another that
shall be, which law did ever uphold the unjust, and please the false Prophets
and hirelings, because they would not have their deeds brought to the light,
and themselves made manifest to be in darkness: but after all your cruelty and
persecution against us, what case will you be in, when the Lord does appear for
us openly, and vindicate our innocent cause, by his just Judgments upon all our
enemies, in making them examples of his wrath to all generations, that the
people that are afar off may hear, and dread, and fear to resist his mighty
power, that is risen, and arising to shake all Nations, and shall bring down
the haughtiness, and the lostinesse of man, and stain the glory of all flesh,
and bring all the honorable of the earth into contempt, that the honorable,
immortal, heavenly seed of life, may be exalted over all; and the kingdoms of
the world become the kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, whose right it
is to reign, and rule over all, blessed for ever.

Woe unto you Rulers in darkness, Magistrates in Sodom, and Governors in
Gomorrah, for the terrible day that is overtaking you, and you would not be
warned: how often has the Lord sent unto you by his messengers and ministers of
truth, both by speaking and writing, that you might be gathered out of that
spirit which leads to destruction, but you have set at naught all his counsel,
and would none of his reproof, therefore shall you eat the fruit of your own
way, and be filled with your cruel devices: for your life in pleasure shall
slay you, and your prosperity in foolishness shall destroy you, because ye
have hated the knowledge of the truth, and would not choose the fear of the
Lord; therefore shall fear come upon you in Judgment, and destruction as a
whirlwind, then will your wickedness and cruelty against the servants of the
Lord, be set in order before you, who have required them evil for good, and for
their labor and pains to bring you into the glorious liberty, you have put
them into prison, oh! this will be heavy upon you, when their blood comes to be
required at your hands, who should have employed your power to have encouraged
them in the service of the Lord, which is the well doing; and so should you
have had praise of God and all just men, and your memorial would have been
sweet in generations to come: but on the contrary, your memorial will rot, and
your name be blotted out from under heaven; but the memorial of the just (whom
you persecute) shall flourish for ever.

Woe, woe be unto you spiritual Lords (so called) that decree unrighteous
decrees, to bear rule over the consciences of the people, and Lord it over Gods
heritage, who labor to devour the flock of Christ, and lay waste his little
remnant, that he has gathered to bear testimony to his great and glorious
name, that he is exalting over all Nations; and because you have combined
against him, and the great and glorious work he has begun in this Nation, his
power is turned against you, and shall pursue you in all your ways, and defeat
you in all your devises, till he has left you neither root nor branch, and
your name shall be cast out as an abominable thing, and an abhorring to all
people; for you have exceeded the blasphemy of those who said they were Jews,
and were not, in calling your selves Fathers in God, and yet never came to
witness the spiritual birth of the children of God, who are come to know their
sins forgiven them, for his name sake, into which they are gathered, where the
Father comes to be known, by the revelation of the son, that is life eternal:
and hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments; 1 John
2.3. this was, and is the saying of the children of God, which you, Fathers in
God (as you are called) never came to witness; to wit, the keeping of the
Commandments of Christ: and therefore you that do believe his Commands, cannot
be kept while you live on the earth, in that unbelief you are shut out, and
there can never come to know him, and he that is there, and says he knows him,
is a liar: 1 John 3.10. In this the children of God are manifest, and the
children of the Devil; whosoever does not righteousness is not of God, neither
he that loves not his brother. In this the Fathers and Children that are
persecutors (for conscience sake toward God) are manifested to be of their
father the Devil, and neither children nor fathers in God.

For the name Father in God came from such as were in that nature, who were
first children of God that had known the Father, and then young men that had
overcome the wicked one, then fathers because they have known him that is from
the beginning, 1 John 2. 13 14. and in the power of God that was in the
beginning, that does overcome, did beget unto God, and so were properly and
truly called Fathers in God; and such I own, and honor in my very soul, who
are honorable in the house of God, and as they ruled well, were worthy of
double honor, from all the children of truth in the Fathers house, but had
nothing to do with those that were without, that were not of the household of
faith, for the Devil bare rule there in the children of disobedience: and,
says Paul, them that are without, God judges; for what have I to do to judge
them also that are without? 1 Cor. 5.12, 13. The Bishops and Fathers in God,
did rule only among the children of God, who were the Church in God, and they
that abode in Christ were his Members: 1 John 2.6. And he that says he abides
in him, ought himself also to walk even as he walked; who said, I receive not
honor from men: (that is, such who will not come unto him, cannot honor him,
but in the unbelief dishonor him) but he that believer, possesses his vessel
in sanctification and honor; (that is to him that sanctifies:) but the
Fathers in God, and Bishops of Christ, never took upon them the vain glorious
honors of the wicked world, nor were called masters or Lords, but were hated
of the world, as their Lord and Master was, (and so such are now) that the
Scripture may be fulfilled, for such are not of the world, but of God: for,
said they, the whole world lies in wickedness, and they were with sound
Doctrine, and a holy Conversation, to beget unto God, out of the world, and if
you, who are called Lords spiritual, did exercise your authority over none, but
they that you had begotten to God out of the world, you would have but a very
small flock, if any at all; but instead of gathering a flock out of the world,
you take the world for your flock, and so exercise Lordship over them; (as
Christ said, Luke 22.25. The kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them,
the example of those you follow, and not Christ:) for there is many thousands
by the year to be gotten by them, and so rule by your outward power and
Lordlinesse (like the false Prophets of old) and many of the world love to have
it so: and so let them have it. But the flock of Christ, the Church in God,
cannot own these things, nor love to have it so, but must stand witnesses
against these things, even to the death, if the Lord require them.

And therein you come to be tried, and made manifest what nature you are of,
and also their faith and patience is made manifest, and the nature of the Lamb
showed forth, that overcomes: but the contrary nature (as I have said) is to be
overcome; that which persecutes, and imprisons, and would force the conscience,
and so slay the soul, or else kill the body, this was ever of the Devil, (and
so it is now) and a mark of Antichrist, the false Church, the Whore, that is
adulterated from the Spirit, and alienated from the Lambs nature, that
overcomes in patience, and obtains the victory, and is made perfect through
suffering; but on the contrary, the Whore, the false Church, is said to drink
the blood of the Saints; and the Scripture bears testimony, that all the blood
is sound in Babylon, (then Sion is clear of blood.) Mark that, and the name
Babylon comes thus to be written in the forehead of every persecutor, who is of
Cains stock that slew his brother, because his worship was in truth, but his in
the murdering nature. (Mark) he that was slain was in the truth from the
beginning, and he that slew was in the deceit; and so we see it has been all
along unto this very day.

And that nature which slew our Lord Christ, when he was upon the earth, is the
same that now persecutes, and slayes his Disciples and followers, because they
are redeemed from the earth, and cannot submit to their vain traditions,
customs, and fashions, and commands, that are contrary to God, therefore are
sufferers by the world; but the sons of Sion are such, who are redeemed with
judgment, and that nature which is at enmity to God being condemned, is
crucified and cast out, and the Lambs nature being raised up, converts to
righteousness, and righteousness being brought forth, glorifies God.

And we, being called and gathered cut of the vain conversation, and also from
the vain worship, (which teaches for Doctrine the commands and traditions of
men) by the mighty power, and outstretched arm of God, are kept in
faithfulness to him, that we cannot bow, or submit to that which the Lord has
showed us to be evil, for fear of men, or their threats, who are but dust,
being accompanied in our sufferings and persecutions, with the power and
presence of the eternal God, that made heaven and earth.

And be it known unto you (persecutors of the holy seed) you shall never
prevail to overcome us, as we are kept in the power of Life, which has
gathered us out of your dead forms, to serve the God of Life in the newness of
his spirit, in which he is worshipped by the true worshippers, out of the way,
sight, and understanding of all that are not come to receive the true light,
who are all in a false worship, erred from the spirit, blind, in the dark, and
stumble at the truth, and fight against the life, that is hid with Christ in
God, out of the sight of the vulterous eye, and out of the way of the venomous
beast, where the lions whelp treads not, and where the devourer cannot come;
and that which God has hid in the spirit, all the natural learning in the
world could never find out, nor ever shall; for being hid from the wise and
prudent of this world, is revealed to such as are babes, who hunger and thirst
after righteousness, (and not after preferment in the world) who cannot be
satisfied with the bread that perishes, but with the sincere milk of the word
of life they grow, which word is nigh them, and is the word of faith in their
hearts, that begets life in them, and this life pints and breaths after
nourishment, from that which has begotten it, and cannot be satisfied with
words, but with the immortal word of life that was in the beginning, that
quickens that again, that in Adam we were dead to; and this is the quickening
spirit that ministers life, which we having obeyed, do live; and the life we
now live is by the mighty power of God, which our souls are made subject to,
and we cannot but obey that which quickened us, and is the immortal life in us
the second Adam, that the children of the first persecute, because they are
born of that which cannot reveal the second, and so being in the darkness of
death, see him not nor know him.

But alas for you! it is in vain for you to think that you can prevail over us
by your carnal weapon, for the sword of the spirit is with us, which has slain
and cut down that nature in us, that your strength stands in, to make War
against us: for the strong man, the enemy of our souls, being overcome (by the
power of life that is stronger) comes to be cast out, who is the Captain that
leads all persecutors, and all destroyers of men's lives for Conscience sake;
that is, he that would destroy us, being cast out from within, and cannot
destroy our souls, would revenge himself upon our bodies; (but we know that he
that has given life to our souls, can preserve our bodies if he please, if
not, his will be done) but this I say to all persecuters, We have overcome your
Captain General, and he that is in us, is greater then he that is in the world
(as we have said, and you shall know) who is the Captain of our salvation, that
suffered by the world, and overcome the world; and therefore know this, that as
our Captain has overcome the world in us, so with us, and in us, will he
overcome the world by us; (but this the world sees not, therefore cannot
receive it). so if all the world rise up against us, as one man, for the
obedience of the spirit of truth, we know it is, that they may be overcome.

And how can you expect that we should submit to that in others, which God in
his dreadful power did condemn, cast out, and destroy in us? But while we did
submit to it in our selves, then we could submit to it in others: for when
death reigned, deceit was honorable; but when life came, death was destroyed,
deceit denied, truth exalted, and God honored, and our souls saved; and so in
Gods salvation we standing, Men and Devile cannot prevail against us.

Now if you persecutors could believe this, then you would know it were in vain
to strive against us, for in so doing you strive against the Lord, and must
needs reap destruction; but on the contrary, if we did not know these things
brought forth in us, by the mighty power of God, then we might believe it were
in vain to resist your wills, and suffer the loss of our lives, goods, and
liberties; not knowing for what. For what would it profit us to suffer for that
which could not save and deliver our souls from eternal death? When we were in
deceit, we could not suffer for the truth, because the truth did suffer by us,
and in us, but now coming into the truth, deceit is denied and cast out into
the world, and there rages at us in all deceivers; who are deceived that think
to stop the way of the Lord, and the work of his spirit in England; Therefore
we choose to suffer with the truth, being sure we shall reign with the truth
(over all that is against it) for that power that has, and does free us from
the enemy within, in his due time will deliver us from the enemy without, and
from the hands of all that hate us, that we may serve him, without sear of
them, in righteousness and true holiness before him, without control of men,
all the days of our lives.

And therefore Infallibly knowing our selves to be led and acted by the spirit
of the Lord God, in the obedience of his will, we do also know as well, that
all our enemies who oppose, persecute and oppress us, except they repent,
shall all be destroyed and perish eternally: and therefore how can we but pity
your condition, pray and mourn for you in secret, that if it be possible, you
may come to the truth and be saved, before it be too late, and then we can
neither pray nor mourn for you, when you have sealed your destruction with our
blood, it will be too late for you? (because you have had such warning
beforehand from the spirit of the Lord in his servants) then the voice of our
blood (which is precious in the sight of the God of heaven) will cry loud for
vengeance against you: How long, holy and true, before thou aveng our blood?
do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? Rev.
6.10.

Woe, woe, from the Lord God of power, to all blood-thirsty Rulers, Judges, and
Magistrates, who hunt after blood, persecute and condemn the innocent who does
not resist you: in you is the resurrection of the unjust and cruel muthering
spirit, which is risen and alive to fill up the measure of iniquity and
cruelty; to bring to remembrance before the Lord, all the blood that has been
shed in your great City Babylon; and woe for ever will be to those that are
found acting in that murdering spirit, for upon that spirit will the Lord
render vengeance in flaming fire, for all the righteous blood that has been
shed upon the earth. And the woeful, dreadful, terrible day of your destruction
(who are in that nature) draws nigh, wherein you must suffer punishment for
every evil thought, and wicked word and action against the innocent (who suffer
for the obedience of his will) as done unto himself, Matthew. 18.6. In as much as
ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it
unto me: And again, ved. 10. But who so shall offend one of these little ones,
which believe in me, (mark) it were better for him that a millstone were hanged
about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea: And take heed
that ye despise not one of these little ones, who cannot Bow to men's Inventions
and Traditions, set up in the wills of some men, and pulled down in the wills
of other men; but we are come to the standing worship in the Will, Power, and
Spirit of God that abides for ever, which men and devils shall not prevail
against: though some may stretch forth their hands to vex certain of the
Church, as Herod did, Acts 12.1. because he saw it pleased their [enemies] the
Jews, but it pleased the Lord to make an example of him, and he was eaten with
worms, that it might be a warning to all self-conceited, ambitious, proud,
highminded, persecuting Rulers and Magistrates in the ages to come.

And if ( Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25.41.) be the portion of those that do not visit
the little ones, his brethren in prisons, and dungeons, and nasty holes where
they are cast, for the testimony of his truth, what shall be the reward and
portion of those that cast them in, and throng them together, to the
destruction of their lives for want of fresh air, that they may be murdered
in secret, without Judgment or Mercy? but alas for you! the cry of their
innocent blood will find you out (both actors and consenters) and bring you to
open Judgment for your secret wickedness.

And if God do not openly appear in terrible Judgment against you for these
things, then you may say, Tush, God sees it not; or that he has forsaken the
earth, or that he is not mindful of those that diligently seek him: but we
know; and you shall assuredly know, you have touched his anointed ones, and
offended his little ones, and despised them, slain his Prophets, and done
despite unto his spirit of grace. Therefore vvoe is me for you, what will
you do in that day (that is nigh at hand)? Who shall deliver you from the
stroke of his vengeance? Who shall save you from his fierce wrath? Alas, alas!
Who can utter the misery, or declare the terrible Judgments that is to come
upon Babylon, and all her Merchants, and persecuting Rulers and Governors that
are found alive in her sin when God shall render vengeance for all the blood
that is found in her, and they in the blood? Woe upon woe, misery upon misery,
plague upon plague is coming upon thee, O Babylon, thou mother of Harlots, and
abomination of the earth.

Oh happy are you, ye Inhabitants of Sion! blessed, yea for ever blessed be the
day, in which that love was manifessed to your souls, that has gathered and
brought you out of the City of confusion, Mystery Babylon the great: Though you
may lose your, mortal lives for a testimony against her, yet you have cause to
rejoice for ever, that you are made worthy to follow the Lamb, and fill up the
measure of his sufferings, and so receive an exceeding weight of glory, which
is laid up for all those that continue faithful to the end.

Woe, woe from the Lord is the portion of all that oppress Jacob, and that
spoil Israel; who exercise rule and authority over the blessed seed, in the
cursed nature; and so being Gentiles by nature, are ignorant of the Laws
Statutes and Ordinances of Sions King, and of his spiritual Israel, who are of
the heavenly birth that is blessed, and cannot bow to Esau's Lordship, who is
of the first birth that is hated, which cannot please God (being in the
unbelief and under the curse) and yet does exercise authority, and oppress the
birth that does: (Mark) He that is in the flesh cannot please God, thus says
the Scripture, Gal. 4.29. And he that persecutes is of that birth, as it is
written, He that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that was born after
the spirit. Even so it is now; (then mark) how can that birth that pleases God
submit to that birth which pleases him not? It could not do so of old both in
the Prophets and Apostles, it cannot do so now in Disciples and Believers: and
because it cannot do so now, the birth of the flesh would force them, by
inflicting punishment upon their bodies, and spoiling of their goods; but he
that gave them bodies is a Spirit, and gives them spiritual power to overcome
that spirit of darkness, in giving up their bodies, that they may not bring
guilt upon their souls.

And from this birth that cannot please God, does the enmity arise in all ages;
from the first that was Cain, to the last that is Antichrist. For the seed that
bruiseth the heel, rules in that birth that persecutes in all ages, and is but
one, though it change its name, yet its nature is to devour and destroy the
life, in which the seed rules that is blessed; which is the Heir that the sons
of Belial in all ages have combined to kill, under the name of a deceiver or a
blasphemer; for old Cains Nature having put on Christ Name, professes him in
Words, but denies him in Works, as says the Scriptures by its testimony under
the several appearances and dispensations of God, it always, and in all ages
testified against that nature.

For as in the time of the Law, old Cain covered himself with a profession of
it, and with the strictest, would Tithe Mint and Cummin (but neglected the
weightier, Judgment and Mercy.) And when the Heir appeared in a body of flesh,
to do his Fathers will (mark) he could not own Cains Religion, although he
professed his fathers Law: Then the old enmity said, Come let us kill him, this
is the Heir; but what says the old enmity now in our age? Come let us make a
Law to Banish them, to spoil their goods, and hang them as Fellons, and what
not? is the old enmity grown worse, that it rages so much? it knows who is
appeared in his mighty power, and that its time is but short; for the Heir is
again appeared, and appearing in the bodies of his people to do his Fathers
will, and these cannot own Cains Religion now, no more then their Lord Christ
owned it then; for the Heir of life know Cains nature then (and so he does now)
notwithstanding his taking the Law of God into his mouth, yet he was from it in
his heart (for there was the murderer in the heart, where the Law should have
been) so the Heir of life, the light of the world, that manifests the deeds of
darkness now, said then, to those Rabbis that went in long robes, and for a
pretense made long prayers, yet devoured the poor, Woe be to you hypocrites,
for ye shut up the kingdom of Heaven against men; for you neither go in your
selves, neither suffer ye them that are entering, to go in, Mat h. 23.13. (Mark
how the old enmity wrought then) he that came to do the will of God they
killed; for having told them before that their Religion was vain, and that they
were of their father the Devil, and his works they did, yet they believed not,
but persecuted to the death; so despised the day of their visitation, and him
that told them the truth, both hated and slew.

Therefore was their house left unto them desolate, and the things that
belonged to their everlasting peace was hid from their eyes. So it being sea
for an example in the following ages, that persecution is punished with
desolation; and that spirit that seeks not after truth and peace with all men,
the peace of God is hid from its eyes, and that is the fugative and vagabond
spirit that slew his brother because he pleased God; and this is that spirit
that reigns and rules in great Babylon, that drinks the blood of the Saints and
Martyrs of Jesus; and this is the spirit that is Head in the false Church, or
Scarlet colored Whore, that calls her self the Spouse of Christ, and covers
her self with his Name, being erred from his spirit, dwells in enmity to his
nature; this is that spirit of Antichrist that is come into the world, with
which the great men of the earth have been led to commit fornication with, and
drawn their hearts from the measure of his good spirit in them, which would
have guided their feet into the way of peace: but that spirit of enmity being
received, guids their feet into the way of Cain, to kill and slay their brother
that cannot sacrifice with them, nor own their Worship in that nature which
cannot please God; and for this cause have the holy men of God suffered in all
ages, as at this present day.

And because of this our Lord Christ suffered, who could not own that nature in
the zealous professing Jews, notwithstanding they seemed to justify themselves
in words to his face, as if they were the children of God, saying, We have one
father, even God, Joh. 8.41. Mark his answer and Character of the children of
God, If God were your father, ye would love me. Love to the truth, Christ, the
light, is the work of a child of God; hatred to the truth, Christ the light,
and those that be in it, is the work of a child of the Devil; thus their works
makes them manifest in all ages: hatred against the appearance of God, comes
from the cursed nature that slew the Lamb.

And to the Professors of the Law of God that were in that nature, his Son
said, and does say, Ye seek to kill me: and what it the reason? because my word
has no place in you. This is the cause of persecution and enmity against the
truth, from the first to the last; the word of truth not being hearkened to, in
the heart, in the mouth, truth comes not to be beloved in the inward parts; and
by such it comes to be hated in others without: If ye continue in my word, then
art ye my Disciples indeed. So mark this, if the word of truth, that which
speaks the truth in you hearts, and shows your evil deeds in secret, and
tells you upon your beds your secret faults and wickedness, and makes you
confess in your hearts it is so, and brings you to a sense of sorrow and
misery that will be your portion, if you repent not and turn to the Lord, that
spirit that searched thy heart, and tried thy reins, that pure word of truth
that cannot deceive thee, the anointing that speaks the truth in thee, and
this I say from the spirit of truth, except thou believe in that word of truth,
and obey it, thou shall never witness salvation. This is the infallible truth
to all upon the face of the whole earth, and there is no other salvation under
heaven, nor no other Name given, to be saved by, then this, which is the
Gentiles light, and Isreal's glory: that which make manifest the deeds of
darkness, and reproves them; this is that spirit that reproves the world of
sin, that leads out of sin all that do believe and follow it: and this is he,
that spirit, that is given for a leader to his people, to be his salvation to
the ends of the earth. This is the Word of God, the Son of God, the Lamb of God
that takes away the sin, and saves the souls of all that believe in him, the
Son, the truth that makes free; the quickening spirit, that quickens to life
again, the soul that was dead in Adam, and so brings Immortality to light,
through his power, which is the Gospel; and he that believes not in his power,
knows not the Gospel, that power which sets free from sin, for that is the glad
tidings to the soul, to hear of a deliverance from the bondage of corruption,
that it may no longer serve sin, the wages whereof is condemnation and death to
it; but that it might come to Sow in the eternal spirit, and Reap the Wages of
life everlasting: for such as it sows, such must it reap, because God is Just.

And therefore they that do believe in the eternal power, have denied
themselves, and given up their souls into the hands of a faithful Creator, that
he may save them from the sin, and take it away, and bring in his own perfect
righteousness, according to his promise in his New Covenant of free mercy and
grace; and it is unpossible for God in Christ to fail or forsake them, but
keeps Covenant and mercy for ever, and saves the soul from the sin, and power
of hell and death, which is the Work his father has sent him into the world to
do and perform; and he that does believe in him, he has promised to raise him
up out of the Fall, Death, and the Curse, and restore him into the life of God
(from which he fell, and was dead to) and brings forth a new birth, by creating
a new heart, and renewing a right spirit in him; and this is his promise to do,
and work to perform, and such who are not of this Faith, can never have this
Work wrought in them; but do, through their unbelief, as it were, make him a
liar; that is, as if he would not, or could not perform his promise: and such
are dead while they live, in the Sin, Fall, and the Curse, Reprobate to every
good work, dishonouring the Lord of life, through their unbelief of the truth.

But on the contrary, believing the lying spirit that leads into the sin, who
says that sin must be lived in while we are on the earth, this is the Doctrine
of the Devil, and the Devils Doctrine which he has taught his servants and
Ministers to preach, who are the false Prophets that daube with untempered
mortar, that deceive the Nations; so upholding the kingdom of the Devil, sin,
and darkness, that he may keep his Kingdom and power in their hearts, and
rule there in the disobedient, and bring forth his will, that is, sin, and
iniquity, and ungodliness, so beget his own Image in them, and do his own
Work through them, and Preach his own Doctrine in them, in which they
believing, can never witness salvation.

But are a company of miserable sinners, laden with sin and iniquity, ever
learning of the deceitful lying spirit, and so can never come to the knowledge
of the truth, that sets free from sin, but are ever pleading for it, being in
the error strayed from the way of Gods salvation, doing the things they ought
not to do, persecuting, hating, and killing the Innocent, spoiling and robbing
them of their goods, acting in madness and folly beyond the very letter of the
law, and sometimes against it; as for example, some are excommunicated, (out of
the assembly of miserable sinners) their Church, so called; and after
excommunication have had their goods strained on, and taken away, for not
coming to their worship in the time of excommunication; this is unreasonable,
cruel, envious, wicked dealings, and this is done against many, casting others
into Dungeons, and nasty holes, and Prisons, that has destroyed their lives,
and all because we speak the truth, and do the things that we ought to do, and
cannot hearken to the lying spirit, that leads into error, and astray from the
way of God.

But do hear the voice of Christ, the good shepherd, and Bishop of our souls,
and keep his sayings, who says, swear not at all, and do not after their works
(who are blind guides) that say, and do not (the thing they say they ought to
do) but believe in the light that ye may be the children of light, John 12.36.
for said he, I am the light of the world, he that follows me, (not blind
guides) shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life; chap.
8.12, 13. then said the Pharisees thy record is not true, mark what the blind
guides said then; and are they not blind guides that say so now? who say, it is
but a natural light, that is the light of the world, that lights every man
that comes into the world, and that it is not able to save a man from sin,
though it do condemn him, and reprove him for sin, and the deeds of darkness;
when as Christ himself, the truth that cannot lie, said, he that follows him,
the light, shall not walk in darkness, and we who are come to the light in our
selves, and follow it, do bear testimony, (against all the blind guides, and
hireling priests, and false prophets upon the face of the whole earth) that his
record is true: but this the unbelieving Jews could not believe then, no more
than the unbelieving Gentiles can believe now, therefore they walk in
darkness, and hate the light; but this is the word of the Lord God of truth,
to all the Gentiles upon the whole earth, they must believe in their light,
(that is to say, the Gentiles light) before ever they can witness Gods
salvation, for that is his Covenant to the people, and his salvation to the
ends of the earth.

What if the blind should say, what to do, answer, to save them from walking in
darkness, and then the fruits and works of darkness cannot be brought forth? I
cannot believe this record, says the blind guide and his followers, then says
Christ, for if ye believe not that I am be, (what he? the true light) ye shall
dye in your sins: then says Jesus again unto them, I go my way, and ye shall
seek me, and shall dye in your sins, whither I go, ye cannot come. Mark that,
ye despisers, and haters of the light, ye despise and hate Christ, and ye that
will not follow him the light, here in this world, shall not follow him
hereafter into the glory of the world to come, but shall dye in your sin, and
perish eternally.

Consider this, ye despisers of truth, there is but a breath betwixt you and
eternal destruction, ye haters of the light, the eternal word, by which you
breath, move, and have a being, who plead for sin, and the deeds of darkness,
to live in them for term of life, read your portion, that live and die in sin,
and consider what he has said that cannot lie, if you will not live the life
of the righteous, (being manifested unto you in the day of visitation) you
cannot dye the death of the righteous, nor shall your last end be like unto
his; because he has called, and you refused, he has stretched out his hand
(of mercy) and you will not regard; ye have set at naught all his counsel, (by
his messengers he has sent unto you) and would none of his reproof, (by his
light in your consciences, the spirit of truth that he has sent to reprove the
world of sin,) therefore says he that cannot lie, I will laugh at your
calamity, I will mock when your fear comes, and when distress and anguish
comes upon you: then shall you call, but I will not answer, you shall seek him
early, but shall not find him: Pro. 1.24, 25, 26, 27. therefore because the
spirit of truth has said it, you that are in that capacity, cannot dye the
death of the righteous, who shall in Gods peace (that he has labored after
with all men) lie down, and in his everlasting habitation dwell safely, and
shall be quiet from fear of evil, for the upright shall dwell in the land, that
the envy of Cains spirit shall not, nor cannot banish them out of; and the
perfect shall remain in it. These be a people, whose life the blind guides
could never yet see in all ages, because they dwelt not in their land, which is
the land of darkness, where Cain said he should be hid from the face of God:
therefore all his generation loves this land of darkness, naturally, to this
day, it being the land of their nativity, where their fathers City is built;
(out from the presence of the Lord, and the blessing of the light of his
countenance) in that land of the valley of the shadow of death, where the
sitting down is in darkness, and the Prince of the power of darkness bears
rule there, teaching his children and subjects to plead for his kingdom of
liberty in the flesh, which natural desires and lusts of the flesh being
brought forth, is the life after the flesh, that cannot please God; the old
man's life in the curse, in whom the seed of the serpent, the subtilest beast,
is head, and makes war in the old enmity against the seed of the woman, of
which is the spiritual, or the birth after the spirit, that the birth after the
flesh persecutes and hates, as Cain did, who was of that wicked one, and slew
his brother: and wherefore slew he him? because his own works were evil, and
his brothers righteous: 1 John 3.12. therefore it is no marvel that the
children of light are hated of the world, that lies in wickedness, and pleads
for it, and hates the light, and pleads against it, for he that hates the
light, abides in darkness, and loves not his brother; and its written,
whosoever hates his brother is a murderer, and ye know that no murderer has
eternal life abiding in him; and where eternal life is not abiding, there is
Cains nature dwelling, and from that nature arises the persecutor, that does
not well, in doing the things he ought not to do, and so fin lies at his door.
And woe unto the wicked, it shall be ill with him, (says the spirit of the
Lord) for the reward of his hands shall he given him, Isaiah 3.11. For the
wicked shall be cut off from the earth, and the transgressors shall be rooted
out of it, Proverbs 2.22.

Therefore let all that have yet a day, prize it, and make your calling and
election sure, in this the day of Gods love, and tender visitation to your
souls; and think not to say in your hearts, did not the thief upon the Cross
dye the death of the righteous? yes: and did he not live the life of the
righteous? yes: he lived by faith, though it might be but the last hour, he
being then called at the last hour, to believe in Christ the light of the
world: he followed him by faith in him, and bore a glorious testimony for him,
when most of his Disciples had forsook him, and the blind guides laughed him to
scorn, and wagged their heads at him; then he who was faithful reproved his
fellow, that was as blind as his guides and chief priests, so the priests, and
the thief, and the elders, were all in one spirit of envy, mocking, and
despising the truth, and chose the murderer and the thief (of which spirit
they were of) before the truth, the son of God, which spirit he that believed
did rebuke, and that was a good work in that hour, when few durst own him: but
yet more then all this, he confessed him to be a king, and that a heavenly one
too, before the face of his enemies, and before the whole world, justified the
righteous son of God, and said he had done nothing amiss; (which proved his
enemies the chief priests murderers) and in such a time, when he was in his
lowest estate, when he said, My God, my God, why have thou for saken me? then
did he honor him, by his faith, which preached God had not forsaken him, but
had given him an everlasting kingdom, and did not doubt, but he was able to
bring his soul that believed into his kingdom, therefore said, Lord, remember
me when thou come into thy kingdom, and so received him before the face of
the world, as a faithful witness to the death, who entered into the glorious
paradise of God, that his precious faith had fitted him for in that short time.

And if in so short a time faith in the power of God can bring forth such a
glorious work; what wretched, wicked, miserable, unbelieving sinners are they,
who say they be in Christ the son of God, yet do not expect to be saved from
their sin, and set free from their iniquity, all the days of their life? these
make but a bad confession of the work of faith, which is not to the glory of
God the Father, that has sent his son to take away the sin, and the work still
undone that he came to do; but such are strangers to the true Faith, that a
grain of which removes the mountain of sin and wickedness, that all the blood
of bulls, and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer, could not remove under the
first covenant, though that took away the guilt after the sin committed, yet
made nothing perfect (therefore he found fault with it, and took it away) but
the bringing in of a better hope did make perfect for ever them that are
sanctified: so if the second Covenant had not made perfect, as appertaining to
the Conscience, it had been as unprofitable in that thing as the first; but the
bringing in of the better hope did, and does, that which all the children of
darkness cannot believe, but he that does believe, has this hope, that
purifies as he is pure, and this is the faith that purifies the heart, and
overcomes the world in it, and crucifies the flesh, with the affections and
lusts: and this is the work of him that God has sent into the world, and
raised him up to bless all those that believe in his name, in turning away
every one of them from his iniquities, that they may come to abide in him that
sins not, that he, whosoever he be that lives in sin has neither seen nor
known.

Woe, woe, from the Lord God of power, is the portion of all those that say, or
have said in their hearts, we will try the Quakers God, whether he be able to
deliver, or save them out of our hands, that we should not execute upon them
the intents, and inventions of our hearts, in breaking their meetings, and
scattering them, that they should not be a people; unto all you be it known,
from the spirit of the Quakers God, your counsel shall not stand, neither shall
your decrees prosper; for you have taken it against the holy seed, that God
has blessed, even against the seed of Abraham, in which all the families of
the earth shall be blessed; which is the seed that could not bow to the pride
of Homan, against whom his sealed decrees could not prosper, but what he
prepared against them became his own portion: as it is written, the wicked are
snared in the works of their own hands.

And you shall know, that the God of the people, scornfully called Quakers, is
the God of the whole earth, and a God of the mountains, and above the
loftiness of the hills, as well as the low valleys; and also a God of the
seas, (and above the loftiness of the proud waves thereof) as well as of the
land; a God infinite in mercy to all that bow to his great and glorious name,
and submit to the government of his spirit of truth, that is come, and has
revealed it self in our hearts, to the saving of our souls; unto which every
soul ought to be subject, and serve him with reverence and godly fear: but unto
those that despise his name, and cast his commands behind their backs, and do
despite unto his spirit of grace, (in laboring to destroy the work it has
brought forth, in the little remnant it has gathered, under its government,
who have, and are subjecting themselves unto its pure leadings) unto such, he
is a God dreadful in Judgment, terrible in vengeance, to whom it belongs to
repay: and as it is written, Hebrews 10.31. It is a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of the living God.

And woe be to all those that are striving against their Maker, and decreeing
against his decrees, and laboring to scatter that which his spirit has
gathered, and to destroy that which he has quickened to life, because it
cannot submit to a contrary spirit, that is of the world, and leads into
bondage, which is the voice of the stranger that the sheep of Christ cannot
follow; but the sheep must hear, and will hear the voice of him that gives
eternal life; who is cow to seek, and to save that which was lost, and that
which was lost being found and saved, will for ever honor its salvation, in
preferring the honor and glory of its Savior, before all the glory of the
world; and for the obedience of his commands, (that his will may be done in
earth as in heaven) will give up even life, liberty, estate, and all, that the
world may know the kingdom of God is come, in great power and glory into our
souls, when his will is preserred before our mortal lives, and his commands
before liberty and estate, that it may preach to the ends of the earth, that we
have found something that is better than all things that wicked men can take
from us; and because we love and honor that which is from above, that which is
from beneath hates us: and because we cannot worship and honor it, therefore
would destroy us: but we see him that is invisible with us, who is high to save
and deliver us, and will not leave us that have left our selves, that he may be
received, and who will not deny us that have denied our selves, and our own
wills, that his may be done; and where his will is done, his power is come, and
his servants we are whom we obey, and we know our master will stand by us,
while we do his will; and all you that do not know whose servants we are,
(because our manners and behavior is not after the fashion of this world) you
laugh us to scorn, like as the old world did at Noah's salvation, that the
Scripture might be fulfilled; as it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be in
the coming of the son of man: you that hate the light cannot see the salvation
of God, no more than they did in the days of Noah; for the prophecy came not
in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved of
the holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. and those who have received the spirit of Christ,
which is the spirit of prophecy, cannot but speak good of his name that has
brought salvation; for blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, whom
the Lords people will receive and hear, but he that comes in his own name,
comes by the will of man, and the men that stand in their own wills do receive
him, and hear him, but he that comes in the name of the Lord, such cannot
receive him; but he that denies himself, and takes up the Cross of Christ,
does receive and hear the Preacher of the Cross, which to him is the power of
God: but to them that perish it is foolishness: 1. Cor. 1.18. so by that,
which the wise of the world ^ounts foolishness, it pleases the Lord to save
us that believe: so was it in the days of Noah, he and his household was saved
by that which the old world counted foolishness; but when the Judgment came,
the high mountains of man's wisdom and imaginations could not save them: then
they knew and saw, that his foolishness was better than all their wisdom; and
so they came to know that in Judgment to their woe, which they refused in
mercy for their salvation.

And as it was then, so is it now, the wisdom of men is received for the
Doctrine of salvation, and the Doctrine of Gods salvation is accounted
foolishness and delusion, and cast aside as a thing of naught, by the wise of
this world, who account it not worthy to have a room in their hearts, nor in
the Nation; and they that have received in their hearts, who believe and obey
it, they have made laws to banish out of their Native Country: but the time is
coming, and very nigh at hand, that you shall know in terrible Judgments, that
your wisdom was but foolishness, and that which you are laboring to exalt,
is that which God is appeared to cast aside and destroy; and that which you are
laboring to destroy and pull down, is that which God is risen in spirit, in
the hearts and souls of his people, to set up: and now you shall certainly know
whose Counsel shall stand, and we have told you before, but you would not
believe the report of the spirit of truth; therefore the arm of Gods salvation
is not revealed in you, which now he is making bare before you, and all
Nations, that you may know you have refused his Counsel, and slighted the day
of your Visitation, and rejected the spirit of truth, that would have gathered
you, and the power that would have preserved you, from the hands of all your
enemies, both within and without, which you shall see and know, is able to
preserve all those that put their trust in it, and to deliver them out of the
hands of all their enemies, so far as it shall make for his glory, and the good
of our souls.

And if he shall farther suffer us to be-tried, to the laying down of our
lives, for his Name sake, his will be done; and let our God glorify himself
with his own, which way he pleases: and if we drink deeper of the cup of
suffering, it is but the same our Lord has drunk, and the baptism he has
been baptized with, but the dreggs thereof shall his, and our enemies drink for
ever. For says he that lifts up his hand to heaven, and lives for ever, If I
whet my glittering sword, and my hand take bold on Judgment, I will render
vengeance to my enemies, and will reward them that hate me, I will make my
arrows drunk with blood, (and my sword shall devour flesh) and that with the
blood of the slain, and of the Captives, from the beginning of revenges upon
the enemy. Rejoice, O ye Nations, with his people, for he will avenge the blood
of his servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries, (mark) and will
be merciful unto his land, and to his people; therefore blessed, blessed of the
Lord, are you his people, that suffer for his name sake, rejoice and be
exceeding glad, Deuteronomy. 32.41, 42, 43. If ye be reproached for the name of
Christ, happy are ye, for the spirit of glory and of God rests upon you; on
their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified, 1 Pet. 4.14.

And are we called to glorify our God, then let him have the glory due to his
great and glorious name, for this is a high, and glorious, honorable calling,
above all the glories of the world: above the glory of Kings, Princes, and
Emperors: this is the glory wherewith the Son glorifies the Father, and the
Father glorifies his again: for he has given them his word, and the world has
hated them, because they are not of the world, but are sanctified through the
belief of the truth, which the world hates, John 17.14.

And how did the Son glorify the Father? Was it not in doing his will, and
bearing witness to his truth? And every one that is of the truth hears his
voice; and because we hear his voice and do his will, in bearing witness to
the truth, therefore are (...) hated, persecuted and spoiled by those that are
not of the truth: for he that had the Languages was not of the truth, but said,
What is truth? (Mark that) for the Languages gives not the knowledge of the
truth; but truth was that which he that had the Languages gave sentance
against: And so it is now in all those that believe not in the true light that
shines in their hearts, which gives the light of the knowledge of the glory of
God, in the face of Jesus Christ. All that are in the truth, are in that which
was before the many Languages were, which began at Babel, and, without coming
to the truth, there must end; but being sanctified by the truth, serves the
truth in its place, to manifest the confusion of Babel that is in the curse,
taking counsel and not of the Lord, and making themselves a name in the earth,
these were scattered over the face of the earth.

But the gathering out of the Confusion and the Curse, is in the Name of the
Lord, that confounds the Wisdom and Counsel from beneath, that is earthly,
sensual, and devilish: and the Language is in the Confusion, cannot lead into
the true knowledge of God, and the unity in his Spirit: but the word that was in
the beginning, leads up to the Father, out of the earth where man was driven,
out of the Curse, out of the Tongues and Languages in the Confusion, where man
was scattered, out of the wisdom from beneath, and selfish counsel of his own
heart, out of the names in the fall and alienation, into the Name which is the
power and life of the Son of God, that only knows the Father and reveals him,
Mat. 11.27. (and not Tongues and Languages) but the spirit and life of Jesus,
that the Father has sent into the world to do his will; and where he is
received he is the Covenant of light, and promise of the father to the
Gentiles; to them that receive him (by believing in his light) he is elect and
precious, 1 Pet. 2.7. but unto them which be disobedient (that is, which
believe not) the stone which the builders disalowed, the same is made the head
of the corner, and a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, against which
many have split themselves (who were once high and mighty in the earth) by
disalowing, him that made Heaven and Earth to rule and reign in the Consciences
of his people, whom he calls out of darkness into his mavelous Light.

Who are a Chosen Royal Priesthood, peculiar to the Lord, that he should act
them by his spirit, to show forth the praises due unto his great and glorious
Name? And why should men be so unreasonable as to disalow the Lord of life
(that has quickened our souls) to live in them, and rule in them, and do his
Fathers will, which way or how he pleases? seeing we are not our own, to do
our own will, but are bought with a price, to do the will of him that has
purchased us unto himself, and not to the will of any man in the first nature,
as in things appertaining to God; for there the elder must serve the younger,
for Jacob had the blessing: and we cannot serve two Masters, that is to say,
the Will of God, and the Will of man, when contrary to God; and thus we (who
keep in the innocence, and cannot please men, to displease God) are grievous
sufferers, and some, even unto death, where many thousand hearts are made sad,
and many thousand spirits Mourn in secret.

Oh that ever such wickedness should be upon recod to posterity, that the
harmless innocent people of England should be banished out of their Country
for waiting upon the Lord that has redeemed their souls, and praying to their
God that made heaven and earth. What? a people redeemed by the precious blood
of the Son of God, imprisoned, and banished, and spoiled by their Neighbors
and Countrymen, and yet call themselves Christians? Christ never yet owned any
such, that imprison, banish, and kill their brethren for worshipping their
heavenly father. And dare any that have any fear of God before their eyes, say
we are not Christians? if so, what Christians are you that banish your
brethren? Christ our elder brother never taught you that practice, nor any of
his Apostles or Disciples gave you that example, but on the contrary said and
commanded to love one another; for John says, 1 John 3.10. In this the
children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil; whosoever does not
righteousness, is not of God, neither he that loves not his brother: so it is
manifest in whom the envious nature dwells, that slew his brother because his
own works were evil, and his brothers righteous; and this is the nature of all
persecuters, and such as banish their brethren for righteousness sake, which
you see the Scriptures says are not of God. And can any be so blind, as not to
believe that the Lord will visit for these things, and stretch out his hand
over the Nation in terrible Judgments, that shall overtake all you that put far
away the evil day, and cause the seat of violence to come near? and then how
will you be able to stand in Judgment, w^ Lord shall reward every man according
to his works? and if you should receive the same things at the hand of the
Lord, as we receive from you, would you not think it a sore judgment? then why
cannot you in judgment remember mercy, and think upon the afflictions of
Joseph? for though rewas sold by his brethren for a bondman into Egypt, yet
the Lord was with him, and he became ruler over the whole Land: And though his
sayings pleased not his brethren, for the which they hated him without a cause,
yet the Lord loved him and blessed him with a double portion.

And now the Shepherd of Israel is leading Joseph like a flock; and does not
his ways and sayings please you? what is the matter? is it not because the
ways of the Shepherd of Israel are not as your ways, therefore his sayings are
not acceptable, nor his testimony believed in the mouths of the people of his
flock, and the sheep of his pasture. And wherefore does not his ways please
you? because you love darkness more then light, and the lusts of the flesh more
then the life of righteousness; this is that which is natural to the flesh, and
therefore no new nor strange thing to us, for we know that seed can bring forth
no better fruit, and therefore it inherits not the promise, for the promise is
to the seed that was, and is disalowed of men, that is it that is chosen of God
and precious; for the believing in, and obedience of, we are disalowed and
hated, as our brethren were in former ages (but mark this, ye persecuters of
our age) the hated of men was, and is blessed of God. He that was sold and
separated from his brethren, being tried, was found faithful, upon whose head
the blessing came. Joseph was sold, and Jesus was sold; Joseph had rule over
Egypt, and Jesus over the World, who is become the head of the corner, and
shepherd of the soul, and leads Joseph like a flock, who is the glory of Israel
that shines forth for our salvation, and blessed are they that walk in his
light: which is the way that pleases not the world, that lies in wickedness,
and loves their evil deeds, but is the way that pleases the Lord, which he
has blessed with ^m everlasting blessing, that it should prosper for ever
(...) ones do walk, and the redeemed of the Lord out of a^ (...)

For the Lord our God is one, and his way is one, who has (...) be one sold,
and one shepherd, out of whose hand his sheep shall not be (...) Job. 10.16.
Into whose Fold we witness a gathering (blessed (...) that has gathered us)
and by his eternal spirit of life has quick (...) into a blessed hope, that
nothing shall be able to reanove us, wh^ (...) in this faith. And therefore
what if the Heathen rage, (...) a vain thing, and the Kings of the eart^^
themselves^ (...) the Lord and his Anointed. And what if the (...) blow, and
the storms (o^ the wicked) bear, and the (...) the un^odly swel, and death and
hell combined and take counsel together against us, yet says he that lives for
ever, I have se^ my King upon (...) of Sion, and blessed are all those whose
souls are subject to his Law, that he has with in their hearts, and to his
spirit in their inward parts; for it is the law of the spirit of life, that the
law of the spirit of strife and envy shall never prevail against though it may
be formed and new molded, yet it shall no^ prosper, nor accomplish the end of
those that made it.

And therefore, is there not a cause to take up this my limentation over you O
ye Rulers and Magistrates of England? why will you die, O ye people by (...)
the paths that lead to destuction, when the Lord stretches ^^ch his kind of
mercy to receive you into his covenant of life? why will (...) choose your own
way, and despise the path of peace and rest to yo^^ ^^^ls? and why do you
disda^^ the noble immortal seed, that the father or (...) sown for your
salvation, that, of which except you be born again, your souls perish for ever?
(...) do you flight the leadings and te^ch (...) spirit of truth in the inward
parts (which is the (...) up teachers to (...) selves conformable to your own
(...) ^able to your wills (...) deceive your souls, and one day you shall know
that these things (...), and that you have hated and persecuted your best
friends, even dear friends to your souls; who are (...) willing to lay, down
(...) a testimony to that truth, by which your (...) to be (...).

And the Lord is our (...) that (...) in his truth, that we desire (...)
dest^^^^tion of any, neither in (...) but the good of (...) our enemies might
come (...) be f^^^ed. And (...) of^^^ prayer (...) for (...) may not (...) day
of visitation, (...) that belong to their everlasting peace be (...) to
destruction for ever. And it is not (...) that I have (...) of the (...) to
(...) of God, (...) for (...) the soul. (...) on in the (...) leads (...) that
the spirit of love and life presses to (...) a (...) and reprove the evil
practice, and (...) And (...) O ye (...) not (...) be (...) are (...)

(...), but a sufferes by your (...) Christ Je^^

M. W.


