Universal CHRISTIAN CHARITY, As Comprehending all True Religion and Happiness.

Demonstrated from Scripture and Reason, IN A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT
HONORABLE Lord Chief Justice Treby.

AT THE ASSIZES held at Maidstone in Kent, March the 17th. 1696.

By THO. WATTS Vicar of Orpington, and St. Mary Cray.

London, Printed for Eliz. Whitlock, near Stationers Hall, 1697.

To his ever Honored Friends, Benefactors, and Loving Neighbors.
NOT to insist upon the Public Approbation wherewith this Discourse was
Honored; nor tho many particular Engagements lying on me, thus to appear, and
under so general a Dedication: In Gratitude to you, whose Beneficent Examples,
give life to the Doctrine asserted, I would only thus far declare to the World
thereupon; that wherever any Obligation lies upon a Man, Common Honesty leads
him to pay the Debt; so may this be accepted as an honest Instance of my Duty
and Thankfulness; though it is impossible for me, according to my small Talent,
to discharge the total Sum; Yet would I make this Public Acknowledgments to
be Just and Thankful: For the Apostle make Ingratitude the Compendium of all
Impiety, in 2 Timothy 3. 2. These two words, Unthankful, Unholy. And though in
general all Men, who receive Favors, ought to be Thankful; yet certainly every
single Person has as much right to choose the way of expressing his Thanks, as
he has a Propriety to his Complexion, and Fortunes. Moreover, the truest Notion
of Gratitude, is never to give real occasion that our Benefactor should Repent
that he bestowed his Benefit upon us.

Now, as I would thus live, and behave my self to my Friends; so would I give
none any just occasion to become mine Enemies; but yet, we must look for
Tribulation in an uncharitable World, and Peace only in Christ; and not expect
to fare better than himself, and his Apostles, and the best Christians did
here: How Innocent, Peaceable, or Beneficent soever we may be, we shall meet
with Foes in abundance, and be ever Persecuted with the Virulent Tongues, or
Malicous Deeds of Selfish, Moross, Proud, Ill natured, Angry Wretches, whom I
do heartily Pity and Pray for; as even those, who can Profanely trample upon
things Sacred, Proudly Insult over their Spiritual Guides, and Hipocritically
Devour, or Sacrilegiously Invade the Churches Patrimony, which Jews and
Heathens have abborr'd to do. How Constantly and Faithfully soever we sow our
Spiritual things, in greatest Charity to Men's Souls; yet are we denied the
Grateful, Just, and Meanest Returns, and basely accounted Men's Enemies for
telling them the Truth. But of you my Friends, have I happily Experienced
better: As Charity is your Glory, and will be your Reward. So Prays your most
Obliged Orator,

T. W.

A SERMON.
1 Cor. XIII. 13. And now abides Faith, Hope, Charity; these three: But the
greatest of these is Charity.
THis Text, which affords such useful Meditations for all times, may not
improperly be considered upon this occasion, and in this our solemn
Lent-Season; as it concludes St. Paul's most Noble Description of the sublimest
Grace, and compleatest Virtue, in a whole Chapter which begins with very great
and surprising Assertions, showing, that all Gifts, how excellent soever, are
nothing worth without Charity, to Verse 4. where by Charity must certainly be
understood that grand Principle of true sincere Love both to God and Man,
residing in our Hearts, enlivening our Souls, purifying our Desires, seasoning
our Intentions, and influencing all our Words and Actions; without which, we
can neither think, speak, or do any thing, that will deserve the Name of pious,
good, or virtuous, nor ever become real Christians: Theresore the Apostle
instanceth in these extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, which God was pleased to
bestow upon his Church in the First Ages of Christianity, Verse 1, 2. Though I
speak with the Tongues of Men, and of Angels, and have not Charity, I am become
as sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cimbal. The Gift of Utterance (equal at least
to the Angelical, and far exceeding all humane Eloquence) were the Apostles
first endowed with, when the Holy Ghost actually descended upon them in Cloven
Tongues, like as of Fire, Acts 2.3. wherewith St. Peter converted 3000 Souls in
his first powerful Sermon, Verse 41. which otherwise had been no better than a
loud and insignificant noise, without the charitable Design and Endeavor of
Conversion: And what better are the wittiest Sayings, the most elegant
Speeches, or highest Strains of Rhetoric, without Intention of Good? It Is the
Charity expressed in the Angel's happy Message to the blessed Virgin, that
makes his Salutation renowned, Luke 1.28. Some Persons may please their Humors
with nauseous Flattery, others satisfy their idle Fancies with mere
Flourishes, or tingle their itching Ears with Clamours; and such may raise
Pyramids to their Orators, given them an aerie Exaltation in a popular Vogue:
But how ridiculous and empty is all that, whereby neither the Speakers aim at,
nor the Hearers receive any Benefit. What signifies the most Learned Harangues,
or florid Panegyricks? And what less the windy Sounds, Groans, and
Acclamations, to rouse up Peoples Affections, and set them a-gazing, when their
Understandings are no ways improved, nor their Wills rectified; while all they
are taught, lie only floating on the Surface of the Brain, having no Root, nor
Foundation lower; nothing deep enough laid for the Glorious Building upon the
Heart, in Christian Edification through Love. Ephesians. 4.16. So farther says the
Apostle; and though I have the Gift of Prophecy, and understand all Mysteries,
and all Knowledge; and though I have all Faith, so that I could remove Mountains,
and have no Charity, I am nothing. Thus Prophecy, and the deepest Knowledge in
the Mysteries of Religion, and the Glorious Power of working Miracles, were in
themselves of no more Account than the other; unless well used to a good end;
unless tending purely to God's Glory, and the Salvation of Souls; otherwise
they that have prophesied, and cast out Devils, or done many wonderful Works in
Christ's Name, shall be cast off at last among the Workers of Iniquity, Matthew.
7.22, 23. Whose best Actions are corrupted through By-ends, False Principles,
or Vanity. As again, Verse 3. And though I bestow all my Goods to feed the Poor;
and though I give my Body to be burned, and have no Charity, it profits me
nothing. Here St. Paul asserts the same concerning the greatest Liberality to
the Poor, and Martyrdom it self, the laying down our very Lives, which seems to
be the utmost that can possibly be required of us upon any occasion; the
greatest Love imaginable, as may be supposed from that noted Text, Joh. 15.13.
But yet here it is manifestly implied, (as a late pious Bishop observed
hereupon) that a Man may part with his whole Estate, and his Life too; and yet
that he may want Charity. This may seem a very strange and surprising
Supposition to us, who can see no farther than the bare outside and appearances
of Things; but God, who is intimately acquainted with all the secret Motions
and Imaginations of the Heart, knows, that too often the most specious external
Acts may proceed from a false, or corrupt Principle; and then, though they may be
highly esteemed and magnified in the Opinion of the World, they cannot be
acceptable to him, who is pleased with nothing that does not flow from a
sincere and truly pious Disposition of the Soul: From that Charity, which
arises from the Love of God; which loves him as the Supreme and Original Good,
and loves every thing else for his sake; that admires and adores his infinite
Fullness, and esteems other things as the Streams and Emanations from that
inexhaustible Fountain. When we have not a due regard to this Heavenly Standard
of our Affections, our Love will quickly degenerate into a silly Fondness, or a
covetous Desire, or some turbulent, uneasy, violent, or exorbitant Passion.
But when the love of God rules in our Hearts; when it presides over our very
Thoughts, and governs the most secret and inward Motions of our Spirits, it
will keep all steady and even, in a due Composure, without any Excess or
Irregularity; and I may add, in a constant readiness to do good. Now this is
that excellent Principle of Charity, which is only able to give any real Value
to all other Endowments whatever; and which accordingly is described in the
next place by some of the most genuine and proper Effects of it, to Verse 8. as
that it suffers long; that it is kind, that it envieth not, vaunteth not it
self, or is not rash; is not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly;
seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks to Evil, rejoiceth not in
Iniquity, but rejoiceth in the Truth, or with the Truth: Bears all things,
believes all things, hops all things, endures all things: Thus it includes
Patience, Benificence, Contentment, Humility, Decency, Generosity,
Publick-Spiritedness, Meekness, Temperance, Good Nature, Piety, Devotion,
Truth, Fidelity, Joy, and Compassion, Peace and Union, Faith, Hope, and the
bravest Christian Fortitude, with all the blessed Fruits of the Holy Spirit;
yea, with all manner of Goodness and Morality, to make us both truly wise and
happy. So next, St. Paul commends it from its duration, because that all the
other Gifts and Abilities, how necessary soever they might be for the
propagation of the Christian Religion, etc should yet fail, cease, and vanish
away, as things that should be of no farther use in the other World: But this
alone should never fail, but continue with us for ever in that Blessed State of
Happiness and Perfection, as you may read to my Text, wherein now lastly our
Apostle mentions the three most eminent Graces Faith, Hope, and Charity; but
gives the preference to the last, concluding positively, the greatest of these
is Charity; which is evident from the whole Chapter, as we have thus far
briefly considered it: From whence now to proceed methodically, I shall,

First, illustrate the Words of my Text in short.

Secondly, Endeavor to demonstrate to you this excellent Grace of Charity, as
comprehensive of all True Religion and Happiness, from Scripture and Reason
together. And so,

Thirdly, I shall manifest some grand Obligations to the due Practice thereof,
from the Points of Duty, Gratitude, and Interest.

First, Then consider the Just shall live by Faith, Heb. 2.4. Romans 1.17. We are
purified, sanctified, justified, and saved by Faith, Acts 15.9. c. 26, 18. Romans
5.1. Ephesians. 2.8. But then it must be such a Faith as works through Love:
Nothing else availing in Jesus Christ, Gal. 5.6. Hope is an Anchor of the Soul
both sure and steadfast, Heb. 6.19. And by Hope are we comforted and saved, Rom
8.24. For this were the Scriptures given, that we might have hope, Romans 15.4.
which works Patience, and Assurance unto Life Eternal, Tit. 2.13. c. 3, 7.
Among our Spiritual Armor we are to take for an Helmet the hope of Salvation,
1 These. 5.8. This is our rejoicing, and will be our Glory in the Lord, Col.
1.27. Heb. 3.6. But yet this must be grounded and rooted in Love; and he that
has this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as God is pure; to be like him
in singular Love above all, as becomes his Sons, 1 John 3.1, 2, 3. Again,
Faith is the Substance of things hoped for, the Evidence of things not seen,
Heb. 11.1. which gives us all Assurance, and some Enjoyment of Heaven upon
Earth; affords us some Antepasts of Life and Glory. But here they end at the
Celestial Gate; here is the Accomplishment of our Faith and Hope, while
Charity, the very Bond of Perfectness, uniteth us to the most Amiable the
Divine Nature; while Love wings our Souls into the Regions of Bliss and
Immortality, abides with us there, and happily employs us unto all Eternity.
Thus Charity is the greatest of all Graces and Virtues, as influencing, and
perfecting all, nearest resembling the Supreme Deity, and glorifying our
Natures. For Love is of God, and God is Love, 1 John 4.7. But he that loves
not, knows not God, Verse 8. How can such then hope for Heaven? Or (like the
bold Fiduciary) presume upon Faith, which only works by, and is dead, and
ineffectual without Love, Jam. 2.3, 4. Love, which is the Light that shines
before Men to the Glory of our Heavenly Father in all good Works, Matthew. 5.16.
Love, which is the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.10. and the New Commandment
of the Gospel, Joh. 13.34. The true, Spirit of all, the very distinguishing
Badge, Cognizance and Characteristick of Christ's true Disciples. Which now
secondly, with all that has hitherto been said, may be a sufficient
Demonstration of the Comprehensiveness of this excellent unbounded, universal,
beatifying Christian Charity: Whereto both Scirpture and Reason give such
ample, undeniable Testimonies, as may yet farther appear from many clean
convincing Proofs.

As there is such an Uniformity, and happy Agreement between the Old and New
Testament, that the one seems to be but the Counter-part of the other; or
rather the Gospel is both the Improvement and Fulfilling of the Law; and an
higher advancement of Human Nature than ever it was blessed with, either by its
own Light, or preceding Revelation. So they all concenter together in this one
Grace of Charity, which carries its own Reward with it in a much more real
Sense than the best Philosophers held of Verture. This Charity implies the
whole of Man, both his Duty and Happiness, which the Royal wise Preacher
concludes with the Fear of God, and keeping his Commandments, so to be prepared
for future Judgment Eccl. 12.13, 14. And what is all this, but the plain
Effect, and sure Demonstration of our Love; which our Lord so positively
requires of us, John 14 15. If ye love me, keep my Commandments. In this
therefore does he sum up all the Law, and the Prophets, from Deuteronomy. 6.5. c. 10,
12, 13. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul, with all thy strength, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great
Commandment. And the second (from Lev. 19.18.) is like unto it, Thou shall love
thy Neighbor as thy self, Matthew. 22.37, 38, 39, 40. Luke 10.27. This is more
than all the plain Hecatombs, than all the whole Burnt-Offerings and
Sacrifices, Mark 12.33. Thus Love or Charity includes both all our Divine and
Moral Duties; and makes us most like, and acceptable unto God, who is good to
all, both Just and Unjust, whose infinite Perfection herein, we may happily
imitate, and particularly as your Savior directs us in his great and admirable
improvements of the Law, Matthew. 5. To love our Enemies, bless them that curse
us, do good to them that hate us, and pray for them which despitefully use us,
and persecute us, v. 44. upon reasons following to the end. So has he taught us
to Pray, and to forgive others; or else we must never expect God's forgiveness
our selves, Matthew. 6.14.

And so has he show us, in the Parable of the good Samaritan, to take every one
for our Neighbor that needs our Mercy, Luke 10.30. to v. 38. Whereupon
farther, we are assured of obtaining Mercy, as we are Merciful, in imitation of
our Heavenly Father, Matthew. 5.7. Luke 6.36 This is that Charity that will cover
a multitude of sins. Which makes St. Peter exhort us so earnestly, above all
things to have fervent Charity, etc. 1 Pet. 4, 8, 9. This is the very Life and
Soul of Christianity: This is that solid Principle, which goes through all,
connecting the Duty and Beatitude together, as may be manifest entirely from
our Saviors most excellent Sermon upon the Mount, Matthew. 5.6, 7, etc.
Wherefore this must guide and influence our whole Lives and Conversations, as
we desire to be Wise, Good and Happy.

In short, this Charity is in Religion, like the Rational Soul in the Body, (as
Aristotle defines it) Tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part, Entire in the
whole, and undivided in every Part and Duty; which our uniform constant
Obedience to the Divine Commands, will clearly alone demonstrate: For the
inseparable effect of true Love, is to work an identity of Volition, as the
Schools speak, i. e. to conform our Wills to the Will of the Person that we
love. Now the Will of our God and Savior, is contained in his Laws and
Precepts, which are to it as the Copy to the Original. So our due observance
thereof, does infallibly imply our Love: For the necessary effect of a Cause,
will of necessity follow the being of the true End. It Is upon this Supposition,
that we our selves expect the same satisfaction.

All the Formalities of Respect, and other Offices of Friendship, we account
but as so many designs upon us, where this Love is wanting: In like manner all
other Expressions of our Love to God, though never so plausible to the outward
view, without this natural demonstrative effect in keeping his Commandments
thereupon, are but mere Flattery and Collusion, and have no other intrinsic
Virtue or Goodness in them, than as they are means to this end, and lead as to
the Obedience and Observance of his Laws; as true Love certainly will; which
the common Notions of Mankind can evince, from more particular Effects and
Properties of Love: whereof hereafter. And to give you some brief agreeable
Instances of Duties, both Relative and Personal; which, both Reason and
Experience will declare the happiness attending, as nothing's more delightful
and easy in Practice. For the pleasure and ease of a thing, results from the
agreement between it and the desire; which if we consider narrowly in this
case, we shall find, that nothing can be more adapted, than the Duties of
Religion to our very Make and Constitution, and to our strong impulses after
Happiness. Nor is any thing (I Am sure) more consonant to the best parts of us,
more advancive of our Natures, and more certainly pursuant of our truest
Interests, both Temporal and Eternal. This made the wisest of Men (upon its
Knowledge and good Experience) thus pronounce of that Wisdom, or Religion,
which he so much recommends above all things: Her ways are ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths are peace, Prove. 3.17. and of this we are
assured by a greater than Solomon, our gracious Lord and loving Master himself,
thus encouraging our Obedience to his Laws, Matthew. 11.28, 29, 30. Come unto me
all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my Yoke
upon you, and learn of me, for I am meak and lowly in heart; and ye shall find
rest unto your Soul: for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. Now this is
the Love of God in particular, that we keep (even all) his Commandments; and
his Commandments are not grievous, but undoubtedly very delightful, easy and
pleasant to the faithful obedient Lovers of God and Christ: in meekness and
humility, overcoming the World hereby, 1 John 5.3, 4, 5, And transforming
themselves (through the Holy Spirit of Love) by the renewing of mind, to prove
what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God, Romans 12.2. Who
would not thus Conscientiously and Zealously discharge all his respective
Duties to God, himself, and his Neighbor: as first, in the Religious;
Exercises of Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, Acts
20.21. Of Devout Praise and Prayer: of Holiness; Public and Private Worship;
Reverence of all things Sacred; Decent and Orderly Attendance upon the Divine
Ordiances; the Solemn Administrations of his Word, and Sacraments; which our
Excellent Church most Piously Enjoins, and Celebrates. Secondly, Exercising
Sobriety of Mind and Body, in Spiritual Meekness, Courage and Temperance; to
resist the Devil, subdue the Flesh, and vanquish all the Terrors and the
Flatteries, the Provocations, Dangers, and Temptations of a malicious World;
completing those victorious Graces and Duties of Patience, Modesty,
Self-denial, Mortification, taking up the Cross, and with the most glorious
Passive Valor following the Captain of our Salvation even through a Sea of
Blood, Rom 8.37. becoming more than Conquerors, in Jesus Christ our Lord.
Thirdly, In Righteous Exercises of Justice, and Mercy to all Mankind. Which
Charity, the very bond of Peace, and of all Virtues, Ephesians. 4.3. Engages us all
too, in that golden Rule of do as we would be done by, Matthew. 7.12. And still
endeavoring our utmost to live peaceably with all Men, Romans 12.7. Which, with
solid Piety and Temperance, do only promote and secure the common Welfare of
all. For what would the World be without these, but a Den of Thieves? All the
orderly Societies and Communities of Men, would (without a Metaphor) be so many
Wild Beasts let loose upon one another; the strongest Preying upon the weakest,
and they again, with the advantages of greater numbers retaliating the injury
of the stronger: But where these Rules are Conscientiously practiced, Men's
Rights and Possessions are kept inviolate: The Poor are then favored and
defended by the Rich; and they mutually aided and assisted by the Poor: And all
things Administered in that Peace and Order, that constitutes a Regular and
well-founded Government; which if any will venture to disturb, and to break the
Peace; will dare to injure other Men's Persons, or invade their Properties, etc.
the Sword of Justice (which the Magistrate is not to bear in vain) must be
drawn upon such: Yea, to punish Malefactors, is both Justice and Mercy; wherein
themselves cannot complain of any wrong done them, when they receive their
Reward, the just retribution of their own Demerits. Yet all due care must be
taken of their Souls; and Repentance may plead for Pardon, as the Great Judge
of the World so mercifully condescends to the vilest Sinner.

Thus Rulers are ordained of God, with an irresistible Power, Romans 13.1. to
suppress the Wicked, and protect the Righteous; to Condemn the Guilty, and
Absolve the Innocent. But woe to those that do otherwise, Prove. 17.15. Isa.
10.12. Now this is the Blessing of all Good Government; as particularly to
right the Poor, the Fatherless, and the Widow; and what is all this, but
reasonable Charity; and to do as we would be done by? Even so, are we justly
obliged to speak and act without guile; to be True, Sincere, Upright, and
Honest in all our ways, and dealings, for our common Welfare and Felicity. The
longest day has a night, and the most continued Serenity a full Period; in
which Storm and Tempest, Darkness and Horror succeed. The uncertain variety of
Man's Condition, makes the Application very easy and natural. The longest
Felicity upon Earth is but short-lived, and never fails to meet with an
interruption at last. And in what a wretched condition were the best and
strongest of us all, if left to our selves in our Calamities; if God had not
made Compassion a natural Inclination, as well as a Law: if Men's Consciences
had learned no such Language as Pity; if there were no Springs in Nature to
stir up our Affections, not only to Commiserate, but to be Helpful and
Assistant to one another, I say, without an Obligation to this Virtue, we
should be left alone to struggle with those Diseases, which we often find
enough for our selves and our Friends; and be forsook by our Neighbors in the
greatest Extremities of Oppression, Poverty or Sickness, as the wounded Deer is
abandoned by the Herd. So for Temperance and Chastity, what can be better
Calculated to serve the Interests, and provide for the Safety of Mankind? Which
is notoriously evident from the dismal inconveniences that Excess and
Debauchery bring upon Men. Shortness of Life, and Rottenness of Bones, Pains
and Aches, Diseases and Infirmities are the constant attendants upon the
constant breach of these Commandments; which to practice with the rest, upon
this Principle of Universal Charity, is certainly more easy and pleasant, and
more becoming Rational Souls and Christians, than all the contrary Vices and
Transactions. Wherefore, in love to God, should we abominate all manner of
Profaneness, Irreligion, Perjury, and Sacrelige: In Charity to our selves,
should we avoid all manner of Intemperance and Uncleanness, Pride, Vanity, and
Hypocrisy: And in Charity to our Neighbor, should we abhor all manner of
Injustice, and Unmercifulness, Malice, Detraction, and Covetousness, the Root
of all Evil, 1 Timothy 6.10. Thus a Charitable Disposition will eschew evil, and
do good: Seek Peace with God and Man, and ensue it, 1 Pet. 3.11. will ever
increase it self in all Godliness, and find it truly profitable unto all
things, as it has the promise both of this life, and of that which is to come,
1 Timothy 4.8. Thus is every thing good and happy included in Charity: Charity the
immediate Offspring of Heaven, Man's summum bonum, the Fountain of all
Goodness and Felicity; the Joy of Angels, and Glory of Men: Now, who wouldnot
thus (with Love it self) go about doing good, Acts 10.38. whatever he may
suffer for the same; when God must be obeyed, rather than Man, Act. 4.19. etc.
wherein Love knows no Difficulties, nor fears any Tribulations. He that is made
perfect in Love, being free from all distracting Cares, Worldly Anxieties, or
servile tormenting Fears, 1 John 4.18. Love secures him in the Pious Filial
fear of God alone; and to make him undoubtedly persist (with his loving Favor)
in all well-doing, and contented suffering. Following his steps as called
thereunto, 1 Pet. 21. as in cases of Persecution, happy are they that suffer
for Christ's, or Righteousness sake, Mat. 5. though it is not our Love and
Obedience, but others Hatred and Disobedience, that does us any mischief
thereupon. For all Christ's Love and Commandments are not only consistent with,
but productive of the common Peace and Good of Mankind, and therefore, if all
Men would unanimously obey his Gospel, as they ought, then no body could ever
suffer by it. However, is it not more commendable, and glorious to suffer
patiently for well-doing than evil doing in any case whatever, 1 Pet. 2.19, 20.
and will not Charity rejoice exceedingly in being reviled, and persecuted for
Conscience sake; and even Bless and Pray for all its Slanderers, Enemies, and
Persecutors; when so great a Blessedness as the Kingdom of Heaven will be the
Reward, and everlasting Glory Crowns the Martyr, Matthew. 5.10, 11, 12. Nay, who
would not (upon any account) even through many Tribulations, enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, Acts 14.22. When all, who thus love their God and Savior,
are assured of enjoying that Mysterious endless Bliss and Happiness in the
Beatifical Vision; which can neither be seen, expressed, nor conceived on this
side Heaven, 1 Cor. 2.9. as those Charitable Persons shall be pronounced
Blessed, in the last General Assize of all, by our great Lord and Judge
himself, and joyfully admitted into that Kingdom prepared for them, where
Charity has fed the Hungry, clothed the Naked, visited the Sick, etc. Matthew.
25.34, 35, 36. has relieved the Oppressed, and redeemed the poor Captive and
Prisoner, whether Friend or Enemy. This is Generous and God-like, thus to love
Mercy. This is preferred before Sacrifice, by our Divine Lawgiver; and this
with the Acts of Justice and Piety, (instead of all the costly laborious
Services and Sacrifices of Nature) God has showed thee, O Man, to be good
under the Old Law, Mic. 6.8. as thus the Gospel teaches us to deny
Ungodliness, and Worldly Lusts; and to live Soberly, Righteously, and Godlily
in this present World; looking for that blessed Hope and Glorious appearing of
the Great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ; who will then receive us into the
Arms of Eternal Love; who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
Iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People, Zealous of Good Works.
Now these things we most Charitably teach and exhort, and (as we may too)
rebuke with all Authority; and let no Man despise us, for thus the Love and
Grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared to all Men, Tit. 2.11. to
the end.

So I come in the third and last place, to manifest some grand Obligations to
the due practice hereof, but very briefly, from the points of Duty, Gratitude,
and Interest; which in other things determine our Choice, and Resolution. As
these are main Topics of Persuasion, great Motives to Action, and high
Encouragements to Perseverance against all Difficulties and Obstacles in the
way. So much more should they be to us, in our Charitable endeavors, in this
our Christian Race and Warfare.

1st. Then, we are bound in Duty to the Religious practice of this excellent
Catholic Charity, because it is strictly enjoined us by the Highest, i. e. the
Divine Authority, from whence all Human Power is derived. This is positively
required of us by our Lord, who has most Right to our Love and Obedience upon
our Creation, Redemption, and continual Preservation: which do, World, and the
Devil; which obliges us in Conscience and Honor to continue his faithful
Soldiers to our lives end, and not cowardly Debase our selves, or Dishonor him
by Disobedience, and Neglect of his Almighty Power, like the Reviling
Blasphemous Jews, who thus Crucified the Lord of Life. All Sin is contagious in
its own Nature, but nothing more so, than disrespect to Superiors; as it is
notoriously plain, that the World is apt to follow Example more than Reason in
this case. So fatal to others, as to ur selves, will be our Treacherous,
Rebellious Disobedience. As nothing can be more Dishonorable, Mischievous, and
Ungrateful, which proceeds from that Earthly, Sensual, Devilish Wisdom,
mentioned James 3.15. not regarding the true Wisdom from above (so full of this
Excessive, Universal Charity, the very Temper of Heaven, the Image of the
Divinity) which is first Pure, then Peaceable, Gentle, and Easy to be
entreated; full of Mercy and good Fruits, without Partiality, and without
Hypocrisy; and the Fruit of Righteousness is sown in Peace, of them that make
Peace, v. 17.18. which,

3dly, Shows our Obligations upon Interest, Peace Internal, External, and
Eternal, flowing from this Principle of Charity, is our only real Happiness,
and consequently our only true Interest. Thus for instance, the truly
Charitable Person (beyond all the greatest Heroes of the World) is Master of
himself, has conquered his Passions and corrupt Affections; humbled his Soul
before God, and cast out all Devils by Fasting and Prayer; is Regenerate and
Spiritualized; renders to all their due; is as faithful to God and his Church,
or his Ministers, as to Caesar and the State, matthew. 17.21. c. 22. v. 21.
Wrongs no Man, does good to all, especially the Household of Faith; owes no Man
any thing but Love, Gal. 6.10. Romans 13.8. provides for his own, and uses
Hospitality, 2 Timothy 5.8. 1 Pet. 4.19. depends upon Grace and Providence;
submits patiently and thankfully to the Divine Will in all things; trusts in
the Merits of his Savior, and who obtains his blessed Legacy of Peace, Joh.
14.17. c. 16. So is he secure from the Strokes either of Justice, or Violence.
None but a Tyrant, or Villain indeed, would injure such a Person, who (as one
truly speaks) is so far from the Designs of Dishonesty, etc. that his hands are
obliged to be employed in Charity; and so far from exasperating others by
unruly Provocations, that his very Enemies may expect (because they must have)
his Love; and those that curse him, his Prayers, Matthew. 5.44.

Thus his Life is safe from the Stroke of Justice, and Injustice too, if
Christianity might be admitted to represent unto the Russian the Obligation
that she lays on her Disciples to affront no Man. However, if Barbarity
prevails, he knows to whom Vengeance belongs, and he is not overcome of Evil,
but overcomes Evil with Good, Romans 12.19.21. And if he cannot heap Coals of Fire
on his Enemy's Head, to melt him by Charity into Love and Compassion, if Love
will not beget Love in his hardened Heart; yet (after the Example of our dying
Lord) he will charitably forgive, and interceed for his very Murderers, Luke
23.34. So he bears good Will to, and is in Charity with his most inveterate
Foes, as he cannot be an Enemy to any, but is always a Friend and Benefactor to
Mankind in general, by good Wishes and Prayers at least, where it is not in his
Power to act; thus charitable may the poorest be. So farther, he enjoys the
continual Feast of a good Conscience, and the blessed Peace of Mind both in
Time of Adversity and Proserity; having placed his Treasure, and set his Heart
and Affections upon things above and not below, Col. 3.1, 2. avoiding the
Snares and Temptations of Riches, by doing good with them, 2 Timothy 6.9, 17, 18,
19. And being assured of God's Protection, and Blessing upon the due
Improvement of his Talents in Love and Fidelity; knowing that he shall not be
tempted above that he is able, but in all Trials shall happily escape, 1 Cor.
10 13. So in the midst of Storms and Tempests, Crosses and Afflictions, Wars
and Desolations, he remains unmoved like an invincible Rock upon steadfast
Faith, and Hope in the God of his Love, Psalm. 46. Who will certainly deliver
him from all Evil, the Evil of Sin and Punishment here, and hereafter; as in
all time of Tribulation, in all time of Wealth, in the Hour of Death, and in
the Day of Judgment, when he will be received into the Joy of his Lord, Matthew.
25. Which now sufficiently manifests our Obligations upon Interest, as well as
Duty and Gratitude, to exercise this Christian Charity, or comprehensive Love
in full observance of the Divine Commandments; whch is the only demonstration
of our Love to Christ, that he will accept of: For he only that has his
Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves him, Joh. 14.21. If
therefore (as now by way of Christian Application) we find this effect in our
Actions, we may be sure the Cause is within our Hearts: But if this alone be
wanting, all our Pretenses to Christianity are vain; yea, all other Offices of
Religion, our Prayers, our Repentance, our Confidence our Fasting, our Alms,
are no manner of Arguments of our Love of God, and Christ, because they are not
used as means to this end, which alone can give them the denomination of
Religious Actions; which plainly signifies the vast difference between Real and
Nominal Christians, between the faithful and pretended Lovers of Christ, who
are all known by their Fruits, Matthew. 7.15. If there were no other way to judge
of the Reality of Men's Affections, than the Greatness of their own Pretenses,
there might not be devised a more impertinent waste of time, than in a
Christian Congregation to endeavor to persuade Men to love their God and
Savior. We call our selves Christians after his Name; we build Churches for
his Worship; where we often appear, as on this day, with bended Knees, and lift
up hands to send up our Prayers and Praises to him; if we may be believed, we
hate them that hate him, as though they were our Enemies: We fight his Battles,
and propagate his Religion with the hazard our own Friends and Relations for
his sake. Our Savior's Prophecy ( Luke 12.51. to 54.) has been notoriously
verified through the Christian World; and as much as any-where in this unhappy
Kingdom, where the pretended Love of Christ, and his Religion has set Father
against Son, Brother against Brother, etc. Ver. 53. And this has taken such
entire Possession of our Affections, that has sadly crowded out all Charity for
one another.

But none of these Pretenses are sufficient Proofs of our Love of Christ; nay,
some are the greatest Arguments against it. For take it how we will, he that
pretends to Love God, and hates his Brother, is justly pronounced a Liar, 1 John 4.20. And it holds not only in the case before-nam'd, but in all other
Instances whatever, where our Pretenses to the Love of Christ are not seconded,
and made out by an entire Obedience to his Commands, as himself requires, Joh.
14.15, 21. Ephesians. 1. Moreover, what an impudent Affront is it to him, and
contradiction in themselves, for the Subjects of the Prince of Peace to be
contentious and bloody; as for the Disciples of the holy and immaculate Jesus
to be profane and impure; yea, as too many are, worse than all other People
and Nation: So Christendom is too fatally become the vilest part of the World,
a Sink of all those Abominations, which even Barbarians detest. O the Horror,
and Misery! Thus is Christ smitten in the House of his Friends; crucified by
his Votaries; his seamless Coat divided by his Disciples; his Spouse the
Church's Bowels torn out by her own Sons; Christianity destroyed by its base
uncharitable Professors, and the Gospel subverted by surious pretended Zealots,
whose Condemnation will be the heavier: Whose Judgment now of a long time
lingreth not, and their Damnation slumbreth not: For The Lord knows how to
deliver the Godly out of Temptations, and to reserve the Unjust unto the day of
Judgment to be punished; as chiefly the Unclean, and Rebellious, the
Presumptuous and Self-willed, that fear not to speak Evil of Dignities, 2 Pet.
2. to v. 11. Among those damnable Heretics, who even deny the Lord that bought
them, and so bring upon themselves swift Destruction, 2 Pet. 2. to v. 11, and
so to the end. All which proceeds from the want of this solid Principle of real
Love, or operative Charity.

Wherein how easy soever it is to deceive others, and what is more our selves,
into an Opinion that we love Christ, etc. when at the same time we do nothing
less; or how dexterously soever we can put the Cheat upon the World, and get
the Name of Religious, at so cheap a rate as the Trouble of a well dissembled
Hypocrisy, etc. yet Christ sees the Heart, and will not be imposed upon. God
will not be mocked, Gal. 6.7. Neither will all their Professions, or Devotions,
save such Workers of Iniquity. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the Will of my Father
which is in Heaven, Matthew. 7.21. And, Luke 6.46. Why call ye me, Lord, Lord,
and do not the things which I say? So was he reviled by his Crucifiers.

But what Lord, or Governor, what Parent, or Master, would endure such heinous
Mockeries, and daring Contradictions? Can we think then that the great King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, will bear with the Contradictions of Sinners against
himself forever? No certainly, unless they repent, and amend, and resolve to do
his Will in Love; which must be our principal, if not only Motive to Obedience:
Otherwise, it is no Argument that we love him, if we do it not for his sake who
requires it: And because there can be no other Reason given of our Savior's
requiring this Instance of our Love, but as it is the Effect of that Cause. If
therefore any By-end, or Self-Interest (such as the getting a Reputation in the
World, the driving on of secular Designs, or Worldly Advantages by that means)
be the end of our compliance with Christ's Commands: He has no reason at all to
look upon it as any Argument of our Affection to him, or to reward it as such:
It Is Carnal, or Worldy Policy, and not Religion: It Is the Love of Our selves,
and not of Christ. And as its Motives are Worldly, so will its Rewards be. Such
a Man has nothing else to expect for a Retribution of such Services, but to
attain in the end that for which they were performed; namely, vain Popularity,
and humane Applause. And to what wretched pupose has such a Man been at the
Pains to keep the Commandments, who has thus literally labored for the Wind.
As he is no less faulty, whose Obedience is Peace-meal and Partial. For he that
offends in one point, is guilty of all, James 2.10.

Charity is Universal, and it is this grand Principle which is signified in all
this Discourse, this pure Christian Love, which will surely Direct, Regulate,
and Complete our Obedience, and Happiness. Wherefore let us practice
accordingly; and then God will reward such Love both with Temporal and Eternal
Blessings, as the Scriptures abundantly testifies. God shows mercy unto
thousands of them that love him, and keep his Commandments, Exodus 20.6. he
keeps Covenant and Mercy for them that love him, and observe his
Commandments, Neh. 1.5. the Lord preserves all them that love him, Psalm.
145.20. and we know, that all things works together for good to them that love
God, Romans 8.28. the same are known of him, 1 Cor. 8.3. are without fear, and
may have boldness in the day of Judgment, 1 John 4.18, 19. The Lord has
promised a Crown of Life, and a Kingdom to to them that love him, Jam. 1.12. c.
2.5. and has prepared glorious Mansions, invisible Joys in Heaven for those
that love him, Joh. 14.2. 1 Cor. 2.9. Take good heed therefore unto your
selves, that ye love the Lord your God, Josh. 23.11. and in Love let each one,
both high and low, make Joshua's Pious Resolution, c. 24.15. As for me and my
House, we will serve the Lord: Which how can we Christians refuse, upon
consideration of the Divine, Infinite, Unparalled Love to us? God the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, in whose Name we are Baptized, Matthew. 28.19. Those ever
Blessed Sacred Three in One, who bear Record in Heaven, having so exceedingly,
loved us, and left us United Witness on Earth in the Spiritual Ministry of his
Word and Sacraments, 1 John 5.7 8. all testifying our Redemption by the Son of
Love, v. 9, etc. that only begotten and well-beloved Eternal Son, the
Brightness of his Father's Glory, and the express Image of his Person, by whom
all things were made, and whom all the Angels of God do Worship, Heb. 1.1, 2,
etc. that ever living Word, Wisdom, and God manifest in our Flesh, who thus
alone could satisfy infinite Justice for us, Joh, 1.1, etc. 1 Cor. 1.24, 30. 1 Timothy 3.16. He relieved us in our most forlorn Condition and remediless Misery*
He, beyond all the instances of endearing virtuous Friendship; beyond all the
Examples of Mankind, stepped in between the just Indignation of the Judge and the
Condemned, by substituting his Person in their stead, and suffering the
Execution of the dismal Sentence to them. He descended from the Throne of
Heaven, Miraculously assuming Human Nature, freely offering himself a
Sacrifice, and so died for his very Enemies, by intolerable Tortures, and by
the most Ignominious, Shameful and Accursed Death. He underwent all the
Reporach and Shame, all the bitter Penalties due to Malefactors, by his own
voluntary Act and free Choice, from no other Motive, and for no other end, but
his own Love, and for the eternal Welfare of those wretched Miscreants, who, as
he well knew, already had, and together with their Posterity for ever, would be
repeated Transgressions of the most equitable Laws, ungratefully provoke him
and his Father.

Here is Charity completely admirable, most singular and unutterable. O what
Tongue of Men or Angels can express, what Heart can conceive the unfathomable
depth of this unparall'd Loving Kindness! Thus he died for our Sins, and rose
again for our Justification; and now lives to make Intercession for us,
reigns for ever our Mighty Prince and Savior adorable by all; and will come
again in Glory to Judge, and Reward all according to their Charity, Ma. 25.
Romans 4.25. Heb. 7.25. Acts 5.31. Matthew. 16.27 Now what returns of Love can we
make him? What Obedience ought we to pay him, who has so greatly Merited, even
Purchased us with his own Blood, and laid such irrequitable Obligations upon
us? Who has so wonderfully wrought our Redemption, and rescued us from the just
Vengeance of his offended Father, into a state of Grace and Reconciliation with
him, and possibility of being certainly happy with him and his Father in
another World.

Which (now lastly) is a thing of so mighty concernment to us, that but for
that alone, we had better never have been born; and the greatest Prosperity of
this World could signify no more to our Happiness, than the fatal Finery of
those poor Beasts which the Heathens put upon them before the Sacrifice. The
Frailty and Mortality of our Natures; those cruel Legions of Diseases Death
keeps in pay against us, the instability of our Fortunes, and uncertainty of
all Conditions upon Earth; with the frequent Diseases and fatal Revolutions
attending the most flourishing States; and the fading Vanity of all Sublunary
things, may really cause the Great Solomon's Vexation of Spirit, Eccl. and
embitter all our Felicities here, or rather our Mockeries and Shadows of
Happiness. Nay, upon other Considerations moreover, profess wisely the true
Christians with St. Paul, 1 Cor. 15.19. If in this life only we have hope in
Christ, we are of all men most miserable. But now the assurances which his
Death and Resurrection give us of a future state of Immortal Love and Bliss,
may well encourage and oblige our constant unlimited Charity; and let nothing
separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans
8.35.39. So I conclude with one of our Churches most Comprehensive, Excellent
Collects, for this.

O Lord God, who have taught us, that all our Doing without Charity, are
nothing worth; send thy Holy Ghost, and pour into our Hearts that most
Excellent Gift of Charity, the very Bond of Peace, and of all Virtues; without
which whosoever lives, is counted dead before thee. Grant this for thine only
Son Jesus Christ his sake: To whom three Persons and one God be ascribed, as is
most due, all Adoration, Love, Glory and Power in Heaven and Earth for ever,
Amen.

FINIS.

