A PASTORS LOVE Expressed to a Loving People In a Farwell SERMON PREACHED At
Stephens VValbrook, London. August 17. 1662.

By Mr. THO. WATSON.

Acts 20. 38. Sorrowing most of all for the words that he spoke, that they
should see his face no more. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1662.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
HEre is presented to thy view, the last Sermon of Mr. Thomas Watson that he
Preached to his loving and beloved people of Stephens Walbrook: the Reverend
Author having no knowledge of its publication, I hope will be sufficient
Apology for the Disparity that is in it from his other Works, it being not
published by the same pen, nor adorned with Marginal Quotations suitable to his
other Sermons, thou can not but know there is great difference between
preparing Sermons for the Pulpit, and for the Press, the wisest Master Builder
sees it sometime expedient to beat often upon one and the same truth, that they
may nayl them not only to the ears. but the hearts of their Auditors, and
therefore wonder not if thou meetest with any thing that may look like a
Tautology, since I would rather be guilty of that then to take my own judgment
for leaving out any thing delivered, I should be sorry, if the publication of
this Sermon, which was intended for the satisfaction of all, should prove to
the dissatisfaction of any, however I hope thou will be so candid to lay any
fault in Printing or the like at the publishers door, not at the Preachers. I
have but one request more, and that is, that the Reader would propound as
honestends to himself, in reading it, as I did in transcribing of it, in so
doing I shall be satisfied, and he will be edified,

Thy Friend and Servant. R. M.

2 Cor. 7. Chap. part of the 1. verse. Having therefore these promises, dearly
Beloved, let us cleanse our selves.
IT is the Title I intend by the help of God to insist upon, this sweet
Parenthasis in the Text (my dearly Beloved) wherein you have the Apostle
breathing out his affections to his people; he speaks now as a Pastor, and to
them as his spiritual Children, my dearly beloved. First, here is the Title, my
Beloved; secondly, the Exhortation to holiness, let us cleanse our selves;
thirdly, the means how we should be cleansed and sanctified, having these
promises; It is the first I intend: the Title the Apostle gives to the
Corinthians, his people, his Children, his dear beloved.

Doct. That the affections of a right Gospel Minister to his people, are very
strong and ardent.

There are two things in every Minister of Christ that are much exercised; his
Head, and his Heart; his Head with labor, and his heart with love.

1. His head with labor, the work of a Minister if done aright, is a work
fitter for Angels then for Men. It is our work to open the Oracles of God, even
these sacred and profound things, that the Angels search into. If God did not
help us, we might soon sink under the weight of such a burden.

2. As a Ministers Head is exercised with labor, so his Heart with love, and
Its hard to say which of these two exceed, so it is in the Text, dearly Beloved.

In these words we have St. Paul laying siege to these Corinthians, and
laboring to make a happy Victory, to conquer them with kindness.

St. Paul's heart was a spring of love, his lips were the pipes, the Corinthians
were the Cistern in the which this spring did run. This holy Apostle was a
mirror or pattern of love; to the sinning Corinthians, Paul's Tears did drop;
to the praying Corinthians, his love did burn; holy Paul he was a Ceraphim, his
heart did burn in flaming affections to his people, how many appelations do we
find scattered in his Epistles, that are witness of his love, he tells his
people to whom he sometimes wrote, sometimes preached, 2 Cor. 12. 14. I seek
not yours, but you; he looked more after their souls, then after their silver;
as a tender Nurse cherrisheth her Child with her breast, so did Paul cherish his
people with the breast Milk of the word, 1 These. 2. 7. we were willing to
impart to you our own souls, because you were dear to us, this man of God did
not only Preach his Sermons to his people, but would part with his own soul to
them; such was Paul's affection to his people, that without a complement he
loved them more then his life, Phil. 2. 17. If I be offered upon the sacrifice
and service of your faith, I joy and rejoice with you all, as if he had said,
if it be so that my blood be poured out as a sacrifice, and my death any way
serviceable to you, if it may help forward the strength and comfort of your
faith, I am willing to dye; I rejoice to do it. So full of affection and bowels
was this Apostle, that he could not choose but love his people, although the
more he loved them, the less he should be beloved, 2 Cor. 12. 15. O how did
Paul sweeten all his Sermons with love; If he reproved sin he was angry in
love, he dipped the Pill in Sugar, Gal. 4. 9, 10. how turn you again to the weak
and beggarly Elements -- You observe Days and Monets and times, I am afraid of
you; and see here how he chides their sins, and at the same time courts their
souls; no sooner does he lance the wound, but presently he pours in Wine and
Oil into the wound, so well did Paul love his people, that he would not justly
give any offense to the weakest beleiver, 1 Cor. 8. 13. If meat make my Brother
to offend, I will never eat meat while the World stands, St. Paul was like
some tender Mother, who forbeareth to eat those meats she might, for fear of
hurting the Child she gives suck to; thus you see he was a spiritual Father
made up of love.

And surely Beloved, this affection in some degree is in every true Minister of
Christ (they are full of sympathy and bowels, over whom the Holy Ghost has
made them overseers.)

There are reasons (which I will but glance at) first, why it will be thus, and
secondly, why it should be thus. First, It will be thus for two reasons.

First, From that principle within, which teaches love, grace does not fire
the heart with passion, but with compassion; grace in the heart of a Minister
files off that ruggedness that is upon his spirit, and makes him lovely and
curtious: Paul he once breathed out persecution, but when grace came, this
Bramble was turned into a spiritual Vine, twisting himself about the souls of
his people with loving embraces.

Secondly, From that spiritual relation that is between him and his people, he
is a spiritual Father, and shall we think him to be without bowels, 1 Cor. 10.
15. Though you have ten thousand instructers, yet have you not many Fathers,
for I have begottten you through the Gospel; some he begat to Christ, others he
built up in Christ; does not a Father provide carefully for his child, can a
Father see the bread taken from his child, and will not his heart be affected.
Is it not a grief to a parent to see his child put to suck to a dry Nurse?

Secondly, There should be this ardent love in every Minister for this reason;
Because this is the most likelyest way to do most good, knotty and stubborn
hearts will soonest be wrote on by kindness; fire does melt the hardest mettle,
and the fire of love by Gods blessing, is able to melt the obdurate sinner; a
Barnabas or son of consolation, who comes in a spirit of meekness is fittest to
do a piece of Gospel Chyrurgery, to restore and put such a one in joint again,
that is overtaken with a fault, Gal. 6. 1. so much for the Doctrinal part.

Application in several Inferences.
First, See here the right character of a Gospel Minister, he is full of love,
he exhorts, he comforts, he reproves and all in love; he is never angry with
his people but because they will not be saved, O how loath is a Minister of
Christ to see precious souls (like so many jewels) cast over board into the
dead Sea of Hell? A conscientious Minister would account it an unhappy day if
he should gain the world and lose the souls of his people: He says as the King
of Sodom to Abraham, Genesis 14. 21. Give me the persons and take you the goods.

Secondly, How sad then is it to have such put upon people as have no love to
souls? The work of a Minister is a labor of love. O how sad is it to have such
in the Ministry who can neither labor nor love? they look more at Tithes then
at souls. It must needs be sad with any people in any part of the world who
have such Ministers set over them, who do either poison them with error, or
destroy them by wicked example. How can the Devil reprove sin? How can that
Minister cry out against Drunkenness in his pulpit, who will himself be drunk?
Romans 2. 22. We read that the snuffers of the Tabernacle were to be made of pure
gold, Exodus 37. 23. Those that by their calling are to reprove and snuff off
the sins of others should be of pure gold, that is holy and spiritual. In the
Law God did appoint that the lips of the Leper should be covered, he should not
be permitted to speak the o acles of God, who though he be by office an Angel,
yet by life a Leper.

Thirdly, See here the happy condition of that Minister who is settled among
such a people as gives him abundant cause to love them, happy is he that can
say to his people, in the words of the Apostle, My dearly beloved.

And here let me speak by way of encouragement to you of this parish. I find
St. Paul commending the good he saw in his people, 2 These. 1. 3. We are bound
to thank God always for you brethren, because your faith grows exceedingly. In
imitation of this Apostle let me at this time speak a commendatory word to you;
I have exercised my Ministry among you now almost this sixteen years, and I
rejoice and bless God, that I cannot say, the more I have loved you the less I
am beloved; I have received many signal demonstrations of love from you: though
other Parishes exceeded you for number of houses, yet I think not for strength
of affection. I have with much comfort observed your reverend attention to the
Word preached; you have rejoiced in this light not for a season, but to this
day. I have observed your zeal against error, and as much as could be expected
in critical times, your unity and amity; this is your honor, and if for the
future there should be an interruption made of my Ministry among you, though I
should not be permitted to preach to you, yet I shall not cease to love you,
and to pray for you.

But why should there be an interruption made, where is the crime? Some indeed
say we are disloyal, we are seditious. Beloved, what my actions and sufferings
for his Majesty has been is not unknown to a few of you; but how ever we must
go to heaven through good report and bad report; it is well if we can get to
glory though we pass through the pikes. I shall endeavor that I may still
improve the sincerity of my love. I will not promise that I shall still preach
among you, nor will I say that I shall not; I desire to be guided by the
guidance of Gods Word and his providence, my heart is toward you; you know
that expression, then we shall be laid down shortly as if we were natural^y
dead; and if it must be so, let me leave some Legacies before I go hence. I
cannot but give some counsel to your souls, and I hope there is no hurt in this.

There are Twenty Directions I would leave with you, and I desire you would
take notice of them.

Direction 1. Keep your constant hours every day with God; the godly man is a
man set apart, Psa. 4. 3. not only because God has set him apart by election,
but because he sets himself apart by devotion: Give God his hours every day;
visit God in the morning before you make any other visit: wind up your hearts
to heaven in the morning and they will go the better all day after. O turn your
Closets into Temples, read the Scriptures, the two Testaments of the two lips
by which God has spoken to us, these will make us wise to salvation: The
Scripture is both a glass to show your spots, and a laver to wash them away;
besiege Heaven every day with prayer, thus perfume your houses, and keep a
constant intercourse with heaven.

Direct. 2. Get good Books into your house; when you have not the spring near
you, you will get water into your Cisterns; when you have not that wholesome
preaching that you were wont to have, good books are the Cisterns to hold the
water of life to refresh you. When David's natural heat was taken away they
applied warm clothes to him, 1 King. 1. when you find a chilness upon your
soul, and that your former heat begins to abate, ply your selves with warm
clothes, get these good Books that may furnish you with such truth as may warm
and affect your hearts.

Direct. 3. Have a care of your company, take heed of having any unnecessary
familiarity with sinners. We cannot catch health from one another, but may soon
catch a disease: the disease of sin is very catching, Psalm. 106. 35. I would be
as much afraid to come among wicked men, as I would be to come among them that
have the plague. If we cannot make others better, let us have a care they do
not make us worse. Lot was a miracle that kept fresh in Sodoms salt waters.
Take heed of the occasions of sin; evil company they are an occasion to sin.
It Is observable that the Nazeri^e in the old Law as he might drink no wine, so
he was forbid to eat of the grape wherewith the wine was made, Numb. 16. to
teach us that evil company is the Devils draw net by which he has drawn
millions to hell. How many in this City has been ruinated in soul and body by
evil company, many go from a Playhouse to a whorehouse, and from a Tavern to
Tyburn.

Direct. 4. Have a care who you hear, it is our Saviors caution, Matthew. 7. 15.
Beware of false Prophets. Let me tell you the Devil has his Ministers as well
as Christ, we read in Rev. 12. 15. of a Scrpent casting waters out of his mouth
as a flood, that is, as the learned expound it, Satan by his Ministers and
Emissaries cast out floods of Arian Doctrine to drown the Church. There are
some of that subtilty and wit that have learned the art to mix error and truth
together, and to give poison in a golden cup: Take heed whom you hear, and how
you hear. Be like those noble Bereans, Act. 17. that searched the Scriptures,
your ears must not be like Spunges that sucks in the pudle water, with the
purest Wine. But like the Fan that fans out the Chaff, whilst the sollid grain
abides; you must do like those in Mat. 13. 48. they gathered the good fish
into vessels, and threw way the other. Saints are called Virgins for their
wisdom, they will not let every one defile their souls with error; they have a
judicious ear, and a critical palate, they can distinguish between truth and
error, they can put a difference between meat of Gods sending, and meat of the
Devils cooking.

Direct. 5. Study sincerity, Psalm. 51. 6. thou desire truth in the inward
parts; be what you seem to be; be not like the Waterman, that looks one way and
Rows another; do not look Heaven-wards by a profession, and Hell-wards by your
conversation; do not pretend God, and love sin; counterfeit piety is double
iniquity: O let the heart be upright with God; the playner the Diamond is, the
more richer; and the more plainer the heart is, the more does God valule this
Jewel. A little rusty Gold, is far better then a great deal of bright Brass, so
a little true grace, though rusted with many infirmities, is better then all
the glitterings of hypocrisy, a sincere heart is Gods Coin, and heel give
graynes of allowance.

Direct. 6. As you love your souls, be not strangers to your selves; be much
and often in the work of self examination, among all the books you read, turn
over the book of your own heart; look into the book of Conscience, and see what
is written there, Psalm. 77. 6. I commune with my own heart, set up a judgment
seat in your own souls, examine whether you have grace or no, prove whither you
are in the faith; be as much afraid of painted holiness, as you would be of
going to a painted Heaven. Do not think your selves good, because others think
so; let the Word be the touchstone by which you try your hearts; let the Word
be the looking glass by which you judge the complexion. Of your souls for want
of sincerity many that have lived known to others, have dyed unknown to
themselves.

Direct. 7. Keep your spiritual watch, Mark 13. 37. I say unto all watch, If it
were the last word I were to speak, it should be this, Watch, O what need have
Christians to be upon their watch, the heart is subtle, it will be stealing out
unto vanity, and if we be not careful it will decoy us into sin, we have a
special eye on such persons as we do suspect, thy heart is a very suspicious
piece, have thy eye still upon it, watch it continually, for it is a bosom
Traitor; Job set a watch before his eyes, Job. 31. 1. we must every day keep
Sentinel, do not sleep upon thy guard, our sleeping time is Satan's tempting
time, therefore let not thy watch Candle go out.

Direct. 8. Do you often who are the people of God associate together, Mal. 3.
16. Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another. Christ's Doves
should flock together; one Christian will help to heat another. One single Coal
of Juniper will soon dye, but many put together will keep them burning;
conferrence sometimes may do as much good as Preaching* one Christian by good
discourse, drops the holy Oil into another, and makes the lamp of grace to
shine the brighter. It is great wisdom to keep up the trade in a Corporation.
Christians by meeting often together and setting good discourse on foot, keeps
up the trade of godliness, which else will decay and soon be lost. Is not the
Communion of Saints an Article of our Creed? and yet do not many live as if
this Article were blotted out. Natura lists have observed the sumpathy of
Plants, they say some Plants will grow better when they grow together, as the
Vine and the Elm, the Olive and the myrtle; this is true in Religion, Saints
who are trees of righteousness, thrive best in godliness, when they grow
together.

Direct. 9 Get your hearts screwed above the World, set your affections on
things above, Col. 3. 3. we may see the face of the moon in the Water, but the
Moon is fixed above in the firmament; so though a Christian walks here below,
yet his heart should be fixed above in Heaven; their is our best kindred, our
purest joy, our Mansion house to have our hearts, above is the best and
sweetest kind of life; the higher the Bird flies, the sweeter it sings; and
the higher the heart is raised above, the sweeter are its joys. The Eagle that
flies in the Air, is not stung with the Serpent. Those who have hearts elevated
above this lower region of the World, they are not stung with the vexing
vanities of the World, but are full of joy and contentment.

Direction 10. Trade much in promises, the promises are great supports to
faith; faith lives on a promise, as the fish lives in the Water; promises are
both comforting and quickening, they are the very breasts of the Gospel: As a
child by sucking at the breast gets strength, so faith by sucking at the breast
of a promise will get strength as the Eagl. Promises are the bladders to keep
us from sinking, when we come into the Waters of affliction: They are a sweet
cluster of Grapes that grow upon Christ the true Vine; there is no condition we
can be in, but there is a promise to it, the promises like manna suits
themselves to every Christians pallat.

Direct. 11. Live in a calling: Ierom gave this advice to his friend, that he
should be always employed, that when the Devil came he might not find him idle;
sure I am, the same God that says remember the seventh day to keep it holy,
says, six days shall thou labor, the great God never sealed any warrant to
idleness; an Idle person is a shame to his profession, 2 These. 4. 11. Some we
hear work not at all. Solan made a Law that Idleness should be punished, and
Cicero says of an Idle person, that he draws his breath but does not live,
that is in a calling he is not useful, a good Christian acts within the sphere
of a calling.

Direct. 12. Join the first and second table together; piety toward God, and
equity toward your Neighbor. The Apostle has put these two together in one
verse, Tit. 2. 12. that you should live righteously and godlily; righteously
that relates to morality, godly that relates to piety and sanctity. Always
remember that every commandment has the same divine stamp and authority as the
other have. I would try a moral man by the duties of the first Table, and I
would try a Professor by the duties of the second Table, some pretend faith,
but they have no works; others have works but they have no faith: Some pretend
zeal to God, but they are not just; others are just, but they have not one
spark of zeal. I beseech you, if you would go to Heaven, turn both sides of the
Table, the first and second Table, join these two, piety and Morality. As we
blame the Papists for blotting out the second commandment, let not the Papists
blame us for blotting out the second Tables.

Direct. 13. Join the Serpent and the Dove together, Innocence and prudence,
Matthew. 10. 16. Be wise as serpents, and harmless as doves; we must have
innocence with our wisdom, else our wisdom is but craftiness; and we must have
wisdom with our innocence, else our innocence is but weakness; we must have the
harmlesness of the dove, that we may not wrong others; and we must have the
wisdom of the serpent that others may not abuse and circumvent us: Not to wrong
the truth by silence, here is the innocence of the dove; not to betray our
selves by rashness, here is the wisdom of the serpent; O how rare is it to have
these two united, the Dove and the Serpent; the Dove without the Serpent is
folly, and the Serpent without the Dove is impiety.

Direct. 14. Be more afraid of sin then of suffering; a man may suffer and yet
have the love of God, but cannot sin but presently God is angry; sin eclipses
the light of Gods face; in suffering, the conscience of a man may be quiet; as
when the hail beats upon the tiles, there may be music in the house; so when
there is suffering upon the body, there may be that music in the conscience;
But when a man fins presumptuously he loses all his peace. Spira when he had
abjured his Faith became a terror to himself, he could not endure himself; he
protested he thought Cain and Judas in Hell did not feel the terror that he
felt. He that will commit sin to prevent suffering, is like a man that lets his
head be broke to save his helmet.

Direction 15. Take heed of Idolatry, 1 John 5. 21. Idolatry is an image of
Jealousy to provoke God; It breaks the Marriage knot asunder, and makes the
Lord disclaim all interest in his people. The popish Religion is not defended
by strength of Argument, but by force of Arms. Keep your selves from Idols,
and beware of superstition which is the Gentleman Usher to Popery.

Direction 16. Think not the worse of Godliness because it is reproached and
persecuted. Wicked men being stirred up by the Devil, do maliciously reproach
the ways of God: Such were Julian and Lucian. And I observe, though men would
be godly on their Deathbeds, yet in the time of their living they revile and
hate Godliness. But think not the worse of Religion because it is reproached by
the wicked. Suppose a Virgin should be reproached for her Chastity, is Chastity
ever the worse? If a blind man should jear the Sun, the Sun is never the less
bright. Godliness is the Angels glory; and shall we be ashamed of that which
makes us like Angels? There is a time coming when the wicked would be glad to
have some of that Holiness which they now despise, but they shall then be as
far from obtaining it, as they are now from desiring it.

Direct. 17. Do not think the better of sin because you see it in fashion:
Think not the better of impiety because most walk in this crooked way. The
multitude is a foolish argument; I say it again, the multitude does not argue
the goodness of a thing. The Devils name is Legion, which signifies multitude.
Hells road is at this day full of Travelers: Esteem not better of sin because
most go this way. The multitude is erroneous says Ierom: The pleading of the
multitude will not hold at Gods Bar, when God shall ask you, Why did you
profane my Sabbaths? why were you drunk? why did you break your oaths? Lord,
other men did so? God will say, seeing you have sinned with the multitude, you
shall go to Hell with the multitude. I beseech you be tender of your souls, and
walk Antipedes with the times; if you be living fish swim against the stream,
Ephesians. 5. 11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness.

Direct. 18. In the business of Religion serve God with all your might, in
Ecclesiastes 9. 10. what so ever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy
might; for there is no work in the grave whether thou art going. This is the
argument why we should do all we can for God, and serve him with all our
strength, because the grave is very near, and there is no praying, no repenting
in the grave; our time is but short, therefore do as David, who danced before
the Ark of God with all his might; act vigorously for God in your spears, you
must not only say a prayer, or read a prayer, but pour out your prayers
before God, do not only love God, but be sick with love to God, in Lev. 6. 13.
God would have the coals put to the Incence, and why so? to signify the heart
should be inflamed in affection to God, your prayers should go up with the
flame of devotion. I confess Hell may be taken without storm, you may drop into
Hell with ease, but it is all up Hill to Heaven; in the 11. of Mat. and the 12.
the violent take it by force; heaven is not taken but by storm. Do not we see
the wicked active for the Devil and their lusts* and shall they take more pains
for hell then you do for Heaven?

Direct. 19. Do all the good you can to others; God has made every creature
useful. The Sun has not its light for it self but for us, the fountain runs
free, and the Mirh drops from the Tree; every creature does as it were deny it
self for us, the Beast gives its labor, the Bird gives us its Music, the silk
worm gives us its silk; has God made everything useful for us, and shall not we
be useful to one another! O be helpful to the souls of others, and supply the
wants of others. Jesus Christ was a publiqueblessing in the World, he went
about doing good, Act. 10. 38. we are all Members of one body pollitick, nay
are not we all members of one body mystical, and shall not every Member be
useful for the good of the body! that is a dead member that does not
communicate to the body. Be useful, that when you die there may be a miss of you
when you are gone; many live so unfruitful, that their life is scarce worth a
prayer, or their death worth a tear.

Direct. 20. And so I have done; every day spend some thought upon eternity. O
eternity, O eternity, all of us here ere long, it may be some of us in a few
days or hours, must lanch out into the Ocean of eternity. There is no
prospective Glass, says Boethius, by which we can see to the end of eternity;
these sands can never be numbered, this line can never be measured; eternity it
is a condition that is everlasting; you that are godly you shall be
everlastingly happy, you shall always be sunning your selves in the light of
Gods countenance, but the wicked shall be always suffering, ever lying under
the scalding droping of the wrath of the Almighty; eternity to the godly, it is
a day that has no sun setting; eternity to the wicked, is a night that has no
sun rising. The serious thoughts of eternity would be a great means to promote
holiness, the fore-thoughts of eternity would make us be very serious about our
souls. O my soul thou art shortly to fly into eternity, a condition that never
can be reversed or altered. How serious would this make us about the
heaven-born soul, Zeuxes being asked why he was so long in drawing a Picture?
Answered, I am now painting for eternity. How fervent would that man pray that
thinks he is praying for eternity? how holy and circumspect would that man live
that thinks upon this moment hangs eternity?

Secondly, the thoughts of eternity would make us slight and con^emn all the
things in the World, what is the world to him that has eternity always in his
eye; did we think solemnly upon eternity, we should not over value the comforts
of the World, nor over grieve at the crosses of the world. First I say we
should not over value the comforts of the World; comforts they are sweet, but
they are swift and soon gone; the pleasures of the World are but for a season,
just like Noah's Dove that brought an olive branch in her mouth, but had Wings
presently to fly away. Secondly, as not to over value, so not to over-grieve
at the loss of them; what are these sufferings, they are but for a while, 1
Phil. 5. 10. and what is that to eternity? our suffering may be lasting, but
they shall not be everlasting; our greatest afflictions are not worthy of that
Eternal weight of glory.

And thus my Beloved I have given you twenty directions for your precious
souls, I beseech you treasure them up as so many precious jewels in the Cabinet
of your breasts, carrying these about you may prove an excellent antidote
against sin, and to preserve zeal, and keep it flaming on the Altar of your
hearts. I have many things more to say to you, and I know not if God will give
another opportunity; but I beseech you let the things I have spoken abide upon
you.

FINIS.

