DAVID'S TESTAMENT Opened up in Forty SERMONS, Upon II. Samuel 23.5.

Wherein the Nature, Properties, and Effects of the COVENANT of GRACE are
clearly held forth:

By that Eminent Servant of JESUS CHRIST, Mr. Alexander Wedderburn First
Minister of the Gospel at Forgan in Fife; and thereafter at Kilmarnock in the
West.

Psalm. 25.14. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear Him; and he will
show them his Covenant.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, (...) to
His most Excellent (...).

To The Truly Noble MARGARET, Countess of ROTHES.
Madam,
BEfore that Pious and Eminent Person, The Duchess of Rothes, Your Ladyships
Renowned Mother, was by Death Removed, I designed, according to the Intention
of my Husband (who is now entered into the joy of his Lord) to Dedicat this
part of his Labors to her Grace. And now when these Papers, by advice of
Faithful and Godly Ministers, are to be exposed to public view, I judged it my
duty to pay that Respect to Her Graces's Memory, as to prefix your Ladyships
Name thereunto (which no doubt, if my Husband were alive, he himself would have
done) which I the more confidently adventure upon, as that I know your Ladyship
to be the Lively-portracture of the Graces and Virtues of your Noble, and now
Glorified Mother, and to be of such Wisdom and Prudence, Humility and
Self-denial, as to excuse any thing of unsuitableness, that may be in this, for
one of my Station and Sex. But being unwilling to Allow your Ladyship any
diversion from the perusal of the Book it self, I shall only pray, that the Lord
may preserve your Ladyship, and carry your hopeful Sons through the hazard of
Nonage, and as they are Heirs of two Noble Families, to make them shine as
Stars of the first Magnitude, amongst the Peers of this Nation; and begs leave
to Subscribe my self,

Madam, Your Ladyships singularly and perpetually obliged Servant, H. T. Relict
of Mr. Alexander Wedderburn.

The Epistle to the READER.
Christian Reader,
I Shall not detain thee, by expatiating to the commendation of the Author, and
this part of his Labors; For the Author, his Memory is still savoury, to all
who knew him, especially to those of the Shires of Fife and Air, where first
and last he exercised his Ministry; And no wonder, for as he was well versed in
Folemick Divinity, so was he a singular Casuist. He had the Tongue of the
Learned to speak a Word in Season to the Weary; He knew when to Lance, and when
to pour in Oil, when to dispense a Corrosive, and when a Cordial; in a word, he
was both a Son of Thunder, and a Son of Consolation. As for these Sermons, I am
hopeful they will commend themselves, to all who have senses spiritually
exercised, such will not quarrel at the Simplicity and Plainness of the Style,
he used not in preaching, to put the Scaffold above the Building, no, his
design was not to tickle the ear, but to reach the heart; had he purposed to
commit these Sermons to the Press, and survived to review them, they had been
more polished, but now they come out to public view, as they dropped from his
mouth, and as he preached them, without Alteration or Addition. It is true,
many have written both well, and at great length, on this sweet subject; but it
is so fertile, that it will still afford new matter, to such as arrest their
Spirits, to pore on it; Thou will find here, the Securities that the Covenant
affords, the Properties of it, that it is Everlasting, Sure and Ordered in all
things; as also the Superstructure, This all my Salvation, and all my desire;
And the sweet Harmony and Concord, that is betwixt God's Promises, and his
Providence, well spoken to; But besides these, I suppose, thou will find the
duty of Personal Cove^anting, and the Method and Order that is to be kept, in
laying clain, to the Promises of the Covenan^, as fully handled here, as any
where else.

Reader, I would earnestly entreat thee, now when all things earthly are so
uncertain; to make sure this Covenant Relation to God, that he is thy God, and
thou art His, by a perpetual Covenant, it is a greater Say, to be able to say on
good ground. My God; than to say, My Kingdom; I have been often affected with
some sort of Compassion, at the reading the two Testimonies that two Heathen
Monarchs, gave to the Majesty of God, Nebuchadnezzar, Daniel 2.47. and 3.28,
29. and Darius, Daniel 6 26, 27. But alas! poor Souls none of them could say,
My God, but the God of Daniel, and of the three Children.

To persuade to make sure Covenant Relation, know, it is this that gives
confidence in our addresses to God, and that Faith, gets readiest gripping on,
in all thy straits, I shall only instance three exigencies among many.

First, Under outward Tossings and Pressures from men, David 1 Samuel 30.5, 6.
is in great distress, and no wonder, the Amalekites had spoiled Ziklag, had
carried away his two wives, and his own men had threatened to stone him, in his
great distress, so verse 6. expresses it, he encourages himself in his God.
When he is in the wilderness of udah, hounted by Saul, Psalm. 63.1. It Is here
again refreshing, O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee; and when
enclosed in the Cave, Psalm. 142. and verse 4. All refuge fails him, no man
cared for his soul, this refreshes him, v. 5. Thou art my refuge, and my
portion, in the land of the living.

Secondly, This Relation is eyed by Faith, and pleaded under desertion, Psalm.
22.1. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Psalm. 88. A psalm wholly spent
in sad complaints, and yet verse 1. Heman begins pleading Covenant Relation, O
God of my Salvation; Isaiah 49.14. But Zion said, the Lord has forsaken me;
there unbelief and sense gets the start, but Faith as it were at the same
breathing eyes this Relation, My God has forgotten me.

Thirdly, This Relation is refreshing at approaching Death, when the Cisterns
of all created comforts will be broken, and may be, the old Temper turns a keen
Accuser, as in this Text, the matter of the ensuing Sermons, 2 Samuel 23.5.
Although my house be not so with God, etc. David's house was not so with God as
it should have been; Amnon had defiled it with incest, and Absalom with
unnatural Murder, Rebellion and incest, and David himself with Adultery and
Murder, and yet over the belly of this guilt, he can draw comfort from this
Covenant Relation, and venture the weight of his Salvation, on this so well
Ordered Covenant, and Sure. I might instance more Cases, but I spare.

It Is this Relation that makes all God's Attributes refreshing to us, He who is
a God of Salvation is My God, Psalm. 68.20. and Psalm. 79 9. The Church pleads
for help on this Relation, Help us, O God of our Salvation: He who is
All-sufficient, who is Faithful and True, whose Mercies exceed all Dimensions,
is my God; Yea, it will make his Justice, which of all his Artributes, does
most terrify a sinner, under accusations of guilt, it will make it refreshing,
He who is Just is my God, and his Justice requires not a double ransom, being
satisfied in my Cautioner Christ Jesus, 1 John 1.9. If we confess our Sins, He
is Faithful and Just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness.

I shall close with an excellent Sentence of Reverend Mr. Dods to this purpose,
and it is this, a person who can satisfactorily answer two Questions, needs
never be discomposed in what ever exigency, and the Questions are, Quest. 1.
Whose art thou? I am Gods by a Covenant Relation. Quest. 2. Where art thou? I
am about my Duty. These two were refreshing to Paul, when near to be
shipwracked, Acts 27.23. The Angel of the Lord, whose I am; There his
Covenant Relation; and whom I serve, there he is at his duty.

That He who alone carries that title, The God of all Consolation, may make
these Sermons refreshing to thee, is the prayer of

Thy well-wisher, more willing, than able to promove thy Comfort. W. T.

SERMON I.
2 Samuel 23. verse 5. Although my house be not so with God; yet he has made
with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure: for this is
all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


I Purposed this Summer, if the Lord give time, to have handled some of
Chr'ists select Names, but have now resolved before I come at them, to handle
the Doctrine of the Covenant of Grace; The secret of the Lord is with them that
fear him, and he will show them his Covenant, Psalm. 25. I shall in the entry of
it beg of God, that he may be with us, in going through the handling of it; and
I obtest you, as ye would not have his Covenant a Witness against you,
seriously to ponder, and to feed, by what ye shall hear spoken about it. I could
not find one verse in all the Bible, wherein the nature, properties, and
effects of the Covenant, were more briefly summed up, than in this verse,
Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me an everlasting
Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure, etc.

For understanding the meaning of the words the first verse of the Chapter
tells us, that they were the last words of David the Son of Jesse, imitating
Jacob, Genesis 49. and Moses, Deuteronomy. 32. making their Testaments, and showing what
were their greatest encouragements when they were dying; he remembers some old
experience of God toward him, that he was the man whom God had anointed, and
lifted up, and made the sweet singer of Israel, and v. 2. The spirit of the
Lord spoke by me; he likewise encourages himself in Christ, whom he describes
in the fourth v. I confess there are some Interpreters apply the words in the
fourth v. to Rulers, because of a word in the third v. but the current of
Interpreters understand them of Christ, And he shall be as the light of the
morning, when the Sun rises, even a morning without clouds, as the tender
grass springing out of the earth, by clear shining after rain: a notable
similitude, expressing the sweetness, brightness, and fruitfulness of Christ,
so that after he has mentioned these two great encouragements in the verses
that we have read, he pitches on that which secures all his other
encouragements: David had a very sinful house, there was murders in it, and
incest in it of Amnon and Tamar, there was adultery in it, and lying, and a
number of evils, and when he was a dying, he reflects on what had been in his
house, and the result is, my house has not been so with God, Although my house
be not so with God, yet he has made with me an everlasting covenant, etc.
Which words, though some refer them to Christ, who yet was not sprung out of
the root of Jesse, but was to be exhibit in the fullness of time, yet I rather
take them, as relating to David's personal case, as ye shall hear when I come at
it.

This being briefly the scope of the words, I will not be able in the work of
this day, to enter on them, or to take them up in particulars: I will only take
one general Observation from the scope of the words, and I look on it as a
notable Porch and Introduction to all the Sermons, that are to follow on the
Covenant, and of the order and sureness of it, and all the rest of the
ingredients mentioned in the Text. The Observation is this, That one of the
greatest of encouragements at death, and when a man is about his last words,
is, to have an interest in the everlasting Covenant. These are the last words
of the Son of Jesse, and there is his greatest encouragement, My house is not
so with God, yet he has made with me an everlasting Covenant, etc. Whether we
understand by house, the house of his Body, or of his Family, or of his
Kingdom, as some do, or whether we take it in all the Three, he had grounds of
fear from them all, but the great encouragement, when he is speaking his last
words, is taken from his Interest in the everlasting Covenant: This Observation
is the very scope of the words, when all things are bidding us adieu, and when
we are quiting all our Charters, and Lands, and leaving them to others to
possess, an interest in the everlasting Covenant is a great encouragement then;
it is remarkable, Heb. 11. and two last verses of the chapter, All these having
obtained a good report through faith, received not the promises, God having
provided some better thing for us: Mark here now, what was the encouragement of
all these Cloud of Witnesses, when they came to die, it was their Faith in the
Covenant, they died in Faith, and obtained a good report through Faith, not
ha-obtained the Promises, but believing it.

For clearing of this, I will Premise two things to make way to the confirming
of it. 1. An interest in the everlasting Covenant is of absolute necessity,
through the whole course of our Life; there are four or five things will evince
this. 1. The Covenant is the Light and guide of a Believers Life, Isai. 42.6.
and 7. v. I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thy hand,
and keep thee, and will give thee for a Covenant to the people, for a light to
the Gentiles, to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners, and them that
sit in darkness, out of the prison house. Mark how the two go together, he is
given for a Covenant and a Light; for if it were not upon the account of the
Covenant, we would not know how to set down one step in our way to God. 2. The
Covenant and an interest in it, is the door by which we come to know, that we
are translated out of nature into a state of grace, therefore Isaiah 56. Every
one that keeps the Sabbath from polluting it, and takes hold of my Covenant,
them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of
prayer; and their burnt-offerings and sacrifices, shall be accepted on mine
Altar. And Ps. 50.5. Gather my Saints together to me, that have made a Covenant
with me by sacrifice. In effect the closing with the Covenant is our effectual
calling. 3. The Covenant is the Foundation of all the Relations, and
Consequences of all the familiarity grounded on these Relations, betwixt God
and his People; The ground why we call him my God, and my hope, my rock, my
husband, my Lord, the ground of all these Relations and Familiarity founded on
them is the Covenant. 4. The Answer of all Challenges, nay of all Temptations,
comes also from the Covenant; Ordinarily Challenges proceed from the Law, and
the Threatenings and Curses of the Law: The best answer to them is, we are not
under the Law, but under Grace, which is in effect to say, we are under a
Covenant of Grace. Lastly, (...) great help to perform Duty is the Covenant, if
we be commanded to repent, to pray, to believe, to suffer, we must always run
to some Promise of the Covenant for strength; and it is remarkable, there is no
Command in all the Law, but in the Covenant there is some Promise relating to
that Duty, and strength for performing of it is holden out in the Promise; for
in effect, if we look after Light, or clearing in our effectual calling, or if
we would lay a sure Foundation, of either an interest in, or familiarity with
God, or hold off Temptations, or Challenges, or have strength to perform
Duties, it is necessary in the whole course of our Life, that we know our
interest in the Covenant; but this is especially necessary at death: which
before I yet confirm, I will add one Caution, which is this; That it may fall
out, that a person with whom God has made an everlasting Covenant, ye^ they
may be unclear about their interest in the Covenant, when they come to die,
they cannot say among their last words, the Lord has made with me an
everlasting Covenant; among many things there may be these Three, that may have
influence, in the darkning of ones interest in the Covenant at Death, and when
they are about their last words, 1. When one has been given much to doubting in
the whole course of their Life, readily God may give them, though not a Hell
for it, yet he may give them a flood of it at their Death; he loves to write
their sin on the chastisement, therefore often as Adonibezek said, when they
caused to cut off his Thumbs and his great Toes, threescore and ten Kings,
having their Thumbs and great Toes cut off, gathered their meat under my Table,
as I have done, says he, so has the Lord required me, Judges 1.7. Frequently
the sin of folks Life, he loves to write it on their end; so he does with
Pharaoh, when he desired to be honored by him, he has this sin among many, he
would have all the Males of the Children of Israel drowned, and Moses also was
laid out to be drowned, until Pharaoh's daughter found him; and what is his
end, he is drowned in the red sea, the great predominant sin of his Life is
written on his end; when the life is full of doubtings, readily like Pharaoh,
he loves to write their sin on their chaslisement. 2. One may be darkened about
their interest in the Covenant at death, because of some un-repented guilt, and
however that guilt shake their interest in the Covenant, it may shake their
clearing about it; often at death it comes to be as it was with Joseph's
Brethren, when he is giving order to bind them, and they looked for nothing but
death, all that is come on us us, say they, because we heard not the cry of our
Brother. It Is observed, that we never read a word since the day that he was let
down into the pit, that any of them was challenged for it, and when they are in
Egypt, they cannot discern Joseph to be their Brother, nor can they have any
hope from him; the reason is, they had not repented for letting him down into
the Pit, readily un-repented guilt has great influence on the doubting of ones
interest in the Covenant at death; however David was guilty of Murder and
Adultery, yet he penned the 51 Psalm, and had his bones broken for it,
therefore at death he can say; the Lord has made with me an everlasting
Covenant, etc. 3. One comes to be darkened in their interest in the Covenant,
when either by Gods providence, or their apprehension, there seems to be an
inconsistency with the Promises of the Covenant; take for instance Josiah,
there is a special Promise made to him by Huldah the Prophetess, when he sends
to her, after the reading of the Law, (thou shall go to thy grave in peace,
before the captivity come on) who would have thought that Josiah would die in
Battle, and be killed by Pharaoh-Necho in the valley of Megiddo, after he had
such a Promise: Take again for instance the fifth Command, Honor thy Father
and thy Mother, that thy days may be long upon the land, which the Lord thy God
gives thee. And yet many are taken away in the strength and vigor of their
youth, they can hardly reconcile the Providence and the Promise, or then it is
so in their apprehension; our discouraged Spirits at Death, are like these that
look through black spectacles, we misconstrue Providence, every thing appears
black through these Spectacles, while it is white. Now readily one of these
three, either some un-repented guilt, or some Providence at Death, that seems
not to agree with the Promise, or the absolute Soveraignity of God, may produce
a great cloud about ones interest in the Covenant, when they are at their last
words; yet notwithstanding of both these Cautions, the point holds firm, that
it is a great encouragement at death, especially to be able to assert an
interest in the everlasting Covenant.

To confirm this in general I will speak a word to these three, 1. I desire ye
may take notice of the Tenor of the Covenant 2. Take a view of the knowledge of
an interest in this Covenant; and 3. I shall consider both the Covenant, and an
interest in it, as trysting with death, and a Believers last words, and these
three will discover what a privilege an interest in that Covenant is, when
it is discerned at death. First, Take a view briefly of the Tenor of the
Covenant, 1. The Covenant is a Transaction betwixt God and man, about man's
greatest concernments, it concerns his Soul, and that is the choicest part of
him, it concerns his Eternity, nay the Covenant, as ye will hear, it concerns
two Worlds, this present World, and that which is to come, for godliness has
the promise of this Life and that which is to come; the Covenant concerns the
Soul and the greatest interests of the Soul, it is only these Covenanted, that
can reach the Souls interest; he was indeed a fool that thought he could tell
his Soul good news, on the account he had his Barns full, Soul, take thee rest
for thou have enough laid up for many years. It was good news to his Ox or his
Ass, but to tell it to his Soul, he was a fool, and the Scripture terms him so;
for it is only these covenanted things that concern the Soul. 2. Take notice,
that infinite wisdom has contrived the Covenant, to be the only way of
Convoyance of interests, the great interest of the Soul, the justification of
it the Adoption of it, the Sanctification of it, the fellowship of it with
Jesus, the glorifying of it eternally, they come in to the Soul no other way
but by the Covenant; they that talk of meriting for it, or working for it, or
buying of it, they do not understand what they say; the Covenant holds out the
greatest interests, and the only way of attaining them, and coming by them, is
in the Covenant way. 3. Not only does this Covenant hold out the greatest
interest, God cannot make greater promises than he has made to the Soul, he
cannot promise greater things than Himself, and there is no other way for
attaining them, than by the Covenant. So in the third place, The Covenant gives
sufficient security for them, to speak with reverence, God becomes a Debtor by
virtue of his Covenant; I confess there are many Divines that say, they like
not the word, that God should be debtor to Man, they think it below his Glory,
and Majesty, yet they cannot deny, but he is a Debtor in a twofold sense. 1.
He is Debtor to his own faithfulness, If we believe not, yet he abides
faithful, he cannot deny himself; it is not said, if we believe not, he cannot
deny us, but if we believe not, he cannot deny himself, he is Debtor to
himself. 2. It Is not denied, but he is Debtor to Christ, for all the Promises
of the Covenant are first made to Christ, and through Christ they come to be
ours, as ye saw a man that makes over his inheritance to his Son, and the Son
marrying a woman, it comes to be the woman's through the Son, she has right to
it, because of marrying the man; the Father is principally, if not properly
Debtor to Christ, for all the promises of the Covenant, and he becomes Debtor
to us, and our right to them is like the Woman's Right, though the Father did
not make over the Right first, and principally to her, but to the Son, yet she
has a Right to them, because of marrying the Son: some may scruple at that, he
is a Debtor to us, but he is both a Debtor to his faithfulness, and to his
Son, so that our Right to the Promises comes to be unquestionable, and as fully
secure, as if God were a Debtor to us; and if he after the promises, he must
both deny himself and his Son; and O! what a mercy is it in such a strait as
death is, to have the Promises in so great assurance. Now taking up the
Covenant in these three respects, O! what special encouragement must it be at
death, when all things are bidding us adieu, to have our great interest by such
a way of conveyance, so secured, as the Father must both deny himself and his
Son, before our Right to them be contradicted.

Secondly, Our privilege to have an interest in the Covenant at death will
appear, if ye take notice what the knowledge of an interest in the Covenant is:
I deny not, but there may be an interest in the Covenant, God may have made a
Covenant with us, and we know not of it, yet consider what a privilege the
knowledge of an interest in the Covenant is, and I will open this in three
things, 1. The knowledge of our interest in the Covenant, in that which renders
it useful for us, in all the commanded Duties of the Law; take for instance, if
ye be called to believe, or love God, which is the sum of the Law, the ready
way a Believer has to perform this Duty is to search out some Promise, and to
lay it before God; but unless they know their interest in the Covenant, with
what cheerfulness and confidence can they go to the promises: I will not say,
as I find a certain Divine say, I thought it a hard word, that a person to love
Christ that is not in Covenant with him, is like a woman lying with another
woman's husband, it is a kind of adultery, to love the person ye are not in
Covenant with; but yet the great encouragement to improve the Promise, in order
to performing duties is, to know the Covenant to be ours, otherwise with what
confidence and hope, can we plead the promise of help in Prayer. 2. The
knowledge of our interest in the Covenant is exceeding useful to bear off all
temptations, the great answer to challenges and fears is, we are not under the
Law but under Grace; the truth is, as a Divine observes, the most part of our
temptations and challenges, they come from the Law, the threatenings, the
curses, the commands of the Law, but the Tempter brings not our Bond against
us, he charge^ a Believer with a Bond, that he is not liable to, and the great
Answer we have to them all is, we are not under the Law, but under Grace; that
is the way to bear off challenges, when he presses with such a Debt, thou have
broken all the precepts of the Law, and thou art liable to all the curse^
thereof; we may Answer, thou have taken the wrong Bond; for we are not under
the Law, but under Grace. 3. The knowledge of our interest in the Covenant lets
us see ou^ duty; there are a number of Duties, that we are called to do, that
ordinarily we lay quite by, because of the want of the knowledge of our interest
in the Covenant, such as rejoicing in God, delighting in God, and they are the
duties that are likest Glory, and yet for all the commands given about them,
because of the want of the knowledge of our interest in the Covenant, we
neither can rejoice, nor delight in Him.

Thirdly, That at all times, and in all cases, the knowledge of our interest in
the Covenant, is most necessary at death, when like David we come to speak our
last words; it is true, it is necessary through the whole course of our life, but
never more necessar than at death, especially if ye take death up under a
twofold formality. (1) Death is the thing that parts us and all other things,
a man then quites his inheritance, by death he loses his legal right to it, so
that if there were a possibility he could come back again, he would find that
death had taken away his propriety to it, death has taken away the propriety
from Lands, it loses the relation to the Husband, to the Wife to the Children;
it parts all, a man then must give up all his Writs and Lands to another, and
his Right to them will be as legal as if they were made over by Disposition; O
how refreshing will this be then, that God shall be theirs, and glory theirs.
(2) Death, as it dissolves all unions and relations made for lifetime, it takes
away a man's Right to his Inheritance, the Woman is no more bound by the
Marriage covenant to her Husband, death has loosed the Contract, so death
comes as a curse, it was inflicted in the beginning as a curse, when God cursed
the Man and the Serpent; now a title to this Covenant, makes the thing that was
a curse a blessing; it is now, Blessed are they that die in the Lord; and all
things are yours, and ye are Christ's. (3) Consider death as it is the
March-stone betwixt time and eternity, we stand as it were on the March-stone
when we are going to die, we are going from the one in to the other; now a
Title to the everlasting Covenant, when we stand on the top of the stone, and
bids adieu to Sun, and Moon, Husband, and Wife, to Children, to Lands, and
Possessions, to bid them all adieu, and claim to an interest in the Covenant,
and to all the privileges if it, what a special encouragement is this? when a
man is making his Testament, he puts in nothing to himself, his Lands and
Possessions must go to others, or to his friends, and he has nothing to
himself; it is remarkable, Jacob when he was a dying, he calls all his Children,
and gives them all Legacies, when he was making his Testament, but he puts in
something for himself, in one little verse in Genesis 49. Lord, I have waited for
thy salvation; so that if ye will take a view of the Covenant, as it contains
the great concernments of time and eternity, and what a privilege it is to
have an interest in it; he that made us out of nothing, might have commanded us
all duties that he has commanded, and annexed no more, but if ye do not these
duties, I will eternally damn you, and cast you in hell, and ye shall drink of
the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, so long as I am God; but so condescending has
grace been, that God has been content to transact thus Covenant-ways, and
among the rest ye have this, if any keep my Commandments, he shall have my
peace, my pardon, nay more, he shall have my self, nay more, he shall have my
Son, and my self for all eternity: now, to have a Title to this everlasting
Covenant, when we are giving up with all our Lands and Possessions, and death
is loosing all Relations, and when we are meeting with that, which is a curse
in it self, then to be able to say, yet he has made with me an everlasting
Covenant, etc.

SERMON II.
2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house he not so with God, yet he has made with me
an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is all my
Salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


THese are the last words of David the son of Jesse, the sweet singer of
Israel; many excellent Psalms has he penned, and many sweet songs had he sung,
but like the nightingal, that they say sings sweetliest before his death, he
reserves this song to be sung among his last words; Although my House be not so
with God, yet he has made with me an everlasting Covenant, etc. I proposed
this general Observation from the scope of the words, That the great
encouragement at death, and when we come to speak our last words is, an
interest in the everlasting Covenant. I confirmed this from the tenor of the
Covenant, the advantages of an interest in it, and from the trysting of these
two together with the time of death, I will only clear one Question, and so
apply this point.

Quest. It may be Questioned, Is not Christ the great encouragement of the
Soul, when we come to speak our last words and why do we ascribe this to the
Covenant? I thought it necessary to clear this in the entry of this noble
Theme, which I will do with these two considerations.

Answ. 1. It were a very great injury to take from Christ, and give to the
Covenant what is his due, all the luster of the Covenant is like the Moon that
borrows its light from the Sun, the Moon would be but a dark Planet, except
it had light derived from the Sun, so all the luster and excellency of the
Covenant flows from Christ.

And I will open here a fourfold reference that Christ has to the Covenant.
1. He was the Purchaser of it, for as much grace as there is in the Covenant,
there is not a promise in it, but it is bought, and bought at the full value;
how free soever it be to us, they were not so to our Cautioner, but all the
promises of Peace, of Pardon, of Sanctification, they stood him the price of
his blood, and so he is the Purchaser of the Covenant. 2. He was the Mediator
of the Covenant, he treated it, and in effect drew the Articles of it; the
Father when the Covenant was in treating, he knew he had to do with fools, that
could not, nor had no skill of their own writ drawing, the Son was the fit
person concerned in both parties, therefore he has a liberty from the Father,
to draw the Articles of the Covenant as he pleased, which he did in one of the
strangest ways, he satisfies the Father, and abundantly satisfies us, and it
was difficult to satisfy both Parties, but he took the difficulty on him,
therefore he is called Heb, 12. Among the many honorable names he gets in the
Bible, he gets this, Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant. 3. He is the
surety of the Covenant, Heb. 7. In so much as he was the surety of a better
Tastement, he is the Surety, the Cautioner of a better Covenant; Therefore I
will offer two things in reference to this, 1. He is the Cautioner for our part
of the Covenant. 2. For the Fathers part of the Covenant, it is well Observed
by one, he had to do with a party that had three desects, when he made the
Covenant, First, that were Dyvors, and not responsable, and therefore behoved
to have a Cautioner, Secondly, they were witless, and had no skill to draw
their own Writs, and therefore left it to the Son to draw the Covenant.
Thirdly, they were unbelievers, and readily would not take him at his word,
therefore he wrote the Covenant in the blood of his Son, and gave him to be
Executor of all the things contained in the Covenant, and that he had promised,
and is in a manner Surety for him, therefore ye have Christ often telling his
Disciples, that they needed not doubt of his Fathers part of the Covenant, for
he had given him all power in Heaven and Earth, for performing and
accomplishing the Covenant, so he is Surety for us.

Quest. Ye will ask, what has he under taken for us? I will have occasion to
speak of this afterward, but I will tell you two things he has undertaken?

Answ. 1, To get our consent to the Covenant, all that the Father has given me
shall come unto me, that is to say, they shall embrace the Covenant; indeed
this was a great undertaking, and that he may be true to that trust, he sends
his Word to reveal the Covenant, his Rod to press it, his Spirit to persuade
to embrace it. 2. He has undertaken to pay all our faillings, otherwise the
Father could not deal with us, for we are Dyvors; and Adam when he was perfect,
the Father knew in the state of innocence, what it was to trust man without a
Cautioner; so he undertakes to the Father, that we shall give our consent, and
for any failling or transgression, he shall be comptable for it, and it shall
be on his score.

And lastly, he is the Substance of the Covenant, he is the marrow, the very
marh of the Covenant, therefore all the promises of the Covenant are nothing
else but the execution of his three Offices; all the promises of pardon, and of
peace, are the execution of his Priestly Office, all the promises of teaching
and guiding, are the execution of the promises of his Prophetical Office; all
the promises of ruling defending, and subduing our enemies, are the execution
of his Kingly Office; So all the promises of the Covenant, are but Christ,
representing himself as King, Priest and Prophet of his Church; So to take from
Christ and ascribe to the Covenant, would be very injurious to God, for he is
the Purchaser, the Mediator, the Surety, and Substance of it. Secondly, to
Answer the Question, the doing of this is no injury to Christ, to say that when
we are at our last words, the great encouragement is the Covenant, no more than
to abscribe to the Rays of Sun, or the pype or conduit that convoyes the water
from the fountains, that we are warmed with the Rays of the Sun, or that we
are Quenched by the Water, that comes from the pype; for this derogats nothing
either from the Sun nor from the Spring so this derogats nothing from Christ,
to say that our great encouragement at death comes from the Covenant, for
Christ is the Spring, and the Covenant is the Conduit that convoyes the water
from the spring; and Christ is the Sun, and the Covenant is but the Rays that
comes from the Sun, both its heat and its Rays comes from this Sun? and this
is necessary in two cases, 1. To show that sometimes in desertion when he
hides, or withdraws, or frowns, all the Promises, and all the Ministers, nay if
Angels should Preach, they will not prove conducible for an outgate, or for
scattering terrors; the reason is, the pype cannot communicate water without the
Spring, and the Rays cannot communicate heat without the Sun; it is remarkable,
2 Kings 4. when the Shunamites child died, the Prophet Elisha sent his servant,
and his staff, but the child remained dead, until the Prophet came himself: so
the Covenant, and all the Promises abstracting from Christ, if they were in the
mouth of Angels, cannot be an encouragement, until he come himself,
conferences and discourses bringing reasons, convincing reasons, from the
Covenant, from the freedom, from the fullness of it, will not bring one from
desertion, until he come himself.

On the other hand, It Is necessary to rebuke them, that catch a Promise of the
Covenant, and will feed upon it, and say, they will come to Glory, and God his
made a Covenant with them, and God has made Promise to them, and yet has no
interest in Christ, it is even as ye saw a man coming through a Garden, and he
claughts a Branch of an Apple Tree, and he goes and lays it in his Chest, and
expects he will have Fruit of it in the Spring; But the Branch cannot bring
forth Fruit, except it abide in the Root; so what we say of encouragement among
our last Words from the Covenant, it derogats notthing from Christ, more than a
man should glory, of such an Apple Tree I plucked Apples, it derogats nothing
from the Tree; for abstract the Branch from the Root, it will bear neither
leaves nor Apple; so the point holds true, that the only encouragement when we
are going to die is from the everlasting Covenant,

Use. 1. For Application, First, Is this the great encouragement when will be
at our last words, and we will be there ere it be long, an interest in the
Covenant, it serves to reprove those who are seeking their encouragament
elsewhere, some take their encouragement in Life and Death from the World
(Soul, take thee rest, thou has enough laid up for many years as one observes
well, he might als well laid down a Promise for his body to feed on, as to lay
down enough for his Soul to feed on: some has common convictions, some has
mora^ qualifications, and possibly some go a little higher, but al^ these seek
their water our of gutters, and come not to the right Barrel for the wine; the
great encouragement is the Covenant, and an interest in it.

Question. Before I go any further in this Use I will clear the practical
Question, how shall a Person know, and by what Rule^ shall they try, if they
make their great encouragement to be the Covenant of God? Answer, For opening
this a little I desire you may take notice, that the Covenant takes in two
things Promises and Duties: now if we would try, if the Covenant will be our
great encouragement, or if we make it our great encouragement, we must first
cast an eye to the Promise, and ^^en to the Duty. 1. Then, for the Promises,
the design of ^^em being to exalt Grace and Christ, a Person may examine ^^d
find, if they bring in their greatest Consolation from the ^ovenant, in these
Three or Four Cases.

First. When they are cheerful, not so much on the account ^f the possession of
promised Mercies, as on the right to the Mercy; there are many indeed if they
get sense, and if they ^et the accomplishment of any Promise, they presently
are ^eady to be much cheered against Death and Terrors, ay but ^emove that,
they can lay no weight on the Covenant it self; ^t's indeed a desirable thing,
to have our hand full and the ^ensible accomplishment of promised Mercies but
when Persons ^ant that Possession, and they lay no weight on the Covenant ^t
self, and on a right to it, that is to bring in your consolation from your
Enjoyment, rather than from the Covenant. ^t's remarkable, Song 2. The Bride is
in a deserted case, and what has she to keep up her heart under all desertions
in that Chapter, My Beloved is mine, and I am his; Her right to the Covenant,
and Interest in it, even when there is a cloud betwixt him and her, makes her
sing, and in that she is encouraged: So that when we have no enjoyment to crack
of, but readily Discouragements from the want of them, then to be cheerful, it
looks like one that brings in their Consolation from the Covenant of God. 2ly.
When one can, nothwithstanding of guilt, be comforted from the Covenant, this
proves a great evidence of ones making the Covenant their great encouragement
many a time; and no wonder, Guilt is a humbling thing, no wonder it fill the
Soul with Terrors from God, for he abhors it, yet when one can, notwithstanding
of Guiltiness, if the Temptation and the Challenge they meet with, say, thou
have broken this Command, and a Second, and a Third, and there us not one of
them, if God pitch on it, but God may condemn thee for; go and tell the
Tempter, ye take the wrong Bond, I am not under that Covenant, I am under a
better Covenant, where the Debt is to be required of the Surety, and my work is
to go to him for pardon, when Challenges and the smell of Guiltiness makes them
not cast away their hope, but tell the Tempter, it is not your Bond, there is a
Pardon to be gotten on the account of the Righteousness of another; That is one
Evidence, that thou bring in thy Encouragement from the Covenant, according
to the design of the Covenant, when notwithstanding of the want of Sense from
the Covenant thou sticks b^^ it. 3ly. They rightly improve the Covenant for
Encouragement that sometime take their guilt, as an Argument to press on Go^
the accomplishment of the Promise, the thing that chases on^ from him, as
Peter, Depart from me, for I am a sinful man^ yet he hangs by the Covenant, and
will make it an errand t^ run to him, and an Argument to press it on him, Psalm.
14 4 (...) I said, Lord, be merciful to me; heal my soul for I have sinned
against thee; Nay more, Psalm. 25. pardon mine iniquity, and hi^ Argument is,
for it is very great. What kind of reasoning i^ this? Any would think, of all
the impertinent grounds to brin^ to God this were one, but take right measures
by the Covenant^ it is no Antinomian principle, Tho your iniquities were as
scarle^ they shall be white as wool, though thou have played the harlot with
many lovers; It Is not we, but the Mediator has put in these things in the
Covenant, and paid the Price abundantly above the value of them. 4ly. One
comes to evidence their Encouragement to come in from the Covenant, when they
make use of providence always with a reference to the Covenant; all Providence
are by them looked on always with a Reference to the Covenant: Now there are
Four Influences^ that a Believer will find in Providence encourage men for if
ye measure Providence by the Covenant. 1. The Covenant is a key to open the
Mystery of the Providence, readily ye may come under a Lash or a stroke from
God, and be a^ that Rebecca was at, If I be so, why am I thus? The Covenant
will open the Providence, ye will find that in Faithfulness h^ has corrected
you, ye will find, that ye could as easily want your meat as a Rod, if he be
faithful to his word. 2dly. I^ Evidences the Wrath and Curse of the Providence
to be removed, one is laid low, and another back by a Fever, or a Consumption,
but they have Dregs and all, for they have no Interest in the Covenant: But for
thee who art interested in the Covenant, the Cautioner as to thee, in the
Covenant, has sucked out of all their Cups; he that brings in his Consolation
from the Covenant, he first takes the Covenant as a Key to open the Providence,
and then he sees that all the Poison and Gall that was in his neighbors Cup,
is sucked out by the Cautioner of the Covenant, is a noble way to keep up hope
under the darkest Providence: was there any so darkened as Abraham was? The Lord
seems to be very kind to him, he converses with him, and he promises, I will
give thee Seed, and in thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed;
and the next day he bids him go to Mount Moriah and offer his Son Isaac, the
Seed of the Promise, in a burnt offering unto the Lord; would any body have
thought, who would take such a way, one day to make a Promise, and another day
to cast it down? he took it not as one casting away his Promise, for he knew
that he was faithful that had promised, therefore he went and put his hand to
the knife to kill him: So when we take Providence, and look on them with a
respect to the Covenant, we have a Key to open the Mystery of the Providence;
and if ye would have a sure Rule to try, if ye be bringing in your consolation
from the Promise, and from the Covenant, try how much ye can rely on the credit
of a Promise against Providence, sense, challenges for Guilt, and
notwithstanding of them all, to cleave to a Promise. But 2ly. They that would
try, if they bring in their encouragement from the Covenant, they must also
look to the Command; these things would appear a plausible Doctrine, and an
Antinomian would embrace them all, to hear a Minister preaching that against
sense, and all the darkness of Providence, there should ^e adherence to the
Covenant, but there must be an eye to she commanding part, and a Person is
bringing in his encouragement from the Covenant, that does these three things
from the commanding Part. 1. Every Command has a suitable Promise, and ay when
he has a call to obey the Command, a Believer has also a call to run to the
Promise; wherever ye are ^alled to pray, if two or three were met together in
Christ's Name, if ye were visiting a Sick Person, or if ye were going about your
own particular case to God, If ye have a call to ^he Duty, ye have likewise a
call to the Promise, which is neces^ar to be observed; and the neglect of it
makes many heartless ^uties when we labor to bring out of our own Gifts the
quali^^cations of the Duty, we bring forth the things that is not ^^ere been;
wherever ye can instruct, that God puts such a ^uty on you, let it be to do, or
to suffer, the same call from ^^e Command, calls for the Promising Part of the
Covenant, and ^e is not rightly improving the Covenant for Consolation, that
^^ns not to the Promise, when he has a call to the Duty, like a ^^an rowing a
Boat, if ye roll with one Oar, it will go continually about, and make no
progress, but if ye roll with both the Oars, it makes the Boat go even, and
makes swift progress; so when we go to the Commanding Part without the
Promising Part, we roll but with one Oar. 2ly. He uses the Commanding Part of
the Covenant for his encouragement, that is, he is as tender of his Obedience,
as he is tender of his Comfort: It is a Question some Divines move, whether is
Sanctification or Consolation must necessary? All determine that Sanctification
is necessary for our being, but Consolation is only necessar for our well
being; we may go to Heaven, and have very little of comfort, but we cannot go
to Heaven without Sanctification; and he is rightly laying the Foundation, to
have the Covenant his encouragement, when he comes to his last Words, that is
minding the commanding Part, and duties in the Covenant, as well as the
promising Part, nay that is rather bound to the commanding Part, than the
promising Part: for we may go to Heaven without consolation, but we may go to
the Pit if we want Sanctification. 3ly. He uses the commanding Part of the
Covenant for his encouragement, that minds the whole Commands o^ the Covenant,
and is not partial in the Commands of the Covenant: he that is partial in the
Commands of the Covenant, do as a man that goes into a Garden, and he plucks a
Flower here and another there, and passes by the rest; no, we must have:
respect to all the Commands, whether ye be Master or Servant Lands-lord or
Tennent, Buyer or Seller, the Commands of the Covenant must regulat you in your
Familles, in the Mercats, i^ your change-houses, in your work, and in your
Shopes, and in all the things that ye go about; and he that would have the
Covenant his encouragement, must roll the command the Promise together, and
must be as tender of the command, as o^ the Promise, and must have a respect to
all the commands; an^ he that can make use of the Covenant in all these
respects, whether he have sense or not, such a one, when he comes to hi^ last
words, and must be quiting with all his Relations, and a^ his Lands, and
Chartors, he will have a special ground to sin^ David's Nightingale song, The
Lord has made me an everlasting Covenant, etc.

Use 2. But there are other two Uses yet remaining, the 1. (...) this, To
encourage Believers to learn to make use of the covenant, make more use of the
covenant than ye do, I know it is the ground of despondency and heartless
worshipping of God either we believe not, or we do not improve the Covenant,
and how many are there guilty of both, when they come in straits, and when
there is a command from God, or a Cross from Men; they are ready to go, like a
Woman with her hands on her Loins, they cannot sing, that the Covenant is full,
and sure, and free.

Question 1. I would excit thee O Christian with three Questions about it, 1. I
ask you, is there any thing out of the covenant that ye would have in, or is
there any thing in that ye would have out? No, there is not one Syllable; I
like the Observation some has made of the Covenant, if we had been altogether,
and had all our heads laid together, there is not one Syllable out that should
have been in, and in that should have been out; what is there, what disease,
what condition of Life, if thou were acquaint with the Covenant, that thou
would not find abundantly satisfied within the Covenant? So that we may say of
it, as that word, Song, 7.13. At our gates are all manner of pleasant things,
new and old, which I have laid up for my well Beloved. Some take that as
relating to the Covenant, are there not all manner of pleasant Fruits to be
found in the Covenant; but I ask thee, what aileth thee? is there any thing out
of that thou would have in, or in that thou would have out? is there any case
or difficulty but this Covenant will satisfy it? why then is your countenance
sad? But 2ly. Ye will say, the Exception runs not against the fullness of the
Covenant, but against the freedom of it, there are many conditions in the
Covenant, say ye; but I tell you, there is no condition in the Covenant, but
one, even such as if a Man were going to marry a Woman, and she should say, I
am poor and has no Tocher-good; he will tell, that shall not hinder the
marriage; but says she, I am black; but am fair, says he, and will make the
fair through my comeliness; but says she, I will not marry thee, except thou be
content to give me leave to be a whore; the truth is, the Covenant is so
ordered in the point of freedom, it is not our blackness, or poverty, that
hinders it; they have no ground to except against the marriage, but because the
Bridegroom will not give them liberty to be a whore; no, he has drawn it in
these terms, that all bygones shall be bygones, and fair play in times to come;
Thou have played the whore with many lovers, and see whom thou have not layen
with under every green tree, on every high hill, yet return unto me; let the
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thought, and he will
abundantly pardon. But 3ly. Ye will say, your consolation is houghed without
the sureness of the Covenant; I will only say this, God may indeed act contrair
to the Covenant of nature, and yet not be unfaithful; he may make the iron to
swim, he may make the moon go back ten degrees, and the Sun stand still, he may
make the Babylonish Fire, not to burn the three Children that were cast into
it; but if he should alter one Article in the Covenant, or not accomplish one
Promise in the Covenant of Grace, he behoved so deny Himself and his Son, for
he is become Surety in the Covenant, and all power in Heaven and Earth is
committed to him, to execut the Articles of this Covenant; for it is a in a
manner written with his Sons Blood, and so why go ye with your hands on your
Loins, ye that have any Title or interest in the Covenant; for it is both Full,
Free and Sure.

SERMON III.
2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me
an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure; and this is all my
salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


I Took from the scope of the Words the last day, one Observation, and handled
it in two Sermons, That the great Encouragement at Death, was an Interest in
well ordered and sure Covenant. What was said of that, I will not repeat now,
but I come particularly, to make some entry on the Words, and in the Work of
this day I shall consider them in this mould and method, and ye have in them
these five things. 1. Ye have the the nature of the thing, which supports David
when he was at his last Words, it was a Covenant, he is supported by a
Covenant. 2ly. Ye have the Parties Transacting in this Covenant, God and me,
God has made with me a Covenant. 3ly. Ye have the properties of this Covenant,
and they are Three, it is everlasting, it is ordered in all things, and it is
sure; Three remarkable Properties. 4ly. Ye have the Superstructure, or that
which Da^^^ builds on this Covenant, that has these Three Properties, a (...)
two things he builds on it, First, his Salvation. Second (...) satisfaction to
all his desires, And this is all my salvation, and (...) my desire, The Lord
has made with me a Covenant, and (...) everlasting, it is ordered in all
things, and it is sure, an^ build on it all my Salvation, and all my desire.
5ly. Ye ha^ the Anticipation of two Objected against Gods entering in Covenant
with David, one upon God's part another on his part, ^^nother on his part.
First for David's part he was a sinful M^^ guilty of Murder, Adultery, and
Lying, and many thin^^ and he had Incest in his house, would God make an
everlasting Covenant with the like of him? Another Objection might h^^ been
made, God crossed him, and Providence looked not li^^ such a Covenant. To remove
these Two Objections, ye ha^ Two Altho's in the verse, There is one in the
beginning of t^^ Verse, another in the end, Although my house be not so with God,
(...) although he make it not to grow, so these Two Altho's remove two gr^^^
difficulties, that might be brought against the Consolation of t^^ everlasting
Covenant; ye may see here a large Field and a Marrowie, that I resolve to dwell
on possibly longer than on any o^ Verse in the Bible, and I beseech you, not
only pray for help, (...) carefully to observe, what shall be said, either of
the Covenant or Personal Covenanting, or of the Properties and Grounds (...)
Encouragement, all my desire, and all my salvation.

To begin with the First of these, the nature of the thing which supports David
at his last Words, it is a Covenant, the word (...) the Hebrew Berith, though
all agree to render it Covenant, y^^ there are many differences about the Root
of it, some derivi^^ it from one word, some from another, it answers to the
Gre^^ (...), which we have translated in the Scripture-sense Testament, the
Covenant and Testament being one thing, so the o^^ and new Testament, they are
in effect on the nature of them, the old and new Covenant: but I resolve not to
dwell on it in the general, I will only take this Observation, and so far as I
can w^^ through it, follow it in the work of this day.

Doct. The Observation shall be this, That the Consolation of (...) Believer,
comes not from a Command, nor from a naked Promise, b^^ it comes from the
Covenant. The Lord has made with me a Covenant, it is not said, the Lord
commanded me a Covenant nor is it simply, the Lord has promised me, but the
Lord ha^ made with me a Covenant.

Before I come either to Confirm or Improve this Truth practically, there are
two or three general Considerations I must give (...), to open and be a Key
unto what ^s to be spoken on this ^^^a^: it is necessar ye know first, what a
Covenant is, Heathens, ^^ristians, Lutherians, Jesuits, and and Protestants,
have ^^itten large Tractats of the nature of a Covenant.

^t is necessary, that I glance a little at the opening of four things, (...)
all agree in to make up a Covenant and the four laid to^^ther make up the
Definition of a Covenant, 1. In a Covenant ^^ere must be distinct Parties, a
man may make a Promise or ^^^ws his alone, binding himself, but he cannot make
a Covenant alone, a Covenant necessarly supposes distinct parties; ^^ither find
we in Sacred or Eccesiastick, or profane Histori^^, mention of any thing, that
ever went under the name of (...) Covenant, but on supposed distinct Parties.
2ly. A Covenant supposes an agreement betwixt their distinct parties, the ^^ties
treat and they agree on some Articles and Heads, and ^^th of them come under
conditions; it is true, there are Covenants of exact Justice, and there are
Covenants of Grace, and ^^cording to the nature of the Covenant so is the
Agreement, ^^d the condition of the Covenant, but there is nothing more
^^cessary and essential, to the making up of a Covenant, than ^^o Parties
agreeing on such and such Conditions and Terms. (...). A Covenant supposes an
Obligation on both Parties, to the ^^nor of the Agreement and Condition, for in
effect there ^^nnot be a proper Covenant, but it induces an Obligation and
Bond, suppose it be either a Despotick Covenant, as they call (...) or suppose
it be a Covenant betwixt Master and Servant (...) suppose it be a Covenant for
Traffic, or for Marriage, suppose it be but a Covenant of Friendship, yet it is
an Obligation (...) both Parties, on the Terms on which they have agreed, and
^^th of them become engadged to the Articles of the Agreement, (...) virtue of
the Covenant. 4ly. Ye would notice, that of all ^^ligations the Obligation of a
Covenant is most sacred; there^^re it is well observed by some, the light of
nature, nay the ^^ry Scriptures themselves, they cannot devise a more
in^^^lable ty, than the ty of a Covenant, the great reason is, ^^en among
Heathens, when they transacted Covenants, they ^^uld not only draw them in
writ, and seal them with lifting (...) their hands, but sometimes they would do
it, with drawing ^^od of their Thumbs and sealing it with their blood; the
Light of Nature cannot devise a stronger ty, than the ty (...) Covenant when
the Covenant is lawful in its materials. no (...) nor society of men can souse
the ty of a Covenant, the reas^^^ because the ty of a Covenant binds the
Conscience, and (...) accresces a Debt to God, because of the invocation of his
Na^^^^ and no man can remit that which is due to God, it is God (...) that can
remit a lawful Covenant; so ye see what a Cove^^^^ is, and laying all the four
together, ye may see what is scatt^^^^ in many Books about the nature of a
Covenant, and I will (...) you this Definition of a Covenant, taking it as it
is stated ^^^twixt God and Man, It is an Agreement betwixt God and Man (...)
certain Articles and conditions, wherein the most sacred and im^^^able ties are
interposed, that possibly can be imagined, both to bi^^^^^ God's part, and our
part; and Gods coming under a covenant (...) man, and man's coming under a
covenant with God, they come (...) the most sacred ty, that nature, morality,
or grace can find out.

But I will add a second Consideration to this, which is t^^ That among all the
Wonders that have come to pass in the Wo^^^ and since the Foundation of the
Earth was laid (and there (...) many wonderful things come to pass, proving the
wisdom, Pow^^^ Justice, and Goodness of God) yet hardly is there any th^^^ more
wonderful than Gods coming under a Covenant with M^^^ and the thing that makes
it wonderful among many, are th^^^ two, 1. As he was man's Creator, and gave him
a being out (...) nothing, he might have commanded all his Creatures, wh^^^
ever he thought fit to command them to do, without any Covenant, he needed have
done no more but told them, if ye (...) not what I Command you, I will cast you
in Hell; no Superi^^^ especially being infinitely a Superior, would have done
othe^^wise, 2ly. This makes it wonderful, in regard a Covenant seems to be a
Treaty among equals, it is not ordinary to ma^^ Despotick Covenants, betwixt
Princes and Subjects, or Covenants betwixt Masters and Servants; but betwixt
Friends a^^ Equals, or Persons in Marriage; they that come under a Ma^^rage
Covenant, ordinarily there is some Equality of their bloo^^ or of their Lot;
but to come under a Covenant with him, a^^ yet he to be our Maker, thy Maker is
thy Husband, are words (...) wonder. Therefore it may be a great Question in
the entry (...) this Theme, what is the reason that should move God, wh^^ being
man's Maker, and might call for all he could do without a Covenant, to enter
into a covenant with him? it is so great (...) Mystery, that Mr. Durham pens,
that there is any proper covenant of Grace, he says, it is so far below God, to
make a covenant. There are many Reasons given, why he has entered in covenant
with man, and when they have breanched them all out (...) seven, eight, nine,
or ten Branches, they resolve all in ^^^ce, in Love, in condescendency. There
can be nothing ^^^gined to induce him to deal with man by covenant but this,
(...) true man is honored thereby, and encouraged to do him ^^^ice, and made
inexcusable by it, if he do him not hearty ^^^ice, who has been pleased to come
under a covenant with (...), and to abase himself, and to encourage him in his
^^vice; and when they have branched all the Reasons in all ^^^ir Members to the
outmost, there is nothing that could ^^^ve so great a Lord, to enter in a
covenant with such base ^^^ngs but al^anerly his Condescendency, his Grace, and
his ^^^^e, especially if ye take in the Tenor of the covenant, a covenant on
such Terms, that he shall take his own Son and ^^^er him up in a sacrifice, to
let us go free; and of all the acts (...) Grace, that ever he yet showed, or
will show, nay I may (...) more, of all the Acts of Grace he can show, there
cannot (...) a greater.

The third Consideration that I will give you about this, (...) that God has
made two Covenants with Men, I know ^^deed there are some of our Country men
speak of three ^^venants, some of four, Cameron a professor in Glasgow ^^d
France, is for a Covenant of Nature. Mr. Dickson has ^^d much to prove a
Covenant of Redemption; the current (...) Divines reduce them to two Covenants,
according to that ^orld, Gal. 4. Which things are an Allegory; for these are
^^e two Covenants. I will not debate whether they be two, (...) three, or four
Covenants, the Covenant of Nature, the ^ovenant of Redemption the Covenant of
Works, the Covenant (...) Grace; I will only speak to the two Covenants, that
God ^s condescended to deal with men Covenant-wayes, and there ^e at least two
signal Covenants, the Covenants of Works and ^e Covenant of Grace; I Will not
dilate much on the Covenant (...) Works, for it is in the Covenant meaned by the
Text that I am (...); it would take many Sermons to tell, wherein the Covenant
(...) Works agrees with the Covenant of Grace, and wherein it ^iffers, I will
readily have occasion to hint at it; but this Covenant of Works is not the
Everlasting Covenant ordered in all things and made Sure, only because it falls
so directly in my w^^ I will clear two Questions about the Covenant of Works,
a^ shall say no more of it, and they are indeed the two great difficulties that
ly about it.

Quest. First it is asked, what evidence is there that God ma^^ a Covenant of
Works with Adam? we find not in all the Bo^^ of Genesis, in all the Writings of
Moses, any thing that wor^ seem to confirm this, that there was a Covenant made
w^^ Adam; there was a Command and a Threatening given hi^ but what ground was
there to think, that there was a Coven^ made with him

Answ. For Answer to this, I will not deny, what Mr Burg^ acknowledges, that
readily Adam might scarcely know, to he was to bind for him and all his
posterity; I know not that can be fully and particularly evinced from
Scripture; (...) that Adam came under a Covenant of Works with God, the things
will make it appear. 1. In the new Testament, (...) 4.23. The transaction made
betwixt God and Adam is call two Covenants, expressly there meant by the
bondwoman a^^ the free; But 2. All the parties of the Covenant are mention in
the Book of the Genesis Genesis 2.16. and 17. Verses, Of the trees of the garden
thou may freely eat, but of the tre^ knowledge of good and evil, thou shall
not eat of it; for in the (...) thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die;
These words are a di^^ Covenant; for 1. There is a Duty imposed, thou shall not
ea^ it; and there is a Threatening, thou shall surely die; the Threatening
contains a Promise, importing this, so long as thou (...) not of the tree, thou
shall not die; Adam upon the o^^ hand accepted this Command on their terms, not
only (...) he not object against the terms, but accepted them, by take him to
the privilege of eating all the Trees of the Gard^^ and when he violat and
transgressed the Command, his con^^^ence terrified him, and he sewed
figtree-leaves together hide himself from God, the terror of his Conscience
^^^^ported his condescendency to the Command and Ther^^ning; that was a direct
Covenant, for all the terms of (...) Law were written in his heart, and they
were con-natural him, he had them from his creation, he had the Law w^^ten in
his heart as distinctly as we have the ten Comma^^ Many other things are
brought to prove, that it was a dist^^ Covenant of Works made with Adam before
his fall, and as trial was put to the Tree in the midst of the Garden, and
^oses gives us account of all things of a covenant, both on God's art and
Adam's part.

Quest. 2. I Will clear another difficulty, now after the fall who ^^re the
persons that are under this covenant of Works made with Adam?

For clearing of this, I will only give this one po^^tion. That all natural
men, and all that are not effectually called, they are under this Covenant of
Works. I have often had a design to follow this point, the reasons of this are,
(...). They are in the first Adam, there can be no real claim to ^he covenant
of Grace, until we be interessed in the covenant, we can no more plead the
privileges of the covenant, of Grace in a natural state, than a woman can
plead ^he Articles of a contract, that is not married to the man, ^he contract
corcerning her; until we be effectually called, and in our effectual calling
united to Jesus, which is but ^he Articles of the contract of marriage betwixt
Christ and Believers, we have no more right to the covenant of Grace, ^han the
woman that has not married the man: this is a most dreadful state, for to be
under a covenant of Works admits of no repentance; if a man: should mourn as
many tears, as there are water in the Sea, if they be under a covenant of
Works, they find no place for repentance. Next, the covenant of Works admits of
no cautioner, a person under the covenant of Works pleading to Christ, is like
man pressing another to pay a Debt, and his name was never named in the bond;
can a man be cautioner, and his name never named in the bond, the covenant of
Works admits not of Christ for a cautioner: So he that is in the first Adam and
not effectually united to Christ, the covenant in which he is, admits neither
of Repentance, nor of a Mediator; the truth is, to go gand discourse to you of
this covenant of Works, of the nature and properties of it, it might draw out a
great length, all that I design to say, is that there is such a covenant made
with Adam, and that all natural men are under it.

4. That I may come to the covenant mentioned in the Text, the everlasting, and
will ordered, and sure covenant, I must premise before I enter on this
covenant, some few generals about it, I will name some of them now, and follow
the rest in the afternoon.

First, This covenant has four names given it in the Bible, and truly all the
four do excellently express and open the nature o^ it. First it is called a
Testament Secondly, it is called a Promise, the Promise made to Abraham, this is
the Covenant made with Abracham Thirdly, it is called a Decree. And lastly its
called a Covenant Now these that would rightly take up the Nature of the
covenant, would consider something of all the four, for in effect we cannot
rightly take up the nature of it, except we search a little in these four names
given unto it.

First, It Is called a Testament, Heb. 7.22. When christ is spoken of to be the
Mediator of it, he his said to be Surety (...) a better Testament; now the
consideration of it as a Testament, renders it exceedingly Sweet; I will name
but found things in a Testament that agrees to a covenant. 1. a Testament it
comes not to be valid, except it be ratified with the death of the Testator, if
the man that makes the Testament live, he may revock, or alter it, or turn it
in another strain than it was; but when this death comes to be inter^posed, all
the Legacies left by the Testator become fir^ and valid, and must be obeyed;
it is a sacred thing to obey the will of the dead, the light of nature has made
Heathen tremble, at doing contrair to the will or the dead; the Testament is
ratified in all the Articles and clauses of it, by the death of the Testator:
this is that which renders it excelent, that the Lord has made the covenant a
Testament, and ratified it by the death of the Testator: So what we are (...)
say of the covenant as a Testament, it is still to be remembered, that there is
no alterations to be made now, more than there is of the will of the dead; we
are not to contrive new Articles in the covenant, or to think that any Article
in it will not be subscribed; for the Testator is dead and has ratified the
covenant with the death that he did undergo at Jerusalem, in all the Articles
of it. 2. It has th^^ as a Testament in it, that in effect, in a Testament
there in no more required but to accept the Legacies that the Testator leaves;
it is not like a man's Testament, as it is in a covenant of Traffic, wherein one
binds to give (...) much cloth and the other binds to pay so much Money;
ordinarily (...) Testament is without such Trafficks; but in the covenat
Legacies are left, and the persons to whom they are left, it is required of them
that they accept: and there is no more required of them, but that they accept:
this makes it of the nature of a Testament. 3. It has this in it of the nature
of a Testament, and wherein he exceeds all other Testaments, that the Legator
leaves Legacies, and he leaves others to give them; but he in the covenant
first leaves the Legacies, and then he gives the Legacies; it is remarkable when
he is about to die, he calls his Disciples, and tells them he is going to
Jerusalem, and he behoved to die there; It was in his farewell Sermon, and
they were much against his going and he tells them, I will leave you a Legacy,
My Peace I leave you, and he puts in the things that never man did put in any
of a Testament and My peace I give you so that it has the nature of a Testament
in it, consisting of Legacies. 4. It has this of a Testament, which is also
singular, it is not ordinary in Testaments, (Lawyers observe that both the Law
of Nature, and all other Laws have made against it) that men should dispose of
an Inheritance by Legacies and Testament; the reason is, because they think
folk when they are dying, are not so composed, therefore the wronging of Heirs
comes to be excepted in disposing of Inheritances; but in this Testament, it is
not Peace, or Pardon, or Communion with God, that he leaves only, but it is a
Testament wherein he Communicats the Inheritance, without wronging of the Heir;
So it has something of a Testament in it, it takes in Inheritance as well as
Movables, and so it is formally a Testament, and therefore the Spirit of God,
and the current of Interpreters on the Scrptures thought fit, to call the
Scrptures, the Old and New Testament, the same on the matter with the Old and
New Covenant; but I pitch on the name of Testament, as it were to show his
latter will, both to show what Curses he leaves, and what Blessings he leaves,
and the way how to get the one, and eshew the other; they are confirmed by the
Death of the Testator, nay the Heir is rather glorified by the Testament,
though it take in the Inheritance.

SERMON IV.
2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me
an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure; and this is all my
salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


I have showed you what a Covenant is, this it is a Sacred ty among parties
agreed about some Article. There is no man, nor society of men, can loose the
tys of a lawful Covenant, but it binds (if it be vinculum reale as they call
it) the persons and their Posterity: Moralists have acknowledged this, by the
light of nature demonstrable by many Arguments: I came to speak of the Covenant
of Works, and touched only on it in two heads; First, to prove that it was made
with Adam, and that all the unregenerat are under it; and in the close, I came
to speak of the Covenant of Grace, and the first thing about it I resolved to
notice was, the names given it in Scripture, it is called a Testament, Heb,
7.22. He is Surety of a better Testament, that is, of a better Covenant; I
showed you, why it is called a Testament, the Testator has left Legacies, and
he is dead, and the Legacies are of great Importance. I will insist no more on
this, only considering the Covenant as a Testament, I will press these two
things on you.

Use. First, I would exhort you, to get the Legacies that Christ had left in
his Testament, ye may readily ask, how shall we come by these Legacies? ye
would hearken to a word of advice.

First, understand what is left you, I will tell you two things which the
Testament bears, it bears tokens and moveable things, and it bears an
inheritance; his peace, his joy, his consolation, are indeed moveable and very
alterable things, ^ut the Testament bears likewise an Heritage; for the Law may
be dispensed with in Christ; the reason why Jurists will not admit of a dying
person to dispose of inheritance at Death, they suppose they will be roving,
and their sickness is distempering them: but this cannot be supposed in Christ,
therefore his Testament bears first tokens, and movables, and then an
Inheritance; now the way to know if the Testament bear you to the inheritance
is, First, to know if the Testament bear you to the tokens and movables, it
bears you to his Pardon, his Peace, his Repentance, and Grief for Sin, they are
movables indeed; But if ye be in the Testament for Such Movables, ye are
likewise in the Testament for the Inheritance; It Is Remarkable his Testament is
not made up of Blessings only, but also of Curses, there are many curses
contained in his Testament, and some get no more in the Testament, but like
some deboisht Children, when the Father has called them together to make his
Testament, he gives one his Blessing, and a second his Blessing, and a third is
fallen in Adultery, and he gives him his Curse, Jacob has it so in his
Testament, Simeon and Levi brethren in evil, cursed be etc.

2ly, I will give you another direction about the Covenant as a Testament, to
take hold of things ordinar in Testaments, I like the observation one has,
writing on the Covenant, he says, that a Testament ordinarily a person cannot
have benefit by it, until it be Confirmed by Law, ^ay but it is not so in
Christ's Testament, ye must take heed that ye do not Confirm it by Law, the
reason of it is, Christ has Confirmed it himself, for Christ to prevent this
when he made the Testament, said, my peace I leave you; But some will say, he
may leave his Peance to us, but we will not get it. until it be Confirmed by
Law, no, my peace I give you; when a thing is both left and given, it needs no
Confirmation; there are many gets Legacies left them, and they must have them
Confirmed by Law, but we need no Confirmation of the thing that is given, so
that any that gets a part of this Testament, whether it be of the Movables, or
a Title to the Inheritance, if they question it, until they get it Confirmed by
Law, they do not know the nature of this Testament, for there needs no more,
since he both leaves and gives.

3ly. In reference to this Name of the Covenant, as it is called a Testament, I
would give you this direction, that ye may have a part of his Testament,
consider to whom the Legacies in the Testament are left, sometimes in the
Testament they are spoken of as folks that were of kin to Christ, they are
called his brethren, his sisters, his friends; sometimes in the Testament they
are spoken of as folks, that he loved to converse with, I say unto you my
friends, fear them not that can kill the body, and can do no more, etc.
sometimes they are spoken of in the Testament, as folk that the Father had
given him; they have many Names in the Testament, there are some but babes,
some young men, some fathers; now I would have you take the Testament in the
full latitude of it, if ye would feed comfortably on it, whether ye be in kin,
or whether ye be Brethren, or Sisters, or in any near Relation, if ye cannot
find your Names in the Testament under that Notion, go and enquire if there be
any friendship betwixt you, tho ye be not in Kin, yet folk will leave Legacies
to their friends, if none of these will hold, try if ye be babes, or young men,
there uses not to be much Friendship betwixt wise men and babes, yet babes may
be in the Testament, for the Testator may have Kindness to them on the account
of some Relation; lay all these Names together, to whom the Legacies are left,
and if ye find ye have not been a Friend, Try if ye be of Kin if none of these
will hold, Try if ye be Babes; the Father had given him all power in Heaven and
Earth, and it must be a rich Testament he leaves, and to have a Right to it we
should labor to shufle our selves in among them that have a Right to this
Testament; many would shufle themselves out of this Testament, ye should rather
consider what a rich Heir he was that made the Testament, and try all the
Qualifications and Designations of the persons to whom the Legacies are left.
To be brief, it is a comfortable sense of the whole Covenant, that it is a
Testament, for it stands ratified by the Death of the Testator, and if the
Father alter any thing of the Covenant, he will alter the will of the Dead,
which looks not like Him. This is the first name given to the Covenant, it is a
Testament ratified by the Death of the Testator, and they have a secure
Legacy, that has an Interest in the Testament, we need not pay for it, for
they were not Legacies if we behoved to buy them, we have our Right to them not
by Price, but by Testament.

The second Name I find the Covenant get in Scripture, it is called a Promise,
so we find in Ephesians. 2.12. That at that time, ye were without Christ, being
aliens from the Common-walth of Isreal, and strangers from the Covenants of
Promise; So we will find it, Gal. 3:16. and 17. verses, twice called a Promise;
and ye will find it frequently get this Name in Scripture, this Name is a
Promise added to a Testament, is very considerable; and there are two things
that I will speak a little to here, First, Why the Covenant is called a
Promise. Secondly, What encouragement a Believer may have, from calling it a
Promise.

Quest: First, Why is the Covenant called a Promise? There are three or four
Reasons, why the Covenant is called a Promise, one of them relates to God, 2
2d. to the Covenant, and a third to Believers.

Answ. First, In reference to God, a Promise it is an Act of Dominion, a man
that makes a Promise, he has the thing he promises under his Command, or else
he promises foolishly. 2ly. A Promise It Is an Act of Condescendency, he that is
content to make a Promise, condescends to the humor and desire of them to whom
he makes it. 3ly. A Promise is an Act of Liberality; but the main thing here, a
Promise is an Obligation, it brings a ty on the Person that makes it:

Now the truth is, the Covenant is all the Four, in regard of God, it is an Act
of his Dominion, of his condescendency of his Liberality, and it brings an
Obligation on him; but these are not the special Reasons, why it come to be
called a Promise, the special Reasons are from the nature of the Covenant, and
the nature of the Covenant has two things in it, that makes it properly to be
called a Promise.

First, The great things in it are Promises, it was not so with the Covenant of
Works, the great things in it were Commands, and therefore ye find it often
called in the Bible a Law, the Covenant of Works will be called the Law, for
the great design of it was to give commands, but it is not so with the covenant
of Grace, it is not Law and commands; that is not the special design in it, but
it is Grace and Promises 2ly. It comes to be called a Promise, in regard there
is no Command in it all, but there is a promise of strength to obey the
Command; ye see me sometime at Examining, putting you to this, there is no Duty
in all the Covenant, but there is a Promise relating to that Duty; and if ye
remember the Observation ye heard the last day at Examining, a Christian has
never a call to a Command, but in that call, he has a call to the Promise; When
we are commanded to obey, to do, or to suffer, Christ never calls us to a Duty
in the Covenant, but he calls us likewise to a Promise of it, whether it be to
^rayer, Repentance, Believing, Loving of Christ, or Suffering for Him; So that
it comes to be no wonder, that is to be called a Promise; for in effect, there
is nothing required in all the Covenant, but it is promised; Suppose there were
a man that should bid another man come to his Shop, and buy such a piece of
Cloth, and in the mean time should round in his Ear, I will give thee Money to
buy it, even as much as the price of it will come to; that is rather a giving
than a selling; we indeed buy in the Covenant of Grace, but it is without Money
and without price, and any thing that we part with for the Covenant it is but
that which would undo us; as if ye saw a Woman that has a Child, that has
gotten a Knife in his hand, and she is feared it undo the Child, she will go
and Treat with the Child, I will give this Apple, and this preasant thing, and
that, providing thou will quite the knife she is afraid the Child cut his
fingers with the knife, or undo himself with it, and the Child will not quite
it without buying it; the Gospel drives such a bargain as this; for in the
Covenant of Grace, all that God does in the point of Command is only that we
quite the knife that would cut our fing^ers, and He will give us all the
Apples, and pleasant things contained in the Covenant, so it is no wonder it be
called Promise.

3dly. It Is called a Promise in regard of us, there are two things in regard of
us, that makes it be called a Promise, and the antinomians will have it called
by no other name, they deny it to be a proper Covenant, they say it is only a
Promise, but it is in regard of us called a Promise, on their two accounts (1)
Because we have contributed nothing to the procuring of the Covenant, but it is
allanerly of Grace; as if a man were sending to his neighbors house for
something he has paid for, he might send for it, and readily crave it as a
debt; but when he sends for any thing promised, he must not go exactly, and
observe all the passages of craving it, he had no right to it but by a Promise,
many a time when God gives not his people that fullness of peace of joy, of
consolation, that readily they would have, they sit down and quarrel, as
readily the thing they would have were paid for; but thy right to it was but
by Promise, And a giving thing should not be looked in the mouth, 2ly. It comes
to be called a Promise, in regard of us, in respect the thing we do in the
condition of the Covenant, it is no way proportioned to the thing promised;
there are great things promised, and we have no Influence on it; What would all
our service do to influence this Promise, I will take away the heart of stone?
What did we contribute, when we first bargained with him, did we not resist the
Promise, did we not say, I will go after my lovers? What warnings did we sit
out, before we brought our neck under his yoke? All these prove that the
Covenant is a Promise.

And from this Name of the Covenant, I would have you notice three or four
things, before I go further; Is the Covenant called a Promise? Then, 1. Mistake
not the Covenant, ye will hear presently, it has another Name nor a Promise, as
if it were no way consistent with the Law, Antinomians say so, it is a
conditional Promise, go not ye to take up the Covenant, as if it were only a
Promise, and had no condition at all: I deny not, but there are absolute
Promises in it; I will speak of them afterward. But, 2ly. Here the great
encouragement, that Believers have for their security, they are under a
Covenant, the Name whereof is a Promise: Suppose one of you were drowned in
desertion, and a second exceedingly weak, and suppose a third were reproached
and despicable; yet if ye have from one that has both power and faithfulness; a
promise, that is refreshing; if one should ask a man that were in great debt,
how will ye win out of it? I have a Promise, says he, ye have no pith nor power
to pay your debt, I have a promise from one tht is rich, that can pay it; here
is the great encouragement that Believers have, and they have no other thing to
keep up their heart, but only this, I have a Promise. 3ly. I mark it for this
end that I may put thee to the thing I was pressing the last day, to take it up
as a Covenant of Promises; what am I? says one, my house is not so with God,
what an I? says another, I have a crossed life in this world. But will any of
these hinder him from making a Promise? Thy Charter is not Merit, thy Charter
and mine is not Purchase, but allanerly Promise; and the only expectation we
can have of wearing the Crown, and walking in the City that has the twelve
Gates, is allanerly Promise. If Satan and our deceitful heart question thy
right, and say, thou deserves Hell, and thou have many marks of going to it;
yet if thou have a Promise, and a Title to the man that gives the Contract, and
draws the Articles of it, thou may be very sure, thy Covenant is a Covenant of
Promise, that is the second Name. The third Name that is given the Covenant,
it is called a Command; ye have it getting this Name, Genesis 17. Abraham is
commanded to circumcise, in the tenth verse, every male child among them, this
is my Covenant which shall be betwixt me and you, and thy seed after thee, every
male among you shall be circumcised, and ye shall circumcise the flesh of your
foreskine: If ye compare this with the 13 and 14 verses, He that is born in thy
house, and bought with thy money, shall be circumcised, and my Covenant shall
be an everlasting Covenant and the uncircumcised man-child, whose flesh is not
circumcised, that soul shall be cut off, he has broken my Covenant, that is, my
Command: Here ye have the Covenant, called under the Name of a Command: And
here I would enquire a little into two things, 1st, Why the Covenant goes under
the name of a Command? 2ly, How we should improve this Name of the Covenant as
a Command;

As to the First, It goes under the name of a Command, He has broken my
Covenant, that is, my Command, on these two grounds; 1. The Covenant of Grace,
it does not only oblige to all the Commands of the Covenant of Works, but to
some more, this may seem a strange assertion; there is no Command in all the
Law, but the Covenant of Grace binds to it, I came not, says Christ, to destroy
the Law, but to fulfill the Law, Thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not
steal, thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, thou shall not
covet thy Neighbors goods, etc. The Covenant binds to all these, and to many
more, it binds to Faith in Christ, to Repentance, which the Covenant of Works
did not; so no wonder it be called a Command: for this Covenant binds to all
the Duties commanded in the Covenant of Works, and to many more. 2ly, It comes
to go under the name of a Command, it was the same Covenant of Grace that
Abraham had a seal of in Circumcision; it is called a command in regard never
were persons so obliged to obey the command, as these that are taken within the
Covenant of Grace: The taking of us within the Covenant of Grace, is like a
Woman Married, that is more obliged against Uncleanness, than she was before
her Marriage, the relation is in Christ, the influences are from Christ. The
persons under the Covenant of Grace, Antinomians say, they are not so bound to
the command as others; but they mistake it quite, if any person be bound in the
world to the command, it is they that are not bound by the Law only, but by
Love; the case is as it was with Moses Mother, Pharaoh's Daughter calls her
when she found Moses among the Flags, and commanded her to Nurse the Child; the
best Motive that moved her to nurse the Child was Love, she stood by to see the
Child among the Flags, and when she took up the Child, Love influenced her as
much as the Law; So, when there is a Covenant relation to Christ, the person in
Covenant has an eye to him, not only from the command, but from Love; So that
no wonder it be called a command, for it has all the commands of the Law, and
some more, and the obligations to obey, are stricter than under the Covenant of
Works.

Quest. 2. But here is a great Question, ye say the Covenant of Grace is a
Covenant of Works; we love to hear Grace exalted, and called a Testament, and a
Promise, but that it should be called a command, looks this like a Covenant of
Grace?

Answ. It Is true, it is called a command, and it binds to all the Duties that
the Covenant of Works binds to, and a great many more, it binds to Believing in
Christ, to Repentance, which the Covenant of Works had no dream of; but this
takes nothing away from the freedom of it, therefore hearken to two or three
remarkable things about the command, and it will show you, that though it be a
command, the command takes nothing away of the freedom of it. 1. Take notice,
that though it have so many commands, as many as in the Covenant of Works, and
more, yet it will not stand on perfect obedience to them, sincere obedience it is
one of the clauses of it, and O! but it is a sweet word, He will accept of the
Will in stead of the Deed: Never one Treated with a Servant, to give him a Fee,
if h^ were willing to go to his Pleugh, and go his Errands, and if he did not
go, he indentured not to accept of the will for the deed; but as a Father with
a Child, so he piti^^ them that fear him, its a command indeed, but he accept
of the sincerity of the will; it is a remarkable way of dealing in this
Covenant, that he had with David, he was si^^ing in his house and grieved to
see the Ark of God in the fields, What am I, says he, that I should dwell in a
house (...) cedar, and the Ark of God in curtains? Nathan was sent t^ him, and
told him, because it was in thy heart to build me (...) house, I will build
thee a sure house. So there are Command^ in this Covenant, that go under the
name of a Command^ but the commands will be accepted in the point of obedience,
the Will will be accepted for the Deed. 2ly, It contributes to evidence the
freedom of it, in the point of (...) command, in that there is nothing
commanded: but it is promised; it was not so in the Covenant of Works, they ha^
habitual Grace, the Grace that Adam was created with, he was to have no other
stock but that; Make to your selves (...) new heart, and renew a right spirit
within you: If any will take that command, and not look to the Promise, they
might say, I may ly down and die; there is no hope of Heaven for me, I can no
more make a new heart, than I can make a new Heaven, or a new Earth; but a new
eeart will (...) also give thee, and I will renew a right spirit within thee^
There is no command, but there is a Promise su^table to it; that was not
according to the Covenant of Works^ there was no promise of a new heart, or of
assisting in Prayer, in the Covenant of Works, though there be as many commands
in the Covenant, of Grace, as in the Covenant of Works, and many more, yet since
we bake beside Mea^ we need not be discouraged. 3ly. Not only will he give to^
will, and strength to will, but which is a great mercy, it^ admits of
repentance, when we have done an ill turn to our selves; if we had weeped as
many Tears as there are Waters in the Sea, If we should give the fruit of our
body for the sin of our soul, if we had offered our Children to God, for what
we had done, it was all to no purpose, In the day thou eats, thou shall die;
but though this Covenant be commands, and yet though they be broken, if we go
and mourn over them, the Covenant admits of Repentance. And lastly, which takes
away the gall of being a command, it admits of a cautioner, and the Covenant is
so ordered, that it we can go and mourn, and lay the weight on Jesus, it is all
one as if we had not broken it at all; so that it is a command, of all that the
Covenant of Works command, and of many more; for there are many things commanded
in the Covenant of Grace, that were not commanded in the Covenant of Works; and
yet the calling of the Covenant a command, takes not away the grace and freedom
of it. So ye have heard of the Covenant of Grace, and of the three Names given
to it, that are handled this day, it is a Testament, a Promise, and a Command;
but the Name I especially designed to handle is, the calling of it a Covenant.

Use I will not fall on the Covenant now, only I exhort you to three things,
which I resolved to press in the close of this Sermon.

1. From all the work of the day, learn the difference betwixt the Covenant of
Grace and the Covenant of Works; if ye be out of the state of Nature, and can
prove your effectual calling, and that God has wrought a work of Conversion
within you I know no tempation, nor discouragement, that needs to afflict you
with the fear of Hell; make but sure under what Covenant ye are, and that God
has indeed brought you to be born again, and stated you under a Covenant of
Grace, the Glory ye look for, how simple, how low, how guilty soever ye be,
it is left to you as a Legacy in Christ's Testament, and the Father will not
control the will of the Dead: If thou can come to be stated under a right
Covenant, thou needs not fear to plead as a Dept of Justice, Lord, give me thy
Peace, and thy Pardon; If thou should say, I am simple, poor, and ignorant, but
will these make exception against the things left in Testament by Christ? The
Mediator has left them in the Testament, and if thou know once the things left
thee in Testament, nothing can obstruct any Peace, however there may be a
Fatherly anger, there is nothing that can obstruct fundamentally and radically
thy Peace about thy great interest; for they are thine by virtue of a
Testament, and the Father cannot but fulfill the Will of the dead. Learn then to
know what Covenant ye are under, for if ye be in Nature, all your grief for
sin, all your repentance for sin, all your pleading to Christ, is all in vain,
y^^ Covenant admits neither of Repentance, nor of a caution^^ is the danger of
men that are not effectually called on (...) acount!

2. I would have you look on this Covenant as a Promi^^ when ye get any thing
of it, either accomplished, or a wo^^ let in to you of it, remember how ye held
it, Isaiah (...) many a sweet Promise, Jeremiah has many a sweet Promi^^^
Ezekiel, Moses, and all the rest of the Prophets, has ma^^ a sweet Promise, and
how come they to be set down there^^ They were not besought by us, we did not
so much as se^^ them to be set down, far less were they purchased by (...) they
came only by Promise, and take in what is requi^^ to a Promise, these things
are the fruit of his condesce^dency, of his liberallty, and they bring an
obligation (...) him to accomplish them.

3. And I close with it, from the work of this day (...) may see that the
Covenant is a command, they have brok^^ my Covenant, that is, they have broken
my command; the^^ are many practical Antinomians among us, they run away (...)
the Promises, and forget that the covenant is a command (...) no it is a Truth,
that I am not afraid to Preach, there is nothing that the covenant of Works
requires, but it is required in the covenant of Grace, and a great deal more;
the^ were many things never called for in the covenant of Work^ that are called
for in the covenant of Grace; and yet th^^ Believer needs not be discouraged,
they are all promised^ the Will will be accepted for the Deed; but if thou
(...) down carelessly, and cast off the command, and pleads (...) the covenant
as a Promise, thou takes not up the covenan^ aright; of all persons bound to
keep the covenant, it is thou that art in covenant with him, like Moses Mother,
that nur^ed the child, not only out of command, but out of Love^ but of all the
Rebels that ever sinned against him, are these that sin against this command.

SERMON V.
2 Samuel 23. Verse 5. ^^though my house be not so with God; yet he has made
with (...) me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; (...)
for this is all my salvation, and all my desire, although he (...) makes it not
to grow.


I Entered the last day to speak of the covenant of Grace, and the first thing I
proposed concerning it was, to consider the Names it gets in the Bible; I have
spoken of is as a Testament, and I have exhorted you to labor to try, if your
Names were in the Testament; It Is called (...) Promise, and it is likewise
called a Command; of all which ^e heard the last day, but the proper Name of
it, it is called (...) Covenant, it is true Antinomians, they deny that properly
it is a covenant, for they say, it is free and without conditions; but in effect
this covenant of Grace, whatever Grace appears in it, it is properly a covenant.

There are three things that properly make up a covenant, and all the three
concur in this covenant; First, there are parties indenturing, and treating,
and concluding together. 2. There are articles and terms on which the agreement
is made. 3. There is the interposing of Obligations for ratifying the Articles,
for the covenant carries a curse in the bosom of it against the breakers of the
covenant; and where these three are, there is properly a covenant, these three
I would make appear to you: for the Parties, I will not speak of them now, when
I come to the second Branch of the v. God has made with me, I will ^^eak of
the Parties; The things that I will insist on to evince the nature of this
covenant to you, is the Articles, and the Obligations that are interposed, for
the ratifying of these Artieles; the clearing of these two will contribut much
to open the nature of the Covenant; Therefore hearken and ponder them: As for
the Articles, that ye may know what ye ^o, when ye covenant with God, or
pretend to be in covenant with him, it were difficult to run through all the
Articles treated in this covenant.

That I may glance a little at them, I desire ye may take notice, that among Men
there are four sorts ordinary of Covenants, and the truth is, the Covenant of
Grace it is not properly one of them, but it is something complex made up of
them all: And they that would understand the nature of the Gospel Covenant,
must take in all the four, 1. Men use to make Covenants of Peace and War,
Kingdoms and Nations they use to enter into such Leagues for a Peace and War.
2^ There are among men Covenants of Traffic and commerce wherein either
particular Nations, or particular Merchants will indenture and barg^ne, and
enter in Covenant for Traffic and commerce. 3. There is among men Covenants,
such a^ pass betwixt Master and servant, betwixt Princes and Subjects which
they call Despotick Covenants. Lastly. There are among men Marriage Covenants,
wherein there passes a Treat^ betwixt a Man and a Woman. Now the Covenant of
Grace, (...) not simply one of these four, but he that would rightly take up
the nature of it, must consider it as taking in all the four, and when we come
under a Covenant with God, or have an Interest in his Covenant, we are
concerned in all the four.

First, There is betwixt God and us in the Covenant o^ Grace, a Covenant of
Peace and War; It Is remarkable the Scripture calls it a Covenant of Peace,
Isaiah 54.^0. The covenant of Grace is a Covenant of Peace and War, and the^
are four thihgs that ye will observes among men concur in (...) Covenant of
Peace and War, and all the four concur in th^^ Covenant.

First, Ordinarily in a Covenant of Peace and War, the^^ is a Reconciliation
betwixt the Parties that come under a Covenant of Peace and War, readily this
is the first step in (...) Covenant of Peace, Man had fallen in a state of
enmity wi^^^ God, and God in a state of enmity with man, God was be^ding his
Bow, and preparing his Arrows to shoot, and fitting them on the strings, and he
is angry with the Wicked eve^^ day; Now when a person comes under a Covenant
with God the first thing that is treated is, a Reconciliation, so th^^ on Gods
part, as Isaiah 1.18. Come now, and let us r^^son together, says the Lord,
though your sins be as scarlet, they sh^^^ be as whit as snow, though they be
red like crimson, they sh^^ be as wool. And the Sinner on the other hand
triumphs i^^ Peace with God, Romans 5. at the beginning, being justified (...)
Faith, we have peace with God: So there is a Reconciliation made up by this
Covenant, the first Step and Article of it is an Article of peace. 2. In
Covenants of Peace and War, there is not only a Reconciliation, but there is a
Fellowship, the Covenant of Peace resolves in Fellowship; it is a rare thing
for men to treat a Covenant together, merely to lay by Feud, and not to have
future Friendship; the covenant of Peace takes in the Reconciliation and Peace,
and then adds a Friend ship, so that now we may have access to God with
boldness, we may go tell him our case, we may beg supplies out of his ^ulness;
he great rise of this is, the covenant is a covenant of Peace, it has both
taken away the Feud, and established a Friendship. 3 In covenants of Peace and
War, there uses to be an owning of one another Interest, their Friends the
same, and their Enemies the same; Now this is in the covenant of Grace and in
this part of it, as it is a covenant of Peace, God Indentures, that our Friends
shall be his Friends, and our Enemies shall be his Enemies, and his Enemies
shall be our Enemies; Therefore he appears to Paul like one bound in a covenant
of Peace with the Saints at Damascus, Saul, Saul, why persecuts thou me? on the
other hand, we come to be concerned in his Interests, his Truth, his People and
all the concernments; Do not I hate them that hate thee, says, David? yea, I
hate them with a perfect hatred: The covenant bound him to it for it is a
Covenant of Peace and War. Lastly, As there uses to be a Reconciliation, and an
establishment of Friendship, and having common Friends and common enemies, so
in these covenants, Princes and others they bind to mutual help, they bind to
help one another Interests in distress; so does God in the covenant of Grace,
the Lord engages to be our Strength, our Savior, our Buckler, our Shield, he
engages to be a present help in time of need; and on the other hand, we engage
according to our power, to help him, to come out and help the Lord against the
mighty, and to help his People and all his Interests; this is necessary in a
covenant of Peace, and it is necessary to be noticed by Believers on a threefold
Ac-account.

1. Many a time they are ready to be shaken exceedingly, in the point of their
Peace with God, for why, they find such an ill heart, such dullness in prayer,
they find readily such failings in conversation, so that they conclude
presently, my peace is broken off, no, the first notion under which tho^ took
up the Covenant is a Covenant of Peace, and so long a^ it stands, thy Peace,
stands; So when there comes to be (...) breach of Peace, we are still to look
into the Covenant, the nature and tenor of it, and to draw out an Extract of
the Articles and Terms on which thy Peace comes to be made up when he made the
Reconclliation, and drew the Articles o^ the Covenant, he drew it not in these
terms, ^ay when ye sin (...) provoke me, this Covenant shall be altered, no, it
stood o^^ surer Principles in the Covenant; therefore when thou think thy Peace
altered, if thou be in Covenant, the Covenant o^ which thy Peace stands must be
altered. 2. It Is necessar t^ be observing the Obligation that lies on Christ's
people, to be Christ's Friends, and Enemies to his Enemies; it is a covenanted
Obligation in this, that when any of his People a^ low, ye may think it Charity
to help them, but if thou hel^ them not, thou breaks the Covenant, for the
Covenant is (...) Covenant of Peace and War, so that in effect, when any (...)
his friends or servants are in distress, if thou can help then and does it not,
thou art in danger of the curse of the Covenant; Therefore take it up ye that
would understand the nature of it, and would know what ye do, when ye say, I go
an^ make a personal Covenant with God, and renew a person^ Covenant with him,
understand what ye do, when ye speak (...) it, it is a Covenant of Peace and
War, and wherein ye are (...) have common Friends and common Enemies, and to
give help to his People and Friends, it is a Covenant of Reconciliation of Peace
with himself, so when any of his Friends stand in need of your help, it is not
only an act of Charity or Compassion, but the neglect of it is a breach of the
Covenant ye are bound to it by the Covenant; therefore if ye would u^derstand
the nature of the Covenant, it is in the first place (...) Covenant of Peace and
War, of Reconciliation, of Friendship and for the future, of having common
friend and common enemy and to give help to his Friends on the account of the
Covenant.

Secondly, among Men Covenants are Covenants (...) Traffic and Commerce
together: I believe in these four I will give you a glance of the tenor of the
whole Covenant? It Is ordinar for Nations, because every Nation cannot supply it
self fully, but it stands in need of the Commoditi^^ of other Nations,
therefore Princes will enter into a Covenant of Traffic, and exchange
Commodities with other, by exporting or importing them; Now the Covenant of
Grace is a Covenant of Traffic and Commerce with Heaven, and therefore ye
have sometimes a Believer called a Merchant, The wise Merchant goes and sells
all that he has, and buys the Field where the Pearl is: And ye have Christ
himself holden out in the Scripture, under the formality of a Merchant, Come,
buy Wine and Milk and Honey, without Money, and without price.

For clearing this formality of the Covenant, as it is a Covenant of Traffic,
I would have you to notice three or four things. 1. That Man as he violats the
covenant of Works, he came under enmity against God, and the Covenant of Peace
was broken up, so that by that Fall all Traffic with Heaven was broken up, to
this day the natural Man has no kind of Merchandising or Traffiquing with
Jesus, readily he may come to Ordinances, and to the Market of the Gospel, but
he has no Traffic with Christ, his Covenant admits of none, there is neither
buying nor selling betwixt Christ and him; but the opening or this everlasting
Covenant, and getting an Interest in it, opens a Traffic betwixt Christ and
Believers, and ye will find in the Covenant these three or four things relating
to this Traffic.

First, Ye will find the goods we traffic for, holden out in the Covenant,
and they are of many kinds, there is wine, milk, honey, spices, gold, oil, fine
linen, eye salve, in effect there are fields, and fields wherein the Pearls
are, the Covenant offers, and opens a traffic, a commerce, a trade betwixt
Christ and Believers, and the things are Wine, Milk, Honey, etc. 2. Ye have the
Covenant not only opening the things for which the traffic is about, but ye
have the price of them in the Covenant, ye have a treaty about the price of the
Commodities, Isaiah 55. ye that have no money, come, and buy without money, and
without price; this seems to be a contradiction, to buy without money, and
without price; How can that be? the truth is, our buying is a kind of giving on
the merchants part, I confess it is a considerable Objection, that some move,
How can it be said, that these commodities are sold without money, does not
the wise merchant sell all, and goes and buys the field where the Pearl is,
can he be said to buy without money, and without price, that sells all and
gives for the field? But the truth is, our all is not money, but dross and
dung, and when we have done all, we are but unprofitable servants; and when we
have sold all, and bought the field, we have neither given money nor gold for
it. 3. There is in this traffic on this formality, under which the Covenant
is taken up, there is this Clause I say, in the Articles of Traffic, that the
whole Stock, on which we Trade, is Christ's, and we come to Traffic with a
nothing man's goods; It Is remarkable, there are some he sends out and gives them
but one Tablent to Traffic with, others he sends out and gives them two, to
another he gives three, to another he gives four, but whether they be one,
three, or four Talents, they are all his, all the things one which the Believer
Traffiques, according to the Terms of the Gospel covenant, they are all his,
the glory and grace of it; no wonder they should especially redound to him; so
that when we have done any thing, or when we have gone and Traffiqued at a
Communion, and Traded in Prayer; or when we have gone to a Sacrament, or a
Promise, whatever the Traffic be, it is always Christ's Stock on which we
Trade, The Talents are his, and not ours, the parts, the gifts, the graces, the
liberty in Prayer, the enlargement of Heart in performing Duties, they were all
Christ's, the Talents were his, and we were only Traffiquent with another man's
goods: so when we have most liberty, and make the best Market we can, the gain
and glory should especially and principally redound to him. 4. In a Covenant of
Commerce and Traffic, there uses to be gain designed, and if it be not
attained, the Merchant thinks all that he, has done lost labor; this is
indeed in the Covenant of Grace, as it is Covenant of Traffic, the person that
has skill to follow the Trade, is designing gain; it is true there are many
bunglers and hypocrites, that has no skill to follow the Trade, but he that has
skill to Trade, his two Talents becomes four, and his five comes to be ten;
it is necessary for them that are under this Covenant of Traffic, to be every
year observing how their Stock grows, whether it be increasing, or going
backward, whether thou be more heavenly, more Spiritual, more Tender, or
whether thou have more Communion with God for the Covenant is a Covenant of
Merchandise: for if we be standing still, we are going back, if we be at a
stand with it, and has no more this year than the last year, thou has the same
measure of Duties, the same measure of Grace, the same measure of Knowledge and
of Words, thou his no skill o^ the Trade, if thou be not thriving and gaining
at it; so ye see it is first a Covenant of Peace and War, next it is a Covenant
of Traffic; labor to make use of the Covenant, not only for Peace, but for
Friendship with him; in the Contrivement and drawing of the Covenant, he
designed a Traffic and Trade betwixt him and thee, and designed gain in it,
examine therefore how it thrives with you.

Thirdly, This Covenant as it is a Covenant that uses to pass betwixt Princes
and Subject, betwixt Masters and Servants, it is called a Despotick Covenant,
under this formality it is necessar to be taken up also, as a Covenant betwixt
Superior and Inferior; now that it is such a Covenant, it is evident, in regard
frequently it is called a Command, as Psalm. 111.9. He has commanded his covenant
for ever. That ye may take it up under this formality, I would have you notice
three or four things, that occurs in this Covenant, all of which ye will find
meeting in the Covenant of Grace. 1. Ordinarily, the Master and the Superior
Indentures with the Servant for several things, the Servant according to the
nature of his station is to perform his part of his Service; every one that
comes under a Covenant, are not called to the same service, the Master will
have one to wait on his own person, another to hold the plough, a third to call
the plough, yet all come under a Despotick Covenant with the Master; thus it is
in the Covenant of Grace, the great Lord and Mediator has Treated the Covenant
so, as every Christian that enters in Covenant, though he be not bound to all
the Work of other Servants, yet he becomes particularly bound to all the work
of the Station, and of the calling, to which by the Covenant he is called;
readily he is not bound to the work of an Officer, but to the work of a more
private station; but all the Duties of his station, the Covenant binds him to
them; whatever be the station thou art in, whether thou be a Merchant, or a
Master, or a Servant, or a Friend, whatever be the station or relation, God in
the Covenant has bound thee to, all the Duties of that station, both in
reference to thy Master, and all thy fellow servants; so that when we wrong our
neighbor, let it be in his name, or in his Possession, we fall under a breach
of one Article of the Covenant, so though the Covenant bind first and
principally the Master to the Servant, coming under the Despotick Covenant, and
the Servant he is especially bound to the Master, yet when he is under that
Despotick covenant, the Master will not allow the Servant to strike his
Fellow Servants, but he is bound in his carriage to be at Peace with others; so
in this Despotick-covenant, it binds first, to love the Lord our God with all
our heart, with all our mind, with all our soul, and also to love our neighbor
as our selves; so the injuries done to our Neighbor, are a breach of the
Covenant with God. 2. In a Despitick-covenant, we have not only service
Required, but it is ordinary for Masters to tell the Servants the manner of the
service, he will have them to do it humbly and obediently, and readily; now in
the Covenant of Grace, as the Father has enjoined all the Duites of the station
of the Servant, he takes in Covenant, so be has told the manner how it must be
performed, he tells it must be performed sincerely, and in faith, and with an
eye to Christ, and from a Principle of Love to God, and to the Glory of his
Master; or else he tells us in the Covenant, he will regard it no more, than
the cutring off a dogs neck, or as if he had killed a man; so when we do the
duties of our station, if we do them not with the qualifications required in
the Covenant, we break the Covenant. O how many breaches are we guilty of, when
we are so little at our Duty; when we engaged in the service, we engaged to do
it seincerely and spiritully, that it is not done in Love, Faith, and in the
right Gospel Motive, we break the Covenant; no wonder many Believers go with
their hand on their loins, for breach of his Laws, when both the Duties of the
station are neglected; or if they be done, they are not done according to the
qualifications required. 3. In doing this service there is a Reward, promised
on the Masters part to the Servant, the Lord of that Servant when eh comes,
verily I say unto you, the Master shall make him Lord over all that he has;
nay more, the Lord of that Servant shall gird himself, and stand and serve him;
so that in effect in this Covenant, as the Covenant binds to the Duties of the
station, and that they should be done in such and such a manner; so there is a
great Reward promised to them that do them. Lastly, Sometimes liberal Masters
in making Covenants with Servants, will give them some Arles, something in
hand; so we read in Scripture of the Earnest of the Spirit, that is, in our
beginnings, the Arles of the Spirit, the beginnings of Love, of life, of
Liverty, of Peace with God, of delight in God, they are like a Master, that he
may encourage the Servant to do the Work he has commanded him; not only he
promises to give him a Reward, but to give him all that he has, and will give
him an Earnest of that; It Is remarkable, Princes that intend to be liveral in
their Offers, which they make, as Herod did to Herodias, they have said, Ask of
me, and I will give it thee, to the half of my kingdom: never one offered to
give them all that he had, and to make them Ruler over all that he had; so ye
see the Tenor of the Covenant, under all these three Formalities, but all these
three hold not out the nature of it so fully, as the fourth, it is a Marriage
Covenant, it is a Covenant Transacted, not only quing together, etc. but it is a
Marriage Covenant, and that best expresses the nature of it.

SERMON VI.
2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me
an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is all my
salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


AMong many Differences betwixt the Covenant of Works and the Covenant of
Grace, this is one; there is no Promise in the Covenant of Works, but there are
four Commands for it, but there is no Command in the Covenant of Grace, but it
has two Promises, there is a promise of strength to obey, and a promise of
Reward when it is obeyed; Therefore no wonder it be called a Covenant of
Promises: I told you that there were four sorts of Covenants among men, and the
Covenant of Grace was a Complex of all the four, it had something of the nature
of a Covenant of Peace and War, it has something of the nature of a Covenant of
Traffic and Commerce, it is a Despotick Covenant, such as betwixt Master and
Servant, and Prince and Subjects; but the truth is, all these three do not
fully express the nature of it; therefore the fourth which remain a little to
be spoken to, will open it more fully, it is a Marriage. covenant, therefore ye
find very frequently in Scripture, mention of Espousals, 2 Cor. 11.2. I have
espoused you, says Paul, as a chaste virgin to one husband, even to Jesus
Christ, I will remember thee the kindness of thy youth, even of thy espousals;
herein it differs from the Covenant of Works, the Covenant or Works was foedus
amicitiae, God and Adam were friends; but this is foedus conjugale, a
Marriage-covenant.

That I may the better open this formality of the Covenant, as a
Marriage-covenant, I will offer these two things to be considered. 1. I will
show you, that this Covenant establishes a Marriage betwixt Christ and
Believers, it is in effect the Contract, and contains all the Articles of the
Marriage. 2. I will show you on what grounds it comes to pass, that this
excellent Covenant establishes this Marriage.

First, That this Covenant drives at a Marriage, it is not a Covenant of Peace
and War only, or a Covenant of Traffic, such as betwixt Kings and Subjects,
but it is a Marriage-covenant, The clearing of this will appear, if ye notice
two things that use to Constitute a Marriage, and the Covenant established them
both with Christ. 1. There is an Union, a Marriage Union. 2. There is a
Communion that flows from that Marriage Union, these are the two things that
effentially constitute a Marriage, and by the Covenant both the two come to be
established, betwixt Christ and Believers.

First, There is an Union, I mean not an Union of Friendship, or that is
founded in the relation betwixt King and Subject, or Master and Servant, but
it is a Marriage Union there are two properties accompanying a Marriage Union
First, It Is the nearest Union. Secondly, It Is the strongest Union. 1. The Union
betwixt Christ and Believers, is the nearest Union, it is remarkable, it is
compared in Scripture to the Union, betwix the root and the Branches, the Head
and the Body, the Husband and the Wise, they are so Unite, that of all Unions
it is the nearest; Christ speaking of these that were unite to him, has a
strange word, Mark 3. and alst verses, For who ever shall do the will of my
Father, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother. How can these consist
together, to be his brother, hsi sister, and mother? But the meaning is, they
have the nearest ties to him, the nearest Union, he is as near to me, as if he
were my brother, my sister, and mother. 2. As it is the nearest Union, so it is
the strongest; the Marriage Union is of all Unions the strongest; but this
Union with Jesus Christ, established by the Covenant, it has something stronger
than the ordinary Marriage Union: For 1. An ordinary Marriage Union may be
loosed by Adultery; It Is not so in this Covenant, Thou have played the harlot
with many lovers, yet return tome, back-ssiding children, for I ma married to
you. 2. An ordinary Marriage Union may be dissolved by death, Romans 7.2. The
woman which has an husband, is bound by the Law to her husband, as long as he
lives, but if her husband be dead, she is loosed from the Law of her husband:
but neither Adultery, nor Death, can loose this Marriage Union; so the Covenant
establishes an Union with Jesus, not merely of Friendship, Traffic and
Commerce; but it establishes a Conjugal and Marriage Union.

2. This Covenant as it establishes a Marriage Union, so it establishes a
Marriage Fellowship; the Fellowship and COmmunion grounded on this Union, makes
it a Marriage Fellowship: Take a view of three or four things holden out in the
Covenant, in reference to the Fellowship, and ye will find, as there is the
nearest Union, and the strongest, and so a Marriage union, so there is a
Marriage Fellowship. 1. Take a view of the Converse that passes betwixt Christ
and Bederers, 2 Cor. 6.10. Ye are the temple of the living God, as God has
said, I will dwell in them, and walk in the, and I will be their God, and they
shall be my people. Rev. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any
man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and sup with him,
and he with me; Lay these expressions together, I will be their God, I will
dwell in them, I will walk with them, and sup with them; they look very like a
Marriage Converse. 2. No only does that converse prove this Marriage
Fellowship, but the Covenant holds out betwixt Christ and Believers a mutual
Communication of Secrets; not only will he walk in them, dwell in them, sup
with them, but he tells them all his Secrets, Joh. 15.15. Henceforth I call you
not servant, for the srevant knows not what his Lord does; but I have called
you friends, for all things that I have heard of my Father, I have made known
unto you. On the other hand, they put on him all their secrets, All my
complaints is before him, and my groaning is not hid from him, said David; It Is
remarkable, there are many things we grcan for, that we dare hardly tell any
body what it is at the root of it; All my complaint is before thee. It wasa
notable word Hannah had to Eli, when she was mourning in the Temple, and he
supposed her to be drunk, Put away from the thy wine, says he; My Lord, says
she, I am not drunk wiht wine, but am a woman of a sorrowful spirit and I have
poured out my complaint before the Lord. It Is a Metaphor taken from a Bottle,
that a man is pouring out, until it be all poured our from the bottom; and this
is like a Marriage Fellowship indeed, He is their God, and they are his, he
walks in them, and dwells in them, and sups with them, and he tells them all
that he has heard of his Father, and they pour out their complaint, and their
very groaning is not hid from him.

But 3. If ye take notice how the Covenant holds out, their standing and
falling together like married persons, as the Woman marries the Man for good
and ill, the alteration of the Husbands lot, from being strong to be sickly,
from being rich, to become poor, from being honorable, to become despised, it
looses not the Marriage Union, the Union is still bound. The fellowship betwixt
Christ and Believers, is of this nature, it is like the Marriage of Married
persons, that if ever they be tender, it is when they are Married, then their
affections boyls most; it is so with Christ, like a kindly Husband, he is most
tender of his married Wife: It Is remarkable, when Stephen was stoned, he looked
up, and saw Jesus standing at the Fathers right hand, the Father said to him,
Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool. And Heb.
1.6. And when he brigeth in the first begotten into the world, he says, let
all the angels worship him; but when any of them that he has Married is
suffering, he lets them see Jesus standing at his right hand, and all the
Angels of God stand and worship him.

Lastly, If ye take a view of the delight they have of one another, O the
pleasure he had of converse with this peoply! Pro. 8.30. Then I was by him, as
one brought up with him, and I was daily his delight. On the other hand, what
delight have they in him, when they sit down under the shadow of the
Apple Tree, and goes with him into the Garden, and into the Banouetinghouse,
and finds his fruit sweet to their taste. So layall these together, and ye will
see the Covenant, as it holds out a Trealy of Peace and War, as it opens a
Traffic, as it is a Transaction betwixt Lord and Servant, so betwixt Flosband
and Wife; so it is a Marriage Covenant, and it establishes and Union and
Communion.

Quest. Before I leave this, there is one question to be cleared, one may ask,
How is it possible, that there should be a Marriage Union betwixt Christ and
his followers in this Convenant, there may be a Treaty of Peance and War, there
may be a Traffic betwixt Kings and Subjects, there may be a Covenant, as
betwixt Lord and Master, but how can there be a Covenant, as betwixt Husband
and Wife The great reason of his difficulty is, the inequality betwixt the
parties he is the Potter, and we are are the Clay, and the Potter to Marry the
Clay, there is not only a physical difference, but a Moral, He is infinitely
holy, and we are exceedingly sinful, and how then can it be a Marriage Covenant?

Answ. For clearing of this, I desire ye may take notice of three or four
things; 1. Our blood is honored and made noble, by the assumiing of our Nature
into a Personal Union with the Godhead, this has in effect preferred our
Nature to the Nature of Angels, Man is now exalted above the Angels, and they
think it no disgrace to them, they were our elder Brethren by Creation, and
they were more noble Creatures, and we were made a little lower than the
Angels, but now they think it no disgrace to worship One that is Man, and to
follow Him where ever He goes: How low soever we be by Creation, yet our Blood
is Nobilitat, in that it is unite to the Person of the Godhead, in the Person
of the Mediator. 2. Take notice of this, That Christ has a way of purifying
these that He marries, the case is as it was with Ahasuerus and Esther, she is
pitched on to marry Ahasuerus, but there must be thirty days, wherein her Maids
were to perfume her, before she was married, this was Typical, and shows, that
though there be an inequality betwixt parties, yet Christ has a way of
purifying, and making them that have an ill smelled breath, to give a sweet
smell, He has persumes that can make them sweet and odoriserous. 3. Though
there be a great inequality betwixt the parties, yet the Covenant may drive
this Marriage, in regard, how low soever we be by Creation, we are the Father
Gife in Election to the Son, the Father gave Believers to the Son in Election,
All that the Father gives me shall come un^^ me. Now how inconsiderable soever
we be by Creation, and how despicable a Gift, yet he respects the Gift for the
Given sake. Lastly, Christ is exceeding condesceading, for as great, and as
noble, and as eminent as Christ is, yet he is o^^ all the most condescending,
he took well with that, not t^ to have a hole to lay his head in, and to be
cruciesid betwixt t^^^ thieves; and no wonder he take well with it, to marry a
blace Bride, especially since she was the Fathers Gift, and he knows how to
perfume her, and nobilitat her blood, by unting it to the Godhead, So that ye
see the Marriage is very forcible, on all these four accounts; Now if ye would
rightly take up this Covenant of Grace, and understand what yet are doing, when
ye make a Covenant with Carist, ye must take up the Covenant in all these four
respects; it is a Covenant of Peace and War, that Christ and ye shall have
common Friends, and common Enemies; it is a Covenant of Traffic, where ye may
buy and sell, ye may buy fine Linen Gold, Eye Salve, without money, and without
price; It a Covenant betwixt Lord and Master, and Subject, and Servants, that
ye shall serve him, and in the manner prescribed in the Covenant; and he shall
give the greatest Reward as the Term, and an Arles until it come; and withal,
it is a Marriage Covenant; take youto the Covenant under all these formalities,
and ye will take it up right.

And that ye may be put to it, take up the Covenant as a Marriage Covenant; I
will but give you these three Qualifications, that are necessary in ones
carrying a Marriage Covenant.

First, I exhort you to pearken to Christ's wooing motions, all the Sermons,
and Scriptures that are the grounds of this Marriage, they are indeed Christ's
wooing motions, he would not only be at peace with them, and have a Traffic
with them, but he would have a Marriage; It Is true, there are many of you, ye
may say, as Abigail said, she was married to Nabal, and David seet to take her
to him to wife, I am not worthy to wash the Feet of the servants of my Lord,
yet she arose and went to mere the Messengers to go with him; indeed we are not
worthy to go to his Marriage Bed, and to be privileged with the privileges of
the Covenant, yet entertain his wooing motions.

Secondly, I would desire you to consider, what the privilege of such a
Marriage is, O such a jointure as he prepares, though he get no Tocher, as a
wonderful jointure he gives; It Is remarkable, Ahasuerus had married Esther, a
poor maid, Mordeci's Neice, yet he loves her, so that he says to her at the
Feast of the Banquet of Wine, what is thy petition Queen Esther, and it shall
be granted to thee, even to the half of my Kingdom: But these are not the Terms
that he makes to his Bride: they are strange offers in the Covenant, concerning
my Sons and my Daughters, command ye me; Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my
Name, he shall give it thee; Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give
thee according to the desire of thy soul.

Thirdly, That ye may enter this Marriage Covenant, remember the Terms on which
ye must enter, as a Woman in Marriage does when she marries Husband, she
marries him for good and ill, readily ye may see your Husbands interests very
low, but let not that dissolve the Marriage; as guiltiness will not dissolve
the Marriage on his part, so the Cross attendig him should not loose it on our
part. Now they that understand the Covenant rightly, and know what they are
doing, when they are personally Covenanting with him, they do all the four,
they accept of him as a Friend, to be at peace with him, and to have common
Friends, and common Enemies; and they accept of a Covenant of Traffic, that
they will buy gold and fine linen; and they accept him as a Lord; but
especially they take him for a Husband, the Covenant is a Marriage Covenant.
These four will sum up the great Heads of the Covenant. But to go further.

The third thing I would open is, how this Covenant is made up on all these
four Heads; I will not here speak of the Mediators part, I pitched on that
else, and showed you what the Mediator did, in reference to the Covenant. But
for the making up of all these four sorts of Covenant, there are two things
necessary to make it up. 1. There must be consent to all the Articles by both
parties. And 2. There must be Obligations to secure the consent for the future,
otherways variable Creatures like us, if there were not a penalty, and a curse
put into the Covenant, what would our consent signify? Now both the two are
necessar, in Transacting of all these four sorts of Covenants, in all the Head
and Articles of it. First, There must be consent of parties, to make up the
Covenant. Secondly, An Obligation trom the hazard or curse, in case that insent
be past from; and here I will speak a little of the Consent, that is necessary
to make up this Covenant, I need not speak of the Consent on Gods part; I will
evidence to you, the most hearty consent that ever wa^ given to a Contract on
His part, by these three things.

First, He committed the drawing of the Govenant to the Mediator, It Is true the
Prophets were the Penmen and Secretaries, but the Mediator was the Inspirer of
all the Articles, now it was an evidence of His hearty consent, that He
committed the drawing of the Covenant to the Mediator, and it is Glory is a
thousand times more advanced by the Covenant of Grace, than it was by the
Covenant of Works all the payment He would have gotten from Adam, was nothing
to the payment he has gotten from His Son; if all the Angels, if all the Sons
of Adam had met together to do Him service, they would not all make up such a
piece of service, as he got from His Son, the Man that was His Fellow. 2. His
consenti's all along declared in the Scripture, why has He penned this Bible,
and appointed his Ministers to Preach and press it on people, if He were not
serious in his designs? Why makes he such protestations, As I live, I delight
not in the death of sinners. Why weeps he when his offers are refused, as he
did over Jerusalem, if he had not given his consent in the Covenant? 3. The
Mediator that drew the Covenant, and sealed it by a Testament with His Blood;
of all the persons that ever were received into Glory, He received Him in the
greatest Triumph, when he welcomed His firstborn Son to Glroy, He set Him down
on His right hand, and bade all the angels worship him? If He had not done Him
the greatest Service, would He have used Him so? And would He had so great
pleasure to have them singing, Worthy, worthy is the Lamb; But all the matter
in making up the Covenant, is about our Consent to the Covenant; now a
Christian gives his consent to the Covenant, and thereby in all the four Heads,
makes it to be a sure and fast Bargain.

First, We give our consent to the Covenant in the second Adam; as we gave an
implicit consent to the Covenant of Works in the first Adam, so we gave a
consent to the Covenant of Grace in the second Adam: Here you would take notice
that though the Covenant of Grace be made with all Believers, and every
particular Believer may make use of it, as if it were only intended for him;
yet the principal Parties Treating the Covenant are, the Father, and the
Mediator; the Covenant of Grace is especially made with the Mediator; now when
the Messiah gives His consent, and accepts of the Covenant, as a Public
Person standing in the room, and supplying the place of all the Elect, we gave
our consent in Him; and the truth is, there is never a Christian that comes to
be backward to embrace the Covenant, or that after they had embraced the
Covenant, breaks it, but in a manner, they say, that Christ consented to more
than they will stand to; for as the Father in Baptism binds the Son to the
Covenant, so the Mediator as a Public Person, standing in the room of all the
Elect, the Father had given His consent, and the Mediator had given His consent
to the Covenant in all our Names, and has engaged to get our consent; as a
Husband may consent for the Wife, or the Parent may consent for the Child that
is a Minor; so does Christ as a public Person consent in our Name, and who
ever break the Covenant, they as it were, flee away from our consent of the
Covenant, Transacted betwixt the Father and the Mediator.

Secondly, We give our consent to all the Articles of the Covenant in our
Baptism: A Christian before he can be engaged to other Lovers, the Lord keeps
him as it were from the Womb, he will give him his Name, the Seal of the
Covenant; it is true the Parent binds for the Children, as men may make Bonds
binding their Heirs, so they have a warrant to bind for their Children to God:
There are two consents we give, and both of them are implicit, our Parents
binds us to be Christ Friends in Baptism, to buy of him gold, fine linen, and
to accept of him for our Lord, to marry him, and to have nearest Union with
him, and the sweetest Communion that may be enjoyed: But there is a twofold
explicit consent, that we give to the Covenant; First, It Is an explicit
consent, when we accept of the external Privileges of the Church, the Word and
Sacraments; when we accept of these and state our selves Members of the Church,
the very accepting of the Privileges, is a consent to all the Articles of the
Covenant; a person that is not resolved to be serious in taking the Covenant on
all these four Heads, had done better not to have accepted the Privilege of
the Church, the very accepting of the privilege, to go to the Church, to get
your Children Baptized, to come to the Table of the Lord, is as much as to say,
I will stand to what the Mediator Treated, and what my Parents did engage to,
when I was Baptized. 2. We give this explicit consent, either in the Sacrament
of the Supper, or at any time that a Christian comes under a personal Vow, both
of these are express consents, so that, though it may be, as ye will hear, the
consent be not cordial; for there are many kinds of consents to the Covenant;
though I say the consent be not cordial, yet it is enough to bring thee under
the curses of the Covenant; though it bring thee not under the blessings of the
Covenant, thou has neither a Covenant of Friendship, nor a Covenant of
Traffic; the Mediator gave his consent, and thy Parents gave their consent,
and in they accepting of the Privileges of the Church, and the Sacrament of
the Supper, thou gave thine; and though they bring thee not to to be married to
the Mediator, yet they may bring thee under the Curse of the Covenant; for when
it may be thou replies, thou did not give thy consent to the Covenant, but thy
consent was given, in thy accepting of the privileges of the Church; or when
thou came to the Sacrament of the Supper, or came under a personal Vow, and in
this consent, either we accept and cordially embrace the Covenant, or by our
consent we expose our selves to all the curses of it; the very consent engages
us to all the curses of it, therefore will he say unto thee, Out of thy mouth I
condemn thee; So the Father is cordial in in his consent, and the Mediator can
bear him witness of it; and all in the visible Church, they visibly profess
they stand to the Covenant, at he drew it, they approve of the consent he gave,
and that their Parents gave in Baptism, and by their accepting of the outward
privileges of the Church, and when they take the Sacrament of the Supper, they
give their own consent, and when they have given their own consent, they are
either under all the curses of the Covenant, or all the blessings of it.

Quest. I will only clear one case of Conscience, that may be very obvious
against this Doctrine, and so shall close this Sermon; some may say, I am
afraid to give an express consent, or else I would go home from this Sermon,
and go to a corner and tell him, I own what the Mediator did, when he
consented to the Covenant in my Name; I own what my Parents did in Baptism,
and I give my own consent, and gives my hand, and as it were strikes hand with
the Father; I will go and do all these things, but I am afraid to give my
consent, on a twofold account. 1. I am afraid that my consent be not sincere.
And 2. I am afraid that it be not abiding. I confess this is a great Objection,
for the Covenant cannot be really Treated, but by Confenters who are upright,
and who will persevere.

For answer to the Question, I will offer you two or three things. 1. I would
have you notice, that several times, the first motive of the Souls consenting
to Covenant with God, it is often fear, I confess indeed, fear is a changeable
thing, and we may do with our fears, asthe fame goes of the man, that when he
was upon Sea, he Vowed to the Virgin Mary, that if he came safely to Land, he
would offer her a pound of Candle, but when he came to Shore, he said a plack
candle might serve her; our resolution alters with our Fears, yet many times
fear of Hell, and desire of Heaven, drives on the beginning. Ye must not think
the work will not be sincere, because the fear of Hell may be at the bottom of
thy consenting to the Covenant, no, like a Woman that is marrying a Man, the
first motive of the Marriage is, he is a great man, and has a great Estate, and
I will have an easy life with him, but yet afterward she comes to love him for
himself; the beginning of the work, and thy giving thy hearts consent to own
the Mediator, in what he did, i^ may be fear of Hell, and love of Heaven, and
thou may love the man that is offered to be thy Husband, because thou will get
great things with him, yet afterward thou will love him for himself, therefore
stand not at it on this account, but come forward.

Secondly, Take notice, that sometimes there may be a very hearty consent, when
yet's it but ill expressed, there may be much in the heart, and little in the
expression; the truth is, the case is in our consenting to the Covenant, as
with two men, the one is an honest man, and down not endure cheating, but for
his hand-writ, he can draw no hing but his mark; the other man is a Clerk, and
can draw excellent Letters, and Gild them all with Gold, but he has a cheating
hand, and a false heart: In thy consent to the Covenant though thou can but
take up more of thy ill, and knows not what thy comfort is, yet there may be
much love, thou art like the man that is writing only his mark, and the fear of
Hell and love of Heaven: makes thee given thy consent and where thou have given
thy consent, thou cannot write thy own name but thy mark, yet come forward
write thy mark.

Thirdly, I exhort thee that makes this doubt, to consider that the strength to
persevere in the Covenant, when thou have consented, it must come from the
Covenant; the cast is with us, as with some poor men that comes to a Writer and
bids him write the Bond of such a Sum, and after it is writter, he bids him pay
for the writing of it, and he says, I have nothing to pay for it, until the
Bond be paid to me; in the point of perseverance it is so with us, we are not
to go and torment our selves with, I will fall away I will not persevere, we
are not bound to pay for the Bond until that the Bond be paid to us; therefore
it is the ground lesest thing in the world to stand at, I will not give my
consent to the Covenant, for I will not be sincere, I will not get bidden at
it, but I will give my consent, when the Bond is paid to me, and then I will
pay for the writing of it, and I will get strength to perform, and to
persevere; thou has no furniture, neither for being cordial, nor for
perseverance, until conce the Bond be begun to be paid.

Lastly, Christian know, thou that stands at consention on these Grounds, know
this for certainty, that there has a great many entered in Covenant with Christ,
and consented to it, they have gone and made a personal Covenant, and holden up
their hand, and Vowed it in a Covenant with God, that were as weak at the
beginning as thou, and by their hanging on the Promises of the Covenant, have
been kept constant; if in thy consent to the Covenant, and endeavoring to
keep it, if thou honestly endeavor to keep it, every breach of it will not
make him cast thee out of it. I confess some Covenants men will make, they have
this clause in it, if the one fail, the other is loose, the Master and Servant
are free at the Term; it is not so in the Covenant of Grace, the Covenant of
Grace binds God to his own Faithfulness, and his Son, if we believe not, he
abides faithful, he cannot deny himself, the scope of this is, to put you, to
own your Mediators consent, and your Parents consent, and go home and strike
hands with Him, and accept of the Covenant of Peace, and a Covenant of
Traffic, that ye will be more in going to the Market, where gold, eyesalve,
fine-linen, are to be sold, without money, and without price, and that ye will
accept him for a Lord; and readily when the Bond is beginning to be paid, ye
will find enough for stedfastness and sincerity. There is Gods part, and our
part in the Covenant, and we will never do any thing at our part, until He
begin to do at His part, all the furniture on our part must come from Him;
therefore we can never be the first play master, and can never be the Party in
Covenant, that will begin first to pay the Articles of the Covenant; no, in the
day we Covenant with Him, we make this an express Article in the Covenant,
Lord, till thou fulfill thy part, I can never fulfill my part.

SERMON VII.
2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me
an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is all my
Salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


I Divided this Verse in five Branches, the first Branch was the Nature of the
Security, that David had from God for his encouragement, he calls it a
Covenant; I have dwelt on this at length, though Divines that write of the
Covenant, insist on several things that I have not mentioned, yet I need dwell
no longer in opening the nature of the Covenant than I have done; there is no
man, nor society of man can loose the Obligation of a Covenant; it always
binds, either to the Duties, or to the Curse and Penalty of the Covenant; and
if we cast off the Obligation to the Duty, wely under the Obligation to the
Penalty.

But before I yet leave this Branch, there is one thing I proposed in the Point
when I named it, that I will dwell on in the Work of this day, which is, to
evidence and prove, that this Covenant is a Covenant of Grace for so I told you
in the proposing of the Point, that the great ground of encouragement at death
is, the Covenant of Grace: I confess, I remember not where in all the Scripture
it is expressly called by this Name; It Is called a Covenant of Peace, and a
Covenant of Promifes, Ephesians. 2.12. And it is called a Covenant consisting of
mercies, Isa. 55. I will make an everlasting covenant with them, even the sure
mercies of David: the root and end of it is said to be Grace, to the praise and
glory of his grace, and to the exalting of his grace: There are multitudes of
Names given it in the Bible, equivalent to this Name a Covenant of Grace;
Therefore it may very rationally have this Name a Covenant of Grace. But the
thing I intend to follow in the work of the day is, to do these four things,
and if the Lord be with us, and bless us, they may be for our edification and
advantage. 1. I will prove and make appear to you, that this everlasting
Covenant, this ordered and sure Covenant, is a Covenant absolutely of Grace. 2.
I will show you some reasons, why God in Transacting this Covenant, would have
it to be entirely a Covenant of Grace. 3. I shall clear an Objection or two.
And lastly shall help you to improve it, in reference to some particular cases.

First, For proving that it is a Covenant absolutely of Grace, I must first
clear what is meaned by the word Grace. It Is true, sometimes it is put for
inherent Grace, which Papists call Gratia gratum faciens. 2 Pet. 3.18. But grow
in grace, and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ: most ordinarily it is put for
Gods free favor and good will, so we find Romans 11. If it be of grace, then it
is no more of works, otherwise grace would not he grace. And when we call it a
Covenant of Grace, the meaning is, it is a Covenant consisting of mere Favor
and Good Will; and this is the thing I am to make out this day, that this
Covenant is absolutely and entirely a covenant of Grace: I confess this is a
generally supposed Principle among Christians, yet it is not well understood.
First, That covenant which is founded neither in the merit of the Creature, nor
in any alluring motive from the Creature, must be a covenant of Grace with the
Creature; there are must be a covenant of Grace with the Creature; there are
ordinarily two things that influence Transactions and Covenants, the merit of
the Creature, or if there be no merit, some alluring motive; Abimelech entered
in a Covenant with Isaac, because he saw God was with him, Shechem is content
to enter in a Covenant with Jacob's Children, for all their cattle says he,
will be ours: Many will enter in Covenants with others, either on the account
of merit, a Master will covenant with his Servant to pay him his Fee, and that
because he has wrought well; or if there be no merit, they go on some alluring
motive: a man will enter in a Marriage covenant, sometimes on the account of
beauty, and sometimes on the account of riches; but God is entering in a
Covenant with us, saw neither merit, nor any alluring motive: as for our
beauty, Ezekiel 16.6. When I past by thee, thou wast cast out in the highway,
lying in thy blood, to the shame of thy nakedness, and no eye pitied thee, I
passed by thee, and cast my skirt over thee, and the time was a time of love:
And for our goodness and riches, Psalm 50.12. If he were hungry he needed not
tell us, for the cattle upon a thousand hills belong to him; and Psalm. 16.2.
Our goodness extends not the thee: He had been no less glorious nor happy, if
He had never created Man, it had diminished nothing from His infinite
perfection. Now a Covenant founded and transacted betwixt Him and us, where
there is neither merit, nor any alluring motive, must absolutely be a Covenant
of free will and entire Grace.

But Secondly, the evince this yet further, that it is a Covenant absolutely of
Grace, compare it with the Covenant of Works, the Covenant made with Adam; for
in the Covenant made with Adam, there was indeed Grace in it, yet not so much
Grace as appeared in this Covenant; the Covenat made with Adam, was made with a
person that did not merit a Covenant, yet it was made with an innocent man;
however he had not provoked God, yet he did not merit that God should Covenant
with him; the Covenant made with Adam, was made with an undeserving man indeed:
but He makes the Covenant of Grace with his enemy, For when we were yet
enemies, Christ died for us, Romans 5. And he gave Himself for the ungodly, and
not for the innocent; any of us may know by our own temper, if we shall make
that the measure, whereby to consider Acts of Grace, if a man had never wronged
us, nor injured us, in word or in deed, how ready are we to make peace with
Him; but if he had done his outmost out of malice and contempt of heart, it is
not easy to fall under a Covenant with him; The Covenant made with the first
Adam, was made with an innocent man, that had done nothing to disoblige Him;
but when He made the Covenant of Grace, He made it with fallen man, the ungodly
man that was his enemy; now what a great deal of Grace was there in this, if we
had bound up Covenants of friendship and fellowship with a man, and if he had
betrayed and gone contrare to his engagements, and turned implacable and
vindictive, would we bind up a Covenant with that man again? And the case was
so, when He treated a Covenant of Grace, He not only saw no merit, nor alluring
motive, but he saw us in a state of enmity, yet that hindered him not to make a
Covenant with us.

Thirdly, To show the Grace of this Covenant, consider the great Blessings that
he is content to promise, and engage for in the Covenant, far greater Blessings
than in the Covenant of Works; nothing contributes more to evidence it to be a
Covenant of Grace, than the consideration of the Blessings promised in the
Covenant. I suppose a man should take a Beggar, or a Prince should take a
Rebel, and promise him his Life, and make him his Kitchin-Boy, and give him
liberty of scour the Vessel, and to turn the Roast, it were much; but if he
Indenture with him, that he shall feed him with Wine, and Milk, and Honey, and
Spices, and give him Gold in his Purse, and Eve-salve, nay more, if he
Indenture with him to give him his Son in marriage, nay, to give him himself,
considering there is neither merit, nor alluring motive for this, the person is
a Rebel, a base and unworthy man: in the Covenant of Grace, the Lord has taken
this way to evidence the Grace of it, to speak with reverence, it is impossible
for him to promise greater things, He is at the outmost of what he can do, and
Men and Angels admire of what He can do; however He be infinite in Power, yet
it is impossible, to speak with reverence, for the eternal God, to promise
greater things than Himself, and his Son, for all Eternity, and that in such a
way, as the creature can be capable to enjoy; so that considering the great
Blessings of the Covenant, not to speak of Pardon, Peace and Communion, and
Joy, but to promise Himself and his Son: In the Covenant He promises to give
His Son to suffer, to be a curse, and subject him to the lowest things, except
Sin, that He could be capable of. It is a great controversy betwixt us and
Papists, if He descended locally into Hell, we deny it; but we maintain that He
had the equivalent of the Pains of Hell on his Spirit; and that Article of our
Bellef, is to be understood of horror of Spirit; now to advance us to the
greatest privileges we can be capable of, which are the enjoyment of Himself
and his Son for all Eternity, in the perfectest measure we can be capable of,
what a deal of Grace is in it?

Fourthly, To evidence that it is thus a Covenant of Grace, consider on what
Terms in the Covenant these great things are; and indeed here especially lies
the Grace of the Covenant, any would think the Terms behoved to be very high,
considering the Glory of the Merchant, and the greatness of the Marriage; here
is the matchless Grace of the Covenant, the Terms on which all these are
offered, makes it indeed of Grace; and in reference to the Terms, I will offer
these five remarkable Considerations, that evidence it a Covenant of Grace. 1.
He that offers these Commodities, offers them with a free Discharge of all
bygone Debt. If for the future the Covenant will be embraced, this is a
remarkable Article, to evidence the freedom of the Terms; there is no
blasphemous person like Paul, none that has had seven Devils like Mary
Magdalen, there is no persecutor like Manasseh, it is supposed he was one of the
most terrible persecutors, of whom the Apostle Heb. 11. speaks of sawing
asunder, he sawed Isaiah asunder with a Saw; no Publican like Matthew, no
denyer of Christ like Peter, no murderer and adulterer like David; no person of
whatsoever guilt, except one Sin, He has excepted the Sin against His Spirit,
but he is content in the Covenant, if any embrace and take hold of the offers,
He will pass all bygones, if there be accurat walking for the time to come.
2dly. It Is remarkable in the Terms, that He requires no other condition, but
allanerly Faith and its Concomitants; this is in effect as much as a free
Discharge, and ye shall not pay for it, only humbly and thankfully accept of
it; Faith is altogether consistent with Grace: suppose there were a great man
would offer a Beggar a Talent, is it not an Alms, and an Act of Grace, if there
be no more required of the Beggar, but to take the Alms? The Covenant of Grace
runs in this Channel, only believe, accept of the Offer of my self, and of my
Son, for all eternity, and this is all that is required. 3dly. The least degree
of this acceptance, providing it be sincere and not counterfit, the Covenant
accepts of it; if your Faith be as the Grain of Mustard Seed, suppose it be
never so small, if it be not counterfit, the Covenant accepts of it. And
lastly, the Covenant accepts of it, though it be mixed with much Corruption;
that poor man in the Gospel that came crying to Christ, has a kindly answer,
Help me, Lord, I believe, help my unbelief. Mark 9.23. My Faith has a great
deal of dross among it, it is as large unbelief, as Faith, but, Lord, help my
unbelief. Now the Covenant that runs on these Terms, is not this a Covenant
absolutely of Grace?

But lastly, to add no more, it is evident to be a Covenant of Grace, if ye
consider the way how this Covenant is followed; it is not only without merit,
and alluring motives it is not only made with fallen Man, and not only with at
innocent Man, not only holds it out the greatest things God can give, and on
the freest Terms: But lastly, it is evident to be a Covenant of Grace, if we
consider how He follows it. I will name but three or four things how He follows
it, and they will evidence it yet further to be a Covenant of Grace 1. He is
the first seeker and offerer of a Covenant; any body would think that we should
begin the motion, for we were the men that had the toom hand, and He had the
full; but yet He is the beginner, and He may say of any when they are
effectually called, and brought under the Bond of the Covenant, I am found of
them that sought me not, and sought them that asked not for me. 2dly, It Is
remarkable in the way of following it, that the persons whom He follows, they
are not only in all things equal with others, but several times they are worse
than others, if ye take a view of them in their natural privileges: was not
Esau Jacobs brother, and the elder brother, and had the Birthright, Yet Jacob
have I loved, and Esau have I hated: Ordinarily these that he follows to bring
under the Covenant, are alike in all things, two lying in one Womb, two
grinding at the Miln, two on the house top; yet He makes a Covenant with the
one, and passes by the other: but often they are worse than others, oftentimes
ye will find them simpler than others, they are the foolishest things, things
that are not; yea sometimes they are very ignorant, and that in the great
things of the Gospel, the subtilties of Philosophy are almost ridiculous to
them; yea, many times they are the worst and greatest of sinners that He brings
under the bond of the Covenant, the like of Paul, of Peter, of Manass^h: Now
that He should follow the Covenant thus, that He should follow them that have
the same things naturally, they are pieces of Clay out of the same Pit, they
are Stones out of the same Quarree, and that He should make choice of one like
a shrub, and the things He leaves like tall Cedars. What a deal of Grace is
there in it, that He should take the shrub, and pitch upon it, bring it under
the Covenant, and leave them that are wise for Wit and Learning. 3dly. If ye
take a view of this, the Grace of the Covenant will appear, that after He has
sought them, and found them, and feltered them, and bound them with the Cords
of the Covenant: the Grace of it appears in this, that once bound, and ay
bound: it is everlasting, there is no getting out under it again: it contributes
to evidence the Grace of the Covenant, that He will bide so many refusals, that
He will stand, and knock at the door, until his head be wet with the dew, and
his locks with the drops of the night, and then put His hand at the hole of the
lock, if he can get but an hole in the door, though He cannot get an open door,
He will put in His Finger at the hole of the door, and drop in Mirrhe upon the
handles of the lock: may not all these things evidence the Grace of the
Covenant; but nothing evidences it more than this, that no unbelief, no
guiltiness will cast without the Covenant again; if once in Covenant with Him,
once in, and ay in it: Thus He covenanted with David, if his children offend,
He will correct them with the rods of men, He will visit their iniquity with
rods, and their transgressions with stripes; He will send them to prisons, and
to scaffolds, but his presence nor his loving kindness will he not take from
them. Now lay all these together, and I hope I have evinced to you, that this
Covenant is absolutely and entirely a Covenant of Grace.

Quest. I would clear one Objection before I give you the Reasons of it: May
not some say, are there not conditions in the Covenant, and are they not
difficult, if not impossible to be performed? Can that be a Covenant of Grace,
that calls for self-denial, for taking up of the cross, for repentance, for
faith, for being holy as God is holy? Nay more, it calls for all the duties of
the Covenant of Works, and more; for the Covenant of Works bound Adam neither
to repentance, nor faith; but this Covenant binds to obedience to the whole
Law, and to repentance, and believing, which the Covenant of Works did not; and
can this be a Covenant of Grace that runs in this channel?

For Answer to this Question, Antinomians indeed say, there are no conditions,
and therefore they deny it to be a proper Covenant; they say, it is rather a
Promise than a Covenant; we maintain there are Conditions in it, and all these
things are true, it binds to obedience to the whole Law; but there are three
things in the conditions, that in effect make them nothing contrare to this,
that it is a Covenant of Grace. 1. There is no condition in it to be performed
in our own strength: a man goes quite from the Covenant of Grace, that would
wring repentance out of his own heart, or that would pray, or preach, or hear,
in his own strength; indeed this suited well with the Covenant of Works; and
when we go like Sampson, in our own strength, we go directly from the Covenant
of Grace; the Father in the Covenant, has appointed a Nurse to bear us up, He
has appointed a Tutor to govern and guide us, a Purse-master to bear our
stock, so that of our selves, as of our selves, we can do nothing; according to
the Tenor of the Covenant of Grace, we are to do nothing; whether to suffer, to
pray, to preach, to hear, the Covenant is so contrived, that all these things
called for, are not called for in our own strength; we break the Covenant, if
we wring them out in our own strength; the main thing is to lay our stock in
Christ's hand, whether to do, or to suffer, it is according to the Tenor of the
Covenant, that we should be supplied by his Grace, that we should have wisdom,
sanctification, and all from Him, which is a necessary thing for Believers to
observe, that take them to the Covenant of Grace; they are sometimes
exceedingly prejudged by not eyeing this Covenant, when they pray, or go to
hear, they think the furniture they have from Grace, or the habitual Grace they
have, will carry them through the duty; no, ye break the Covenant, if ye eye
not Him in all things the Covenant calls for. 2ly. Although there be many
conditions in the Covenant, yet nothing is a condition on our part, but it is a
promise on Gods part; there cannot be that Duty instanced in all the Covenant,
for which there is not a Promise; so is the business contrived, as if he saw a
Merchant that lays out a piece of cloth to a man to buy, and the man has no
money to buy it with, but he engages to give him money; but before he buy it,
the Merchant promises to give him Money to buy it with: so there is no Duty,
let it be named Mortification, or Vivification, there is no Grace required, or
Duty to be performed, but there is a Promise in reference to that Grace, and
that Duty. Now since there is no condition on our part, but there is a Promise
on Gods part; the condition makes nothing against the Covenant. 3ly. There is
no condition in the Covenant, the want whereof will cast us out of the
Covenant; it is remarkable, the Covenant betwixt God and us, the Covenant of
Grace, is not made as a bargain betwixt two men, wherein they engage, I vow and
promise to do this to you, providing ye do this to me, I will give you such a
Sum of money, if ye give me against such a day such a piece of cloth, and if he
bring it not against such a day, the other is loosed from the condition of the
money: where there is a conditional bargain, he that falls on the one part of
the condition, he loses the other, it is not a binding obligation: It Is not so
in this Covenant, though there be conditions in the Covenant, our not
fulfilling of the condition, looses not God from His part of it; if there were
any thing that would loose Him, Faith being the great condition of the
Covenant, it would be the want of Faith; if we believe not, yet he abides
faithful, he cannot deny himself. There are conditions in the Covenant; but
there is no condition required so, that if once we be in the Covenant, will
loose God from the condition on His part of it: the reason of it is, the
Cautioner in the Covenant, becomes bound for our failing in the Covenant, and
what is wanting in our Sanctification and Obedience, the Lord gets satisfaction
for it in Christ's Righteousness: So there are conditions and great things
required; yet they make nothing against it is being a Covenant of Grace. I hope
from all this, I have in this Sermon abundantly evinced, that this everlasting
Covenant, is properly a Covenant of Grace, though it has conditions in it.

SERMON VIII.
2 Samuel 23. Verse 5. Although my house be not so with God; yet he has made
with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure for this is
all my salvation, and all my desire, although (...) makes it not to grow.


It Is an Act of Grace that God did ever condescend to any kind of Covenant with
man, so great a God, but to make such a Covenant, a Covenant of Promises, and
of (...) great and precious Promises, we may indeed do as the builders that
builded the second Temple, cry, Grace, grace unto him. I was proving in the
forenoon, that this Covenant was a Covenant of Grace, notwithstanding o^ all
the conditions in it: Before I proceed in the following of it, I would have you
notice, that when the Covenant is called a Covenant of Grace, ye are to
suppose, that the Grace of the Covenant has these three properties. 1. It Is a
Covenant of pure and unmixed Grace, there is nothing but Grace in it, there is
neither merit, nor motive, and therefore the whole contrivement of it is Grace
and only Grace. 2ly. While we call it a Covenant of Grace, it is not only to be
understood of pure and unmixed Grace, but of perfect Grace; the Grace in the
Covenant is advanced to so great a hight, as the definition of perfection
agrees to it. Moralists say, that that is perfect in which nothing is wanting,
and to which nothing can be added; now the Grace of the Covenant is of this
nature. 3ly. When we call it a Covenant of Grace, it is to be understood of
persevering Grace, Grace which cannot be changed: Some things may be pure and
perfect, but they are variable: the most part of the kindnesses of Cretures are
of this nature; let them run like a burn in a spait, yet a Summer comes, and
they dry, it is not so with the Fountain: They say, the original of all Springs
is the Ocean, and that the Waters grows fresh running through the bowels of the
Earth, and they must drain the Ocean, ere they drain the Spring; no wonder then
it be persevering Grace; so that when we call it a Covenant of Grace, the
meaning is, it is a Covenant of pure unmixed Grace, perfect and full Grace, and
of persevering and continuing Grace. But before I improve this, the calling it
a Covenant of Grace, because it will have a great influence on all the Sermons
following, I would clear two or three questions that may come in, as Objections
against the Covenant being a Covenant of Grace,

Quest. 1. It may be objected, what reasons or motives, since there was neither
meriting, nor moving consideration, what rise could this Covenant have, to be a
Covenant of pure, perfect, and preserving Grace? These that write of this Head,
bring a number of reasons, they say, that God intended to humble man, and to
make him inexcusable, for when He shall judge him at the great day, he will
have no thing that will be a clock of excuse, according to that word, Joh.
15.22 If I had not come unto them, and spoken unto them, they had not had sin;
but now they have no clock for their sin. To refuse a Covenant of Grace, takes
off all clock of excuse; I deny not, but there may be many reasons why He made
it a Covenant of so pure, perfect, and persevering Grace: but I conceive, the
special reasons why it is so made, may be reduced to these two. 1. He made it
thus of Grace, that it might be sure, Romans 4.16. Therefore it is of faith and
by grace, that the promise might be sure to the seed: Mark, there it is by
Grace, that the Promise might be sure; had God entered with us in a Covenant on
any terms in the world, but Grace, it would never have been sure, suppose we
had been as perfect as Adam; and had had as great a stock of grace within us,
yet He would never make a bargain with the like of us, who were so changeable
things, if the bottom of the bargain had not been Grace; therefore it is through
Faith, and by Grace, that the Promise might be sure to the seed; He knew what
we were, when we were at our best, when we were new come off the stocks, and
were new come from His Hands by Creation; probably Adam stood not above five
hours, and what would a Covenant with the like of us signify, if it stood not
on Grace? 2ly. He made it thus of Grace, that He might exalt Christ: the
securing of us, and the exalting of His Son, both contribute exceedingly to His
own Glory; afterward I will make it out to you, if the Lord will, that the
Father is infinitely more Glorified in the Covenant of Grace, than if the
covenant of Works ha^ stood: but the great design He had in making a covenant
of Grace, was to secure us, and exalt His Son; the covenant runs in these
Terms, that in all Daties, in all our sufferings we must ay go to Christ for
strength. But if any would ask our right to the Crown, what ground we have to
think, that He will not cast us in Hell? how we will pray, how we will suffer,
and believe, and how we think to be freed from Hell? The Answer of all these
Questions is in one word, in Christ; the covenant is so contrived, as when we
have to do for Wisdom, Sanctification, Righteousness, Redemption, the truth is,
in the covenant, Christ is made all things. He is the way, the truth, and the
life, the door, the bread, the drink, and the apparel; the Apostle sums them up
in one word, He is all in all Now the exalting of His Son, never was there so
submssive a Son to the Father, He was his Equal, and was content to be trampled
on, and in a manner bruised, therefore the exalting of His Son, is the great
contrivement of the covenant; so that in effect, it is of Grace, both that the
Promise might be sure to the seed, and that Christ might be exalted; in both
which, the Glory of the Father is more advanced, than in all the Works of
Creation and Providence; and that clears the first difficulty, why God resolved
to make it a covenant of Grace?

Quest. 2. The second difficulty against this, that it is thus a covenant of
pure, perfect, and persevering Grace, How can this stand with the Justice of
God, and with His Holiness? God is naturally just, and infinitely just, and He
as necessarly punishes sin, as the fire burns, or as a weighty things moves
downward? It Is remarkable, the Scripture tells, He cannot behold iniquity, nor
suffer it to go unpunished; now to make with Rebels, and swear a covenant, to
accept of men perfect holiness, to accept of the Will for the Deed, to pardon
iniquity, to cast their sins in the bottom of the sea; to tell them in the
covenant, the iniquity of Jacob shall be sought for, and not be found; How
stands this with Justice? Does not Grace prevail over Justice?

Answ, For Answer to this, know, that this covenant of Grace, is made on all
these Terms that I spoke of it the forenoon, without the least violation of
Justice, and two things will evedience the truth of this. 1. Christ the
Mediator of ^he covenant, before He could accomplish and order a covenant of
Grace, He treated a covenant of Redemption; I think indeed, that is a proper
covenant, though generally foreign and domestic Divines have not adverted to
it, yet many of late, have seen all the essentials of a covenant in it; in the
Son (before the covenant of Grace was, in all the particulars of it Transacted)
He Transacted a Covenant of Redemption with the Father, wherein He undertook to
satisfy Justice, and the Covenant of Grace runs in so free a current and
channel, on the account of the Mediator's indenturing the Covenant of
Redemption. 2ly. It Is no wrong to Justice, to accept of a Cautioner, there was
Mercy in the midst of it; there was Grace in the Fathers accepting a
satisfaction from the Son: The Schoolmen speak of the Fathers uniting the
Godhead with the Manhood, and so glorifying the humane Nature, and the
accepting of a Satisfaction from the Humane Nature, was an Act of Grace, yet
such an Act of Grace as Justice was satisfied fully by a person that had not
committed thee deed: Za^eucus emitted a Law, that whosoever committed Adultery
^n his Kingdom, both their eyes should be put out, and when the Heir of his own
Kingdom committed Adultery, he appointed one of his eyes to be put out, and one
of his own, because he thought that the person that sinned should suffer; but
this was neither perfect sufferings, nor perfect satisfaction and Justice; but
here Justice is abundantly satisfied, though the person sinning, was not the
person sufferer; to be brief, the Covenant of Grace being a result of the
Covenant of Redemption, wherein the Mediator undertook the paying of the
sinners Debt, it is abundantly satisfying to Justice, and Mercy and Justice kiss
one another; for Mercy has gotten full scope, and Justice has gotten full
satisfaction.

Quest. 3. The third question I will move against this Truth, that it is a
Covenant of Grace; some may say, there might have been more Grace in it than
there is, there might have been Promises of perfect holiness; now in all the
Bible we have no Promise of perfect Sanctification: and which makes this the
more difficult, we are commanded to endeavor perfection, and yet we have no
promise of perfection in all the Scripture; we cannot go to God in Faith and
pray, to make us perfect in this life, for we can Pray for nothing in Faith,
whereof we want a Promise; so that it would seem, it is not of such perfect
Grace, as I have been saying, for there is not in all the Bible a promise of
perfection.

Answer For the clearing of this, I will offer you these three things. 1. It Is
the nature of sincerity to aim at perfection, it stands as it were on its
Tip-toes, and stretches its arms to it; its true they are but childrens arms,
and are but weak and cannot reach far off, yet there is never sincerity but
there is an aim at perfection, therefore ye shall find the true godly, the most
part of their exercises run not on the want of Grace, but on the weakness,
insufficiency, and the Imperfection of Grace; The great reason is, sincerity
will be constantly complaining, until it be perfect, until it reach the
resurrection of the dead; therefore there comes in the heart that is upright ay
some complaints, alas I cannot get grief proportioned to sin, I cannot get love
to God, alas, I cannot grieve enough for sin; it is called perfection in
Scripture, because it aims as perfection, and will ay be complaining until it
be perfect. 2ly. Know this, that though in all the Covenant there is not a
promise of perfection, nor perfect Sanctification. no^ not one, until we come
to Glory, and until the woman clothed with the Sun, have the Moon under his
feet, there the Crown will be set on, and love and delight will be perfected;
the great reason is, because perfection here would neither suit our duty, nor
our case, no, were there perfection of holiness here, it would overturn the
whole frame of the Covenant, which is, that we shall go to Christ for pardon,
for healing for making up of wants: Perfection would be inconsistent with all
these, beside to be perfect here, would neither suit with time nor place; take
the finest Gold, or the best Jewels, and lay them in a reikie house, readily
they would get the smell of the reik: It Is remarkable, ever Paul was it danger
to be puffed up with abundance of Revelations, therefore it is no wonder, for as
great as the Promises are that perfection be not promised, for the Jewel would
be in a reikie house, and we would be puffed up with abundance of Revelations;
so it is no way inconsistent with the covenant its being a covenant of Grace,
that the roving Patient has not from the Physician, all that he cries for, the
Physiciain gives what is suitable and agreeable to the nature of his case, so
the covenant is of perfect Grace, because it contains promises of perfection,
and so much Grace as was necessar for our case.

Quest. 4. The fourth Difficulty I would move against this, the covenant its
being a covenant of Grace, Does it not contain the Cross, and are there not a
multitude of clauses in it, bearing afflictions and crosses? And indeed, some
have observed, the threatening part of Afflictions in the covenant, it often
holds as true as the promising part of Peace; and pardon, which may be a very
great scruple sometimes in one, that has taken them to the covenant, and has
resolved not to follow the guise of the world, they will credit the Promises,
and take them to the covenant, and in the mean time, the only part of the
covenant that is most verified is, that part which contains the Cross; the
Promises of supping with him, and bringing them into the banqueting house, they
know little of that: But as for that part of the covenant, they know He has
been a true and faithful witness, and true to His word; now the question is,
looks this like the covenant of Grace?

Ans. For answer to this, I desire ye may take notice of three things, first,
Take notice what the covenant removes, in reference to the Cross, and we may go
to God and peremptorly press Him, for removing these, nay readily He is
faithful and true in removing of them. 1. Several times He will remove the
curse and sting of the Cross, all the Elect meet with that; The covenant has
promised, and rather threatens the Cross, but withal it is added, it shall come
like a Be, it may come bumming and making a noise, but it wants the sting, and
one needs not be afraid of a Be that wants a sting; the covenant has promised,
that in reference to the Cross, the curse and sting are both removed. 2ly. The
covenant has promised, the proportioning of the Cross to our shoulders, it is
indeed a special promise to that purpose, He will not suffer them to be tempted
above what they are able to bear; He knows that which would be balast to one
Vessel, would drown another; therefore He calls a Christian to suffer according
as they have gotten Grace, every one is not for the service that others are
for, readily if He give Effectual Calling, Pardon, Communion with Himself, and
Peace,, one to ten thousand, if that person go to the grave without some signal
Cross; so the Covenant secures these two, it secures against the Curse and
Sting of the Cross, and against a disproportioned Cross to our strength. 3ly.
The Covenant secures of help under the Cross, it bears them up, it is a wonder
to see how that part of the Covenant has been accomplished, when I come to the
ordering of the Covenant, I will have occasion to speak of it; these that have
sometime in their life been sinking under fears, so that the least noise of
leafes on the Tree in the night time, and even their own shadow on the wall,
would have feared them, in the time of Persecution, have cheerfully suffered
themselves to be cast to the lions, and in the fire; The great reason is, the
Covenant engaged for strength under the Cross; and the Lord has promised, if he
call David to go against a Goliath, He shall deal with him as Saul did with
David, he shall get on the King's Armor to fight with. 4ly. He has secured
this by the Covenant, that the Cross shall be the way to the Crown; I deny not
but there may be some in Glory, but certainly they will be rare, who have not
come through Afflictions and Tribulations: and if they be in Glory, they shall
be among the least of the Kingdom of God; the Captain came through Afflictions,
and why not the Soldiers; The Scripture speaks generally, These are they that
have come through great tribulation, it is the Testimony given to the generality
of them, in some period of their life or other, they have had some signal
Tribulation, and the Scripture tells us If we suffer with him, we shall also
reign with him: So the covenant secures against all these, against the Curse
and Sting of the Cross, against a disproportioned Cross to our strength, and
strength under it, and the way to the Crown.

Secondly, Consider that sometimes the Cross is as necessary as a manifestation
may be, however indeed we would be ay at carving out our own cordials, and like
children, would have our handful, and our sense and our eye filled; yet the
Cross may be as necessary as the great privileges of the Covenant, therefore
ye find sometimes the Cross made a Promise, as Hosea 2.6. I will hedge up my
way with thorns, and make a wall that she shall not find her paths: And ver. 7.
And she shall follow after her lovers. and shall not overtake them: and she
shall seek them, and shall not find them; and the result is, then shall ye say,
I will go and return to my first Husband, for then it was better with me than
now. Many a time David sung this Song in the Psalms, especially Psalm, 119. It
is good for me that I was afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes: Before I
was afflicted I went astray, but now have I kept thy word: Therefore it is not
inconsistent with the Grace of the Covenant, that there be imperfect
Sanctification, and the Cross in it.

Quest. 5. The last Difficulty that I would remove is, that it is a Covenant of
pure and perfect Grace, Might it not remove our fears, though it keep us under
imperfect holiness and the Cross? However the Covenant had not carried us up
above affliction, would it not have been a Covenant of perfect Grace, if it had
done this alms deed, to secure the Elect against their fears, especially since
they are not only fears of sin, but fears of Hell, and servile, and despondent
fears?

Answ. for answer to this, I will offer you these three things. 1. The Covenant
has done as much against fears, as was necessary to it, for the Covenant has
declared servile fear to be sin, and has expressly forbidden them; it is spoken
of the reprobat, they shall be in fear where no fear is: The Covenant often
quarrels for them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? So the Covenant
condemns these servile fears, and quarrels for them, as a plague inflicted on
the reprobat. 2. Take notice, that a multitude of these fears, they ordinarily
come on Believers, when they are furthest out of sight of the Covenant, they
forget the Covenant: the great ground of these fears is, from their reading the
Covenant of Works, when they should read the Covenant of Grace; it is not from
the Covenant of Grace that they have these fears, for the answer of these fears
is from the Covenant; the great ground why Believers are swallowed up with
these fears, is, because they understand not the Doctrine of the Covenant, or
if they understand it, they forget it. 3. To say no more, ye shall know that
the Covenant holds out Promises, even against these fears; thou may possibly
have a plaster lying beside thee for a sore, and if ye lay it not on, it
cannot cure: There may be fears on thee, and there lies in the Bible, in the
room thou lies in, a plaster of the Covenant, that would remeed and cure these
fears, but thou lays it not to, therefore the pain continues; several times
it is the not applying the Covenant, and not the want of the Covenant, that
makes the pain continue. Our Countryman Mr. Dickson, has written a Book
Therapeutica, the Title of it is, The curing of all diseases, by the
application of the Covenant.

Use, For use of the Doctrine, the consideration of the Covenant, as a Covenant
of Grace, I confess it is the greatest encouragement, if we were going to ly
down in the Grave, that I could imagine, therefore hearken a little to the
improving of it, and I would direct the improving of the Covenant of Grace to
three sorts of persons. 1. There are some Beginners, that have never to this
day known, what a personal Covenant with God was; and readily they may be at
this, O! I hear of so great things in the Covenant, there is wine, milk, honey,
eye salve, gold, fine linen, spices, and I have heard, that God cannot make
greater Promises; and to speak with reverence, It Is impossible for him to make
greater; and shall the like of me, a poor ignorant polluted thing, make a
Covenant with him? I confess thou had reasoned well, if thou had been under a
Covenant of Works, but since thou art under a Covenant of Grace, I will say but
these three things to thee. 1. If thou will go home this night, and give him
thy hand, and Indenture with him, to be true and faithful to him, though thou
have no money, all these things shall be given thee, without money and without
price. 2. I will say more to thee, though thou have played the harlot with many
lovers, yet return again to me. Nay 3. I will say yet more to thee, whatever
thy guiltiness has been, and though thou has been a transgressor from the
womb, yet if thou will yet go, and seriously indenture with him, and enter in a
personal Covenant for the time to come, all former by-gones shall be by-gones,
and thy want of money, and want of price to give for all these things, shall be
no hinderance to thee and the great reason I give for this, it is a Covenant of
Grace therefore go and indenture with him, and take the tide (...) it, it may
be the Master rise and close the door on you and if ye be found without, and go
down to the Grave on^ of these days, ye may meet with, Depart from me, I know
you not: therefore take the tide so long as the Market last^ and go and engage
in this Covenant of Grace.

A second sort it speaks to, if it be a Covenant of Grace, it speaks a word of
reproof to you, that do not notice and take it up as a Covenant of Grace; and
there are three sorts that take it not up so. 1. There are some that would take
up the Covenant of Grace for a Covenant of Liberty and Licentiousness; indeed
it is a Covenant of Grace, but not of Liberty, and thou that wilt go and neglect
Prayer, and be a stranger to all the acts of fellowship with God, and of Grace,
and will go follow thy Lusts, and will talk of a Covenant of Grace, thou calls
it a Covenant of Liberty, and of all Creatures he will be angry with, and be
avenged of, it will be thou. 2. It reproves these that never will deal with God
by way of a Covenant of Grace, but by way of a Covenant of Works, ay when they
come to him, they would ay have money in their hand, to give for the wine,
milk, and honey; proud man cannot endure to hold of free Grace: of all the
Doctrines of the World, it has been most opposed in the Church, Papists,
Socinians, Arminians, Lutherians, they become generally enemies to it. 3. It
reproves these, that though they acknowledge it to be a Covenant of Grace, and
without merit, and alluring motive, yet they would have it a Covenant of a
mixed nature, they would have some mixtures of some things of their own, in
with the Grace of God: therefore they go constantly trembling, alas, I have
such a heart, and such a way, I have no love to God, nor delight in him,
therefore they will cast away hope, as if the Covenant were a Covenant, partly
of Grace, and partly of Works, no, it is a Covenant of pure and unmixed Grace,
it is a Covenant of perfect and full Grace, it is a Covenant of persevering and
continuing Grace; now go not to turn it into a Covenant of another nature: But
since the Father has resolved to exalt Christ and his Grace, subscribe to the
Tenor of the Covenant.

Thirdly, It serves to press Believers to make use of it, as a Covenant of
Grace; I will tell you three or four things, wherein I will especially press
you to make use of it as a Covenant of Grace. 1. If ye have any great thing to
seek from God, may be some have a Temporal thing to seek from him, they have a
strait to come through; may be some have a Spiritual thing to seek, they have
committed a sin, and would have pardon for it, and they can scarcely expect
that God will hear them; take up this Covenant as a Covenant of Grace, it is
the nature of this Covenant, to give Pardon freely, without money, and without
price; and if ye go to him and say, Lord, bring me out of such a strait, Lord,
forgive me such a sin, and ye think ye will not be heard, why? I have no money
to give for it; but let the Papists give their Pardons, it is not so in this
Covenant. 2. Make use of it in answering all challenges, I will have occasion
when I come to that, Although my house be not so with God, To let you see, how
the Covenant answers challenges, I believe it is the thing that makes many
Christians spend the most part of their Religion in complaints, they are either
ignorant, or forgetful of the Covenant. 3. Improve it in all external
difficulties; In a word, there is no case, no incident case, no challenge, no
difficulty, no petition, we carry to God, but the consideration of the
Covenant, and of all the Promises of it, as an Act of free favor and Grace,
may be eminently useful to them. Learn all of you to take it up as a Covenant
of Grace; and take heed, when God has given you a Covenant of Grace, and the
Mediator has purchased it, that ye deal not ordinarily with your self, as if ye
were under a Covenant of Works.

SERMON IX.
2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me
an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is all my
salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


I Proposed in this Verse five particulars to be handled; First, The nature of
David's security, it is a Covenant, I have spoken to this in some preceding
Sermons, and I purposed to dwell no more on it; Therefore I come to the second
Branch of the Words, The Parties among whom this Covenant is Transacted, The
Lord has made with me a Covenant: That I may the better reach what is
comprehended in this Branch of the Verse, I desire may take notice of four
particulars in it. 1. Ye have the Author and efficient cause of this Covenant,
The Lord has made, He does not say, I have made with the Lord, but the Lord
has made with me a Covenant. 2. Ye have the Parties concerned in this
Covenant, the Lord and me. 3. I shall take notice of the particulars, and
personal way of Covenanting, or expressing these Parties; he says not, the
Lord, and Christ, and the Lord and all the Elect, have made a Covenant, but the
Lord has made with me personally. Lastly, I shall take notice of the
Assurance, which his confident asserting of it imports, he can affirm it with a
deal of confidence, as a thing he is persuaded of, The Lord has made with me a
Covenant: These four ly all in the Text.

The first particular holds out the Author of the Covenant, the Lord is the
Maker of it, as he is the maker of Heaven and of Earth, so it is he that made
the Covenant; the word is Emphatick in the Hebrew, it is true, it is not the
proper word that signifies to creat; yet some Critics think, it is sometimes
used for creation, The Lord has created with me a Covenant, yet I take it as
it is rendered in our Translation, and in this Sermon I will speak a little to
this Doctrine, Though the benefit of the Covenant redound to us, yet we were
not the makers of it, but God made it; it has the smell of his Hand in it, and
the making of it is frequently in Scripture ascribed to him, Isai. 55.3.
Incline your ear and come unto me, hear and your soul shall live, and I will
make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. Jer.
31.31. It shall come to pass in these days, says the Lord, that I will make a
new Covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah, not
according to the covenant that I made with their Fathers, when I brought them
out of the land of Egypt; but this shall be the covenant, after those days,
says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Constantly
throughout the Scripture, the making of the Covenant, he takes it to himself as
the Author of it, and the efficient cause of it; this Branch of the Verse is
considerable, for the truth is, we had no hand in the making of the Covenant of
Grace, it was allanerly himself, the Lord made it with me.

That I may clear this Branch a little to you, I will dwell on these three
things. First, I shall enquire into what respects the Covenant may be said to
be made by the Lord. 2. I shall give you some Grounds to evince, that in all
these respects, that it was made, and only could be made by him. And 3. shall
apply it.

Quest. First, In what respects the Covenant may be said to be made by the
Lord, I shall desire that ye may notice these four or five particulars here.

Answ. 1. The contrivement of the Covenant in all the Heads, Clauses and
Articles of it, was allanerly from him, it was he that contrived it in all the
Clauses, and Articles of it; the truth is, it contains a design very suitable
to his Wisdom, if ye will take a view of three mysteries into it, ye will find
it proceed from the depth of infinite. Wisdom. 1. If ye will take a view of the
Truths in it, O! such strange Truths, one Person to be both God and Man, How
difficult was that to reconcile? He was Mary's Son, yet Mary's Maker, that he
was David's Son, yet David's Lord; What a strange Mystery is that in the
Covenant, that Christ should be altogether free of sin, and yet justly suffer
for sin? The great Mysteries in the Covenant, in reference to the Truths holden
out in it, evidence that the contrivement of it, could only proceed from God.
2. If ye will take a view, not of the Truths only, but of the Duties required
in the Covenant; What a number of strange Duties are contained in it, that
would never have entered into the heart of Man? Numa Pompilius, that gave Laws
to the Romans, Lycurgus that gave Laws to the Lacedaemonians, Solon that gave
Laws to the Athenians, their Laws never dreamed of Believing, and being saved
by another Righteousness; such Duties, as taking up of the Cross, denying our
selves, walking by another strength, and doing all that we do, by a Spirit of
Promise, Would ever Natures Light have reached these Duties of the Covenant? So
take a view of these, and ye will find that the contrivement of it could only
come from God. 3. Take a view of the Persons admitted to the Covenant, if we
had a secret to communicate, readily we would choose, not the simple, or the
foolish, or babes, to communicate it to, we would pitch on the Learned, on the
wise, on the prudent; but the Covenant is so contrived, that the Truths of it
are the greatest Mysteries; one Person to be both God and Man, and that Person
to be both the Son and the Maker of his Mother, that the Duties of it are
strange, one to Live by another Righteousness; and that all these things
should be revealed to babes, and things that are not, and that the learned, and
wise, and prudent, should be passed by; such a contrivement, had it proceeded
from any man or angel, it had justly been accounted the most ridiculous and
strange fancy in the World; as a famous Ancient said of Christianity, that if
he were not persuaded, it immediately proceeded from God, it would be the
Religion of any that ever he heard, that he would be furthest from Believing;
therefore the Covenant is from God, for the contrivement of it, in all the
mystical Truths of it, in all the Duties it requires, and the persons to whom
these Duties and Truths are communicate, evidences it to be from God.

Secordly, As the contrivement of the Covenant is from God, so the Terms of the
Covenant are made by him, he not only has made his own, but our Terms, before
we were, the Covenant was, and in some respect, it was from Eternity, from
Everlasting, and before ever we were capable to give our consent, he ordered
both his own Terms and ours.

Quest. Readily ye will say, Was not this an injury to us, that he should make
the Covenant so, as to make our Terms, as well as his own?

Answ. For Answering this, ye may remember some Sabbaths ago, I opened to you,
That it was a Despotick Covenant, such as is made betwixt Prince and Subject,
Master and Servant, Landlord and Tennents, that he is absolute Lord, and has
power to give Laws. 2. Take notice, that Christ the Mediator has represented
us in the Covenant, and so we had him like a Commissioner in a Shire, having a
Commission to go to Parliament, and giving his Vote for the Shire, he
represents that Shire from whom he has the Commission: So we had a
representative, in the person of a Mediator in the Covenant. 3. The Terms are
made so, as it was impossible to imagine them to be more to our advantage,
could there be an easier Clause put in, than that we should accept? This is is
all that is required on our part, that we shall consent; now since the
coutrivement of the Covenant, and the Terms on which it runs, proceeds both
from God, it may justly be said, that he has made the Covenant.

Thirdly, He is said to have made the Covenant, in regard the furniture for
doing our part of the Covenant, proceeds also from him, whatever is necessary
on his part, or our part, and the truth is, he stands on both sides of the
Covenant, engaged to furnish what is necessary for the Elect; the Father is as
much engaged, for performing their part of the Covenant, as his own; they are
bound by the Covenant to repent, to believe, to walk humbly and holily; all the
things that are Terms on their part, he is engaged to furnish them; they could
contribute no more to it, than as ye saw a Potter that takes a piece of clay,
and divides it in two, and the one part of it he casts it by, and casts it in
the gutter, and treads on it, and the other part he takes it home, he provides
gold, and gilds it, and makes it fit to be set on a Princes Table; all the
gilding was from the Potter, it was the potter that made the difference betwixt
that piece and the other bit lying in the gutter; therefore ye find him so
earnest pressing our consent to the Covenant in the Gospel, if that prevails
not, he yokes to his Spirit, and never leaves them until he bring them to
purposes and resolutions, and to subscribe their names to the Covenant, and
then he leads their hand, and helps their purposes and resolutions. So he
stands on his own side, for the great and precious things promised; and he
stands on the Elects side for performing their Duties. So it may be justly said
of him, he is the Maker of the Covenant.

Fourthly, He may be said to have made the Covenant, in regard the publication
and revealing of the Covenant, it allanerly is from him, for this end has he
appointed the Scriptures to be written, and has ordained Ministers to Explain
them, that he may reveal the Covenant; nay all the Philosophers, and all the
Learning in the world, would never have carried a man to dream of such a
Covenant, without immediate Revelation from God; the Light of Nature, the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, though they lead us to God as Creator, yet they do not lead us
to the opening the meaning of the Covenant, the revealing of that is allanerly
from him; so the Contrivement, the Terms, the Furniture, and the revealing of
the Covenant is from him.

And Lastly, The fixed perpetuity of the Covenant is also from him, ordinarily
according to the nature of persons, so are their Covenants, careless persons,
their particular interest will easily make them break their Covenants, variable
and changeable persons; but an Eternal God, and an Eternal Covenant, the
perpetuity of it is from him, he has secured it so, as though we break to him,
yet the Covenant remains firm, Jer. 3. Thou have played the harlot with many
lovers, yet return unto me, for I am married to you: Harlotry divorces by the
Law of God, which provides that in case of Adultery, the man and the wife
should be Divorced, and the Marriage-bond comes to be loosed by Adultery. All
these five, evidence that the Covenant is made by him, and really, it adds a
relish to it, that the smell of his hand is in it; it adds a sweetness to it,
that he contrived it, and that he drew the Terms, both on his own and our side,
that the Furniture, the Revelation of it, and the Stability of it is from him.

Now in reference to the Covenant, that all these are made by him, will appear
by these two remarkable Grounds, 1. This Covenant could neither have been made
by Men, nor Angels, therefore it was made allanerly by God. 1. It could not
have been made by Men, for we are but of yesterday, and the Covenant is
everlasting; when this Covenant was made, Man was lapsed and fallen, it could
not have entered in his heart to think, that God should give his only Son for
him, and make a Covenant of Grace with him on that score; it was undoubtedly a
surprisal to Adam, and many Divines think, he understood it not at first what
that meant, The seed of the woman shall bruise the head of the serpent, It was
revealed to him in a dark mysterious Type, and a promise of the Messiah; all
the course that he took when he was fallen, was to run away from God, and hide
himself, and to go and sew Fig Tree Leafs together to cover his nakedness, he
was far from dreaming of making an everlasting Covenant with him. Neither 2.
Could this Covenant have been contrived by Angels, they are brought in, 1 Pet.
1.12. And doing it to this day, looking into this Mystery, Which things the
angels desire to look into, they are excellent creatures indeed, and perfect in
Wisdom, and Righteousness and Holiness, but their Knowledge is not able to
fathom the height, the length, the breadth, and depth of the Covenant, no, had
the Angels been the Arbiters (for as excellent creatures as they are) of our
distance, after the fall, it was beyond the reach of their capacity to dream of
such a Covenant, therefore when they heard of it, and when it was revealed to
them, they pry into it, and looked into it, and were astonished at such a
contrivement of a Covenant of Grace, so it was above the reach of Angels; and
poor Man could not do it, for he could do nothing when he fell, but run away
and hide himself, and scarce knew what the first promise of the Covenant was,
the seed of the woman shall bruise the head of the serpent.

Secondly, That this Covenant was made by God, (and I like the notion well)
will appear from this, that there are three designs, that wise and good men
have, in the driving their business in the world, and the wisdom that is given
to them, makes them drive these three designs, and ye will find, the Father
driving all the three, in making the Covenant, which evidences, that it is an
act suiting his infinite Wisdom, and that there is but some resemblance among
men of this Wisdom. 1. Several times men design the exalting of their Children.
2. The magnifying of themselves. 3. If they be good, the advantage of others,
And there runs a design in the Covenant, suiting infinite Wisdom, in reference
to all these three. 1. Like a wise Father, the design of the Covenant is, the
exalting of his Son, he intends indeed to have his Son great, From whom could
the covenant come, that tends so much to exalt Christ, but from Christ's
Father? it looks like the design of a Father, the scope of the Covenant, the
accomplishment of it, tends so much to the exalting of his Son, all the Blood
that runs in the Veins of the Covenant, seems all to drive at the exalting of
him, he is the Mediator of the Covenant, the Surety of it, all the Promises of
it, are the accomplishment of his three Offices; any that will observe the
scope of the Covenant, the exalting of the Son, may well conclude, it was the
Father of the Son that made it. 2. The Father in his infinite Wisdom, designed
the exalting of himself; I deny not, but he might have been exalted in his
Justice, and have taken other methods, and ways, and measures, than by making a
Covenant of Grace, as he might have been exalted in his Power, Wisdom, and
Justice, if he had taken Noah to Heaven, when he drowned the old World, and
then made another World; but the great thing wherein men are most exalted is,
Goodness and Grace; we read of some that have Ruled Tyrannically, and when they
were dying, they have been like a Candle put out, that leaves an ill smell
behind it; there is nothing better than to be exalted in Goodness, and Grace,
and there is no better way to do it, than that man should fall, and that he
should give his Son to die for him, and to make a Covenant with him, that he
shall give him Peace with himself, and an deaven for all Eternity: So it looks
like a Covenant made by him. 3. God being a Communicative Good, Good in
himself, it is impossible for him not to communicate Good to others, as
impossible as it is for the Sun, which is Light in it self, not to communicate
Light; therefore when God made the World, he behoved to make Man, that he might
communicate the good of the World to him, he being a Communicative Good, his
nature carries him to do good to others, and the Covenant is so ordered, that
there is no good that man can be capable of, but it is promised in the Covenant.
Now all these three declare that it was he that made the Covenant; because it
tends so much to the exalting of his Son, his Goodness and Grace, and his being
a Communicative Good; I will not dwell more on this.

Use. I will only say some few things by way of use, that I may come to speak
of the Parties, The Lord has made with me, ye see the nature of it, there are
many practical Improvements of it, that I cannot now dwell on; Only here, 1.
How humble men ought to be, the greatest ground of boasting we have in the
World, is the Covenant, but alas, we had no hand in it, nor yet the Angels,
they could not have contrived it, and we are very far from it: O! but
Christians, whose greatest Charter in all their Chest is, this everlasting
Covenant, we ought to be be walking very humbly on this account, for we
contribute not so much as a desire unto it, not only did we not merit, or was
there any alluring motive, but there was not so much as a Prayer for it, or did
we spend a Tear for it, or had a sigh or a groan for it? But the Lord has made
with me, he contrived it, and drew all the Articles of it, therefore go humbly,
and walk as one, that in the thing wherein thou has the greatest ground of joy
that ever thou had, yet had no hand in the contrivement of the Covenant. 2. It
puts you to admire the unsearchable riches of this grace; will ye but sometimes
take a view of your case, when Adam fell, and run away amongst the Thickets to
hide himself, and he and all his posterity were forfeited; Take a view of what
ye have deserved by that fall, if the things that ye can tell of your selves
were written on your Foreheads, ye would be forced to go to some corner, like
an Owl, to flee to the desert and hide your selves: But O! the breadth, the
length, the depth, and the height of this Grace, that God will contrive the
Covenant, and draw the Terms of it, and stand on both sides of the Covenant,
both on our part of the Covenant, and his part, and Redeem us; go home and fall
down before him, and exalt him, that ever he condescended to make the Covenant;
What would have been our lot, or whether would we have turned our selves, or
whether would we have fled, or left our Glory, if we had not this Covenant to
run to? Therefore go, and admire and praise him; It Is a notable frame of
Spirit, when things revealed in public, carries persons to a corner, with some
suitable thoughts of what they have heard; and indeed we should carry our
Duties in private, suitable to our Duties in public: Praise him, who in such a
desperate case, was content to make as Everlasting Covenant with thee. 3. Here
is great ground of encouragement, to you that are not yet brought under the
bond of the Covenant, He that made the Covenant, and brought persons under it,
he chused whom he will, he chused a Jacob and not an Esau, a Peter and not a
Judas, Judas he had not done so much ill as Paul had done before his
conversion, Judas was preaching Christ, and was casting out Devils, and was in
Christ's company, yet Judas was left to betray him; Paul was pensecuting and
blaspheming Christ, and making havoc of the Church, and yet an Elect Vessel,
to lift up his Name amongst the Gentiles; therefore all of you that are without
the Covenant, since he made it with a Paul, and not with a Judas, with a Jacob,
and not with an Esau, and yet Esau was the elder brother, on this account keep
up your hope, and go to him, and press him to bring you under the bond of the
Covenant, for what brought in Jacob, a Paul, a Peter, into the Covenant, but
his own Grace? Lastly, Was it he that was the Author and Maker of the Covenant?
Then behold, amongst all the things that ever he did, since he created the
World, it is the thing that contributes most to exalt him, it was a great Work
for him to say, Let there be light, and it was light, and for him to stretch
out the Heavens and the Earth, and to make an Earth, as it were to hang on no
foundation, and the circumference of Heaven about it, all these were great
Declarations of the Greatness and Power of God; but all of these may stoop to
this, that he has made a Covenant of Grace, who in one Person is both God and
Man, and on the foundation of this Mystery, has founded so many Duties, and
great Privileges, that if himself had not revealed them, they would appear the
greatest fancies in the World, and they that do not believe what he has
revealed, counts them all Phanaticks that credits them; but here is the
greatest demonstration of Grace that ever he gave, that he has ordered a
Covenant, and contrived it, and made it so secure, that no breach on our part
shall break the Covenant, and he is bound for our part of the Covenant, as well
as his own, and he is engaged for our consent, and when we come to subscribe
the Covenant, He will lead our hand; Can any imagine such a Declaration of
Grace? O! be ye astonished, O ye Heavens, at the length, and breadth, and depth
of this Grace, and Power, and Love.

But I will close all, with saying three things about his making the Covenant.
1. If there had any advantage redounded to him by making the Covenant, it had
not been so strange, I confess there is a Declarative Glory; like a man that
comes to such a spring of Water, and then he commends it, but he infuses no new
quality into the Well; all that we can do, adds nothing to his Essential Glory;
now, it is strange that he should make such a Covenant, and that all the
advantage should redound to us, and not to him, except what is Declarative. 2.
The damned Angels they had many grounds to have pleaded a Covenant with him,
rather than we, they were more noble Creatures, and whatever was their sin, it
is generally thought to be pride, though it be difficult for us to determine,
for they aspired to be as God, so we are guilty of the same sin, the Serpent
tempted Eve to eat the Apple, and be like God, and so we were guilty of the
same sin, the Angels were guilty of. Now, that he should make a Covenant with
thee, and not with them, is strange. 3. The foundation of this Covenant, (and
there was no other possibility of making it, in the strain it runs on,) it was
to be laid in the Blood of his Son; O! how many ways would man have taken, to
have shifted the bargain, if the bargain could have stood no other way, but on
the Blood of their Children; yea though the advantage was all to be ours, and
we were as ill deserving as the Devils, and that he saw there could not be such
a bargain driven, for our pardon, our peace, and our Heaven, but it behoved to
be laid on the Blood of his Son; yet he drew the Covenant, contrived it, as it
is this day. O! ye should pray, that ye may be able to comprehend the height,
the length, the breadth, and depth of such a Covenant.

SERMON X.
2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me
an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is all my
Salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


WE were neither the Contrivers, nor the Treaters of the Covenant of Grace, the
Lord made it, The Lord has made with me an everlasting Covenant; I shall say
no more of his making of it, since it is so evident, that neither Men, nor
Angels had no hand in it; and since it savours of infinite Wisdom, we may very
rationally ascribe it to the Lord: The word Jehovah is one of the greatest
Names he has, which fitly comes in here, when David is to speak of the
Covenant; The Lord has made with me an everlasting Covenant. To say no more
then of his being the Author, Contriver, and Orderer of the Covenant. I come to
speak of the Parties that enter in this Covenant, The Lord has made with me;
In the handling of this, I shall consider the persons, first something more
generally, and then I shall consider them more particularly and personally,
readily I will dwell some Sermons on this branch of the Verse.

First, The general consideration of this, I will not dwell on it, I have
spoken several things when I entered on the Verse, of the Lords condescendency
to make a Covenant with the Elect, only I would have you notice four things
about it. 1. The Name Lord, it is here not to be taken Personally, but
Essentially, as including all the three Persons of the Trinity, so that in
effect, in making the everlasting Covenant, all the Persons in the Trinity
became our Covenanted Parties, each of them have their distinct Work in
fulfilling the Covenant; the Father has his Work, the Son has his, and the
Spirit has his work; and the truth is, when we Covenant with God, so far as we
can reach, there ought to be a distinct eye had to each Person of the Trinity,
who though they be One in Essence, yet there are three distinct Persons. M.
Durham in his Treatise on the Revelation, makes a question, which I will not
determine, Whether in Prayer, a Christian be obliged to eye distinctly every
Person of the Trinity? But sure I am, in Covenanting with God, since we find
distinct actings ascribed to the Father, Son, and Spirit, in the Covenant there
is great need, to eye the several Blessed Persons of the Blessed Trinity; the
Name Jehovah is common to them all, so that in effect, David's party with whom
he Covenanted, when this everlasting Covenant was made, it was not the Father,
or the Son Personally considered, but all the Persons of the Blessed Trinity,
each of them in the Covenant; as they have their distinct works and operations,
in bringing the Elect to Glory; so they all become Debtors to their own
Faithfulness, for accomplishing the things of the Covenant, which they made
with David. 2. Take notice, that this taking up of God essentially, the Lord,
or Jehovah, there is employed, as ordinarily the Name is used by the word Jah, as
Psalm. 68.4 Extol him that rides on the Heavens by his name Jah, which is a
Compend of the name Jehovah, and is retained in our English Translation, the
taking him up under this name Jehovah, holds him out, as not only Faithful and
True to his Promise in the Covenant, but as abundantly able to accomplish his
Promise in the Covenant: It Is very pleasant to consider the Parties that made
the Covenant, all the three Persons of the Blessed Trinity, holden out under
the Name Jehovah, thou that hangs by the Promise in the Covenant, why go
thou with thy hands on thy loins, constantly moving discouraging Questions, and
saying, One day or another I shall fall by the hand of Saul, Is not the Party
Covenanting Jehovah? Is he not known to thee by the name Jehovah? He was not so
known by the Tribes of Israel: It Is remarkable in the beginning of the Belief,
the first Article of it, I believe in God the Father Almighty; He is not like a
Father, If his child ask bread of him, he will give him a stone; for he is a
Father that will not beguile you; but many Fathers are not willing, nor able
though they be willing, but he is both able and willing to help, he is
Almighty; It Is a remarkable beginning of the Commands, I am the Lord thy God,
which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, and out of the house of bondage; I
am the Lord God, I am Jehovah, the taking him up thus as Jehovah, is a
necessary consideration; David made many Covenants with Princes that were about
him, and he made many Covenants with his Subjects, but he never made one like
this, the Lord has made with me an everlasting Covenant. But 2. The taking of
him up under this name, the Lord, and considering this Covenant in the general,
it is indeed astonishing, that he should have made a Covenant with men; take
but a view of these three or four things, and ye will find, that the Lord and
me, to come under a Covenant together, is exceeding strange.

First, Consider that he is the God that gave Man, (who was lately nothing) a
Being, O! they are words of wonder, that he comforts his Church in a sad case
with, by the Prophet Isaiah, Thy Maker is thy Husband: Ye heard, it was a
mystery in the Covenant, Mary's Son, yet Mary's Maker: It is no less a mystery,
a Husband, and yet our Maker, to make us, and then to marry us, is it not
wonderful? And that is imported in, The Lord has made with me. 2. If ye
consider, that by virtue of his creating, he had a Right of Dominion; he needed
no more but Command, and Threaten, for he being our Maker, and Preserver, he
needed no more, he had a right to Command and Threaten; he needed say no more,
but do not eat of the tree, for is the day thou eats thou shall die, as he did
with the first Adam; but that he should lay by his Dominion, and come as we
were equals, and treat a Covenant, nay, when it was treated, the Person that
represented us, was his equal, he was the Man that was his Fellow, and thought
it to robbery to be equal with God, Philip. 2. Now that he should treat a
Covenant with us, as Abraham did with Abimelech, how strange was this, since
the Parties were not equal? 3. Had it been a Covenant of Works he had treated,
it had suited some way to a Command and Threatening; but to treat such a
Covenant, the Lord Jehovah with us, is wonderful; Who of us would take a Dog,
or a Worm, and Indenture with it, to give it our own Bed, and in a manner
prefer it to our own Children? The truth is, he seemed to do this, when, that
we might be healed, he laid the stripes on him, he was made a curse, that we
might be made righteous; he was made sin, that we might be holy. But Lastly,
This Covenant was made with lapsed Man; he could not promise to himself from
us, the thing he could promise from Adam; for however Adam was under a
possibility of falling, yet that was all, it seemed very improbable, that so
light a Temptation would make him break the Covenant that he had made with God,
but the imaginations of our hearts are evil continually; it is since he made
that Covenant, frequently the complaint is, I am pressed under with their
iniquities, as a cart is pressed under with sheaves. And, I am broken with
their whorish heart; So consider his being our Master, and consider the
Dominion he had on that account; and consider that the Covenant is made with
lapsed Man, and that it is a Covenant of Grace; it is in effect one of the
greatest wonders in the Bible, The Lord has made with me, etc. O! learn to
admire the condescendency of Grace, it is a wonder that we are not oftener
telling it to others, and that we spend not more time when we meet, in
discoursing of it; but this general I will not insist upon.

I will consider this transaction of the Covenant personally, more particularly
it is remarkable, David does not say, he made with the Elect, whereof I am one;
or he made with the Church, whereof I am a member, but the Lord has made with
me an everlasting Covenant; he takes it and applies it personally to himself. I
had long time a design to speak to this Head of personal Covenanting with God;
I judge it one of the great duties of the Gospel, and that which will
contribute as much to lay a restraint on sin, and to excite to duties, as any
mean that a Christian can follow; therefore I intend to dwell some Sermons on
it, I shall make some entry on it now, and shall take this Proposition to be
handled.

Doctrine 1. That though the Covenant of Grace be generally made with the
Mediator, and with the Elect, yet every believer should make it personally;
they should be at, the Lord made with me: It Is remarkable, when God first
entered in this everlasting Covenant, he indeed published it generally to all
the seed of the Woman, that is, to all the Elect, who were comprehended under
the Mediator, who was the seed of the Woman, and not of the Man, yet afterward
ye find it is personally made with Abraham, Psalm. 105. it is sworn to Abraham,
and confirmed to Isaac with an oath, and afterward it is particularly confirmed
to Jacob, and here it is renewed to David, it is indeed a general Covenant made
with the Mediator, for all his Members, yet often ye find God treating it with
Abraham; and again, it is not enough it be made with Abraham, but he must treat
it with Isaac, and confirm it with an Oath, and over again, he must treat it
with Jacob, importing, he must not only make it with the Fathers, but with
their Children: there are many that he has made a Covenant with their Father
and Mother, but they are not in it themselves; they can say, the Lord has made
an everlasting Covenant, but they cannot say, the Lord has made it with me,
therefore the Lord will manage this Covenant, first with Abraham, and afterward
he will treat it personally with Isaac, and confirm it with an Oath, and renew
it again with Jacob.

But to follow this Head of Personal Covenanting with God, I would have you
notice this Caution in the beginning of it,

Caution, That the Covenant of Grace is but one Covenant, the same Covenant for
substance, that God made with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: We must not think there
are as many distinct Covenants, as there are distinct persons, that enters in
that Covenant; there is but one Sun, and every one may have enough of light
from that one Sun, and a Ray of that Sun comes in at his own Window, if he cast
open a Broad of his Window, though it be the common Sun, that serves all the
Kingdoms of the earth: So, it is the same general Covenant made with the
Mediator, every particular person is to open his Window-broad, and let in a
suitable Ray of that Covenant to his case, and particularly and personally
apply it to himself. We are not to think, as Arminians say, that God has made
a general Covenant with all the Elect; but for particular persons, he has left
a blank to be filled up, when they believe and repent; they say this same of
Redemption, they make general acts of Grace to be conditionally accomplished;
especially, if they believe the Lord, when he indented the everlasting
Covenant, he set down not only Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob's name, but thy name,
if thou will consent; Nay, what do I say, if thou consent, he filled up thy
name being an Elect, and engaged to effectuat thy consent; so we are not to
think, that there are as many Covenants as there are distinct persons; it is one
general Covenant, like as it is one Sun that affords light to all the World,
yet every Believer and Elect, is personally to Indent for himself, and to apply
the Covenant, and to apply the promises on the Fathers part, but he has bound
himself to the duties of the Covenant on his part.

And in the general, this personal Covenanting takes in three things; I
confess, the third of them is not a proper act of Covenanting, yet it is
necessary to the making of it up. (1) A person in making this Covenant, is
either saying or subscribing, as Isaiah's word is, One shall say, and another
subscribe himself to be the Lords; whatever be the way of it, sometime one will
do it with saying, sometime one will do it by subscribing, or sometime one will
do it with lifting up their hand to God, that the solemnity may be the greater;
in their indenturing in this personal Covenant with God, the tenor of what they
do is, I accept this Christ on these terms, he offers me Wine, Milk, Honey,
without money, and without price; he offers me fine Gold, I accept of the
offer, and I give my consent, I will either write it down, or give it under my
hand, I will say it, or I will do it, by lifting up of my hand to the Lord.
(2.) The person that thus personally Covenants, or that is about to draw the
general Covenant of Grace, to his case, subscribes to the duties of the
Covenant, particularly to give himself to the Lord, One shall say, and another
subscribe with his hand, I am the Lords: It Is remarkable, since God in the
Covenant gives himself to us, he will accept of nothing from us but our selves
again; when we subscribe to give our selves to the Lord, we subscribe to this,
Lord, dispose of me as thou will, cross me or humble me as thou will, for I
give it under my hand, that I am thy disposing; it is true, we bind to all the
duties of the Covenant, likewise I deny not, but a person may find their
temptations miscarry them, in reference to some sins; some are led away with
ill company, and made to swear, some are tempted to drunkenness; I deny not,
but they may either Covenant with God, or particularly bind against that,
wherein their greatest temptations and weaknesses lies; if persons find
themselves negligent in Prayer, of that the least wag of their neighbor
coming, will call them from their duty to God, though they are in the Covenant,
to bind to all the duries of the Covenant, yet we are particularly to bind,
where our temptations are greatest, and where our weakness is greatest:
Personal Covenanting with God, ought to run most on that Head, which may prove
an excellent restraint to the soul, and an excellent hinderance to the
corruption, which the heart is drawn to, with any light temptation: so this
personal Covenanting with God, when we can say, the Lord has made with me a
Covenant, though the Lord has made the Covenant in general with Christ, and
all the Elect, and though he has visibly appeared to Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, and afterward, though he has not so visibly appeared to David, yet he
has his own way of communication, and we enter in a personal Covenant with
him, when we go, and either with our voice, or with our hand subscribe it on
Paper, or with lifting up the hand solemnly, when we are in a spiritual frame
in Prayer, and we do this, when we accept of the offer of the Covenant, and of
the Mediator, on the terms of the Covenant; and binds our selves to the duties
of the Covenant, especially such as we are most negligent of, and soonest led
away from: There lies the way of personal covenanting with God, especially, if
ye add, as a Capestone. (3.) When the soul engages to these two, that it cast
an eye to the Treasurer, unto whom the Father has committed the bearing of the
Purse: The Truth is, our covenanting with him, is like Deliab's binding Sampson
with cords, so long as she cuts not his locks, his strengthremains, but when
his locks are cut, he is weak. When we can an eye to the Treasurer in our
covenanting, we are strong; but when we eye him not, we are weak: It Is supposed
Adam when he was perfect, stood not above five hours, and what can lapsed man
do? Therefore the Covenant takes in the accepting of the offer, and binding to
the duties, but both to be done through the Mediator, and if this be neglected,
it is not right covenanting; And I believe it lies at the root of much of our
covenanting, and many lave challenges in their covenanting with God, that they
have not eyed the Mediator, and gone to the Fountain and Treasurer, out of
which their strength both for accepting and binding must come.

Quest. But ye will say, I have opened in this Covenant personal and particular
covenanting, but what if God make not a Covenant with me, or if I make a
Covenant, with him, how shall I know if he makes a Covenant with me?

Ans. For Answer to this, I shall only say these two things, (1.) God in making
personal Covenants with men, had very different ways of communication of
himself; when he made the Covenant with Abraham. he spoke with him face to
face, he did so to Isaac and Jacob, but he did not so to David, but he sends a
Prophet to him; it were unreasonable he should do so to every body; there were
many Worthies under the Old Testament, that could say, the Lord has made with
me an everlasting Covenant; and God did not come down and speak face to face
with them, and confer with them, and say, this is my promise; it were I say
unreasonable he should do so to us, for though the Covenant be not so sensible
as it was to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, it may come to thee, as it did to
David: So that we are not to expect he will take the same way with every one,
that he brings under the bond of the Covenant.

I will close this Sermon, with exhorting you to study this personal
covenanting with God, I indeed take it up, for the great duty of the Gospel; I
confefs, it is the great neglect of the generation that we live in, the
generation coming may be more in the practice of it, that Masters of Families
will not take their Wives, Children and Servants, and enter in a
Family-Covenant with them, and when they are in corners, would enter in a
personal Covenant with him. I will only close this discourse of it, with naming
three or four things, that I judge to be great hindrances in the way of
Christians personal covenanting with God. (1.) It is a great hinderance, our
mistaking the end of the Law, the Law is a Schoolmaster to lend to Christ; and
there are many, if they come under a Law-word, they perswarded, that they
should dwell on it, they cannot be persuaded, that this drives at personal
covenanting with him; ye will hear afterward, if ever there be a time of
entering in a personal Covenant with God, of accepting the Covenant of the
terms offered, it is when we are under a work of the Law: now many Christians
mistake quite the end of the Law, they think their tears and humiliations, and
Law-works, they are to dwell on them, and they know not that the Laws is a
Schoolmaster to lead them to Christ; the end of these fears is, to terrify
you to seek a shelter in the everlasting Covenant. (2.) It hinders many to
enter in this Covenant personally, they are exceedingly afraid, that their
guilt be greater, if they break; I consfess it is justly to be feared, but that
same Argument should hinder thee from being Baptized, and from going to the
Sacrament of the Supper, wherein thou renews a Covenant with him; the same
Argument that hinders thee from covenanting with God, hinders thee from these
two; but would ye think it a good arguing, if a man were like to drown in a
Well, and one let down a Rope to him, and bid him take hold of the Rope, and it
will bring him up; if he should argue, I dare not take hold of the Rope, for
fear when I near up the Rope break, and my fall be the greater? But I say,
unless thou enter in a personal Covenant with God, and accept of the Covenant
of Grace, and apply it to thy case, thou art arguing, as the man in the Well,
that will not take hold of the Rope, for fear when I am near up (...) get the
worse fall. 3. It hinders some from covenanting with God, they would have some
Arles in their hand, before they trust him: says one, I would Covenant with
him personally, if he would give me a fill of Sense, and would take me to the
Banqueting House, and cast his Banner over me, and give me that soul-delight
that he gives to some; but they do not remember, it is a reflection on him, not
to trust him, without something in hand. Take heed to this Covenant, and hang
upon his promise, and if thou should never be able to sing, the Lord has
filled my hand with send all my life, thou has a nobler song to sing, The Lord
has made with me an everlasting Covenant. (4.) It hinders some from making a
personal Covenant, they are afraid to lay bonds and ties on them, and take away
their mirth: O! it were a mercy if some of our profane young ones, that are
filling the Town with profanity, and their Parents taking no notice of them,
the most part of them begging the one half of the day, and profaning the Name
of God the other, if they could be brought thus to Covenant with God: But many
think that a great tie and a burden, that they should be more in speaking of
Christ when they were in company, and may be thou can be in many companies, and
never a word of him; or thou can mock at Prayer and Godlienss, and may be it
not challenge thee, but thou art afraid that personal covenanting bring a
burden on thee. I will Answer all these, when I go through the point; I will say
this of it, thou must either accept personally of the Covenant, on the terms
that it is offered, and engage personally to the terms on which it is made, or
then thou shall never have any benefit by it. O? what a mercy were it, if when
we come under some strait, some sickness, or when we get any loosing of heart
at a Communion; nay, when we come under desertion, the renewing of a Covenant
may be the way to an out-gate. It Is remarkable, when Christ was hanging on the
Cross, and the great cloud of his Fathers wrath hanging over his head, in a
manner, he renews the Covenant with him, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? If thou fall in any gross sin, go and renew the Covenant; if he command
some signal stroke to attend thee, renew the Covenant: The great Objection is,
it is a sore matter to be ay binding, and ay breaking, and this is thy case
readily. I confess it is a dreadful case, to be ay binding, and ay breaking; yet
notwithstanding of all thy breaches, if thou will yet go and say, and subscribe
with thy hand, to be the Lords, and to be more to his praise; if thou be a
neglecter of Christian fellowship, that thou shall speir it out, speir where
thou shall get some to pray with, and put in that in the personal Covenant; if
thou be negligent in Prayer, to lift up thy hand to be so no more: all former
breaks will be all past, if thou can say with full purpose of heart, the Lord
has made with me an everlasting Covenant.

SERMON XI.
2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me
an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is all my
salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


HAving spoken of the nature of David's security, I came the last Sabbath to
speak of the Parties transacting in this Covenant, The Lord and me, I proposed
four things to be noticed; First, The Author of the Covenant. Secondly, the
Parties with whom the Covenant is made, and told you that that the word
Jehovah, is to be taken essentially, as including all the Persons of the
Trinity, who are all Partiesin the Covenant, and each of them has their
particular work, in the accomplishing of the Covenant. But passing what was
spoken, I come to that which I proposed to dwell on this day, the particular
Application of the Covenant, individually and personally to David: It Is no, the
Lord has made with Abraham, nor with the Elect, but, The Lord has made with
me an everlasting Covenant.

That which I shall dwell on this day, shall be this Proposition, which
natively arises from this Scripture.

Doctrine, That however the Covenant externally and visibly be made with the
whole visible Church, and really with the Mediator, and through him with all
the Elect, yet every Believer ought personally, and particularly to Indenture
in this Covenant, and apply it.

It is true, the Covenant is offered to be Transacted with all the Members of
the visible Church, and really with all the Elect; yet every Believer, who
would secure his interest in the contents and clauses of the Covenant, is to
indenture personally, and particularly apply the Covenant to himself, as if it
were made with them. This Truth has a great deal of opposition in the world,
Arminians, and Antinomians, who though they unite not in many things, they
unite in opposition of this Truth, they deny personal and particular
Covenanting with God; the generality of Atheists, and profane mockers, look on
it as a fancy, personally to Covenant with God; and the most part of hypocrites
in the visible Church, satisfy themselves with their Transactions in Baptism,
and some external kind of Transacting at the Sacrament of the Supper, but
personally and really to indenture with God, on the Terms of the Covenant, they
utterly neglect; therefore, to follow this Truth, since it comes so directly in
my way, I will insist on these three things in following this head. 1. I shall
labor to prove by some reasons, that it is not only a warrantable, but a most
necessary Duty, for Christians to make personal and particular Covenants with
God. 2. I shall open wherein this personal and particular Covenanting with him,
does consist. And 3. shall apply it.

First, That it is not only warrantable but necessary, personally and
particularly to Covenant with God; for confirming of this, I will offer these
five or six rational Considerations.

First, We have not only Scriptural practices of it, particularly of David, of
whom this Text speaks; whom we have frequently practicing it, Psalm. 16.2. O my
soul, thou have said unto the Lord, thou art my God. So we find Asaph, Psalm.
73.25. It is good for me to draw near to God: And then, Whom have I in heaven
but thee, and on the earth that I desire besides thee? It was in effect a
Covenant of this nature that Thomas entered into, when he said to Christ, thou
art my Lord and my God. We have not only practices of it, but Prophesies of it,
amongst many Prophesies about it, for clearing and confirming it, I will read
two, one of them ye have, Isai. 44.5. One shall say, I am the Lords, and
another shall call himself by the name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe
with his hand to the Lord, and surname himself by the name of Israel, Mark
here, ye have one, and one, and another; individually and indefinitly
indenturing with God, and ye have the different way of their doing of it, one
shall say, and another shall subscribe with his hand; ye have the same over
again Prophesied, Isai. 45.24. Surely shall one say, In the Lord have I
righteousness and strength, even to him shall men come; here ye have these two
Scriptural Prophesies, relating to the times of the Gospel, wherein there
should be, a saying, and subscribing with the hand, and it is no the Church in
general, but one shall say, and another shall subscribe, it is a particalar and
personal indenturing with God; I know not what a multitude of Scriptures I
might multiply for the confirmation of this, that it is not only warrantable,
but absolutely necessary, it is the accomplishment of Prophesies, and an
imitation of the cloud of Witnesses, who have gone before us in it.

Secondly, The Light of Nature teaches; that in mutual Transactions, that pass
betwixt Parties, about business of concernment, the Transaction should be
managed particularly and personally; Natures Light teaches, that dolus
versatur in generalibus, frequently this holds in this case, where there passes
no indenturing betwixt God and the Soul, but merely generals, readily the a
surance of an interest in any Transaction by the Light of Nature, it is the
surer and clearer the more particular mention be of the Parties concerned in
ti; hardly is there a very small business a man will Transaact with his
neighbor, but he will be as distinct and particular as he can, especially if
he know it be a thing will be subject to much debate in Low; is it not strange,
that Nature should teach men to be so distinct, and particular in their
smallest concernments, and yet they rest on generals, contrair to the Light of
Nature, in their greatest concernments? No, that same Light that leads men to
be personal and particular, and distinct in mannaging all their other other
affairs, in order to their clearing and assurance, leads them up in the
business of their greatest concernment, far more to be personal and distinct.

Thirdly, All the fundamental Privileges, are all particular and personal, and
why ought not the Covenant to be particularly and personally entered into?
Election is not indefinit and universal, as Arminians and Papists teach: no,
it is neither universal nor conditional, it is absolute and particular; there is
a certain number given by the Father to the son in Redemption, so it is no
universal, nor indefinit, nor conditional Election; Adoption, Union with
Christ, and all the rest of the fundamental Privileges, they run in this
stream, to be particular and distinct, Why ought not the Covenant, which is as
it were the Charter, by which we come to be secured of these fundamental
Privileges, to be also personal and distinct? Why should our Election,
Redemption, Adoption, and Effectual Calling, each of them be particular, and
personal; and the Covenant, which is the Charter, and great ground of our
security, not be particular and distinct also?

Fourthly, On Gods part, whether we respect the absolute Promises, or the
conditional, they all point at particular persons; I will take away the heart
of stone, I will put my fear in their heart, and I will give them pardon of
sin; whatever promise be made, whether absolute of conditional, they are not
terminat, nor have their accomplishment together, in the visible Church, but
like Water that is to be poured in every particular Bottle; now since on the
Fathers part he became debtor to every individual or personal Member, taken
within the Covenant, Is it not only warrantable, but absolutely necessary, that
there should be a particular application, and personal taking hold of the
Covenant, in all these clauses whether absolute or conditional?

Fifthly, The duties of the Covenant are particularly and personally to be
performed, there is none here can go a warfare for another, none can pay
another debt in the Covenant, every man must give an account for himself in
this Covenant, the Parent cannot do for the Child, nor the Husband for the
Wife, but every man must do for himself; now fince every Duty must be performed
particularly and personally, Is there not then and absolute necessity, that
there should be an engaging and personal indenturing with God?

Lastly, The nature of justifying Faith, which is the great condition of the
Covenant, consists in a particular and personal application of the Covenant; an
Historical Faith will carry the Devils to believe, that Christ loved the Elect,
and gave himself for them; but justifying Faith carries a Paul to, He loved me,
and gave himself for me; herein lies the nature of justifying Faith, it is a
particular application of Christ and of the Covenant, in all the articles and
caluses of it; and there can be no right application by Faith, of the
privileges of the Covenant, without becoming subject to the duties of it,
otherways, as in marriage, we would separat what God has joined, we would
separat the promising and commanding part of the Covenant. Now lay all these
six together, and I conceive, I have laid before you, most rational grounds,
why the duty of personal Covenanting with God, is not only warrantable, but of
absolute necessity.

The second thing proposed, shall be to open, wherein this Act of personal
Covenanting with God consists; some have dilated on it at a great length, and
have dwelt on the preparatory Acts to it, and the things formally required in
the Act it self, and there, have spoken of the Properties and Consequences of
it; but I will not dwell on it at this length, yet that I may be helpful to
you, in your personal Covenanting, in regard one of the great grounds of our
withering and dryness, results from the neglect of this Duty, I shall therefore
insist, in opening the nature of it, only in speaking to these tgwo things,
which I conceive will briefly sum up, wherein this act of personal Covenanting
consists. I will not go to speak any thing of Gods part, either when we make or
renew the Covenant with him; But all I shall say now, shall be something of our
part, when we personally Covenant with him, I will reduce them to these two
Heads.

First, Our personal Covnenating with God, consists in our accepting of the
offers of the Covenant, as they are made by God. 2. In our engaging to the
Terms of the Covenant, required by God; for the Terms must be the Terms that he
has made in the Covenant; we must not make now Terms, neither must we reject
any of the Terms already made: I deny not, as ye shall hear, when I come at it,
but on the account of a particular failing, a Christian may be more in engagin,
with respect to one things, than another, especially where he has failed most,
and Conscience does challenge him most; but we are neither to make new Terms,
nor reject the Terms already made, in our personal Covenanting with God, we
must keep to the Terms already made and proposed in the Covenant, in all the
Articlaes and Clauses of it.

First then, It consists in the accepting of the offer of the Father, made in
the Covenant: I confess, I like well to read the excellent Soliloquies, many
have had with their own Souls, in the accepting of this offer, and entering in
this Covenant; ye have patterns of them set down, Mr. Allan in his Vinditiae
Pietatis, Mr. Baxter in his Saints Rest; It Is like these holy men's souls, when
they have been Transacting this personal Covenant with God, they have been in a
very elevated frame, they speak part of the Language of Canaan; What
Apostrophies, and what turnings to their own soul, and what excitements and
encouragements they offer to the soul? and then closes with either, I accept
this Covenant, or this contrivement of the salvation of sinners, as it is
offered: or else readily, I swear and subscribe it with my hand. or else I lift
up my hand. Mr. Allan approves for some length of the lifting up of the hand,
that the solemnity may be the more binding, in the accepting of the Covenant,
and of the Terms offered in the Covenant.

But here I will offer you two things about this accepting of the Covenant,
which is the first thing wherein this formal act of personal Covenanting
consists.

First, Take notice, that this acceptance, if it be done cordially, seriously,
deliberatly, and according to the Gospel; it is a most difficult thing, it is not
an easy thing to bring the heart to it; I will not say this for the
discouragement of any, but there are three things that makes it most difficult.
1. There is no seed of Believing naturally in man; Naturalists have observed,
that it is a most difficult thing, to bring Creatures to act about a thing
whereof they have no principle within them; How difficult is it, to Teach
Philosophy or Reason to Bruits? And the great ground of it, is they have no
feed or principle of it within them, and this makes the accepting of the offer
of the Covenant, to be a thing most difficult. 2. In the accepting of this
Covenant, not only have they no seed of Believing in them, but all the
principles in man are contrair to it; It Is a wonder to see how proud man
repines, to accept of an imputed Righteousness; ye will find in the Church,
Papists, Socinians, Arminians; and I know not what a multitude of them, crying
down Justification by Faith alone, and mocking at the Term of an imputed
Righteousness; and O! that there were not too many amongst our selves, running
headlong to these principles. 3. The difficulty of it will appear, if ye
consider the opposition that it meets with in the World, in accepting this
imputed Righteousness, How many oppositions did Christ himself meet with, when
he was among men? It was constantly his work, to be pressing this, yet when he
came to his own, even amongst the Jews, they required a sign, before they
accepted it: and when he was preaching to the Gentiles, they required Arguments
and Demonstrations, ere they accepted it; in effect, man having no principle
within him, for accepting this Righteousness, and all the principles within him
being contrair to it, and Christ himself having met with so much opposition
when he preached it, ye may conclude from these, that it is not an easy thing
to persuade a sinner to accept of this Righteousness of the Covenant. But I
will add another thing, that this Act of accepting, it is one special part of
that, wherein personal Covenanting consists; and for clearing of this, I would
have you to notice three things. 1. Ye shall take notice, that God in the
Covenant of Grace, he has as it were, past from the Terms of the Covenant of
Works, no but he requires the same duties in the Covenant of Grace: I have
already evinced it to you, that the whole Law, we become bound to obedience to
it in the Covenant of Grace; yea, there are some Duties required in the
Covenant of Grace, that are not required in the Covenant of Works; yea, he has
bound us to the whole Law, in our accepting of this Righteousness; I say,
though he has bound us to the Law. it is not the Law that is the great
condition of the Covenant of Grace; it is not our obedience that is the great
condition, it is our believing and accepting of the offered Righteousness; so
that though obedience to the Law was the great condition of the Covenant of
Works, the tenor and nature of the two Covenants are exceeding different, and
now the great condition, though the Law be required, the Law is not the
condition, it is the accepting and embracing the offered Righteousness, which is
necessary to be observed, in regard there are many precious to God, they deal
with themselves ordinarily, as if the Covenant of Grace run in the same channel,
that the Covenant of Works run in, and if they have not the same perfection of
obedience, and if our Sanctification have not such and such qualifications, and
such degrees, they utterly sentence themselves as cast-aways; no, obedience is
required in the Covenant of Grace, but the accepting of the offered,
Righteousness, is the great condition of the Covenant of Grace. 2. Take notice,
that this accepting of the offer, it is really and formally the very act of
Believing; In personal Covenanting, it may be convenient, that one should say,
and another subscribe with his hond; but the very act of accepting is, the act
of Believing; so the Soul tranfacts with God in this part of the personal
Covenant, when it puts out an act of recumbency and relying on Jesus Christ, as
he is holden the out in Covenant; so, this is the great condition of the
Covenant, and this accepting is the very formal and proper act of Believing. I
add 3. This accepting is the special thing in personal Covenanting: I deny not,
but the Terms, as ye shall hear, on which the offfer is made. are necessary to
be eyed, and readily we make but a very superficial bargain, that will make a
fashion of accepting the offer, and slight the Terms on which it is made; but he
principal act in Covenanting is, to credit deliberatly, seriously, and
effectually, the Grace that makes the offer of Christ in the Gospel, and to
rely and cast our selves absolutely over on him. I deny not but we are to give
our selves to the Lord, and resign our selves to be disposed of by him, and to
be engaged to Duties, according to our station: but this is not the princinal
part, the principal part is, to go to him, and say, This day, Lord, I accept of
Christ, I accept of this Righteousness, that he has purchased; I will rely on
it, and cast my soul and hope of my salvation it. But I will not insist in
teaching you a form of words, that may be used in accepting of the offer; but
as this accepting is a difficult thing, there being no principle in man for it,
but all against it, so the great condition in personal Covenanting is, this act
of accepting.

The other thing required in making up this personal Covenant with God it is
engaging to the Terms on which the offer is made; we cannot go personally to
Covenant with God, but first we sust accept of the offer, and then indenture to
the Terms; There are two or there things here, I thought to have spoken a
little unto. 1. To hold out to you, that ye may be the better directed in it,
something of the Terms, on which the offer is made, of their reasonableness and
their excellency. 2. That though it be not the principal act in personal
Covenanting, it is indispensably necessary, and in effect there can be no
personal Covenant, except we indenture to the Terms, and accept of the offer on
the Terms.

SERMON XII.
2 Samuel 23. Verse 5. Although my hose be not so with God; yet he has made
with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is
all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


HOW excellent soever the Covenant of Grace be, and excellent it is, yet the
Lord has left a liberty in the visible Church, for every man to come and put
in his name into it, Ho, every one, and whosoever will let him come, and take
the waters of life freely. Without a curious inquiry, into the many things
pre-required, or subsequent unto it; I resolved the Answer in two Heads: First,
The accepting of the offer of the Covenant. 2. The indenturing to the Terms of
the Covenant, the accepting of the offer, is the first and principal part,
though the Covenant require other Duties, yet they are not the proper
conditions of the Covenant and for less the first and prineipal condition; I
shall say no more of that Branch of the act of Covenanting, the accepting of
the offere.

The other thing wherein it consists is, the submitting and indenturing for the
Terms, on which the offer is made; and here there are two things that I would
do. 1. I shall inquire a little, in helping to this act of persomal Covenanting
with God, into what the Terms are. 2. What encouragement the Soul has to
indenture for these Terms. notwithstanding of their number and greatness.

First, What these Terms are, Antinomians will not admit of any conditions in
the Covenant; I will net deny, but if ye examine that word Condition properly,
but they may have something to say, but that there are Terms on which the offer
is made, and which in the Souls Covenanting with God, must be indentured for,
is beyond all controversy; what these Terms are, is then worthy of inquiry; to
run through them at large, would take a large time; I will only mention two
things. 1. In personal Covenanting with God, there is something we must give.
2ly. There is someting we must do, and we must indenture for both what we are
to give, and what we are to do.

First, There are somethings we must give, and what is this, what have we to
give? Had we the cattle on a thousand mountains, and give we them, what would
they signify to Him? Shall we give the fruit of our body, for the sin of our
soul? no, we are to give Him our self indeed the indenturing on our part, is
mainly lying in this, to make an absolute resignation of our selves to Him, as
the Macedonians, Paul bare them this testimony, and he thought it not strange,
that they were charitable, for they had given themselves to the Lord; the Lord
in the Covenant, He gives Himself, and it is the least we can do, to give our
selves back again; it is a marriage Covenant, and it is not enough for the
bride, that she give suit and presence, but that she give her self to her
husband: It Is reported in the life of Socrates, That one day whenhe was at
Athens, several of his Scholars brought presents to him, some rich presents,
some smaller; there was one poor Scholar that had nothing to give. but said
he, I will give him myself and Socrates esteemed of that Gift, more than of all
that had been offered to him. It Is not only our duty, but our privilege;
sometime a Beliver may go with that argument in his mouth, when he has any
count to make to God, I am thine, save thou me, so when we make a personal
covenant with Him, as we accept of the offer of Himself, of His Son, His Peace,
His Pardon, the Land of Canaan, so we engage to resign our selves to Him, and
to give our selves to Him, which imports two things into it. 1. We give our
selves to be disposed of as to our work. 2ly, We give our selves to be disposed
of as to our station, in performing that work.

First, We give our selves to be disposed of as to our work, though it be a
marriage Covenant, yet it partakes of a Covenant betwixt King and Subjects,
Master and Servant, it is a Despotick Covenant, every Servant is not called to
the same work; some of His commands, as some observe well, they both please HIm
and us, they will please our flesh, He bids us eat and drink, and cloth our
selves, they are commands of the Covenant, and they please both Him and us; but
there are many other commands, they please Him, as to take up the Cross, to
deny our selves, they please Him, but they are often unpleasant to us; He may
call one to preach, and another to suffer; In the personal Covenant with Him,
we resign and give over our selves, to be disposed of as to our work, 2ly, We
give over our selves to be disposed of, as to our station, every vessel in the
house is not of gold, there are some of silver, and some of clay, and he that
indentures in this personal Covenant, providing he be a vessel for the master
use, it is all one wheither he be gold, silver, or clay, the presonal Covenant
makes a gift of our selves to the Lord, with an absolute resignation of our
lot, of our station, and service in the wilderness, if they be not a glazen
window in the house, they are content, providing they be a nail in the wall; if
they be not an eye, they are content, providing they be a toe, if it be for the
good of the body. It Is true, we are no great gift, when we have made a gift of
our selves, yet it is that He calls for, and in personal Covenanting with Him,
that we indenture for, like the Macedonians, we give our selves to the Lord, to
be disposed by the Lord; if He think prosperity or adversity for us, we are
content; if He think a suffering lot, or a peaceable lot for us, we are
content; or whether we be in a high place, or a low place, it is all one, for
it is a clause in the indenture, we are to be at His disposing,

Secondly, In the Covenant, we not only look to what we are to give, but what
we are to do; it is true, all the Duties of the Covenant, ought to be done; in
our Covenanting with Him, we are not to make exception of any of them, a
Believer may personally Covenant with God, that does not distinctly take up all
the Terms, on which the Covenant runs, yet they do not make exception of any of
the Terms, but esteems all his commands, concerning every thing to be right;
some of them are greater, some of them are smaller; even in our indenturing in
the Covenant of Grace, we are not to walk by the principles that others walk
by; O say they, the Truths relating to exteranl Worship and Church Government,
they are but small things; the great duty is to accept of the Righteousness
offered in the Covenant; they will personally Covenant with God, for these
absolutely incispensible and necessar things; but they think they need not take
in these lesser things into the Covenant; But like a man clipping gold, he will
stoop down and left the least clipping, Why? it is gold; in our indenturing, we
are not to make exception of any of the Terms, Why? the Terms are His, and
there are two reasons for this. 1. In the great Duty of the Covenant, the
Father's design is, the exaltation of His Son, it was one of the proofs I
brought, to prove Him the Maker of the Covenant, it looked like the design of
it, that He designed to cry up His Son; therefore the great violation of the
Covenant lies unbelief, and in not accepting of the Son which would be noticed
by all, who will go mourning for other thins, and will be cherishing their
unbelief: There cannot be a greater affront put upon God, than what is put upon
Him in His Son, in regard He is at the outmost of His offers, to speak with
reverence, he cannot make a greater offer, than of his Son, now an eye ought to
be had to this great Duty especially. But 2ly, These things wehrein our
infirmity is greatest, or that we are soonest worested by Temptation, in
Covenanting to Terms, in our Coveranting which God, a special respect ought to
be had to these, as Samson had something wherein his great strength lay, in
other things he was like another man; so every one of us has something wherein
our weakness lies; now in our Covenanting with God, if one be a neglecter of
Family Duty, or if one be easily drawn away from God, after evil company, if
one be in a passion and provoked to profane and blaspheme the holy and
precious Name of God, if one be superficial in secret Prayer; observe wherein
the infirmity lies, and where the temptation does most easily worst them, to
have an eye in the persponal Covenant with God, to these things; it is observed
by some, when they write of the covenant, when the Spirit is about to
challenge, for neglect of these things, there will nothing sooner come in ones
heart, than the covenant they made, like a knock of an hammer, it will drive in
the Challenge, and roove the Nail to the head; therefore, a special eye ought
to be had for these infirmities incident to us, wherein temptations uses to
assault us most. So I hope, laying these things together, I have proved,
wherein personal covenanting with God lies, it lies in accepting the Son, the
Father has offered Him, and all that he has, and when the Soul accepts of
this offer and relyes with an act of recumbency on the faithfulness of Him that
made it and subscribes to the Terms, both to give themselves to the Lord back
again, and to indenture to the Terms and Duties required, and particular
indenturing against the infirmities we are easily beset with, and that
Temptation easily worsts them in; herein lies, as I conceive, tha Act of
personal Covenanting with God, especially if ye add to it in.

The 3d place, the manner how this acceptance, and this engagement is to be
performed and gone about; and here I shall notice to you three or four things:
(1.) Take notice, that in accepting this offer, and in Indenturing to these
terms, in a personal Covenant with God, the action ought to be very deliberat
and advised; it ought not to be, as one says, as a man loving a woman, at the
first view he sees her beautiful and comely, and presently it goes in his heart
he will marry her, not considering that she may have much debt, and an evil
humor, and many infirities following her; so, many in their personal
Covenanting with Christ, they presently fall in love with Glory, they fall in
love with the Land of Canaan, and they see the Mediator beautiful and lovely,
but they do not consider the crosses, the reproaches, the temptations the
difficulties, that will accompany Covenanting with him. It Is remarkable in
Scripture, it is called the deed of the wife Merchant, that goes and sells all
that he may buy the Field where the Pearl is; this is not the act of a fool,
it is not an hasty act, no, he goes and considers the Field, and finds it is the
Field where the Fearl is, and he goes and sells all that he may but it; so, the
sold that Indentures with God on this score, must consider, it is a business
may cost him all that he has, he must consider, whether the Pearl will
compense the selling of all that he has; There are many, it may, be truly said
of them, they are pound fools and penny wife, all the little wit they have in
the Wilderness, is only like Children, it is how to build Houses, and run after
Flies, and busk Babies, but their deliberation runs not about this. It Is
strange to see many rational in may things. and so far from reason in their
Religion, the most thing wherein they play the fool is, there, but this Act of
personal Covenanting, is a deliberat Act, it is an Act of the wife Merchant, who
considers whether the Field and the Pearl will pay the cost. (2ly,) This Act is
to be an Act of the whole Soul, the understanding, will and affections, the
Lord will have the consent of all, in perfecting this work of personal
Covenanting; the case is with them, as with some generous spirits, who in suit
of Marriage, except they get the Woman's heart and consent, all other things
that they c^n offer, will be of on value, and will not induce them to Marry:
Wisdoms demand is, my Son, give me thy heart, it is not, give me thy hand, or
give me thy tongue, or ear, but my Son give me thy heart; it is not, my Son,
divide thy heart, give me a piece of it; but, my Son, give me thy heart, it is
the whole heart that must be given him, in personal Covenanting with him, and
when he he has gotten the whole heart, he has not gotten a thing of much
worth, unless he take a way when he has gotten it, to clothe it with the
righteousness of his Son, and to Persume it, and yet for as feckless as it is,
he will have it in personal Covenanting with him, to concur. (3ly) It may be
very necessary and useful, semetines to express outwardly our accepting of his
offer, and Indenturing to these terms on which the offer is made; it is true,
the special obligation, and that which is especially required, is, the firm
purpose of heart, the content of the heart, and he will not take words, if he
marry, except he know well he get the Brides heart; there may be externals
subservient to the great end of personal Covenanting with him, as sometimes to
go and to say to God, Lord, I accept of this Christ, and Indenture on these
terms, I will give my self to thee, and will watch especially against the
things I have been neglective in, and guilty of, sometime we may do it, by
lifting up of the hand, our hearts, are such cheats, as we cannot lay too mahy
ties on them; sometimes believers have done it, by subscribing to the Lord,
they have drawn up the sjpecial things of it on Gods, part, and the special
du^ies they have engaged unto on Gods part, and they have written them down,
and spread them before the Lord, and them subseribed them; which if they find
of any use, when they have examined their way, they have run to the engagement
they made to the Lord, and they find, if performing such duties, yielding to
such temptations, be agreeable to the Covenant they made with God; therefore
form the fear of the wrath of the Covenant, they have been made to mourn for
Covenant breaking with him. Now when things are thus performed, when with
eonsent of the whole man, they are content either to say, or to subseribe, or
to swear to God, that they take his offer, they hold him at his offer, they
take hold of the offer, as it is offered, and will not alter the terms, but
accepts of it on the very terms that it is made, this is the Act of personal
covenanting with God, as I conceive.

But before I proceed to the Application, there is one great difficulty
necessary to be cleared, ye would remember both the grounds I brought in the
forenoon to prove the necessity, and the Ecplication of that, wherein the
formal act of personal covenanting consists.

Quest. The question necessary to be cleared is, whether is this personal
Covenanting with God, the duty of all within the visible Church? Is there not a
mixed mult tude of elect and reprobat, and is not the Church like a Drag-net,
wherein good and bad Fishes are, and can this personal covenanting and
accepting the offer, and Indenturing to the terms, be the duty of the reprobate
and bad Fishes in the Net? This is the tossing of a great Arminian Question, If
I should dilate in the Latitude, it would carry me before such a popular
Auditory.

Ans. For Answer to the Question, I will only say this, this Act of personal
covenanting, is the duty of all within the visible Church, and none is to go
and exempt himself from it, but indeed especially it is the duty of the Elect.

There are Two Parts of this Answer, that I would labor to confirm to you,
from some Reasons, 1. That it is the duty of all within the visible Church,
thus Personally to covenant with God, shall appear from these things, 1. All to
whom the offer of the covenant is made, are bound to the accepting of the
offer; now whatever be in the purpose of God, the Promulgation and Proclamation
of the covenant, and the offer of it, is made to all within the visible Church,
and who shall question where there is an offer made, that it is presumption to
accept of it? Many stand at it, as if it were presumption; I suppose one were
coming by a house, and if the Master of the house should look out at a window,
and see him, and entreat him to come and dine with him, and eat and drink with
him, would ye think it presumption, especially if he should add Allurements,
and Promises, and tell you that he has killed his Fatlings, and mingled his
wine, and if he should not prevail with all these, if he should look our at the
windom and cry, if ye will not come in, I swear I will come down and kill you;
the Father has done so in this Covenant, he has given Entreaties, and
Allurments, and Promises, and sworn, if ye accept not of his offer, he will
damn you eternally in hell. 2ly. All whom the command of Believing reaches, and
who are concerned in it, are bound Personally to Covenant with God, but all in
the visible church are commanded to believe, and the great Root of the Sentence
that will pass against them will be, even the Reprobat, their not believing.
3ly. If all were not bound thus Personally to Covenant with God, what can be
the meaning of the many Regreates and Lamentations in the Gospel, for many
Reprobat ones, for their not Indenturing with him, to sit down over Jerusalem
and weep, to upbraid Chorazin, and Bethsaida, if they had not been bound thus
Personally to Covenant with Him: So its the duty of all within the visible
church, all of them ly under an Obligation, to make a Covenant with him by
Sacrifice, on no less hazard than what they are worth for ever and ever: But
this is the duty of all, but especially the Elect, the reasons why it is the
Elects duty, I will not dwell on them at this time, but will show you, that
though it be constantly the duty of the Elect, tobe making and keeping Covenant
with God, yet there are some special times, wherein especially they are called
to it, and all I shall say in this Sermon, shall be to show you Four or Five
remarkable Junctures of Cases, wehrein the Lord calls his Elect, to enter in,
or to renew a Covenant, first At their first effectual calling, when He has
made a law work, to make way for a Gospel Work, when He has sent His Spirit to
convince of Sin, and of Judgment, the Spirit has a Couumission also, to
convince of Righteousness, then especially they are called to Personal
Covenanting with God. And the truth is, the work of effectual Calling, the Term
of it, that which perfytes it, and makes it effectual Calling, its not
Challenges and Convictions of Sin, its the closing with Christ, and entering in
a Personal Covenant with Him; for suppose we should be able to tell, of never
so many Challenges for Sin, and fears of Hell, they have had, they are not able
to instruct from all these, their Effectual Calling, if they have not come
under a Personal Covenant with Christ; so any of you that are under the pangs
of the NewBirth Birth, as there are some traveling among you, under fears, and
griefs, and guiltiness, and fears of Hell, the way of coming to a delivery, and
an outgate from all these is, to enter in this Personal Covenant, to accept of
the offer, and the Terms on which the offer is made. 2ly. It Is a very suitable
time to enter in this Personal Covenanting with God, when there comes to be any
special impression of the Spirit, made on the Soul, we ought to take the stot
of our hearts, readily it may be long before ye get that occasion again, it is
not your each days dinner, when ye get any Elevation of Spirit, any delight, or
any peace or joy in believing, any striking of the Irons in Prayer, that the
heart will affect the eye, when ye go to God, that is a special time of
Personal Covenanting with Him, in this case, we are to do as Psalm. 27.8. Thou
said, seek ye my face, that is the Spirit working within him, it was even
like a command, and my heart Answered, Thy face, Lord, I will seek, hide not
thy face from me; So at your first Effectual Calling, it may be in some corner,
ye may have some liberty to vent your heart to God, and ye may have some gale
on your Spirit, ye cannot improve that time better, as a cord to knit to the
duny better, than to say, I accept of the Offer, and I accept of the Terms on
which it is Offered, and I shall watch against the Failings wherein I have been
weakest. 3ly. It Is a suitable time to enter in a Personal Covenant with God,
after we have fallen in some great Sin against God, after we have been left to
some Sin against God, that has made a breach on the former Personal
Covenant's, that we have made with Him: It may be some wide breach then, that
come; to be a call to thee from God, to go and renew a Covenant with Him: It Is
remarkable in Thomas's case, when Christ came in among the Disciples, when
Thomas was absent; and they told him that Christ was risen, and that they had
seen him, O says he, I will not believe, exccept I put my hand in his side,
and in the print of the nails; Christ comes and convinces him of this Sin, and
challenges him for it, and bids him not to be unbelieving, but faithful; and
when he had seen him, and heard him, and had been convinced, thou art my Lord,
and my God, says he, it is as much as if he had said, I will Indenture of new
with Christ, and renew a Personal covenant with him, thou art my Lord, and my
God; so that when there comes to be any breach betwixt God and us, that readily
has made a great slap in our former vows, when ye are not to go and run away,
and give over hope, but even after Thomas would not believe, that Christ was
risen trom the dead, and was living, yet when he is thoroughly convinced of all,
he says, thou art my Lord, and my God. 4ly. It Is a fit time in entering in a
Personal Covenant with God, when a Christian comes under desertion, and when
there is a great Cloud betwixt him and God; It Is remarkable, upon the case,
Christ complains nore of Desertion, than of the nails that was thurst in Him;
it was no wonder, if he Had taken ill with the Cross, for He was daily with the
Father, as one brought up with Him, and He was daily his delight, before the
Mountains were brought forth; and a desertion was heavy to Him, and what is His
way he takes for outgate? He takes him to the Covenant, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? In this casting a copy to us, that there is no such
promising way under Desertion, as the renewing of a Covenant with Him Lastly.
It Is a fit time to enter in a personal Covenant with Him, at a Sealing
Ordinance; the Sacrament of the Supper, it is a Seal of the New Testament in His
Blood, and it may lay a great Obligation, on a loose careless heart, that if it
get leave, will be thy death, as a poor man complained, Alas! my heart will be
my death, thou that have such a heart, thou art to enter in a personal Covenant
with him, and take this Bread and this Wine, and say, I accept of this deemer,
as the Father offers Him; I Indenture to the terms of the Gospel, without
exception of any of them; but especially to the great things wherein I have
been most negligent; there is a fit time to enter this personal Covenant, when
there is a Seal of the New Testament Passing as it were, out of his hand, into
thine; and that is a great part of the Souls Communion with him, in that
Sacrament.

Use. I will only exhort to two things, and with them close this Sermon. 1.
Christian, will thou go and take a view of this Covenant, that thou may be
encouraged, to engadge in it; many are ignorant of the Covenant, I complain of
your ignorance of the Scriptures, and of your unacquaintedness with them, and
for all the sweetness of the Promises, that ye know nothing of them, that ye
cannot say, as an Ancient was wont to say, this is my Promise, a Believer ought
to have several Promises in the Covenant, these which they have gotten, most
reviving, quickening, and consolation from; what an excellent thing is it, if
one were going through the Bible, and through the Covenant, and doing as
Apothecaries use to do, they go to a Garden, and they get a Flower here and
there, and puts them up in Boxes, that when sick folk comes, they may go
rightly to the Box; sO ought we to do with the Promises, we ought to gather the
Promises in classes, so that when we have to do with any Promise, we may go to
them, and take out a Promise suitable to our case. 2ly. I exhort you to take a
view of the Duties, and Terms of the Covenant; ye need not be discouraged at
them, there is a kind of Heaven in holiness, and the scope of them all is, to
make us holy; it is true, the generality but breaks the shell, and gets not the
kernel; there is nothing more sweet and satisfying than the kernel, it is like
Honey; all that taste of it, cry more, more, but of all the wershest things in
the world, is the shell.

SERMON XIII.
2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me
an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure; for this is all my
salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


I Proposed in the second Branch of this verse, three things to be considered.
First, Who is the Author of the Covenant? Of this I have spoken. Secondly, The
parties considered personally and particularly, and the special thing I
insisted on the last day, was, That every particular Believer ought personally
and particularly to find himself concerned in the Covenant; and named five or
six grounds, to prove the warrantableness and necessity of personal covenanting
with God: And then opened that Question, wherein personal covenanting
consisted: I also requited in this Question, who were bound in this Duty of
personal covenanting? I told you, that it was the duty of all the Members of
the visible Church, but especially the Elect. I shall now, that I may the more
fully open the Duty of our personal and particular covenanting, or entering in
a covenant of Grace with God; open some properties of this Act, of personal
indenturing and covenanting with God, and I shall name these five or six of
them, and from them ye will better understand the nature of it.

First, This Act of personal covenanting with God, it is an absolutely necessary
Act, it is indispensibly necessary, that we should accept his offer in the
covenant, and bind our selves to the Terms of the covenant; and that is the
first character and property of it. It Is observed by Divines, there are some
things God has forbidden, there are some things God has left indifferent, and
has neither commanded nor fordidden them; there are some things God has
commanded, and they are necessar, necessitate praecepti, they are to be obeyed
hic and nunc, as the Sacrament of the New Testament is; and there are some
things necessar necessitate medii, as Schoolmen speaks, we cannot be saved
without them. Now this Act of personal covenanting with God, is of this nature,
it is of absolute and indispensible necessity, which will appear from the
consideration of these three or four things. 1. Unless we particularly and
personally, and expressly accept of the covenant of Grace, and indenture with
God on the Terms of the covenant, we cannot be stated in a Covenant Relation
with God. The Covenant made in Baptism by our Parents, wherein we have but a
virtual consent, does not state us in a real covenant with God, until we really
Indenture, and with consent covenant with Him in the Covenant; so until we
consent, we must be under the curse and covenant of Works, in all the Clauses
and Heads of it, and cannot claim unto the Covenant of Grace, in all the
Clauses and Articles of it; for there cannot be a Covenant Relation with God,
until we expressly, particularly, and personally Indenture in a personal
Covenant with Him. 2ly. Until we thus particularly and personally Covenant, we
cannot have any benefit by Christ's Death; whatever he has purchased, (and he
has purchased great things) yet, until we accept and take hold of the
Covenant, and particularly and personally Indenture in it, we can have no
benefit by his Death: the Covenant is as it were the Contract, and there is no
woman that has a right to the Contract, but she that marries the man; until we
be unite to Christ, we can have no benefit by the Covenant; and until we enter
in the Covenant, we cannot be unite to him. Ephesians. 2.12. At that time ye were
aliens from the common wealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenant of
promise; mark how these two go together, without christ, and strangers to the
covenant of promise; even so that until we come to Indenture personally and
particularly in the Covenant, we are without Christ, and without a right to the
benefits of his Death. 3ly. Until we come personally, and particularly to
indenture with God, and accept of the Covenant of Grace, we can have no
comfortable views of Providence, especially if they be dark and humbling
Providence. The Covenant is as it were a Key, that opens all Providence: it is
a remarkable word, Psalm. 25.10. All his ways are mercy and truth, to such as
keep his covenant: mark here, all his ways are mercy and truth. And how come
they to be known to be Mercy and Truth? They come to be known by our interest
in the Covenant, and by the Covenant it self. Let him do to us what he will;
let Him correct, and let Him do it never so sharply, yet by the Covenant, and
our Interst in it, we see them to be Mercy and Truth. 4ly. Until we thus
personally Indenture and Covenant with God, we neither own our Baptism, nor
can we rightly Communicate; there is a Covenant indeed made with God by our
Parents in Baptism, in whom we virtually consent to the Covenant, in all the
Clauses and Articles of it, but this not enough; as a man suiting a woman, he
judges it not enough that he have her Parents consent, it is her self he must
marry, and he must have her own express consent before they marry; so in
Baptism, our Parents gave their consent that we shall accept Christ on the
Terms of the Covenant; but we never own our Baptism, until we personally
covenant with God; neither go we rightly about the Sacrament of the Supper,
which is as Seal of the Covenant, until we personally Indenture and Covenant
with Him. Lastly. Until we personally Covenant and Indenture with God, there
can be no comfortable viewing of the Great Day, the thoughts of Judgment and
Eternity are terrible to them, that have not an interest in the Covenant: It Is
a remarkable word, Psalm. 50. The beginning whereof, the current of Interpreters
refer it to the Judgment of the Great day, in the 5. and 6. verses. Gather my
Saints to me, those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice, the heavens
shall declare his righteousness, for God is judge himself: mark here, that Day
will be a comfortable day to the Saints, and who are they that are to be
gathered to him that day? It Is those that have made a Covenant by Sacrifice
with Him, and God himself is Judge: now lay all these five together, and ye
will find that this particular Indenturing with Him, is of absolute necessity.

But I come to a second property of this Covenant, this Act of covenanting
personally with God, and accepting of the Covenant of Grace, personally and
particularly, as it is an Act of absolute necessity, it ought to be a Deliberat
well pondered Act, no Act ought more to be pondered: many go about this rashly,
they are like that Scribe that came to Christ in Matthew. 8.20. The Scribe says,
Master, I will follow thee whithersoever thou go. Christ tells him, the
foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man has
not where to lay his head; but we read no more of that Scribe, it is as much as
thou art not deliberat, thou offers to follow me whithersoever I go, it is a
rash offer, thou knows not what thou say. This Act ought to be a very
deliberat Act on these grounds. 1. Man is a rational Agent; Reason is the great
specific Difference, distinguishing him from a Bruit; if in any thing his
Reason is to be exercised, it is in his Religion: for however, God has called
us to believe several things, which our Reason cannot comprehend, as that there
should be three Persons in one Essence, two Natures in one Person, our Reason
cannot fathom, nor dive into the deep of these Mysteries; yet there is nothing
in our Religion contrare to Reason, and however we have such dusty Spectacles,
that we will take the thing for Reason the day, which we will count Folly to
morrow; however our Reason since the Fall, has gotten a Wound, that makes us
like Jacob, go halting, when he is touched on the hollow of his Thigh; and yet
so much of the exercise of Reason is left to us, as that in our Religion there
is a special exercise for it; God calls not man in this Act of personal
covenanting, to deny his Reason, but rather to exercise it. And when a
Christian goes in his walk with God on well founded Reasons, Scriptural
Reasons, and the Authority of God in the Scriptures, readily that Christian is
not frothie, driven like chaff before every wind of Temptation, but is solid in
his walk. 2ly. This Act of personal covenanting with God, ought to be
deliberat, in regard of the great importance of it: Nature will teach us, that
things of great importance, ought to be done with great deliberation; and
hardly is there a thing of more importance, than our accepting of the Covenant
of Grace, and Indenturing with the Father, on the Terms of the Covenant: many
ponder not the importance of it, but it is of so great importance, as for all
Eternity, so long as God will be God, it is of importance for us, it ought to be
very deliberat, unless we will be pound fools, and penny wise, who will be
deliberat in Trifles, like children busking their Babies, and rickling up their
Houses. 2ly. It ought to be deliberat, in regard undeliberat Actions to
Godward, makes them soon evanish; there are some, if they come under
afflictions, or if they fall in sickness, or a Fever, and God shake Death over
their head; or if they be at some solemn Ordinance, they will be at resolving
and purposing, and readily bringing vows on hemselves, of personal covenanting
with God, but as they are easily gotten, so they easily evanish. Psalm. 78.34.
When he slew them, then they sought after him, and returned and enquired early
after God; several times our affections are like a Gutter, when there is a
great Shower, we will be running over with purposes after God; Nevertheless
they flattered him with their mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongue,
for their heart was not right with God, nor were they steadfast in his covenant:
and yet when he slew them, they sought after him, and they yearly enquired
after him: so that indeliberat Actions and covenatings with God, as they are
hastily begotten, they no less suddenly evanish; the SAction ought then to be
deliberat when we Indenture with the Cautioner, and obliges our self to more
watchfulness, and more tenderness, or else it will soon evanish.

Quest. But here I will clear a Question, whereabout are we to deliberat, what
is a person to deliberat about, when he thus Indentures with God? The Answer is
obvious, and I will reduce what I will say of it to two heads. 1. We are to
deliberat, to consider and ponder what Offers God makes in the Covenant. 2ly.
On what Terms these Offers are made, both these two being by a rational soul
rationally pondered, may have great influence on a fixed work with God, and not
prove a flash, like what is in an Hypocrite.

First, We are to consider, and deliberat on the Tenor of the Offer made by
God, which we are to consider positively, and comparatively. 1. Positively, we
are to consider his Offers; the multitude of them, the greatness of the things
he offers: some have labored to reduce them to heads, he not only makes offer
of peace and pardon, and happiness in the Covenant, but to speak with reverence
of the Majesty of God, he is at the utmost of what he can offer: to say it with
reverence, it is impossible for Him to make greater Offers, He cannot make
greater Offers than of Himself, and of his Son, and both these He offers in the
Covenant for all Eternity. Now when we enter in a personal Covenant with God,
we are to ponder the Promises of the Covenant, that they are great and precious
Promises: we are to consider the multitude of things offered in it, and the
greatness of them, that in a manner, He is at his utmost in His offers, He
cannot make a greater Offer. 2ly. We are to consider these Offers
comparatively; the heart of man has many Wooers suiting it; sometimes it has
something in the World suiting it, sometimes Lusts are suiting it, sometimes
Satan is suiting it, sometimes one thing, sometimes another; but let them
carry it that makes the best Offers: lay these Offers in the Balance with what
the World offers, and the Honors and Advantages of it, lay them in the
Balance with what your Lusts offer, and with what Satan offers, and let them
carry the Heart who makes the greatest Offer: the consideration of these
things, when one sits down like that man, that when he came to the exercise of
his Reason, he began to consider, it is not long since I came to the World, and
in a little I will be no more in it, and wherefore came I to it, what is my
business in it? There are many things suiting my heart, and whosoever makes the
best and the greatest, and the surest Offers, let them carry it. Such a
Soliloque betwixt a man and his his Soul, acting like a ratinal Agent, will
readily put the soul to accept of the offer of the Covenant, and Indenture with
God.

Secondly, We are likewise to consider the Terms on which these Offers are
made, and upon which we are to Indenture with God: many will make this Bargain,
as sometime a Drunkard will make a fresh bargain in his drink, that when he is
fresh, he rues it, and would steal from it again: but we are to consider the
Terms, on which we enter in this Covenant, and we can never rightly enter in
this Covenant with God, (and without entering in this Covenant, we cannot be
saved) except we ponder the Terms on which we Indenture, and there are three
things necessar to be pondered about them. 1. The multitude of them, it is true
the Covenant is a covenant of Grace, adn not a Covenant of Works; and as I
said, believing in Jesus, and accepting of Him, is the only proper condition of
the condition of the Covenant of Grace; God in the Covenant of Grace, has
bound us to all the Duties be has commanded in the Covenant of Works, what a
multitude of them there are, take a compend of them in that word, 2 Cor. 7. at
the beginning, Having these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of
God; mark there, we must cleanse our selves of the fill hiness of the flesh and
spirit; a famous Ancient said well, when he read that verse, this seems to me
says he, like the Message the King of Syria sent to the King of Israel, 2 Kings
5.2. I have sent my servant to thee, that thou may recover him of his
leprosy; what says he, am I a God, to kill and make alive, that this man
sends to me to cure him of his leprosy? 2ly. We are to consider, the
constancy we are bound to in these Terms, if we enter in Covenant with God,
it is a marriage Covenant, whatever fall out to a man or woman, except Adulters,
the marriage-tye remains firm; if one were never so sickly or tender, it does
not break that tie, all the variety of cases his people can come under, cannot
dissolve it; we are not to be Time-servers in these things, for in a little,
they that serve Time, their Master will be taken from them, Rev. 10.5. And I
saw an angel Hand upon the sea, and he lift up his hand to heaven, and swear by
him that lives for ever and ever, that there should be time no longer. But
3ly. We are to consider the difficulties that will accon pany these Terms; the
Terms are, to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit,
perfecting holiness, in the fear of God; what multitude of difficulties must
these Terms be carried on with? will they make a man walk like an Owl among the
rest of the Birds? What a deal of crosses and difficulties will attend him that
makes a Covenant with God? Now one that would Indenture in a personal Covenant
with God, must consider and ponder all these. Now this is the second Property
of personal Indenturing with God, it is an Act of absolute necessity, and we
ought to be very deliberat and serious in it.

Thirdly, This Act of personal covenanting as it ought to be deliberat, so it
ought to be sincere, and an Act of the whole Soul. Psalm. 16.2. O my soul, thou
have said unto the Lord, thou art my God: God will dispense with any Infirmity
in this Act, sooner than Hypocrisy, He cannot endure to be mocked: For
clearing this, that it ought to be done with the whole Soul, I would have you
notice, First, This Act of personal covenanting, requires a very well ordered
Soul, not only Morally well ordered, but Spiritually; Divines observe well, the
Soul is well ordered in two Cases;

First, When the Will comes to beled by the Understanding, several times the
Will like a domineering Lady, it glories in it is Liberty and Freedom, it will
bind the Understanding, and draw it after it; we are easily brought to believe,
what the Will inclines us to, and to find our Reasons, for justifying of the
thing which it desires. Next, the Soul is well ordered, when Understanding,
Will and Affections follow the Conscience, and the Conscience is regulat by the
Word of God; the Affections, often it holds true of them that is said of Fire
and Water, they are good Servants, but ill Masters; when the affections comes
to domineer, they are ill Masters, but when they are ruled by the Conscience,
and the Conscience regulat by the Law of God, so that we can moderat our Anger
and not sin, that we can desire nothing but what we lawfully desire, and we
fear nothing, but what we lawfully can fear; when gref keeps within it is
bounds, when the Affections are thus regulat, what a sweet calm is there in the
Conscience, like an Instrument, that all the Strings of it are rightly placed,
and when ye strike on them, every string gives the sound they ought to give; so
the Understanding, Will and Affections, when they are rightly regulat, they
give the sound that is proper for them; when the Understanding is thus regulat,
that the Will follows the Understanding, and the Soul is regulat by the
Conscience, and the Conscience by the Word of God. 2ly. This Soul covenanting,
it imports a rightly ordered frame of the Soul, for it is an affectionat and
sincere Act, it is not to be wrung out of us; Bellarmine calumniats Protestants,
when he says, we maintain in the Act of Effectual Calling, that Deus torquet
voluntatem, in he does not thraw the Will, no, in this Act of personal
covenanting, it uses to be done, when it is done with the Soul, not with the
Affections only, but with the Bensil of the Affections; it is as it were the
marriage day, and in that day, the Soul is clothed in its best Appatel, and the
Unferstanding, Will and Affections, are at the height of their Vigor and
Fervency, it is necessar it should be so; for the Lord when he entered in
Covenant with us, O! so sincerely and affectionaly as He enters, and when he
has found the lost Goat and straggling Sheep, He call His neighbors and
friends to rejoice with Him. Luke 15. I likewise say, there is joy in Heaven
over one sinner that repents, etc. When he does it so affectionatly, and is so
much taken when a person does personally Covenant with Him, ought we not to
Covenant sincerely with the Bensil of the Affections.

SERMON XIV.
2 Samuel 23. Verse 5. Although my house be not so with God; yet he has made
with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is
all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


AMong many excellent Truths in this verse, this is one, not of the meanest,
that David speaks of the everlasting Covenant, as a thing personally and
particularly made with him, he does not say, the Lord has made with the
Church, but with me, an everlasting Covenant, I entered on the Properties of
this personal Covenant, and spoke to three of them; there are some yet
remaining, and therefore I shall proceed, as this personal covenanting with
God, is of absolute necessity, and is a very deliberat Act, and a sincere Act;
so there is a

Fourth Property of it, it is an Act that ought to be timeously, speedily, and
early done without delay; some of our Divines in their casuistical Disputs with
Papists, they rationally allege, that the Doctrine of the Popish Casuists in
some Principles, tends to hough all the Practices of Religion; for among other
things, they maintain, that if a sinner fall in sin, he is obliged to repent,
when he comes under some cross, or at some solemn Ordinance, or at the hour of
Death; we maintain against them, that a sinner is obliged to repent, immediately
on the back of the commission of the Sin, the same we say of personal
covenanting with God, it is to be done without delay, To day if ye will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation. Heb. 3.7. Cited out of
Psalm. 95.7. It Is not said to morrow if ye will hear his voice, but to day; It Is
true, there are some times and cases, when it is sweeter going about this work,
than at other times; there are some approaches in Spirit to us, which we should
exactly observe, as Courtiers that have their Nobilissima fandi tempora, they
get some fit opportunities of putting up their Petitions to Princes. 1. It Is an
excellent time in going about this work, of Indenturing, vowing, and resolving
with Christ, when the Spirit is making his approaches; yet we are not to delay
till these times, for the Command of God lies on us at all times: It Is a great
delusion of Quakers, that think they will not pray, or hear, but when the
Splrit comes; the Obligation to Duty is the Command, and the Command lies on
us, whether we be in frame, or out of frame. 2ly. It Is true, the Lord will
sometimes deny his People assisting Grace, that he may make way for accepting
Grace: He will leave them to toil, and wrestle with Duties, and then He will
take the strained Duty off their hand; several times He will do with them, as
He did with the poor Widow, to whom He gave but two Mites to cast in the
Treasury, and He accepts of them; He will leave one to toil, and wrestle with
Duty, as one under Irons, and then kindly accept of the Duty; so, whether we be
in frame or not, as we should pray, read and meditat, so it is not in these
times only, that we should make a personal Covenant with God, but we are to do
it without delay, and that upon these Reasons. 1. Hardly is there a greater
mercy bestowed on a person, than when they give their youth to God, and begin
early to seek Him; it is remarkable, Solomon shuts up that Book of the
Ecclesiastes, with Rmember thy Creator in the days of thy youth; the time that
others give to vanity, the time that is most difficult to be regulat by Reason
and Religion, we are to give that time to God, and to begin to enter in a
personal Covenant with Him, 2ly It ought to be done without delay, in regard of
the uncertainty of time, and of the Gospel Offers; we are all of us Tennents at
will, we know not what to morrow will bring forth, it is a wonder to see, what a
number of doors can easily be opened to let us in to the Grace, and many have
died very speedily; that young Divine that died in Holland, when he was yet a
young man, he wrote a Book, wherein he says, some have died of an hair in Milk,
some have fallen back from off the Stool that they sat on and died; now, since
both the time, and the Offers of the Gospel are so uncertain, this accepting of
the Offer, and Indenturing on the Terms of the Covenant, ought to be done with
all speed, and without delay. 3ly. It ought to be done timeously, and speedily,
in regard, ay the longer one continues in sin, and in a natural estate, they
are constantly the more hardened, the Conscience like a foot that it used to go
bare, it gathers a scurff; what a rare thing is Conversion in old age, how
seldom falls it out? So that this Work of personal Covenanting, ought to be
done without delay; for ay the longer it is delayed, the heart grows the more
averse, and the more hardened, and the custom of sinning takes away the
conscience of it. 4ly. It ought to be done speedily, in regard, many times
delays puts the Work wholly by, it is never done when it is delayed; there are
severals, as a man reported of himself when he was dying, that took this gate
of it, If I were once come to thirty years, I would be holy, and when he comes
to thirty, he puts it off till he came to fourth, and when he came to forty he
died, Lamenting that he had delayed and put off so long. It was so with Felix,
when he heard Paul preach of Righteousness and Jedgement to come, I will bear
thee, says he, at a more convenient time, and that convenient time never came:
yet, ordinarily delays evanished in nothing. And lastly, it ought to be done
without delay, in regard as we tell Papists in casuistical Disputs, that
Deathbed Repentauce is very suspicious; it is true, we read of one, and but one
in all the Bible, the good Thief on the Cross, who got Repentance at Death,
there is one to show its possible, and but one, to show that it is not very
probable. The Scripture calls it an houling on the bed, readily the Lord will
say to them then, Because I called, and ye did not hear, ye shall call, and I
will not hear; I have stretched out my hand all the day long to a rebellious
people; it is remarkable in the Vineyard, some are called at the seventh hour,
some at the eight, some at the ninth, some at the eleventh; but why are there
not some called at the tweltth? They say, that the twelfth hour is the time of
dismissing Servants, and not of putting them to their work. All these presses,
that this Act of accepting the Covenant, and Indenturing through the Mediator,
ought to be done early, and without delay. This is the fourth Property.

Fifthly, As it should be done deliberatly, sincerely, and timeously; so it
should be done confidently, and boldly, Heb. 4 16 Let us come with boldness
unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in
time of need. Let us come bodly, (...), some render the word (...), quesi
(...), let us confidenly speak out all that is in our heart.

But ye will ask, why may we not do it tremblingly, fearingly and doubtingly? I
will tell you some Grounds, on which Faith may build confidence in this Act of
Indenturing with God. 1. We have the Command of God to indenture with Him, and
accept of this Covenant; it is the great Command He has given, if we slight Him
in this Command, He values not what we do in other things. John 3.23. This is
his command, that ye believe on his Son: that is a ground of confidence, not
only has He commanded it, but He has threatened, if we slight Him in this;
remember the similitude I illustrat to you the other day, suppose ye were
coming by a house, and the Master of the house should cry down to you, come in
and eat and drink with me, were it presumption for your to come in, especially
if he should swear, if ye come not in, I will come out and kill you? So the
Lord in His Indenturing in the Covenant, has not only commanded, but he has
sworn by himself. he will cast you in hell, if ye do not accept of Him. 2ly.
Desperate necessity is a ground of confidence; I confess in all the Books that I
have read, over all the Sermons that I have heard, I know not a possible way
how to escape hell, but by taking hold of this Covenant, desperate necessity
helps to boldness; ye remember the Lepers at the Gates of Samaria, who were to
hazard on the Camp of the Syrians, all the men of War durst hardly hazard on
them, but their motive was good, if we stay here we shall die, and they
hazarded on the Camp of the Syrians: if thou be without this Covenant, thou art
eternally ruined. Now to go and accept of the Covenant, take hold of it, and
personally to Indenture with God in it, may be a great help and motive to
confidence; thou may reason with thy self, I am eternally ruined without it,
there is no other way to escape the fire that burns in the bottom of Hell, but
by taking hold of it. 3ly. This may be a ground of confidence in going about
it, in that there is nothing promised in it, but Christ has purchased it; it is
true, all this is of free Grace, in regard the giving of the Purchaser was an
act of free Grace; If we confess our sins, he is just to forgive; any would
think, it would suit better to say, He is merciful and gracious to forgive, but
He is just to forgive; to speak it with reverence, it were in consistent with
Justice, not to pardon Sin, and ransom the Elect, for whom He has received a
Price; the Price is paid, and we may say, how sweet soever the pardon of Sin
be, and peace of Conscience, and communion with God, yet there is something
given for it, beyond the value of them, for they are all purchased by the Blood
of God. 4ly. We should do it confidently, in regard, when we go to Indenture
with God, the want of confidence fills us with doubting, which is very near of
kin to unbelief: often, if we be to Indenture with God, the smell of
Corruptions, and Temptations, and a discouraged Spirit striking in with it,
makes it like the Meteors that ascend upward, they may go to and fro, but at
length they resolve in Clouds, and fall down upon the earth again: So, when we
go to personal covenanting with God, doubtings and fears, the smell of
guiltiness, and a multitude of Temptations, produces a wavering in the Spirit,
which is the next door to unbelief; now to be free of this, we should covenant
with confidence and boldness: There are many that Indenture with him in a
personal Covenant, and the next day a very small Temptation makes them doubt
that it was a personal Covenant. Why? They had so much fear, and so many
doubtings in the menagement of it; thererefore, we are to loup over all our
difficulties, and cut them all with the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, and this
is the right way of managing a personal Covenant with God.

The sixth Property of it, as this Act should be confidently, so it should be
done with full purpose of heart, as Barnabas Acts. 11.23. exhorts them all at
Antioch, to cleave unto the Lord with full purpose of heart; this Act os
personal covenanting on our part, the first beginning of it lies merely in
Purposes and Resolutions, on which we cast on the knot of a Vow in personal
covenanting with God; therefore I will speak a little to these Purposes and
Resolutions, that in the first act of the souls personal covenanting with God,
are that in a manner, wherein the Act of covenanting with Him consists, and two
things I will speak to it. (1.) I shall show what weight is to be laid on these
Purposes and Resolutions of the heart, when it is about to covenant with God,
(2ly.) I shall show you what are the reasons, why many of these Purposes and
Resolutions prove so evanishing.

First, What weight is to be laid on these purposes and resolutions of heart? I
desire ye may take notice, that when we come with full purpose of heart, to
enter in a personal Covenant with God, there is a considerable weight to be
laid on these purposes, if ye notice these things. (1.) The rational way of the
Spirits working is, first to convince the Understanding, and then to determine
the Will to purpose and choose. I confess, Philosophers call the purposes of
the Will Velleities, they deny it to be that elicit Act of the Will which they
call Velle, but yet they suppose a complacency of the Object; and ye will find
these three or four things about them in Scritpre, First, When there is no more
but a purpose, the Lord will commend it, even when one is but purposing and
resolving. It Is a remarkable word, 2 Samuel 7. The Lord sends the Prophet Nathan
to David, to tell him, Because it was in thy heart to build me a house, I will
build thee a sure house; he says not, because thou have builded me a house,
David had no more but a purpose of building a house, he could not endure to
dwell in houses of Cedar, and the Ark of God in Curtains; any would have
thought, that the Lord would have stayed until David had builded him an house,
but he had no more but a purpose, because it was in thine heart to build me an
house, I will build thee a sure house. And it is remarkable, that the Prodigal
Luke 15. When he was in a far Country, he came only to resolutions, he is only
saying, I will arise, and go to my father, and say I have sinned against
heaven, and before thee, and when he was yet far off, his father saw him, and
ran and kissed him, and embraced him. (2ly.) These purposes, several times they
contribute to determine the Will; the Will is an unstayed thing in us, it is
like running water, ye will not find it one hour where it was another, it goes
like a Wheels, the Spaik that is up now, is presently donw, and we are willing
the things to day, that we are loathing the morn; it is rouch to get the Will
determined, and if any thing do it, it will be a purpose with the cord of a
Vow, and the cord of God fastening it. (3ly.) These purposes have something good
in them, they are like the flourish of an Apple Tree, though it may be it be
nto completely an Apple, yea many of them falls off, and is never an Apple, yet
they have something of the Apple in them, there is something of God in these
purposes: it is true, it is a great agrravation of ones guiltiness, is God has
convinced them, and brought them to purposes and resolutions; if they fall away
from them, it is hard to renew them again by repentance; the Lord by his Spirit,
is doing with them, as a man taking a Key to open a Lock, if he throw about the
Key and open not the Door, he readily spills the Lock: where there are purposes
and resolutions, and falling away from them, it is one to ten thousand, but the
Lock is spilt, and readily will never be opened by that Key: yet there is good
in these purposes, they are like a smoking flax, that has something of fire
in at, but it can do no more but smoke; and he that will not quench the
smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed, will not readily set his foot on
these purposes: so when we come to Indenture with God, and with full purpose of
heart Covenant, that we will keep by the terms of the Covenant, and accept of
the offers of it, it is a character of personal covenanting with God.

Quest. And here I will clear this case what is the reason that there are so
many purposes and resolutions to God that evanish, we makes a Covenant with him
to day, and Indenture against these sins that our remptations carries us most
easily away, as there are some things wherein every one is weakest, what is the
reason that these purposes do so often evanish?

Ans. I will name two or three things that influences this, (1.) Serveral times
we purpose in our owe strength, we putpose and we go in our own strength: It Is
a remarkable thing in Either, she saw the danger that the Church of God and her
people were in, and she sends to Mrdecai, and tells him, I will go to the King,
if I perish, I perish, though it be against the Law; but says she, Conveen thy
people, and fast three days, and I and my maids will do likewise; there is a
thing difficult to be done, she goes not in her own strength, but she carries
it on by prayer: when we go out against any corruption within us, we are like
David going out against Goliath with a sling and with a stone, and what would
that signfie? unless he had that to tell, I come to thee in the Name of the
Lord, whom thou have blasphemed; the sling and the stone, and the Name of the
Lord, was strong enough against a Goliath; but when we go against any corruption
in our own strength, we go like David, with a sling, and with a stone, and not
in the Name of the Lord. The reason why our purposes evanish when we are sick,
or at a Sacrament, or when we are at a low ebb, we do not as Esther, carry them
on by Prayer; nor as David, in the Name of the God of Isreal. (2ly,) Several
times there comes purposes and resolutions in the soul, or convictions of the
Spirit, and these purposes evanish, because they have not been sincere,
deliberat and serious enough, readily they have been extorted by fears, and
readily we do as Earsmus reports of the man, that when he was at Sea, vowed he
would offer a pound of Candle to the Virgin Mary, when he came to Shore, but
when he came to Shore, he said a Plack Candle might serve here: Readily we do
as that man, when we are under a strait, we come under vows, and when the
strait is over, like one come to Land, we forget all; this is the reason why
many their purposes evanish, the Lord will lift off the Cross, and the Spirit
abates their challenges, and the humility that will sometimes be in them, will
be but like the Dogs returning to his vomit again. Josephus tells us, that
after the Flood, the inhabitants of the World that were the posterity of Noah,
for fear of a new Deluge, built their Houses on the tops of Hills, but when
they see there is no new Deluge like to come, ye find them in the Plains of
Shinar, building a Babel, whose top reaches to Heaven; this is a great cause
why our purposes evanish, under a strait we would take the Covenant and the
righteousness of it, but when our fears and challenges are away, like a man in
a rainy day, that will take an old Cloak about him, but when the shower is
past, he lays by the old Cloak. But (3ly.) These purposes and resolutions
evanish, by the company of the ungodly, there is nothing will sooner coo^ these
purposes, than the company of the wicked; It Is a remarkable resolution of
David's, Psalm. 6. Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity, Why? I have
resolved to keep his Commands, and I know I will not follow this resolution, if
ye do not depart from me: oftentimes there is nothing makes purposes sooner
evanish, than the company of wicked men, therefore the young man whom Solomon
would have kept from the whorish woman, among many directions he gives this, My
son, go not near her door, not only commit no uncleanness with her, but go not
near her door.

Seventhly, The last property of this act of personal Covenanting, as it has
all these six that I have mentioned, so it has this character, as it is often
broken so it should be often renewed; we are frequently breaking our Covenant;
how many times will we bind against a lust, or to the performing of duty, and
readily, if a man should bind himself as for instance, to secret Prayer, to
reading the Scripture the Lord will tryst him with some trial, with some
diversion, with something that will appear virtue to him, or that will appear
to be his interest, to try if this will make him break, and if on this account
we break, we should be as often renewing again; and two things will evidence,
that when we come to break our engagements of personal Covenanting, we are no
to say, there is no help for my soul in God. (1.) Take notice, that one God
part with them, the Covenant remains constantly firm: Think ye the Covenant
everlasting, bacause we everlastingly keep it? It Is everlasting, because he is
everlasting, and everlastingly keeps lasting, because he is everlasting, and
everlastingly keeps it. So he calls often to us to renew this Covenant, Jer. 3.
Thou have played the harlot with many lovers; any would have thought, the next
word would be, thou shall never be owned by me again; yet the next word is, yet
return unto me, backsliding children, for I am married to you, and I will take
you one of a tribe, and two of a family, and bring you to Zion. (2ly.) This
evidences that the Covenant should be renewed because the Sacrament of the
Supper is renewed, he has commanded the Sacrament of the Supper to be often
taken, and what is that, but to renew a personal Covenant with him? (3ly,) The
renewing of the Covenant is our only safety, there is no other way of doing for
us in safety, and eschewing the wrath of God, but by renewing the Covenat.

Use. I will only close this day with a word or two, of practical improvement
of all that has been said of these seven characters of personal Covenanting
with God. (1.) I exhort you who are minding this, as the great design ye have,
to put you to accept the offer of this Gospel, and Indenture with God, ont he
terms that are made; labor from all that is said, to take up the nature and
properties of this personal Covenanting with God, many never knew what it
meant, and therefore they never practiced it. But consider for giving you light
in this matter, what ye heard the last day, of the nature of the Covenant, and
of the acts it consisted of, and these properties that ye have hard of it, that
it is an act of absolute necessity, there is no safety through all eternity,
but in the doing of it; consider that it is an act that is deliberat, that is
sincere, that is done with confidence, and should have a full purpose of heart,
in the beginning of Indenturing, with God, and when it is broken, should be
renewed; take it up thus, and it may give you a great deal of light. (2ly.) I
would have you for your encouragement, be taking good notice what God does in
his part of the Covenant to you; readily when ye are about to Covenant with
him, if he give warmness of heart, if he give a full purpose of heart, if he
give any act of confidence, if he give deliberaltly to cast over the cord of a
vow, for our after-walking, or if he give full purposes and resolutions of
heart, ye may take these things from him as an earnest that he will do more; if
ye find these things, ye may do as Naomi to Ruth, she goes to Boaz's Field, and
he bids the Reapers let some Heads fall to her; the next day she comes, and he
lays on a burden of Corn on her back; Naomi finds him taking this course with
her, sit down my Daughter, says Naomi, for the man will not be at rest, until
thou be Lady of the whole Field: If he be beginning the accomplishment of the
promises, let it be but a Head falling this day, and a Head another day, this
is a sure Earnest that ye will come to enjoy all that the Covenant contains,
and will be Ruler over all that he has. (3ly) I would have thee that art thus
Indenturing, and resolving from all these Sermons, to give thy self to him, and
to give him thy service in thy while of this Wilderness, do not only purpose,
but endeavor to perform: It Is lamentable to hear how much we talk of the
Covenant of promises, and what great encouragements there are from it, and yet
what a careless walk, and how unanswerable to the great things offered;
therefore, if thou be Indenturing with him, delay it not, but accept it, and
resolve, that thou be for him; and not for another; but remember, that the
Sundays Covenanting with him be not broken on the Monday. It was a notable
answer that one gave to a temptation, when it offered to draw him away from
God, it is not lawful, says he, for a man to tempt another man's wife, I am
married, and another wifes husband, and it is not lawful for me to tempt
another man's wife. Therefore let thy walk in reference to the temptation, and
the thing thy heart inclines thee to, let them look like thy personal
engagement and Covenant with God, otherwise the thing that is thy great help,
shall be the greatest witness against thee, and thy Judge shall tell thee
before all the sons of Adam, thou art a person condemned out of thy own mouth.

SERMON XV.
2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me
an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is all my
Salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


THE last day I fell on the properties of this duty, of personal Covenanting
with God, I spoke to six or seven, which I will not now resume; but because it
is so necessary a Theme, and that which the practice of it affords to many that
are now in Glory a great deal of sweetness, I will yet add three or four
properties of this personal Covenanting with God, before I apply it. First,
this personal Covenanting, the bringing the Covenant particularly home, as made
with me, as it ought to have these six or seven things ye heard of the last
day, so in the eighth place, it ought to be very express, distinct and formal,
it ought not to be a general entering in a Covenant with God, nor a conclusion
drawn out of a general, but it ought to be an express, formal, explicit
Covenanting with Him. There are two remarkable words ye find David have Psalm.
16.2. O my Soul, thou have said to the Lord, thou art my God, compared with
Psalm. 35.3. Say to my soul, I am thy salvation; lay the two together, David in
personal Covenanting with God, he can give an express account what his soul
said to God, and what God said to his soul; it ought not to be a mere general,
or a conclusion drawn out of a general, but it should be very explicit and
express; and here I will clear two things, (1.) Wherein ought a Christian, in
his personal Covenanting with God to be express? And (2ly,) shall give you some
grounds why we ought to be so express in our personal Covenanting with God.

First, Wherein ought we to be express in our Covenanting Among many things I
will name these three, (1.) We ought to be very express in this, that it is a
Covenant we make with God; it is not a purpose, nor a resolution that we take
up, but it is an express Covenant we make; ye have often heard, that of all
ties, the ty of a Covenant is most binding, no man can loose himself nor no
society of men can loose themselves from the ty and obligation of a Covenant
with God; Therefore it is remarkable, when the Lord makes over to Believers, the
things purchased in and by his Sons death, firmly and surely, he has amongst
all other ways, eligible for that end, pitched on making them over by way of
Covenant; he knew well, that of all things that made up a Security, a secure
right in a Covenant was the most firm; so when we come to make a Covenant with
God, that we may not shake our head loose, as often we do in purposes, we ought
to be very express in it; this that ye I do, and that which I transact, it is a
formal Covenant, which contains the strongest tie; It Is not a purpose, nor a
resolution only, but it is a formal and express Covenant, which is necessary to
be adverted unto, because many at Sacraments, and when they come under the
Spirits convictions, they come under purposes, and possibly some kind of vows,
and they slip as hastly from them again; whereas, if they were express in this,
that it is a formal Covenant the soul enters into with God, the obligation
would readily appear more binding. (2ly,) As we are to be express in this that
it is a Covenant we transact with God, that afterward we may remember, such a
day I not only purposed, resolved, and vowed, but I Covenanted with God. In the
second place, we are to be express in the terms on which we Covenant: and here
ye would notice two things, (1.) We are to be express in the things we bind our
selves to do. (2ly,) We are to be very express in the condition, on which we
bind our selves to do these things. First, We are to be express in the things
we are to do, it is true we are not to make new duties, nor to put in terms that
are not in the Covenant already; yet there are three particulars, wherein a
person Covenanting with God ought to study to be very express. First, There are
the great things in the Covenant that we should believe, mourn for sin, and
pray; these things are indispensibly required in the Covenant: therefore when
we enter in a personal Covenant with God, and would be explicit and express
about it, we are expressly to mention the great Articles of the Covenant on our
part, whatever we bind our selves to do, If we bind our selves in the Covenant,
to build the Church, and give our goods to the poor, and our bodies to the
fire, except these great Articles of the Covenant be performed, it is not a
Gospel Covenant: therefore we ought to be express, in binding our selves to
these great things, indispensibly required by God in the Covenant. (2ly,) in a
time of trial, a Christian should be express, in binding himself in a personal
Covenant, to the owning of these truths and interest, that come to be a case of
confession; it is an easy thing to own uncontroverted truths, but these
things, that in our generation come to be a case of confession, these
interests, and people that are most born down, we are particularly to Indenture
in a personal Covenant with God, especially for the owning of these Interests:
though we are to have respect to all his commands, yet especially to these that
make against the errors of the time: It Is remarkable, ye find the most part of
the Prophets writings, running against Idolatry, and the most part of Christ's
Sermons running against hypocrisy, the great reason of this Is, in Isaiah's and
Jeremiah's time, Israel was prone to Idolatry, and in Christ's time, they were
overwhelmed with Hypocrisy. (3ly,) A Christian ought especially to bind
himself to these duties, at which his careless heart is most sloathful, and
against these corruptions he is most prone to; every man is weakest at
something, as Samson had his particular wherein his strength lay, so every man
has something wherein his weakness lies; and when we personally Covenant with
God, we ought to be express in it; if one be negligent in Prayer, a wanderer in
hearing, if one have a gading, light heart in conversing with God, they are not
only to purpose and resolve, but to cast over the cord of a Covenant, on that
levity of spirit; so when we Covenant personally and particularly with God, in
these three above all other things, the soul ought to be express and particular
into it.

But secondly, we ought to be express and particular in the conditions on which
we bind to these things, otherways after our Covenanting with God, which
affords a great deal of peace and sweetness to the soul, and many of late have
gone sweetly down to the grave, when they have brought out their old personal
Covenanting with God, and renewed them, and we ought to be express in the
conditions, especially in these three. (1.) It Is a promise of the covenant that
God shall give strength for performing our part of the covenant, he has often
promised this, The feeble among you shall be as David, and David as the Angel
of God, they shall renew their strength, and mount up as an Eagle, they shall
walk and not to be weary, run and not faint; now when we bind to the great
duties of the Covenant, to the owning the truths and interests of the Gospel,
we are to put in that condition, wherein it is promised that he will do these
duties, viz. that all our strength must flow from him as a River, and that on
these terms and conditions we bind, providing he give strength; this is the way
to make our part of the Covenant, both pleasant and easy, when we can go to
Christ as our Treasurer, to bring our strength from him, to do what we have
Covenanted. (2ly,) We are to put in this condition expressly, that he will
accept of the will and endeavor, in place of perfection; if we were to make a
Covenant of Works, as Adam did, we were obliged to bind, that we should be
perfect in love, and perfect in faith; but in the Covenant of Grace, we are to
bind, according to the terming of the Covenant of Grace, the grace of the
Covenant has trade the proposals of it run in this Channel, he it is alone
that works in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure, and he will
accept of the will in place of perfection. (3ly,) We are to Indenture in this
Covenant on these terms, that all our failings shall be covered with the
righteousness of a Cautioner; when we have any challenge for guiltiness, being
in Covenant with him, our only recourse, like Manoah's Wife, the second time
that the Angel came to her, she was not accustomed to speak to Angels, stay
till I call my Husband, the Covenant holds him out as the only fit person to
deal with Serpents, whose heads he bruised: So we are to be express in our
Covenanting, that our failings shall be covered with the righteousness of a
Cautioner; so ye see, this personal Covenanting with God is not so dreadful and
scarring a thing, as many take it up to be, but it is easy and pleasant, if it
be gone about according to the method of the Gospel.

The second property of this Covenanting with God, shall be this, that as it
ought to be gone about expressly, explicitly, and distinctly, so it ought to be
gone about according to the method of the Gospel, no person goes about it
rightly, that does not keep in it the method of the Gospel.

Quest. Ye will readily ask, What is it to keep a Gospel-method, in Covenanting
with Christ?

Ans. For clearing of this I desire you may take notice of these three things,
that make up this Gospel method, in a souls personal Covenanting with God (1)
The Gospel-method is kept, when the Law makes way for the Gospel; I do not
deny, but one may enter in a personal Covenant with God, that has not had the
Law work to such a hight as others have had; we read of some in the Gospel,
that were cut to the heart, before they were brought to believe; so here are
some of them we read of, there is no more but the Lord opened their heart, as
the Lord opened the heart of Lydia, there is no such acount of their Law-work,
as of others, yet this ordinary Gospel-method, of the Laws making way for the
Gospel, was typified by the stinging of the fiery Serpents, before they could
look for healing on the brazen Serpent; and readily they will never make a
sincere personal Covenant with God, that have not had the challenges and
threatenings of the Law, like an Ax laid to the root of the Tree: It Is ordinary
for any, when they take up a profession, and readily sewes a new profession to
an old heart, like a new Cloth sewed to an old Garment, they will presently
enter in a Covenant with God, but it uses not to be sicker and lasting, unless
the Law has made way for the Gospel: O but they will come sweetly and accept
his righteousness, and bind with him upon any terms, that have been sitting in
prison, and has had the sentence of death in themselves, and that has lain in
the Irons, and as it were been hanging over the Pit; it will be but a frothy
kind of work the soul will perform, when there has been no Law-work, nor Legal
humiliation before. (2.) In this personal Covenanting, this method is to be
kept, that the absolute promises are to be eyed, in order to our performing the
conditional promises; when we personally Covenant with God, we have to do with
a Covenant of promises, but the promises takes in duties, and in order to the
performing the condition, we must keep the Gospel method in the Covenant; Lord,
I bind my self in this Covenant, to accept of thy Son, and to believe in him,
and to take him for my Husband, but in order to this, ye must look on the
absolute promises; there is a Spirit of Faith promised, there is one holden out
to be the Author and Finisher of Faith, and we never Covenant in a Gospel
method, when we eye not the absolute promises, in order to the performing of
the condition of the conditional promises; as for example, a person binds
himself deliberatly, I am negligent in Prayer, I bind my self against
negligence, to be more diligent, I am a person wandering in hearing, I bind my
self in this Covenant against it; they have still an eye to some absolute
promise where things are promised an eye to some absolute promise. (3.) Ye
shall take notice, that every man before he enter in a personal Covenant with
God, he is in Covenant with death and hell. Remarkable is that word, Isai. 28.
comparing the 15th. and 18th. verses, Because ye have said, we have made a
Covenant with death, and with hell are we at an agreement. Verse. 18. And your
Covenant with death shall be disanulled, and your agreement with hell shall not
stand, and the overflowing scourge shall overtake you. Every natural man is
under a Covenant with death and hell; now, when ever we come under a personal
Covenant with God, that Covenant must be broken: The Covenant is like a
Marriage Covenant betwixt Hosea and the Woman of Fornications, he is commanded
to marry a Wife, an Adulteress, says he to her, thou shall no more play the
Harlot, thou shall be for me, and not for another, so will I also be for thee,
then we keep a Gospel method in a personal Covenant with God, when the work of
the Law drives the Soul to the Gospel, and when we eye the absolute promises,
in order to the performing the condition of the conditional promises, and when
we break the Covenant with death and hell, like a Woman that is Married, she
gives up with all the rest of her Wooers, because she is married to another; so
in this personal Covenanting with God, there must be a bidding Adieu to all the
rest of the Suitors, and we must break Covenant with death, and hell, and
lusts, for we are now married, and become another Man's Wife, and readily, the
thing that was but Fornication before, will be Adultery now.

Thirdly, And lastly, This personal Covenanting with God, ought to be complete,
it ought not to have limitations and reservations, but it ought to be complete
and entire.

Quest. Readily ye will ask, How is this personal Covenant with God complete,
and in what respect is it so?

Answ. I might instance many reservations, that any would make, when they come
to indenture in a personal Covenant with God, but I shall rather choose to show
you three things, wherein this act of personal Covenanting with God, becomes
entire and complete. 1. When we give our selves wholly to Christ, when we give
and Covenant our All to him. 2. When we are content in a Covenant, to take
Christ for All. And 3. When we are content in the Covenant, to take all Christ,
as he is offered to us, these three makes a complete Covenanting with him, and
in a personal Covenant, when the Soul proceeds not dissemblingly, but
sincerely, it is content to make it complete in all the three. First, When we
are content to Covenant, to give our selves all wholly to him, our life, our
liberty, we are content to be disposed of, as ye were hearing, as to our lot in
the world, yea, as to our service; some he calls to one piece of service some
to another; some he calls to do, others he calls to suffer, and when the Soul
is content, wholly to give it self, and its concernment up to him, that he may
take their life if he please, their liberty if he please, and whether he calls
for doing, or suffering, according as he calls, we Covenant to obey him. Many
Covenant with him, and they have reservations of some one thing or another; but
when we indeed Covenant as Christians, we are to give up our selves wholly to
him. 2. We are to take him for all, Ps. 73.25. He that has made this personal
Covenant, sings it over to him, Whom have in heaven but thee, and on the earth
whom I desire besides thee? He has taken him for his all, he is satisfaction
to all his desires; if there were nothing left him but God, as the man said,
there is nothing left me but God, and then he chideth himself, and but God, and
what would I have more? When we are content to take Christ for all, for wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, and satisfaction to all desires,
then the Covenant is complete. 3. When we are content to take all Christ, as he
is offered, not only the merit of his death, but the authority of his laws, as
a King, we are content to be subject to the workings of the Spirit, to the
influences, for consclation, to convictions, to lay our selves open, to receive
these influences, and impressions of the Spirit; the Covenant is complete when
all the three are performed. Thus I have run through the Doctrinal part of this
Head, of personal Covenanting, and have labored to open it up, as fully as I
could, in the nature of it, and grounds and properties of it. I will only break
in on the practical part at this time, and make way for following it in the
afternoon.

Use 1. First, Is it a Duty personally to Covenant with God, and particularly
to be able to say, The Lord has made with me an everlasting Covenant? Then
first, it serves for Information, and it informs of five or six particulars. 1.
Is it a Duty thus personally to Covenant with God? then certainly it must be a
great sin to neglect it, the neglecting of this personal Covenanting, and
indenturing with God, must be a very great guiltiness; by the Law of
contraries, if the one be a duty, the neglect of it must be a sin; many has
never laid the guilt of not entering in a personal, particular, express Covenant
with God to heart; readily there are some, who have come under some general
confused resolutions, and possibly under some vows to God, but to go and firmly
state a Covenant, wherein they indenture to accept of the offer of Christ in
the Gospel, and to bind to the terms, on which the offer is made, without
altering of any of the terms; how few take up this for a guilt, yet certainly
there is a great deal of guilt in it, if ye shall take a view of the five or
six Grounds, that I brought this day fourthnight, to prove the necessity of
personal Covenanting with God. Therefore without resuming any of them, I do
exhort all the multitude, that are hearing this Sermon, that they would be
convinced, that the neglect of this is a very provocking guiltiness against
God; yea it is a mother sin, and it is a nurse to other sins, if thou knew what
it were personally to Covenant with God, readily there would not be so much
neglect of morning Prayer, and Family Worship, and there would not be so much
liberty taken in your walk, the bond of the Covenant would restrain thee; nay,
it is not only a mother sin, and a nurse to other sins, but it is the highest
affront that can be given to God, who offers his Son in the Gospel, and thou
has never given a particular and personal acceptance of him.

SERMON XVI.
2 Samuel 23. Verse 5. Although my house be not so with God; yet he has made
with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is
all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


AN Historical Faith, such as the Devils have, who believe and tremble, will
assent to this truth, That God has made a Covenant; but it requires a saving
and justifying Faith, to put to these two word with it, The Lord has made with
me an everlasting Covenant. I have handled the Doctrinal part of this great
Duty, of personal Covenanting; and now I come to the practical part; I began in
the Forenoon with an Use of Information of five or six Branches. 1. Is it a
Duty personally to Covenant with God? then the neglect of it must be a sin,
every contrariety to a Duty is a Sin, it is indeed a sin of the highest degree,
however many that are challenged by a natural Conscience for other sins, do not
ponder it, it is a mother sin, and an affronting of the Father in his Son. But
2. If this personal Covenanting be a Duty, then it is no presumption personally
to Covenant with God; it is well observed by some practical Divines, there are
many things, that it were presumption in us to require them of God, but it is no
presumption to do them, when they are commanded of God; indeed for us to have
dreamed of such a thing, as that the Son should marry us, that the Spirit
should dwell in us, and that we should have such a Covenant of Promises, it had
been presumption in us to require them; but being made Duties, it cannot be
made presumption in us to obey them; there are many stand at a personal
Covenanting with God, what, so great a God, so great offers as himself, and his
Son, and to be made ruler over all that he has: but since his liberal heart,
has not only offered them, but has commanded us, under the pain of his
displeasure, it can be no presumption to obey, though I confess, it had been
presumptive to require them. 3. Is it a Duty personally and particularly to
Covenant with him, then it necessarly follows, that our duty is our honor; a
very great privilege, what, God to be our God, and to be in Covenant with him,
to be able to take up the Bible, and read that part of the verse, which is
agreeing to our case, My Beloved is mine, and I am his, what greater privilege
than this? Saul made an offer of his Daughter in marriage to David, he was
lately following his Fathers sheep, Seems it a small thing to you, says he,
to be Son in law to a King? But the offer made it David's duty to embrace the
offer, and the King's Command, and his duty became his Privilege.

And here ye would notice two Things by the way. 1. That it is remarkable, that
the great duties of the Gospel, are not mere Service, but a Christians greatest
Honor; Believing, delighting in God, walking with him, rejoicing in him, are
not mere Service, but a Privilege, which is necessary, to be observed by some,
who think, if they win at their duties, they are advanced to great honor, and
they take up the want of them, as their Affliction; these are thy Duty, and the
want of them is thy Sin. But there are others, that take up the duties of the
Gospel, as their duty, but they go about them Toyling and Wrestling, but they
take them not up as their Privilege, and yet they are both woven through
other, and our Duty is our greatest Privilege. 4. If this personal Covenanting
with God be a Duty, then we are not to Disput, whether we should enter in this
Covenant or not; commanded Duties should not be Disput, he is not a Servant,
that thinks he understands himself so well, that if his Master command him to
go, or to come, that will stand and debate with himself, whether it is most
convenient for me to go, or to come? the Masters will is to determine him in
this; it is ordinary for us, we are more in disputing our Duty, than in doing
our Duty, we are constantly debating this Question, and that Question, and our
converse together, is more in disputing, than in helping one another to do; but
that which is duty, should not be disput; readily the adversary, (if one be
about this Duty of personal Covenanting with God,) will bring in this, and
that, and a third thing, but not to lay by the duty, yet to delay it, but this
is duty, and it is a notable evidence of a faithful Servant to his Lord and
Master, that will not disput his Duty, but will make all the inquiry how he
should do it. 5. If it be a Duty thus personally to Covenant with God, then we
are not to stand on Events, about our duty, for where ever there is duty, we
are not to consider Events, the great reason that Scholars give of this, say
they, when God commanded the duty he foresaw the Events, and it is a reflection
upon his Wisdom, to think he would engage his People in Duty, and not care for
them in the Even; some need not be careful about the Event, why? We are clear
about our Duty. Now if this personal Covenanting be, as it is proven to be, a
Duty, for us to sit down, and calculat, as with Counters, this will cost me so
much doing, and that will cost me so much suffering, no, in the matter of Duty,
we are not to debate the Event, he that commanded the Duty, foresaw the Event
before he commanded it, and we are to leave the ordering of the Event to him,
O! says one; if I Covenant with him, I will look for a harsh life of it; says
another, I will never be able to wade through the things I see, if I engage in
a personal Covenant with him; all these things should be referred to him, who
commanded the Duty. Lastly, If this be a Duty personally to Covenant, it
informs us, that certainly these who Indenture with him, will get strongth to
perform, for they are about a duty, however it may be, the failings that adhere
to our corrupted nature may accompany us in the Duty, yet if they be not
wilful failings, but that they be in sincerity, minding their duty, the case
will be, as if a Father call to a Child, to give him a Glass of Wine, and the
Child takes the Glass, and throws, it in a passion on the Ground, and breaks
it, no question, the Father will be angry at him, and scourge him; but if the
Child take the Glass, and fill the Wine, but his shaking arm lets the Glass
fall, readily the Father will pity him, because it is an infirmity accompanying
his arm. There are in our performing Duties, many infirmities accompanying our
Arm, we will not get it perfectly done, but the Arm will shake, and let the
Glass fall, yet if we set sincerely about the Duty, we will get strength to
perform; They that wait on the Lord, shall renew their strength. All these Uses
of Information, follows from this natively, that this personal Covenanting with
God, is a duty, it is no Phanaticism, it is a Commanded Duty, it is the great Duty
of the Gospel, it is on the matter all one with Believing; it is no presumption
to Covenant with him. But I insist not on this, there are some more special and
practical Improvements of it, than this general; Therefore I proceed,

Use 2. To a Second Use of Information, Is this personal Covenanting with God a
duty, and so great a duty, as is proven, then be exhorted to Covenant with him;
I have pressed you before, to go home and do it, and not delay it, and to make
it as express and distinct, as to the Terms, as ye can; and either with
writing, or saying it over to God, as that place ye heard cited, Isaiah 44. One
shall say, and another subscribe with his hand, I am the Lords. But this Use of
Exhortation, that I may the more distinctly handle it, I shall follow it, with
Reference to two sorts of Persons in the visible Church, and in this place, who
have need of Exhortation. 1. There is a multitude of carnal careless
Professors, that readily are at the pains, to wait on Ordinances; and the
Externals of Religion, are punctually observed; but for personal Covenanting
with God for ever, having done any thing of this kind, they are great strangers
to it. That I may at least, leave a conviction on these, I will speak a word to
two things. 1. What are the things that hinders the generality from this, of
personal Covenanting with God? 2. What is their misery.

Quest. First, What is it that hinders the generality from this personal
Covenanting with God?

Answer, Among many things, I will name these Four.

First, A great many understand not the nature of the Covenant, they are in the
estate of nature, they are under the Covenant of Works; it is a truth beyond all
controversy, all natural men, however they may be visibly under the Covenant
of Grace, they are really under the Covenant of Works; they are in the first
Adam, and therefore they are under his Covenant, until they be really unite and
married to Christ: the Covenant is the Contract, and until we marry the Man, we
have no right to the Contract, now the generality understand not the misery and
danger of this Covenant, they consider not that it is a Covenant, that requires
perfect and personal obedience, they are under a Covenant, if they fail in the
least, they must be damned for it; however they cry to Christ, and die hoping
in Christ, yet their Covenant admits not of a Christ, nor of a Cautioner; nay,
the Covenant they are under, admits not of Repentance: It Is remarkable, the
Covenant made with Adam was on these terms, in the day thou eats, thou shall
die; it is not said, in the day thou eats, if thou repent, thou may be spared;
no, it admits of no Rpentance, if Esau should seek the blessing with tears, he
cannot have it, he rews that he had sold his birthright, but he could not
obtain the blessing, though he sought it with tears: even Adam in the state of
innocence, could not keep this Covenant, the generality consider not the misery
of it, but were it pondered as becomes men, that in a little will meet in the
Valley of Decision, and reckon before the Tribunal of God, for ye are under a
Covenant, that admits not of a Christ, nor Cautioner, nor of Repentance, but it
requires personal and perfect obedience; if it were seriously pondered, O! what
pains there would be, to get a Covenant made with God through the Son. 2. The
generality do neglect this personal Covenanting with God, because other things
take up their time, it is very remarkable, Isaiah 55.2, 3, and 4. Incline your
ear and come unto me, hear and your soul shall live, and I will make an
everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David; but what goes
before? why spend ye your money for that which is not bread, and your labor
for that which satisfies not? There is the impediment, that hinders many from
entering into this personal Covenant, they are so taken up, spending their money
for that which is not Bread, and their labor for that which satisfies not,
that their ear is not inclined to hearken unto this everlasting Covenant with
Christ; readily the thing hinders you, from personal Covenanting, that hindered
Martha from hearing Christ, she was busy taken up in the house; Martha, says
Christ, thou art troubled about many things: and very lawful things, may be
sinful hindrances, in the way of this Covenanting. It Is remarkable, the
persons that sent the Answer to the Master of the wedding, when he sent out his
servants to invite them, the one of them says not, I have a Whore, I cannot
come; another says not, I have a drunken lawing to count, I cannot come; but
one of them says, I have a Farm; another, I have a yoke of oxen; another, I
have a Marriage, I cannot come; all the three were lawful things, but they
became sinful hindrances, in the way of coming to the Wedding. No, the truth
is, earthly-mindedness lies in the way of many, in this place of personal
Covenanting with Christ, They spend their money, for that which is not bread,
and their labor for that which satisfies not. 3. A third impediment in the
way of the generality, in making this personal Covenanting with God, it is this,
they are like a Woman that is already married, marrying another Husband, They
have made a covenant with death, and with hell are they at an agreemet, as ye
heard cited from Isaiah 28. It Is true, That is making lies their refuge, as
it is called in that same place; yet they cannot break that Covenant, they
cannot break the Covenant they have made with their Lusts, sometimes they are
inclining to break it, they are oftentimes like a sleepy Servant in a house,
the Master calls him, he will cry, coming, and immediately falls a sleep again:
several times, they will break that Covenant with their Lusts, but that is but
like the morning Dew, or an early Cloud, like Ephraims goodness, it soon goes
away, they cry, coming, and then falls a sleep: Now, the great impediment of
the generality, that hinders them from personal Covenanting, there is a
Covenant driven, and roved, and subscribed, and Sealed with Death, and Hell,
and Lusts; and they cannot break this Covenant, they cannot shake it off.
Lastly, It impeds the greatest part, the generality their entering in this
personal Covenant with Christ; fear of difficulties, if they shall Indenture
with him, they must resolve with the Cross, they know indeed, there is much
good gotten with him, but there is evil also; there are Reproaches, and
Crosses, as some of the Heathens professed to the Primitive Christians, that
they could embrace the Gospel, but they could not burn for it; but, as we have
said, where there is a Question about the duty, we are to leave the Events to
him, that has commanded the Duty; for he has commanded no duty, but he
foresaw the Events, and will regulat them, and yet ordinarily, we cannot trust
him with Events: These things makes among many, that may be brought, that the
generality of natural men, and the generality of them that are living in the
visible Church, they rest on the Covenant of Baptism, and the Supper of the
Lord, but to take them to consider their misery they are under, by continuing
in their natural estate; and what intanglements from the World, lies in their
way, and what a difficulty it is, to break the Covenant with Death and Hell,
and that they should leave Events to the Lord: they cannot look through them,
therefore they go on in the house of their pilgrimage, from twenty years old to
thirty, and from thirty to sixty, and like sheep they are laid in the Grave,
and Death has Dominion over them: these are the impediments that the
generality have lying in the way, of personal Covenanting with God.

In the second place, There are some that go an higher length, beyond these
that I have spoken to; it may be they come under some implicit Covenant with
God, that dare never venture on an express, formal, stated Covenant with him,
either to subscribe with his hand, or to lift it up, as some that make personal
Covenants will do, or to open the mouth, by some solemn engagement to him, they
dare not come this length, and there are three or four things, use to ly in
their way, and I would gladly cast up the Ga^es, and remove the stumbling
blocks, that ly in their way. 1. Sometimes before we can trust God, we would
have surer pledges from him than his Word; It Is a difficult thing to live the
life of Faith, and very often his People would have some sense and experience,
before they can personally Covenant with God; like Thomas, he would not
believe, until he saw the print of the nails; and yet he came at length to do
it, Thou art my God, and my Lord, says he; this was a great injury done to him,
but he had to do with one, that could soon forgive injuries; it was a great
wrong, not to believe the Resurrection of Christ, he had been often told of it
before, and yet I will not believe until I see the print of the nails, and put
my hand in the holes of his side; and readily many of his People, before they
Indenture and Covenant with him, they would have some sensible Proofs and
Experience of his Covenant, I will not believe, while I see the print of the
nails, before I can say, my Lord, and my God; this was a great injury, but he
has magnified his Word above all his Name, and yet oftentimes, when we think
of personal Covenanting, we cannot credit the Word of him who cannot lie: This
several times keeps back his People from personal Covenanting, they can tell,
O! such a Covenant, such a sure one, and such Promises as are in it, and made
by a God that cannot lie, O say they, I see not the print of the nails, the
hole in the side, and therefore they refuse personally to Covenant, until they
get such a measure of Sense. It Is just that they go mourning over the want of
it. 2. Sometimes his People refuse thus to Covenant personally with him,
because they mistake the Work of the Law, and the Conviction of the Spirit,
accompanying the Law, frequently if the Law, like a Sword put in the Spirits
hand, begin to wound, they presently think, there is no more for them, but to
dwell on sorrow; or like Jacob, if they should live to gray hairs, they should
go down to the Grave with sorrow, for ordinarily the Spirit and the Law wound
together, and it is strange, to see the thing, that Christ intends to drive to
personal Covenanting with him, should be the thing, that should hinder us from
it: The great end why the Spirit takes the Law, and convinces and challenges,
it is no to drive us from the Covenant, the great end of the Law is, to be a
Schoolmaster to lead us to Christ, it was evil Logic in Peter to say, Depart
from me, for I am a sinful man; it was far more suitable to have said, come to
me, for I am a sinful man; this readily hinders many from coming to Christ, and
personally to Covenant with him, they think it suits best with them, to cherish
the Challenges of the Spirit, and Convictions of the Law, and to dwell on them,
if it were to go to the Grave, with no other Religion, than what that has
produced, altogether mistaking the design of the Spirit, which is in all these
Convictions, and Work of the Law, to drive us to a personal Covenant with him.
But 3. A third impediment, that lies in the way of this personal Covenanting,
it is this, many a time these who would go about it, they account the things in
the Covenant so far above them, that they cannot offer to claim at them; what,
say they, God to be their God, and Glory to be theirs, himself to be theirs,
and to be made Ruler over all that he has; oftentimes this keeps many of his
People from personal Covenanting with him; they are like some weak eye, that is
dasled with looking upon the Sun, the Sun is so bright; the things offered in
the Covenant are so great, that in a manner, they put out their eyes; As I
hinted at already, indeed it had been presumption in us, to have required them,
but it is none to obey them, when they are commanded; it had been great
presumption in Peter, to have come to Christ, and said, Lard, wash my feet, but
it was a great sin in Peter, when Christ girded himself with a Towel, and came
to wash his feet, for him to say, thou shall never wash my feet, Christ takes
him sharply up for it, If I wash thee not, says he, thou have neither part nor
portion in me. Frequently we look on the things of the Covenant, as so great
and so far above us, that we cannot personally Covenant with him, whereas it is
above thy Fathers House, and all thy Kin, to require them, but since thou art
commanded, and threatened with Hell, except thou personally Covenant, there
cannot be any presumption in it. 4. A great many who would incline to this
personal Covenant, are hindered by this great impediment, discouraging
Temptations, many of which I could name, but I will only say this now, since it
is this use of Exhortation that I am on, I would exhort you to go about this
work of personal Covenanting, all ye that are in nature, and are hindered with
this, that ye would have more from Christ nor his bare Word, or the Covenant,
or ye that are mistaken with the Law, or any of you that think the Covenant
above you, or that are hindered with discouraging temptations, I exhort you to
go home, and make this personal Covenant, and I shall only say these three or
four Words about it. 1. I would exhort thee to take some time for considering
and conferring with thy self, I delight to read the Books of some, that write
of personal Covenanting, to read of their Soliloquies, to sit down and
consider, it is not long since I came into the World, and it will not be long
before I be out of it, and wherefore came I into the World? Are these
Scriptures the Word of God? If they be, I must either hearken unto them, or
else be damned; if I be in a Covenant of works, I am under a Covenant, that
admits of no Cautioner, no Repentance, and if there be the least fail, it will
bring me to Hell; but here I see another Covenant of Grace, but if I enter in
this Covenant, I must be holy, or then I will be eternally damned, and there is
a Spirit of Faith, and Prayer, and Repentance, will be given me: now will ye
take time, and confer these things with your own heart, 2. I exhort you, in
order to the putting of this in practice, Christian, to carry it on by prayer,
when ye go about it, ye may warrantably say to God, Lord, I am pressed from
yonder Pulpit, to make this Engagement and Indenture, and I am told the method
that I must keep, must be, to wait on thy strength, to wait on the absolute
Promises, therefore go to him, and pray for strength, and the accomplishmet of
the Promise, and it will be a sweet evidence, that thou will get it, if thou
get liberty to seek it by Prayer, Psalm. 10.17. He has prepared my heart to
seek him, and he has caused his ear to hear; the case is with thee, as with a
Man that has a Petition to give to a Prince, if the Man sit down to write it,
and the Prince bid him put in this and that in it, it is an evidence that he
will grant it. 3. I exhort thee even to use some solemnity in entering this
Covenant, either by writing it down, or subscribing it with the hand, or
lifting up the hand, or some solemn uttering the words, that the next day, when
anything bids thee break thy Covenant that is dear to thee, as nothing could be
dearer to thee, than Jephthah's Daughter was to him, say as he said, O! my
danghter, thou art a trouble unto me, what is the matter, I have opened my
mouth to the Lord, and how can I go back.

SERMON XVII.
2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me
an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is all my
salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


THE last day I spoke to an use of Information, and proved, that this personal
and particular Covenant was a duty, and the neglect of it was a sin, and that
our duty was our privilege, and that it was no presumption to enter in this
Covenant; without further re-capituation, I shall proceed to the second Use.

Use 2. If personal Covenanting with God be a duty, as is proven and cleared,
then it serves for Exhortation, to stir up all of you thus personally to
Covenant with God; it is not only a duty, but as I have proven it, it is the
great duty of the Gospel, all other duties without this, are unacceptable, we
can neither lay claim to Christ, nor to the privileges of the Covenant, until
we thus personally and particularly Indenture with him.

Before I press this Use, that I may in the Afternoon more perswasively follow
it on you, that ye would thus personally and particularly Covenant with God; I
will in this Sermon insist two things. (1.) I will remove some Objections or
Impediments, that ly in the way of the Souls personal Covenanting with God.
(2.) I will open some advantages that will follow on the doing of it; the truth
is, in so necessary a duty, we are to do as some that Write the Jewish
Histories tell us, that the Magistrates throughout all the Land, they were
obliged to have the high ways plain, and Bridges over the Waters, and the
stones removed out of the high way that led to the City of Refuge, that he that
fled from the avenger of blood, might have no stop in his way; I would do this
in handling this duty of personal Covenanting, and among many, I shall pitch on
four or five impediments that ly in the way, and prove obstructions,
notwithstanding all the Sermons that ye have heard on it.

First, It may be said, Shall I thus personally and particularly Covenant, to
accept of Christ, and Indenture and vow and swear to the terms of the Covenant,
since I know not if I be an Elect? Election is a fundamental privilege, and if
that be wanting, all that we do in this, is but like a house without a
foundation; one might as well go and Sow another man's Land, and build a House
on another man's Ground, that has no Bond, nor Charter, nor Seasin, nor any
other Right to it, as a Reprobat can go and plead the privileges of the Elect;
and I know not if I be an Elect, and therefore shall I go make a personal and
particular Covenant with God? This is indeed a very natural Objection; but I
would desire you to consider these three or four things, that will contribute
to remove it. (1.) Know, that Election is not the ground, or the clearing about
the ground of our believing and closing with Christ; in the Covenant we are not
to proceed on this ground, I am an Elect, and I will close with Christ in the
Covenant, and make a personal Covenant with him; but rather our closing with
him is a Medium or Argument to prove our Election; we are not to proceed on
this method, I will first be clear of my Charter, Election, and of the purpose
of God, before I build on this ground, no, we are first to build on this
foundation, and then to be clear of Election; for though Election be first in
the order of Christ's working, Calling is first in the order of our knowledge,
and we must first know that we are called, before we know that we are Elected.
(2.) Consider this, where will ye find in Scripture, that ever God secluded man
from any promise in the Covenant, merely because the were not Elect? He has
indeed secluded many, because they were not Believers, and because they were
scandalous, and hypocrites, but in all the Bible ye will never find him seclude
any, merely because they were reprobats, why should we go to put in an
exception, where he makes none? It Is not our Election, or Reprobation, that is
made an impediment in all the Bible, against our being bettered by Christ, our
unbelief may be one, but our Election is none. (3.) Ye would notice this, that
the debate about our Election and Reprobation is very impertinent, before our
Effectual Calling, and closing with Christ in a personal Covenant. It Is
observed by Schoolmen, that there are only three ways possible for a man to
know his Election, there is the reading of the Book of Gods Decrees, the
Revelation of the Spirit, and thirdly, the fruits of Election, appearing in the
progress of Sanctification; now the first two are impossible for us; we cannot
read the Books of Gods Decrees, we cannot tell who are Elect, or who are
Reprobate, out of the Book of his Decrees, we cannot tell the Revelations of
the Spirit, because our Effectual Calling, it may convince and challenge, but
it cannot reveal, therefore it remains, that it must be the third, which cannot
be, until we personally Covenant with Christ. So, to dispute our Election
before we Indenture with him, and to say, I will not Covenant with him, for I
am not an Elect, thou must have understanding, to read the Book of Gods
Decrees, and to have the Revelation of the Spirit. (4.) Consider, that our
Election is not our duty, it is our privilege, but not our duty, we cannot
elect our selves, a servant in an house, is not bound to be most taken up about
his masters secret thoughts, the thing he is most to be taken up about, is his
masters command, and that what he has bidden him do; we cannot elect our
selves, God has not commanded it. Now when we are personally Covenanting with
Christ, it is not our duty to enquire about things that are not our duty, God
has commanded us to accept of his Son on the Terms offered, and for us to
refuse, for a thing that he has never commanded to be our duty; we cannot be
sure of Election, until we personally and particularly Covenant with him, we
may like a Husbandman know, that it is the Spring time, by the springing of
the grass, he knows it not by the position of the Heaven, but by the springing
of the Grass and Herbs, so we would be clear of Election: and I would warn
Christians of this, when Satan has a mind to bring a person under the neglect
of some duty, he will readily puzzle them with Questions of Election, or
Reprobation, as a Robber, that will ride with a man in a fair high way, and not
wrong him, but will wait until he get him in some Wood, or some Den, and then
he will assault him: Now the Question of Election and Reprobation, is like a
Wood, or a Den, and the Tempter has a great advantage, when he assaults about
these. Therefore since Election is not our duty, but our privilege, and since
we cannot know it, before we personally Covenant; it ought to be no exception
to thee, suppose thou be in the dark about thy Election, and not be able to
tell thine own heart and thy neighbors, I know not if I be an Elect, and if I
personally Covenant with him, I am but like a man that is going to build upon
another man's ground, that has neither Bond nor Charter; but thou follows not
the Gospel-method, which is first to Covenant with him, and then to be clear
about thy Election.

A second Objection that I suppose will ly in the way, in harkening to the
Sermons that ye have heard; I am exceeding guilty, and shall I own God to be
my God? Does not the 50 Psalm say, What have thou to do to take my Covenant in
thy mouth, seeing thou hates to he reformed? Shall I take this Covenant in my
mouth, when I have such a heart, and such a way? Readily all the aggravations
of guilt, and all the threatenings against it, they come never to be more
multiplied, than when we are called to some special duty; the challenges about
guilt, will let us alone at one time, that will follow us at a Sacrament, or
some solemn Ordinance, and when we should personally covenant with him. For
removing of this impediment, I would have thee first in the general, notice,
that to stand at personal covenanting with God, because thou art guilty, is
very like Peter's Argument, Depart from me, for I am a sinful man; and Peter's
Argument is, like as a Patient should say to a Physician, depart from me, for I
am sick: Why said he to him who was called Jesus, because He should save His
people from their sins, Depart from me, for I am a sinful man?

But more particularly to this, thy guilt can be no rational impediment in the
way of thy entering in this personal Covenant, on these considerations. (1.)
Know, that never any entered in this Covenant, but guilty persons. Adam that
was an innocent man, came not under the Covenant of Grace, until he became
guilty; and it had been unsuitable for Adam, so long as he was innocent: never
any came under this Covenant but guilty persons; and sometime they that came
under it, were among the most guilty: the like of David, of Paul, of Manasseh,
of Mary Magdalen; so that thou mistakes the nature of this Covenant, that will
stand at Indenturing and subscribing to the Lord, because thou art guilty, for
it is a Covenant made for the guilty, and it would not have agreed to Adam when
innocent. (2ly.) Thou would notice, that the Covenant expressly mentions the
pardon of all guilt except one, it is a large word, it is true it is a dreadful
word, but it is exceeding comfortable, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be
forgiven, except the sin against the Holy Ghost; there is neither Adultery,
Murder, Swearing, Lying, nor Drunkenness excepted, but only this sin against
the Holy Ghost, why should thou put in exceptions, where God has put none? If
a Prince should come and suit a Maid in a Cottage, and she should tell him, I
am black and poor; but if he can dispense with her blackness and poverty, why
should she make an objection of it? (3ly.) I would have thee to ponder, that
Christ's righteousness it is a sufficient satisfaction for the sins of all the
Elect, how great soever thy guilt be, it is not so great as the sins of all the
Elect; grant thou be the greatest sinner among all the Elect, yet thy sin is
not so great, as the sins of all the Elect; Christ's righteousness is as the
Ocean, that if a man could lift a Mountain and cast it into the Sea, the Waters
could go over the top of it; now would any think, that the Water that covers a
Mountain, would not cover a Peeble-stone? Admit thy sin be amongst the greatest
of the Elects, Paul when he calls himself the chief of sinners, he says not, he
is greater than all sinners; but take in the sins of all the Elect, Christ's
righteousness is sufficient for them all, and that which ^s sufficient for all,
is it not sufficient for thee? So guilt can be no exception to refuse
personally to Covenant with God.

A third Objection, say some, though it be neither my Election, nor my guilt,
that can hinder me personally to Covenant with God, yet I cannot come under the
Bond of the Covenant, for in one Chapter, Heb. 11. I find the faithful, and
they that come under this Covenant, they meet with cruel mockings, and
scornings, torturings, sawn asunder, quench the violence of fires, stop the
mouths of Lions; and shall I come under a personal Covenant, when I bind my
self to all these things? For answer to this, it is true, in the Covenant he
deals so faithfully that has made it, that he has concealed none of these,
but rather laid them out to the outmost; and many come under a personal
Covenant with him, that comes not under the half of these things; but suppose
thy personal covenanting with him, should bring thee under these, since it is a
time, wherein covenanting with Him may bring people under the Cross, I would
have thee consider four or five things. 1. Consider the Cross as a testimony
for Christ. It Is remarkable 2 Cor. 3.3. that the Apostle calls the Corinthians
Christ's Epistle, his meaning is, they are Christ's Testimonial, he is speaking
before of Letters of Commendation, and verse. 3. Ye are Christ's Epistle: What is
the meaning of that? Ye are a commendation to Christ; when Christ calls out his
servants to do or suffer, they bear testimony to the Gospel, they are like
Letters of Commendation, testifying, that the Gospel is true, and Christ is
glorious, and all the loss a man sustains for the Gospel, Christ makes it up.
It Is a wonder, that the most part of Christ's followers have not renounced him
before this day; they have had cruel mockings and scourgings, and the rest
spoken in that Heb. 11. If they were not made up some other way, they would
renounce him; the Martyrs have before all the World, testified, that they that
serve Christ, have something from him that makes up all their losses; he puts a
great honor on us, when he puts us to suffer, many die Ministers, who do not
die Martyrs; Luther the night before he died, wept that he was not a Martyr:
did we understand the honor that is put upon us by suffering, we would not do
as Moses, when the Lord is sending him to Egypt, he is unwilling to go, says he
to God, I am not eloquent, I cannot speak, send by whom thou will; and yet of
all the honor that ever was put upon him, it was one of the greatest, and the
thing that makes him famous this day, and eminent in glory, was the honor that
was put upon him, in going down to Egypt: Therefore, we ought not to decline
personal Covenanting because of the Cross. 2ly. Though it be true, that this
Covenant provides the Cross, and they that enter in it, will meet with it, yet
consider the Cross as an evidence of our Adoption; not only as a testimony to
the Gospel, but as an evidence of Adoption, Heb. 12.8. If ye be without
correction, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons. Mark
here, the Evidence of a son, if ye come under correction; Divines say, the
reason is, if we have the same spirit that Christ had, if we be patient, and
submissive, as Christ was, then we may conclude, that we are sons also of
Christ; Christ met with the Cross, and endured patiently, nay, the out-lettings
of Fatherly love, never more than under the Cross, he is never more tender,
than under the Cross, the Spirit of Christ and glory rests on you, he says not
the Spirit of grace, but glory: Many a time Christ does with his out-lettings,
as men do with Candles and Fire, frequently his out-lettings are greatest under
the Cross, and he lights his Candle ordinarily to his Elect when in the dark,
and kindles his Fire and comforts them under the Cross. Now since the Cross is
such an evidence of Adoption, and such a testimony of the Gospel, what wonder,
it should be no impediment in our way of covenanting with Christ? 3ly. However,
if ye personally Covenant with Christ, ye may forecast with Cross. Yet thirdly
consider, when an excellent help the Cross is to mortify corruption? Isai.
27.9. By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the
fruit, to take away his sin: Readily, nothing contributes so much to curb
corruption, as the Cross; It Is an Observation of a Divine, if ye heard
Christians complaining one to another, I have an evil heart, I have Unbelief, I
have Pride, I have Passion, and if ye heard them go to God in a corner, they
will have so many complaints of themselves, and yet when God sends the
Executioner, the Cross to kill these Malefactors, they take ill with it; the
Cross is sent for that end, to kill corruption, and to remove pride, and
earthly mindedness, and sensuality; and yet when the Executioner comes, we take
ill with it. What a deal of folly is it, to be mourning for the thing that we
cannot endure to have killed? Such Children are we, and so far from
understanding, that we will go to God and complain, and complain to our
christian Friends, and yet when the Executioner comes, we cannot endure to have
it killed? But when we take up the Cross, as an Executioner come, to take away
pride and earthly mindedness, and sensuality, readily we will make the Cross
welcome. 4ly. Consider the cross, as that which may promove our Glory; the more
of the Cross for Christ, the more eminent degree of Glory; the more of pleasure
in time, the more of torment after time. I will caft up a word to you that ye
have written, Rev. 18.7. He is there speaking of Babylon, the mother of
fornications; and in the 7th. verse, says, How much she has glorified her
self, and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her. It was so in
Gods dealing with Dives, when he came to the place of the damned. By the Law of
contraries, how much of suffering, how much of grief and affliction for Christ,
readily so much the more glory; and therefore in this same Book of the
Revelation, though all that are in Glory, walk with white; yet they that were
beheaded for the cause of Christ, are termed by John, to walk in long white
robes; now, did we take up the cross of Christ under these four considerations,
it would never hinder us personally to Indenture with Christ: Did we take up
the Cross as a Testimony to the Gospel, as an Evidence of our Adoption, as an
Executioner to kill the corruptions, we mourn over, and as a Presage, that we
will wear the long white robe, when we come to Glory: readily we will never
stand at this, I will not enter into a personal Covenant, for I see what is the
result of it, it is the Cross; but since these things are so, it is a wonder
rather, that we do not seek after it.

SERMON XVIII.
2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me
an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure; for this is all my
salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


THis Duty of personal covenanting with God, being so clear from this Text,
that I need dwell no longer on it; I have brought the Point to exhort you to
the practice of it, and removed three Objections that ly in the way of it; that
I may remove all the stumbling blocks that ly in the way, I will briefly run
through other three. First, Some may say, I cannot thus personally Covenant
with Christ, for fear of the want of perseverance, it is a dreadful thing, to be
ay binding, and ay breaking, and it is a great aggravation of our guilt, when we
walk contrary to our Vows and Engagements to God, better not bind, than break
again. This Objection lies in the way of many; and for removing of it, I desire
you may take notice of these four things. 1. When the question is about our
duty, we are not to argue from events against our duty; it was excellently
reasoned in Queen Esther, when she was convinced, it was her duty to go to the
King, and plead for her people the Jews, she sends word to Merdeca^, I will go
to the King, if I perish, I perish; she will not bring an argument from the
event, against her duty: if personal covenanting with God be a duty, the
argument taken from the event is very improper, when it is brought against a
duty. 2ly. I would have you to notice, that in reference to Perseverance, there
are two kinds of Promises in the Covenant. 1. There are Promises made to
Perseverance. 2ly. There are Promises made of Perseverance; these two are
diligently to be noticed: There are some Promises made to Perseverance, Heb.
3.6. We are made partakers of Christ, if we hold fast the confidence, and the
rejoicing of the hope, firm unto the end: There are some Promises made or
Perseverance, I will put my fear in their heart, that they shall not depart
from me. Now when we Covenant with God, we are diligently to eye both these
kinds of Promises: There are Promises made to Faith, and Promises made of
Faith, and if ye be staggered at this covenanting with God, for fear ye do not
persevere, remember that the Covenant contains Promises of perseverance. 3ly. I
would have you to notice, That as God in our Election, decreed our effectual
Calling, so he decreed the reviving and quickening of Grace in us, when it comes
under decays, Psalm. 23. He restores my soul: Ye find him, Ezekiel. 34. Brought
in, building up that which is broken, strengthening that which is weak. He
revives Grace, as well as quickens that which is dead: several times his people
have fallen under decays, as a Tree in Winter, that has neither Leaves nor
Flourishes; an evil time, and an erroneous opinion, and a strong temptation,
may bring his people under decays, that they have no might to persevere; but he
must bind up that which is broken, and restore it: so, if they sit down and
say, all those Sermons on personal Covenanting, will not influence me to
Covenant with him, for I will but bind and break, and play fast and loose with
him, thou argues from events against a duty, thou should go to the King, even
though thou should perish; and the Covenant thou binds now to, binds thee to
Perseverance; and though there be decays in thy spiritual lot, yet he will bind
that which is broken, and strengthen that which is weak, and restore the soul,
and make a David Pen the 51. Psalm, after he went in to Bathsheba.

The fifth Objection against this way of personal Covenanting, is this; some
readily stand at personal Covenanting with God, there are so many Duties
required in it, I must pray continually, I must rejoice always, I must deny my
self, I must not love the World; these are all Terms in the Covenant, and my
heart will never subscribe to these; if the Covenant run on these Terms, is it
not better for me, not to bind at all, than to do the thing my heart will not
consent unto; if I contract with God on these Terms, I am like a man marrying a
woman that I do not love; for removing of this, I would have you to notice
these three or four things. 1. As there are many duties required in the
Covenant, so there is abundance of strength for obeying them; we have little
more to do, than ask and have, nay, sometimes there is more given than we can
ask; the Lord deals with many that use to go to Him in prayer, as Naaman did
with Gehazi, when he ran after him, and said, send my Master a talent, for he
has need of money, I pray thee, says he, be content, take two; so, the Father
of the Prodigal did with his Son, when he returned, make me, says he, as one of
thy hired servants; the Father says, bring forth the best rob, and kill the
fatted calf, put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet; There is more
offered in the Covenant, than we have an appetite to desire, and what need have
we to scar at duty, when we bake beside meal, and have offered us in Christ,
more than is required? 2ly. Take notice, though there be many duties required
in the Covenant, yet duty is our greatest honor; the blessed Angels account so
of it, they are thrice in the Bible called Angels, where they are once called
Spirits; Angel is a name of Office, but Spirit is a name of nature, and they
glory more to have their names recorded from their Duty, than from their
Nature; there is no greater honor than duty; now, to be scarred from personal
covenanting with God, when there is a talent, more nor required in the
Covenant, and when Duty is our greatest honor, what an unreasonable exception
were this, to stand at personal covenanting! 3ly. Take notice, that the Duties
ye bind to, in this personal covenanting with God, ay the longer ye perform
them, they will be the more easy and pleasant; it is remarkable, David, a man
exercised with performing Duties, I had more joy in thy testimonies, than in
all riches; if some men had been commanded to compare Riches and the
Testimonies, they would have been far from giving David's Testimony, but he
would meditat on his laws day and night, he will rise at midnight and praise
him, he will water his couch with tears, his sore will run in the night; when
others were sleeping, he was about the Tract of his Duty, and he came to this
at length, I had more joy in thee, than in all riches. the greatest part of
them that quarrel, and find no pleasure in Duty, are they that are not
exercised with performing Duties; so we need not stand at personal Covenanting
on this score, that there are many Duties required; for not only do we bake
beside meal, and have strength for performing Duties, but ay the longer we
perform them, they are the sweeter and easier. 4ly. Though we bind to the Terms
and Duties of the Covenant, yet he with whom we bind, will accept of
uprightness in place of perfection; he will take the Will for the Deed, many a
time has he done so with his people; I have given you several Reasons why he
does so, for he gets the full payment from Christ; if ye will accept Christ and
his Righteousness, he will do with you, as with a man coming to a Register to
get up a Bond, he desires that the Bond may be given him, and that he may have
it freely, in regard the Cautioner has paid the full Sum; when we go to
Covenant with him, we may plead he will accept of our Sincerity in place of
Perfection, the reason is, the Cautioner has paid the full Sum.

The last and great Objection against this personal covenanting, is, readily
some may say, I cannot Covenant nor Indenture with Him, for I suspect if I do
it, I shall do it Hypocritically, and I have been hearing, it must be a
Cordial, ferious work, and if I go, and make a personal Covenant Hypocritically
with him, he will break out on me with his wrath; it were better leaving it
undone, than to do it Hypocritically; do I not hear Sincerity indispensibly
required to it, and he will pass by many things, before he pass by Hypocrifie;
and if I go and make a formal, heartless, and not an upright Covenant with Him,
it were better leaving it undone. I confess, what it is they give the Hypocrite
in this, I have determined in an Argument before, that all within the visible
Church, are obliged personally to Covenant with Him, they being bound to
believe and accept of the Gospel, as it is offered; yet in this case, it is
difficult what to say, for since it is indispensibly required, and to go draw a
personal Covenant, and subscribe it, and attest God, and lift up the hand, and
yet do it Hypocritically, is it not better to leave it undone? Therefore I
shall answer this in doing these three things. 1. By showing you, that there
are some who will very boldly and confidently Covenant with God, and in effect,
they are doing nothing but playing the Hypocrite in it, and dissembling, they
may bring many things to prove that they are not Hypocrites in it, and I would
encounter two or three of them. 1. Say some, I am no Hypocrite, for I abhor
Hypocrisy, I cannot endure it in another, and can I be guilty of the thing
that I abhor? Judah was very severe against Tamar his daughter in Law, when he
heard she was with Child, bring her forth, says he, and burn her; David was
very severe against the man that took his neighbors Lamb, when he had an
hundred sheep of his own, verily he shall die, yet both of them were guilty of
the Sin that they condemned. Divines observe, there may be several motives that
may make many condemn Sin in others, that they approve in themselves. In the
2d. place, some will say, I am bold in affliction; The sinners in Zion are
afraid, and fear takes hold of the Hypocrite, but I am not so, I am bold in
affliction; this will not prove it either, for there is a Roman courage, a
natural courage, that may be far from the Truth of Grace, ye have evidence of
several in Scripture and History, who has been so; but says some, I am much in
secret Duty, I pray, I read the Scriptures; but Hypocrisy is like the Egyptian
Frogs and Caterpillars, it will even be in our Bed-chambers; he that studies to
pacify his Conscience, and keep it quiet, will be much in secret duty; on that
principle, thou may say, I love not Drunkenness, nor Swearing, nor whoring, I
love not the Scandals my heart is inclined to, and therefore I am not an
Hypocrite; but our Lusts are like the Sea, they ebb and flow, the Sea loses not
it is power of flowing, when it is ebbing; there may be something restraining
lust, that yet has not killed it, thou may taste of the powers of the life to
come, and yet be an Hypocrite; so some may Covenant with God Hypocritically,
and on shallow grounds conclude themselves no Hypocrite.

Secondly, Some stand at Covenanting with Him, for fear of Hypocrisy, they are
too lightly brought to conclude themselves Hypocrites, and there are Two or
Three things makes Believers to do so. 1. Says some, if God saw me not to be
an Hypocrite, He would not toss me and continue the Rod so long, nor hide
himself from me under the Rod, as he does; this was the Argument that Job's
Friends brought, to prove him an Hypocrite, that God had continued the Rod with
him; but this is no ground to prove thee an Hypocrite at all, thou could easily
answer this, in the case of another, and by the way, it is remarkable to see,
how one Christian will easily louse another Christians Doubts, that when the
same Doubts occures in their own case, they will be overwhelmed with them: thou
knows affliction and Sincerity may go together, and though affliction ly long
on, and thou ly long in the furnace, it may say, that thou has much Dross, but
thou art no Hypocrite. The Lord will do sometimes with his People in
Afflictions, as Physicians do with their Patients, He will sometimes give them
Purges, and sometimes gives them Cordials; when thou art under the Cross, its
the time of thy Purging, but afterward comes thy Cordial. Others say, they are
Hypocrites, for they say, they are under decays, Grace grows, and decays
again, and must they not be Hypocrites, that are so? But every decay of Grace
will not prove thee a Hypocrite; an Apple Tree may continue to be a Tree,
though it have neither Apple nor Leaf on it; the best of Christians have their
Summer and Winter, Decays and Growings; So there may be great mistakes, about
Hypocrisy and Sincerity; some have observed it well, ordinarily Satan, who is a
liar and a deceiver, tempts ordinarily, to things contrary to Truth, he will
persuade the Hypocrite, that he is sincere, and on the contrair, he will
persuade the sincere Christian, that he is a Hypocrite; therefore, if thou
stand at personal Covenanting with God on that Score, that thou art a
Hypocrite, and cannot Covenant with Him, know that there is nothing more
ordinary, than mistakes about Hypocrisy and Sincerity, many concluding
themselves sincere, that God will send to Hell, and many concluding themselves
Hypocrites that are sincere.

But secondly, to make this matter clear and plain, it concerns thee to try in
thy covenanting with God, whether thou be sincere and upright, and I will offer
thee three Marks whereby to try it. 1. Sincerity where it is, it aims at
perfection, it may be known by it is aims; the same word in the Hebrew that
signifies Perfect, signifies Sincere, and ye will find them often convertible
in Scripture, not only because God accepts of Sincerity for Perfection, but
Sincerity can never be satisfied, until it be perfect; therefore, ye find the
most part of the exercises of the upright run on this, they cannot get Love
enough, Faith enough, Repentance enough; for Sincerity will ay be complaining,
until it be perfect: it is resembled by a Divine to a young Heir, that is never
content though he have meat and cloth in the house, until he get the whole
Inheritance; for the Mark of Sincerity is, that it is ay complaining, and
humbled, because it is not perfect. 2ly. Sincerity is discerned by something in
the nature of it, it takes in the Gospel qualifications, it has love to
Christ, as the principle; it has the glory of Christ, as it is motive and end;
Sincere, it is sine cera, without Wax; it has love to Christ as the principal
Motive, and the glory of Christ, as the End of it, that it drives at; and where
these two concur in our Covenanting with God, we may rationally conclude, that
it is not hypocritically done; if we find the love of Christ, and the glory of
Christ, as the two Butts set up, the one from which the Arrow comes, the other
to which the Arrow drives: and if there be an aiming at perfection, that though
we cannot say, we perfectly love Christ, and believe in Him; yet Sincerity will
ay be complaining, until it come to Perfection; if thou find these two
Characters of Sincerity, thou may conclude, thy Covenanting is not Formal and
Hypocritical, but that it is done in Uprightness and Sincerity. 3ly. I will say
this, for removing this Doubt, suppose after all that is said, thou art unclear
about Covenanting with Him, for fear thou do it Hypocritically, yet that ought
not to hinder thee from personal Covenanting; and there are two Reasons for
confirming this. For 1 All that live under the Gospel, they are bound to accept
of the Covenant, and that on the Terms offered; now, Suppose thou find not
Sincerity in thy covenanting, yet it takes not off the Obligation of the
Command, the Command binds thee, if thou be under the offer of the Gospel,
personally to Covenant, under the hazard of the eternal wrath of God, whether
thou be a Hypocrite or Sincere; therefore, thou art not to dispute thy case so
much, as to understand the Command. 2ly. Take notice, That there is in many
their Indenturing with Christ, that at the first have many Selfish and
Hypocritical-like ends, that after they have covenanted with him, have become
sincere; the case is, as with a woman that at the first marries a man, because
he is rich, but afterward she would not be divorced from him if he were
begging; several times it comes to pass, that at our first Indenturing with
him, it will be some selfish end, that the Soul may drive at; but afterward,
the Soul would not quite him and renounce him, and give him over, though they
had nothing but his Cross; so ye would not stand at that, I am not upright and
sincere, as becomes one that would Covenant with God, thou may have some
selfish ends at the first, but like the woman that marries the man, because he
is rich, thou would not now be divorced from him, but loves him for himself.

The second thing I proposed, in following this exhortation, was, to show you
some Advantages that the Soul will have by this personal covenanting with him:
I have hinted at some before, and before I give you the Marks of right personal
covenanting, I will tell you the Advantages, that are in personal covenanting
with him, and I will say these three or four particulars to you. 1. All the
good we are to expect from God, must come in to us through Jesus Christ,
without Him we could expect nothing from Him, but wrath and hell, for we have
broken the Covenant of works, and he is infinitely Just, he punishes Sin by a
necessity of nature; But add to this, 2ly. That all the things we can expect
from Jesus Christ, they must come in to us by the Covenant; what is the ground
that one has no benefit by Christ, he is to them a stone of stumbling, and a
rock of offense, and they will be broken on him? And another, they will get
peace and pardon by him? It comes in by the Covenant, they are concerned in the
covenant of Redemption, they are concerned in the covenant of Grace, so that as
we can have no benefit by the Father, but by the Son, so we can have no benefit
by the Son, except we be concerned in the Covenant. 3ly. We can expect no good
from the covenant, except we be particularly and personally concerned in the
covenant; what would it signify for David to say, The Lord has made with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, a Covenant, if he be not able to say, the Lord has
made with me a Covenant? So laying these three together, First, Being
particularly concerned in the covenant, all that is in God, and all that is in
Christ, and all that is in the Covenant, becomes ours: O! what a cooling is
there in these three? I like the Observation that one has, on that Word that
David often uses, by virtue of this Covenant, O my God, thou art my God, says
he, this Word, my God, takes in more, than all the Philosophers in the World
could draw out of it; if he had not explained it himself, I am the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, God is not the God of the dead, but of the living;
Christ brings it in to prove the Resurrection, for, says he, I am not the God
of the dead, but of the living; but there is something in that Word, my God,
that no Logic can reach, all the Philosophers on earth, could not have proven
the Resurrection out of that, if he had not done it; it is a strange
consequence, Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob willl rise, therefore the dead will
rise: now he that is particularly applying the covenant, has no less made over
to Him, than I will be thy God. 2ly. A second advantage is, that a Believer may
go, and plead the Promises of the covenant; the mercy of God indeed is a sweet
argument, but the Promises are a Debt to him; we may go, and as it were, lay
his hand-writ before him, as some Ancients, that went to pray in a particular
place, they would lay the Bible before them, and point out such a Promise, and
tell him what he had bound himself to; in how many cases is it advantageous, to
have the Promise to plead, when they have covenanted with him? (...) Suppose
thou go to God, and plead for Bread, thou has a Family, and thou has Children,
and all the toil and shift thou can make, cannot serve to get them Bread; the
Promise is, He remembered his Covenant, and gave them Bread; suppose in another
case, thou go to Him for Pardon, thou art exceeding guilty, it is a strange way,
that they that have made a Covenant with him, will take in pleading for Pardon,
Psalm. 25. Pardon mine iniquity, for it is very great: the Covenant will admit
of the pardon of iniquity: They that have accepted the Covenant, and Indentured
with him sincerely, on the Terms of the Covenant, may go and seek pardon, for
their iniquities are very great, for it is like the Covenant. 3ly. A third
advantage, in time of desertion, suppose he be hiding himself, and thou cannot
tell where he is, nor whether he is gone, the Covenant will influence his
return; She that was termed forsaken, shall be so no more; I have forsaken thee
for a little moment, but with everlasting mercy will I gather thee, is not Zion
married to him, are not his walls continually before him? and the mother may
forget her sucking child, but he cannot forget him; what case is there, that we
can go to him in prayer, but constantly the Argument is taken from the
Covenant; and thou that has sincerely Indentured with him, thou may go as
warrantably, and plead the Promise, as he can command thee to thy Duty; though
he be a Sovereign Lord, and thou a bit of clay, yet, since the Covenant has
made thee a Debtor to thy Duty, the same Covenant has made him a Debtor to his
Promise; for as thou art bound to the one, he is graciously bound to the other,
no that thou art to suspend thy Duty until he perform the Promise, but thou may
press the Promise as much on him, as he may press thy Duty. 3ly. Thou may lay
the Covenant for an excellent ground, to cast in the Anchor of Hope; without
the Covenant, we might renounce our Hope; I know not what ground of hope we
have, abstracting from the Covenant, we need not, nor Hope never gets a surer
Anchor than the Covenant; and what an excellent too-look has Hope, when one
has accepted the Covenant, to have all that God has to give, and all the
purchase of Christ, and all that is contained in the Covenant; may not thou
take up thy hope to the top of Mount (...), and let it see the promised Land,
that flows with Milk and Honey? and let it see the City with the twelve Ports,
and twelve Foundations, and say, all these are mine? What an excellent help is
it, in all straits of the time, when the time is, that many will think that
Popery will rise, and thou may be put to deny Christ, or then to suffer for
him? To be brief, this personal covenanting with God, has so many advantages
in it, that it is difficult to tell them all; but take these three, God makes
over himself and all that he has, his Son, and all: thou has the Covenant to
plead with him, as he has the Law to plead with thee; if he charge thee with
the Law, and command, what thou in the Covenant has Indentured to obey, then
turn back the Promise on him, where he has engaged to fulfill, what thou have
Covenanted; and if thou have sincerely Indentured with him in the Covenant,
thou may take a view of the twelve Ports, and the City with the twelve
Foundations, and say, my Father, and my Fathers House, and all is mine. If any
ask, what is the ground of this? Ye have taken hold of the Covenant, and
embraced Christ; he has made over himself in his Fullness, and the
Righteousness of his Son to thee, if thou will take hold of his Covenant:
therefore go home, if thou have the work of sincere Covenanting with him, thou
may go home, and take up for time and eternity, all things of absolute
necessity, and at length may sing, all is mine; and if any ask, what is thy
Charter and Right? There it is, I have accepted him, and entered in a Covenant
with him, and who can question my Right to these?

SERMON XIX.
2 Samuel 23. Verse 5. Although my house be not so with God; yet he has made
with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is
all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


AFter I had removed many Objections, against this personal Covenanting, I came
to press it, with the advantages that would follow on entering in a personal
Covenant with God: I will not follow this a little, for it is very conducible
and useful; in the pressing of it, the gain will be great, all ye that love
gain, follow this way of personal covenanting with God; all ye that would be
Rich and Great, and secure in both, enter in this personal covenant with God;
that I may the better press this, I would open to you some few Advantages that
the Soul has, that has made a personal Covenant with God. First, I shall give
you two generals, then four or five special and particular advantages, that ye
will have by it.

First, the two Generals shall be these. 1. By being in Covenant personally and
particularly with God, all that is in God will be yours; Micah said of his
Idol, Ye have taken away my gods, and what have I more? If ye have God, what
would ye have more? It Is very remarkable, I will be thy God, Genesis 17. was the
sum of the whole Covenant; So 1 Cor. 6 16. I will dwell among them, and walk
among them, and I will be their God. This is the thing that these that are in
Covenant with him have, they have God, and all that is in God to be theirs; but
because this General will not sufficiently open this Privilege, I would have
you to notice these three or four things that are in God, that if ye be
particularly in Covenant with him, will be yours. First, All his Attributes
will be yours, his Power, his Mercy, nay his Holiness and Justice will be
yours; he will be just to forgive, as John calls him; his Omnipotency, his
Goodness, his Truth, and all his Attributes will be yours; and they will be
yours in the same way that they are Christ's; it is remarkable, when he sent the
Commission to his Disciples by Mary, he sent on these Terms, Go, tell my
Disciples; I go to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God; he is
yours in all his Attributes, when ye have to do with his Power, his Holiness,
his Goodness, if ye have made a personal Covenant with him, all his Attributes
are yours. 2ly. All the Relations in which he is holden forth in the Covenant,
are yours; He is your Husband, your Father, your Hope, your Glory; it is
remarkable, there are a number of Relations, cannot agree to the Angels; it is
true, he may be called their Creator and Maker, but he cannot be called their
Husband, nor their Father, with a reference to the work of Redemption: So, if
ye be in Covenant with him, as God is your God, so all his Attributes mentioned
in the Covenant are yours, ye may call him your Power, your Rock, your Husband,
your Strength, your Strong Tower. 3ly. If he be yours, all his Dispensations
are yours; Romans 8.28. All things work together for good to them that love God;
all Providence, every thing, nay death it self, 1 Cor. 3.22. All things are
yours, life oy deach, things present, or to come, all are yours, and Christ is
Gods; even death it self is yours, when ever death comes, if ye be in Covenant
with him, it comes like a servant to attend you, and carry you home to the
place of your rest; if he be yours, all his Attributes, and Relations, and
Providence also are yours. Lastly. If he be yours, there is something that ye
have, in having him, that no Minister nor Angel can tell, nor explain to you;
the truth is, if he be yours, the case is with you, as if a countryman should
find a Jewel, and he should go through all the country, and let this man and
that man see it, and ask what it is worth, and there is none that can tell the
value of it, except one that is a Jeweler; indeed Christ only can explain it,
Matthew. 22. I am the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob; he only can prove
the resurrection from the dead, from that which no Minister nor Angel could do;
there is no Minister nor Angel can tell, what is imported in this, to have God
for our God: for all the excellencies of the Creatures are imported in it,
Psalm. 84.11. The Lord is a Sun and a Shield: He is a Sun for prosperity, and a
Shield for adversity, he is both for Prosperity and Adversity; the man can
never fall wrong, that is in Covenant with God, under no Cross will he be
broken, under no Prosperity will he be blown up; so ye that enter in a personal
Covenant with him, ye will have God to be your God, and if he be your God, all
his Attributes, all his Relations are yours, all his Providence will make for
you, and when ye have counted on all the three, ye have somewhat in this, my
God, that no Minister nor Angel can explain, and that is the first Advantage I
offer, by personal Covenanting with him, God will be yours.

Secondly, By personal Covenanting and Indenturing with him, all Christ's
purchase will be yours; great things has he purchased, and readily he has
purchased no more, than he has paid for; he has abundantly paid for all
that he has gotten; nay, to say the truth, he has paid above the value, to
give his Blood for the like of us; and for the Glory that he has now in
Heaven, he had as much before, though not properly as Mediator, yet as God
Essential, and Con-substantial with the Father; now, all that he has purchased
is yours. For clearing this, I will offer you two things to be considered. 1.
The Covenant of Grace on Christ's part is no more, but the execution of his
three Offices, as he is King, Priest, and Prophet of his Church; all the
Promises of the Covenant may be reduced to these three: all the promises of
Pardon, are the execution of his Priestly Office; all the promises of guiding
and Ruling, are the execution of his Kingly Office; all the promises of
teaching, are the execution of his Prophetical Office; the truth is, the whole
Covenant is nothing, but the Execution of his Three Offices, for he is left
only Executor in the new Testament; He was both the Testator and he is
Executor, and must fulfill the Legacies left in the Covenant. Now he that has
made a personal Covenant with him, he has a right and Title to all his
Offices, and consequently to all that he has purchased; they may not only
count on God as their God, but on the Mediators purchase, as their purchase.
2ly. Another thing will evidence the truth of this, in regard all things that
Christ has purchased, they are all Secured and Ratified by the Covenant; ye
have often heard, that God cannot give a greater Security to men, than the
Security he makes by way of Covenant; now they that have made a personal
Covenant with God, they have Security in the Covenant for all Christ's purchase;
now these are advantages abundantly sufficient, to bind you to this personal
Covenanting. But to follow this more particularly, I would have you to take up
the Covenant under a Fourfold Formality, and the taking it up under this
Fourfold Formality; will let you see more of the advantage of personal
Covenanting with God; First, Consider the Covenant as the Conduit, I say not
the Fountain, but as the Conduit and Channel, of all Sinctifying Grace, through
which runs from the Fountain of Grace, all Sanctifying Grace. 2ly. Consider the
Covenant, as it is an Answer to all Challenges and Objections. 3ly. Consider the
Covenant, as it is a Charter and Security, for the Church of God in general.
Lastly, Consider the Covenant, as the Charter of our inheritance, for all
eternity; and under these Four Formalities, ye may see the advantages, that a
person has, who enters in a personal Covenant, and takes this everlasting
Covenant, and applies it to himself.

First, Consider the Covenant, as the Conduit, through which all Graces runs to
us from Christ, all Graces runs through the Channel of a Covenant; it is true.
Christ is the Fountain of Grace, and of his fullness we receive, and Grace for
Grace; but all the Graces that comes from Christ, comes to us from the Promise;
it is remarkable, there is no Grace, whether it be the first Grace, I will take
away the heart of stone, and I will put my fear in their heart; or whether it
be the Grace, that is built on these first Graces, they are holden out to us in
the Covenant; the Grace of effectual calling, the Grace of Sanctification,
Adoption, and pardoning Grace; the Conduit that convoyes them all, is the
Covenant; the truth is, we can lippen for nothing, for as excellent as Christ
is, (and O! but he be excellent and good) we can lippen for nothing, but
Covenanted things from him; Faith can go no higher than the Covenant, there is
indeed some that have written, that he will be better at the great day than his
word; I will not go to contradict them, I know no Scripture that will
contradict them, but I know no ground, for Faith to expect any thing from him,
but according to his word; we can lippen for no more, nor Faith can warrantably
expect, for no more than what he has promised. So all Grace, the Conduit and
Channel through which it runs to us, is the Covenant; so he that has made a
personal Covenant with God, has in effect laid the pipe to the mouth, through
which the water that comes out of the Fountain, is convoyed; all the Graces of
the Spirit are promised, I know no Grace, but it is promised in the Covenant by
God; he that has made a Covenant with God, however Christ be the Fountain of
Grace, the Covenant is the Conduit and Spout, through which they all run to
thee, and thou that makes a personal Covenant with God, lays thy mouth to the
pipe, and waits, until the Fountain of Grace, spring Grace to thee; thou art in
a fair way to get a new heart, and the pardon of the Sins of thy youth, to get
love to God, and patience, and delight in God, for thou art entered in a
Covenant, that carries all these things from God the Fountain of Grace.

Secondly, By the Covenant, we come to Answer all Challenges and Objections;
there are Three great Things, that keeps Believers humble, and make them go
mourning, so long as they are out of Heaven, Temptations, Afflictions, and
Desertions, added to their Corruptions, that makes the wilderness to them to be
full of Briers and Thorns; and he that enters in a personal Covenant with God,
beside that he has his mouth laid to the Conduit of Grace, he has in the
Covenant an Answer to all these Three Objections; and I would fain know, what
any of you, that have not entered in a personal Covenant with God, does, with
your Temptations, Crosses, and Disertions; it is very evident, all these Three
are Answered in the Covenant: if the Believer meet with Temptations, the
Covenant will tell him, The God of peace shall tread Satan under thy seet;
shortly; and though thy iniquities were like scarlet, he shall make them white
as wool; If we meet with Affliction, the Covenant will tell thee, Whom I love,
I chasten and rebuke; and I know, that in faithfulness, I have afflicted thee;
If we meet with desertion, the Covenant will tell thee, For a little moment I
have forsaken thee, but with everlacting kindness will I gather thee; and she
that has been forsaken, shall be as if she had not been forsaken. I cannot
tell how refreshful it is, to hear some Christians, answering all their
Objections with Scripture; they that take them to the Covenant, and answer
their Challenges in the Covenant, and bear off their Temptations, Afflictions,
and Desertions, with something in the Covenant, they take the Gospel Balm, and
it is like their wounds will be healed, when others will apply something, that
will gangren and canker them, and make them turn to Error. The Covenant is the
only solid Answers to all Challenges, whether they come from Temptations, or
from the Cross, or some Desertion from God; there is no kindly plaster can be
applied to any of these wounds, but allenarly the Covenant; now he that enters
in a person Covenant with God, as he has laid his mouth to the Pipe, through
with the golden oil run, out of the Fountain, so he has a very cordial Gospel
Balm, for all discouragments, whether they come from Temptations, Crosses, or
Desertions Thirdly. Take the Covenant as a Charter for the Church of God, and
in reference to this, I would have you notice Three or Four Things. 1. In the
Covenant, we find not only the particular cases of Believers, their pardon,
their taking away the heart of stone, but there are greater things promised to
the Church, that are not yet accomplished; the Millenaries, an ancient Sect, as
ancient as the Apostles time, when they read through these prophesies, they
thought that Christ would come, and receive them personally on earth a thousand
years; and the fifty Monarchy men, have run in so many fancies about them; but
there are great things prophesied, concerning the Church, that are not yet
accomplished, That all the earth shall be full of the glory of the Lord, and
Jerusalem shall again be inhabited, and holiness shall be written on horses
bells; The meaning of the place is, that the people shall be mostly taken up
about holiness, and denied to their vanities; the generation is coming, that
will see these days, these great things that are in the Covenant, and the
truth is, these things are far greater, than our particular; our pardon, and
our peace, is nothing to the case of the Church of God, 2ly. I would have you
notice, that he that enters in a personal Covenant with God, as I have often
told you, he is to take in the case of the Church of God, as well as his own
particular, he is to take in, that he will mind the case of the Church, and
say, Lord, I will believe all the promises concerning the Church, I will accept
these promises, and I will rely on the faithfulness of him that made them; and
though I be laid in the Grave, I expect that there is a generation coming, that
will see all these things; I deny not, but we should look to our Mother Church,
whereof we are Members, but withal, we ought to take in the case of the whole
Church, in our personal Covenanting with God, since the Covenant runs so much
on the case of the Church; it is a strange Covenant that he will make, that
will seclude the case of the Church of God, and since he has made so much
mention of it in the Everlasting Covenant, what kind of Covenant is that thou will make, that will seclude the case of the Church of God? So we are to take
in this, Lord, I will be an enemy to the Error and Profanity of the time, I
will neither be led away with the giddiness, nor the drunkkenness, nor
profanity of the time; the Covenant is for Truth and Godliness, and therefore
thou can Covenant against delusion and prosanity: and here a great advantage he
has, that enters in a personal Covenant with God, in backsliding times, when
the wicked are counted happy, and they that work unrighteousness, are set up;
and when there is such a current of profanity, and as Zacharias says, The best
are as briers and thorns; when there are few young ones brought in to Christ,
and when they who are brought in, we know not what they may turn to, for many
turns away to Error; he that has entered in a personal Covenant with God, he
is secure; for though he see not these days, yet as Abraham saw Christ's days a
far off, ye may see them afar off. O! but it is comfortable to remember, that
there will a generation come, when thou art laid in thy Grave, that will have
holiness written on the horses bells, and that all will be taught of God, from
the meanest to the greatest, and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd; and
the vail will be taken down betwixt them. 3ly. He that enters in a personal
Covenant with God, he has this encouragment, the Covenant takes in the healing
of Divisions among his people; it is remarkable, it is often promised, it is true,
it is long in fulfilling, I will give them one way, and one heart, and they
shall be as one stick in my hand; the time of the fulfilling of the Promises is
not yet come; no, almost as many heads, as many opinions; in a time of liberty,
it would be difficult for a beginner, how to fix, there are such varieties of
Opinions, no wonder the protane multitude Skuriner at all profession; but he
that has made a personal Covenant with God, he knows, the Covenant carries
this in the bosom of it, They shall be as one stick in my hand; these days are
coming, though we wait on; now in the personal Covenant, he that has
Indentured with God, and given him the hand, however ye may see, that there are
scarce three parts of nynteen parts of the World, Christians, and among these
three parts, but few Protestants, ye he that enters in a personal Covenant with
God; has this, that he may go and sing, All the earth shall be full of the
knowledge of God. and when these days are come, they will be like one stick in
his hand, and they will have one heart, one mind, and one way: and we may
rejoice as Abraham did, to see Christ's day far off; now he that enters in a
personal Covenant with God, considers the Covenant, as the Conduit of all
Grace, and the immediate answer to all Challenges, and a Charter for the Church
of God, when the earth will be full of the knowledge of God, and when they will
be like one stick in his hand, and when they will have one heart, and one way,
and will not be saying, here is Christ, and there is Christ; for that is now
accomplished in our time, there is one saying, Here is Christ, and there is
Christ, and one knows not where to set down their steps, there is such variety
of Opinions, and a multitude of Divisions. Lastly, Take up the Covenant, as the
Charter of the inheritance, and ye will see what advantage he has, that has
made a particular Covenant with God; all the glory to come is his; O! but the
Cvenant speaks excellently of the Inheritance, take the twenty one and twenty
two Chapters of the Book of the Revelation, and read them over, what a stately
City is there? what stately Foundation? what Porches? and what Trees, that
bears twelve manner of Fruits, every month, and the Leaves of them are for the
dealing of the Notions He that has entered seriously in Covenant with God,
according to the qualifications I spoke of before, the Covenant carries him
with a Legal Right to all that City, let it have never such Foundations and
Porches, all the Porches, Trees, and Foundations in it, are all his; Nay, the
Tree that is in the midst of Paradise, that bears the twelve manner of Fruit,
is his. Now, see what a privilege it is, to enter in a personal Covenant with
God. Now take all up these Advantages, and I have laid this before you, if not
to persuade you, yet to make you inexcusable, and to help to bring your Blood
upon your own head, if ye enter not in a personal Covenant; But,

Thirdly, After I have removed the Impediments, and showed the Advantages,
there is a third thing, in following this Use of Exhortation; it shall be in
exhorting you, to enter this personal Covenant; consider a little the persons,
that are admitted to personal Covenanting with God; and generally practique
Divines do it, that write of the Covenant; the persons that are admitted, may
be a great motive, to press this Use of Exhortation, if he had stood at Kings,
Princes, the great Ones of the Earth, the Wise, the Learned, the Holy, and
Righteous, and these that are exact, according to the Coneant of Works; but ye
would notice four or five things, in the persons that are called, personally to
Covenant with God; and I take up this as the great incitment, to press this
personal Covenanting in you. 1. That no former guiltiness, may hinder you from
entering in this personal Covenant, nay I say more, the sin against the Holy
Ghost cannot hinder; for if a person could consent to accept of Christ, it
would not be that sin against the Holy Ghost; therefore it is remarkable, they
have entered in a personal Covenant, with him, that have been the greatest of
Sinners, they have had seven Devils, like Mary Magdalen, there have been some
blasphemers, like Paul; some that have killed the Prophets, and stoned them;
some that were Persecutors like Manasseh, as those that are mentioned in the
Hebrews, that were sawn asunder, of whom it was reported, that he did saw
Isaiah asunder, with a timber Saw, yet when he was in Bonds in Babylon, he
repented, and found mercy. That is one thing in regard of the persons. 2ly. In
entering in this personal Covenant, he stands not at how mean a birth and
parentage persons be; it is remarkable, Abraham with whom he first made a
Covenant, a Syrian to thy Father, and thy Mother an Amorite; Moses, he had his
Name Moses, that is drawn out, because he was drawn out among the Flags, he was
in a manner a Funling, he is found lying among the Flags by Pharaohs Daughter,
no, he stands not at that, but can enter in a Covenant with a Moses, though he
be drawn out 3ly. He stands not at the weakness of Parts, let one be never so
simple, He stands not at that, the twelve Apostles are called often the (...),
our Translation, for respect to them, has i^ unlearned Men, when they
perceived them to be unlearned men, in the Original, they were but poor fisher
men, but that stood not in the way of it. 4ly. He stands not at the weakness of
Faith, if he come to make a personal Covenant, he neither stands at former
guiltiness, nor the meanness of birth, if thou were even a Lazarus, laid full
of Boils at Dives gate; nor at the meannest of Parts, nay, nor at the weakness
of Faith. And Lastly, He stands not at the mixture of Faith with corruption,
though thou can say, Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief; he is like a man,
that if one should ask him? Is it day, he cannot tell, whether it be day or
night, he cannot tell whether his Faith be Faith or Unbelief. Now in entering
in a personal Covenant with God, God will stand at none of these. Lay all these
together, and I hope, I may close this use of Exhortation, exhorting you all,
to take this gate of it, enter in a personal Covenant with God, and say, and
subscribe it with your hand; if ye have not done it, go and do it; ye should be
exhorting your own Soul to it, and your neighbors, ye that have children,
should be pressing them to do it; Husbands should be saying to their Wives,
Come let us return to the Lord, come and let us enter in a personal Covenant
with him; they that has sitten all these Sermons, and have not advanced one
step, I am afraid, they be the Tree, of which it is said, Never fruit grow on
thee henceforth. ye are daily dying, and going off this Stage, therefore be
exhorted, to take you to this personal Covenant.

SERMON XX.
2 Samuel 23. 5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me
an everlasting Covenant, or dered in all things and sure; for this is all my
salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


I Have spoken to Two uses of this Doctrine, of personal Covenanting with God,
one of Instruction, which consisted of five or six Branches; another of
Exhortation, which has been pressed in several Sermons, by removing the
Impediments, and considering the Advantages, of personal Covenanting. The third
Use might be of Trial, whether we have personally Covenanted with God, or not;
but since this will come in, in the Third Doctrine of this Branch of the verse,
David's asserting, The Lord has made with me an everlasting Covenant, I will
refer the marks of personal Covenanting, until I handle that Branch of the
verse. I purpose this Afteernoon, to close this Head of personal Covenanting,
though it will occur often in handling this verse after wards. I will shut it
up, with an Use of Direction.

Use 3. For the right management of this Work, of personal Covenanting with
God, I have proven the necessity of it, opened the Nature and Properties of it,
and have cleared many Questions about it: Now the Key and Kirnel of Direction
follows to be handled; and that I may do it the more distinctly and clearly, I
will follow it to four sorts of Persons, which will readily take up the
substance of this afternoons Sermon.

First, is it a Duty, thus personally, and particularly to Covenant with God,
then it speaks a word to these, who have hitherto neglected, or it may be are
still averse from this Duty, they can count on many things that have occurred
in the wilderness to them, our never of a personal Covenanting with God. I have
spoken some what to this sort of people before, and may be the shorter now, I
shall only name these four things to them, 1 It is already proven, to be a Duty
of absolute necessity, the Saints of old have practiced it, if we believe
particular Election, and particular Redemption, and that we stand bound
personally to the Duties of the Covenant that we personally, and particularly
claim the privileges of the Covenant, we stand obliged, of absolute necessity,
personally and particularly to Covenant to them, I think I have, on solid
Gospel Principles proved, that there can be no benefit by Christ, without
particular Covenanting with him; thou ownes not thy Baptism, thou goes not
rashly about the Sacrament of the Supper, if thou do not particularly and
personally Indenture with God. I exhort thee to consider these grounds, who has
never dreamed of this Duty; all that is in Christ, all that is in the Covenant,
all that is in the Father, they signify nothing to thee, without a personal
and particular Covenanting with him. 2ly. I would exhort thee, that has never
done it, to consider the wretchedness and misery of the Covenant that thou art
under, until thou particularly Covenant with Christ, according to the tenor of
the Covenant of Grace; thou art under the Covenant of Works, Do thou hear?
This is a Covenant that admits not of a Cautioner, nor of Repentance, that will
not dispense with the smallest transgression, nor admits not of Sincerity,
however thou talk of Christ and of Repentance, if thou has not made a
particular Covenant with God, according to the Terms of the Covenant of Grace,
thou art under the Covenant, that admits not of a Christ, Repentance, and
Sincerity. 3ly. Thou that has not made this personal Covenant, and particularly
Indentured, either by Word, or Subscribing, or lifting up the hand to God, I
would have thee considering, that there is in thy Lot, somewhat that is worse,
than the c^^e of Heathens; they have no Revelation of a Covenant of (...), they
will not be comptable, for the thing that was never revealed, Tyrus, and Sidon,
Sodom, and Gomorrab, the men of Nineveh, will rise in judgment against thee,
for at the preaching of Jonah, they repented: but thou that lives under the
drop of the Gospel, and hears of a particular and personal Indenturing with
God, thou shall have them coming, from the East and the West, at the great Day,
and they shall all be witnesses against thee, for at the preaching of Jonah,
Nineveh repented, and thou have this Covenant pressed on thee by the Gospel,
yet thou do not repent, nor make this personal Covenant. 4ly. I would have
thee to consider, that if thou be not in a particular personal Covenant with
God, thou can lay no claim to the Covenant at all. Thou art an alien to the
common wealth of Israel, and a stranger to the Covenant of Promise; we must
either be particularly inerested in it, or not at all, it must have our several
consents, or we have no claim to it; thou that has never made this personal
Covenant with him, and yet art living under the drop of the Gospel, thou art
neglecting a Duty of absolute necessity, thou owns not thy Baptism, thou can
plead no benefit by the Covenant: if all these things will not move thee, I
know not what will do it; if thou sit them out, thou art like to be the Tree,
on which fruit never will grow, thou may be fuel for burning, but not for
bearing; and I am afraid, there are many so, that are standing in the vineyard,
and are Trees for burning, but not for bearing.

Secondly, this was of personal Covenanting, speaks a word to a second sort of
Persons, and that is to those, who come some length, but they stick in the
Birth, and never come up to the full length in this act of particular and
personal Covenanting with God: There are a great many that do so, we have a
number of sober Civilians; some Divines that write of personal Covenanting,
they say, It Is the lot of many persons of Quality, they go some length in
Covenanting, but they go not the full lenght, length, readily they forsake the
pollutions of the World, but comes not the length of giving themselves over to
him according to the Covenant of Grace, in their lot, and service, and
condition in the World. I would have such considering, for there are many, that
sit down betwixt Towns, betwixt Heaven and Hell: I would have them considering
three or four things. (1) Thou art in danger to lose two Worlds; If thou take
this present World, for thy happiness, why fulfills not thou thy lusts in it?
If thou take the World to come for thy Portion, why walks thou not suitable to
thy Hope? It Is a lamentable thing, many they will find, they lose both Heaven
and Earth, they have been denied to the pleasures of the Flesh, and yet for not
going a greater length, they have lost Heaven also, often Hypocrites do so, and
the generality of sober Civilians, that comes not up the length the Gospels
calls for, but comes some length, they are like to lose both this World, and
that which is to come. (2ly.) I would have thee considering, thou that comes
some length, that there are many, who have been almost Christians, that have
all their life struk at that Almost, and eternally perished in it; the famous
Agrippa, a friend of Augustus, could tell Paul, thou almost perswads me to be a
Christian, would to God, says he, not only almost but altogether, thou were
such as I am except these bonds. I will recommend thee to a Book on that Text,
The almost Christian, many of you have need of that, what does it signify to
be almost, and not altogether one? Thou had as good renounce it altogether, as
to be almost, and not altogether a Christian. (3ly.) Consider thou that comes
some length, in this personal Covenanting, what a foolish bargain have thou
made with Christ, to agree with him in many Articles, and to be content to pay
many things, and to break off the bargain for a penny: it is a business of a
Heaven and of a Hell, and thou that would make a Covenant with him. I shall not
be a Drunkard, I shall not be a Swearer, I shall wait on the Ordinances, I
shall pray in Secret, and in my Family; but for the inward Lusts of my heart,
and secret walk with God, I dare not Covenant for that; there thou has offered
fair for Heaven, and art like to lose it for a little, he that is the Author of
the Practice of Piety, he brings in many, that are in Hell, saying, O but I was
near heaven, and did many things, and suffered many things for him, and yet I
am here; that agregges their Torment and their Misery, Readily, thou may have
gone a great length, yet it may be, it encourage thy blasphemy against him, in
the place of the damned, th^^ thou has done many things, and suffered many
things, and (...) thing is lacking 4ly. I would have thee Consider, that thou
that art sitten down in an Almost, on this Motive, that thou readily thinks, at
Death, or some period of Time, or another, thou will come to do it Altogether;
Thou would know, if thou sit such a Sermon on it, as this, it shall be denied
to thee at Death, if thou sit this afternoon, and do not resolve, to take Him
on the Terms he offers himself; if thou wilfully harden thy self against all
these things, thou shall have enough to do, to wrestle with the Fever, when it
comes, thou may be roving, and lose the Composure of thy Spirit, and the thing
thou will not do now, shall be denied thee then; Therefore, thou that art come
up almost to do it, I have removed the Objections out of thy way, know, if thou
hope to do it afterward, and will not do it now, in the day of thy distress,
or at Death, it shall be denied to thee, and thou shall die, either Roving, or
Sleeping, or Stupid, and shall be laid in the Grave like a Sheep: Therefore
whoever has come up almost to Covenant, but not altogether, but hopes, there
will come a Better day afterward, Remember, if thou refuse it this Night, and
go not home thus to Indenture with him, on the Terms you have heard, belike
Roving, Stupidity, or Presumption, will deprive thee of it, when thou art lying
on the Bed of languishing.

Thirdly, Is it thus a Duty personally to Covenant with God, then it speaks a
word to them, who have done it, and broken again; They find they have a heart
so slppery, that it will bind the day, and break the morrow; unto these I would
say three or four things, 1. Thou that have Indentured and Broken, I would
inform thee, that ay when we break, God does not break, it would never be
called an Everlasting Covenant, if it had only a reference to us; it might be
called an Hourly Covenant, a Daily Covenant, a Diurnal kind of a Covenant, but
not an Everlasting Covenant; The thing that makes it be called an Everlasting
Covenant is, the Everlasting Faithfulness of God, it is so contrived, as tho we
break, if we believe not, yet he abides Faithful; now, when he enters in a
Marriage Covenant, the Contract is not like the Clauses of the Marriage,
betwixt a Man and a Woman, if one of the Parties commit Adultery, the Law
provides a Divorce, Thou have played the Harlot with many Lovers yet return to
me, for I am married to thee. 2ly. I would have thee, that has Covenanted with
God and broken, to mind, that in the Covenant there are promises of Reviving,
Renewing, Restoring, and of binding up that which is broken, and strengthening
that which is weak; it would never have been Everlasting, if there were not
such Articles in it; So that if thou has broken, thou art not to run from the
Covenant, but thou art to take thee to such promises of it, as concern thy
Case; all the Promises relating to Reviving, Restoring, Renewing, healing that
which is broken, and strengthening that which is weal, It Is a great failing in
many precious to God, when they find they have made a Covenant, and broken it,
they resolve to make no mo but altogether give it over; In that case they are
to go, and seek out such Promises, as relare to Restoring, Reviving, Renewing,
binding up that which is broken, and strengthening that which is weak, other
ways the Covenant could never be an Everlasting Covenant. 3ly. I exhort thee,
who have broken, to go mournfully, and plead the Promises; if thou do it
presumptuously, It Is like thou has no Claim to these Promises; there are many
when they fall, they presently talk of Christ, and of the Covenant, and before
ever the Plaster be applied, the Sore is heal; the Plaster of Reviving Grace,
nothing makes it stick better to, nor Tears. If thou shall go and take the
Plaster, and apply it to the breach of Covenant, and not mingle in Tears with
it, the Plaster will not stick, there is nothing that makes it stick so well,
as Tears flowing from a contrite heart; Therefore, thou that has broken
Covenant with him, and are guilty of this Sin, which many of the generation are
guilty of, thou have Indentured with Him, and dealt deceitfully in his
Covenant; go, and apply these Promises of the Covenant of Reviving, Restoring,
Renewing, and binding up; but know, that nothing will make the Plaster stick
so well to, as Tears; if you do it presumptuously, thou may apply the Plaster,
but in a moment it will fall off. 4ly. Thou that has broken Covenant with Him,
and Indentured, and art afraid to hazard again, know this, that burnt Bairns
fire dreads, the thing that occasioned the breach of Covenant, eshew that; I
will offer you two or three things, that uses ordinarily to bring Persons, that
uses to Covenant with God, under a breach of Covenant. 1. Ordinarily overly and
careless performance of secret Duties; thou goes to God, and it is words without
Life or Spirit, that thou vents to God in prayer, thou will soon break all they
Vows, if there grow a dryness betwixt the Root and the Branches, the Branches
will soon wither; It Is remarkable, that which Elihu said to Job, he was
mistaken in Job, but the Word he spoke was true, had it not been applied to
Job's case, he thought Job spoke unreverently of God, and he took him for an
Hypocrite, and he thought all his Arguments reflected on God, and when he had
heard him out, surely says he, thou restrainest Prayer, and castest off Fear,
his meaning is, therefore thou may say any thing thou thinks, overly performing
of prayer, will soon bring one to break all their Vows. 2ly. It Is given by some
Divines, as one of the Reasons of breaking Covenant with god, unprofitable
Converse among Christians, every Christian meeting with another, should be like
a man going to light a Candle in another House, where he knows there is fire,
when we use to Converse together, there is nothing of God in it, nothing of
Christ's Death and Sufferings; readily we may grow careless of our Covenants
with God; It Is a great fault among many, I know whether it be Ingnorance, or
the want of matter within, that occasions it, if one should begin a spiritual
Subject, they will give it no kind of Intertainment, but silence, they will sit
graver possibly at that time, than at another, and hear, but they give it no
kind of Answer; thou art refusing to light thy Candle, at thy neighbors fire,
and readily thou will break thy Covenant wiht God, to be brief, I exhort thee
who has broken thy Covenant, to take the Promises of Reviving, Renewing,
Restoring, and of healing that which is broken, strengthening that which is
Weak, and lay them to sore, with the Tear in thy Eye, for nothing will make the
Plaster stick so well, as Tears mingled with a contrite heart.

The last sort of Persons, to whom I will speak, and therewith close with this
Theme, and it is to those, that has Covenanted with Him, they have made a
Covenant with him by sacrifice, and would gladly know some Advice how to keep
it, that they be not guilty of the sins abounding in their time, of being
breakers of Covenant with Him, That I may not let thee go, without some word of
Advice, who art serious, how thou shall get it kept, I shall for present give
thee these two words of Advice, First, if thou would keep this Covenant with
God, look well to thy Conscience. 2ly. Look well to thy Conversation.

First. If thou would keep this Covenant with God, look well to thy Conscience,
it is Gods Deputy within thee, and the immediate Judge of all thy actions; and
here I would show you, that a Man looks well to his Conscience, when he looks
to these three things in it; 1. When he looks to have his Conscience well
informed, the Conscience is a blind Guide, it is the candle of the Word that must
regulat it, therefore ye will find a conscientions Christian, he is always
waiting on the Word, waiting on Sermons, and proposing Doubts; and the great
Reason of all is, to get the Conscience well informed; therefore if the
Conscience be blind, and decline to Error, as often it will do, it will
sometimes call the thing a Duty, that God calls Sin, and that Sin, which God
calls Duty; therefore, if thou would keep Covenant with God, look well to thy
Conscience, that it be well informed, and regulate by the word of truth, that
thou make not a Duty, when there is none. In this time I am afraid, many are
taken away from their Obligations to Him, through an ill informed Conscience;
Conscience may err on the right hand, there are many make more Duties than God
has made, it may make that Duty which God has never made one; It may Err in
the lest hand, by presuming on Dity, and prostituting Duties to Lusts, and if
thou have not a well informed Conscience, all thy running through the
Wilderness is to no purpose. I believe all Papists, Turks and Quakers outstrip
us, there are no persons takes less pains to come to Heaven, than protestants;
therefore, if thou would keep thy Covenant with God, in such a time, when there
are some saying, Here is Christ, and there is Christ, and many falling into
Errors, both on the right hand, and on the left hand, labor to have thy
Conscience well informed. 2ly. Look to thy Conscience in this that it be kept
tender, all the light in thy Conseience, will not keep thy Vows and Covenants
to God, if it be not kept tender; It Is a singular Character of Josiah's
sincerity, that he weeped, when he heard the Book of the Law read; Huldah the
Prophetess sent him word, because thy heart was tender, if thou would look well
to thy conscience, look well that it be well informed, and then that it be
tender: there are some ye may drive Carts and Wains over their Consciences,
they will not crack, and of all Plagues this is the greatest. 3ly. Hearken to
the voice of thy Conscience, do not sit it out. when Conscience presses on
thee. Amesius in his cases of Conscience, says, He that resists his Conscience,
or what he takes to be the mind of God in the Conscience, he resists God,
because it is the mind of God, for he takes it up as the mind of God, in such a
time; No man ought to follow another man's Light, but to follow the Dictats of
his own Conscience; many are like the old Prophet, and the young, the young
Prophet comes to Bethel, and denounces woes against it; the Lord said, See thou
turn not aside to the right hand or to the left hand, to eat or drink; The old
Prophet comes to him, and says, turn in with me, and eat Bread, he follows the
old Prophets Light, and goes with him, and there comes out a Lion and tears
him: So labor, first to have the Conscience well informed, and then that it be
tender, that ye may not drive Carts and Wains over it. And 3ly. Hearken to the
voice of the Conscience, for it is Gods Deputy: a man will never keep a personal
Covenant with God, that looks not to these three.

Secondly, as ye would look to your Conscience, so look to your Conversation;
there are many things that are necessar to be spoken to here, our secret Walk,
oru family Walk, our public Walk, comparing them with the Rules of the Gospel;
It would take a long time to go through them, I will close all with these two
words, and shall say no more. 1. I have long longed to handle this Head of
personal covenanting, ye have now heard fourteen Sermons on it, the Stones of
these Walls, and the Timber of this House, God himself and his holy Angels
shall be witnesses against you, if ye do not personally Covenant with him: for,
in so far as I know the mind of God has been delivered truly to you, and all of
you your selves shall be witnesses against other, if ye fall not on this work
of personal covenanting with God; I know nothing would conbribute more to make
you serious Christians, then the practice of it, and if ye have not done it, go
and do it, subscribe your Name, life up your hand to God, if ye delay it, and
expects some better time, remember a Fever, a Flux, or a Scrubie, will stop the
flux of your glass, and if you delay until death, either Roving, or Stupidity
shall carry you to to the Grave; Therefore, let one go and say, I am the Lords,
and another subscribe, and call himself by the name of Israel. 2ly, if ye will
go and do it, all by-gones shall be bygones, and all former Transgressions
shall be past; nay, if ye were never so poor, never so simple, never so
Ignorant, if ye were of never so mean a Birth, of never such mean Parts, if ye
had never so weak a Father, if ye had never such a mixture of Corruption with
it, if ye will but say, I am the Lords, and from this time forth, will Covenant
to take him, as he is offered in the Gospel, and do the Duties that the
Covenant requires, the Bargain is made, and it is subscribing, it is an
everlasting Covenant, and as ye have made an everlasting Covenant, ye shall
have an everlasting Name, so long as God is God; and this Covenant shall bring
you to the place, where ye shall be made a Pillar in the Temple of God, and ye
know, a Pillar lasts as long as the house stands.

SERMON XXI.
2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me
an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is all my
Salvation, and all my desire, although be make it not to grow.


THE third particular in this part of the verse remains, which is the assurance
that David had, that he was personally Covenanted with God, he can affirm it,
and set it down in the Bible, and make it a part of the Canon of the Scripture.
The Lord has made with me an everlasting Covenant. so that this being the third
thing, I shall take this third Note, and therewith close this second Branch of
the verse, and the Note is this.

Doctrine. That not only does God take Believers in a personal Covenant with
Him, but they may be clear, assured, and able to affirm it, that God has made a
Covenant with them, This assurance David has here, and the Spirit of God does
so agree with his assertion, that it is made a part of the Cannon, a part of the
Bible, that God made with him an everlasting Covenant, So this is the Truth,
that I will handle this day, that one may be assured, and very clear, they may
be able confidently to assert, that God has made a Covenant with them, This
being a thing of great Importance, I will follow it in this Method. 1. I will
open to you, that Assurance of a personal Interest to the Covenant, is very
necessary. 2ly. I will show you, that this Assurance is not only attainable,
but it is not so difficult, as ordinarily it is apprehended to be. 3ly. I will
open to you some of the Ways and Methods, that the Spirit keeps, in bringing
Believers to be Assured, that God has made a Covenant with them. And Lastly, I
shall apply it.

For the First, That this Assurance, that we particularly are in Covenant with
God, is of great necessity; that we may be able to say, The Lord has made with
me a Covenant; For clearing a little the necessity of it, I will premise two
Distinctions, First, Take notice, that there is a Threefold Assurance, that
the Scripture mentions, First, There is an Assurance of knowledge, Colose. 2.2.
That their hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto all
riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgment of the
mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ. 2ly. There is an Assurance of
Faith, Heb. 10.22. Let us draw near, with a true heart, in full assurance of
Faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and our bodies
washed with pure water. 3ly. There is an Assurance of hope, Heb. 6.11. And we
desire, that every one of you do show the same diligence, to the full assurance
of hope, unto the end. v. 12. That ye be not slothful, but followers of them,
who through faith and patience, inherit the promises; There ye have a
Threefold Assurance, there is an Assurance, of Knowledge, that is the first
proposition of the practical Syllogism, by it I come to be assured of the
Mystery of Godliness, that it is a Truth: There is an Assurance of Faith,
whereby I am assured of my Interest in that Mystery; there is an Assurance of
Hope, whereby I am assured, that God will make out all that is contained in
that Mystery; now we take in all the Three, when we speak of Assurance in the
Covenant, there must be first, Assurance of Knowledge, that God has made a
Covenant, and on what Terms he has made in 2ly. There is Assurance of Faith
that I am in that Covenant. 3ly. There is Assurance of Hope, that all the
contents of that Covenant, shall in due time be accomplished; when I say that
it is necessary a Believer be assured, I take in all the Three.

But 2ly. Take notice, that there is a twofold necessity, when we say this
assurance is necessary, that God has made a Covenant with us. First, There is
something necessary for the being of a Christian. 2ly. There is somewhat
necessary for the well-being of a Christian; now, we say not, assurance that we
are in the Covenant, is necessar for the being of a Christian, no, one may be
in Covenant with God, and far from being assured of it; several times Questions
about their Interest, may be more necessar than Assurance for them; several
times, the Thief Scandalous, and presumptuous sins, will take away their
Assurance, and some times the moth slothfulness, will take it away; it were a
hard Doctrine and dreadful, to say, Assurance is necessary for the being of a
Christian, only this Assurance we say is necessary for the well-being of a
Christian; they cannot live so comfortably in Christ, if they were not assured
that the Covenant is made with them: so ye may understand what is meaned by
this, when we say, Assurance is necessary for the well-being of a Christian, to
be assured that he is in the Covenant.

To confirm this, I will offer you five or six things, that will let you see
the Advantages, that the clearness of an Interest in the Covenant, draws after
it. 1. When our interest in the Covenant is clear, our personal Interest, it is
easy to believe all the Promises of the Covenant; it is observed by some
Practique Divines, there are two things that makes us doubt of the Promises,
sometimes we doubt of Gods power, and sometimes we doubt of his willingness,
it is indeed a rare thing to see a Christians Faith stick at God; power, a
Phi^istine may acknowledge, these are the great Gods that divided the Red Sea;
now when we are clear of an interest in the Covenant, we can no more doubt of
his willingness, more than a man will doubt, that his neighbor will give him
an Apple, who has given him the Apple Tree, or that God is willing to give the
World light, since he has given them a Sun, and a Moon; no, he is able to
believe all the Promises of Pardon, of Perseverance, of through bearing in
affliction, they are all easily credited, when we believer, he has made a
Covenant with us, since Faith sticks not at his power, it has no ground to
stick at his willingness, whenthe whole Covenant is made with us. 2ly. Another
Advantage by being cleared of our interest in the Covenant, that readily by it
we are stirred up to love Christ, our love to Christ takes fire at Christ love
to us, we can never love him, except he love us: our love to him, is but like a
plack candle kindled at a Torch, our love comes to be cleared by his love to
us: now there is nothing clears up his love more to us, than to be cleared
about our interest in the Covenant: an interest in the everlasting Covenant,
contributes very much, for the clearing of his love to us: it reveals his love
to us, and thereby it kindles our love to him: so that beside, that he easily
believes the Promises, if our interest in the Covenant be cleared, we are
helped to love Christ, and to have our plack candle kindled at the Torch of his
love to us, revelaed in the Covenant. 3ly. The clearing an interest in the
Covenant, is a great remedy against servile fears, there is a kind of Hell in
these fears, there is not only a guiltiness in them, but a torment accompanying
them; ye that know what it is to be keepd in bondage under fears, know, that
there is no Fever, no Prison, no disquieting Dispensation outwardly, that can
come near the letting in the Waters to the Soul, as a flood of servile fears
will do; now to be cleared about an interest in the covenant, that God has
made it with me, contributes exceedingly to scatter all these servile fears;
there lies the remedy of these fears, the application of the covenant, like a
Plaster laid to a Sore; sometimes Believers will take other ways to cure their
fears, but they bring their Water out of Gutters, and there is no right Balm,
that can be applied to them, but the covenant; so if we come to plead an
interest in the covenant, not only kindles it our love to Christ, and scatters
our fears, But 4ly. These that have an interest in the covenant cleared, are
excellently furnished for all Duties of active Obedience; whatever God calls a
person to do, they still go to a Promise, if they be to repent, if they be to
pray, if to believe, if to sing, or meditat, whatever the Duty be, an interest
to the covenant, is an excellent support; a person that will go on in his own
strength, in performing Duties, goes to bring forth the thing that is not there
ben, it is impossible to wring it out of thy own heart; So the way to be helped
in all duties, is to know an interest in the Covenant, 5ly. Know, there is
nothing contributes so much to patient suffeing, as to be cleared of an
interest in the Covenant; it is remarkable, Romans 5. When the Apostle is giving
the reason, why Christians they joy in Tribulation, and are not ashamed, they
are justified by Faith, Being justified by faith, we have peace with God; Mark
there, an interest in the Covenant, contributes to their patient suffering; it
were almost impossible for a Christian to bear, what we find them put to, Hebr.
11. throughout, if it were not on the account of the Covenant, they hazard on
the Faithfulness of God, and the credit of his Promises, therefore they rejoice
in Tribulation, and wash their hands in the Flames; and the great thing has
made them do it, is their being cleared, the God has made a Covenant with
them. Lastly, An Interest, and to be clear about it, that God has made the
Covenant with us, is necessar, in regard the neglecting of Assurance, is a kind
of contempt of the Covenant, the person that neglects Assurance about it, is a
despiser of it; there are some things we undervalue, as if a man let a prine
fall out of his slieve, he is not anxious that ever he get it again, but if he
let a Jewel, or a precious Stone fall, he values that, how careful and restless
is he, to be cleared, and to get it again? If we careless of our Assurance, we
undervalue the Covenant, we look on it, as a man having a Prin fallen out of
his slieve; so that ye see the grounds of a necessity of an Interest in the
Covenant, thereby we get love to Christ, the faith of all the Promises, it
contributes to stop and scatter servile fears, it is an excellent help to
Obedience, and it influences cheer fullness under the Cross; and the neglect of
it evidences, that we contemn the Covenant. From all these grounds ye see, that
a Believer should be assured, that the Lord has made a Covenant with him.

The second thing I proposed, That this Assurance is attainable, here we have
the Papists and Arminians, great adversaries to us, they call us all
Enthusiasts, and they say, we pretend to a possibility of Assurance of an
Interest in the Covenant; they do not deny, but the Apostles and Pen men of the
Scriptures, had this Assurance, but they say, because David and Paul had it,
will it therefore follow, that every Christian should have it; no, every
Christian ought to have it, and is oblidged to study it, and that it is
attainable, I will make it appear, on these Four or Five remarkable grounds. 1.
If God has made it a duty, to endavour Assurance of an Interest in the
Covenant, then it may be attainable, no body will deny this, and that God has
made it a duty, ye will find it, Heb. 6.11. And we desire, that every one of
your do show the same diligence, to the full assurance of hope unto the end,
that ye be not slothful, but followers of tem, who through faith and patience,
inherit the Promises; Mark here Three things. 1. What the Apostle Exhorts to,
he Exhorts to Asurance, and the full Assurance of Hope. 2ly. Whom he Exhorts,
it is not the Schoollars only, or the eminent Christians, but every one of you.
3ly. It Is remarkable, the means he prescribes, That ye be not slothful,
importing, that slothfulness will hough their Assurances, and that Diligence is
the way to attain it; here is a place that evidences, that a Believer may come,
not only to Assurance, but full Assurance, and every one that is Diligent, may
come to it. 2ly. It Is evident, that this Assurance is attainable, in regard
there are some Duties called for, that were impracticable, without Assurance;
as for Example, Christ calls a man to this, do thou Believe, if the man could
have no Assurance, nor Knowledge of the Faith, the Question were impertinent,
he might Answer, It Is impossible for one to be Assured, of any Interest in
Christ; he would never have asked the Question, if he could not be Assured; and
Christ has bidden us, Rejoice in the hope of the glory of God, and rejoice
that you names are written in the Book of Life, and can we rejoice in the hope
of Glory, or that our Names are written in the Book of Life, if we could not be
assured of it. 3. That this Assurance is attinable, is evident from this, that
there is a necessary Connection, betwixt the golden links of that golden Chain
of Grace, Whom he did predestinate, them he called, and whom he called, them he
justifies, and whom he justifice, them he also glorifies; It Is not denied, but
we may be assured of our effectual calling; they say, a man may have Grace, but
the knows not if he will persevere; they say he may be in Covenant with God the
day, and with the Devil to morrow; no, there is an inseparable connection, Whom
he did predestinat, them he also called, and whom he called, them he justified,
and whom he justified, them he also glorified; so gran^, that we may know our
effectual calling, and that we are in a state of Grace, we may be assured we
shall be glorified, and our interest in the Covenant being once cleared, it can
never be disput again. 4ly. that this assurance is attainable, it is evident
from this, there are many recorded in Scripture had it, and laid down inthe
Grave with that, Psalm. 16 9. My flesh also shall rest in hope, Verse. 10. Thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thine holy one to see
corruption. Verse. 11. Thou will show me the path of life. Paul had it, Romans 8
38 I am persuaded, that neither death nor life, etc. shall be able to separat
me from the love of God, in christ Jesus. But say they, will ye compare with
them? They had immediate Revelations, and Inspirations, why are ye not also Pen
men of the Scriptures? Why writ ye not a new Bible? We answer, if the grounds
of this Assurance had been extraordinar Revelations, we should never have
pleaded Assurance, because they had it; but the ground of our Assurance, is the
love of God in Christ, and the love of God in Christ, is common to all
Believers as well as to Paul, it is like the fountain opened in the house of
David, that is opened for all the House as well as for David himself; so if they
had Assurance upon grounds common to all the Elect, all the Elect they may
attain this Assurance. These things being laid together, will clear this Truth,
that as this Assurance of a personal interest in the Covenant is necessary, so
it is attainable,

Before I proceed to show the Method and way, how the Spirit brings up to this
Assurance, here ye would mark two things. 1. Take notice, That this Assurance
of a personal Interest in the Covenant, is not like the Interest it self, but
it differs in two things from it. 1. The interest it self, it is not acquired by
us, it is that which is conferred on us in effectual calling, when we are
merely Patients; the greatest Interest in the Covenant is so made up, that in
effect, we are mere Patients, when we are interested in it; it is not so in the
Assurance of an Interest: I deny not, but the Spirit sometimes will give a
glance of Light, when one will be very slothful, but it is rare; we are to come
by our Assurance by Diligence: readily sometimes the Spirit will give
extraordinary things; that Mystery that Mr. Sibs reports of a woman in England,
when she was going to die, all the Ministers that came to her, as they had
often discourses with her, they could bring her to no clearing of her Interest,
or that she would come to Heaven, she having a Glass in her hand, she says to
them, I can no more be saved, than that Glass can be preserved, by throwing it
against a Wall, and she threw it against the Wall, and it did rebound safe from
the Wall; the case of these extraordinary things, is like a man coming to a
deep water in a dark night, where there are Steps, and providentially one
should hold out a Candle to him, and let him see over the Steps: if another
should come at such a time of the night, he must not think, that a Candle will
be holden out to him, this is not the ordinary way, we must not expect
extraordinary things, our assurance of an Interest, comes in by Diligence, Give
diligence to make your calling and election sure; so this clearing of an
Interest comes in by Diligence, and is not like the Interest it self, which
readily at the beginning is made up, when we are merely passive, and in a state
of nature. 2ly. Ye would notice another difference, that of all things that
ever God made, a Believers interest in the Covenant is most enduring, it shall
be as lasting, as the Union betwixt the humane nature and the Divine, as long
as Christ is God-man in one person, as long shall the Members make up a
mystical Body; if the Interest in the Covenant be once secured, it is as sure as
the personal Union, betwixt the humane and Divine nature; yet there is nothing
more unsure, than the Assurance of that Interest, readily it will be had one
day, and doubted the next day.

And here, before I open the way, how the Spirit brings up one to assurance,
that the Lord has made with me a Covenant, I would open somewhat that has
influence on the changeableness of this assurance, that we can assert at one
time, over the belly of all temptations, and at another time, the least thing
will make us doubt. 1. Several times a Christian comes to this assurance two
ways, these two ways that Christ speaks of, when he is exhorting his Disciples,
To lay up treasures in heaven. where the moth and thief will not come; ye know
there are many utensils, and things that folk lay up, that are taken away,
sometimes by the moth, and sometimes by the thief; Divines understand by the
thief, scandalous sins, if a Christian fall in sins against his Conscience, he
will be sure to have his Assurance clouded, he will not be able to say, The
Lord has made with me a Covenant, why, the Thief has taken it away; sometimes
it is not the Thief, but the Moth that takes it away, that is to say,
slothfulness, it breaks not in so strongly, as the Thief does, but slothfulness
is like the Moth, that piece and piece frets, and eats away the piece, as the
Moth eats the Garment; so one may be in Christ, and in the Covenant, and it is
clear that God has made a Covenant with them, one day, and another day, the
Thief and the Moth, may have taken it away. But 2ly. This Assurance comes to be
so changeable, that like the Moon it will have many different Forms, the
Assurance and clearing of an Interest, will have many different Forms in one
Month; God orders it so for several ends, there are some persons, the want of
an Interest in the Covenant, will damn them, but the wart of Assurance, will
not damn them, and yet it may keep them fearing and doubting; it is very
necessary, that God take some to Glory in a lacking Vessel, though it drown
them not, yet it may weit them, and they may be all their day, under fears and
bondage; and this may be necessary for them. Having this opened these two
things, that this Assurance is necessary, on all the six grounds that I have
given, that a Christian can never be a comfortable, nor cheerful Christian,
except he be able to say, The Lord has made with me a Covenant; and next that
it is attainable, the Lord would never have bidden us rejoice, if our Names
were not written in the Book of Life, ^he would never have bidden us rejoice in
the hope of Glory, it it were not attainable. So though this assurance be
variable, and often the Thief and Moth will take it from us; yet it is real, and
solid, and is attainable.

SERMON XXII.
2 Samuel 23. Verse 5. Although my house be not so with God; yet he has made
with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is
all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


IT is a Doctrine, very dishonorable to God, and very prejudicial to the
Saints comfort, to deny, that Believers may be assured, that God has made a
Covenant with them; our Divines, in disputing with Papists and Arminians, on
the Heads of the certainty of Salvation, they call that Doctrine, a Doctrine of
Devils; they teach the thing indeed, that the Devil has ordinarily taught, for
he is often pressing doubting, and hindering a Christian from saying, The Lord
has made with me a Covenant. Before I speak of the way, how the Spirit brings
the Elect to be assured; I would yet premise somethings about it. 1. We do not
assert an assurance a priore, as they speak, the Papists say, that we speak and
preach to People, as if we had read the Book of Gods Decrees; and that we there
saw, who were Elected, or reprobated, no, that is not the way we take, we tell
them, that the good tree is known by his good fruit, and the corrupt tree is
known, by the corrupt fruit, it is not by searching into the root, but by
searching into the fruit, that we tell Christians, they may be assured of their
Interest in the Covenant. Next, We say not, that this Assurance comes in by
Enthusiasms and Revelations, they say, we are Enthusiasticks, no, we are far
from that, we look on their way as deluding; we deny not the Spirit a liberty,
of giving extraordinary things, and the Candle may be holden over the Window,
when he is walking along the steps in a dark night. 3ly. When we bid folk be
assured, by effects and fruits, we do not assert an assurance by effects, that
has these three defects in it. 1. We do not assert Marks, as procuring causes
of an Interest in the Covenant, we do not preach, be diligent, and clear an
Interest in the Covenant; only we say, be diligent, and clear an Interest
procured by Jesus; Marks are not stones of which the Wall is built, but they
are excellent Mortar, to make the stones stick together; the Wall grows little
by the Mortar, but the stones stick together by it; the clearning of an
Interest, and of what Christ has done with our case agree well, when suitable
Marks are brought. 2ly. We do not assert Marks from Sanctification and
Diligence, to wrong the Spirits concurring; the Antinomians follow us, they
say, Marks are prejudicial to the Spirits working; we confess, our Marks are
all written in small Print, and we have but dark eyes, and if the Sun be not
up, it is ill to read them; we deny not, but many Christians are in the dark
about their Interest, and cannot affirm, The Lord has made with me a Covenant,
under desertion; the person that would read his Marks under a cloud, is like a
man that would read his Charter, when he has neither Daylight, nor
Candlelight. But not to insist on the Doctrine of Assurance, against Papists
and Arminians, I would come to the thing that I left at in the Forenoon; I was
proving, that the Assurance that David asserts, that the Lord has made with me
a Covenant, is a thing attainable; and I gave you several grounds of it, and I
would add this, that it is not so difficult to be attained, as many apprehend, I
confess it is difficult, but not so difficult.

I would offer you for clearing this, that even an Assurance, that would
exclude several Fears and Jealousies, is not so difficult to be attained, by
offering these three or four things to be considered. 1. There is nothing it
our former life, that can prove or evince, that God has not made a Covenant
with us; many a time Believers stich at this, I was a persecutor, and a
blasphemer, says Paul, but I obtained mercy, that in me he might show a pattern
to them that should come after me, 1 Timothy 1.13.16, Thy former life will not
prove, that God has not made a Covenant with thee, he made a Covenant with
Paul, and he had as much to say against him, as against thee. 2ly. The present
m^xture of corruption with thy Grace, will not prove that God has not made a
Covenant with thee; yea, it may be thou have made a Covenant with him, and
doubts that he made it with thee; Why? Since thou made the Covenant with him,
thou went to him and wrote it down, and spread it before him, thou lift up thy
hands, and have broken it; that will not prove, that he has not made a
Covenant with thee; David had begun very early, the man that wrote this verse in
the Bible, when he went out against Goliath, he went out in the Name of the Lord
his God, his elder Brother was angry with him, and Saul called him a Stripling,
his Father Jesse had employed him to follow the Ewes, the Lord takes him from
following the Ewes, and makes a Covenant with him, and when he is a dying, he
has it to say with assurance, The Lord has made a Covenant with me, an
everlasting Covenant: So that will not prove, that he has not made a Covenant
with thee, that since thou made it with him, thou have failed. These two being
laid aside, they make the assurance the less difficult. 3ly. Very ordinarily,
this clearing of our assurance in the Covenant, comes when there is diligence;
ordinarily when we are ediligent, the Spirit comes and lights his Candle, and
lets us see our assurance; there are a number that complain, they are not
assured, and cleared of their interest, and all their Religion lies in
doubting; ye may justly suspect them that they are sloathful and sluggards,
they are not diligenct, they go not often to duty; were they diligent, they
would not want the Spirit's concurrance: readily if we want assurance, we have
quenched the Spirit's motions, or grieved the Spirit; were we but more
diligent, we would have more Light; all the marks in the world will never clear
an Hypocrite, nor give him assurance, nor will all the condescending marks that
God has made, clear the sluggard. So, if we were but a little more diligent,
we would be more assured, and we would be the better able to say, The Lord has
made with me a Covenant; for the Spirit uses not to be wanting with
Illumination, to them for whom he gives Assistance for practical Duties. 4ly.
That it is not so difficult, will appear from this Truth; that often the people
of God ly in the way fo their own assurance, they hinder their own clearing,
that God has made a Covenant with them.

I will offer you four ways, how frequently, when clearing an assurance, about
our interest in the Covenant, might be had, that we use to hinder it. 1.
Serveral times we hinder it, by disputing the Question at a wrong time, we are
never so ready to disput our interest, as under desertion, there are some times
when our Spirits will be carried as a Ship under sall, and all the design of
the Soul will then be to do, but at another time all the design of the Soul
will be, to doubt and disput our interest; and we are never more ready to do
this, than under desertion; now, what a foolish things is it, to go and debate
with a man, that is roving under a Fever, and we are never deserted, but we are
roving; assisting influences are so necessary then, to go and disput, to take
the time when one is in the dark, and their Candle put out, and then coming to
read their Evidence, as I said before, our marks are written in small print,
and we have but little Light, and if the Candle be put out, then to go, and
disput our case, whether God has made a Covenant with us, in the wrong time;
yet readily, we are never more ready to do it, than at that time. 2ly.
Sometime, Believers hinder their own Assurance, that God has made a Covenant
with them, not only by choosing the wrong time, but when they take wrong Marks,
they take not the Right Rule; several times we go exceedingly wrong in our
Marks, the generality of profane and natural men, they take the Marks that the
Pharisee did, I thank God, I am not like this man, I am not a drunkard, nor an
extortioner; and these are their Marks; many a time Believers, they take the
contrair way, they take too high Marks, O! say they, some could say, God has
made a Covenant with me, I can delight in him, I can meditat on him, I can be
satisfied with him as with Marrow and with Fatness; But they have the
Complaint, that the elder Brother of the Prodigal had, thou never gave me a kid
to make merry with; I can never count on the day, wherein the Call was killed
to me, and that I was clothed with the best Rob, and shoes put on my feet, and
a Ring on my finger; therefore they conclude, he has not made an everlasting
Covenant with them, by taking too high Marks; thou may imped thy Assurance, I
believe it indeed, which the greatest Divines affirm the Reason, why so many at
Death have peace, that readily want it all their Lifetime, as ye will find few
of the godly, but they will go to the Grave in peace; one reason is, at that
pass and strait, they are driven to take the lowest marks, they can say, All my
desire is before him, and my groaning is not hid from him; they will take at
that pass the lowest Marks, for there they must either do or die, they are
content to do, as Benhadad's servants did with Ahab, is he alive, he is my
Brother, they got that word, my Brother, they take hold of the least word that
makes for them; at that pass we are driven to take in our light at a score,
though it come not in at the window, therefore they have more peace at Death,
than they had in they had in their Lifetime, now when we go to take too high
Marks, it is a great Impediment in the way of Assurance. But I add 3ly, to let
you see, that many a time Believers ly in the way of their own Assurance, and
hinder it, several times there is an inclination in the Soul, rather to
intertain the challenges of the Spirit, than the Comforts of the Spirit,
especially after our effectual calling; the common comforts of the Spirit, will
be entertained in a Natural State, far more easiy than the challenges of the
Spirit. If ye ask what is the Reason of this, that after effectual calling,
guiltiness has another smell, then before effectual calling? The Reason is, a
Believer finds the scent of his guiltiness so strong, after effectual calling,
that the challenges of the Spirit are far more pronly entertained, than the
comforts of the Spirit, the Spirit will sometime knock at the door, Open to me,
my dove, my undefiled; but if he come with a knock, and say, thou have procured
all these things, thou have destroyed thy fels, look back to thy way in the
valley, how will that easily be entertained, after effectual calling? Now on
these accounts, the taking too high Marks, and reading Marks under a cloud, and
being so prone, rather to intertain the challenges of the Spirit, than the
comforts of the Spirit, makes, that a Believer lies in the way of his own
Assurance, and cannot come up to say, The Lord has made with me an everlasting
Covenant; not because thou wants allowance and ground to do it, but because
thou disputs in the Dark, and takes too high Marks. To close all, I will clear
one Question, which readily many of you will ask, and it is the third thing I
proposed, in the Doctrinal part of this Doctrine.

Quest. What is the way apd method, by which Christians come up, and can be
able to say, The Lord has made with me an everlasting Covenant, how brings the
Spirit them to this.

Answ. That I may make way to the Practical part of this Doctrine, I will offer
four steps, by which the Spirit uses to bring the Elect, to affirm it as
confidently, as David sets it down a part of the Bible, and when he was a
Dying; it was not time then to dissemble, Although my house be not so with God,
yet he has made with me an everlasting Covenant: How does the Spirit bring the
Elect to this ground of Assurance, to be able to affirm, that God has made the
Covenant with them? I confess, it is great privilege, and they have a great
Charter, that can say it is their privilege, they have the promises of this
life, and that which is to come, they have no less in one Article, in one line
of the Bible, He shall make them Ruler over all that be has; a little time
will try this, to be no fancy, but it is furer than the Covenant with the Sun
and the Moon, how brings the Spirit them up to this Assurance? 1. Ordinarily
before he brings them up to be Assured, that the Lord has made with me a
Covenant, he takes down the natural assurance like one that has to build upon
an old Foundation, and he finds it rotten, and thinks it best to take it down
to the bottom, before he build a new Foundation; so that readily, in the
beginning of the Spirits working, a person can give no account of the Spirits
working, neither what he has done in the old Foundation, nor the new; ask you
your case, you can readily give no account, yet dare not build on the old
Foundation, and ye dare not say, ye have a new Work; this is very frequenly in
the way of the Spirits bringing the Soul to, The Lord has made with me a
Covenant; they can neither build on the old ground, nor dare they say, they
have a new ground; this has ordinarily a tendency to the clearing of an
interest, wherever ye find a person like Rebecca, having Twins struggling within
her, they know not what to say, they are so confused, the Spirit has taken
away the old ground, and for any thing that is known, the Spirit has not laid
the new Foundation; That case looks like to be the beginning, to come to that
day in the week, that thou will say, The Lord has made with me an everlasting
Covenant; That is the first Part, whereby the Spirit leads to the clearning an
interest in a personal Covenant. 2ly. Where the Spirit is leading, to the
clearing an interest in a personal Covenant with God, ordinarily the Spirit
prompts to Duty, and assists all diligence; we are not to expect it with
raptures of Joy, and Consolation, and delight in God, many a time like the
Syrian leper, that was sent to the King of Israel, I thought he would have come
out, and called on his God, and laid his hand on the place: We think, except we
get such elevation of peace and joy in prayer, we can never have peace; no, we
must not limit the Lord, if he take that way, it is well; but the ordinar way
is, he will help at prayer, and excite to delight in him; at another time he
withdraws himself, and makes the Desertion thy burden; the complaint of his
absence, may be as sweet a mark as his presence; the heart that will complain
of his Absence, may prove an interest, as well as his Presence. Now when he
has pulled down the old rotten Wall, and not possibly brought the new above
ground, but he assists in Prayer, in believing, in Repentance, in mortification
of lusts, then he is about to bring thee to say, the Lord has made with me a
Covenant, it is near the break of the day, it is not far from the dawning; he
that has helped thee to Diligence, is not far from bringing thy Consolation,
even though it seem to be the darkest time of the night; yet if the Spirit be
helping at Duty, and taking a lift of thy Case, the day is near the breaking
with thee. But Thirdly, the Spirit guides to this assurance, by giving true
Marks, that God has made a Covenant with him. And here I shall enquire, what
are the sure Marks, by which one may try, if God has made the Covenant
particularly with them; I have made the Covenant with him, and have Vowed and
Promised, and Subscribed with my hand, and have lifted up my hand, but how
shall I know if he has made a Covenant with me? The business is not so
difficult to know, if thou be diligent, and be not an Hypocrite, and playing
the cheat in thy Religion, but conforming thy heart to this Gospel, and
wrestling with all the Non-Conformities of thy heart; I have searched the
Judgment of many, how to come to reciprocal Marks, how to know if he has made
a Covenant with us: Antinomians have disput the Question so exactly, and
Objected so strongly, about our wanting these Marks, that they put Divines to
so many Restrictions and Limitations that it is difficult to give a reciprocal
Mark, on which a Christian may rest, if he has made a Covenant with him. I
will offer you three things, on which I lay the greatest weight my self. 1.
That Mark that Mr. Baxter has often come over, a habitual preferring of
Christ's Interests, to the interests of the Flesh, that is indeed a great Mark
that God has made a Covenant with thee, when Christ's Interests are habitually
preferred to all the Interests of the flesh.

To clear this Mark, ye would notice three things, 1. When God enters in a
Covenant with a person, they take up Sin as an Enemy, they hate it as an Enemy,
they have entered in a League with the contrary Party, they take up Sin,
especially presumptuous sin as an Enemy, and accordingly they deal with it;
they hate it, they eschew the company that may bring Temptations to it, for
they have entered in a League with its greatest Enemy, even with Christ:
shortly after Paul is a Convert, he is at, O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of Death? He was angry at the very being of sin, and
could not suffer the smell of it; what ever the Sin be, not only presumptuous
and gross Sins, and neglects of Duty, if thou has entered in a Covenant with
God, thou has broken the Covenant with death and hell, and if thou has no
kindness looking to that Art, thou has great ground to say, the Lord has made a
Covenant with me, they take up sin as an Enemy, and deal with it so. 2ly. In
reference to this, the Soul goes unitedly against it as an Enemy, the
understanding is at, I should leave such a Sin, the Conscience is at, I will
leave such a Sin, the Will and Affections are at, Depart from me all ye workers
of iniquity, for I have kept the Commandments of my God; they turn it out of
doors, if there be a taking it up as an Enemy, and dealing with it so, and the
Understanding, Will, Conscience, and affections, uniting against it as an
Enemy, thou may be sure to say, the Lord has made with me a Covenant; the
Bargain must be driven by both Parties; but if thou be grown secure, and
neglects Duty, and goes out against sin as a friend, and has not taken it up as
a Enemy, and dealt with it so, thou may say, I have made a Covenant with the
Lord, but thou cannot say, the Lord has made with me an everlasting Covenant.

Secondly, These that have made a personal Covenant with him, and he with them,
they have a second Mark, they follow the design of the Covenant, which is
Holiness, 2 Cor. 7.1. Having these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the
fear of the Lord. Now, he that has entered in Covenant with God, and would
have a sure Mark from his Holiness, should look to these two, 1. He is to look
to the Holiness of his heart and conversation; if he say, I am holy in my
Desires, and holy in my Delights, I have a holy Joy, and a holy Peace, and has
not a holy Walk, and looks not like a savourie Christian in his conversation,
that person cannot readily say, the Lord has made with me a Covenant: he may
have made a Covenant with God, but he cannot say, God has made a Covenant with
me. Besides 2ly. Not only must Holiness be in the conversation, and in the
heart, but he is careful to prefer the design of the Covenant, to all other
things; if the Lord should give thee the Offer that he gave to Solomon at
Gibeon, Ask of me, says he, Riches, or Honor, and many things he named, and I
will give it to thee, he preferred Wisdom to them all: So he that is in
covenant with God, would prefer Holiness to any thing that God could offer.
It Is remarkable, Psalm. 119.111. Thy testimonies have I chosen, as an heretage
for ever, for they are the rejoicing of my heart. Mark how he came by that, I
have chosen, what choosed he? I have chosen thy testimonies, that is a general
word, it is no I have chosen thy Promises, but I have chosen thy Testimonies,
taking in the Commands. Mark 3ly. For what he choosed them, I have chosen thy
Testimonies for my heretage; Mark, 4ly. The reason why he choosed them, I have
chosen thy testimonies, for they are the rejoicing of my heart; importing,
whatever I meet with, I get no true joy from it, therefore I have chosen the
testimonies, for my heretage for ever, for they are the rejoicing of my heart;
I can get nothing that rejoices my heart, but allennerly thy Testimonies,
therefore I have chosen them; that is the second Mark, whereby ye may try, if
God has made the Covenant with you, if ye have come to take up sin as an
Enemy, and deal with it so, and if ye have taken Holiness, not only in heart
and conversation, but ye have chosen it as your Heretage, because it rejoices
the heart.

Thirdly, ye may know if he has made this Covenant with you, by his
accomplishment of the Covenant to you; if he has begun to fulfill the covenant,
he has certainly made the covenant with you; Experience is a notable
ratification of the Promise; O but it is a sweet proof of the truth of the
Promise. he that believes has a witness within him, that Christ is the Son of
God; he has the Spirit within him, and none can send the Spirit, but the Son
of God: take a view of the Promises, and sort them, that ye may go to such a
Promise, when ye are under challenges, under deadness and desertion, and mark
them; it is a dreadful thing when all the Bible is alike to us, and when we have
not some passages of the Bible that we may say of them, these are may
Scriptures. Now if he has been pleased to acccomplish the Promise, thou may
say, he has made with me a Covenant. It will fall in afterward, when I speak
of the several passages in this Verse, by what Rules we shall try, if the
things that we meet with in our Spirit, be the accomplishment of the Promise;
Observe your case, and compare it with the Promise, many have no skill to do
this, they take the Promises in Gross, they observe not absolute and
conditional Promises, they compare not their case with the Promise, therefore
none is so confident, to say, God has made with me a Covenant. I say to you,
go home, and say to your hearts, the word that Ahab said to Micajah, How often
shall I adjure thee, that thou tell me nothing but the truth? Go and charge
your Heart and Conscience, with see thou tell me nothing but the truth; if
these Marks do not agree to thee, whatever thou say of making a Covenant with
God, thou may go home after all these Sermons, and say, I have made a Covenant
with God, but I dety thee to say, God has made a Covenant with me.

SERMON XXIII.
2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me
an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure; for this is all my
salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


WHen first I entered on this Verse, I proposed four things to be considered.
First, the Nature of David's security, it is a Covenant. 2ly. The Parties
Transacting in this Covenant, the Lord and me, of these two I have spoken all
the things that I judge necessary to be spoken, in a multitude of Sermons: The
other two Branches of the Verse, which are the most natural, remain to be
handled; the first whereof are, the Properties of this Covenant, there are
three of them mentioned in the Verse, it is everlasting, it is ordered in all
things, and sure; Where, by the way in the general, ye would notice two things.
First. That these three Properties, are marks of Distinction, betwixt the
Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace; it was neither Everlasting, nor
ordered in all things, in any way suitable to man's Salvation, nor was it sure;
so that from these three Properties, we can prove, That the Covenant God made
with David, it was a Covenant of Grace, and not the old Covenant of Works. 2ly.
Ye would notice, that such as would have peace from the Covenant, they must
study and be acquaint with the Properties of it, it is no sufficient ground for
David at death to say, the Lord has made with me a Covenant, unless it be an
everlasting Covenant, and well ordered, and sure; these who are ignorant of the
Properties of the Covenant, can never have the sweetness and consolation that
the Covenant affords. Therefore without further, I will begin and handle this
day, the first Property that is here mentioned of this Covenant, it is an
everlasting Covenant; it is true, the main thing I design, is, to handle the
order of the Blessings of the Covenant; and here, before I can come at that I
am to handle, there are two textual Doubts necessary to be cleared. 1. How is
the Covenant said to be everlasting? 2ly. Whether this be a peculiar Property
of the Covenant of Grace, not belonging to the Covenant of Works?

Quest. First. In what sense the Covenant of Grace is said to be everlasting?

Answ. For opening this, take notice, that a thing is said to be everlasting in
a twofold sense. 1. That is said to be everlasting, that is never to end,
though it had a beginning; So ye find it, Psalm. 24. Lift up your heads, ye
everlasting doors, that is meant of the heart and Soul of man, which though it
had a beginning, yet it is to endure for ever; so Everlasting, and a proper
Eternity, are not one thing, it will take two Everlastings to make one
Eternity, from everlasting to everlasting thou art God, mark there, an Eternity
takes two Everlastings. 2. A thing is said to be Everlasting, when it has a
proper Eternity; So Isaiah 9.6. Christ is called wonderful, counselor, the
mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace; now, Everlasting is to
be taken in the second sense, it is an eternal Covenant, not only is it never to
end, and is everlasting, but it is from everlasting; however it was Transacted
in time with man, yet it was Transacted with Christ from all Eternity, and it is
as ancient as the Covenant of Redemption; so ye see in what sense it is called
an everlasting Covenant, that is an eternal Covenant, from Eternity to Eternity.

Quest. 2. Whether is this a peculiar Privilege of the Covenant of Grace, that
it is everlasting? The reason of this Difficulty is. 1. The Covenant of Works is
older in Time, for it was made with man in a state of integrity. 2ly The
covenant of Works, is first in the order of nature, for the covenant of Grace
being made with lapsed man, it supposes the covenant of Works to be broken.
3ly. It Is supposed by many great Scholars, that if Adam had not broken the
covenant of Works, he had been everlastingly in Paradise, and would have
continued in pleasure without death; so the covenant of Works in the nature of
it, was an everlasting covenant, and consequently, this is no peculiar
privilege of the Covenant of Grace.

Answ. For Answer to the Question, however the Covenant of Works, was treated
with man in time, and though it be in the order of nature, prior to the
covenant of Grace, yet in the counsel of God, the covenant of Grace is before
the covenant of Works; the reason of it is, that which famous Doctor Twisse
lays, as a Principle; that a rational Agent intends first the end, and then the
midses; as a man going to War, intends first the end, and then the midses; the
covenant of Grace being the great end, in making the covenant of Works, that by
it he might make way for the end, the covenant of Grace; the covenant of Grace
is first in his purpose, in regard it is the great end of the covenant of Works,
and he intended the end before the midses. 2ly. Whatever the covenant of Works
should have been, is a Question of which the Scripture is silent: yet the
covenant of Works, if Adam had not broken it, would have been everlasting, but
being broken, it is laid aside; so that it is far from being everlasting, in
regard of duration, that it is supposed that man stood but few hours, and it was
broken, and he was liable to the Penalty; so the covenant of Grace is not only
everlasting, but the only everlasting Covenant. So having cleared, that this
Covenant is everlasting, I will take only this Note, and handle it this day.

Doctrine, That the Covenant with Believers is an everlasting Covenant; so ye
find it frequently called in Scripture, Isaiah 55.3. Incline your ear, and come
unto me, hear and your soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting Covenant
with you, even the sure mercies of David. So Ezekiel 16.60. Nevertheless. I
will remember my Covenant with thee, in the days of thy youth, and I will
establish unto thee an everlasting Covenant. It is frequently called an
everlasting Covenant in Scripture; I shall not need to insist to prove, so well
a known Truth, but to take way to the Doctrinal Part, I would Doctrinally
enquire into two things.

First, In what respects the Covenant of Grace is an everlasting Covenant. 2ly.
I would enquire into the Grounds, why the Lord in his making a Covenant, would
not have it a Tack, for a lease of years, but an absolute Gift, and an
everlasting one.

Quest. First, in what respects it is an everlasting Covenant?

Answer. For clearing of this, I desire ye may notice these two generals. 1.
It Is an everlasting Covenant, in regard of Duration, it is from Eternity to
Eternity; it is remarkable, Psalm. 103.17. The mercy of the Lord is from
everlasting to everlasting, upon them that fear him; it is as ancient as God,
and will endure as long as God, for all his Decrees and Purposes are
everlasting, and eternal, and an Eternity, has no beginning nor end; this
Covenant was treated with the Mediator from all eternity, and will endure with
him to all eternity. But 2ly. Take notice of this in the general, that when God
transacted the Covenant with man, he intended not to set him a Tack or Lease,
with reserves, but he intended to make an absolute irrevocable Gift; therefore
it is expressed in the New Testament, not by way of Tack, having a number of
Clauses in it, but by way of Testament, it is the Gift of a Testator, ratified
by his death, and none can revock his Will, no, he cannot revock it himself; so
that in effect, it is not a Tack or a Lease made of Pardon, or Peace, or a
Heaven, in the Covenant, with many reserves, but it is an absolute Gift, like
the Gift in the Testament, that cannot be revocked by any, no by him that made
it; which will appear if ye notice three things.

First. Take notice, that when God transacted the Covenant himself, and his
Son, he in a manner, bound up his own hands, from ever revocking the Gifts
contained in the Covenant; if once he give them, then he cannot revock them,
Psalm. 89. If his children forsake my Law, and walk not in my judgments, if
they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments, then will I visit their
transgressions with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes: nevertheless, my
loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to
fail, my covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my
lips; Mark there, he binds up his own hands, he has made the Gift so absolute,
that though he be provoked, he will not break; it is not like a Tack, made
betwixt a Lands-lord and a Tennent, that if the Lands lord be forefaulted, the
Tack will fall; he has past from all these Articles and Clauses, and bound up
his own hands, that if my children offend, I will correct them with the rod of
men, but my Covenant I will not break. 2ly. I deny not, but there are
conditions in the Covenant, but the man that gets the Gift, cannot fall in the
condition, the Covenant cannot fail on that score. Why? As the conditions
required, so it is also promised; God has not left it to the freedom of man's
will, to repent or not to repent, to believe or not to believe, but he has
secured it in the Covenant, as a Master setting a Tack to a Tennent, should
bind him to such a Farm, and in the mean time, obliged himself to give him as
much as to pay him; if there be a faily there, it must be on God's part, and
not on theirs. 3ly. For securing the condition, take notice, that there are in
the Covenant clauses of Pardon, nay, not only so, but on supposition that a
Believer should fail in the condition, his failing makes not the Covenant to be
altered, the Covenant remains firm; no change in the Elect, can alter the
Covenant; indeed, a change in God would do it, which were impossible, but
though we believe not, yet be abides faithful: and here comes the Covenant to
be secured, to be everlasting, that there are Promises of the condition, and
there is more, there is pardon of failings in the condition; the case is, as in
a Marriage-covenant every failing looses not the Marriage, it may have an
influence on an interruption, on the Marriage-fellowship, but not on the
Marriage knot; the case is so in this Covenant, it is almost impossible for a
Believer, to fail in the condition, except God fail in his Promise, which is
altogether impossible; and though there were a failie in the conditions yet it
breaks not the Covenant, it stands firm, notwithstanding of their unbelief,
this is no Antinomian Doctrine, but it is solid, and well grounded upon
Protestant Principles against Papists and Arminians.

Having premised these two Generals, I will offer four things, that will
evidence the Covenant to be everlasting.

First. It Is everlasting, in regard of the Foundation, and ground on which it
stands, there are three principle grounds, on which the Covenant stands. 1.
It Is founded on the decree of God's Election, his eternal purpose of glorifying
the Elect, whom he has chosen; so that it is collateral with the Election, and
there can never be a change in that, except he alter his Decree first, and then
the Covenant; if once he take a person in Covenant, before he cast him out of
the Covenant again, he must of an Elect, make him a Reprobat. 2ly. The Covenant
is founded on his love, with an everlasting love have I loved thee, therefore
which loving kindness will I draw thee. 3ly. The covenant of Grace is founded
upon the Covenant of Redemption, the Father has Transacted with the Son from
all eternity, and that cannot be altered then, and far less now, after the Son
has performed all his part of the Transaction, what he had engaged to in the
Covenant of Redemption, it could never be altered, and far less now after the
death and Passion of Christ, and consequently, the Covenant of Grace and
Redemption, must stand and fall together, so it cannot choose but be an
everlasting Covenant. 2ly. It Is an everlasting Covenant, in regard it is one and
the same, without the least change in all ages, from the beginning to the end,
there is not one Article of it at all altered, since the day it was published
in Paradise to Adam, nor will be altered, till the last man that will be born
in the World; there is nothing more reeling, than the case of a Believer,
sometimes they are left under Challenges for guiltiness, sometimes they are
abhorring themselves in dust and ashes, sometimes they have peace, and
sometimes they have terror; there is nothing more reeling, than Providence
are; God is sometimes smiling, sometimes correcting, but in the midst of all
these reelings, the Covenant remains the same; there is not the least jot or
syllable of it, that comes to be altered; as it was published in Adams days,
when he published it in the Garden, it is continued until now and will continue
until the last man that shall be born upon the Earth; and whatever reelings be
in Providence, the Covenant is always the same; even as it is with the Sun,
since the day it was made, it is still the same, there has been many Winter
and Summer days, many Showers and Blinks, yet the Sun has not losed one hour
of its Course, in its rising and setting, that it did at the beginning; nor is
it an hair breadth diminished of its light, for all the light he has given,
nor is he weary with running his course, but he comes forth in the morning as a
Bridegroom, and as a strong man that rejoices to run a race: So the Covenant,
amidst all the Providence, and diversities of changes, it is still the same,
and will be so, until the last man that shall be born upon the earth. 3ly. It Is
called everlasting, in regard all the fundamental privileges of the Covenant,
are everlasting; effectual calling being once gotten, it remains; the gifts and
calling of God, are without repentance; there is the pardon of sin in the
Covenant, and that once being had, can never again be called in question, Jer.
31.34. I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more, I
will blot out their iniquities for my names sake; Mark there, I will blot out
their iniquities, and if once they be blotted out, I will remember them no
more; if I once pardon Debt, I will not again remember it; therefore he is
said, to cast our iniquities in the bottom of the sea, and I will cast them
behind my back, and I will bury their sins; Importing as much, as if once one
get pardon of sin, it is everlasting, and it is that which he will never revock,
nor keep up a quarrel for the sin he has pardoned. Nay more, the Covenant
becomes everlasting, in that it remains even in death, the Covenant remains
with our dust in the Grave; it is very remarkable, when Christ tells his
Disciples of Lazarus death, he tells them, our friend Lazarus sleeps, he says
not, he that was our friend, but he that is our friend; the Covenant remains
with our dust in the Grave; all the ties among men, they are loosed by death;
the Woman is freed from the Law of her Husband, and they remain no longer
Husband and Wife; the Relation betwixt Husband and Wife, betwixt Parents and
Children, and kinsmen, they are all made for time, and time lays them in the
Grave; it is not so in this everlasting Covenant, it remains even in death, and
never parts with us, until it possess us in an everlasting Crown; so all the
fundamental privileges are everlasting, it is everlasting union, it is
everlasting pardon, and everlasting peace, and the Covenant is never fulfilled,
until it possess us in a Crown. 4ly It Is everlasting, in regard the Parties
covenanting are everlasting, not only has this holden true, considering the
principal Parties, the Father and Christ, but even Believers and their Seed,
they are both everlasting, and every particular Member that is taken in
Covenant, is an everlasting Party in this Covenant; it may be, some of them,
thirty years, or thirty two years, will open their Grave, and they must ly down
in it, but even there, they cease not to be Parties in the Covenant: it is
remarkable, Mat. 22. I am the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, God is not the
God of the dead, but of the living; from which he proves the Resurrection, the
meaning of that place is, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob are living, or else the
Covenant could not be everlasting, Abraham is living in regard of his Soul, his
Body is living in regard of the Resurrection at the great day, for the Covenant
is made with his Dust; however it were hard to find his Dust, yet he is
considered as a living Party in the Covenant, yea, even his Flesh is an
everlasting Party in the Covenant, although it be dispersed into Dust, and the
Fowls and wild Beasts carry it away, yet says Job, with these eyes, and no
other for me, shall I see God. This proves the Party to be everlasting, every
Believer is an everlasting Party in the Covenant; so that taking either the
Grounds on which the Covenant stands, the Decree of Election, and Love, and the
covenant of Redemption; or considering the constantness of the Covenant, amidst
all the changes of Providence, and the case of Believers, like the Sun, that is
the same Winter and Summer, or considering the fundamental privileges of the
Covenant, all of which are everlasting; it is everlasting Election on which it is
founded, and everlasting Calling, everlasting Pardon, and an everlasting
Heaven; but the Parties are also everlasting. not only in regard of their Head,
but Abraham is a Party in the Covenant, and God is his God, which is the Sum of
the covenant after Abraham's dust can scarce be found in the Grave.

I will speak a word to the second thing that I proposed, the grounds why the
Lord would have this covenant, to be an everlasting covenant. (1.) In the
contrivement and drawing up of the covenant of Grace, the Lord designs the
exaltation of his Grace, and that was to the praise of the glory of his Grace,
as the Apostle words it in the Ephesians; now if there be never so great things
promised, he has promised, I will take away the heart of stone, and give you
an heart of flesh; but had the ease been the next day, that he had said, I will
take away the heart of flesh, and give you an heart of stone, what would that
have signified for the exalting of his grace? Had he been one day giving an
heart of flesh, and another day taken it away, wherein would his Grace have
been exalted by sinners, unless it had been by, I will give you an heart of
flesh, and I will never take away your effectual calling? Had there been no
more to debase Grace, but the changeableness of it, it had been enough;
therefore God would have his Covenant everlasting. and herein he would have a
distinction betwixt the Covenant that was made of Grace, and that which stood
on the free will of man; the principal ground on which the Covenant of Works
tood; was Free will, and in that state he had Free Grace, yet it depended on
his Will; but herein is Grace exalted, in that he cannot alter his Covenant,
no, therein lies the exaltation of Grace, and the difference betwixt the
Covenant standing on the Free will of man, though perfect, and the Covenant
founded on Grace and Christ, that the one is everlasting, and the other endured
but for a few hours; so that it is to the praise and glory of his Grace, and
the exalting it above all his other Attributes, that he has made this Covenant
an everlasting Covenant; it is not that he is paid for it on these Terms, it is
not from merit, nor purchase, that he has fulfilled this Covenant, but merely
to the praise of the glory of his grace in Christ Jesus, that the Covenant is
made so everlasting, that though God (to speak with reverence) and man incline
to alter it, they cannot after it. (2ly.) The Lord made it thus everlasting,
that Believers might have strong consolation; it is remarkable, the allowance of
joy in the Covnenant, it is full joy, These things have I spoken unto you, that
your joy may be fuil; they are bidden rejoice evermore, and rejoice always, and
no wonder we be bidden rejoice, when there is full joy allowed in the Covenant;
nay, there is not only consolation, but strong consolation, Heb. 6.18. God has
confirmed it by two immutable things in which it is impossible for God to lie,
that they might have strong consolation, who have fled for refuge, to the hope
set before us; and the truth is, it is a Principle of Arminians, they tell, a
Believer may have Grace to day, and they may have the Devil to morrow; they may
be effectually called to day, and a Child of the Devil to morrew; it houghs all
consolation, if they were in never so sweet a temper to day, they cannot tell
but they may be a Child of the Devil to morrow, and what peace and comfort
would there be, if the Covenant were not everlasting? So when we have searched
all the grounds, why God would have this Covenant everlasting, they are summed
up in this, in exalting the Grace of his Son, and affording strong consolation
to them that have taken themselves to the Covenant. So ye see the Covenant is
everlasting, not by way of Tack for so many years, but it is an absolute Gift,
and the Father has not only, not put in reserves into it, but he has
absolutely bound up his hand, and confirmed it by two immutable things, wherein
it is impossible for him to alter, which is his Oath, and the blood of his Son;
so that now it stands on such Terms, as (to speak with reverence of the Majesty
of God) it is impossible for him to alter it.

SERMON XXIV.
2 Samuel 23. Verse. 5. Although my house be not so with God; yet he has made
with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is
all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


IT is a sweet Observation, that some have made on that word Everlasting, as
it is applied to the Covenant, taking everlasting for a proper Eternity; it is a
peculiar Attribute of God, agreeable neither to Angels nor Men, and yet God
has given this Attribute to the Covenant, it is an eternal Covenant; God puts
in a Letter of his own Name in Abraham's name, He puts in the Letter Jehovah, he
was first called Abram, and then puts in this Letter, and calls him Abraham, He
puts in a Letter of his own Name Elohi, in Jacobs name he was first called
Jacob, and then he calls him Israel; but in the Covenant, He puts in one of his
own essential Attributes, and that is Eternal; and this could neither be said
of Angels, nor of Abraham, nor Jacob, it could be said of none of them, that
they were Eternal, but the Covenant is an eternal covenant, it is from
everlasting to everlasting, and this has a considerable weight into it. I
followed in what respects the covenant was everlasting, and why God would have
it everlasting, He intended to exalt his Grace, and give strong consolation to
his Elect. I will now follow the practical improvement of it, in two Uses, and
in clearing of three Questions, which I conceive, will abridge the things
necessar, in this Property of the covenant, that it is everlasting.

Use 1. First, Is it an everlasting covenant, it serves for Instruction, in
these six or seven particulars. 1. Then there is a great Mystery in the
Covenant, of all things that Divines and Philosophers write of, it is the most
difficult thing, to take up Eternity, they write many things about Eternity,
that they cannot explain, as when thye write of the nature of it, they say,
that it is tota simul and perfecta possessic, they say it is a duration, and
altogether a duration, and we cannot conceive of that; they say, it is without
beginning, and we cannot comprchend a thing that is without beginning, let our
imaginations run back millions of millions, we cannot comprehend it; when one
falls upon the thoughts of Eternity, he is like a man wading a deep water, he
that is fardest in, it soonest over the head, and herein Scholars are drowned,
the reason is, a finit thing cannot comprehend an infinite, more nor a
Cockle-shell can comprehend the Sea; so, that which is Eternal, is a mystery,
and the Covenant is Eternal, and consequently is a mystery; it is an eternal
Covenant, it began in Eternity, and will continue unto Eternity; so then it is a
great deep, take not only the Truths of it, God and Man in one Person, a
Virgin, and yet bearing a Son, and many such things; or take the practice of
it: I many times have pitied Ranters, but I have not thought it strange, that
they take the greatest Mysteries of the Covenant, for fancies; a Believer may
try, where natural men's Diabolick conjectures lies, for the Covenant is a great
Mystery, God manifested in the flesh, and no wonder, all natural men stand and
demur, and at length rant, and resolve to hazard on the things that are seen,
and cast at the Covenant, for it is a great Mystery. 2ly. If the Covenant be
everlasting and eternal, it informs us, who was the Author and Contriver of it,
and of whom we hold all the privileges of it; it was very remarkable, when the
Disciples asked Christ, if they should pay tribute to Caesar? Says Christ, show
me a penny, whose image and superscription is this, says he? They say, Cesars,
give unto Caesar the things that be Cesars, and to Christ the things that be
Christ's: So that Eternity is nopart of our Image, any thing the property
whereof is eternal, has no part of our Image or superscription, for we are but
of yesterday, and we know not what will be to morrow; and any thing that is
eternal, we have no influence on it; and if the Covenant be properly Eternal,
as evident it is, then all the Glory of contriving, and Ordering, and the
pureness of it, we have no influence on them, for we are but Thieves, If either
we steal or reset any thing that is eternal, we came but yesterday out of our
mothers womb, and to morrow we must return to the Dust, and be laid in the
Grave. 3ly. It informs us, if the Covenant be eternal and Everlasting, that as
we were not the Authors of it, so we were not the procurers of it, for it was
before we had a being, it was when we were nothing, and there is none of us
will question, but in Eternity we were nothing, and when we were nothing, what
could we contribute, or merit, or put chase from God? For all the tenor of the
Covenant, if it be everlasting, speaks out love in God, and Grace in God, but
it cannot speak out any thing in us, except we could procure something, when we
were nothing; now we are to be informed of it, if it be everlasting, it is a
Mystery, it has not our Image and Superscription, we were not the Authors of
it, and we did nothing to procure it, unless we should suppose, that we could
merit, when we were nothing. 4ly. If the Covenant be everlasting, it informs of
the great Obligation, that we have to the Mediator of the Covenant; the truth
is, we might have had a quarred with him, he acting in our room, though he had
drawn it in never so excellent terms, if he had not made it sicker, we would
have thought him like a Workman, that set the Nail in a right place, but did
not roove it, and make it sicker, excellently is the Covenant drawn, but if he
had forgotten to roove the Nail, and make it sicker, that if we repent, we
shall be pardoned; if we believe, we should be saved? These are easy terms,
but if it were so drawn, that we were in a state of Grace the day, and out of
it to morrow, we should be pardoned the day, and might be damned to morrow, we
might have had some quarrel against him, that stood in our room, that the
Covenant, though it were free and gracious, yet it were not sicker and rooved;
but so excellently was it rooved and ordered, that among the rest of the
properties of it, it is everlasting. There is a very great obligation to the
Mediator, that when he had modelled, and ordered the Covenant, with the
greatest freedom and fullness of Grace, he rooved the nail, and made the
Covenant, ont these Terms everlasting; when he had obtained of his Father, all
the Terms of the Covenant, he would have in that in it, that it is everlasting,
and that these Terms should never be altered again. 5ly. It informs us, on what
grounds the perseverance of the Saints stands; we say, it is not our skill to
guide Grace, we say not that it is from the nature of Grace, but we build it
especially upon the perpetuity of the Covenant, the Covenant is an everlasting
Covenant, the Mediator has so ordered this Covenant, that if once we be in
Covenant, we can never be out of it; and he has rooved the nail so, that Satan
can never draw it, with all his Hammers and Instruments that he can bring,
thereon stands the perseverance of the Saints; that is the thing that can never
fail them, if once they be married, they are ever married, and if once they be
in Covenant, they are always in Covenant, for it is an everlasting Covenant; But
add 6ly. If the Covenant be thus everlasting, see from it, the difference
betwixt the mercies of the Covenant of Grace, and the mercies of the Covenant
of nature; I confess there are some things in the Covenant of nature, that they
may say of them that there is such a Covenant properly, the Ordinances of the
Sun and Moon, the Rain falling on the just and the unjust, the shining of the
Sun and Moon persevere; but these natural things, how changeable are they? We
have health to day, and may be sick to morrow; there are few, but in a little
ye will scarcely know their faces to be what they were: there is a moth in
their body, and a thief in their strenght: many time our humors are like our
beauties, we lose the things we love; we find our Relations dissolve, the
Friends we hd are dead, the Enemies we had, and the things of time, like a
Wheel, are constantly reeling and turning about; and there is nothing, but a
few months produces another face than it had: but it is not so with these
mercies of David in the Covenant, they are everlasting, it is not so with our
Election our effectual calling, our union with Christ; it is not so with any
fundamental privilege of the Covenant; ye that are constantly complaining, and
finding the reelings of the World, learn like a Child that is weaned from the
Pape, it is not that the Mother intends to hunger the Child, but that she would
have it feeding on stronger Meat; the reason why so many are complaining of the
bitterness of the things of time, and the changes of them, their health, their
strength, and their friends, are not what they were; it is not that ye should
want them, but we would have you seek them in the Covenant, and the sure
mercies of David; there is a considerable difference betwixt them, and the
things of Time, for who ever builds on the things of Time, they are drawing
their waters out of the Gutters, and not out of the Spring, but these are
founded on an everlasting Covenant. 7ly. If the Covenant be everlasting, then
it informs us of the Wisdom and Skill of the guide of them, that make choice of
the Covenant; there is hardly Wisdom in the choice of other things, they will
not last, variable and changeable Humors, and variable and changeable Things,
that every day fade; they are no Fanaricks, that take them to the Covenant, the
mercies of the Covenant are great mercies; for though they were small, yet they
are everlasting, and better long little, than soon nothing; and there is
nothing in Time everlasting, but like a Waster, they soon spend and waste; thy
heart, thy sense, thy Flesh will fail thee, thy Reason will turn to
Melancholy, and thy young Ones will look on thee, as one that has scarce the
exercise of Reason; all these things will reel to and fro in the World, and we
must expect that it will be so; but this everlasting Covenant is as the Sun, it
will ay rise at its appointed hours, and go to at them, and there will be no
stop of its Course, its not Fanaticism, to go on the surest Grounds, that ever
men followed, that take them to this Covenant, and resolve to hang both their
ill and their good on it, that is the first use of the Point.

Use 2. The second Use of the Point is this Covenant, an everlasting Covenant,
then Christian, labor to improve it as an everlasting Covenant; make use of
this Property of the Covenant, that it is everlasting. And there I will offer
you five Cases, that truly take in the most part of the exercise of Believers,
all of which come to have some answer, in this Property of the Covenant, that
it is everlasting. 1. It comes to be an ordinar case, and the improvement of the
everlastingness of the Covenant, it is a good answer to it, I say, it comes to
be an ordinar case, I am guilty, I cannot feed on the Covenant, for I know the
thing of my self, that no other knows; this Property of the Covenant, takes
aways this challenge, if God had made this Covenant so, as he made the Covenant
of Works, in the day thou eats, thou shall surely die, this Covenant is broken,
but the Mediator contrived it to be everlasthing, which would never have been
everlasting, if ay when we were guilty, the Covenant should be altered; no,
under all the challenges that thou has, if ever thou was in Covenant, and has
the Marks that were given the last Sabbath Day, of God's making the Covenant
with thee, there thou must continue in the Covenant, or thou must scrape out of
the Covenant, everlasting Covenant; no, this Property of the Covenant, when I
come to the last verse, and there show you, how you shall answer your
Challenges, ye will hear that guiltiness does not cast out of the Covenant, for
if that were, it were not everlasting, 2ly. There is a second case, wherein it
is to be improven, and it is very frequent, I am a poor crossed Body, and
scarce have Bread, and either I am not in the Covenant, or he has broken it.
But I say also, that this is answered in this, that it is everlasting; I like a
word of Master Dicksons, he says, it is ordinar for persons that treat with God
in the Covenant, they conform the Covenant to their case, but they will not
conform their case to the Covenant; suppose there should be never so many
crosses in thy case, yet thou art to rule thy case by the Covenant, and not to
bring the Covenant to thy case; it is ordinar for thee, to tell thy neighbor,
either I am not in Covenant with him, or else it is broken betwixt God and me;
but suppose thou should go to thy bed supperless, and the next morrow have a
greater cross, and knows not what to get to thy Breakfast, thou art to bring
thy case to the Covenant, but bring not the Covenant to thy case. Abraham when
he is to offer up Isaac on mount Moriah, in a burnt sacrifice, no body that
would have met him, but they would have said, God has broken the Covenant with
him, In thy seed shall all the Nations of the Earther be blessed; Abraham knew
well, that out of the ashes of Isaac, God would fulfill his Promise, he reduces
the ashes of Isaac to the Covenant, reduce ay thy case to the Covenant, but
bring not the Covenant to thy case. 3ly. There may be another great improvement
of it, and it is this, I am frequently challenged and deserted, it is not poverty
and sickness that I complain of, but of challenges and desertions, and I am
undoubtedly out of Covenant, it is not everlasting to me, for I am challenged
and deserted. The Husband may go from home, and bide long away, and come home
angry, but that looses not the marriage ty, the marriage union remains; neither
does his absence, nor his quarrels, prove the marriage to be loosed, the
Covenant, the marriage Oath remains firm; it is a sore matter, that when we come
under any exercise, we can never understand where we are, until our exercise
comes to fundamental doubtings; it is a sweet complaint, my Husband is long
away, and he is come home, but without a challenge to me, but it is a fore
matter to come home with, he has declared himself not to be my Husband, and he
has put me out of Doors, and he will give me no allurement, but he calls me a
Whore. So that under all these variety of Dispensations, this property of the
everlastingness of the Covenant, may be well improven; I am guilty, if thou
take that, as putting thee out off the Covenant, thou may put out that word,
everlasting Covenant out of the Bible; some are crossed and deserted, but the
perpetuity and everlastingness of the Covenant, runs like the Sun, and keeps
its course in a direct line, in Winter as well as in Summer. 4ly. Some are
troubled with this, what ever my case be, I think I will not persevers; but
thou art mistaken, thou knows not the Tenor of the Covenant, it is everlasting,
all thy Experiences, and all the Elevations of Spirit thou have had, and all
the things thou have had, that thou thinks looks like blinks with Jesus; there
is no wedding, but thou may be an Aduterer, or an Idolater, but the Covenant
secures all; it is true, the fundamental priviledgs secures thee as to them, but
it secures thee not from very gross sins, but that which secures all, is
founded on the Decrees of God, and the Covenant of Redemption, it is impossible
for him to lie, and to be unfaithful, and to deny himself, therefore the
Covenant stands sirm, if thou be at, I know not what to do, if Trial or Popery
come, I will deny him; but if thou be in Covenant, the Covenant is everlasting,
and not only the Devil and his Angels, cannot cast thee out of Covenant, but to
speak it with reverence, God has made it everlasting and unalterable for
Himself. 5. There is a fifth Difficulty that many ly under, some may say, I am
near Death, I find my self hanging over the Grave, I find these Legs, and this
Back, and this Head, things that will not long subsist, I must go to the place,
where there is no mention of the Covenant, no speaking of his loving kindness:
but thou art mistaken, it is not like the Covenant betwixt Husband and Wife, if
the one of them die, they may take another; the case not so, if the Worms
should destroy this Body, and the Birds should fly away with a bit of thy Body,
that is left above the Ground, the Covenant is with that bit, it is the Fathers
pleasure, that I should lose nothing, that I should not lose a Nail of a Toe,
for the Covenant remains with thy dust, for it is an everlasting Covenant; I
think our ignorance of the Covenant, is the great ground of the most part of
our trouble, if we understood it, and the Properties of it, we might have a
more hopeful, and cheerful life, in our walking with Jesus, than we have. I
would here clear two or three Questions, and but name them. 1. Readily some may
say, this day is very sweet to hear, that Christ has rooved the nail so, as it
cannot be drawn again, if once we be in Covenant, we will never be out of it
again, and the Father has bound up his own hands as it were, that it is
impossible for him to do otherwise, therefore some may obejct.

Question 1. Can this Covenant be everlasting, for of all the changeable
Providence that ever we saw, persons that are in Covenant meets with, they are
crossed, challenged, deserted, and rejoicing one day, and in the dust the next
day, ye will scarcely find them in one Frame?

Answer. I like the Observation well, that a certain Divine has, on the eighty
ninth Psalm, If his Children forsake my Law, then I will visit their sins with
rods, but my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, my Covenant will
I not break; I have sworn that I will not lie unto David, his seed shall endure
for ever, and his Throne as the Sun before me, it shall be established as the
Moon for ever; why are these two put in, the Sun and the Moon? Ye shall never
observe a change of the Sun, it is any alike great, but the Moon Astronomers
write of it, will have fourteen or fifteen several Forms, in one Month; it has
every night almost a new Form, and they give names to every several Form; but
the meaning is this, it is as much as the Covenant that I swear to David, shall
be as unchangeable a thing as the Sun, and yet shall be as changeable at the
Moon, that returns ay when it is full Moon, it shall be changeable and
unchangeable; these that come in Covenant with him, may say, as to all
Fundamental Privileges, it is as the Sun, and as to the things built on these
Foundations, it is as the Moon, as to the variety of cases, it will be as the
Moon, that will have twelve several Forms in one Month, and yet be unchangeable
as the Sun; and ye must not conclude, that ye are not in Covenant, and that
it is no everlasting, your peace, joy, liberty in Duties, and Covenant clearing,
may be as the Moon, and your Covenant case may be as the Sun. 2ly. All the
changes that falls out in thy Lot in time, that are like the Moon, they at
length terminat in these Fundamental Privileges; it is remarkable, that for all
the changes that the Moon has, once in a Month it is full Moon, it is true, it
will not bide long at that; they that are in Covenant, all their changes, long
at length terminat in their Fundamental Privileges, which is a remarkable
thing, their peace, their joy, is not Fundamental, yet it shall be as the Moon,
all the Alterations in the Covenant, they are at length Terminat in the
Foundation.

Question. Secondly, it may be Objected against this everlastingess of the
Covenant, is not this a Doctrine, tending to security and prophanity, to say,
one is in Covenant, and never out of it, does not this lay a God to Secruity,
do we not sing folks asleep, that readily comes to produce old experiences, and
are now taken and carried away with Scotlands backslidings, and to tell them,
it is an everlasting Covenant, and it is impossible to alter, lays not this a God
to Security?

Answer. I will close all this comfortable Truth, by telling you these three
things. 1. The Secure and Profane, it is almost, and more nor suspicious, they
are not in Covenant; if one be Secure and Profane, they may do as I have
sometimes told you in preaching, like a man coming by an Appletree, and he
claughts a Branch of the Apple Tree, and lays it up in his Coffer, and thinks
that he will have Apples of it, but it wants the Root, and it will neither have
Leaves nor Apples; some say, that they have gotten a Promise, I am afraid, that
they have but a riven Branch from the Root; if ye be fallen Secure, profane,
and negligent, and yet are telling your neighbors, I have gotten a Promise
long since, ye have gotten a Branch, and that ye have claught off the Root, and
it is without the Root, and will neither bear Flourishes nor Apples. 2. This
Doctrine tends not to security, nor prophanity, in regard all that are in this
Everlasting Covenant, they receive Influences, that keeps them from security
and prophanity; I will not say, but they may have their Winters, David had it
for a year, it was a year after he went in to Bathsheba, and murdered Vriah,
before the Prophet comes to him. The Spouse is made to sing, The winter is over
and past, the Summer is come, the time of the springing of herbs is come; the
Spring must come if thou be in Covenant with him, therefore it opens no door
for Security or Prophanity, for they that are in Covenant with him, it is
impossible for them to continue in Security, I will put my fear in their
hearts, and they shall not depart from me. 3ly. This Doctrine has no tendency
to Security, for ordinarily, these that are in Covenant, if they will not be
awakened by the Word, the Lord will awaken them by the Rod; I have told you,
that Christ has three Posts, he sends after Believers, there is his Word, and
his Rod, and if none of these two will prevail, he will send his Spirit, and
that will prevail; they that are in Covenant, cannot get leave to live in
Security and Prophanity; if the Word will not waken them, the Rod shall do it;
and if neither of these two do it, the Spirit shall do it; so, if any shall
say, I am secure, and am living in Security, thou may go and dash thy head
against a stone, but this Covenant is Everlasting, and it cannot be altered, we
shall be judged by it, in the day of our appearing.

SERMON XXV.
2 Samuel 23. Verse 5. Although my house be not so with God; yet he has made
with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is
all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


IN the right up-taking of the Covenant, we must not only search into the
Nature of it, but into the Properties of it, three whereof are expressed in
this verse, it is everlasting, it is ordered in all things, and it is sure. The
first of these I spoke to the last day, that it was Everlasting, and have
showed you many things about it, Doctrinally and Practically.

I come to the second Property, Ordered in all things, this, though ye do not
at first see through it, yet ye may see it afterward; having a great deal of
Marrow into it, and it is a very material Property of the Covenant; the Word in
the Hebrew Vehalma, Mentanus renders it, dispositum in omnibus. Junius renders
it, ordinatum in omnibus. The Septuagints, or the seventy Interpreters,
Translate it by a Word borrowed from a General Marshal in an Army, putting all
his Forces in a Military Order; it is well ordered, as a well Marshalled Army,
wherein every one is in their proper posture; and so is the Covenant ordered,
the meaning is, every thing in the Covenant, is fitly disposed, or appointed,
or ordered. And for clearing of it, ye must take notice, that the intention of
the Spirit of God, in speaking by David that it is fitly ordered, is not only to
show, that there is an excellent method, and sorting of all the parts of the
Covenant, but that it is excellently sorted and ordered, in order to the great
end, for which the Covenant was made, to advance the Glory of God, and the
Salvation of the Elect, which are the two great ends, for which it is made, and
herein it differs from the Covenant of Works, for though it is not denied, but
it be well ordered, and fitted, yet it neither contributes so much, nor was it
so conducible, to exalt God, and bring the Elect to Glory, as the Covenant of
Grace is; which I might let you see in many particulars, it was well ordered in
a way suitable to that Dispensation, but not in all things, in a way tending to
exalt God, and the salvation of the Elect, as the Covenant of Grace is; to be
brief, this is a very special property of the Covenant of Grace, and a
distinguishing one from the Covenant of Works, that it is ordered in all things,
not abstractly, but in order, and in reference to the end, which is to exalt
God, and to promote the salvation of the Elect. So this property of the
Covenant is considerable, as it is an everlasting Covenant, so it is Marshelled,
and Ordered, and disposed as an Army, in an excellent posture for a Victory.
This being the meaning of it, I will make two Observations, and follow them in
several following Sermons; the first of them I will but name, but shall God
willing, dwell on the second.

The first is this, that such as would have consolation from the Covenant, must
observe the order and method, and disposal of the contents of the Covenant.
2ly. I will take this, that the Covenant is excellently and singularly ordered,
in all things relating to the exalting of the Father, and the Mediator, and the
salvation of the Elect.

Doctrine first, Such as would have peace, as David had at his death from the
Covenant, are to consider the order of the Covenant; so does David here, when
he is rejoicing, among his last acts, from the Covenant that God had made with
him; he considered it as a Covenant ordered in all things, these that take not
up the right order of the Covenant, and the method of it, can never have
sweetness, nor peace, nor consolation from the Covenant.

For confirming and clearing this to you, I desire ye may take notice of these
three things. 1. God who is the God of Order, and not of confusion, (for so the
Scripture calls Him) he is very exact in observing of Order; Observe him in
natural Things, in the Work of Creation, what an excellent Order he kept,
first to make Light, then to make other things, and then bring in Man when all
things were Ordered for him: There is an excellent Order in his Providence,
the Ordinance of the Sun and Moon, and all the Stars have an Order, by a Decree
appointed them; it is true, there will appear confusion in his Providence, but
they are but like the black and white Threeds in a Web, or like the discordant
Strings of an Instrument of Music, they all move to make the Instrument play,
or like the Wheels of a Knock, though some of them move against other, yet they
all tend to make the Knock strike when the hour comes; so all his Providence,
tend to the end he has Decreed; he has appointed Order in his Church, Let all
things be done decently, and in Order; they that are for confusion, are not for
God, for God he is the God of Order, and not of confusion; it is true, Papists
and Prelates would build on this, a multitude of humane Inventions; but Order is
best kept in the Church, when it is according to the Scriptures, God is the
God of Order, and Parity among Church Officers has no tendency to confusion;
for Christ would never have established a Parity among his Apostles, if he had
thought it confusion: To be brief, God is the God of Order, and both in the
Government of the World, and of the Church, he has appointed an Order, and
has said, Mark them that walk disorderly; and they who are overturners of
Scriptural Order, they become enemies to the God of Order, who has not
appointed his Church, to be like a Babel, or a mass of confusion; but He has
appointed Order, and all things to be done decently in it. 2ly. Take notice of
this, that especially he has appointed an Order in the Covenant; to make no
order in the Covenant, and observe none, is to make Christ the Minister of Sin;
take for Instance, there are some Promises in the Covenant, I will blot out
your iniquities, though they were as scarlet, I will make them white as wool,
they shall be forgotten, and shall be no more remembered; and I will cast them
behind my back, and such like; now, if one should take these Promises, and not
observe the order of the Covenant, they make Christ the Minister of Sin; there
cannot be a greater afront put upon him, than to think that he has done any
thing to encourage Sin, no honest man will take it well, to say to him, thou
art an encourager of the wicked; take some Promises of the Covenant, and let
him go to them, and say, I have gotten a Promise, but they observe not the
Order of the Covenant; Shall we sin, that grace may abound, says Paul? God
forbid. Now he that will take a promise of pardon, and feed on it, and rely on
it, and not observe the Order of the Covenant, he makes Christ the Minister of
Sin, and Grace the occasion and encourager of it. 3ly. There can be no true
peace, except ye observe the Order of the Covenant, in regard the Spirit, who
is the Author of peace, makes it according to the method of the Covenant; it is
true, Satan and our own hearts, will influence a kind of peace, but ordinarily
they violat the Order of the Covenant, their peace comes not in according to
the method of the covenant; when the Spirit gives peace, he is the Spirit of
Promise; when he comes and comforts, He shall take of mine, says he, and show
it you, that is, he shall take of my Peace, and my Righteousness, and give it
to you; the Spirit in influencing Peace, keeps the Order of the Covenant; where
ever there is peace, and the Order of the Covenant not kept, it is suspected
to be either a Peace of our own making, or a Peace that the strong man that
keeps the House gives; for when the strong man keeps the House, all is at
peace; therefore, there can be no true peace from the Spirit, except we observe
the Order of the Covenant, which the Spirit of Promise keeps; so this is an
unquestion able Truth, Christ would be the Minister of Sin, and Grace would be
the occasion of Sin, and there would be no true peace, and God would not be the
God of Order, but of confusion, except we observe the Order of the Covenant.

Use 1. I would apply this a little for two Uses, and so go forward. The first
Use is, to reprove them that lay claim to peace from the Covenant, but observe
not the Order of the Covenant; I have gotten a Promise that he will blot out my
iniquity, and what needs me to fear? But that Peace is not from the Spirit,
when it comes not in according to the Order of the Covenant; take a single
Promise, and no more in the Covenant, and thou shall make God the God of
confusion, and not of Order, and Christ the Minister of sin, and the Spirit to
speak peace, not according to the Order of the Covenant; who ever they be, that
will build on a particular Promise, and not observe the Order of the Covenant,
can have no sure Peace from it; who are they then, that will plead the
Covenant, and not observe the Order of the Covenant?

I will evidence this to you in five or six particulars. 1. When one pleads a
Promise in the Covenant, and has no good, nor well grounded Interest in the
Covenant, that is against the Order of the Covenant; the Covenant must first be
ours, and then we may plead the Promises of it; we come to plead the Farm of a
Field that is not ours, and that we have not paid for; when we plead the
Promises in the Covenant, and has no Interest in the Mediator of the Covenant,
we plead the Juncture, when we have not married the man; before we can have a
right to the Apple, we must have a right to the Apple Tree. I will be thy God,
before I give thee peace, or give thee pardon. This is the great substance and
marrow of the Covenant, they that cannot say that God is their God, and yet
will take a promise of pardon, and of peace, they over-turn the Order of the
Covenant; readily many come and plead the Promises, and God may meet them with,
what have thou to do to take my Covenant in thy mouth? Is the Covenant thine?
Is the Mediator thine? Thou but breaks thy Neighbors Orchard, to go and take a
Promise, and not in the Order of the Covenant; thou but steals it, and runs
away with it, like a man that will break his Neighbors Orchard, and take away
the Apples that grows on his Neighbors Tree; the Mediator is not thine, the
Tree where the Apples grow is not thine, thou may take promises, but thou
over-turns the Order of the Covenant, if thou take a Promise, and not marry the
Promise-maker. 3ly. They over-turn the Order of the Covenant, who plead the
Promises of the Covenant, but they forget the Commands of it; the Covenant is
made up of Promises and Commands; the Commands are indeed fewer, they are
indeed not so exactly pressed, as in the Covenant of Works; now he that will
plead a Promise, and go to it as his own, and tell his Neighbor, I have gotten
a Promise, and in the mean time slights the Command, he overturns the Order of
the Covenant; if ever peace come in by a Promise, it must come in by a way
suiting the Order of the Covenant. 3ly. They over-turn the Order of the
Covenant, that plead the conditional promises of the Covenant, and have never
pressed the absolute Promises; the conditional promises, are promises of peace,
and joy, and pardon, and communion with God indeed; but as ye shall hear, the
absolute promises, I will take away the heart of stone, and give thee a heart
of flesh, must be accomplished before the promise of pardon; the Lord has
promised pardon, but he has promised it only to the penitent; he that prays
for pardon, and has not repented, he tempts God, and God must overturn the
Order of the Covenant, if he give pardon before Repentance; the absolute
Promises must be fulfilled before the conditional: and he that will say, I have
gotten peace, and pardon, or fellowship and communion with God, and yet has
never been effectually called, never knew what Faith and Repentance was, or the
taking away a heart of stone, and giving a heart of flesh was; what ever
Promises he talk of, he has overturned the Order of the Covenant, the first
and absolute Promises, must be fulfilled before the conditional: So who ever
says, give me peace, pardon, and communion the day in the Church, and yet has
never had the accomplishment of the absolute Promises, he tempts God to
overturn the Order of the Covenant. 4ly. They overturn the Order of the
Covenant, that would plead some Promises of the Covenant, and neglect others;
the Order of the Covenant is, to whom one Promise is fulfilled, all Promises,
though not in the same degree, are also to be fulfilled; there are several will
plead, Lord, forgive me my sin, give me pardon, but the promises of
Sanctification, the promises of Influences for Holiness, in the Life and
Conversation, the Promises of cleansing, they plead not these: They that go
ordinarily to Christ for Justification, and forget Him for Wisdom and
Sanctification, they indeed seek the Promises, but they would have him overturn
the Order of the Covenant, and the Lord is peremptory, in keeping the Order of
the Covenant, and he will not break it; for if he brake it, he would overturn
the whole contrivance of Grace; which we do when we plead the Promises, and
forget the Commands. 5ly. They overturn the Order of the Covenant, who, though
they mind the Duties of the Covenant, yet they mind not all the commanded
Duties in the Covenant; there is some Idol they would spare, that readily the
Covenant binds him most against; it is true, when we enter in a personal
Covenant with God, we bind against every Corruption, but especially our Idols;
yet it is strange, that the thing that we incline especially to spare, is that
which we are most bound to wrestle against; if it be Pride, Carnality,
Earthly-mindedness, Sensuality, Lasciviousness, that which in a personal
Covenant, we are most bound to wrestle against, is the thing we are most prone
to spare, and he that does so, overturns the Order of the Covenant; the thing
that thou does, when thou art entered in a personal Covenant with God, if thou
spare thy Idols, if God spare thee, he will overturn the Order of the Covenant.
6ly, and lastly. They overturn the Order of the Covenant, who would have in the
beginning, and when they lay the foundation of a Work, the thing that God has
promised them, at the putting on of the Capestone: I have known several
precious to God, that have concluded a work of Effectual Calling not to be
real; Why? Say they, I have not that peace, and that joy in Believing, that I
ought to have; but thou may believe twenty years, before thou have joy in
Believing. There is peace in Believing, but not in the first laying of the
Foundation of the Work, nor is there joy in Believing, ay when we would be at
it; no, we overturn the Order of the Covenant, if we do this; and the Truth is,
as ye shall hear, the great reason why we have so little sweetness from the
Covenant, we observe not the Order and Method of the Covenant, we might have a
great deal of sweetness from the Promises that we want, and we might draw out
of these Breasts of Consolation, refreshing Milk, if we knew the Order of the
Covenant.

Use 2. I will close this Observation, with saying three things about it. 1. I
exhort thee to get an Interest in the Covenant, and then to plead it; Marry the
man, and then plead the Contract. I prophecy to you all that are not
effectually called, and all that are not united to Christ in the Covenant, all
that I have said, or that I am to say from the Covenant, or all that ye can
plead from it, shall never be to your advantage; there are great and precious
Promises in the Covenant, I will blot out your iniquities, and remember them no
more, I will cast them behind my back, and cast them in the bottom of the Sea;
none of them all are to you, if ye nave not married the Man. 2. Consider, if ye
would follow the Covenant orderly, consider seriously, what a ridiculous thing
it were, if a Sinner should go to that Promise, though your iniquities were red
like crimson, I will make them like wool, though they were as scarlet, I will
make them white as snow: If ye should not observe the Order of the Covenant,
and not observe what is required before ye get that fin pardoned; might not all
Whoremongers, and Adulterers, and Murderers, and Blasphemers, and
Sabbath Breakers, come and say, O here is a Promise, I will blot out your
Iniquities, and will remember them no more, and sprinkle clean water upon you,
if they should not observe the Order of the Covenant; and by the way, take good
heed, how ye bring in a promise, if ye keep not the Order of the promise, ye
have no right to the promise. Antinomians tell us, we may preach to Sinners
reeking in sin, and bid them believe, immediately after the act of committing
the Sin, and tell them, though your Iniquities were as Scarlet, they shall be
white as Snow, they observe not the Order of the Covenant. 3. I would have you
in Order to this, that ye may observe the Order of the Covenant, know, how the
Covenant is ordered, what is the Order and Method in which God has casten the
Covenant, since we can never get Benefit from the Covenant, except we observe
the Order of it? If we plead one Promise, and forget as necessary an one, if we
plead pardon, and have not repented, if we plead peace, and are not effectually
called; it is true, there are promises of peace and pardon, but they are not
pleaded according to the Order of the Covenant, and this leads me to the second
Observation.

Doct. That in order to the Glory of God, and the Peace and Salvation of
Believers, God has appointed an Order in the Covenant to be observed, and we
must observe it. He has appointed an Order, and an excellent Method in it, for
it proceeds from the God of Order, and it is treated by the Mediator of the
Covenant, the right Order of the Covenant, is one of the sweetest
Encouragements that Believers have; and I will let you see, that of all the
Ingredients in the Covenant affording Consolation, the Order of the Covenant is
one of the sweetest.

To break then in upon it, there are two things I must premise, and shall only
name to make way to the rest. 1. Take notice, that a Covenant may be said to be
Ordered two ways. 1. When all the parts of it are rightly Disposed and Ordered.
2. When all the parts of it, are rightly Ordered and Disposed, with a reference
to the end; the first is called an Abstract Order, the second a Relative Order;
in handling this Order of the Covenant, I will first consider the Order of it
Abstractly, and let you see, that all the Promises are rightly Ordered;
Secondly, that all the Commands are rightly Ordered. 2. I will consider it with
a reference to the End; There are two great Ends in the Covenant, the Exalting
of Christ, and the bringing the Elect to Glory; and here I will let you see,
that both the Promises and Commands, are excellently Ordered, in reference to
Christ's Honor, and Believers peace, and their Heaven. 2. I intend to let you
see, of what Importance it is, for a Christian in his way to Glory, to observe
the Order of the Covenant; for it is a deep contrivance of Grace, there cannot
be a greater Delusion, for a person to say, I have gotten peace and pardon, and
neither the promise of peace nor pardon has come in according to the Order of
the Covenant; if it has come in not according to this Order, it is but a peace
that Satan or thy own heart has given thee.

SERMON XXVI.
2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me
an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is all my
Salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


AMong other Meditations that David had, when he was a dying, concerning the
Covenant, he remembered the Order of it; had it been a Covenant that had not
been everlasting and sure, or had he fed on it, without observing the Order of
it, it would not have afforded peace; but among other things, he put in this,
Ordered in all things and sure, the Lord has made a Covenant with me, ordered
in all things and sure. I proposed two Observations from this, First, that such
as would have peace and sweetness from the Covenant, they must observe the
Order of it, take a single part of the Covenant, without its Harmony and Order,
it might have been a God to Security, but it could not afford peace. I entered
upon the second Observation, that God had appointed an excellent Order in the
Covenant, I will not Criticize on the various descriptions of Order, what it
is: we have many Disputs with the Patrons of Ceremonies, that say, that we have
no Order, about, the Definition of Order; some define it bo be a convenient
placing of means and midses, that relate unto an end one after another; but I
will not insist in enquiring into the nature of it. I proposed to enquire,
First, into the absolute Order of the Covenant; Secondly, into the relative
Order; the Order of it in reference to the two great Ends. in exalting of
Christ, and the saving of the Elect. In the absolute Order, I proposed, 1. To
speak of the Order of the Promises, and then of the Order of the Commands. 1.
To the Order of the Promises, a Truth very necessar to be observed, by all
those who have the Promises for their Charter, and that have all their Hope
founded in them: many have written long Discourses of the Order of the
Promises, which now I will not dwell on. I shall reduce all that I shall say,
that is necessary for you to observe in your Practice, in reference to the
Order of the Promises, to these three Heads. 1. I would have you consider, the
Order of the Matter of the Promise. 2. The Order observed in the timeing of
this Matter. 3. The Order observed in the Dispensing of the Promise; the Spirit
of God has appointed an excellent Order in the Promises, in reference to all
these three, and Christians would observe this Order.

First, there is an Order observed in the matter of the Promises, 1. There are
some Promises absolute, and some conditional; God has made some Promises, if
we were never so wicked, if never so drowned in nature, if never so carnal and
sold under sin, yet the Promises take us in: there are other promises he has
made, that we must be Gracious, Believers, Mourners, before we can hope for the
accomplishment of them; it could not be expected in reason, I will take away
the heart of stone, providing the he have it not; but he could say, I will give
you a heart of flesh, if ye have it not: So there are some promises absolute,
and some conditional, they but tempt God, if they go to him with a conditional
Promise, and want the Condition; but they may go to Him with an absolute
Promise, a Truth very necessar to be observed, we may go to him in prayer for
pardon, for peace and communion, and press him with his promises peremptorly,
while in the mean time, he might overturn the Order of his Covenant, if he
grant it; that he cannot do, for the Covenant is the result of his eternal
Decree, and it is ordered by Christ, and is infinitely for our advantge, and for
thee and me, to overturn that Order, were great presumption, we may go to him
and say, Lord, give me Repentance, give me Faith, and take away the heart of
stone, for they are absolutely promised; but we cannot go to him for peace,
pardon and communion, and glory, so peremptorly, except we have the condition:
So the order is necessary to be observed, some are absolute, and we may
absolutely plead them, and some are Conditional, and may only be pleaded when
have the condition, which is necessary to be observed; when some complains,
Lord, I have no joy, and comes away wanting it, no thou art a fool, thou has
not gotten pardon. and how can thou have peace and joy. 2. Another thing to be
observed in the matter of it, there are some things he has promised presently,
and some things are only promised for the future; there are several things
promised for the present. I will take away the heart of stone, and will be as
the dew for influences of holiness, but the perfection of holiness, is only
promised for the future. So if we go to God and press him with perfect
Mortification, pertect Love, perfect Holiness that is in the Covenant but it is
not promised now. but it is to be expected afterward; so if we observe the
method of the Covenant, we must observe, what is to be given now, and what is
to be given in Heaven; for the one, we must exercise Faith, and for the other,
we must exercise Hope. So if you shall go and press him with the promise of
perfect delight, perfect peace, perfect joy, if he give thee the hope of it, he
answers thy prayer, for the promises of the Covenant bears, the one to be
perfected now, and the other to be perfected hereafter. (3.) In the matter of
the promise observe, there are some things promised absolutely, and there are
some things promised, but there is a reserve in Gods heart; as for example,
there is Adoption, Effectual Calling, Sanctification, if thou be a Believer,
there is pardon and a Heaven; there are also temporal things promised, such as
health, deliverance in trouble; now in the matter of the Promise, God is a
Supreme Lord, he has reserved a latitude to himself, that he will either give
health or sickness, he will either give deliverance, or not give deliverance,
what signifies the Promise then? Yes, very much, for he does not prove untrue
to his promise, even in temporal things, but better than his promise, if a man
should promise to his neigbour an hundred weight of Lead, if he give him an
hundred weight of Gold, ye would not say, that that man had broken his promise,
but was better than his promise; if he give a sanctified improvement of the
promise, the promise is not broken, but the Promise^ maker is better than his
promise; So we may go to him, and peremptorly say, Lord take away this ill
heart, and if he taken it away, we may say, Lord, give me pardon, give me
peace, joy, and assurance; but we cannot say, Lord, give me health and
prosperity; the reason is, in the order of the Covenant, there is a liberty of
exchange left to the Lord in temporal things, that he may give the thing, or a
better thing; but he has not left a liberty of exchange in spiritual and
eternal things: for to speak with reverence, he would not be true to his
promise then; if one would come and say, Lord, give me peace, if he answer not,
but give him health, he would not be so good as his promise. (4.) In the order
of the matter of the promise, take notice, there are some things promised, that
God has promised in the Covenant, but he has not promised to give with these
things, the discovery of them; he may give the thing, and he may hide it when
it is given; he may be true to his promise, and accomplish the thing promised,
and yet the person be like the man that sought his Hat, when it was on his
Head; it is one thing, to give the thing promised, and another thing to give
the discovery of it; there may be some saying, fails his word evermore? has he
forgotten to be gracious? but our eyes may be darkened, and we cannot see the
accomplishment of the promise; some may say, O! he has not made out his
promise to me, for I have not that peace, that joy, that assurance, these
influences, that he promised; but thou may have these, and the promises may be
accomplished, and thou not see them So in the order of the promises, in
reference to the matter of them, we are to take notice of all these four. (5.)
Take notice, that the promises in the matter of them, are so ordered, that like
workmen about one work, one of them works to another hand, one promise makes
way for the accomplishment of another; as for example, the promise of
influences, I will be as dew to Israel, makes way for that promise, and he
shall grow as the Lilly, and cast forth his roots as Lebanon, Hos. 14.5. Every
one of the promises, especially the sirst promises, makes way for the second;
so, if God give repentance, the person may certainly argue, that he will get
pardon; if he give faith, he will certainly get communion with Jesus; if he
take away the heart of stone, he will sprinkle them with clean water; if he
call them, he will certainly justify them; and if he justify them, he will
glorify them; for whom he calls, them he justifies, and whom he justifies,
them he also glorifies.

But 2. Another thing to be remarked, in reference to the order of the
promises, and that is the order of the timing of them; O but he was wife that
drew this Covenant, and had excellent skill of ordering all the Articles of it:
There are four things remarkable, in the order of the timing of the promises of
the Covenant. 1. There are some promises Divines call Legal promises, there are
other promises they call Evangelick promises; the Legal promises go before the
Evangelick, Joh. 16. When the Spirit shall come, he convinces first of sin,
that is a Legal work, and then he convinces of righteousness, that is an
Evangelick work; this order of the Covenant of promises, relating to a
Law-work, they go before the promises, relating to a Gospel-work; in the
ordinary way of his working, he kills, that he may make alive, he has torn,
that he may heal, hesmites, that he may bind up, Hos. 6. These who are
observing the order of the Covenant, and the promises of it, must expect them
in this method, that the Spirit shall first convince of sin, and then of
righteousness; some are convinced of righteousness, and they talkk of Christ
and his righteousness, before they be convinced of Christ and his
righteousness, before they be convinced of sin, but they are overturning the
order of the Covenant. 2. There is this remarkable in the order, of the timing
of the promises, the promises that relate to a gracious frame; a person can
never come to be in a gracious frame, before he be in a gracious estate, no,
that is impossible, a natural man, and one that never had a Law-work, can never
come to a gracious frame; an hypocrite may have flashes, and things that may
put on the clothes of a gracious frame, but in the order of the covenant, we
must first be in a gracious estate, before we be in a gracious frame; all the
Communion-days, and all the rods that a natural man comes under, and all the
expressions of love to Christ that he has, makes not up a spiritual frame;
Why? he is not in a spiritual state, and the order of the Covenant must be
overturned, if this be. 3. The Lord has this in the order of the timing of the
proises, that there are some promises he will begin early to accomplish to a
Christian, and readily will keep them under these promises, the most part of
their life; whereas it will not be these promises that he will keep other
Christians under; as for example, there are some promises of conviction of
challenges, of discovering of iniquity, he may bring one under these promises,
and effectually call them, and all their lifetime keep them under them;
whereas many have these promises accomplished, and lives but short while under
them; the reasons are, in the order of the Covenant, God has reserved a
liberty to himself, the Mediator has promised to make out all the promises to
the Elect, but he has reserved a liberty, he will keep one feeding on one
promise all their life, and will change them to others, the reason is, he
reserves a liberty to himself, in dispensing all the promises; so one may be
brought in early, and changed and effectually called, and all their lifetime
may be kept under the drop of Conviction, whereas others boy I he may let out
with a Pin, and bring thee easily to the promises of consolation; why? In the
order of the Covenant, though he has secured the main to every Elect, yet the
order fo the promise is, that he should have a latitude in it, as Lord, which
is not loosed by the obligation of the Covenant. 4. There is this order to be
observed, in reference to the timing of them, that the promises of the first
graces, which are fundamental and absolutely necessary, they are made out to
the Elect, sometime at the third hour, sometime at the sixth, and sometime at
the ninth, and sometime at the eleventh, it is near twelve then, but he has
reserved this liberty in the order of the Covenant, that though thou be an
Elect, and shall have all the fundamental privileges, and all the privileges
built on the foundation, yet some may have them at the third hour, some at the
sixth, some at the ninth, and some gets them not until the eleventh; so, he
has ordered the Covenant, in reference to the timing of the promises so
excellently, that yet he remains a Lord, the Marriage-tye that makes him an
Husband, deprives him not of being a Lord, and of timeing all the particulars,
in reference to believers.

But Thirdly, Consider the Covenant in the manner of dispensing the Promses,
and the order is remarkable in this, and here ye would notice these things. 1.
In Gods dispensing the Covenant, there is this order in the Promises of it,
that the mercies bestowed, are all first given to Christ, and through him they
come to be ours; the Fathers pardon, his Peace, and Communion with him, we come
to be blessed with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places, through Christ;
the Father has contrived the Covenant so, as they come to us, all through
Christ, and it is the more excellent order, that the smell of his purchase, and
his intercession is on them; some move a Question, What is the reason that
Christ should be an Intercessor, and should pray for the thing that he bought,
and paid for? They tell, that the Father in the contrivement of the Covenant,
he would first have his Jestice satisfied, which is satisfied by his purchase:
And secondly, he would have his grace glorified, which is by the intercession
of a Supplicant, now when any thing comes the Covenant-way to a Believer,
through Christ it comes, so as the price is considered that he gave for it, and
that is a fruit of Gods Justice, and then the intercession is considered, so
that there are in the Covenant Mercies, but it smells of the Fathers Justice,
and of his Mercy, and of the Sons Purchare and Intercession; ye never get an
Act of Communion, nor an answer I Prayer, but it has the stamp on it, both of
Christ's Purchase and Intercession. 2. In the dispensing of the promises of the
Covenant, there is this order in the manner of dispensing them, that God
dispenses them to Believers according to their capacity; readily he does with
them, as with the Corn, or the tender Plants, if he should open the Windows of
Heaven, and let out Rain as a Deluge, it would drown all the Corn and the
tender Plants; but he makes drops fall here and there, and now and then, that
the Corn and the tender Plants may spring up and grow; the promises are ordered
so, as they are full, but we have no Vessels to contain the Oil: It Is
remarkable, there are two great Apostles in the New Testament, Peter and Paul;
Peter is brought up to mount Tabor; Paul; is caught up to the third Heaven; the
Lord has recorded these instances, to see how we would carry, if we had an
Heaven upon Earth; Paul sees Christ transfigured, and Moses and Elias with him,
and how carries he? Master (says he) let us build here three tabernacles, one
for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias; the Text says, he wist not what
he said; Paul he is ravished up to the third Heaven, and he knows not whether
in the body, or out of the body, he heard things unutterable, and what follows,
a messenger of Satan was sent, lest I should be puffed up with abundance of
revelation. The order of the Covenant is so contrived, as the bleslings of it,
they shall not come one as a full deluge, as they did upon Peter and Paul, that
descended on Mount Hermon. 3. In the matter of dispensing the promises of the
Covenant, he has wisely provided it so, that the Covenant-blessings shall be
rather suited to our necessity, than to our appetite; there are two things that
the Father considers in the blessings of the Covenant, and they are, our need,
and our appetite; as a Physician that has a Patient in a Fever, but he is
roaving, he considers neither what is best for his need, nor for his appetite;
had we been at the contrivement of the Covenant, we would have put in nothing
but peace, pardon, and prosperity; these are nothing but roavings of Children
in a Fever; but he has put in among the promises, the cross, nay, the
correcting with the rods of men; why has he put in this? Though it agree not
to our appetite, yet it agrees to our necessity; sometimes a desertion, and
sometimes a prosperous condition, may be wholesome for us; therefore he has
appointed all the blessings of the Covenant to come through Christ, so he has
ordered them in a way, rather suiting our necessity than our appetite; which is
necessary to be observed, when we lay our hands or our loins, and we tell,
there is a Covenant of such promises, and I have neither peace nor joy, thou
may have the thing that suits thy need, and be refused of the thing that suits
thy appetite: so, if ye consider all these, ye shall find the promises are all
well ordered, they are much better ordered that we would have carved them out,
if we had been at the contriving of them; if we had been trysted with abundance
of revelations, we would have been puffed up; if we had been on Mount Tabor, we
would have roaved; so, the Covenant is far better ordered, than if it had
consisted of eminent raptures of love, and transcendent ravishings of joy.

Quest. But here is a difficulty, may some say, are there not many contraries
in the Covenant, as for example, find we not mercy and justice in it? find we
not Christ killed? find we not many Law-works and Evangelick? find we not
plentiful promises, and dark providence? and can that be a well ordered
Covenant?

Ans. To consirm that the Covenant is well ordered, I would have you notice two
or three distinctions, that are most necessary to be observed by a Believer,
and to be eyed in this deep of the ordering of the Covenant. 1. Distinguish
betwixt the beginning of Christ's accomplishing a promise, and the end of it, ye
would not think the beginning a piece of the same Web with last, ordinarily
when he begins to accomplish a promise, ye would think it a threatening, there
is hardly any that looks on it, but they would think it like Abraham's going to
Mount Moriah with his Son Isaac, with Wood and Fire to offer him up in a
Sacrifice, ye would think that he were to accomplish a threatening, but wait
until the end, and ye will see it otherways: the Goldsmiths before he dress a
Watch, he will take it all down, and then dress it; this is very necessary to
be distinguished, for often at the beginning of the accomplishment of a
promise, we are at, I am undone, and at the end, we are at, I had been undone,
if I had wanted it; what ever contrariety appearin he providence, in dispensing
promises, yet it is but the half of his work, stay until the end, and ye shall
see the end of the Lord; he began harshly with Abraham, and with David, and
with better than David, with Christ himself, but it ended in this, he set him
down at his own right hand, and bade all the Angels worship him. Any of you
that he is accomplishing a promise unto, he is killing, that he may make alive,
he is tearing and wounding, that he may heal; he is smiting, that he may bind
up; however ye may go sometimes weeping, bearing your precious seed, yet it
will end in rejoicing, bearing your precious sheaves. 2. I would have you
distinguished betwixt his dispensing of a promise, and your sense of it;
readily your sense may be directly contrary to the nature o the thing; O but
Sense is an ill judge in the matters of Faith; I deny not, but Sense will
strengthen and confirm Faith, but when it is strengthened in opposition to
Faith, it is a great impediment to Faith: I will not believe, except I see,
says Thomas, it was his Sense that was a great impediment to his Faith; so we
are to distinguish betwixt the matter of the work of his dispensing, and our
sense of the work, like the vulgar people, we will be of one judgment one day,
and another judgment another day; one day we will cry, Crucify, crucify him,
and another day cry, Hosanna, Hosanna; one day we think, there is nothing more
real, and another day we think there is nothing but delusion and shall we lay
weight on this? But learn to distinguish^ betwixt his dispensing of the
promise, and your sense of it. But 2. ye would notice this, if ye would see the
excellent order, both of making and contriving of the Covenant, that it is a
Christians duty, ay to bring the providence to the promise, and not the promise
to the providence; we are not to say, O in this dispensation, he is not true to
his promise, but we are to bring the providence, and the lot we are under, to
the promise; so Abraham staggered not at the promise, but judged him faithful
that had promised; there is one thing that puts the capestone on the order of
the promises, and a luster on the Cove ant, that it is so full of so great, and
precious promises, in reference to the Church of God, it is true, God has
concealed the time, and the way how he will accomplish these promises; but
believe it, and go home and rejoice in the hope of it, that all the earth shall
be full of the knowledge of God; Popery, Judaism, and Quakerism, will all fall
to the ground; the time will come, when Holiness shall be written on Horses
Bells, when Wars and rumors of Wars shall cease, and men shall beat their
swords into plough-shares, and the Lamb shall ly down with the Wolf, and not be
afraid; and there shall be no more War seen in all the nount of God; ye may
say, there is no ground for this; but the Mediator has ordered the Covenant,
and has put in it, not only the blessing of Peace and pardon, and Repentance,
relating to the like of thee and me, but he has put in it the Order of the
promises, relating to his Kingdom, tho there be no appearances of it, but all
things against it; yet all that are against, are but barking against a wall;
for shall he cry, and shall it not be heard? shall he speak, and shall it not
be done? No, all the earth shall be full of the knowledge of God; therefore, ye
that have your heart broken, with something of the desolation of the house of
God, ye may see those days afar off, with Abraham, and rejoice, and who can
tell, but the Confusions of Europe this day, be the accomplishment of these
Promises? the time is coming, and is hastening, and will be accomplished in due
time, and all the earth shall be full of the knowledge of God, as the Seas are
full of Water; and when ye go to him for your pardon, go to him and protest,
that ye will not be satisfied, except he will fulfill all his promises to his
Church.

SERMON XXVII.
2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me
an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is all my
salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


THE second property of the Covenant of Grace, that it is rightly ordered, I
entered on, God who is the God of Order, has appointed an excellent order in
his Covenant; and it is necessary for a Believers consolation, to take notice of
it; in handling of it, I proposed to speak to three things, the Order of the
promises of the Covenant, the Order of the Commands, the Order of both the
Promises and Commands, with reference to an end. I have spoken to the Order of
the promises.

I come now in the second place, to speak to the Order of the Commands of the
Covenant, and ye will find it of great necessity, for one who would profit by
the Covenant; first, observe the Order of it, there is indeed an excellent
Order among the duties of the Covenant; I cannot run through them all, that
practick Divines have written about, I will reduce what I will say of the Order
of the Commands, to four heads. (1.) The Covenant has Ordered Graces and
Duties, to be knit together, to make up Obedience to the Covenant; it is not
Grace only that fulfill; our part of the Covenant, nor is it Duties only, but
is is Graces and Duties knit together; we are commanded in the Covenant to
pray, but to pray in the Spirit, we are commanded to mourn for Sin, but we are
commanded also to believe, and repent; we are commanded to suffer when called
to it, but if we give our body to the fire and want charity, it profits
nothing; the commanding part of the Covenant, takes in both Grace and Duties;
if a man perform never so many Duties, and want Grace, he fulfills not his part
of the Covenant; Obedience and Duties without Grace, are like a Carcass without
a Soul, or a Shell without a Kernel; and in effect, they signify nothing, as
to our part of the Covenant; there are some, they think they have the truth of
Grace, and are negligent in Duties; there are others, they multiply Duties, but
they make no conscience of the Grace that shojld accompany the Duties; thou has
no kind of order in the Covenant, the Lord has knit the two gogether,
otherways there is no suitable frame to the Covenant at all. 2. The Covenant,
in the preceptive and commanding part of it, the first and principal Grace
called for, is Faith; Faith is the special part of the Covenant required on our
part, this is his Command, that is the great command in the Covenant of Grace,
for it was not commanded in the Covenant of Works, that ye believe in his Son
whom he has sent; God has required many things in the Covenant of Grace, but
the great thing he has laid on and commanded, is believing.

There are three or four things, will evidence the truth of this to you. (1.)
Ye shall find the great Inquiry he makes, when he Inquires about a persons
Estate is, after their Faith, if ye will but take a view both of his Word and
of his Works, ye will find the truth of this; it is evident, that a man desires
to know a thing by his inquiring after it; Joseph when his Brethren came down
into Egypt he inquired, Is the old Man of whom you spoke alive? So Joab when he
returned from the Battle, David is very inquisitive, is the young man Absalom
safe? Jacob was much on Joseph's spirit, and Absalom was much on David's so in
the Covenant of Grace, ordinarily ye will find, when he has ado with any
person, he asks; can thou believe, do thou believe, when he lays on the
Cross, it is to try their Faith, 1 Pet. 1.7. That the trial of your faith being
much more precious than Gold, that perishes, though it be tried with fire;
might be found unto praise and honor and glory at the appearing of Jesus
Christ; if he delay an Answer to prayer, it is to try Faith, as he did with the
Woman, he called her a Dog, as if she were not in his Commission, but in the
end, he faith, O Woman, great is thy faith. (2.) It will be evident, that this
is the main thing in the Covenant, in the Order of it, that we should believe,
in regard of the great commendation given to it in the Covenant; it is
remarkable, Heb. 11. When the whole cloud of Witnesses, that covenanted wiht
God, are brought in beginning at Abel, and coming down to Abraham and David,
the thing especially commended in them is their faith, no question, they had
patience and love, but that which the Scripture cries them most up for is,
especially their Faith; this evidences, that faith the greatest thing in the
Covenant on our part, not only is it the thing that Christ makes a special
Inquiry after, but it is the thing of all the Qualifications thou have, that
Christ especially commends. (3.) In regard of the honor put upon it in the
work of justification, we are justified by faith alone without the works of the
Law, this is a special honor put upon it; it is a question among Scholars, why
faith only, and not love, is employed in the work of Justification? they give
this as the reason of it, faith is the meetest for it; if ye Inquire why the
Eye sees and not the Hand? Why the Hand works, and not the Eye? The reason is,
they are fittest to be Instruments in Seeing and Working; so faith is fittest
to be the Instrument of Justification, for it is a receiving Grace, it is called
a receiving of Christ in the Scripture. John 1.12. But as many as received
them, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that
believe on his Name; Now, there is no Grace so fit to be honored in
Justication, where God gives the pardon of sin as a receiving Grace. A second
Reason, why Faith is employed in the work of Justitication, and not Love,
because Faith will not wrong Christ's honor. Romans 3.27. We are told by the
Apostle, boasting is excluded, by what Law? by the law of works? nay, but by
the law of Faith. v. 28. Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by
Faith, without the deeds of the law. Faith excludes boasting and gives all the
honor to Christ, if Love or Patience were employed in the work of
Justification, they would plead to more meritorious causes, but Faith is the
instrumental cause; so, no wonder Faith be made the principal condition of the
Covenant of Grace, in regard it is so fit to receive from Christ, and it will
not wrong Christ in his honor, it will plead for merit, in regard it is only
to receive what Christ has bestowed. But 4. and lastly, Faith it furnishes all
other Graces work, every other duty is influenced by Faith, patience,
repentance, prayer, and love, are influenced by faith, for faith works by love,
every other Grace is actuated by faith, so until we come to believe, we cannot
repent, we cannot suffer, we cannot pray; all these things, like a body without
a Soul, will be dead and lifeless things, without this Grace of Faith. Lay all
these four together, and ye will see, that in the Order of the commanding part
of the Covenant, Believing has the precedence of all other Graces and Duties;
so in the Order of the commanding part of the Covenant, whatever other Duties
God has commanded, he has especially commanded Believing, that is to be the
first in order of our Obedience, and to have the precedence of all other
Graces, which is necessary to be observed, for many think, that they can go
about other duties before they believe, and that in a way suitable to the
Covenant, but they are altogether mistaken; for there is nothing acceptable to
God without Faith.

Thirdly, In the Order of the commanding part of the Covenant, though Faith be
first and principally requiried, yet it is not only required; Papists calumniat
(...), when they say, we preach, and say, that Faith is only required, it is
the only Instrument of Justification, it is by Faith only that we are
Justified; but it is no faith only, that is the condition of the Covenant of
Grace, therefore in the order of the Covenant, the obedience to the whole Law
comes in after believing; such as would observe the order of the Covenant, must
be obedient to all the commands of the Covenant; it is remarkable, the obedience
that the Covenant of Grace requires, has these three Properties, 1. It must be
new obedience, that is to say, obedience from a new heart, and obediedce
conform to the tenor of the new Covenant; the obedience is new, when the
principle of it is Love; it was of old fear, but it has a new principle, when
the end of it is the exalting of Christ, it was of old the exalting of our
selves 2. The obedience must be strict obedience, I would recommend to you the
excellent discourse, that Master Allan has wirtten in his Vinditiae pietatis,
proving, that the holiness he says of a Christian is strict, ay, no less strict
than that of the Covenant of works requires, every Christian must be a
Precisian, and must labor to strive and wrestle, and take the Kingdom by
violence; to watch against the least beginnings of sin, and the least
encroachments of it on Christ's Honor, or else it is no Obedience according to
the Covenant. 3ly, It must be perpetual Obedience, For if the righteous man
fall from his righteousness, all the righteousness that he has done shall be
forgotten; So the Order of the Covenant runs, that there shall be Graces and
Duties, making up our part of the Covenant, and among these Graces and Duties,
Faith must have the precedence.

Fourthly, The Order of the commanding part of the Covenant requires, first and
principally mortification, and then vivification; ye will find in the promising
part of the Covenant, there are first promises, Ezekiel 36. I will sprinkle
clean water upon them, and I will cause them to walk in my statutes: these that
set to duties, without Mortification of Lusts, observe not the order of the
Covenant; those that never knew what a work of Mortification of inward Lusts
meant, but performs Duties at random, they may perform Duties, but not
according to the tenor of the Covenant: they cannot have peace from the
Covenant, that observe not the order of it; now in the preceptive part of the
Covenant, though he command all the parts of vivication, yet he commands to
begin at Mortification, to cut off the old man of Sin, To cut off the right
hand, to pluck out the right eye, that is to say, to mortify any Lust, that
will be as painful to part with, as our right eye or our right hand, if one sew
a new profession to an old heart, like new wine put into old bottles, or piece
of new cloth to an old garment, it is never suitable to the Covenant; so we see
the Order of the commands of the Covenant, there must be Graces and Duties
joined together, the principal Grace in the Covenant is Faith, and where a
person neglects that, he failw in the principal tenor of the Covenant.

Before I come to speak of the realtive Order of the Covenant, as it relates to
the end, I would have you take notice, that not only is there an order in the
Promises, and Commands of the Covenant, but the Promises and Commands are
excellently forted together, they are sweetly joined; take notice of the union
betwixt the two, and I will speak to a twofold union betwixt them, 1. Take
notice how sweetly they are unite. 2. How strictly they are unite.

First, Take notice how sweetly they are unite; for clearing of this, Take
notice of three things, 1. The Promises are sweet to the Commands, I find some
Divines cast it up, they say, for every Command in the Covenant, there are at
least two Promises; I confess there are some Commands, we may get ten Promises
relating to them, but take them at the lowest, there is no Command in the
Covenant, but there are two Promises for it; ye need not go to think where will
I get a Promise suited to this Duty? ye see, that the Promises and the Commands
are most sweetly unite together, the Promises is a Bond on God to give strength
for the Commands, and readily ye will get two Bonds in the Covenant, for every
particular Command. 2. Take notice, how sweetly they are unite in this, that as
the Promise influences obedience to the Command, so the Command influences, and
evidences an interest in the Promise: the way how to get strength to obey the
Command is, to go to the Promise, and the way to know, if the promise be ours
is, to try our obedience to the Command; so like two bearing a Barrow, they
work to one another hand. 3. The two joined sweetly together, contribute to
keep the heart in an equal frame, the Promise holds out the Reward, and the
Command holds out the service, if we had only a Promise, we would presume, and
if we had only a command, we would despair; and the two laid together, they
sweetly, not only influence one another for our obedience, but the two joined
together, keeps them in an equal balance, the promise keeps from despair, and
the Command from presumption. So nothing could be sweetlier joined together,
than the promise and the command in the Covenant; we would not want any of
them; if we could be so foolish, as to wish the Covenant ordered only of
promises, it had been no way our interest, it had rather made against us than
for us, had we gotten our desire, it had been among the rest of the roavings of
our Spirit; it is really our interest, that we should be servants, and to know
our interest by our obedience; so has he ordered the Covenant well, that has
twisted the two sweetly togegher, in a way suitable to our heart, and his
Fathers honor.

Secondly, Observe, how strictly they are unite together, observe this in three
or four things, and they are to be noticed by all, who would observe the
Covenant. 1. Take notice, that if we have a title to the Promise, we are
necessarily bound to the Command; to think that we will accept the promise, and
lay by the Command, as to overturn the order of the Covenant, they are so knit
together, that as a Woman in Marriage, in her accepting of the Man, she is
bound in obedience to him, so when when accept of the promise, or take it
according to the tenor of the Covenant, we presently in that same very act of
acceptance, are become bound to the Command; it implies a contradiction to say,
we have gotten a Promise, when we cast at a Command, when we accept of the
promising part, we engage to the preceptive part, the reason is, in the order
of the Covenant they cannot be separat, they are so strongly knit together,
that he that accepts of the Promises of the Covenant, he binds himself to the
Commanding part of the Covenant; on ghe other hand, if we engage to the
commanding part, we have a strong Title to the promising part, the promising
part if the Covenant, the greatest and most special Promises of it; if there be
conscience made of the commands of it, he has a Title to all the promises of
it, the reason is, the order of the Covenant, has joined the two together so
strictly, that if we engage with the Commands, we have a right to the Promises.
2. This strictness of the Union betwixt the two in the Covenant, which is
excellently contrived in the order of it, appears in this, that the commanding
and promising part of the Covenant, are in all their parts and pendicles,
inseparably joined together; if we have a right to one Promise, we have a right
to all, we cannot obey one command in the Covenant, and cast at another, for
that overturns, the order, and strict connection betwixt the parts of the
Covenant: I deny not, but one Promise may be sweeter that another, and we may
be better at one duty than at another, we may get more liberty in one duty than
another; but to accept one promise, and cast at another, to accept one duty,
and cast at another, overturns the order of the Covenant, and whoever pretends
to the Covenant, and thinks he has a sweetness from it, and casts at one duty
in the Covenant, and not at another, He that offends in one, he offends in all,
as James says, no, but we may be stronger in one thing, and weaker in another,
but a wilful passing by any duty in the Covenant, and slighting of it, is an
evidence thou despises it. 3. The strictness of the order of the Covenant,
betwixt the Commands and the Promises, will appear in this, that there is no
obedience to the Command can be given, without the Promise, and there is no
evidence of a right to the Promise, without the Command; they are so
inseparably knit, that a man could as soon pluck the Sun out of the Frimamen,
and stop the course of the Moon, as to obey the Commands, without the Promise,
not that I would have you to run away from the duty, but go to the promise with
it; on the other hand, they are so knit together, that it is high presumption
for a man, to lay claim to the Promises, except he give obedience to the
Command; however some may flatter themselves, as the distracted man at Athens,
who would go to the Harbor, with Paper and Ink in his hand, and call for all
the Ships, and take a List of all the Goods into them, and come away rejoicing,
that they are all his; there are many do so in the Covenant, they take the
Promises and count them theirs, but there can be no comfortable evidence of a
Title to the promise, if we conscientiously obey not the Command; the reason of
it is, in the order of the Covenant, he that treated and drew the Covenant, in
all the contents of it; so as there is no Title to the promising part, without
the commanding part, and no obeying the commanding part without the promising
part, so ye see the Order of the Covenant, in reference to the Promisee of the
Covenant, and the Commands of it, and the connection betwixt the Promises and
the Commands. I say no more of the absolute Order of the Covenant.

Before I complete this Discourse of the Order of the Covenant, I would
consider the relative Order of it. Order is a right situating of things in
order to the end. Now, both the Commands and the Promises, whether ye take them
separatly, or jointly in the Covenant, are excellently ordered in reference to
the ends of the Covenant. To open this unto you, I will show you three ends for
which the Covenant of Grace is made with Believers, or with the Mediator in
their name, and ye will find both the Commands and the Promises excellently
ordered, in reference to all the three. (1.) The Covenant of Grace was made to
exalt the Father. (2.) It was made to golrifie the Son. (3.) It was made to
make the Salvation of the Elect sure and easy. Now in reference to all these
three Ends, the Covenant is excellently ordered in all things. I will speak a
little to this, in regard the special order of the Covenant, lies in the wise
ordering of the End, for which it is made. First, I will show you how this Order
of the Promises and Commands, tends to the honor of the Father. (1.) This
Order in the Covenant contributes to exalt the Father; there are some that
write on the Covenant, they offer some excellent Reasons, to prove that the
Father has gotten a great deal more Glory by the Covenant of Geace, than he
has gotten by the Covenant of Works, even though Adam had stood still in his
Integrity: I will only let you see this in two or three particulars; 1.
Consider the Glory of his Justice, the Glory of his Justice is exceedingly
advanced, indeed he had a great deal of Glory of his Justice, when he sent the
Deludge and destroyed the old World, and when he sent fire and brimstone, and
destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, all men might see the Glory of his Justice in
this; but this was nothing to what Christ met with from the Father, Awake, O
sword, and smite the man that is my fellow. Any that heard of the Deludge, and
of destroying Sodom and Gomorrah by fire, would say that he is a just God, that
would not suffer sin to go unpunished; but they that hear of this, that he took
pleasure to bruise his own Son and had a delight in the breaking of Him that
when he stood a Sacrifice in the room of Sinners, he would not forgive him one
Farthing; when he cried upon the Cross with strong cries and tears, being in an
Agony, and commanded the Sword to awake, and smite the man that is my fellow,
he would not stay until his Sword was wet with his hearts Blood; is there not
great glory in his Justice? All the torments of the damned for all eternity,
declare not his gloy, so far as the sufferings of Jesus Christ. (2.) It exalts
the Father, not only in his Justice, but in his Power, all the things that ever
he did to declare his Power, the making the World out of nothing, and giving so
excellent an Order to it, declares him an excellent God: but the Power that
appears in the Refurrection of Christ, and the working of Faith, which is the
exceeding greatness of his Power, outstripes that; when he made the World, he
made it out of nothing, but here he brings it out of its contraries, he brings
a heart of flesh out of a heart of stone, but the raising of Christ from the
Dead, that had all that the Justice of God could do, and all that Satan could
do, he rose and declared himself to be the Son of God with power. (3.) If ye
take notice of his Wisdom, he is the only wise God: the things that we quarrel
at, we find that he did it in Wisdom, he has given great proofs of his Wisdom,
but in nothing more, than what he has given in the Covenant of Grace; that his
Son should come from his Bosom, and be personally unite to man's nature, and in
that nature to suffer, that man might not be condemned; if he take his Mercy,
his Love, and his Grace, and the rest of his Attributes, whatever appeared in
the Covenant of Works, are all nothing to the contrivement of the Covenant of
Grace; so the Order of the Covenant, is so well suited to the end, especially
to his Fathers golry, that in all the things that are done, or would have been
done, from the beginning of the World to the end, it never appeared so; as by
the Covenant of Grace, the Father is exalted above all, that ever the Angels
could devise by this Covenant of Grace. But these are but one of the Ends, the
glorifying of his Son, and making the Salvation of the Elect sure and easy,
are the two great Ends of the Order of the Covenant.

SERMON XXVIII.
2 Samuel 23. Verse 5. Although my house be not so with God; yet he has made
with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is
all my salvation. and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


THere are three special ends of the Covenant of Grace, the exalting the
Father, the glorifying the Son, the making the salvation of the Elect sure and
easy; all these three the Covenant has so ordered, that they tend to promove
both the Promises and Commands; First. The glorifying of the Father, O but he
is infinitely far more glorified by the Covenant of Grace, than by all the
things that ever he did; but I have spoken particularly to this.

I come to the second, the glorifying of the Son, the Covenant is so ordered,
as the Son is exceedingly glorified; Now, ye would consider Christ in reference
to the Covenant, three ways. 2ly. Consider, that all the Glory of these three,
redounds to him alone.

First, Christ is the procurer of the Covenant, the Purchaser of it, however
the Father has infinite Grace, yet this Covenant was bought and paid for by
the Mediator. 2. As he is the Purchaser, he treated the Covenant, he drew the
Contents and all the Articles of it, he drew them to the satisfaction of all
Parties. 3. He is the Executor of it, all the Promises of it are the
accomplishment of his three Offices; all the Promises of pardon, are the
accomplishment of his priestly Office; all the promises of Holiness, are the
accomplishment of his prophetical Office; all the promises of ruling, are the
accomplisment of his kingly Office. Now, since he is the Purchaser of the
Covenant, and the Treater of it, and the Executor of it, what a great deal of
influence has he on the Covenant?

2. The glory of all these redounds to him, there is none to rob him of them.
Some suppose, the standing angels pitied lapsed Man's case, when he was fallen,
yet they could not help it, it was above their reach to contrive the Covenant,
far more to purchase and execute it: so the Angels could have no hand in it;
and as for men, since the Covenant was from eternity, they could have no hand
in it, nothing contributed more to exalt the Mediator, for he was both the
Purchaser and Treater of it, and paid for it, and execute it, and alone did
it, without the help of Angel or man. So the Covenant of Grace, cries down all
the Merit and Price, and the glory of the treating of it, and purchasing of it,
redounds only to Christ.

Thirdly, This Covenant is ordered suitably to the third end, to make the
Salvation of the Elect have three Properties; First, Sure; Secondly, easy to
be attained; and Thirdly, Suitable. 1. It makes it sure, the Covenant made with
Adam, tho it had a perfect man standing as a Party, yet he was a fallible man.
Adam could fall, and actually did fall, so it was put in the hand of a man,
whose estate was great; but it was possible for him to be a Bankrupt and
deboisht, and to make shipwreck of his stock; that made not the Salvation of
the Elect sure. 2. This Covenant makes the Salvation of the Elect easy, for
the Cautioner takes a Discharge of all things, by way of satisfaction and
payment, so that there is nothing left for us to pay. 3. This Coventant is also
suitable, to have Heaven without Holiness, is like Pearls on a swines snout, it
will be only the Holy, that will come to glory, For without holiness none shall
see God. So in effect, the Covenant is ordered in all things, in its Commands
and Promises, and the connection of the Promises and Commands, with a reference
to the ends for which the Coventant was made, the glorifying of the Father, the
exalting of the Son, and making the Salvation of the Elect sure and easy, and
then suitable to it. I shall say no more of the ordering of the Covenont, but
will now come to the application of the point.

Use First, Is the Covenant thus well ordered in all things, in its Promises
and Commands, and with a reference to all its ends? Then first, it serves for
Information and it informs us of these four things. 1. That one great Duty,
that readily many Christians may neglect, who plead the Coventant, but they
take no notice of the order, that the Mediator has observed in the drawing of
the Covenant, this order is not taken notice of, and I would press your
Observation of the Order of the Covenant, with these four or five
considerations. 1. Not to observe the Order of the Covenant, is to reflect on
the Mediator, who when he drew one Promise, to be accomplished before another,
and one Duty to be done before another, understood what he was doing; he that
would have absolute Promises to be accomplished, before the conditional, and
promises of our Estate in Christ, and being in him, before the Promises of our
fellowship with him; he that in the Commands would have believing to be a great
Duty, and first and principally to be performed, understood well what he was
doing; he that observes not the order of the Covenant, but snatches at a
Promise, and takes a stolen Apple off the Tree that is not his own, he
reflects on the Mediator; it was the product of his infinite wisdom, to order
the Covenant, and he that observes it not, reflects on the Mediator 2ly. The
Spirit in the communication of Promises, and applying them, observes the order
of the Covenant; the Spirit will not speak peace to him, who is not pardoned;
the Spirit will not speak peace to one that is in nature, and without
Repentance; the Spirit keeps the order of the Covenant, and if thou observe not
the order of the Covenant, but will snatch at a promise of peace, without
pardon, and at promises of pardon without Repentance, and at a promise of
Repentance, while thou art in a natural state, thou first reflects on the
Mediatior, that contrived the Covenant, and secondly, on the Spirit, that
understood the method of the Covenant. 3ly. Not to observe the method of the
Covenant, is to make Christ the Minister of sin; if one should take that
promise, I am he that blots out iniquity, transgression, and sin, and observes
not the order of the Covenant, that is a Promise made to them that have a right
to the Covenant, and to them that are effectually called, and to them to whom
the Spirit of Repentance is given, ye that do this, make Christ the Minister of
Sin, and the Covenant an occasion of Sin. 4ly. Not to observe the order of the
Covenant, is the high way to a Delusion, nothing will contribute more to delude
the Spirit, and to set up a counterfit peace, than when we lay our head on the
cod af a Promise; if there be a sound sleep gotten at all, it will be on that
cod; but in the mean time, has not observed the order of the Covenant. What
kind of peace can there be from a Promise that a man has stolen, adn that one
is making use of that has no right to it? It will be one of the quarrels
against thee, that thou has broken the Orchard, and stolen the Fruit, for thou
came not to it in the order of the Covenant; and this is the reason, why many
their peace is neither so easy, nor so lastie, nor cannot abide a storm, for
they take Promises, but not according to the order of the Covenant. 5ly. And
lastly, not to observe the order of the Covenant, brings the soul readily under
the threatening of God, and in the end, under the curse of the Covenant; it is a
great assertion of a great Divine, says he, he that steals a Promise that he
has not a real Right to, has a real Right to the Threatening; so, where the
order of the Covenant is not observed, the peace that we pretend to have from a
stolen Promise, it turns to grief, and to a real Threatening, and in the end to
the Curse. These Motives press you to observe the order of the Covenant, I
believe there are many, that have been looking to the Promises, that have not
observed this, but ye cannot plead the Promises, but according to the order of
the Covenant.

Quest. It may be inquired here, what should a Christian do, that he may have a
claim to the Covenant in the order of it?

Ans. For opening this to you, and it is the great thing that I design, in this
branch of the order of the Covenant; I will offer you some few Directious, that
ye may come to know a Promise, according to the order of the Covenant. 1. I
would have you to go home, and among other things, lay this before God, that ye
have entirely submitted to the order of the Covenant, if ye have not adverted
to it before, if ye have thought it enough, if ye have gotten a Promise in
Jeremiah, and in Ezekiel, and ye presently lay down your head on that cod, and
sung the requiem and peace to your self; go now and tell him, that ye submit to
the Order of the Covenant, and that ye could not make it better; if ye had been
at the making of it, it is better ordered, than ye could order it, For he was
Christ, the power and wisdom of God, that did it; and tell him, ye will take no
promise again, except it come in by the order of the Covenant; make this one of
the Articles of your Indenturing with him, that ye shall not rashly take a
promise, unless ye know the Tree to whom it belongs. 2ly. If ye would have
peace coming in according to the Tenor of the Covenant, labor to have an
interest in the Covenant, and then plead the Promises of the Covenant; your
interest in the Covenant is made up, by your interest in Christ, he is the
Bridegroom, and the Covenant is the Contract; your Interest in him is known,
by your effectual calling; I have pitied some ignorant careless persons, that
tell, they have gotten a Promise, but what is their Right to the Covenant of
Promises? Will ever one get a Promise, that has no Interest in the Covenant?
They may steal a Promise, and take an Apple off the Apple tree that is not
theirs, and lay their head on that God, and sleep on it, but it is stolen, and
they have the curse for stealing the Apple, and breaking the Orchard Labor
then to have an Interest in the Covenant, that ye may say, The Lord has made
with me an everlasting Covenant; ye may ask the mark of one that has an
Interest in the Covenant: if ye married the man in effectual calling, after
long wooing of you by the Law, and ye have given your heart to him, and he has
given love to you, so that ye may say, I am my beloveds, and my beloved is
mine: but to plead the Promise, and have no right to the Covenant, and not to
marry the man, is to steal a Promise off a Tree that ye have no right to. 3ly.
If thou would have a mercy coming in by the order of the Covenant, Observe, if
the Spirit that accomplishes the Promises of the Covenant, has made out the
absolute and fundamental promises in the Covenant, before the conditional; he
first begins with the Promise of Repentance, and then he comes to Pardon, and
then he comes to the promise of Peace, founded on Pardon; thou that has a
Promise, that thou thinks has come in by the order of the Covenant, the Spirit
has kept the order of giving thee it, if the Spirit has given thee it, he
first takes away the heart of stone, and then he sprinkles clean water, and
then he gives the Spirit of Repentance, and then he will give thee to believe,
and then give thee pardon, thou must come in this way, or then thou comes not
in by the order of the Covenant. So if thou would have thy mercies coming in by
the order of the Covenant Observe, if the fundamental promises, and promises of
the first Graces have been accomplished to thee, other ways in the rest of the
promises, the Spirit must overturn the order of the Covenant, if thou thinks he
has given thee peace, but not in this order and method, thou may cry peace,
and make a blaze, but it will go out in the dark of the night; so if ye would
know, if ye have gotten a promise in the order of the Covenant, observe these
Rules. 4ly. If thou would be at a promise in the order of the Covenant, take
this rule, observe whether thou keeps the order of the Commands of the
Covenant; the order of the Commands in the Covenant, is, first believe, and
then pray, first believe, and then hear, first believe, and then rejoice;
believing is the great condition of our part of the Covenant, because he saw
believing so glorious to him, and to his Father, that it would not rob him of
his honor, nor wrong Christ of his glory, it will not do as readily our love
would do, love would plead a kind of Works, but believing pleads only to be an
Instrument of Justification; see that thou rightly observe the Commands,
according to the order in the Covenant, that is to say, when thou goes to vent
thy heart to God in a corner, thou have first believed, and then thou have
prayed; when thou go to the Church to hear a word, thou has first acted
Faith, and then thou have heard; if this method be not kept, thou observes
not the order of the Covenant. So if ye would know, if the Promise ye have
gotten, has come in to you according to the order of the Covenant; observe if
ye keep the order of the Covenant in your obedience, ye first believe, and that
makes you take up the Bible and read, and to desire spiritual conference, and
use Christian fellowship; we must first believe, and then obey, otherways it
will not be according to the order of the Covenant, we must ask in Faith, and
what is not of Faith is son. 5ly. And lastly, if ye would try, if the Promise
ye have gotten comes in by the order of the Covenat, I exhort thee to have a
holy jealousy and suspiciousness, that ye may have been in a mistake about
that Promise, take a view of the Covenant; ye may say that we preach doubtings
with the Papists to folk, but I exbort thee, who has gotten a Promise
according to the order of the Covenant, not to doubt, your Peace stands on as
sure a ground, as Heaven and earth; but we do exhort you, that ye do not
lightly lay hold on a Promise, otherwise into your coming by it, ye have taken
an Apple off a Tree that is not yours, and has but stolen a Promise; try if
ye have submitteel to the Covenant, if ye have a right to the Covenant, and if
the Spirit has made out the absolute Promises, and if your life and
conversation has looked like the order of the Covenant, if ye first believe,
and then pray, and come to the Church, if these be not, I exhort thee to
suspect thy self, and rather to quite a Promise, than to entertain a deluding
peace. So ye see the necessity of looking to the order of the Covenant, and the
rules and marks, whereby ye may try, if any Promise ye have gotten, has come
in by the way of the Covenant, and if it has not come in so, it will be vomit
up again, and of all the ill smelled things in the world, that will be one, to
swallow down a Promise and vomit it up again.

Use. 2. The second use of the point, is there such an excellent Order in the
Covenant, then I would have thee to submit to this Order in the Covenant, and I
will offer you four cases, wherein I would press you to submit to the Order of
the Covenant. I believe there are many, and I wonder often, that both my self
and other Ministers, that we are not more in preaching so necessary a truth,
that its not more ordinar, to tell people, that they have gotten a Promise, and
they observe not the Order of the Promise. 1. I exhort you to submit to this
Order of the Covenant, in your desires, when we go to God with our prayers, the
thing we pray for, is never prayed for right, except we submit our desires in
two things. 1. I desire you may submit your desires in trying the things ye
make request for, submit to it according to the tenor of the Covenant; do not
say, give me pardon, when he has not given Repentance; do not say, Justify
me, when he has not effectually called you; for ye bid him in that case,
overturn the Order of the Covenaut. 2ly. I would have you submit to it, in the
answer of your desires, many a time we go to him, and of all the fruitless
works we go about throughout the week, is Prayer; we never know our selves a
strae-broad better at the Weeks end, than at the beginning of it, when we have
been in secret morning and evening, and sometime at midtime of the day, the
reason is, ye go not to him according to the Order of the Covenant, it is an
unreasonable desire to bid him overturn the thing that his Son has treated,
and sealed with his own Blood, and paid for; we go to him, and desires him not
according to the Order of the Covenant, we cry, give me Peace, and give me
Pardon, and it may be, he has not given Repentance; therefore learn from this
Sermon, to submit your desires, and the answers of them, to the ordering of the
Covenant; and I am confident, there are many that use to go to God, if ye would
cast up your reckoning, what ye desired, and the way of your desires, whatever
it was, it was something inconsistent with the Order of the Covenant, that the
Mediator treated. In the second place, I would have you to submit your practice
to the Order of the Covenant; ye were hearing, that believing is the first and
principal thing, and other Duties must be influenced by faith; many when they
go to pray, observe not this, and when they come to hear, they hear not in
faith; what ever they ask, they ask not in faith; they would have Prayer,
Hearing, Repentance, without Faith, which is not according to the Order of the
Covenant; Submit thy practice to the Order of the Covenant, when thou goes to
God, examine if it be according to the Order of the Covenant. 3ly. I would have
thee submitting thy Enjoyments, to the order of the Covenant; I mean, even thy
greatest Spiritual Enjoyments; the Lord has ordered the Covenant so, as he
has the timing of the Peace, and deliverance of his Ghurch, and the
communications of his Spirit to his people; many a time we would limit God, in
asking peace, and delivering the Church, we bid him do this the day, or to
morrow; the Covenant is so ordered, as he has left the timing of these to him,
who is a Lord of his Liberty; thou that will quarrel, I was at this Sermon and
that Sermon, and I saw him not, and I go to him in corners, and I scarce find
him; ye would take notice, that the ordering of the Covenant, it secures the
mercy, yet it allows him the timing of it, in the ordering of the Covenant. And
lastly, I would have you to submit to this order in the Covenant, not only your
desires, your practices and your enjoyments, but also subrnit to it, in every
thing, whatever be more comprehended under any of these three. O! If this were
more observed, readily there would be more peace.

Use 3. But to close all, because of the time, I would close all with a word to
three sorts of persons, and shall say no more. The first shall be a word of
Reproof, to them that observe not this order, and they are the generality among
us; and the truth is, it makes up a frothy Profession, these that perform
duties without Faith, these that have gotten a promise, without a right from
the Govenant, they observe not the order of the Commands and Promises: they
hear, they pray, they wait on Ordinances, they confer, and have spiritual
fellowship, and in the mean time they do it without the spirit of faith; I tell
thee, and I close with this part of these four Sermons, that thou boserves not
the order of the Covenant, and thou shall never be the better of the Covenant:
It was a well contrived and a wisely ordered Covenant, and ye that think to
take Heaven in another order and way, and will not first believe, and then do,
and thou will take a Promise, without observing the order of the Covenant, thou
shall have the Lord meeting thee in the valley of decision, with, what have
thou to do to take my Covenant in thy mouth? And thou shall have a real curse,
for taking a Promise that thou have no right to, and stealing an Apple off a
Tree that is not thine. 2ly. I exhort all of you, to observe the order of the
Covenant better; it is a business of a Heaven and of a Hell, if ye would feed on
the consolations of the Covenant, the blessed Jesus, who was the Wisdom of the
Father, he drew it, treated it, contrived it in such an order, in Commands and
Promises, and the sweet harmony of Commands and Promises. I exhort you, among
all the Sermons preached on this Text, that ye would observe the order of the
Covenant, which readily may be more necessary for you, than any part of the
Bible; but for Believers that have observed this, I have three or four things
to say to them, and will close with it. 1. Christian, I exhort thee to build on
the Covenant, O! it is well ordered. There are some Divines regrate, that in our
Church we want Evangelick Psalms, taken out of the New Testament, on the
immediate praises, not Typical praises, but the express praises of Jesus Christ:
though I be against the Papists on this head, yet it is a thing we may have
drawn up; as Simeons Song, and Mary's Song, to be sung among us; yet what ever
of this be, we are to be be praising him, for the right guiding of the
Covenant; the Father could wish no more in the rigor of Justice, and we could
wish no more, in the rigor of Grace, than we have gotten; therefore build nto
only on the Covenant, but when ye have any occasion, ye are to tune over a Song
to God, and bless him for the order of the Covenant, and for the treating of
the Commands of the Covenant. 2ly. I would have you making use of a main
particular in the ordering of the Covenant, and the not usemaking of it, undoes
a Believers peace; that is to say, 1. The Covenant is so ordered, that he is to
pay for all our debt. 2ly. He is to pay for all the infirmities of the heart
3ly. When there are any failings, that he shall accept of the sincerity of the
will for perfection, therefore go ye, and make use of the order of his own
contriving, he has done the business, so as there is not a Groat left to thee
and me to pay; the Father has received a ransom, and he has paid the whole
Shot, he has ordered the Covenant so, as it is not laid on me in the Covenant,
to take away my heart of stone, but it runs, I will take away the heart of
stone; now Isay, press this order of the Covenant on him, and be supported with
it, for your friends, and for your selves; and when there comes to be any fail
or breach made, and ye have gotten a wound for it, as a Beleiver may have all
his bones borken, as David had his, Plal. 51. know, that he is bound to bind up
your wounds, and press him with it, for he is abundantly able to pay; never
press him with less than he has undertaken in the Covenant; press him that he
would keep you from a delusion, and from laying a stolen Apple to your door,
but have first a right to the Apple Tree. I will close this, with pressing you
to improve these Sermons on the order of the Covenant; I know no Scripture will
contribute more for your illumination, than this order of the Covenant, for it
may shake many of your peaces, therefore go and observe the order of the
Covenant.

SERMON XXIX.
2 Samuel 23. Verse 5. Although my house be not so with God; yet he has made
with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is
all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


HAving spoken in some preceding Sermons to the order of the Covenant, and
showed the necessity of observing the order of the Covenant, both in its
Promises and Commands, and rebuked those that steal a Promise, and lay it as a
God to Security to sleep on, while in the mean time the Promise comes not in,
according to the order of the Covenant, the absolute Promise not accomplished,
and yet claiming to the conditional Promise: A multitude of things of this
nature have been handled.

But I come now to the third property of this Covenant, and sure, it is ordered
in all things and sure; if this property were wanting, all the rest of the
properties would be insignificant, for it would not be everlasting, though it
were never so well ordered, nor it would not be comfortable, unless it were
sure.

The word in the Hebrew Montanus, renders it Conditum, others render it
Munitum, it is ordered in all things and fortified; it is a word in the Hebrew,
that comes from a Root that signifies to guard, a Metaphor borrowed from a
Garrison, when Soldiers use to ly in Garrisons together; it is ordered in all
things, and guarded and Garisoned, but our Translation has it, It is ordered
in all things and sure, and accordingly I will take it in handling this Theme.

The word sure, it imports many things into it, it is a Covenant, that God will
not change not alter, nor yet that he will break; it is called 2 Chronicles. 13 5. A
Covenant of salt; when Abijah comes out to fight with Jeroboam, who had stolen
Israel from the House of David, ought venot to know, says he, that the Lord God
of Israel, gave the Kingdom over Israel to David for ever, even to him and to
his Sons, by a covenant of salt; now salt is the thing that keeps any thing
from purrifaction, the thing that is salted uses to be preserved; so ye find it
Numb. 18.19. speaking of the Priests portion of the offerings, It is a covenant
of salt for ever before the Lord, unto thee, and to thy seed with thee; so a
Covenant of salt, that is, it is a Covenant that will not putrify nor corrupt.
But I will take this property of the Covenant, as it lies translated in this
text, and shall propose this observation from it.

Doctrine. That among many excellent ingredients and properties of the Covenant
this is one, that it is sure, it is ordered in all things and sure. The mercies
of David are called sure mercies, Isaiah 55.3. Incline your ear, and come unto
me, hear, and your soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting Covenant
with you, even the sure mercies of David. But ye have a remarkable word, to
confirm this property of the Covenant, that is sure, among many others in the
Bible, Jer. 33.20. Thus says the Lord, if you can break my Covenant of the day
and of the night, and that there should not be day and night in their season,
then may also my Covenant be broken with David my servant, etc. Now, is there
any thing surer than night and day in their season? Since the foundation of the
earth was laid, this has never failed, what ever reelings have been in the
world, day and night in their season has never failed; now the Covenant is no
less sure than night and day in their season; a number of such like Scriptures
might be brought to prove that it is sure.

Now I would insist a little in proving that it is sure, and then shall clear
some Practical Questions about it, and 3ly, shall apply it.

And First, that I may let you see that your Faith walks not upon ice, that
will crack under you, and break through, while you take you to the Covenant, but
upon a sure foundation, I will offer you reasons of two sorts, to prove that it
is sure, and the laying of them together, will make it appear a very rational
truth.

I shall first give you some negative Reasons; and secondly, some positive
Reasons; which being laid together will evince that it is guarded, fortified
and sure.

Reas. 1. Negative. For the first, the Negative Reasons that will contribute to
prove it sure, I shall reduce them to three heads, or rather there are three
things, that use to make a Covenant or Bargain unsure, and all the three are
removed from this Covenant of Grace. 1. Either there must be something makes it
unsure on Gods part; or 2. There must be something on our part; or 3. There is
something makes it unsure in the nature and form of a Covenant. These three
ordinarily in Bargains makes them unsure, and none of the three can concur, to
make this Covenant unsure; examine all the three, and ye will find is one of
the best secured Bargains that ever was made to any.

First, There can be nothing on Gods part; there are three things on men's part,
that make a Covenant or Bargain unsure, and none of them all concur in God. 1.
Often men makes Bargains, and they forget them; it is remarkable Pharaohs chief
Butler, when Joseph had interpretred his dream, promised that he would remember
him, but when he was advanced to his Dutlership again, he forgot him. Genesis
40.23. But this cannot be incident to God in making this Covenant, Psalm. 111.5.
He will ever be mindful of his Covenant; And Heb. 6.10. For God is not
unrighteous, to forget you work and labor of love, which ye have showed
toward his Name, etc. Now, forgetfulness in him, would be unrighteousness.
2ly. Severals break their Covenants, not only through forgetfulness, but
through weakness and impotency, they are not able to fulfill them, and
therefore they break them; now this cannot be in God, we believe, (and it is
the first Article of our Greed, and we may believe all the rest the better that
it is there.) We believe in God the Father Almighty, He that measured the
waters in the hollow of his hand, and metted out the Heaven with the span, and
comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the moutains in
scales, and the hills in a bullance, in not he able to fulfill his Covenant?
There is no promise in all the Bible, but he is able to fulfill it. 3ly.
Severals break their Bargains through unrighteousness, the rue them again;
there are some make vows to God, and they seek out all the evasions in the
world they can get, to satisfy their Conscience, that they may be loosed from
those vows; they do (as Lycurgus said some do with their Oaths and their Vows)
as Children use to do with French Kyles, they are at a great deal of pains to
get them set up, and in right order, and when they are all set up, they
presently roll a Boul among them, to throw them down again: but this cannot be
in God, there is no Attribute in him prejudged by his unrighteousness, his
mercy, his justice, his glory, is more advanced by this Covenant, than the
Covenant of Works; so he cannot do with his Covenant, as we do with ours;
readily they that do so with their Bargains and Covenants, they are like a
Horse kept within a Hedge, they are peaceable, but when they break ovee the
Hedge, they range over the Country; so do men with their Covenants, so long as
they are kept within the Hedge of the Covenant, they seek not so much after
their lusts, but when they have broken over ihe Hedge, they get liberty to
follow their lusts; so, there can be no failing of the Covenant upon Gods part.

2ly. It cannot be unsure on our part, it is true, here would appear the
greatest weakness, but it is abundantly secured on our part; Remember ye not
what ye heard, when I was speaking of the Covenants being everlasting; That a
Believer cannot fall out of a Covenanted estate, unless God break unto him: Now
it cannot be unsure, in regard there are four of five kinds of Promises in the
Covenant, that makes it sure on our part. First, There are Promises of the
first graces the want of an heart of flesh, the want of clean water sprinkled
on us, cannot make the Covenant unsure on our part, because all these are
promised. 2ly. On our part, it is true we have grace, but it cannot act, and one
may think, that will make the Covenant unsure, but there are promises of
influence in the Covenant, Hos. 14.5. I will be as the dew unto Israel, he
shall grow as the Lilly, and shoot forth is roots as Lebanon. 3ly. That might
make the Covenant unsure on our part, we may break and fall away; but there are
promises of perseverance in the Covenant; remarkable it that promise, Jer.
32.48. And I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn
away from them to do them good, but I will put my fear in their hearts, that
they shall not depart from me: It Is made an everlasting Covenant, because not
only God will not turn away from them, to do them good, but he will put his
fear in their heart, that they shall not depart from him. 4ly. It may make the
Covenant seem unsure on our part, that we are guilty, and will not that make
him break? No, guiltiness on our part will not break the Covenant, for there
are promises of repentance, and promises of a righteousness of faith, to cover
our guiltiness, if once we be really in Covenant with him, he must break to us,
before we can come out of a covenanted estate with him. Must it not stand then
on very sure terms, when there is nothing either upon Gods part, or our part,
that can break this Covenant, and make it unsure?

But thirdly, The Covenant may be unsure, because of the nature or form of a
Covenant; and in this covenant, none of these two can concur to make it unsure;
and First, there is nothing in the nature of it can make it unsure, in Disputs
with some, who have labored to loose the ties of National Covenants; there are
three things has been objected against them, it is true, all of them
groundlesly objected against them; but that they be Objections against this
Covenant of Grace, ye will find them far from having any foundation. 1. They
tell us, a Covenant is not sure, when it is contrair to former lawful Oaths; no
question a Covenant about indifferent things, contrair to former lawful Oaths,
cannot be lawful; and the Instance they bring is, the tie of the Covenant was
contrair to lawful Oaths, and therefore cannot be binding: but this cannot be
pretended to in the Covenant of Grace in the least shadow of it. 2ly. They say,
the Tie of a Covenant cannot be binding, when the matter comes to be
impossible, the thing we promised when it was lawful, becomes sinful when it is
impossible; yet the Tie of the Covenant, binds us to the outmost of our
Endeavors, now in the Covenant of Grace, there is nothing in it impossible for
God, nor can we say, from them nature of this Covenant, that there is any thing
in it impossible. 3ly. They say, a Covenant is not binding, when the nature of
it is unlawful; they say, if they promise to give a man a Sword in his hand
against such a day, and if the man Distract against that day, the nature of the
case is unlawful, and comes to be altered; but this cannot be alleged in the
nature of this Covenant, that there is any circumstance occurring, that God did
not forsee, when he made it, and consequently, there can be nothing in the
nature of the Covenant, to make it unsure; go through all the Articles and
parts of it, and there is nothing in the nature of the Covenant, especially
proceeding from God, whose Will is the first Rule of what is lawful or
unlawful, and ye will find nothing that can make it unsure; we maintain in
Schools, that there are many things commanded, he might have commanded
otherways; for his Will is the first rule of Truth and Error; it is his Will
that makes this a Truth, and that an Error; so that there can be nothing
unlawful in it, nothing impossible in it, nothing contrare to any former deed
or act of his, therefore there can be nothing in all the nature of the
Covenant, that can make it unsure.

2ly. There is sometimes something in the form of the Covenant, that will make
it unsure, as if one drew a Contract, and drew it not well, he put all things
necessar into it, but he put in some irritant Clauses into it, that if a person
fulfill not, and perform not such and such things, then and in that case, the
Covenant is void and of none effect; but there is nothing in the form of this
Covenant that is irritant, he was excellent at drawing the Covenant, he was
Christ the Wisdom of God that drew it, it is the product of the Wisdom of God.
Though we believe not, yet he is to abide faithful, 2 Timothy 2.13. Likewise Psalm.
89.30 If David's children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments, etc.
Yet v. 34. My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out
of my lips. There is no irritant Clause in all the Covenant, that ever will
make it unsure; so laying all these negative Reasons together, either on Gods
part, or on our part, or in the nature or form of the Covenant, ye will find
nothing in it at all, that has the least tendency to insure it, but it remains
sure, and therefore as it is ordered in all things, so it is sure.

Reasons Positive. Take some positive Grounds and Reasons to prove that the
Covenant is sure, (it shall be a witness against you in the day of the Lord, if
ye seriously improve them not for your advantage) take some sure foundations on
which it stands and is built, and in them ye will see how sure it is. Reason 1.
All the promises of the Covenant, are the result of the Decrees and Purposes of
God, it is not so with the Commands, the Lord may command to do something he
has not decreed should be done, the Lord commanded Abram to kill Isaat, and
offer him up in a burnt-offering, he decreed not that he should be killed and
offered up in a burnt-offering; it is not so with the Promises of the Covenant,
there is no Promise, but it is answerable to some Purpose and Decree of God;
there is nothing he has promised to do, but he has decreed it so to be; so
that the promises of the Covenant, and the decrees are of equal extent; there
are none of them larger and longer than other, what ever is promised, is
decreed; and in order to the salvation of he Elect, what ever is purposed is
promised, the decree cannot be altered. Psalm. 2.7. I will declare the decree,
the Lord has said to me, thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee. His
Decrees are surer than the decrees of the Medes and Persians, there is nothing
can alter his Decree, his Counsel must stand, shall he say it, and shall it not
be? Shall he decree, and shall it not come to pass? What a reflection were it
on the unchangeable God, if his Decree could be altered? So the Covenant must
be sure. Reason 2. This Covenant must be sure, for it is founded in his Love as
well as his Decree. Jer. 31.3. I have loved thee with everlasting love,
therefore with loving kindness will I gather thee. The Covenant is as it were
gathering with loving kindness, there are some acts of Justice, that he has
seemed to us to change, he commanded Jonah to go to Nineveh, and proclaim it
will be destroyed, yet he will not destroy it; it is true, there was no change
in God in that, for he threatened to destroy it only conditionally, in case they
repented not, and they repented; but there is no act of his love, that ever he
seemed to propose, that ever he seemed to change; what ever is founded in his
love, ye will not find changes of it, except it be to the sense of a Believer;
and the Covenant is founded in his everlasting love, and consequently, the
Covenant must be everlasting it self, because it is grounded in his love.
Reason 3. The Covenant cannot be but sure, in regard it is founded in the Blood
of his Son, it is purchased by Christ: ye have heard, when I was speaking on
that, He has made with me an everlasting Covenant, when I spoke of the Author
of the Covenant, and of the fourfold influence, that Christ had on this
Covenant, among other things, I told you, he has purchased it, there no
Article of it all, but it is the price of his Blood, he gave himself and died
for that end, that he might purchase the Covenant; and since it is in every
Article of it put chased by him; and since, before ever the Father consented to
one Article, or subscribed to one Article of the Covenant, he laid down his
life, and shed his blood, how can that Covenant alter? Shall his Blood be as
the woman of Tekoa said of Absalom to David, All we are like water spilt upon
the ground, that cannot be gathered up again? Shall his Blood be so? That is
impossible. So, this Covenant standing on these three Foundations, is it any
wonder, that it be entirely and absolutely a sure Covenant, alswell as a well
ordered Covenant? But add in the 4th place, consider the Seals he has put to
the Covenant; since it is the result of his Decree, and of his Sons Blood, and
of his Love, these were enough to ratify it; but he has to do with
unbelieving hearts, that scarce will credit him, therefore he has put to many
Seals to it; and I will only name you three or four Seals, he has put to the
Covenant to make it sure. 1. He has sealed it with the death of his Son, the
death of the Testator makes the Testament of force, Heb. 9.16. Where a
Testament is, here must also he of necessity, the death of the Testator, for a
Testament is of farce after men are dead, otherwise it is of no force at all,
while the Testator lives. 2ly. He has Sealed it with the Witness of his
Spirit, every Believer is sealed by the Spirit, Ephesians 1.13. In whom also after ye
have believed, ye were sealed with that holy spirit of promise; it is an
excellent confirmation of all the Promises of the Covenant, when he gives the
Spirit. 3ly. He has confirmed it by his Oath, Heb. 6.17 Wherein God willing
more abundantly, to show unto the heirs of promise, the immutability of his
counset, confirmed it by an oath. Verse 18. That by two immutable things, in
which it is impossible for God to lie, we might have strong consolation. 4ly.
He has confirmed it by the Seals of the Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords
Supper, which should make you, when ye hear of the occasion of the Sacrament of
the Supper, to run to it; there are many very indifferent about it, yet in
other places, they run to the occasion in multitudes. All these four Seals laid
together, prove this Covenant to be sure, for whom he loves, he loves to the
end. Lay all these grounds together, and these four Seals superadded, and ye
will see, that there is not the least ground left, to doubt of the certainty of
it, for both as to the negative and positive Reasons, it has all things that
can sicker a Covenant.

To make way to some Questions about this sureness of the Covenant, I will give
you these two things superadded to all the former Grounds to prove it sure. 1.
The Covenant of Grace is surer than the Covenant of Nature; now the Covenant of
Nature is very sure, the Mountains stand firm, and the Sea keeps its ebbing and
flowing; the Sun keeps his course, and the Moon keeps her course, and loses not
an hour, and the Stars keep their course; so that a man may prognosticat all
the Eclipses to the end of the World; the reason is, the Covenant of Nature is
so sure, and the Order given to them is so sure, as there may be a sure
Prognostication given, of all the changes to the end of the World, yet they are
not so sure, as the Covenant of Grace; he may alter the Covenant of Nature, and
not be unfaithful, he may make the Fire not burn, he may make the Sun stand
still, he may make the Iron swim, he may make the Hills skip like Lambs, he may
divide Jordan, and may alter many things in the Covenant of Nature, and not be
unfaithful; but if he alter one Article in the Covenant of Grace, if he
glorify not one that is Redeemed, and pardon not one that is a Penitent, he
would be unfaithful, he would deny himself; for God may alter and overturn
things in nature, but he cannot alter one Clause of the Covenant of Grace,
without a reflection on his faithfulness. 2ly. This Covenant of Grace is no
less sure, than the Covenant of Redemption, that was made betwixt the Father
and the Mediator; for in effect, it is a Stream of that Ocean: there are many
of our Divines, that continue still to make the Covenant of Grace, and the
Covenant of Redemption, one Covenant; Mr. Dickson has distinguished them, and
as appears very rationally, they having distinct Articles, and distinct
Parties, but whether they be distinct Covenants, or Equal, they are equal in
the point of certainty, they are not surer than other. So that if Christ might
break one Article of the Covenant of Grace, he might break one Article of the
Covenant of Redemption.

SERMON XXX.
2 Samuel 23. Verse 5. Although my house be not so with God; yet he has made
with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is
all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


IT is one sweet Property of the Covenant of Grace, that it is sure, I labored
to prove this in the Forenoon, and before I apply this Doctrine, there are two
practical Questions, I will but briefly touch.

Quest. The first is this, is not the Covenant unsure in some things?
Particularly, is it not unsure as to the date and time of the accomplishment of
the Promises? Who can tell when he will bring in the Jews, or when the fullness
of the Gentiles will come, or when he will give deliverance to his Church, or
when he will return to a Believer, whom he has deserted? Do we not find the
Promises generally sine die, there is no day nor term put in the Promises? Who
would take a Bond, and count it a sure Bond, that had no term nor day set down
in it? And does not this render the Covenant unsure? Now for clearing of this
Question, I desire ye may take notice of these three things. 1. It Is true, the
Promises have not a day set down, they that will sit down, and tell within such
and such a time, such and such things will come to pass, they are adding to the
Covenant their own Inventions; yet we have in the Covenant several things,
relating to the term and day, that are sufficient, and ye will find four things
relating to the Term and Day. 1. Ye find the Vision is for a set time, there is
a determinat time with God, Psalm. 102.13. Thou shall arise and have mercy upon
Zion, for the time to favor her, yea the set time is come; So we know, and may
comfort ourselves in this, that there is a set time of the accomplishment of
the Promises with God. Habakkuk 2.2, and 3. verse, And the Lord answered, and
said, write the vision, and make it plain upon tables, that he may run that
reads it, for the vision is not yet for an appointed time, but at the end it
shall speak and not lie, though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely
come, it will not tarry. 2. We have this relating to the Term, that it will be
a short time; it is among the last Letters that we received from the Mediator of
the Covenant, Rev. 22.12. Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to
give every man according as his work shall be. He is making all the haste he
can, he will not tarry, nay he will come quickly, and that is more than he will
not tarry. 3ly. We have this in the Covenant, that that time will be a
seasonable time, when he comes with the accomplishment of the Promise; It will
be a seasonable time, 1 Pet. 5.6. Humble your selves therefore under the mighty
hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time. 2 Cor. 6.2. For he says, In a
time acceptable I have heard thee, etc. That is, a seasonable time; now what
would we have more? Is there any uncertainty in the Promises, though they be
sine die, or though they be given as a Bond without a Term? When he has put in
all these, that there is a set time, and that it will be a short time, and
accomplished in a seasonable time? But I add secondly, that though there be not
a diet in the Promises, and God delay the accomplishment of the Promises; yet
his delaying the accomplishment of the Promises, and not putting in a day, are
for our advantage. I will offer you three things remarkable, in Gods delaying
the accomplishment of the Promises. 1. Sometimes he will delay one Promise, and
yet be accomplishing another, the Promise that we would be at, we stand in need
of the accomplishment of another before it come, several times he delays the
Promise of Pardon, because we have not been humbled enough, we are waiting for
the Promise of Peace, and he follows us with a challenge, or a trouble in the
Conscience, the Wars seems to grow now, the delaying of a Promise of Peace may
be advantageous, for the sore must be ripped us, before any thing can be applied
for healing: this delay is our interest, though we expect (when we take our
selves to a Promise) that we must have the Peace, the quiet, the joy, that
Believers have; you mistake it, the Wound must be lanced better, before any
healing can be applied. 2ly. Sometimes he delays the accomplishment of the
Promises, and we learn some Duties in the time of the delay, that readily we
would not have learned, if we were enjoying the Promises; several times the
delaying of the Promise, puts us to the exercise of Patience, Heb. 10.36. For
ye have need of Patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye may
inherit the promise; after the will of God is done, there is need of patience;
hardly is patience more tried by Prison, or by any affliction, than it is by
the Soul that that is waiting for the accomplishment of the Promise; often they
will be at, why delays he his coming, fails his word evermore? However Faith be
a delaying Grace, yet in us it is often mixed with haste; so while he delays
the accomplishment of the Promise, he teaches patience, all the exercise we
have for patience, it will be hereaway; therefore James says, Let patience have
its perfect work; and that we may learn this Lesson, he will delay the
accomplishment of the Promise we wait for. I add 3ly. This delaying the
accomplishment of the Promise, makes nothing against the sureness of the
Promise; 2 Pet. 4.9. The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men
count slackness, but is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance; it is remarkable, the Lord
pronounced a curse against the Amorites, and the posterity of Ammon, that never
lighted on them, until the birth of the Promise; the date of the Promise, and
of the threatening, may tryst together; so these delays makes nothing against
the sureness of the Promises; the Clock will strike when the hour comes, the
Promise will rise as punctually as the Sun rises, and the threatening will go
down as punctually as the Sun goes down, it varies not from its appointed
course the time that he has set.

Quest. 2. The second Question is, can the Covenant be sure, since he varies
and changes? He will give one thing for another, sometimes he will give a
spiritual thing for a temporal; as for example, take the Promise annexed to the
fifth Command, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long upon
the land, which the Lord thy God gives thee; now one may honor their Father
and their Mother, and yet go soon to the Grave; how is he true then to his
promise? does not he vary and alter, when for so long a day he gives Glory?

Answ. For Answer to this. 1. In regard of temporal things, he will alter and
change a temporal thing for a Spiritual and Eternal; but this says not, that
the Covenant is not sure; suppose a man promise his Neighbor an hundred weight
of Lead, and when he looks for the accomplishment of his Promise, he sends him
a thousand weight of Gold, would ye count that man a breaker of his Promise? Or
because of this, would ye count the bargain unsure? He that is better than his
Promise, is no breaker of his Promise. Now that variation proves not the
Covenant unsure. 2ly. God cannot vary nor alter, in dispensing the Promises of
the Covenant, as to Spiritual and Eternal things, there is nothing he can give
in the place of Pardon, or in the place of Heaven, no, He does in this as a
Father with an Heir, he may in Summer give him one sort of Clothes, and in the
Winter give him another; he may change his Dinner or his Supper, but he cannot
alter his Inheritance, he cannot give any thing in the place of that: These
Promises we may be peremptory in pressing, the accomplishment of which must be
accomplished in specie, or in the kind; there is some Debt paid by permutation
or change, and there is some Debt paid in specie, these Spiritual things in
the Covenant cannot be paid by permutation, but they must be paid in specie;
in Spiritual things He cannot vary. O! They are so great Promises, such as the
Promises of his Son, the Promises of Himself, and of all things purchased by
him; that to speak with reverence, it is impossible for God to make greater
Promises; so that ye see, though there be no day in the Covenant, and though
there be some latitude left in the Covenant as to temporal things, yet none of
them make against the sureness and stability of the Covenant, but it is a
Covenant ordered in all things and sure.

Now I shall apply this Doctrine in three practical Uses, and so put a close to
the Property of the Covenant, that it is sure.

Use 1. First, Is this Covenant so sure, surer than the Covenant of Nature,
founded on such sure Foundations, standing on such sure Rocks, such as the love
of God, the Decree of God, the purchase of Christ, and sealed with His Oath,
having all these negative and positive Reasons, being sure in the Nature and
Form of it, without any irritant Clauses; and so secured on our part, that he
must break, before we fall out of a Covenanted state? It serves for.
Information, and that in these three particulars. 1. Is the Covenant so sure?
Then be informed of what a sure bargain they make, that can say, The Lord has
made with me an everlasting Covenant, etc. The nature of the Covenant will
always abide, and our appetite after it will always grow; there are some things
that we set our hearts upon, such as our Strength, our Comeliness, our Riches,
our Reputation, and Credit, and they take the wings of the morning and are
gone, when we would fainest enjoy them, there are other things we set our
hearts upon, that abide with us, there are some things we love, we come to
loath again. O! how will we loath the things we ardently loved? but both remain
here; the things contained in the Covenant are sure, and our appetite after
them will eternally grow; what an excellent bargain must they make, they who
are every day feeling Death gaining ground on them; what an excellent bargain
do they make, that have an interest in this Covenant? That word, Psalm. 73. at
the close, It is good for me to draw near to God, why draw near? v. 26. my
heart and my flesh fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion
for ever; Now what can we say for ever to? Ye cannot say, my Husband, my Wife,
my Estate, my health are for ever, but God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever. May it not be cried in the ears of many, to whom I have been
preaching this quarter of a year, (Why spend ye your money for that which is
not bread, incline your ear and hear, and I will make an everlasting Covenant
with you, even the sure mercies of David?) All ye that busk a flower that will
wither in your hand, will ye be invited to get an interest in this Covenant,
and it will stand by you, and be sure, when all other things will bid adieu to
you; produce your Tack of Time, and of your enjoyments if ye can? But there are
some nothing will prevail with them, no not though an Angel should come down
from Heaven and preach to them, they will only give it a hearing, like one
hearing a lovely Song, or hearing one playing on a well tuned Instrument of
Music, but it would get no impression the heart, As many as were ordained to
life believed. 2ly. Is it so sure? Then see the obligation ye have to the
Mediator of the Covenant, that as he ordered it well in all things, in all the
Articles and Clauses of it, so he resolved on securities for it, that to speak
it truly, were more than necessar; it is remarkable in the Covenant, God has
given Securities, that were more than necessar to secure it, they were rather
suited to our unbelief, for whom he treated the Covenant, than to the necessity
of the thing; he knew he had to do with unbelieving hearts, that would be
constantly doubting, and seeking security of this and that, and I appeal to any
of you, when ye have gotten all these Confirmations and Seals spoken of, would
ye not sometimes seek a Sign to confirm it further, or then ye will not
believe? But the Mediator in treating the Covenant, has driven the nail, and
rooved it so fast, that there were no possibility to draw it again: O! this
obligation we have to him, ought to make us take with the reelings of all other
things the better, that he makes one Fatherless, another a Widow, and another
sick, when we find our lot all reeling in the World, we ought to take it well,
since he has treated the Covenant well and sure. How well may ye bear with all
the reelings and changes in your Lot, and variety of Dispensations ye are
trysted with, ye are trysted with one case this year, and another the next
year, but all should be welcomed, since the Covenant is secure. 3ly. Is the
Covenant thus made sure, then see from it, what weight may be laid on the
Promises, and the Articles of it, sometimes his People will be with the
Promises, as men walking upon Ice, that will crack and fall in, and drown them;
some profane Rantars dare not hazard upon the Covenant, and the Promises of
it, they count them all Fanaticisme, and count them all Fanatics that take
themsevles to the Covenant, and the Promises of it; and even Believers are at,
What is become of his Promises, does his word fail for evermore? O! but his
Testimonies are sure; they are Secured, and Ratified by more than was necessar
to secure the thing, there are many things added, because of our unbelief,
Christ thought we would scarcely trust him, therefore he would have them Sealed
with his own Blood.

Use 2. Secondly for Use, is the Covenant sure? It serves for Exhortation, and
it exhorts to these two things. 1. Is the Covenant thus sure? Then Christian,
labor to make it sure to thee, it is one thing to be sure in it self, and
another thing to be sure to me; Divines distinguish betwixt certitudo mentis,
and certitudo entis, the certainty of the thing, and the certainty of the mind
about that thing; now if it besure in it self, make it sure to thee; if it be
not so, thou man go under much anxiety, and disquietness of Spirit; an^ that
thou may do this, I offer thee three Rules to walk by I know there are many
think themselves sure, but your w^^ that ye have woven, is but a Spiders web,
the least swee^ of a Besom, or even a Fly going upon it, will pull it a^ down.
Then 1. Make your Interest in Christ sure, th^^ Woman that marries the Man,
makes all the Articles of the Contract sure, now the Covenant is the Contract,
and (...) that marries not the Man, cannot claim a right to the Contract; make
your Interest in Christ sure, and ye make all the Articles of the Contract
sure; ye that know not that Christ is in you, and are not laboring to secure
an Interest in hi^ by all the Characters given of him, If any man be in Christ,
he (...) a new creature, ye can have no claim to the Covenant, (...) the
Promises of it, no, no; they cannot claim a right to the Apple, that have not a
right to the Apple Tree, they man break the Yard and steal an Apple, but they
have not leg^ right to the Apple Tree. I have often since I began th^^
Doctrine, with the Sword of the Lord, labored to loo^^ the Fingers of them
that glesps to Promises, and take the^^ not in the order of the Covenant. 2ly.
If ye would make sure your Interest in the Covenant, and make it sure to yo^^ I
would exhort you to take the Covenant, the promising pa^^ of it, in its full
latitude and freedom: remember ye no^ when we were speaking of the order of the
Covenant, (...) told you, that a Believer should quit Christ of nothing o^ his
Bond, the Father when he dealt with him, forga^^ him not one farthing, he
required of him fully, according (...) the tenor of the Covenant of Works, for
he knew, he could well pay it: there are promises of pardon, of Repentance,
(...) Influences, of a gifted Righteousness, etc. He is able to acquit himself
of the whole Bond, the thing that makes it unsure to us, we take not up the
promissary part of the Covenant in its full latitude, and puts him not to it in
all the Articles of it, and Clauses of it, to make them out; what ever thy case
be, that makes the doubt of thy Interest to the Covenant, there is not a case
thou can be in, but there is (...) promise for it; I have gotten something of
the Seed of God in me, but its not active, nor in exercise, it is mingled i^
with much corruption; I cannot get a Righteousness to cover ^t, what ever it
be, put him to it, whether it be in the case of hardness of heart, or the want
of influences, or dullness in prayer, or wandering of the mind in prayer, put him
to his promise in the full latitude and extent of it, for he is like a
straightened Breast, it is an ease to him to have the Child sucking its fill, and
the more it sucks, the more the Breast is ^^ased; put him to his Promise, even
to the utmost, and the more ye put him to it, in all the variety of cases ye
can be under, (for ye will get variety of Promises) the welcomer; put him to
it, without Dispensation in Spiritual and Eternal things, and this will be the
way to secure you in the Covenant. 3ly. If ye would make sure your interest in
the Covenant, and make it sure to you, then look to the commanding part of the
Covenant, look it be in the order ye heard of, first believe, then pray, and
meditat on all the Commands, for what is done without believing is sin, without
Faith it is impossible to please God: so if ye would secure your Interest in
the Covenant, and secure it to you, look to the Commanding part of it: if we
were true to these things, and laboring to secure our Interest in Christ, the
Appletree that bears all the Apples would be ours, if we were putting him to
the promising part of the Covenant to the utmost, for every thing we stand in
need of, and minding the commanding part in the order of the Covenant, mingling
in believing in all our Duties, and looking upon it, as the great condition of
the Covenant, indispensibly required to all the Duties of it; we would not have
so many complaints, that we are unsure about the Covenant; but carelessness and
slothfulness, is the Nurse of doubting, the best way of clearing Doubts, is
diligence. But 2ly. Is the Covenant thus sure, as ye have heard? I exhort you,
not only to make it sure to you, but since God has made it so sure, labor ye
to be sure to him; it is true, if we be once in Covenant, we cannot fall out of
a covenanted estate again, the promises of Grace, the promise of Influences, of
Pardon, of Repentance, and a gifted Righteousness, they are all secured to us
in that Covenant; yet this opens no door to security, if we would have the
Covenant indeed secure, as it is sure upon Gods part, we would labor to be
sure to him; and here I offer you three things. First, Severals come under Vows
and Obligations to God, sometimes at the Sacrament of the Supper, and sometimes
under affliction, and they break over them again. And O! but it is a dreadful
thing to break upon the Lord, it is a notable Bridle upon the head of
corruption, to bring it under a vow. I have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and
how shall I go back? Says Jeptha, if the thing be commanded of God, that thou
have vowed, thou has a double tie upon thee to keep it; but if it be
indifferent, the Lord prizes it highly; see an Instance of this in the
Rechabites, Jeremiah 35.6. Jonadab the son of Rechab our father commanded us,
saying, ye shall drink no wine, neither ye, nor your sons for ever, etc. and
they kept it; and three hundred years after this time, Jeremiah could not
persuade them to drink Wine, when he set pots full of Wine before them, they
said, we will drink no Wine; and the Lord commended them for it, and promised
them verse. 19. that Jonadab should not want a man to fland before him for ever.
So if thou would make the Covenant sure to thee, take heed thou break not over
thy vows, least God give thee over to follow thy lusts. 2ly. I exhort thee to
walk dependently upon God, like a Child that dare not trust his own legs, if he
be young, upon the top of a Rock, or in a windy day, therefore he goes in his
Fathers hand; if thou would be sure to God, never neglect Prayer morning and
evening, and in all thy business, go to him in Prayer: the man answered well,
when he was asked what will thou do with such a business? I must go to God,
says he, and know his mind; the person that can ly down with Prayer a^ night,
and rise without Prayer in the morning, there is no Temptation but he is a prey
unto it, there is no gutter but he may fall into it; Why? He is not walking in
his Fathers hand, but upon his own legs. 3ly. Christian, if thou would be sure
to him, be often examining thy case, let us not run on like a Bankrupt, that
never examines his case.

Use 3. Thirdly for Use, Is the Covenant so sure? Then improve it for
consolation; I know not how many ways practically it might be improven, for the
consolation of Believers. 1. It might be improven for consolation, it reference
to all the reelings of times; I doubt if any generation have seen mo reelings,
and that to the worse, than this generation; what a deal of toyling, tossing,
and alteration there is, and has been; but the Covenant is sure, reel times as
they will, and serve that reeling Master who will, there is no alteration in
the Covenant, for it is sure. 2ly. It Is a great Cordial against all the
revolutions of our case, some days we are refreshed and cheerful, and another
day we are cast down and discouraged, yet this is consistent with the sureness
of the Covenant; rejoice in the certainty of the Covenant, under all these
vicissitudes and changes, alterations of Providence, as this reeling World is
full of them, whiles Winter Showers, and then Summer Blinks, to's and fro's,
ups and downs, are the ordinary and constant lot of men, so long as they live
in time; but yet the Covenant is sure, there is no alteration there, the
Mediator has driven the Nail, and rooved it so fast, that he has gotten his
Fathers Oath for all the Articles of it, and sealed it with his own Blood. O!
how may this make you, who can give an account of all the changes, the ups and
downs ye have met with, whiles a bit of Meadow, and then a Hill, whiles a Burn
with some Briars about it, and then a Brae; How sweetly may they sing? [The
Lord has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and
sure;] Since the day he treated this Covenant, it is like a Rock; nay, since
Abraham's days, nay, more since eternity; ye heard, it was Contracted from
eternity in the purpose of God, there was not, nor will be the least alteration
of it to all eternity.

But to close this Discourse, I will shut it up with these two words. 1. I
would have you now and then taking a view of this Covenant, greater and better
things cannot be defired than are contained in this Covenont; ye have now heard
many Sermons upon it, wherein all the things that I judge necessary, to be
spoken to, and many more yet to be spoken to, have been handled; I would have
you make use of all the helps ye can get from the Covenant, and be often
sorting the Promises, as Apothecaries use to do with Herbs, laying them in
Eundles together, that when ye have to do with such a Promise, ye may know
where to get it, and after ye have considered the Covenant in all the Articles
of it, add to it, these are all sure. 2ly. The generality of Ranters, and these
that come under temptations from Satan, they question not, but that the
Covenant is great, the Promises exceeding great and precious, but all the
matter is, if they be sure; this is the thing that makes ungodly men lay their
souls at the Stake for a while of their lusts; they resolve to take a time of
it, and the ground of it is, the Covenant is not sure; but be taking a view of
all the particulars ye have gotten laid down before you this day, and be
persuaded, there is no greater certainty, that the Sun will go down the night,
and rise the morn, and the Moo^ will keep her course, that the fire is hot;
yea, there is no^ greater certainty ye have heard with your ears, and seen with
your eyes, than this Covenant is, in all the Articles of it^ therefore answer
all your temptations with this, that are tempting you to call the Covenant
Phanaticism, and call the^^ Phanaticks that take themselves to it; but take
this Covenant, and view it in all the Articles of it, and ye will find i^ sure,
and then ye shall be made to sing, the Lord has made with me an everlasting
Covenant, ordered in all things and sure.

SERMON XXXI.
2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me
an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure; for this is all my
salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


I Have spoken to three Branches of this verse, First, the nature of David's
security, with which he encourages himself at death, it is a Covenant.
Secondly, the Parties Indenturing in this Covenant, the Lord and me, the Lord
has made with me. Thirdly, the properties of this Covenant, whereof very
remarkable are mentioned by him, it is everlasting, it is ordered in all things,
and it is sure. I will not resume any thing that has been spoken to, but I come
to the fourth Branch of this Verse, which contains the superstructure, and that
which David ^uilds on this Covenant so qualified; and there are two great
things he builds on it. First, All his hopes of Salvation. Secondly,
Satisfaction to all his desires, this is all my salvation, and all my desire;
now men's desires are vast, it is not easy to find that one thing that will
satisfy all our desires, but says he, this is all my aesire, or that
satisfies all my desires, I desire no more, since he has made with me an
everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure.

But I will take the first of them to be the Subject of some few Sermons, this
is all my salvation, the word in the Hebrew Col-segni, it is rendered by
Montanus, cuncta salus mea; these words are not in the Hebrew, but supplied by
Interpreters, as being employed in i^; it is a pathetick expression, all my
salvation, but these words are put in to make up the sense.

Before I can reach what I design, there are two Textual doubts necessary to be
cleared: 1. What is meant by salvation? 2. How this Covenant can be called all
his salvation? For the first, What is meant by salvation? The word salvation
has several senses in Scripture, it is sometimes put for the Doctrine of the
Gospel, so ye find it, Heb. 2.3, 4. speaking of the word of the Gospel
delivered by Christ, How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation,
which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by
them that heard him? That is, the Doctrine of the Gospel, ordinarily it is put
in Scripture, as ye will find it, Heb. 1. last Verse, Are they not all
ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister to them, who shall be heirs of
salvation? that is of Heaven.

The other difficulty is greater, how can the Covenant be called all his
salvation, or all his Heaven? Are there not rivers of pleasures at his right
hand, and who would be content to take the Covenant for all their Heaven? For
Answer to this, take notice that there is a figurative speech in this, the
object is taken as including the act relating to its object; some read it, is
all the conduit or channel through which my sal^ation runs; but the current of
Interpreters take it thus, this is all my hope of salvation, as in the
following words, this is all my desire, the act of the soul is taken, that is,
this is sufficient to all my desires; so here, the object is taken as including
the act, this is all my salvation, that is to say, this is all my hope of
salvation. That ye may be persuaded of this the more, thak notice, 1. That
salvation is sometimes taken in this sense in Scripture, as Luke 19.9. This day
is salvation come to the house, that is, this day is the hope or assuracne of
salvation come to thy house, says Christ to Zacheus, when he called him down
from the Tree. 2. Ye shall find one, even David, in personal Covenanting with
God, who uttered these words, expressing very confidently his hope of
salvation, Psalm. 16.2. O my soul thou have said unto the Lord, thou art my
Lord, etc. Which generally is understood of personal Covenanting; but verse. 9.
For this my flesh shall rest in hope; there ye have him building the hope of
salvation on this Covenant, his flesh shall rest in hope, on the account of his
entering in a personal Covenant with God, this is all my hope or assurance of
salvation.

But there rermains a third difficulty, how can this be called all his hope of
salvation? Is not Christ and mercy amongst the grounds of his hope of
salvation? Shall I rob Christ to clothe the Covenant with the honor due to
him? But the Covenant is as the Case, and Christ as the Jewel, for all the
excellency of the Covenant comes from Christ; this as ye shall hear, excludes
the Covenant of Works, and it is one of the places some bring against Just
fication by Works; but this Covenant neither excludes Christ, nor mercy, no,
they are like the blood that run through all the Veins of the Covenant, so this
is all my salvation, the meaning is, this is all my hope of salvation. If any
shall ask, what ground have I to hope that I will come to glory? This is all my
hope of salvation, that God has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered
in all things and sure, and this is all my salvation, etc.

Haying cleared the words to you, I will take two Observations, and shall be
but briefon the first, that I may come to the second. Observe. 1. That Believers
have in their straits, and especially at their death, the hope of salvation for
their encouragement Observe 2. That all the ground of their hope is, that God
has inade with them an everlasting Covenant, etc. It Is founded on the Covenant
of Grease, and on their personal and proper interest in it, these two ly
natively in the words, and hearken to them, if ye would have some of the
greatest things of greatest concernment, cleared unto you.

Doct. For the first, That believers have the hope of salvation, as an
encouragement in their greatest affliction, but especially at death. David is
at his last words, as the beginning of the Chapter tells us this, many proofs
ye have in Scripture of this, as Genesis 49.18. Jacob is making his Testament, and
tells his Children what will befall them, and what I Legacy he leaves them, and
in the midst of it, he puts in something for himself, Lord, says he, I have
waited for thy salvation, he takes this portion to himself, and encourages
himself with it; it were needless to prove this, that blievers have in their
straits, and at death, the hope of salvation to encourage them with, the
Martyrs have washen their hands in the flames, and counted them Beds of Roses,
because of the hope of salvation; some of the Martvrs have told their
neighbors, let us walk a while in the fire, and in the twinkling of an eye we
will be at our Fathers house: When they were weeping over Master Ridley in his
house, do not weep for me, says he, for I shall have a sharp Dinner, but I
shall have a good Supper.

Quest. 1. Before I apply it, I would inquire a little in the Doctrinal part,
how it is? or when it is, that the hope of salvation proves so great an
encouragement in straits, and at death to Believers? Whence is it, that it
proves so supporting?

Answ. For opening this to you a little, ye would notice these four or five
remarkable things, First, the back that bears affliction is patience, now the
hope of salvation strengthens patience, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. The Apostle joins these
three together, Your work of faith, and labor of love, and patience of hope in
our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God and our Father. I deny not, but
there is in affliction a twofold patience; there is, as some call it, a
desperate patience, men force themselves to be patient; for many are at, there
is no hope for me in God, we will walk after the imagination of our own hearts;
and there is a stupid and ignorant patience, like the patience Nabal had in his
drunkenness, O so courageously as he speaks to David's Messenger, 1 Samuel 25.10.
Who is David? or who is the son of Jesse? There be many Servants now a days,
that break from their Masters, Shall I then take my bread, and my water, and my
flesh that I have killed for my shearers, and give it unto men whom I know not
whence they be? And verse. 37. when Abigail his Wife had told him, after he had
been drunk, what was David's purpose, his heart grew stupid, or his heart died
within him; Many have such patience, that wears off when the stupidity wears
off; but none of these are the pathence of hope; so long as hope lasts,
patience lasts, and it is easy to go through affliction, and hope put betwixt
the Lord and it. 2. It Is an encouragement, in regard it not only helps its
patience, but it influences joy, we rejoice in tribulation, knowing that
tribulation works experience, and experience patience, and patience hope, and
hope makes not ashamed. It Is observed by some Divines, that there are two
Graces that has a special influence on a Believers joy, Faith and Hope, 1 Pet.
1.18. After ye believed, ye rejoiced with joy unspeakable and full of glory.
The reason why these two Graces influences a Believers joy is, Faith assures
what Christ has done, and Hope assures what he will do; now lay these two
together, the assurance of what Christ has done, and will do, is it any wonder
that there be a great deal of cheerfulness in tribulation? Faith has anfluence
on our joy, and so upon our hope, and he that goes through the valley of the
shadow of death, and the heart filled with cheerfulness and joy, is it any
wonder that he be encouraged, and be not damped with affliction? 2. This hope
of salvation is a great encouragement, in regard it fills the heart with an
earnest longing after salvation, suppose it be in the case of death, none longs
more for Heaven, than those that have assurance of it: It Is a remarkable word
ye have Romans 8.23. And not only they, but our selves also, which have the first
fruits of the Spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for
the adoption, to wit the redemption of our body, for we are saved by hope: Mark
here, they that have received the first fruits of the Spirit, should be
longing, now we groan, why groan we? We long for glory, the forecasts they have
gotten of glory, are appetizing, and makes them long, yea groan for it. The
persons that have no rational hope of glory, are indifferent about it, when the
Lord trysts with affliction that threatens death, he that has the hope of
glory, knows he is near the thing that he has been groaning for, no wonder it
prove a special encouragement, in regard it is an answer of the groaning, that
they that have had the first fruits of the Spirit have been groaning for. 4.
This hope of salvation, cannot but be a special encouragement in affliction,
and at denth, because this hope of salvation influences contempt of the world;
there is nothing will make the world more despicable in ones eyes, than the
lively hope of Heaven; it is rremarkable that is spoken of Abraham, Heb. 11. 9.
By faith Abraham sojourned in the land of promise, as in a strange land; and
what moved him to sojourn in this land? v. 10. For he looked for a city that
had foundations, whose builder and maker was God: Could not Abraham be content
with Canaan, it was a pleasant land, a land that flowed with milk and honey?
But the thing that made him look upon this land, as a thing not much to be
prised, he looked for a city that had foundations, whose builder and maker was
God; the hope he had of Heaven, made him think little of Canaan: Ordinarily an
earthly man has nothing, if ye take the world from him, to counter-ballance
the loss of it with; but take Canaan from Abraham, it will not much trouble
him, for he looked for a City etc. And this is a great encouragement under any
tribulation, when we can get an heart to contemn the world, for it is that
Pitch that sticks to our fingers, that makes either afflictions or death so
grievous; but where a person has gotten the hope of salvation, he looks on the
world as Abraham looked on Canaan, he looked on it as a strange Land, and
looked for a City that had foundations, etc. 5. The hope of salvation proves a
great encouragement, in regard of Hope, especially when the Soul comes to the
full affurance of Hope, it has assurance of these three things, 1. It assures
the salva ion to be certain, for hope grounding it self on Faith, has
apprehended its object; for Faith and Hope have the same object, but diversely
considered; Hope brings in Assurance of the certainty of the object, so where
the Soul comes to a lively hope of salvation, it is sure. 2. Hope brings
Assurance, that the object is transcendent, that the salvation looked for, will
counter-ballance all the afflictions of time, The light afflictions of this
present world, says Paul, are not worthy to be compared with the glory that
shall be revealed; and what a special Cordial is this in affliction, and at
death? 3. Hope discovers the subserviency of afficton to Glory, through much
affliction we must enter into Glory: It may be said of every Christian, as
Christ said to the two Disciples going to Emmaus, Ought not he to suffer these
things? Now, when one comes to be lively in the hope of salvation, it not only
assures, this is a rock, a resting place, but it assures, that all our
afflictions will be swallowed up in that. Now lay all these together, the
influence that the hope of salvation has on patience, and joy and groaning
after glory, and contempt of the world, and that it has in it the assurance
both of the glory to come, and the transcendency of the glory, and the
subserviency of affliction to that glory; I say, lay them all together, and I
hope ye are convinced, that the hope of salvation is a special Cordial, though
ye were under the greatest affliction, and even at your last words.

Quest. 2. The second Question I shall clear, what is this hope of salvation,
that is so great a Cordial in affliction and at death? It Is true, we have no
express definition of Hope in our Catechism; many think it is included in the
description of Faith, it being an act, whereby we rely on God for the good
promised, and not yet accomplished, differing only from Faith in that, that the
object of Faith is present, and the object of Hope is future; but that ye may
know what this hope of salvation is, I will describe it thus, It Is a
supernatural grace, wrought by God in the heart of a believer, whereby he
expects and wairs for from God, the good of the promise not yet accomplished.
It Is a supernatural grace, grace cannot be the hope of salvation in a natural
heart, there cannot be a lively hope in a natural heart, nay, Heathens cannot
have this lively hope, they have had some hope of resemblance since the Fall,
their hope is like an old Tower, that is all fallen and ruinous, ye find some
pieces of the Wall standing, which tells there was once a stately House there,
but now there is nothing but a bit of an old Wall; so the hope of the natural
heart that remains since the Fall, is but a bit of a decayed Tower, it is not an
house wherein a man can shelter himself from challenges, from rain, storm, and
terrors; it is a supernatural grace, and Heathens they can have no hope of
salvation, but some relicts of the old Wall, that says, once there was a House
there. Next, it is a supernatural grace wrought by God, all the Angels and
Ministers could not work this grace of hope, therefore if ye find a person
tending to despair, all the Ministers ye can bring to them, cannot bring them
to his hope of salvation till God work it. 3. It Is a supernatural grace,
wrought in the heart of a Believer, the person must be first a Believer, before
he can have the hope of salvation. 4. The object of it is, some good not yet
accomplished, for hope that is seen is no hope; so if ye would see what this
hope of salvation is, that is so great encouragement in affliction, and at
death, it is a supernatural grace, wrought by God in the heart of a believer.

Quest. 3. There is only one practical Question, to make way for the
application that I shall clear, and it is this; Have all believers this hope of
salvation in their end, to encourage them with? David had it indeed, but have
all believers, and all that are in Covenant with God, have they this hope of
salvation? The rather this difficulty is to be noticed, in regard, 1. The Lord
sometimes will bring some to their last words very despondent, full of fears;
there are many, their first assurance has been, the setting their foot on the
Shore; and many have gone in to glory, and the tear in their eye, with the fear
of the pit; have they all then this hope of salvation, to be their
encouragement at their last words?

Answ. I will Answer this in these three or four particulars. 1. All believers
have grounds of the hope of Salvation, they are all within the Covenant, they
have the purpose of God, the promise of God, and the purchase of Christ; it is
true, their Evidences may be out of sight, and so dark, that they cannot read
them in the night, and readily the tear may be in their eye, and they cannot
see to read their Evidences; yet generally, all the Elect and Believedrs, they
have, as leamed men observe, this hope of Salvation, either in promisso, in
decreto, or in semine, they have a ground to hope for Salvation, and ye must
distinguish betwixt these two, the actual hope, and the ground of hope, it is
true, the very unbelievers, and ungodly men, have a possibility of hope, which
is a great mercy, there is hope for a living man, the Devils and Apostat
Angels, would buy this possibility of hope at a dear rate, but they are
excluded from a possibility of hope; but the Elect they have a possibility of
hope, either in promisso, in decreto, or in semine, they have the actual ground
of hope, though readily the exercise of their hope be slow. 2. Though God deny
to some the assurance of hope, yet ordinarily he gives the full assurance of
it, then it is a Question among Divinges, what is the reason that many that have
gone doubting all their days, that when they have come to die, have had more
peace, more joy, more clearness, than before? They Answer, that God, who is the
Steward of our peace, and of our joy, keeps it till then, and then he lets
it out. And 2. They, whom God denies the full assurance of hope, they will be
content of bare marks at death, and under affliction, they would not be content
of it another time, and the marks they rejected when they were well, they are
forced to take them then. And 3. He may deny it for good reasons known to
himself, and they are especially three, why even at the latter end of some, he
will deny them the actual exercise of the hope of salvation. 1. To let them
see, that he is Lord of his own Grace, and of is own time, to dispose as he
thinks fit; for if there were always a hope of Salvation, in the end we would
think it due; though he give it ordinarily, yet he makes exceptions, to let us
see, that he reserves a latitude to himself, and will not fix nor determine a
tine, for the communication of his influences. 2. There are some that die under
some un-repented sins, they may have gone through their whole lives, and may
have heard many Sermons, and yet may be secure, and quiet, and hardened, though
their Consciences could tell them of some secret guilt, they have committed in
their life, un-repented for; no wonder he give them a storm in the mouth of the
Harbor, not to take away their hope, but to let them see, that he is Lord of
his own Grace, and of his own Time. Mr. Sibs Observes, that they have had
manyest terrors in their end, that had fewest in their life, a person that
goes under a quiet peaceable way of Religion all their life time, who neither
in the beginning, nor progress of it, has had many Terrors, will have a Storm
in the End; though he secure their Salvation, yet he may deny the strong actual
exercise of the hope of Salvation, all their Lifetime.

4. Though the Lord deny the Joy, or Assurance of the hope of Salvation, as
there is Joy and Assurance of the hope of Salvation, evidenced in Scripture,
yet there is in all Believers, a secret innitency of hope, as there is a secret
relying of Faith, so there is a secret innitency in hope, I have been witness
to some, that at Death bed bold be brought to no hope of Salvation, and when
they were bidden quite and renunce and despair of the hope of Salvation, no,
they durst do nothing of that kind, which evidences, there was some secret act
of inn itency on Christ, and hoping for the thing promised, though there was
not the actual exercise of it. So in Answer to the Question, ye have all these
four, First, That all men have a possibility of hope, that the Devils, and
Apostat Angels cannot have. Secondly, Believers have always the grounds of
hope, either in the Decree, the Promise, or in the Seed. Thirdly, If the Lord
deny them the actual exercise of hope, it is either to chastise them, for some
Un-repented guilt, or for trial, to let them see that he is Lord of his own
coming and going, and not to limit him to a Time. Fourthly, to learn them to
distinguish, betwixt a secret act of hope, so that a man cannot well call it
hope himself yet it has hope imported in it, and a real act of hope, that is
strong, lively and in exercise; so that generally the point holds, that
Believers in their latter end have the hope of Salvation, and this hope is a
special cordial to patience, and longing for Glory, and to all to all that I
have formerly spoken of.

SERMON XXXII.
2. Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me
and everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is all my
salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


DAvid the Son of Jesse in his last words, like the Nightingale, sang
sweetliest toward his end; he has sung of the Covenant, and hope of
Salvation, he had from it, he had fallen in Adultery and Murder, and many
grievous sins, yet he casts not away the hope of Salvation, but he dies with it
among his last words, because God had made with him an everlasting Covenant,
etc. I opened the meaning of these words, all my salvation, I followed the
Doctrinal part of the first Doctrine, I will come now to the Application, and
be brief in it.

But do Believers in their straits, and at Death, ordinarily rejoice in the
hope of Salvation? there is a threefold use I will speak a little unto.

Use. The first Use is of Exhortation, be exhorted to get this hope of
Salvation, it is excellent in your Life but chiefly comfortable at Death; all
things then will be bidding you adieu: it is recorded of Quintus Curtius in the
Life of Alexander, that when he was going to Asia, he distributed his Kingdom
among his Favorites, and when one asked him, what he would leave to himself?
he answered hope; man must in a little distribute his Estate and Movables, and
what will he leave to himself, except he have this hope of Salvation. I exhort
you to get this Hope, ye that want it.

But ye will ask, how ye shall come at it? For helping you to it, I would offer
you some considerations, and some Practices for helping you to it.

First, Take notice of some Considerations, and I shall name these three, First
it may help you to this, that ye are under a possibility of this hope, hope is
possible for you, it were a folly to preach among the Devils, or the damned in
Hell to hope, for they are excluded from all possibility of hope, if they had
ten thousand worlds, and every one of them better than this World, they would
give it all for hope, if it were but possible for them ^o get it; but there is
a possibility for you, in a little ye will be beyond the possibility of it, if
ye do it not now. 2. Consider what a dreadful thing it is, to be without the
hope of Salvation; the Apostle Ephesians. 2.12. Kints these two together, having no
hope, and without God in the world; if ye be without hope, ye are without God,
and what have ye in your hand, if ye be without God; it is but a poor thing ye
have in your own havd, ye have your little Cottage and your Diet, and your
clothing, is that your all? if ye be without the hope of Salvation, ye have
your all in your hand; what a dreadful thing is that, and what a poor man is
he, that has no more but what he has in his own hand. 3. I exhort you to
condsider to press you to get this hope of Salvation, that ye are trysted with
a tossing time, a time of trial, if we were without hope, says Paul, we were of
all men most miserable, what will be your cordial in all the trials and
afflictions ye may meet with, if ye want the hope of salvation? I might add
many more to press you, to get this hope of Salvation, but if ye ponder these
that I have given you, they may be of great weight.

I would offer you four Practices, I that would second these Considerations
with, to press you to get this hope of Salvation. 1. I exhort you to take heed
of a counterfeit hope, The hope of the hypocrite, says Job, shall be like the
giving up the Ghost, They gloss it well, that say, The hope of the hypocrite,
shall go away, as the giving up of the Ghost. Thue Faith and true Hope, had
never greater enemies than the counterfeit of them; Jeroboam was a great
Politician, when he resolved to keep Israel from the worship of the true God at
Jerusalem, he will not keep them from all worship, but will set up in the place
of one God, two calves, one at Dan, and another at Bethel; Some gloss it, he
will give them daily work, if he set up a counterfeit hope; better have one
true God, than two calves, and theere is nothing will hinder them more from the
worship of the true God, than these two calves, therefore take heed of
counterfeit hope; for Whoremongers and Adulterers, will enter into the Kingdom
of God, before proud Pharisees, and they that have counterfeit hope. 2 If ye
would win at this hope of Salvation, I exhort in the second place, to be more
diligent, Heb. 6.11. And we desire, that every one of you, do show the same
diligence, wherefore diligence? To the sull assurance of hope unto the end; be
not slothful or negligent, a person that would come to his Hope, would not only
be serious, but diligent in his seriousness; we must be both diligent and
serious, or else we cannot have a well grounded hope of salvation. Therefore if
ye would be at this Salvation, that comforted David at his last words, take
heed of a counterfeit hope, and be diligent and serious in it. 3. If thou would
attain this hope of Salvation, thou who art without it, I exhort thee to be a
serious student of the Covenant, the great ground of hope is from the Covenant,
all that we may expect from Christ, or mercy, is holden out in the Covenant;
therefore a Christian that would trow in this hope of salvation, or would have
it real, should (like a Child) be lying at the Breasts of the Covenant, and
sucking out of these Breasts: Observe the Conditions of the Covenant, if thou
understand not the Covenant, and suck not out of the Breasts of the Covenant,
thy hope is but a patched up hope, and like the hope of the Hypocrite, that
has only a Portraicture in the Soul, and not a living hope; study these
things, if ye would be at a well grounded hope of Heaven. I know there are many
would be at a well grounded Hope of Heaven, they see they must die, and that
their days will not ay last, and that it will not be the thoughts of creatures,
that will determine, whether they be good or evil; if you would have a hope,
that will stand through in that day, observe these things, consider there is a
possiblity of genting it, it may be it close before this Winter be done, and
consider if ye have no hope, and be without God, ye have no cordial in
affliction, and at death, in a little ye must divide all that ye have, and
leave it behind you, and not take a frothy thing to the grave with you, and
except ye retain a hope of salvation, ye take not so much as a sheet to the
grave with you, ^ake heed of the counterfeit hope, and be serious and diligent,
and such your hope out of the Covenant.

Use 2. Another Use of this Doctrine, is this hope of salvation so great a
Cordial in affliction, and at death? I would from this encourage you that has
this hope, of all the places of Scripture ye may take up that morning and
evening, 1 Pet. 1.3. and 4. and sing, ^lessed be the God; and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us
again unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to
an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, etc.
Suppose ye count on never so many Crosses, if ye have hope of Salvation, he
has made up in one Jewel, all that he has cast down in all his dispensations
to them; ye that have this hope, I exhort you to two things, first, to live
answerable to this hope; secondly, I exhort you to strengthen it; first, ye
that have this hope, live answerable, many a time our hope and our way is knit
together.

Quest. 1. I will prosecute this Exhortation in answering this Question, how a
Christian that is hoping for Heaven, lives answerable to his hope? for it is
unsuitable for us, to profess the hope of glory, and live as we do, we speak of
our Country but seidom, and we speak not as Travelers going home to their
Country.

Answ. I will answer this in these few particulars. 1. A Christian lives up in
some measure to his hope of Salvation, when he is careful to do nothing that
will contradict his hope; if we be without faith, it is impossible to please
God, and so without hope of Salvation; there is no prayer we put up, but we
should examine, is there faith in it? we preach nothing, we hear nothing, we
read nothing, but we should examine, is there a mystery of Faith in it? we
should do nothing but what may consist with our hope; Nehemiah reasoned well,
when he was bid fly into the Temple to save his Life, shall such a man as I
flee, says he? If a man wrong you, and ye find thoughts of revenge against him,
and will not forgive him, ye contradict your hope; have ye the hope of the
forgivance of a Debt of a thousand talents, and will thou stand with thy fellow
servant, for the Debt of an hundred talents? if ye have the hope to walk with
him in white, and to have all the guilt of your heart, and your way washenin
the blood of the Lamb, and will ye stand at a Triffle, that expects the removal
of a mountain? 2. Positively, one comes up to the hope of Salvation, in the
practice of these four things. 1. We walk like our hope, when we keep company
in the world like our hope, we profess we are strangers in this world, and
hopes in a little to be at home, in less than threescore and ten years, and yet
we keep not company like our hope; it is a remarkable word of Abraham's, Heb.
11.9. By faith he sojourned in the land of promise, as in a strange country,
dwelling in tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same
promise; Abraham kept within doors, and whom had he to converse with? He had
Isaac and Jacob heirs of the same Promise, Travelers in a far Country, upon
the account they are country men, and minds to be at home, they travel, they
converse, and traffic together, and can thou have hope to be in Heaven, and
not walk suitable to thy hope here? if a Person given to error or profanity, be
the person with whom thy converse is most, and yet hopes to be in the land,
where there is neither error nor profanity, thy walk contradicts thy hope. 2.
As thou would walk like thy hope in thy company, so I would exhort thee, to
walk like thy hope in the strain and height of thy way; why art thou not more
spiritual in thy converse in the world? O! how strange is it for me to profess,
I take communion with God, for my chief happiness, and hopes for an eternity of
it, and yet can be content with so little of him here; if thou hope to have an
eternal communion with him, can thou be content to hear a Sermon, without
communion with him? can thou go to a Corner and be content, without communion
with him? when thou walks contrair to this, thou walks not suitable to thy
hope? if thou have the hope of Salavation, thy secret converse with God, and
when thou comes to have public Ordinances, they will all keep up a
suitableness to thy hope, otherwise thy hope is false. 3. If thou would walk
like thy hope, manifest it in thy contempt of the world; the hope of Glory,
ought to fill thy heart with contempt of the World: I suppose any saw a man
that had a great estate, and had many Farms coming in, and a great many fields
of Corn, if ye saw him gatering heads of Corn after the Reapers, among the
Beggars, would ye not undervalue his Spirit, and think he walked very
unsuitable to what God had given him? The truth is, when Believers are vexed
and entangled with the world, constantly having their Joy and their Sorrow,
Ebbing and Flowing, as the World Ebbs and Flows with them, they walk not like
their hope of Heaven: I like the Observation of a great Man, he says, in all
the Bible it is never found, that a truly godly man was covetous; and is it not
a strange thing, that now it should be the notted sin-of Professors? they were
guilty of many gross sins, but they were never guilty of that, and they that
have the hope of Salvation, expecting to wear a Crown, and to see him as he is,
and to carry Palms in their hands, and does not manifest their contempt of the
World, they are like a man, having a great Estate, and yet found among the
Beggars, gathering after the Reapers. 4. If ye would walk suitable to your
hope, then ye would manifest it in affliction and death, thus David did here,
the last words of the Son of Jesse; I have read it in the Turks History, they
say a Christian cannot be serions in believing, that there is such Joys after
Death, as the Christians profess, the reason is, say they, they are so
unwilling to die; great fears of death evidences small hopes of Heaven. 5. If
ye would walk suitable to your hope, it would be manifested in your care to get
these hopes; Why do we press you to embrace the Covenant, and hearken unto the
offers of Salvation, but that ye may come to have that hope of Salvation ye
look for?

I exhort you in the second place, to labor to strengthen your hope; Wherefore
the rather brethren, we exhort you, to give all diligence, to the full
assurance of hope; rest not upon a general of hope, unless ye get the full
assurance of it; I will not say, the want of assurance of Heaven is a sin, but
the want of diligence to get assurance is a sin, God may delay assurance of
Heaven for Trial, or for Chastisement.

Quest. Ye may ask, How shall we come by the strengthening of our hope?

Ans. I will offer you three Rules to strengthen your hope, and I beseech you
to ponder them. 1. Christian, if thou would have strong hope of Heaven, labor
to get a strong love to Christ, the thing that shakes our hope to Heaven is
Fear, and perfect Love casts out Fear. 2. I exhort thee, to be frequent in
exercising thy hope of Heaven, ordinarily any thing gathers a habit by often
acting it, ought it not to be fear that should be putting a person to abstain
from sin, or to be comforted against the difficulties of the time? If a
Christian meet with Temptations to Sin, if he be under fear of Hell for it, I
will go to Hell, if I do this, it is not the way to strengthen hope; but when
we are encouraged under difficulties, from the hope of Glory, that in a little,
we will be above difficulties, it is the ready way to strengthen hope. 3. If ye
would have your hope of Heaven strengthened and made sure, observe your
experiences ye have of God. Romans 5.4. Patience works experience, and
experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed; it is true, the great ground of our
hope, ye will find it in the Covenant, therefore observe well your experiences
ye have of God, and of his Word. I would give to Christians three Rules, in
their observing experiences of God. 1. Know, that one may have experience of
God, and not know that they have it, in the time they have it, there may be a
real experience of God, a gracious experience, and yet in the time a person
has it, they may not know they have it; let but any take the discourse betwixt
Christ, and the two Disciples going to Emmaus, all the time that Christ is with
them, they know him not, and they speak out much unbelief, We thought this
should have been he, which should have redeemed Israel, and on the matter, they
said, they are beguiled; and yet after he is away, they said, Did not our heart
burn within us? They observed not the burning of the heart in the time, but
after he is away, their heart burns: Many have sweet experiences of Christ,
that think not much of them in the time, but after they are away, they would
give their hearts blood to have them again; there may be a very real experience
of God given, and yet in the mean time, not take it for a gracious experience.
2. I would have the Christian know, to keep up their hope by experiences of
God, that experiences will sometimes be altogether out of sight; so that thou
can neither see them in the time, nor after they are gone, I like the advice I
have sometimes given a Christian in that case, in keeping up his hope of
Heaven, is not to cast away hope, when all experiences are out of sight, but
there are two things to keep up hope, when experiences are cut of sight. 1.
Take up shelter under the absolute Promises, ay when we are dung from our
Evidences and Marks, we should not sit down and despair, but go to the absolute
Promises, such as, I will take away the heart of stone, I will sprinkle clean
water upon them, etc. And there may be hope there. 2. When experiences are
away, it is a Christians duty to seek a new Extract of them again, like a man
that has paid some Debt, and he has gotten a Discharge of it, but he has
lost it, and he is charged for the Sum again, and he goes to the Register, and
takes out a new Extract; So thou art not to cast away all hope, but to go to
him for a new Experience, and readily that will be an Extract of the true
Discharge, and be as valid in Law, as the Discharge thou have lost. Record your
Experiences of God, and when ye want them, ye are not to cast away your hope of
Salvation.

Use 3. The third Use, Is the hope of Salvation so sweet, and so necessary, it
serves for Trial; try of what Metal ye and made of, I believe there are none
sitting here, but they are all filled with the hope of Salvation, your hope
will make many of you ashamed, and your Hell may be hotter, than ye had not
hoped for Heaven. I will only leave this discourse of the hoping of Salvation,
with giving these three Marks, whereby ye may try, if your hope be a Helmet, as
the Apostle calls it ( Ephesians. 6.17.) of Salvation, of the right Metal, or only
a Counter. 1. The hope of Salvation that is right, we are begotten to it, 1
Pet. 1.3. Blessed be the Lord, who has begotten us again to a lively hope, to an
inheritance, etc. It Is not a hope of our making, to which in Effectual Calling
we are begotten; if thou cannot prove thy Effectual Calling, and thy
Regeneration, and that thou art born again, and in Effectual Calling begotten,
all thy progress, all thy diligence, and all thy parts, will not prove it a
lively hope; therefore examine your Effectual Calling, if ye were begotten
again by the Gospel, otherways your hope shall perish with you. 2. The hope of
Salvation, which is of the right stamp, carries along with it Mortification,
Acts 13.9. Purifying your hearts by faith: we have hearts within us, like
stables, that would be often muched; there is a Dung hill within, that Pride,
and that Passion of thine, if ye have the lively hope of the Inheritance, ye
will be cleansing, ye will be sweeping the House every day; what are ye
carrying every day out of the heart? there are many that have great hope of
Salvation, and if they were dying they would tell many stories that they had of
marks of Salvation, but if ye be not purifying your self, and observing what of
corruption ye are carrying out, and what degrees of corruption ye have gotten
the victory over, and if there be not this, your hope is not right. A third
Mark ye have, Collos. 3.27. Christ in you, the hope of glory; What account can
ye give of Christ dwelling in you? Where he dwells, he dwells as a King, as a
Refiner, as a Counselor, as a Comforter, as a Leader, as a Guide; He is holden
out in all these respects in the Covenant, it is no, if ye have Parts, if ye
have Gifts in you, but what account can ye give of his dwelling in you? uses he
to sup with you, and ye with him? walks he in you? he has Promised, I will
walk in them, and dwell in them, and be their God; when ye meet with
Temptations, ye will talk of the hope of Glory, but is Christ dwelling in you,
the hope of glory? Lastly, This hope of Salvation, it both flows from
diligence, and is accompanied with diligence, Heb. 6.11, and 12. And we desire,
that every of you show the same diligence, to the full assurance of hope to the
end, that ye be not slothful, but followers of them, who through faith and
patience inherit the promises; thou have a great hope, and a slothful
conversation; I have often wondered to see, how careless a way, and so great
hope, do we talk of so great a hope, and think we have no more ado, but gather
heads among the Stuff, and live as the Beggar? Now, put your self to the Trial
in all these four, and if it want these four, it will be a hope, that will be
like the giving up of the Ghost, and will leave you in the day of your distress.

SERMON XXXIII.
2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me
an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is all my
salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


AFter David has spoken of the nature of the Security, that it was by way of
Covenant, and after he has spoken of the Properties, he mentions the
encouragements, and superstructures he builds on the Covenant, they are two,
This is all my salvation, and al my desire. The first fo them, I have spoken
unto, and showed you, how the Covenant was all the hope of Salvation, that a
Believer had; Gods Mercy, and Christ's Righteousness, Abstract them from the
Covenant, it might as well be pleaded by Devils as Men, the thing that makes us
have the hope of Salvation from them, and not the Apostat Angels, is the
Covenant.

But I come now to the second Superstructure and Encouragement, he has from
this well ordered Covenant, it is all my desire; it is not easy to satisfy all
desires, our desires run very wide, but this is all my desire; Two things are
necessary for clearing this to you. 1. How the Covenant can be called our
desire? some gloss it thus, the act is put, say they, for the object, the
desire is an act of the will, and sometimes a distinct affection from the will,
the velle, or that which is the proper act of them Will, is a desire, and how
can the Covenant be called, this is all my desire? Therefore some gloss it
thus, all the object of my desire, the desire is put for the thing desired; or
as others will have it, This is satissaction to all my desires, or, the thing
that satisfies all my desires, and all my desire is, that God has made with me
an everlasting Covenant, etc. But there is a great difficulty behind, How can
the Covenant be called satisfaction to all our desires? have we not many
irregular desires, and can it be called satisfaction to all our desires?
Therefore the meaning must be, all my lawful or regular desires, the Covenant
satisfies all that I can lawfully desire. Now desires may become irregular, and
unlawful two ways. 1. When we desire things unlawful, covetous and lascivious
desires, the Covenant satisfies them not at all, but rather condemns them. 2.
Desires may terminat on lawful objects, in an irregular way, and the Covenant
satisfies them not, a person may have desires after the Covenant, and yet these
desires may prove very irregular.

There are three kinds of desires about the Covenant it self, and all these may
be irregular desires. 1. Sometimes we desire the blessings of the Covenant,
without a right to the Covenant; as if one would desire the fruit of an
Apple Tree, without a right to the Tree. 2. And sometimes we desire the
blessings of the Covenant, and forgets the commands. 3. And sometimes we may
desire the promises of peace and consolation, without the promises of Effectual
Calling; these desires terminat on lawful objects, but they are irregular
desires, and the Covenant will not satisfy them; but all our regular desires,
all that are warrantable and according to the Covenant, there is in the
Covenant satisfaction to them all; the person that has a Covenant Relation to
God, they have in that relation, satisfaction to all their desires.

Withoutinsisting further in clearing the words, I will take one Observation,
and readily follow it in three or four Sermons, for it is a great truth, and as
important a truth, as any that has yet occurred in this Verse, and the
Observation shall be this;

Doctrine. That the Covenant is satisfaction to all our desires: if God has
made with me an everlasting Covenant, it is that which may satisfy all my
desires; it is true, it will not satisfy our irregular and unwarrantable
desires, it will not satisfy covetous and lascivious desires: I remember I
read of a man, who came to a Philosopher, O says he he is a happy man that
has all his desires; the Philosopher answered, he is a happy man, but a far
happier man, that desires nothing but what he ought to desire; so, if we desire
nothing but what we ought to desire, the Covenant will satisfy all our
desires. This shall be the Theme that I resolve to follow a little, that an
interest in the everlasting Covenant, is satisfaction to all our lawful
desires. It will be a great work to convince you of this, but I hope to make it
appear from very rational grounds, and so let you see, that the torment we have
in our life, it is not from want of grounds of satisfaction to our desires, but
from the irregularity of our desires, we go in our desires beyond what we ought.

That the Covenant affords ground of satisfaction to all our desires, before I
prove it, I must give you this Caution as introductory to it: Satisfaction of
desires consists in two things, 1. The object that satisfies must be adequat
and full, it must be as comprehensive as the desires are large, other ways it
cannot satisfy; it is very observable that Schoolmen teach, that in glory, if
there were one desire unsatisfied, it would be a degree of misery, he that has
an appetite, and has his desire unsatisfied, is in so far miserable; and if
there were one desire, and one thing in our appetite not satisfied, it would be
a degree of misery; so, what is satisfying to desires, must be adequat and
fully proportioned to the desire. 2. As it must be a full, so it must be
suitable satisfaction, as some describe it, it consists in a suitableness of
the object to the faculty; so that if ye ask, what is that which satisfies the
desires of the soul? It Is a full object, and an object suitable to all the
faculties in the soul; so when we say, the Covenant satisfies all our desires,
there are two things wemust instruct to you, that the Covenant is full and
comprehensive of all the good we can desire, and that these good things are
suitable to our desire: these two I will labor to make out in this Sermon,
that I may prove that the Covenant is satisfaction to all our desires, I shall
first prove it to be full and adequat, and then prove it to be suitable, and
consequently prove it full satisfaction to all our desires.

First, That the Covenant is full, abundantly adequat and comprehensive of all
the things we can warrantable desire: for clearing of this, I will offer you
first some general proofs of it, and secondly some particular and special
proofs of it.

First, I will offer you some general proofs of it, and by way of Introduction
to them, I will give you this in the entry, That God in the Covenant resolved
to lay himself out to the outmost, Mat. 22. the Gospel-offers in the Covenant,
are like to a certain King, that made a Marriage Feast, at the Marriage of his
only Son; a King making a Feast, and making a Marriage Feast at the Marriage of
his only Son, thou may be sure he would lay himself out to the outmost at that
Feast; so the Lord has laid himself out to the outmost in the Covenant: This
being generally premised, it may make you expect, that it will not be difficult
to prove, that the Covenant contains satisfaction to all our desires.

And I will offer you these four general proofs of it, 1. The Covenant contains
all the excellencies that are to be found in the Creatures; ordinarily our
desires they are regulat by our senses, like Eva we see the Apple, and we have
an appetite after it, according as we see, our appetite and our desires, are
regulat by hearing and seeing; there is nothing excellent that ever we heard
of, or saw, but it is contained in the Covenant; take a view of the Covenant,
and ye will find in it the promises of a Kingdom; nay more, of Bread, Wine,
Milk, Honey, Myrrh, Spices; ye will find also in the Covenant, promises of
Fountains, Gardens, Beds of Roses, ye will find Gold, Linen, Eye Salve: there
are some Divines have taken pains in some of their Books, to gather all the
similitudes together, and they evidence, that there is nothing excellent in the
Creature, but it is promised in the Covenant; if a man have a desire after Gold,
and fine Gold, if he have a desire after Linen, and fine Linen, after Bread,
Wine, Spices, Beauty, ye will find one, who is white and ruddy, has promised
all these in the Covenant; what ever it be that a man has an appetite after,
ye will find it in the Covenant; and since the Covenant contains all these
things that are excellent among the Creatures, is it any wonder that it
satisfy all desires? all pleasure, profit, honor, or whatever the appetite
can be carried after, is promised in the Covenant; and which is remarkable,
Gold, Bread, Wine, fine Linen, etc. they are but shadows that are to be found
among the Creatures, the substance is only to be found in the Covenant: It Is
called fine Gold, to distinguish it from Gold in the earth, it is called fine
Linen, for all other Linens are but black in comparison of this; it is called
Eye Salve, for Salves may be Salves to our finger when it is cut, but it is much
to make up Eye Salve; all excellencies in the Creature, are only to be found in
the Creature in the Shell, and are to be found in the Covenant in the Kernel.
2. All that is in glory, and all that is in Heaven, are contained in the
Covenant: The Prophet tells us Isaiah 64.4. Since the beginning of the would
men have not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither has the eye seen, O God,
besides thee, what he has prepared for him that waits for him. It is a
strange description given of Heaven in Scripture, Rev. 21.10. It Is called a
City, and a great City, and verse. 12. The wall of it has twelve gates, and
verse. 14. It has twelve foundations, and verse. 19. The foundations of the wall
of the City, are garnished with precious stones, and verse. 21. The streets of
the City are of pure gold, and verse. 22. and 23. There is no Temple there, and
there is no need of the Sun there, for the Lamb is the Temple of it, and the
Sun is the light of it; now, ear has not heard, nor eye has not seen a City
like that which is described there, and the Covenant holds out all these;
therefore some have well observed on this Text, that the Covenant not only
satisfies all our desires, but it contains something more than our desires, our
desires would never have reached the longing after such a City, that had such
gates, and such foundations, and streets, etc. So the Covenant must contain
satisfaction to all our desires, for all the excellencies in the Creature, and
all the excellencies of glory, are promised in the Covenant. 3. The Covenant
must satisfy all our desires, in regard it holds out to us what ever is in
God; his infinite Attributes, his Mercy, his Goodness, his Truth, his Power, all
these are made over to us in the Covenant; there is more in God than we can
desire, nay, there is something in God; that it is impossible for our wit to
reach: It Is remarkable Mat. 22.31. Christ proves against the Sadducees the
resurrection from the dead, from that word he spoke to Moses at the burning
Bush, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, God
is not the God of the dead, but of the living: all the Philosophers on earth,
could never have drawn that consequence out of that word; would not any have
thought it so remote a proof of the resurrection, that no Physician, no
Philosopher, nor no Jurist could have drawn such a consequence, unless Christ
had done it himself? There is somewhat in that word, my God, and I am the God
of Abraham, etc. that will require Christ to explain it. Now, in the Covenant
he has made over himself to us, and all that he has, I will be thy God, this
shall be my Covenant with you, I will be your God and ye shall be my people;
and is not this satisfaction to all our desires? But 4. to evidence this yet
further, that there is a satisfaction to all our desires, and a complete
satisfaction to all our regular desires in the Covenant, ye would take notice
what I hinted at, when first I entered on this Verse; there is a threefold
Covenant necessary, to make up complete satisfaction and security to our
desires, and all the three kinds of Covenants concur in the Covenant of Grace:
1. There passes betwixt men a Covenant of War, and a Covenant of Peace, they
are bound by that Covenant in offensive and defensive Leagues, there is a
mutual Peace betwixt them, and a mutual War against the same enemies, they have
the same friends and the same foes; this is a thing very necessary in
satisfaction to our desires, and this is in the Covenant of Grace, there is a
reconciliation, a peace made up, and all the Articles of it are very favorable
and advantageous. 2. To make up satisfaction to our desires, it is necessary
betwixt Nations that enter in Covenant, that there be a Covenant of Commerce
and Traffic, they will Import and Export Goods; so here, sometimes he Imports
the blessings of Heaven, and sometimes he will Export other Goods, not to wrong
us, but to satisfy our desires. 3. There is a marriage-Covenant; now what can
be more desirable, to satisfy our desires, than these three? for the Covenant
partakes of all these three, and what can be more required of God, to satisfy
all our desires? To be brief, the Covenant is holden out so, as it holds out
things of infinite excellency, and our appetite being finit, it is impossible for
us to have desires suitable, and adequat to the Covenant; David had said
nothing but truth, if he had said, the Covenant is satisfaction beyond my
desires. Now lay the four together, and ye will see, that since God was
resolved to lay himself out to the utmost, according to his own heart, to
satisfy all our desires, no wonder the Covenant satisfy our desires, since it
contains all the excellencies of the Creature, and all that is in Heaven, and
all that is in God, and that there is made over and secured to us, not only a
Covenant of Peace and War, and a Covenant of Traffic, but also a
Marriage-Covenant, wherein our Maker becomes our Husband. These generals
contribute somewhat to evidnce, that the Covenant may satisfy all our regular
and warrantable desires.

I will follow the rest with answering five or six Questions that may occur
about this, that the Covenant satisfies all our desires, and they will
contribute much to clear and confirm, that there is in this Covenant
satisfaction to all our desires.

Quest. 1. It may be asked, suppose the Covenant be full and suitable, yet it
satisfies not all desires, unless they have a right to that fullness; it is a
very difficult thing to satis all desires, a man proves not the Covenant to
satisfy all desires, that proves it to be full and suitable, but I have not a
right to it.

Answ. For answer to this, this will be no Exception against the Covenants
satisfying all desires, if ye take notice of three things. 1. It Is true indeed,
it may be a very ordinary Case I confess, the Covenant is full and very
suitable, but my desire is to have a Right and Satisfaction in the Covenant. In
answer to the Question, I say first, the Covenant it offers a Right, thou could
desire no more in the offer of a Right, than the Covenant holds forth, thy
desire is satisfied to the full, thou art offered all the excellencies in the
Creature, and all that is in Heaven, and all that is in God, there is no less
offered thee in the Covenant, thy desires are satisfied to the full as to the
offer, and as to the terms on which the Offer is made, there is no more
required of thee in the Covenant, than to take all these and make them thine;
no more but take and accept them, would thou have the Covenant made to thee,
whether thou accept of the terms or not? So in the Covenant, thou has the offer
of a right, on the easiest terms our heart could imagine. 2. Thou that says,
the Covenant answers not all my desires, I would have thee to consider in the
second place, all that get a right to the Covenant, the right to it is not of
their buying or meriting, but it comes through the grace of the Covenant; so it
may satisfy all thy desires as to this, the Price of the Right is Paid in the
Covenant, the offer of the Right is Paid in the Covenant, so thy Right to the
Covenant comes through the grace of the Covenant, there is not only the offer
of a Right, but the communication of a Right, and even that communication of a
Right, comes through the grace of the Covenant. 3. I would have thee that makes
this exception, that thou has no Right to the Covenant, because it answers not
all thy desires; do but accept of this Covenant, and embrace Christ on the
easiest terms, and thou shall find thy Right to the Covenant confirmed by the
Covenant; to be brief, thy desire of a right to the Covenant may be satisfied,
if thou will but add to thy desires, the aceepting of the Covenant, and
embracing of the offer; put forth thy trembling hand and take the Covenant, and
thou shall find it satisfy thy desires, as to thy right to the Covenant; so
there is none can justly except, that the Covenant satisfies not all desires,
if they desire a right to the Covenant; I tell thee again, if thou will but
accept of and embrace this Covenant, I make the offer to thee in his Name this
day, take it, and it is thine. But to confirm it the better, I will offer thee
two or three things, 1. If thy desire be of a right to the Covenant, if thou
accept of the offer, thy desires shall be satisfied, notwithstanding of all thy
former guilt, if thou have a desire of a right and an interest in the Covenant,
though thou were a Murderer, a Whoremonger, a Persecuter or a Blasphemer, thou
shall have thy desires satisfied; the Covenant excludes not thee, but rather it
tells thee, though thou have played the Harlot with many Lovers, yet return
unto me. 2. The Covenant will not stand at the weakness of thy faith, if thou
be one that desires a right to the Covenant, and if thou accept of it, though
thou take it with a trembling hand, and with a palsy arm, though it be a
trembling and shaking faith, if thou have a desire to accept the Covenant,
there is in the Covenant, that which will satisfy all thy desires, though thy
faith be but like a grain of mustard seed, or a bruised reed, or a smoking
flax; if it be sincere, it will satisfy thy desires, if thou accept the
Covenant. But 3. If thou accept the Covenant, it shall satisfy thy desires,
and satisfy thee, as to thy right of it, though thy faith be mingled with much
corruption, suppose thou cannot say, I believe, yet say, I accept, and let the
next word be, Lord, help my unbelief. 4. If thou will accept this Covenant,
thou shall be satisfied in thy desires of a right to it, though thou have no
price in thy hand to give; if thou have no money, yet thou may buy without
money, it is God that sells, and he sells without money and without price; so
thou cannot say, thou has no price to give for a right to it, the Covenant may
satisfy thy desires in that, for the price is paid in the Covenant; so I
suppose, the first Objection is satisfied, for I have holden out the Covenant
to be full, containing all that is in the Creature, all that is in Heaven, and
all that is in God; if thou shall say, it satisfies not my desires, I desire a
right to it, and cannot win at it, but as to the offer of a right, and
accepting of the least faith, for all former guilt, and a faith mingled with
corruption, and a faith that cannot buy, because they have no money, the
Covenant dispenses with all these; therefore if thou be not satisfied in thy
desires of a Right, the fault it is not in the Covenant, but in thy self, for
thy desires of a Right, comes not to be satisfied, but through the Covenat.

SERMON XXXIV.
2 Samuel 23. Verse 5. Although my house be not so with God; yet he has made
with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is
all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


IT must be an excellent thing that can satisfy all our desires; how vast are
our desires, and how unsatisfiable? would ye then know what it is that
satisfies all our desires, the Lord has made with me an everlasting Covenant,
and this is all my desire? I was offering you some reasons, why the Covenant
satisfies all our desires; I was entering to answer some Objections, that would
contribute to clear it, I named one, two or three more I will name you, and
then shall come to the Application.

Object. 1. It may be objected in the first place, that only can satisfy all
our desires, which being alone enjoyed is satisfactory; take a man in Prison,
in Poverty, in Contempt, will the Covenant alone satisfy him? have we not
lawful desires after Meat or after Apparel? and if these be nothing, can the
Covenant satisfy all desires: for Answer to this, ye shall notice three things.

1. That all outward things, in so far as they are necessar (and we can only
warrantably desire them, in so far as they are necessar) are promised in the
Covenant; it is a rare thing for one to die of hunger, thousands die of Surfeit
and Gluttony, where one dies of Hunger, and yet the Covenant satisfies their
desires are to necessaries. 2. Ye shall notice, suppose there were want of
necessaries, yet it is accomplished and made up in other things, Gold will
compense Brass and Copper, he that has God, and a Right to Heaven, will hardly
complain of the want of Health; he corrected his word well that said, there is
nothing left me but God, and but God said he, and what would I have more? 3.
The Covenant alone it will satisfy all desires, in regard it compenses, and
makes up any thing that we can desire that is wanting; a remarkable instance ye
have of this in the Bible, Jacob he got the Blessing, Esau he got the fat of
the earth. Genesis 27. Esau comes to meet Jacob with four hundred men, Jacob
offers him a present, Genesis 33. Esau he refuses to take it, I will not take
it, says he, for I have enough, take it, my brother, says Jacob, for I have
all; now, he had not the fat of the earth, if he would have counted his whole
Stock, it would have but amounted to two Bands, but he had the blessing, God
was become the God of Jacob, he had seen God in a Vision at Bethel, and God had
blessed him, therefore he can say, take it my Brother, for I have all; now he
that has all, has satisfaction to all his desires, so the Covenant alone,
holding out Christ and the Father in our offer, is alone satisfying.

Object. 2. Another Objection may be made against this, my heart desires, says
some, the possession of the Promise, the accomplishment of the Promise is not
the Covenant, my heart would have the accomplishment, I would have the Peace,
the Joy, the Consolation that is promised, and I would be at the Heaven
promised; now how can the Covenant satisfy all desires? it contains excellent
promises indeed, but it contains not the Peace, the Heaven and the Joy
promised, and how then can it satisfy all my desires?

Answ. For opening this to you, I desire ye may take notice of three things. 1.
Ye must take notice, that there is a twofold Inheritance, or a twofold
Possession; there is a possession of the Promise, and a possession of the thing
promised; several times Believers are called in the Bible, Heirs of the
promise, was ever a man called an Heir of the Charter, he may be called Heir of
the Land that the Charter carries; but the Believer may be called an Heir of
the promise, the reason is, because the Promise is a great part of the
Inheritance, a person in Covenant with God, is an Heir of the Promise, as Isaac
and Jacob are called; so that there is an Inheritance of the Promise, as well
as in the thing promised; a very necessary thing to be observed, for there are
many precious to God who think, if they were in Heaven, and if they enjoyed the
glory that is to be had there, they would count themselves as Heirs; but while
thou have a Promise, thou art possessing an Inheritance, for the Covenant it
self is a kind of possession; thou that says, thou would be possessed in the
promise, and it is no words, and a Covenant thou would be put off with, thou
mistakes, for the Covenant and the Promise is an Inheritance, and thou art no
Minor in the case, but art possessing as a Major.

2. Take notice ye that would be at the Possession of the Promise, and that
thinks all your desires will not be satisfied until then, that the Covenant,
though it put you not in the possession of the promise, yet it makes the
Possession as sure, as if it were in your hand; that which we have in a promise
from God, It Is even as sure as if it were in possession; it is remarkable, Psalm.
3.7. The Psalm is entitled, a psalm of David when he fled from Absalom his
son, Thou have smitten all mine enemies upon the cheek, thou have broken the
teeth of the ungodly: how could they be broken, when he was flying from
Absalom? But David had a promise for it, and he counts it as sure as if it were
in his hand; it is true it is not so sweet nor so refreshing, as if it were in
hand, but it is as sure; so ye see, though the Covenant put us not in possession
of the promise, yet it holds forth that which is as sure, as if it were in
possession. But the third thing I will give you, that will more fully answer
the Question, and remove the Objection; that the delay of the possession of the
promise, is no denial of it, and to desire the possession of the promise,
except it be in the method of the Covenant, is an irregular desire; ye heard,
that the Covenant satisfies all regular and warrantable desires, but to desire
the possession of a thing, before we have sought for it, and done that for
which we came into the world, is an irregular desire; so if thou say, I have a
great desire of the possession of the Peace, the Joy and the Heaven, that the
Covenant holds forth, thou art irregular in thy desire; would thou be at the
possession before, thou have run the race? or would thou be at the Crown,
before thou have foughten the battle? that is an irregular desire, and the
Covenant is not to satisfy these desires, the Covenant possesses thee in the
promise, and that is an Inheritance, and makes it as sure, as if it were in
possession.

Object. 3. There are lawful desires of the Creatures, and of eschewing the
Cross, and the Covenant satisfies them not; may we not warrantably desire
convenient Food, many seek no more from God, and gets it not: they may have
hundreds of Temptations about their Food, and how to eschew the cross, and
does the Covenant satisfy all their desires? For answer to this, I would have
you notice these things.

Answer. 1. Take notice, that we may desire indeed lawful convenient Food, and
it may be denied, and the removing of the Cross, and it may be denied; but in
this case, the Lord satisfies the desire of our necessity, however he satisfies
not our appetite, he may satisfy the cry of our need; if he shall kill us with
Hunger, why not? if Famine be the Post to bring us home to our Fathers house,
why not as well as a Fever? Whatever be the way he bring us home, he satisfies
the scope of our desires, the scope of our desires to him for temporal things,
if they be lawful, they run in this Channel, that he would give us the things
of time, in subordination to the things of Eternity, if we seek them otherways,
we seek them irregularly, we seek Bread and Clothes to help us to Heaven, but
if he make Famine, and Nakedness to help us to Heaven, he satisfies our
desires; sometime we will go to God, and cry, Lord, give me this outward Mercy,
and remove this Cross, for that will be helpful for my Heaven, if he deny the
Mercy, and keep on the Rod, and yet help thee to Heaven, he satisfies thy
desire; as if a Patient should cry to a Physician, O! I am burning in a Fever,
give me water to drink; but he makes a Cordial and gives him to cool him, he
grants his desire, though he give not water to drink; so in affliction we cry,
Lord, remove this affliction, and help me to Heaven; he lets the affliction ly
on, and helps thee to Heaven, does he not grant thy desire? we are ill carvers
of our own Lot, our desires about temporal things may be granted, when the
particular way and manner of it may be removed, he takes one way for the end,
and we would take another; we cry to be brought to Heaven in a Chariot, and he
thinks sit we should be brought in a Cart, we would be at glory with a fair
wind, and he thinks fit in a cross wind; but if we come to glory, as well with
a cross wind, as a fair wind, the desire is granted. Another thing I would have
you consider, is this, Though we desire temporal things, and get no
satisfaction, yet the Covenant may satisfy our desires, the reason is, it is
rare to find us regular in temporal things; such a Woman would have her Husband
living, and she would quite God many other things, if he would not remove the
delight of her eyes; another does so with her Child, and yet they both die,
notwithstanding God makes it up, and he grants their desire, they think they
cannot have contentment in the World but in such a Lot, they have swallowed and
drowned all their contentment, if that be taken away; the case is so with
David, there is a Child Bathsheba bare in Adultery, the Child falls sick and
dies, he lies on the ground, while the Child is lying sick, and will not eat
all that time, after he has cried to the Lord, the Child dies, was it not much
better, the same Woman bore him a Solomon, than that the Child begotten in
Adultery should live; to be brief, there is hardly any Objection can be brought
from a Christians case, or from their worldly desires, but they may be all
abundantly answered from this, that the Covenant is satisfaction to all our
desires.

I would speak a little to the Application and Practical part of the Point, in
regard it is a thing of great Importance, I resolve to fall from this Branch of
the Verse, and therefore will apply it, supposing that I have proven it
abundantly.

Use 1. And I will apply it in three or four Uses, First, Is the Covenant
satisfaction to all our desires? Then it informs of three or four things. 1. It
informs of what an excellent thing the Covenant must be, Riches may satisfy
the Covetous, and Honor may satisfy the Ambitious, and uncleanness and
Whoredom may satisfy the Lascivious; but what a thing is there that will
satisfy all desires? that is allanerly to be found in God, and in the
Covenant, ye that would have the thing in one Jewel, that the generality of men
are seeking in many pieces of Copper Coin, get an interest in the Covenant, and
it will satisfy all your desires; O! but it must be an excellent Jewel, that
will pay off all your Debt. 2. It informs what is the reason, that Believers
have such a deal of quietness, even in the worst of cases, let them be in
Prison, let them be in a Fever, in Reproach, or in Poverty, yet they have a
great deal of sweet quietness; I will tell you, they have all their desires
satisfied in the Covenant, they desire no more; and a man that has all his
desires, in what condition soever he be, he is quiet; the great ground of our
disquieting is, we want something we desire, but a Believer that can say, he
has made with me a Covenant, he has Bread, Apparel, Wine, Milk, Gold,
Fountains, Kingdoms, Cities, and he has them all in the Covenant; therefore no
wonder, if men labor to take their quietness from them, if devils labor to
take their quietness from them, yet they have still a great deal of quietness,
for they have all their desires, and they are all contained in the Covenant. 3.
It informs of a third thing, of what is the reason of all the exercise of
Conscience, and disquietings, that Believers have; would ye know what it is,
there is one thing that is all their desires, which is their security in the
Covenant: now, no wonder, when they are crossed in that which is all their
desire, to see them hanging down their head, and the seeble knees smiting one
another, for when they are crossed in their interest in the Covenant, they are
not crossed in a trifflle, but in that which is all their desire; so ye may see
the reason of their peace, and their trouble, (one thing have they desired of
the Lord, as it is, Psalm. 27.) And as one thing goes ill or well, accordingly
have they peace or not. 4. Is the Covenant all their desire? it informs of what
a different nature the Spirit of Believers, and the Spirit of the Ungodly are;
there are many they never care for the Covenant, many say, who will give us
Corn and Wine, and many hunt after their lusts; it is a wonder to see the great
odds, betwixt the desire of Believers and ungodly men, even as great odds as
betwixt East and West, all their desires are satisfied, if they can say, God
has made with me an Covenant, wherein he has made over himself, and his Son,
and all that he has; hardly will there a Cross come, that will ly heavy on, no
wonder, for they have all their desires, and a man cannot count himself crossed,
that has all his desires.

Use 2. Secondly, for Use, is the Covenant all the desires of the Believer:
Then I would exhort you to make it all your desire, O! we are plagued sometimes
with Lascivious, Earthly and Frothy Desires, how excellently did the
Philosopher Socrates answer the man that came to him, and said, O! says he, he
is a happy man that has all his desires, but says he, he is a happier man that
desires nothing, but what he may lawfully desire? labor to get your desires
regular according to the Covenant, that these may be nothing in your desires,
but what is contained in the Covenant. I would press this with several Motives
and Considerations, O! but the person is come to a noble Lot in his way to
Glory, that has his desires regulat, according to the Covenant, whether they
be desires for the Church of God, or for themselves.

Readily ye may ask, How shall we get our desires regulat according to the
Covenant? I will offer you two remarkable helps, and two Motives, to get you
desires regulat according to the Covenant.

First then, for helps to get your desires regulat according to the Covenant,
take these four things. 1. I would exhort you to study the Covenant, it will be
an excellent help, to get your desires regulat according to the Covenant, if ye
be acquaint with it; the Covenant should be the glass ye should be looking
into, and bringing your desires to it, and the Covenant, like a face in the
glass, should resemble one another; believe it, Christian, who minds to come to
Heaven, there is nothing thou needs, either for thy being or thy well-being,
but it is contained in the Covenant; therefore be a student of it, and be well
acquaint with it, it holds forth the things of Time, and things of Eternity,
all the excellencies of God, all that is communicable to Creatures, are in the
Covenant; therefore, if thou would have thy desires regulat according to the
Covenant, be a student of the Covenant. A second Direction is, consider
seriously, there is nothing thou can desire in Faith, except it be a promised
mercy, and contained in the Covenant; we have a great Question with the Patrons
of Liturgy, the English service Book; some Divines write against it, say they,
there are many Prayers in it, for things not promised, and we can only pray in
Faith, for what is promised; we can warrantably pray for nothing, but a
promised mercy, for Faith is always founded on the Promise; so it is objected,
if the prayer go beyond it is Object, it is a prayer of the Service Book, and I
believe some pray in passion against their neighbor, and they pray for
themselves ignorantly, as their Opinion leads them; but if it be not a prayer
within the Covenant, it will do no good, for Faith is a believing in the
Promise, and if thou prays not in Faith, thou prays in sin: so this may be a
pressing consideration, that our prayers will never be heard, though it be
presented with as many Tears as there are Waters in the Ocean, if it be not
according to the Covenant. A 3d. Direction, endeavor a work of Mortification
in thy desires, unless thy desires be mortified, they will go beyond the bounds
of the Covenant; therefore in Effectual Calling, there is especially intended
by the Spirit of God, the Mortification of our desires, we are not to desire as
Christ said to the Mother of Zebedees Children, Ye desire, says he, ye know not
what, she desired one of her Sons to sit upon his right hand, and the other on
his left; she would fain have the persons great that she loved; were we
mortifying our desires, we would have another kind of life of it in the world,
than we have, the thing that torments us in the world, we have a desire after
this and that, and the third thing, and are tormented because our desires are
not accomplished; but were there a mortification of our desires, and a bringing
them according to the Covenant, we might have a sweet and contented life in the
world, beyond what we have; I heard a passage of an Old Man, here am I, says
he, that in my life desired nothing, but what I got, and I wanted nothing of
what I desired, if we could get our desires regulat according to the Promises,
and agreeable to them, what a sweet and contented life might we have in the
Wilderness; therefore labor to mortify your desires. A 4th Direction is,
labor to desire all temporal things submissively; he did cast us a noble Copy,
that said, Father, let this cup depart from me, yet not my will be done, but
let thy will be done; what ever temporal Lot we come under, if our desires be
according to the Covenant, (let your desires be for the life of your husband,
or this friend, or that Child) they will be with submission, not my will, but
thine be done. Now these four would help you excellently, to get your desires
regulat according to the Covenant.

I will press these four with these two motives. 1. Know this Christian, that
the great reason of all the anxiety and torment of thy life, flows not so much
from thy crosses, as from thy desires; the great reason of all our torment and
anxiety of our life, is not, that God afflicts, but that our desires are
contradicted, readily affliction is according to our apprehension, the only
thing that makes the cross light to one and heavy to another is, the tempter of
the Spirit; if we could get the victory over our desires, we might go through
the World singing, hardly would we be tormented with the things that torment
us; one desires brave apparel, another honor, a third good entertainment, and
they want them; it is no: the want of them that is the cross, but their desire
that makes it the cross; it is evident from this, one will want their desires
and not be crossed; one will take well with a reeky Cottage, and a piece of brown
Bread, that another would account a cross; the reason is, the one's desire is
not like the other. A second motive is, it was one of the great reasons that
made Christ have so contented a lise in the World, there was hardly a man the
Father had crossed more, than he did him, and yet ye find him never discomposed,
he is many time at, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests,
but the Son of man has not where to lay his head; he is sometimes led so the
Wilderess, and tempted of the Devil, and the Prince of this World comes against
him, but has nothing within him, for he had no desires, therefore he is not
disquieted, he will come to an Hill side and sleep all night, another time he
will be on the Sea all night, another time he came to Jacobs Well, and sought a
drink of Water, he had Tribute to pay when Cesars Tribute was to pay, never one
had mo crosses and more quietness, the reason is, he had no desires, if we
could get the victory over our pride, our ambition, our lasciviousness, the
hundred part of what we have, would satisfy us, but it is our appetite, and not
our necessity, that has a great influence on our torment.

Use 3. Thirdly for Use, Is the Covenant satisfaction to all our desires? Then
the third Use is of Consolation, and it speaks comfortably, especially to three
sorts; 1. To them that it may be have not much sense and experimental proof of
God, readily when they go to pray, he hides, he neither gives liberty to pray,
nor answers he their prayer, shall he sit down and say, he has no satisfiction
to his desires? No, if he lay in a part of the Covenant to you, the Covenant
must be taken for the Inheritance, so long as we are Minors, we must look on
the Promises as an heretage; and if he lay in a Promise, or a part of the
Covenant to thee, bring not in a bad report of him, to say, thy desires are not
satisfied, I came to his door, and I came from it as hungry as I went, and yet
he has given thee a part of the Covenant: It Is lamentable to see so excellent
a Covenant, purchased by such a person, contrived by such a Mediator, and to
see Believers lay so little weight on it; suppose he deny thee sense in thy
spiritual interest, yet thou have ground to sing, that thou have satisfaction
to thy desires, if he lay in a part of the Covenant, and clear up thy interest
in it. 2ly. For consolation, they that go through the World laden with
crosses, they hardly find the World but scouling on them, they may be prone to
bring up an ill report on God, to say, he gives other folk their desires, but
gives not me mine; but has he given thee the Covenant, and will thou say any
thing to thy interest in the Covenant? And will thou yet say, he has not given
thee thy desires? If he has not given thee thy desires, they are irregular, go
and repent for thy desires. Have thou not in the Covenant drink indeed, Wine,
Milk, Honey, Gold, Eye Salve, Fields, Fountains, Kingdoms, Cities? And yet will thou say he has not given thee all thy desires? Nay more, have thou the City
that has the twelve foundations? Has he made over by Covenant all that is in
God? Remember ye that Note, that in the Covenant, God lays himself out to the
outmost, like a certain King making a feast at the marriage of his only Son, if
ever a feast be great, it will be the feast of a King, and the feast of a King
at the Marriage of his only Son: the scope of it is, that God lays himself out
to the outmost, and yet shall thou say, he answers not all thy desires? Go not
to complain of your straw-bed, nor of your Bread, though it were never so
brown, if ye have an interest in this Covenant, ye have all your desires, and
more than ye can desire, for there is something in God our appetire cannot
desire. 3ly. It speaks comfortably to them, who know not what may be before
them; O! may some say, if I go forward, I will fall over head and ears, and
all; and another says, O! I am afraid I fall away, and many torment themselves
with what is to come, and the evil they feared fell on them; but why art thou
tormented, that has an Interest in the Covenant? If thou have that, thou have
all that thy heart can desire, I will close all with exhorting all of you, to
labor to regulat our desires according to the Covenant; when ye find ye desire
a thing ye cannot produce a Promise for, suspect it as an unwarrantable desire,
and all that has gotten the victory over the corruption of their heart, if ye
can go this night and ly down, and appeal to him that is the fearcher of the
heart, ye desire no more than what is promised, its an evidence he has
mortified your desires, and brought you under the Bond of the Covenant; blessed
are they that can say, the Lord has made with me an everlasting Covenant, and
desire no more if he would make me a King, nay, and give me all that is betwixt
the rising of the Sun and the going down thereof, I desire no more, for he has
made with me a Covenant.

SERMON XXXV.
2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me
an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure; for this is all my
salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


DAvid is describing the Covenant that God made with him, that it was
everlasting, and well ordered, and sure; he builds two great Conclusions on it,
this is all my salvation and all my desire; the latter of these I have spoken
to, it is a great mercy, when we can have our desires regulat according to the
Covenant; when there is nothing desired, but promised mercies; irregular
desires are the great foundation of the torment of our life, they cannot choose
but have sweet contentment, and a life full of tranquillity, that have gotten
the victory over their desires, not warranted by the Covenant.

But I will say no more of this, before I leave these two, there is one thing
yet lying in them, all my salvation, and all my desire; the two joined together
imports, that the Covenant is a perfect Charter, it is a very rational Deduction
from it. That which is all the ground of the hope of salvation, and that which
is satisfaction to all desires, must be a perfect Covenant; therefore, before I
leave the handling of this Character of the Covenant, I will take in this, and
handle it this day.

Doctrine. That the Covenant of Grace made with believers, is a perfect
Covenant, it is a very useful character of it, and comfortable, and therefore
hearken unto it; it may be said of the Covenant, which David Psalm. 19.7. says,
The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul; and that which he says
Psalm. 119.96. I have seen an end of all perfection, but thy Commandment is
exceeding broad; it is as much as, I can see no end of thy Commands, they are so
full and so perfect; this is an excellent character and property of the
Covenant; whereas in other things, we can see nothing but vanity, and
emptiness, and froth, there is a perfection in the Covenant.

That I may the more distinctly handle this, I will propose these four things
to be dwelt on. 1. I will prove by some reasons, that the Covenant of God is a
perfect Covenant. 2ly. I will enquire in what respects it is perfect. 3ly. I
shall clear some Questions, and answer some Objections against its perfection;
and in the last place, I shall dwell on the practical part of it.

Reasons First. For some reasons to prove, that the Covenant is perfect; and
indeed it is not easy to believe the Covenant to be perfect, every one will
have their Objection against it; yet there are these four things, that will
very strongly concur to demonstrat that it is a perfect Covenant. 1. That to
which nothing can be added. and from which nothing can be wanting, must be a
perfect Covenant, that is the proper definition of perfection; now this agrees
well to the Covenant, there is nothing wanting in it, and nothing can be added
to it; it is remarkable Rev. 22. He that adds to the words of this Prophecy,
God shall add to him the plagues written in this book; and he that takes from
it, God shall take his name out of the book of life; that is one sure reason,
to prove it a perfect Covenant. Papists tell us, they say they add no corrupt
additions, but perfecting additions to the words of this Book; now, corrupt
additions is a contradiction, for a corruption is not an addition, but the
Covenant is so perfect, as whosoever he be that offers to add to the words of
this Book, God will add to him the plagues of this Book, and whosoever he be
that takes from it, God will take his name out of the Book of life.

Reas. 2. That Covenant that is sufficient to make the man of God perfect, must
be a perfect Covenant: that which is in it self sufficient to make a Believer
perfect, what can be more requlsite to make up perfection as to us, but the
thing that will make us perfect? And the Covenant is sufficient to make the man
of God perfect. 1 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and
is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness: Now, since they are sufficient to make the man of God Perfect,
the Covenant must be a perfect Covenant that is thus useful.

Reas. 3. It will prove a perfect Covenant, if ye consider that God in the
Covenant is at the outmost of his offers; now there can be nothing wanting, if
God be at the outmost of what he can offer. There are three things that in the
Covenant evidences God to be at his outmost, so to speak with reverence, that
he cannot go beyond the three. 1. The blessings of the Covenant, he cannot go
beyond them, he cannot offer greater things than himself and his Son, and both
these are promised in the Covenant. 2ly. He is at the outmost of the freedom of
the terms, on which these offers are made: it is impossible to make an offer on
freer terms, that we should accept of him, and turn from our iniquity and
hearken and incline our ear to the Covenant; what easier terms was it possible
for God to make such great offers on? 3ly. He is at his outmost as to the Seals
and Security of the Covenant; it is remarkable, when he confirmed the Covenant
to Abraham, Heb 6. Because he had no greater to swear by, he swore by himself
that imports, that he gave the greatest Oath he could make, if he could have
sworn by a greater, he would have sworn by it; so he is at his outmost, as to
all these three. Must not that then be a perfect Covenant, where God is at his
outmost, and where (to speak with reverence) he can neither make greater
offers, nor freer offers, nor give greater security for his offers?

Reas. 4. That must be a perfect Covenant, which upon the grounds given in the
Text, satisfies all desires, and is all the hope of salvation, this proves it a
perfect Covenant; our desires are very vast they are ordinarily like the Sea,
our desires are like an Ocean, yet all desires, and even when they shall be
racked to the full, the things contained in the Covenant shall satisfy them,
and that for all eternity: so the Covenant cannot but be a perfect Covenant; so
lay the four together, and ye will see it a perfect Covenant.

But the more clear handling of this will appear, if I will particularly
enquire into what respects it is a perfect Covenant: It would take a long time
to open this, I will confine my self in handling this, to four or five
particulars, and in these shall let you see, in what respects it is a prefect
Covenant 1. It Is a perfect Covenant in regard of excellency; it is perfectly
excellent, if the things contained in the Covenant, had been many things like
the gifts Abraham gave to Ketura his Concubine and her Children, it would be
far from being a perfect Covenant, suppose it had been a liferent Bond, or a
life's Tack of health, or a little whiles flourishing in the world, what a silly
thing had it been in the point of excellency? But the Covenant is perfect in
this respect, the greatest things God can give, are contained in it, he will
give grace and glory, and no good thing shall be wanting to them that live
uprightly; no, he cannot offer greater things, he offers in the Covenant all
that he has, and to make us Ruler over all that he has, blessed shall that
servant be, whom his Lord when he comes finds so doing, verily he will make
him ruler over all that he has. 2ly. It Is a perfect Covenant, in regard it
holds out not only all these excellencies, but it is a Covenant of the most
excellent things in their perfection, in as far as they are communicable:
Divines distinguish two sorts of Attributes of God, some communicable, some
incommunicable. Infiniteness is incommunicable; Eternity is incommunicable;
other Attributes of God are cammunicable, his Wisdom, his Holiness, his
Justice, his Goodness. All the Attributes of God communicable, are made over to
us in the Covenant; he promises they shall be forthcoming to us,: and there
are some Rays communicate to Believers, like Beams proceeding from the Sun, they
come from God the Fountain of Wisdom and Holiness, all the righteousness of
Christ, in so far as it is communicable, and as we stand in need of, is made
over in the Covenant; there is nothing in the Father or in the Son, that is
communicable, but it is made over in the Covenant; since it is so, that the most
excellent things are promised in the Covenant, and all the excellencies of the
Father, and of the Son, in so far as they are communicable, and we are capable
of, are made over in the Covenant, it must then be a perfect Covenant in regard
of excellency: What is possible for you to imagine? What is desirable? What is
the Father and his Son, and all that is in him, in so far as we are capable of,
and are communicable, is made over to us in the Covenant. 3ly. It Is a perfect
Covenant in respect of duties; there are two things that make up the whole duty
of Man, or of a Christian, and ye will find there was never any thing so
perfect in both regards, as the Covenant is. 1. The Covenant is perfect in
regard of Mortification. 2ly. In regard of Vivification. First, It Is perfect in
regard of Mortification, the Heathens and all Hypocrites know nothing of this
mystery of the Covenant, the Covenant is perfect in regard of Mortification; if
ye view three things required in the work of Mortification. ye will find them
all called for in the Covenant. 1. The Covenant requires, that we should not
only mortify outward and scandalous lusts, but also inward heart-lusts; the
Covenant calls for both the two, all the Law-gives that ever gave Laws to the
world. their Laws strike not at heart-ills, but the Covenant is thus perfect,
as the lusts of the heart, the lust of the eye, eyes full of Adultery, even
that the Covenant condemns, and makes Adultery; and so its perfect, in regard
it not only sneds off the Branches, but it strikes at the root, even or
heart-lusts. 2ly. The Covenant it presses the mortification of lesser things,
even the things that we would think but a small evil, the Covenant presses that
we should watch against every iniquity, and count nothing small that is
committed against a great God. 3ly The Covenant not only presses the
mortification of heart-ills, and the least ills, but it presses the
mortification of the most dear things, and things most precious to us, such as
the right hand, the right eye, Mat. 5.29. If thy right hand offend thee, cut it
off, and cast it from thee, if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, etc.
better to go to Heaven with one eye, than to go to Hell with two; so argues
Christ, the smallest sin, the least appearance of sin, and the dearest of
things, though it were as dear as the right eye, and the right hand, they must
be mortified, and must not that be a perfect Covenant, that gives so perfect
Laws?

Secondly, Take a view of Vivification, and of positive duties supradded to the
work of Mortification, and ye will find it perfect in regard of these,
especially if ye notice three things. 1. The Covenant presses universal
obedience to the Law, not only the first Table of the Law, but the second, not
only duties to God, but to our neighbor; the Covenant presses a believing of
all that God says, God spoke all these words, saying, is the Preface to the Ten
Commandments; they are all the words of God, if one of them had been spoken by
the god of Ammon, if a second had been spoken by the god of Israel, we might
have said, this was spoken by the god of Ammon, and is not to be obeyed; but
all the Commands are the Words of God, and therefore all are to be obeyed. 2ly.
The Covenant in the point of Vivification, declares against slothiulness as
well as scandals, the Covenant says, the Tree that brings not forth good
fruit, or the careless or barren Tree, will be cast into the fire, as well as
the Tree that brings forth Accorns, and that is an evidence of the perfection
of the Covenant; it is well observed of Jonah, a sleeping Jonah may ruin a
Ship, as well as a Pirat; had there come an Enemy, or a Pirat upon the Ship
that Jonah sleeped in, it could not contribute more to ruin it, than his
sleeping; security and slothfulness will bring thee to Hell, as well as the
grossest scandals. 3ly. The Covenant calls for Grace as well as duty; there is
nothing acceptable duty to God, but what has grace at the bottom of it, if we
give our body to the fire, and want charity, if we pray never so much, and pray
not in faith, it is not acceptable; there is no right work of Sanctification,
except the work consist of Grace as well as duties: must not that be a perfect
Covenant, as to all the duties of Mortification and Vivification, that requires
such exact obedience, as ye see required in it? 4ly. It Is perfect, in respect
it is a complete answer to all our necessities; there is nothing our necessity
can call for, but it is contained in the Covenant, the truth of this will
appear, if ye take notice of two things. 1. There is no want a Believer can be
liable to, but readily ye will get two Promises in the Covenant relating to it;
some have taken the pains to cast them up, and in their Treatises made appear,
that there is no want a Christian can come under, but in the Covenant there
will be at least two Promises for one want, if ye go through particularly; is
it a heart of stone ye complain of? Is it an unclean heart? Is it weakness of
Grace? Is it the strength of corruption? Be what it will, ye shall readily find
two Promises for what ever want a Christian can come under. 2ly. The Covenant
holds out Christ in all his three Offices, it is certain, Christ being appointed
of the Father a Physician, a Mediator, a Propitiation, he must be suited to all
our wants; now Christ in his fullness is holden out in the Covenant; so the
Covenant in all the Promises of it, is nothing but the execution of his
threefold Office, as King, Priest, and Prophet in the Church; hence I
rationally infer, it is a perfect Covenant, for if there be a fullness in Christ,
in whom a Believer is complete, and that fullness be communicate and dispensed,
according to the tenor of the Covenant, then it must be a perfect Covenant, for
there is no want, there is no strait, there is no case that can be perplexing,
but at least ye shall find two promises, if not sometimes six relating to it.

Lastly, to prove it a perfect Covenant, that must be a perfect Covenant, the
blessings whereof are to be eternal; indeed if they ended, if there were but a
Liferent-tack of them, suppose he should give us a Tack of peace and of pardon,
and all that God has; suppose he should have made over all that he has in the
Covenant, and only given us seventy years Tack o^ them, as he has given us of
our life, and the date of our time, though it had been perfect in excellency,
yet it had not beet perfect in duration, but this makes it perfed in all
things, and well ordered, that as the excellency of it stands in this, that all
that is in God, and all the righteousness of his Son is made over to us; so it
is to endure for all eternity. Now lay these four together, and ye will see
that the truth of this is unquestionable, that among many excellent characters
and propetties of the Covenant, this is a special one, that it is perfect.

Before I apply this Doctrine, there are three Objections, one of them made by
Quakers, another by Papists, and a third by Episcopal men, and Patrons of
Ceremonies; and all the three I will remove.

Object. 1. First, it may be Objected, this Covenant is not perfect, why? There
are many things revealed by a voice within us (say the Quakers) not contained
in the Scriptures; that cannot be a perfect Covenant, that contains not all
things necessar for Salvation, and this Covenant contains not all things
necessar for Salvation; why? The Spirit reveals this and that to me, when there
is no nearness to him, and this is necessar, and therefore the Covenant cannot
be perfect; and indeed Quakers, who are multiplying, and against whom Ministers
should give warning, they are twining up their Disputs to this head, for if
they gain this, that the Spirit reveals new Truths, not contained in the Bible,
they gain all their desire; what ever is born in on a man, they call it the
work of the Spirit, now what can be Replied to this?

Ans. For Answer to this, and to guard against this Doctrine of theirs, ye
would take notice of three or four things about it. 1. The proper work of the
Spirit of Truth, is not to reveal new Truths, but to open the eyes to the
Truths already revealed; when the Spirit, the Comforter, comes, he will guide
you in all Truth, and bring all things to your remembrance, the work of the
Spirit of Truth is to bring all things already revealed to our remembrance; The
Spirit when he comes, he shall take of mine, and show it you. John 14.16. That
is, He shall take my Covenant, and my Righteousness, and shall show it to you:
so the work of the Spirit of Truth is, to bring things to our remembrance, that
Christ has already revealed, when they are put to it; they cannot in all the
Bible show the least Promise, that the Spirit will reveal new Truths, but will
bring things already revealed to our remembrance. 2ly. Take notice, that this
Principle contain, one of the greatest reflections on the Scripture, if there
were no more to make it odious to you than this, it is enough, for it says, the
word of God is not perfect, the Spirit says, it is perfect, and closes the
Bible with it, If any shall add to the prophesies of this Book, God shall add
to him all the plagues contained in this Book; if there were no more to make it
abominat, and odious, by all sober Christians, this reflection that it
contains, on the perfect rule of manners, the Scriptures and Covenant of God,
it is enough; and who will maintain a necessity of Revelation of new Truths,
must maintain, that the things already revealed, were not perfect, and
consequently reflect on God, who has given man a rule, but not a perfect rule.
3ly. The evil of this will appear, in regard it were the way to destroy, and to
turn not only mankind, but the Church of God into confusion; by what rule shall
one discern the thing born in upon us, to be from the Spirit? They say, they
are to judge the Spirit by the thing born in upon us, and not to judge the
thing born in on us by the Spirit; Therefore in Germany, it was so born in on a
man, to that hight, as to kill his own Wife, and one another, to blaspheme God,
and one another to commit Incest, and shall we judge such blasphemies against
God, and such horrid Acts of Murder and Incest, when born in on a person, to be
from the Spirit? That would destroy both the Church of God, and all humane
Society. An^ Lastly, it fathers on the Spirit of Christ, the Spirit of Truth
all the horrid Inventions and Imaginations of man's own hear^ what a dreadful
thing is this, that the corrupt heart inven^ and imagines, and then fathers it
on the Spirit of God, an^ speaks lies in his Name? So if there were no more, to
make you tremble at this Principle of Quakers, and make you (...) believe the
Covenant a perfect Covenant, it is more than enough Now for all this Principle
of Quakers, and the Objections the^ make, the Covenant is perfect, and all
things to be believe^ and to be done, are contained in it; and they that will
say the Spirit reveals new Objective Truths, by the Spirit with^^ them, they
are putting themselves to horrid Temptations.

Object. 2d. The second Objection is moved by Papists, wh^ say, there are
unwritten Traditions as necessar for salvation as any thing contained in this
Covenant; the Council of Tre^^ say they, appointed them to be received pari
pietatis affect^^ that the Scriptures are to be received; and here is one of
the great grounds, why the Christian Church, is so tossed with Divisions and
Questions, about things they confess are not i^ the Scriptures, but are
contained in a Rule as certain as the Scriptures; and makes not this against
the perfection of the Covenant? It Is not perfect, say they, in regard the
generality of Christians, and all Papists, they take themselves to unwritten
Traditions. I need not dwell on this, I trust there is not much need of crying
down these Traditions in this place, in regard, I am persuaded, the most part
believe the perfection of the Scriptures and of the Covenant.

Ans. I will only say these three things of these Traditions. 1. Take notice,
that the most part of the thing; they offer for Traditions, as necessar for
Salvation, if ye would but examine the grounds on which they are taken up, ye
would admire, that men of such parts, go upon such shallow grounds; They say,
their Traditions must come from the Apostles; why? Because we cannot tell when
they came into the Church, such as the Office of Cardinals, etc. As if a man
cannot tell, there is a Burn running through the Town, that yet cannot tell the
Springhead, out of which it comes: now, is not this a very shallow ground,
these Traditions must be Apostolic, because none can tell when they began.
2ly. I will say of these Traditions, the most part of them are but vain things,
they look not (...) flow from the Spirit of God; there are many of them vain
^^ings, and tend more to prove a Popish Interest, than Christian piety; no
wonder then, that Christians heart stand at them. 3ly. We reject all these
Traditions, and there will never be peace until all these Traditions be taken
away, and ^ll we come to resolve in the Covenant of God, and the Scri^ures, to
be the perfect Rule of manners, which are sufficient to make the man of God
perfect. So it stands as a firm Truth, that the Covenant is a perfect Covenant.

Obj. 3. May it not be said, are there not many things ne^essary for Believers
in their Faith and Practices, that are not contained in the Scriptures? As for
example, if there be a Question about Forms of Ecclesiastic Government, that
is not determined in the Scriptures.

Ans. To this, I will say two things. 1. It is enough to me ^ustly to have
aversion from any form of Government, if it be not determined in the
Scriptures; many confess this, and yet they own Prelacy, they say in all the
Word of God, God has ^eft no particular Direction to such and such Officers,
but what he has left to all Ministers, he has imposed no Duty on them, nor
has he told people now to carry to them, in all the Bible; is not this a
sufficient reason against them? Is not this a yielding of the Cause? But 2ly
The Covenant is perfect, as to this, the Lord has determined a form of
Government, and has set it up even among preaching Ministers of the Gospel,
giving them the same qualifications, with any distinction; the Lord has
positively determined all things necessar for such and such Offices, and herein
the Covenant is perfect, in regard it positively determines, what form of
Government the Master of the house would have in his own house.

But secondly, are there not many things relating to worship, that are not
determined in the Scriptures? Such as Forms, Gestures and Garbs, and such like,
and are these determined in the Scriptures? For Answer, if they be not
determined in the Scriptures, they should not be practiced, and this is a
sufficient Argument; it is ordinarily the Whore that busks her self, let the
Whore, or the Romish Church wear a buskin all hanging with Ribbens, but let not
the true Church wear that Garb; for the Bride, she is ay comliest in her native
purity; and really Gods Ordinances have another manner of Grace, in their naked
purity, we need not set Forms in our Worship, all these things are determined
in general Rules in the Scripture, Let all things be done decently and in
order, let all things be done without strife, and let them be done in charity.
To be brief, there is nothing in time and eternity, but it is contained in the
Covenant, and so it must be a perfect Covenant.

SERMON XXXVI.
2 Samuel 23. Verse 5. Although my house be not so with God; yet he has made
with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is
all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


PErfection is a comprehensive Property of the Covenant, I can say no more of
it than I have said, Perfection is a thing, to which nothing can be added, and
to which nothing is wanting; I labored to convince you of this.

The practical part of the Point remains to be handled. Is the Covenant a
perfect Covenant? There are three or four practical Uses of it, I will follow;
I confess there is hardly any thing in Time that we can ascribe the name of
Perfection unto; the most excellent of persons have some defects, there is
something wanting in them, there is something in their humor, and in their
way, that says, they are not perfect, the most excellent of things are so, the
Rose will fade, and it has a Brier in it, but the Covenant is perfect.

Use. 1. It serves then to reprove these, who take it not up as perfect; and
there are three or four sorts of Persons, that come under this Reproof. 1 It
reproves Quakers, that tell us of new Truths, that will be revealed to one man,
and not to another, they reflect on the Scriptures, they say the Covenant is
not perfect, they blaspheme God and destroy humane Societies; they make no
Church certain till their Revelation come; all that has been done by Christ,
may be overturned by a new Revelation; ye ought to be guarding against this
Principle, they will be lying among you, and ye not know them, this is their
great Principle, and that which now in their Books, they are hotest in
following, guard against it, as ye would have God's peace, and hold by this,
that the Covenant is perfect, it contains all your salvation, and all your
desire. 2ly. It reproves Papists, the bulk of whose Religion lies in humane
Inventions and Traditions; Mr. Baxter observes well, it is a ground to suspect
them enemies to the Scriptures, for they will not admit the Scriptures to be
the Judge of Controversies; it is even like a man declining a Judge, because he
suspects him; but we maintain this Covenant to be a perfect Covenant, it
contains all our Salvation, and all our desire; and we bid no more for the mind
of God, than what is contained in it; and until we see him, we will take these
Letters of his, and trust them, and walk by them, and expect from him,
according to what is contained in this perfect Covenant. 3ly. It reproves these
among us, who will have the Covenant perfect, as to all things relating to
Faith, but they will not have it a perfect Rule of Manners, they say, for
Ceremonies and Forms of Government, we are not to seek them from Scripture, and
a Covenant; and where should we seek them, if we seek them not there? And what
have any thing to do in his house, that has not his Warrant, if there be not
determinations in the Word about them, and if they cannot pretend to Christ's
Commission, what Warrant have they to his house? O! they cut the throat of
their own Conscience, while they deny this. 4ly. It reproves many practical
Christians, who do not take the Covenant for a perfect Covenant. Frequently it
comes to be the case of a Christian, to doubt and question, and sit down (like
a Woman in Travail, thinking she will never be delivered) seeking after some
Sense and Experience, unless God communicate something that will tickle their
affection, they cannot take the Covenant, nor a Promise of the Covenant; thou
does not believe the Covenant to be a perfect Covenant; readily thou speaks of
it, as if it wanted out thy case; thou will say, it contains many things, but
alas it wants out my case, thou understands not the nature of it, for it is a
perfect Covenant, it is all thy Salvation, and all thy desire, and there is
nothing wanting in it, that he that was wiser than thou, thought necessar to be
put in it. All these comes under this reproof, and however thou joins with
Papists and Quakers, and all the Patrons of Ceremonies; in an hour of
Temptation, when thou takes not the Covenant for a perfect Covenant, yet it is
a perfect Covenant.

Use 2. The second use of the Point, is the Covenant so perfect a Covenant, it
contains what God can promise, and all that we can desire? then it serves for
Information, and there are four or five things it informs of, and that a
Christian should seriously ponder. 1. Is it a perfect Covenant? It informs of
the Obligation we have to him that made it, and to the Mediator that treated
it; there is nothing can be added to it. O! but he managed the business well,
and there is nothing wanting in it, for it is a perfect Covenant, there is
hardly a man has a business, but we will find some fault. I like well the
Observation a Moralist has, says he, there are many, they are like Witches, in
finding out faults, whereas Wit lies rather in covering faults; it is the
greatest Wit that can best defend a bad Cause; ordinarily, there is no man can
go through the World, but there are ay some saying, see the fool, but what
fault can ye find in the management of this Covenant, for it is perfect? I
appeal in cold blood to any Christian, is there any thing can be added, or
wanting in it? He that managed it, was Christ the Wisdom of God, and the Power
of God, that carried the business so, as the most censorious Wit, can neither
add, nor find a want in it: some tell of one a Critic, in the whole course of
his life, he could scarcely find one action that pleased him; whatever any did,
he found ay a fault in it; but bring out this Covenant, and give him the
Spectacles of a Christian, and he will find it a perfect Covenant, he would not
find in it the least fault or want; nor is there any thing to be added to it,
which preclaims the Wisdom of the Mediator; our business was better in his
hand, than if it had been in ours; for if we had had the managing of it, either
there would be something added or wanting; but he managed it so, as there is
nothing can be added or wanting. 2ly. Is it thus a perfect Covenant, then not
only bless the Mediator, but make use of it, improve it a a perfect Covenant;
there is indeed the great use of the Point I would dwell a little on, and help
you to improve it as a perfect Covenant; there are four cases wherein we are to
improve it as a perfect Covenant. 1. I exhort you to improve it in all Debates,
this is a time full of Debates, ye shall find hardly two meet in one judgment
in all things; here is Christ, says one; there is Christ, says another; there
is one thing cried up this year, another thing cried up the next year; but the
Covenant is a perfect Covenant; bring all your debates to the Scriptures, and
to the Covenant, do not stand on the Judgment of Rantars, and profane wicked
men, that readily will not turn over a Chapter of the Bible in a week, it is
impossible for them to know the word of God, no question, they may rant, and
they may alter according to their shallow wits, like men groping in darkness,
and knows not at what they stumble, Isa. 8.20. To the law and to the testimony,
if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in
them: In all questions of the time that thou art trysted with in this world, if
thou would be a person that would look out like a witty one, and a man of
understanding, be well acquaint with the Scriptures, and understand them well;
I would not value a man that is un-acquainted with the Scriptures, more than
the barking of a Dog. 2. Improve it in all things that relate to your peace,
Antinomians and Socinians tell us, they can afford peace to the wicked, it is
true their principle leads them to that, but we tell them, it will not be a
spiritual peace, it will not be according to the Covenant; let them speak
peace, it is not Christ that speaks peace, it is no peace from the inferior
Judge, if the supreme Judge condemn it; what signifies peace from all the
Ministers in the world, if the Master say, depart from me, I know you not; and
if he say, come to me, little children, what signifies it, if all the Ministers
in the world say, depart from me? therefore take up the Covenant, as a perfect
Rule in order to your peace; if it speak peace to you, take the peace of it: if
it speak war to you, take it, for it is a perfect Rule, to which nothing can be
added. 3. I exhort Christians to improve it in a third case, and that is, to
bear off Challenges and Temptations; frequently they come multiplying, take the
Covenant, it is a perfect Covenant, why go ye about to be disquieted with, I
think, and I fear, when it may be, neither thy thought, nor thy fear, has a
spiritual warrant; take the Covenant, it is perfectly the mind of God, and if ye
knew how to improve it, readily ye might find, that there is no Temptation, nor
Challenge of what kind soever, but ye may find an answer to it in the Covenant.
I will offer you but these three things, that may occur, and they most
ordinarily meet you. 1. Ye have a natural heart, go to the Covenant with it,
it is perfect, I will take away the heart of stone; I like it well to see
Parents, that teach their young ones to pray, they put this Promise and that in
their hand; ye that have a gate of it, put in this Promise in their hand, I
will take away the heart of stone, teach them in their youth to press this
Promise, and bid them go to God, and the Covenant, where they will find this
among the first Promises, I will take away the heart of stone, and I will give
you a new heart. 2 If your case be great guiltiness, what should ye do with it,
should ye sit down and despair, and cast away your hope and considence, and be
waiting for death, as the Messenger that will take you to Hell; no, go to the
Covenant with it, Isa. 1.18. Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be
white as snow, though they be red as crimson, they shall be as wool. Isa.
43.25. I, even I am he, that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake,
and will not remember thy sins. But 3. If the Challenge were, that ye want
Repentance, and cannot get a heart broken for these things, ye have committed
against God, go to the Covenant, and ye will find the Promises of Repentance;
for as I said, it is a perfect Covenant, I defy you to instance the case ye can
be in, but there may be two Promises made to it, if not six; therefore be
improving the Covenant in all your debates and disputes of the time, in all
things that relate to your consolation, and that relate to your Challenges. 4.
I exhort you to improve the Covenant in all your duties, make use of it as a
perfect Covenant, I declare from this place this day, that I take nothing for
my duty to God, but what is contained in the Covenant; no man, nor society of
men can make duties to God, nothing can be a duty to God merely from the will
of men; nay more; it is enough to make it a quarrel, if we worship him according
to the Traditions of men, and no wonder, for it says, this Covenant is not
perfect, therefore nothing can be a duty to God from men; though they were
never so perfect or holy, they cannot make duties, but what are contained in
the Covenant, and they who will take upon them to say, this is a duty, and this
is a duty, and the contrair is a sin, they take Gods Office on them, for it is
he that makes duties, and it is he that has made them perfectly in this
Covenant, and they that can keep up the duties of the Covenant, they will in
due time be made perfect in the Covenant.

Use 3. The third Use of the Point, Is it a perfect Covenant? then it is
encouraging and comfortable to Believers; O! to be under a perfect Covenant,
it is very comforting and encouraging, in these four or five Cases. 1. Compare
your case with the case of the generality of men, the generality of men, they
are seeking their contentment in other things than the Covenant, but the things
are not perfect; It Is observed, there are three great imperfections in all the
Creatures. 1. There is nothing in the Creature complete, there is neither
Perfection nor Thing, even though men should say it were perfect in its own
kind, yet not in every kind, some have Strength, and they want Wit; some have
Beauty, and they have a wicked ill humor; some have Riches, and they are base;
some have Honor, and they are poor; there is ay some Briar in their Rose; ye
will find several Worthies mentioned in the Scripture, who had their own
imperfections, David he had uprightness, but he was not free of Scandal; Moses
had meekness, yet he wanted not impatience; Abraham had Faith, yet he wanted
not fear of his Life, when he went to Egypt, and to Abimelech's Court; there
was in them a Rose that blossomed, but there was ay a Briar beside it; hardly
can it be said of any thing, that ever was, that was said of Christ, Col. 2.10.
And ye are complete in him. 2. There is an imperfection in the Creature of
duration; suppose it were complete, yet it cannot last, like Jonah's Gourd, it
shadowed him from the heat of the sun in the day, but at the evening it
withered; a little time puts an end to it, there is no perfection of duration
in the Creature, Ps. 73. My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the the
strength of my heart, etc. 3. There is an imperfection of suitableness, suppose
the thing were entirely complete and lasting, yet our humor and inclination may
change, according to our appetite, for suppose the thing continue complete and
endure, yet our inclination may alter; hardly are there any thing constantly
enjoyed, but the ordinar use of them is enough to give a surfeit of them. Now,
there is imperfection in the Creature, but in this Covenant there will be no
change, the thing is complete; and ay the more enjoyed, there is the greater
appetite, and the more longing desire. Therefore, ye that have an interest in
this Covenant, compare your case with all others, and suppose ye cannot count
on such Bonds, and such Charters of Lands, yet consider, that they have but a
perishing good, and ye have an interest in the everlasting Covenant; be
comforted with comparing your case with others. 2. I exhort you that have an
interest in this Covenant, to learn to understand your privilege; there are
many Believers, like a young Heir, that cannot read nor write, they understand
not their Charter; so many Believers understand not their privilege, because
their understanding is imperfect, they go mourning and complaining of their
case, while their understanding of the Covenant is imperfect.

Quest. I would move here one practical Question, what course a Believer should
take, to understand the Covenant in its perfection?

Answer, I will offer you three Rules, that may prove helpful to you 1. I would
exhort you, ye have variety of Cases, whiles ye are full, whiles poor, whiles
reproached, whiles deserted, whiles tempted, go to the Covenant with every
case, and that will train you, and teach you the perfection of it, readily ye
have scarcely the confidence sometimes to do it; but this was the way of Mr.
Dickson, if any thing troubled him, he labored ay to get a Promise, and if he
got it, he rejoiced, and in his old age, he wrote the Book Therapeutica Sacra,
the cure of all cases by the Covenant; and if ye make use of the Covenant, ye
will find there is no discouragement, no affliction, but ye will find a remedy
for it in the Covenant. 2. I exhort you to be much in fear, filial fear, Ps.
25.14. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show them
his Covenant; the ready way to be acquaint with the Covenant is, to be a
Christian much in fear, why does not he say, the secret of the Lord is with
them that love him? that rejoice in him? or that believe in him? the person
that is fearing him, is driven to the Covenant. 3. If ye would understand your
privilege, and understand the Covenant, be more a student of the Covenant;
consider the grounds ye heard laid down. he has laid himself out to the
utmost, he has never holden in making Promises, until he has made that
Promise, He will make him ruler over all that he has; He has ay gone on in
making one Promise upon the back of another, until he make over all that he
has; and make the person Ruler over all that he has, and what would ye desire
more? or imagine more? He put in Promises of peace, Promises of pardon,
promises of Adoption, and of Effectual Calling, and of taking away the heart of
stone, and never stopped at Promises making, till he come to make him Ruler
over all that he has; and if ye were studying this, ye might understand your
privilege; and I am persuaded all the disquietings ye might come under, flows
from the not understanding the Covenant, therefore understand your privilege.

That I may close this point, I will speak a word to two or three Cases, 1. It
speaks a word to those, that seek their contentment in other things than the
Covenant; some seek contentment in their lusts, some in the company of the
wicked, some in their riches, some in their honor, but ye are all seeking hot
Water under cold Ice, ye will not find it there; Incline your ear and hear, and
I will make a Covenant with you; why spend ye your money for that which is not
bread, and your labor for that which satisfies not? And I will tell you where
ye will find it; there is a well ordered and everlasting Covenant, and that is
the only thing that will afford true contentment; ye will find there perfect
pleasure, Bread Milk, Wine, Honey, Gold, ye will find Cities and Kingdoms. and
ye will find all these in the Covenant, in the Kernel, and not in the Shell;
seek not your contentment in other things, for the things that may give you
content the day, may be your grief the morn, they may be a sting in your
Conscience the morn, and like fire in your bosom, Incline your ear and hear,
why spend ye your money for that whick is not bread? The Lord has a quarrel
with the people that hear not, as with the people of old, my people have
committed two evils, they have forsaken me, the funtain of living waters, and
hewed out to themselves cisterns, broken cisterns that cvna hold no water. 2.
It speaks to these, that think believers the greatest fools and Phanatick in
the world; why? They taken them to you Covenant; ye know not what ye say, it is
a perfect Covenant. it has perfect promises, and made upon the easiest terms;
it has perfect Seals, the Lord cannot add a greater Seal to than he has
added; and think ye that Phanaticism? No, all of you that are following the
world, and making a Covenant with the East Wind, ye know not what ye are
depriving your self of, no, it is no Phanaticism, it is the solidest, the surest,
and the most ratioal way that ever a man took hmself to; take yourself to this
Covenant, why? It Is a perfect Covenant, it is impossible to add to it, or take
any thing from it. 3. Imention those that have taken themselves to it, and
exhorts you to be encouraged; and here for their encouragement I will say two
things. 1. I exhort you that have taken your self to it as a perfect Covenant,
to which if ye were racking your wit, ye could add nothing; I exhort you to be
encouraged under your imperfect privileges, ye neigher get in the wilderness
the meat, the reputation, the strenath, the fellowship with God, that others
get, ye could bear the better with all other things, if he made it up: whatever
imperfection be in the privilege, ye have a perfect Covenant, therefore go
through the world as the young, Heir not yet come to his Inheritance, and that
has not much to spend, yet he has an excellent Charter, and excellent Bonds:
So whatever imperfection be in your privilege, ye have a perfect Covenant, be
exhorted to rejoice upon the account of the Covenant; it is a wonder to see
David spend, the hundred and nineteenth Psalm, and never a word of Christ in it
all, except in one Verse, but in every Verse he mentions the Law, and Covenant,
of God; I will rise at midnight and praise thee, because of thy goodness, I
will sing of thy loving kindness; therefore rejoice in the Covenant, for it is
perfect, and any that make their Religionly in complaints, all that ye say to
God is complaints, and all that ye say to your neithbours is complaints; take a
rebuke in the Name of God, for whatever ground of complaint ye have, ye ought
to rejoice in the Covenant, for it is perfect, and there is nothing can be
added to it, nor taken from it. 2. I would have you who have the marks I have
often given you, of an interest in the Covenant, to bring forth the Covenant,
and not only make it a song to God, but offer it to your Consciences, when your
challenges grow; if we were laying strss upon the Covenant, and taking it up as
a perfect Covenant, we might have a better life of it than we have, but
ingorance of the Covenant makes, that the half of his allowance is not enjoyed.

SERMON XXXVII.
2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me
an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure; for this is all my
salvation, and all my desire; although he make it not to grow.


HAving spoken to the nature and properties or the Coveant, and resolving not
to dwell much longer on this Text, I come to the latter thing that I suppose is
to be handled in it; there are two Objections that might be made against David's
consolation from the Covenant, one taken from his own guilt and the guilt of
his house, although my house be not so with God, another taken from Gods
providence and hsi dispensations to him, although he make it not to grow; so we
shall handle the beginning and the close of the Verse gotether, as best
agreeing to the method that I proposed, and did cast the words into.

The first Objection I will begin this day, which is, the smell of his guilt,
and the guilt of his house, though my house be not so with God, etc. It Is made
a great Question, and there are diverse opoinions about what is meant by David's
house, whether it take in the state of the Kingdom and Church, as sometimes it
does in Scripture, or whether it be his particular family, in which there was
abounding Incest, Murder, and Adultery, and many other things; or whether it
be the house of his body, and the tabernacle of his body, his person where
there were many failings; like wife the meaning of the phrase, Although my
house be not so with God. though it be not legally qualified, and be not so
with God, as either God or I would have it; for there emust be some such thing
here, yet he has made with me an everlasting Covenant; so that before I can
come to speak of his house, and the failings consistent with the Covenant, and
of the answering their failings in the Covenant; there is one thing I cannot
pass, and will handle it this day, it is this, comparing the Objection and the
Privilege together, my house is sinful, it is not so with God, yet
notwithstanding it be so, ha has made with me an everlasting Covenant.

Doctrine. The Observation shall be, That the Covenant made with believers,
it is a Covenant of Grace; it is absolutely of Grace, that Lord makes the
Covenant with them, although their house be not so with God, yet the Covenant
is made with them, and this entirely proves it a Covenant of Grace. I will in
the work of this day, comparing the Covenant with David's house, handle this to
you, that it is a Covenant of Grace, it is an absolutely this to you, that it is a
Covenant; it is a remarkable confirmation of this you have Ezekiel. 36.32. The Lord
has in the former Verses, set down many promises ses in the Covenant, such as,
I will sprinkle clean water upon you, a new heart will I give you, and I will
put a new spirit within you, I will take away the stony heart, I will sprinkle
clean water upon you, and write my Laws in your heart; and Verse 32. Not for
your sakes do I this, says the Lord God, be it known unto you, be ashamed and
confounded for your own way, O house of Israel. Many precious promises has he
made in the Covenant, yet for the rise of them, be it known to you, says the
Lord God, not for your sakes do I this: That I may follow this a little, I
confess it is the great thing of our Soul, it we were this day going to the
grave, that he should make a Covenant with you, whose house is not so with God.

I will first prove this Covenant made with David and his seed, to be
absolutely and entirely a Covenant of Grace. 2. I will inquire into the
reasons, why God will have this Covenant of Grace. 3. I will clear a Question
or two about it, and lastly shall apply it.

Reas. 1. First to prove it a Covenant of Grace, that is a Covenant of free
favor, that is made with them, whose house is not so with God, it is a pathetick
expression, there is much more employed than is expressed. That the Covenant is a
Covenant of mere grace and free favor, will appear from these three remarkable
truths. 1. We have no accession in procuring it. 2. The grounds and motives of
it are only in God. 3. It has all the properties of grace and favor into it
that could be expected, to prove it a Covenant of Grace. 1. It proves it a
Covenant of free grace, absolutely of free favor, in regard we are altogether
secluded from having any hand in procuring it: It Is observed in Dispute with
Papists, there are four wavs by which we might be conceived to influence a
thing from God, and all these we are secluded from. 1. By was of merit; 2. By
way of prive. 3. By way of service. 4. If there were suitableness in us to it;
several times there is beauty and comeliness, where there is neither merit, nor
price, nor service, that will be alluring and procuring, but all the four ways
we are secluded from having any hand in it.

First, There is no merit; there are two things necessary to make up merit; 1.
The thing we give must be our own. 2. It must be proportioned to the thing we
receive; the Schoolmen cry down merit on these two grounds; in strict Justice,
the thing we merit must be of something of our own, we must have a proportion
of the thing to what we receive, and there is nothing of this in us in strict
Justice, Adam could not merit any thing that could have the name of merit, it
did refult from the Covenant, and not from his obedience, for it was neither
his own, nor proportioned to what he was to receive, there could not be a
proper commutative Justice betwixt God and Adam, even though he had kept the
Covenant of Works, far less could we merit, lapsed man could not merit under
the Covenant of Grace: 2. As we could give no merit, we could give no price;
the reason of this is, the outmost we could do was, Sacrifices and Offerings,
all the Heathens could never go beyond this, when they set their wits a-work to
please their gods, they took the best things they had, to cast into the fire to
their gods, but what are Sacrifices and Offerings to him? Psalm. 50.10. For
every beast of the forest is mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills. Psalm.
51.16. For thou desire not sacriace, else would I give it thee, thou
delightest not in burnt-offerings. Psalm. 16.2. My goodness extends not unto
thee. Micah 6.7. Shall I give my first born for my transgressim, the fruit of
my body for the sin of my soul? What would all this signify as a price to him?
3. As we cannnot merit, nor give a price, so there is no service we can do;
there are servants that cannot buy nor merit, yet there are some pieces of
service, by which they may bring an obligation upon their Master; but there is
no service we can do, that can bring an obligation upon him. Isaith 64.6. But
we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness are as filthy rags.
Luke 17.10. So likewise ye, when ye have done all those things which are
commanded you, say, we are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was
our duty to do. Lastly, suppose we have none of these three, we might influence
a thingfrom God by beauty and comeliness, and suitableness to his inclination;
but neither can this be: Read the sixteenth of Ezekiel, and ye will find what he
found in Israel, when he first entered in Covenant with her, Thou wast cast out
in the open field, to the loathing of thy person, in the day that thou wast
born, he compares Israel to a Child new born; as for thy nativity, in the day
that thou wast born, thy navel was not cut, neither wast thou washed in water
to supple thee; thou wast not salted at all, nor swadled at all, etc. Now when
I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold thy time was the time of love,
and I spread my skirts over thee, and covered thy nakedness; so the Covenant of
Grace running in this strain, we must be altogether free from having any
accession to it, there is none of us, but we may say, although my house be not
so with GOd, when he enters in Covenant with us.

For further clearing of this, it will appear in these three or four
Particulars. 1. Take a view of the persons he takes in Covenant with him, when
first he meets with them, they are sometimes simpler than other, and sometime
baser than others, it is not many Wife, not many Noble, but God has chosen the
foolish things to confound the wife; several times when he begins first to take
them into Covenant, they are in regard of outward privileges, inferior to
others, was not Esau Jacob's Brother? and the elder Brother? they had the same
Father and the same Mother, and any thing that might be a difference, Esau had
it, yet Jacoh have I loved, and Esau have I hated: the persons he takes in
Covenant, evidence it to be a Covenant of Grace and free favor; sometime they
are the simplest, sometime the lowest, sometime among the grossest of sinners;
what was Paul? what was Mary Magdalen? 2. It evidences the Covenant to be of
mere Grace in regard of us, in that the Lord keeps different ways with them he
takes in Covenant, after he takes them in, and yet he does them no wrong, there
are some he will call at the third hour, some at the sixth hour, some at the
tenth, some at the eleventh, he will give as much to them he calls at the tenth
Hour, as to them he calls at the third, he will give as much Glory, and as much
Honor, and when he has done that, he can tell, Friend, I have done thee no
wrong I may do with my own what I will; there may be one called in at the gates
of Death, that may have as much, nay a greater gale of sweetness, than the old
standing Christians ever had; it is remarkable, the good Thief on the Cross,
never man exceeded him in a gale of sweetness, yet he searce had it one hour,
he had it out of Christ's own mouth, this night thou shall be with me in
Paradise, scarce any exceeded him in a flush of love, he tells the ill Thief,
we are justly here, says he, but this man what has he done? and yet he came in
at the eleventh hour. So it evidences it is of Grace absolutely, in regard he
will call what person he will in, and dispense to them as he pleases when they
come in, tho they come in at the eleventh hour, yet he will give them possibly
a Feast, that they that come in at the third hour get not. 3. It evidences it
in regard of us to be of Grace, in that the dispensations of the Covenant, they
are not only communicate to what person, and in what measure he pleases, but in
the third place, their Dispensations are limited by no Law, either as to Time,
or Place, or Duration, or Continuance under the Covenant of grace; we cannot
telll when we will have communion with God, nor how long we will keep it; it
will sometimes come before, we be aware, and it will go before we be aware, the
Design of it is to prove, that the dispensations of the Covenant of grace,
depends on the Will and good Pleasure of him that gave them, of take a Believer
at his fullest, the Covenant is the enjoyment of it, is proven to be of Grace,
in regard the thing given, we can have no hand in it, and it goes, and readily
he is no finful cause of it; so these are clear evidences, that the Covenant is
of mere Grace. This be the first ground on which I go, to prove the Covenant to
be of Grace.

The second is, that on Gods, part, all he does; proves it to be of Grace,
might he not have said, that which is filthy, let it be filty still? that which
is dying, let it die? after Man had fallen, but he took another way.

The Grounds on which the-Covenant stands, and the foundations Divines make,
are three, and all the three are to be found in him; the first is, his Love;
the second is, his Christ; the third, his Mercy; these three are the
foundations on which the Covenant stands, and they all prove it to be of free
Grace. 1. There is his Love, it is so much the sweether, that love is at the
bottom of it, if the Father give a Jewel to his Son, but if he give it with a
frown, or a token of anger, it would not be so much, as if he had given him a
Farthing, with all the Testimonies of his Heart-love; but here we have a Jewed,
and we have it with no frown; it is remarkable, Deuteronomy. 7.7. The Lord did not set
his love on you, nor choose you, because ye were more in number than any people,
verse 8. But because the Lord loved you, and because he would keep the oath
which he had sworn to your fathers: Now, heard ye ever such a because as this?
I have loved you, because I have loved you. What Logic would this appear to
Aristotle? would they not call it an Identick? but this holds well in the point
of the Covenant, I have loved you, because I have loved you; so that there is
the first rise of the Covenant, it is love, and if ye say, what was the rise of
the Love? was it Beauty? was it Service? Merit? or Price? no, it was Love, I
have loved you, because I loved you. 2. The great foundation of the Covenant is
his Christ; therefore the Covenant is called, the sure mercies of David, now
David was dead long before Isaiah's time; It shall come to pass, says he, in
the latter days, that David my servant shall be their King, David was dead, but
there were two David's, and like the second Temple, the glory of the latter
Temple, was greater than the first; now the sure mercies of David, are the sure
mercies of the Covenant, which are called so, because they are sounded on
Christ, whose Type David was, and he a Branch sprung out of the root of Jesse.
3. The Covenant is founded on his Mercy, that ye may distinguish from his love,
Mercy supposes misery; the proper object of Mercy is misery: we may rather call
the ground of the Covenant Pity, I had pity on them for my own names sake, it is
not love that inclines some to be favorable to them that are in misery, but
pity, the same was at the root of the Covenant, he saw many to be created and
born, and knew they would eternally ruin, and out of pity he entered into this
Covenant.

For further clearing and confirming of this point, that the Covenant is
absolutely of Grace and free Favor, I would have you take a view of the
Blessings of the Covenant, the conditions of the Conenant, and thirdly of the
end and design of the Covenant; and all these three will evidence it, to be a
Covenant of Grace. 1. Take a view of the Blessings of the Covenant, if ye will
but view them in their greatness, that God should be our God, that Christ
should be our Mediator, that we should have Pardon, Peace, Fellewship and
Heaven, readily we could neither Merit, nor give Peace, nor Service, but some
trivial thing in time, but what could we do for Heaven? if there were no more
to make Popery odious, that is enought, that they plead for merit, they that
will plead for Justification by Works; there seems to be some Magic in them.
2. If ye view the Conditions or Terms, on which they are made, it is impossible
that there could be an Offer made, but upon some terms, unless God would bring
all to glory, both the Reprobate and Profane, and the Godly, he behoved to make
some terms, and it was impossible for him to make them lower, than to accept
of, believe in, and imprace the Son. 3. If ye view the end of the Covenant,
which is the exalting of the glory of his Grace; since the beginning of the
World, he has exalted his power in his Government of the World, and in the
end, he will exalt his Justice; but here in making this Covenant, he has
exalted his Grace: so ye see this Covenant clear, that it is merely of Grace.

Before I clear any Objection against it, I would inqure into the Reasons, why
the Lord would have this Covenant, absolutely of Grace and free Favor; many
reasons are brought by them that treat of the Covenant, but I will pitch on
three or four. 1. The Lord would have it a Covenant of mere Grace, that is
might be sure; it could stand on no Foundation without tottering, but on his
Grace, therefore it is of faith, Romans 4.16. That it might be by grace, to the
end the promise might be sure to all the seed; that which makes the Covenant
sure is, that it stands on God's Grace; the Covenant of Works stood on Adam's
free will, it is true he had an excellent qualified will, and abundance of
power, and con-creted grease too, in as great a measure as he was capable of,
yet when it stood on Adam's inherent grace, it could not be sure. but now it
stands on Gods, grace, so that Gods grace must fail, before the Covenant fail,
why? he has made it stand on the foundation of Christ, and so long as Grace
endures, the Covenant endures, 2. As he has made it sure to them that do not
deserve it, so he has made it a Covenant of Grace, that he might make all the
refusers of it inexcusable, If I had not come, and spoken to them them had not
had sin, but now they have no cloak for their sin: he might have come and
spoken the Covenant of Works, and that readily would not have taken away all
excuses form them, but Christ came and spoke the Covenant of grace, and if he
came and spoke it, what cloak can be invented for sin, and rejecting of Christ
in the Covenant? ye are told, he will forgive all by-gones, if ye be but
willing, and thought ye have a mixture of unwillingness, yet if ye come with
that unwillingness, and accept of his Offer, he will forgive; does not this
take away all excuses? what excuse can the sinner have, and imagine to have, at
the great day, when a Covenant of grace is offered to him, and yet he rejects
it? 3. it is of grace, to keep the godly humble, it keeps them humble, if ye
take a view of three things, that are brought under th Covenant. 1. The time
was, when they were like the worst of sinners, there is not one piece of Clay
in the hole of the pit, not one stone in the Quarrie, but they are like other,
Jacob is like Esau in the hole of the pit. 2. Any thing that has made the
difference betwixt a Believer and a Reprobate, it is a thing given, What have
thou that thou have not received? and if thou have received it, why boasts thou
as if thou had not received it? they are alike in natures, and any defference
there is, it is but as ye saw on a wall, there is one place of the eall dark,
and on another place there is a ray of the Sun, that ray came not from the
wall, but from the Sun, and if there be an Interpostion, it will be as dark as
any other place in the Wall, and this contributes to keep them humble. 3. The
Lord would have this Covenant to be of grace, that he might exalt his Son, and
there is indeed the great Reason of it, the Father intended to exalt the humane
nature of the person of the Mediator, that is one Design, like the Dream Joseph
saw in the Fields, I dreamed, says he, that all your Sheafs fell down, and mine
stood up; this Dream the Father accomplishes in the Covenant of grace, he would
have yours and mine, and all our Sheaves fall down, and Christ's stand up; the
exalting of him is well paid for, he merited it, does he not deserve it:? the
exalting of his Son is one great Design he has, in preserving and governing of
the World, for he has done him, besides the love he had to him, a wonderful
piece of service; that it is a wonder to be considered; so that the Covenant
might be sure, that it might make the Be probate inexcusable for rejecting of
him, and make Believers humble, and yet exalt Christ, it is made a Covenant of
grace. Lastly, he would have it a Covenant of grace, that there might run a
considerable difference, betwixt it and the old Covenant of Works; I deny not,
but there was grace in that Covenant, but it was nothing to this; these Reasons
do sufficiently evince, why the Lord would have this Covenant of Grace.

Object. There is one only Objection I will answer, May not some say, did not
our Cautioner purchase this Covenant? and in a legal sense, what the Cautioner
has paid, the Principal has paid, as to all uses of the Law, the Act of the
Cautioner is to be imputed to the principal Debtor, and if the Cautioner has
paid, how can it be a Covenant of grace and free favor.

Answ. This Objection will be taken away, if ye notice three things, 1. It was
Grace that made the Father give Christ; was ever the like of it heard tell of,
a Father loving his Son, and loving him so well, and giving him for his enemy?
would that derogat any thing from Grace? I like the Observation of a Divine, he
says, there are many gracious promises in the Covenant, but the Kernel of the
grace of them lies, in giving Christ; of all the wonderful acts that ever was
heard tell of, the like of this was never heard, that the Father shojld bive
Christ; it is true Abraham offered to give his son Isaac, but Abraham was a
Servant, and was commanded, and he had done a great sin, if he had refused;
beside, he knew well that God was able to raise up an Isaac out of his Ashes;
so that is was of grace he gave his Son. 2. It was grace, that he accepted his
Son; I confess the sacrfice he offered, was of infinite value, but the Law
porvided, that the person that sinned should die. and he was not the person
that sinned: it is a great wonder, that he accepted from any other, but from the
person that sinned. 3. The glorifying the Mediator for the satisfaction, was a
great act of grace. Remember ye an Observation I had, the last time we had the
Communion on that Text, Come to the Wedding, all things are ready; ye heard,
the difficult things were put by hand, not only the decrees of Election, but
the satisfaction of Christ is put by hand, neither could God, nor Man, nor
Angels satisfy for us, 1. God could not satisfy, for he was not the person
that sinned; Angels could not do it, upon the same ground; and Man could not
give a satisfaction of infinite value, How should it be done then? He must be
both God and Man in one person; what a difficult pass was this? he must be God
to overcome, and Man to die; and so ye see, that Christ has paid the Debt,
and purchased the Covenant, and this derogats nothing from the grace of the
Covenant, but rather confirms it to be of grace.

SERMON XXXVIII.
2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made wiht me
an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is all my
salvaand all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


FRom that branch of the Verle, Although my house be not so with God, yet he
bath made with me an everlasting Covenant, I did infer, that the Covenant made
with David, was a Covenant of mere grace, altogether independent form any
Merit, from any Price, or Service, or Suitableness in him; without resuming any
thing that I have spoken before, I come to the practical part of this, there is
one Objection I would clear, and shall say no more of the doctrinal part.

Object. Does not the Covenant of grace injoin the whole Law, how can it them
be called a Covenant of such entire grace? nay more, ye have heard, there are
things commanded in it, that are not commanded in the Covenant of Works? how
can it then be a Covenant of mere grace and favor?

Answ. For opening, I desire ye may notice three or four particulars. 1.
Obedience to the Law, is not the principal condition of the Covenant of grace,
believing and accepting of Christ, is the principal command and condition of
it, nay justifying Faith; however there be some in this generation, would fain
put in love in the definition of faith, either designing a Socinian, or Popish
error, they know not, that Faith is the principal condition, and that as
justifying, though it cannot be separat from Works, they go inseparably
togegher, yet in its nature and essence, it does not include them. 2. I add,
though the Covenant command the Law, and enjoin it, yet it does not enjoin it
as a thing to be performed in our strength, Adam was to obey it by the strength
of inherent Grace, but we are to obey it in the strength of assisting Grace;
there is a Thesaurer appointed, Who is made of the Father, our wisdom,
sanctification, and redemption, a very necessar Truth to be observed; some when
they go about duties, they would wring them out of their own hearts, and do
them in their won strength, that agrees not to the nature of the Covenant, the
way how we are to obey the Law is, to abide in Christ, and bring out strength
out of him, and the more we depend on him, and the oftener we come to him we are
the welcomer; he readily gives more than we ask, he will do as Naaman did with
Gehasi, as one observes well, Gehasi running after Naaman, he asks a Talent of
him, I pray thee, says he, be content, take two; we bake beside Meal, and have
a Thesaurer to bear our Purse, and to defray our expense. in every Inns, and in
every strait we come to. 3ly. Though the Covennat command the Law, yet it will
accept of the will for the deed, and sincerity for perfection; it was not so
under the Covenant of Works, where it was threatened, He that offends in the
least, is guilty of all; but in the Covenant of Grace, though we be commanded
to be perfect, yet there will be acceptance of uprightness for perfection,
4ly, Obedience to the Law is indeed commanded, but not to be our Righteousness;
it would have been Adams Righteousness, had he stood under the Covenant of
Works, but this cannot be commanded in order to our Justification; there is a
Righteousness accepted, and that is one of the reasons, why the Lord in the
Covenant of Grace accepts of less, than under the Covenant of Works; He first
considers our lapsid estate, then he does with us, as a man that has a great
Sun owing him, by a Creditor, he gets so much from the Cautioner, that he is
content to accept of less from the Principal; all that God could expect, was
from Adams self, his Bond admitted not of a Cautioner; but under the Covenant
of Grace, there is less accepted at our hand, that there is so much done by the
Cautioner; so it does not overturn the Truch of the Covenant, that this
Covenant is absolutely free, and a full Act of free Grace, though there be a
commanding of the Law in it.

Without insisting more on the Doctrinal part, I will come to the practical use
of it. 1. Is this Covenant a Covenant of so free Grace and Favor, made with
those whose house is not so with God? Is it a Covenant thus of mere Grace? The
motives and grounds are not derived from us, but from something in God himself:
it serves for several practical improvements.

Use 1. First, I would exhort you to take heed of making the wrong Use of it,
so as to abuse this Doctrine of free Grace, two or three sorts of people come
under the abuse of it. 1. Such as take liberty to sin, they abuse it, to take
Grace, and make it a prop to sin, is an abuse of Grace; God forbid. says Paul,
that we should sin, that Grace may abound; I like the Observation a Divine
has, he says, there cannot be a greater wrong done to an honest ingenuous man,
than to say, he is an encourager to Drunkenness, to Swearing, to Adultery, to
Murder, and to Lying, what a reflection must it be on Christ, to say, that his
Covenant is not of Grace. 2ly. All they that live in any known sin, and are
cherishing themselves with the Doctrine of Grace, they abuse it; it is a
Covenant of Grace indeed, but as ye heard, It Is ordered in all things; ye
cannot plead the conditional Promises, before ye make use of the absolute
Promises. 3ly Such as are pleading for pardon without repentance, they are
abusing this Dectrine of Grace, and there cannot be a greater injury done to
Christ; he has mediat and treated this Covenant, and ordered it in all things;
it is one of the great fruits of the deep of his Wisdom, and to go to abuse it,
is a great wrong. 4ly. All ye that live careless, ignorant, secure, and
scandalous under the Gospel, and are always pretending to Grace, and a Covenant
of Grace, know, that to all your other guilt readily this may be added, as the
capestone, that ye turn the Grace of God into wantonness, and fall asleep in
your guilt, on this pillow, that this Covenant was free; therefore, whatever
has been said of Grace, as free, stand by all ye that are living in any known
sin, and golrying in Grace, and makes no use of Christ for Repentance; whatever
encouragement I have in commission to thee, that desires to feed on the
Covenant, it is the Child's Bread; therefore let the former stand by; and the
latter, take your own allowance.

Use 2. Is this Covenant of Grace? It serves for Information, and it informs of
four or five remarkable things. 1. Of the great condescendency of Gods Grace,
he had made a Covenant with Aaam. the perfectest mere man that ever was, when
God mad a Covenant with him, he broke it; in the estate of Innocence, it was
made with him, was it not a wonder, that ever he should have thought upon any
other way with fallen man, when perfect man could not keep it; yet when after
that Covenant was broken, and after the Bond, we had failed, He immediately
thinks on another Covenant, and that to run in the channel of Grace; it is
remarkable, man was lapsed and fallen, readily any then would have made it a
ground of contradiction, which he turned up into an Argument of pity; O! the
condescendency of Grace, O! the height, the depth, the breadth of his love; ye
should be admiring his love, and sometime speaking of it one to another; that
after we had broken one Covenant he would immediately think of making another,
and that founded on Grace, that it might be sure, it is of Grace, that it may be
sure.

Will ye be exhorted to be more in the meditation of this Grace, will ye speak
often to one another, when ye have occasion, of the condescendency of his
Grace; why should all your discourses run, in complaints of misery and
difficulties, and not more in commending this admirable Grace, that manifested
it self, when we had broken that Covenant, to enter in another, and found it on
Grace. 2ly. Is this Covenant a Covenant of Grace? Then it informs, of what is
the ground, on which stands our enjoying the privileges of the Covenant: I
like well the Observation of a Divine, he says, it is a necessar work for a
Christian, to sit down, and confider, whence is it that one has effectual
calling, and another wants it? What is the reason I have pardon, and another
will never get it? And sometimes what is the reason, that I am not in the lake,
and left not to be tormented for ever and ever? Would thou know the reason,
it is Grace, and mere Grace, how necessar is it for us, when we take up the
Covenant as a Covenant of Grace, to be considering, that all our Mercies
privative and positive, what we are kept from, and what we enjoy, they come
all from Grace? For the Covenant is a Covenant of Grace. Were we serious in
pondering this, it would put a luster on our mercies, the smell of Grace would
add a great deal of sweethess to them. 2ly. It would make us use them very
humbly, what mercy has thou? Grant it be Prayer, or the Spirit of Prayer; thou
holds it of Grace, and allenarly of Grace; it is Grace, and Grace only, that
has put the difference betwixt thee and him; it is no wonder, that of all
Christians, those Christians be the most humble, for when they come to glory,
and has on their Sundays Clothes, Grace, Grace will be cried to be the
Capestone; the Papists say, if we merited not Heaven, we would not be so
glorious in Heaven; says one, to whom is the glory to be given? The
distinguishing Grace, preventing Grace, the many privative and positive
Mercies, will be the ground of our Song, therefore take up a Catalogue, both of
what thou has, and what thou hopes for, and give the glory to Grace. 3ly. It
informs upon what warrantable ground we may want for the Calling, nay, for the
Glory, even of the most wretched; it is true, if our effectual calling were to
be merited, if our pardon were to be bought, we might give over all hope; but
since they come by Grace, the Glory is to be ascribed to Grace; there are three
things in this Grace, that may warrantably make the soul hope. I Grace stands
upon no bygones, the sin against the Holy Ghost excepted; if thou were never so
gross a sinner, if thou come and accept the offer of Christ, as he is held out
in this Covenant, he is content to pass all bygones. 2ly. This Grace stands not
at the weakness of Parts, nor the meanness of Qualificatious; no, Babes and
Sucklings, and things that are not, Grace will prevent them, and pass by them.
3ly. Grace stands not at the weakness of Faith, even though it have some
mixture of corruption; I believe, help my unbelied, said the poor man; so thou
may warrantably go to God, and pray for such a friend, that is living, and may
be sees not the danger of his natural State, and thou thinks he is so gone, as
that he is incurable; thou knows not that thou have to do with a good God, who
is the foundation of the Covenant of Grace; readily ye will say, what ground of
hope? There is a Covenant of Grace, that is founded neither upon merit, nor
price, nor service, but allenarly Gods Grace. These Uses of Information, and
several others, I will not insist upon.

Use 3. Is this Covenant so free, and of Grace? then it serves for Exhortation;
Be exhorted to improve it, as a Covenant of Grace; frequently Believers deal
with themselves, as if they were often under a Covenant of Works, and hence it
is their consolation is no way answerable to their allowance; several times,
they are like Children beside a full breast, the Child is lying, and it is lean,
and ill like, all the members of the Body of it are decaying, the reason is,
not because the Nurse has not a full Breast, but the Child wants the art of
sucking.

Therefore I will here press on Believers these two things. 1. I would exhort
you to take up this Covenant, as a Covenant of Grace. 2ly. I exhort you to
improve it as a Covenant of Grace. 1. Take it up as a Covenant of Grace, and
that ye may do this, two things I will only recommend unto you. 1. Consider,
God intended absolutely to alter the nature of the first Covenant, when he made
the second; in the first Covenant God required perfect obedience, he would not
admit of a Cautioner, nor of the least failing; were we under the Covenant of
Works, there is not the least failing, nor the least idle word, but we might
sit down and conclude, it will eternally cast me in hell, for I am under a
Covenant that binds me to damnation, for the least tailing; but the nature of
the Covenant is altered, and if ye would take up the Covenant of Grace aright,
labor to understand the difference betwixt the Covenant of Grace, and the
Covenant of Works, that thou may not go ay judging thy case, as if the nature
of the Covenant were not changed, but as if thou were under thet Covenant,
which is impossible for thee to obey. 2ly Not only understand the differences
betwixt these two Covenants, but exaine these four things that I have often
mentioned, the principle from which it flows, and that is Love and Grace; the
prive that was given for it, and that is the Blood of his Son; the great
contents of it, ye have often heard, that it is impossible for him, (to speak
with reverence) to promise greater things than he has done in the Covenant, he
has promised Himself and his Son; and 4ly, consider the end of it, and that is
for the Glory of his Grace, the end of it is, that ye may exalt his Grace; and
so if ye would take up the Covenant a right, do not only state it in
competition with the Covenant of Works, but consider it in these four that are
last mentioned. In the second place, I exhort thee to improve it as the
Covenant of Grace; I shall first show you, who are they that do not improve.
And 2ly. Give some directions how to improve it as a Covenant of Grace. There
are three or four sorts of persons, that do not improve it as a Covenant of
Grace. I. However we hold in disput on this head, preparatory Works, to be in
Gods ordinary way, antecedent and introductory to conversion, yet we determine
not the degrees of preparatory humiliation, no, there is some times the Lord
opens the heart of a Lydia, and we read nothing of his Low Work before; some
may reason, my work is not of effectual calling, why? I had never the legal
humiliation that some has; but what if he let out thy Byll with a Prin, and
take a Sword to others? What if he carry on thy work of humiliation with thee,
in the progress of Sanctification? What if thy Legal Terrors be before thee,
that some have had in the beginning of their work? He is an absolute Lord, that
has the oversight of this, thou that will sit and question all thy foundation
marks. O! I was not humbled, the preparatory works was not with me as with
others; however we maintain preparatory works against Antinomians, that deny
them utterly, they say, to what purpose are they? We maintain a necessity of
them, in so far as the Lord bring; the work of conversion after them, as
necessarily as the Thread must follow the Needle But 2ly. They do not rightly
improve this Covenant, hat would make up a hatchpotch, betwixt the Covenant of
Works, and the Covenant of Grace; readily there are some, they would lay some
stress on Mercy and Grace, providing they had some works to mingle in with
their Grace; I formerly hinted at it, it is impossible to be under both
Covenants, and thou that would make up a hatchpoton of these Covenants, in
order to thy Justification, thou art taking a way to mingle both together, and
they will never wall well. 3ly. They rightly improve not this Covenant of Grace
that ordinarily reject the offers, as either being too far above them, or too
far below them; several Believers, when they are called by the Gospel to come
in to the Banqueting House, they would be at some merit or price of their own,
before they can treat with Jesus, about their pardon and their peace, these
take not up the Covenant as a Covenant of Grace, and are not improving it as
such.

Therefore, I will offer four Directions, especially relating to four practical
cases, wherein Believers ought to improve the Covenant, as a Covenant of Grace.
1. When under the sense of unworthiness; O! such a silly heart as I have, and
what can I do with it? Shall I go to God with it? Will thou take up the
Covenant as a Covenant of Grace? I have several times advised you to do with
Christ, as the Father did with him, the Father in the Covenant of Redemption,
forgave him not one farthing, he paid it to the utmost, for he knew he was
abundantly able, therefore he took pleasure to bruise him, therefore he
required all that he had promised, and on the terms promised; so if he has
bidden thee come, and get the change of an unworthy heart, and told thee, that
unworthiness is an argument of pity, do not sit down in the Land of Famine, as
Jacob's Children were ready to do in the Land of Canaan, even when Joseph has
the Command of all the Store in Egypt, and if thou should go down with money in
thy hand, to buy victuals, he will send thee home, and the money in thy sacks
mouth. 2ly. It Is an ordinary case, when we come under challenges, to say, there
is no hope for me in God, what will ye say of Pardon, has he not promised
Pardon? But say they, will he pardon the like of me? Will he not pardon the
like of thee? He has pardoned as great sinners; What made him pardon David,
Abraham, Manasseh, Paul, but Grace? And that same Sun that shined in their
days, shines now in our days: and that same Grace that was then, is to the fore
yet. 3ly. Improve it, when thou goes to God with any Petition, though it be
some great thing, may be thy heart is broken, under the Desolations of the
Church of God, the grace of the Covenant may be a great encouragement to thee
in that case, though thou think, O! such an undeserving thing as I am, and what
can Grace do but cast me off? But thou may go considently to him, if it be for
thy self, if for thy friend in distress, if for the Church of God; and though
thou have no other argument, thou may press the Grace of the Covenant. Lastly,
improve this Grace in the judging of Fundamental Privileges, and in the
building of thy hopes of eternal ones; First, Thy Adoption comes to be a
Question, what? An I adopted to be a Son of God? A poor thing? But what could
that hinder the Grace of the Covenant, if Grace thought fit to call thee to
that Privilege? These that are ready to think on such great things, what is in
my walk? Shall I enjoy God for all eternity? How can it be expected, that I
shall enjoy him? But Grace is the great ground of all our hopes; to be brief,
learn to take up this Covenant, as a Covenant of Grace, and to deal with
himself according to it, there are none of you, but in a little while, ye will
be at the gates of death, and this will be the great ground of your
encouragement.

Use 4. The last Use is of Consolation, I would from this, have Believers
encouraged; there are three great encouragements ye have from it. 1. If ye be
in Christ, his Grace is infinite, all your provocations cannot exhaust it, if ye
be in Christ, it is like a man would take a Miln-stone, and cast in the Sea, the
Sea will cover the Miln-stone, as well as it will do a little peeble stone, the
greatest provocations will sink in this Grace, as well as the small ones; it is
true, if thou take occasion and sleep secure on this cod of Grace, it shall be
an aggravation of thy former guilt; but if thou be a penitent, this Grace will
cover it, though it were great, as if it were small; therefore be encouraged,
all that take them to this Grace, in its due Order, the Grace of it is infinite.
2ly. Ordinarily it is the nature of Grace, the more miserable the Object be, the
more Grace is manifested, and appears, in that it did Terminat on that Object;
the more wretched, the more Grace has appeared in curing that wretchedness so
that God designs to exalt his Grace in this Covenant, and the more wretched and
miserable, the more will Grace appear; Grace has shined brighter, and has the
more of Grace into it, that it did Terminat on the like of Paul, Mary Magdalen,
and a Manasseh. 3ly. Consider, that one Act of his Grace is a pledge of
another, if the Lord has begun to give thee preventing Grace in thy effectual
calling, know the nature of this Covenant, and the Grace of it, it will not
stop there, until this Crown glorify thee; if the Lord has brought thee under
this Covenant of Grace, and if he has begun to prevent thee, and carry on a
work of Grace in thee, it will never stop, until it close in perfecting Grace,
and have the Crown set upon thy head. Let us bless the Lord, that has changed
one Covenant, and has given us another, wherein the greatest Testimonies of
Grace that could be given, are manifested; take your selves to it, and labor
to improve it, and get an interest in it secured, and ye shall find the comfort
of it through all Eternity.

SERMON XXXIX.
2 Samuel 23. Verse 5. Although my house be not so with God; yet he has made
with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is
all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


I Have dwelt the most part of this Summer on this Verse, and purposes to close
it this day; there are two Objections, one taken from David's guilt, My house
is not so with God, another taken from God's Providence, Although he make it
not to grow; The first of these I have handled in several Sermons, and told you
what was meaned by David's House, it was not right with God. There are two
Observations remains, and both of them Native, and very Important. First, There
is this.

Doct. 1. That Challenges for guilt of our house, are excellently answered in
the Covenant; the Application of the Covenant, is the proper Salve for such
Sores; I intended to have handled this Truth at some length, but when I
consider that famous Mr. Dickson in his Therapeutica, a Book he has written
for securing all Cases by Application of this Covenant, has handled this so
fully, that I resolve to forbear; I recommend only that Book to you, where ye
will find many diseases the Soul is liable to, and they are all cured, by
Application of the Covenant; it is not this Truth then that I will insist on.

Doct. 2. There is another Observation lies in this, Although my house be not
so with God, That though a Believer be challenged for guilt, and the sins of
his house, yet he is not to cast at the Covenant. The sense of guilt ought not
to put a Christian to cast at the Covenant, Though my house be not so with God,
yet David can assert his interest in the Covenant, notwithstanding of all his
guilt, personal or public, or in his Family: This is a native Truth and
massy, ye have a remarkable confirmation of it, Nehemiah 9.32. throughout the
Chapter, he is confessing the sins of the Kings, of the Princes, of the
Priests, of the Prophets, of his Fathers, and of the People; and yet in this
verse he appeals to God, as their God, Now therefore, O our God, the great, the
mighty and the terrible God, who keeps Covenant and mercy, let not all the
trouble seem little before thee, that has come upon us, on our Kings, on our
Princes, on our Priests, and on our Prophets, and on our Fathers, and on all
thy People, since the time of the Kings of Assyria, unto this day, etc. There a
multitude of sins that are confessed by him, throughout the Chapter, and he
looks on God as Mighty and Terrible, and yet none of them dings him from the
Covenant; whatever be the smell of our guilt, or of our Family, yet we are not
to cast at the Covenant.

I will in following this truth, speak a little to these three things. First, I
shall give you some grounds to prove, that whatever be a persons guilt, yet
they are not to cast at the Covenant. Secondly, I shall clear some practical
Cases about it; and Thirdly, shall apply it.

First, I shall give you some grounds to prove, that whatever be a sinners
guilt, he is not to cast at the Covenant, though my house be not so with God,
yet he has made with me a Covenant; I will offer you these five remarkable
grounds to prove it; The first I take from God, and there are three things in
God relating to the Covenant, that will prove the truth of this. 1. For all our
guilt God holds the Covenant firm, guilt casts us not out of the Covenant, it
may cast us out of fellowship, that will not cast us out of the Covenant. Jer.
3.1. Thou have played the harlot with many lovers, yet return again to me,
says the Lord. And verse. 14. Return, backsliding children, says the Lord, for
I am married to you; there the Covenant holds firm, and since God holds the
Covenant firm under guilt, we may warrantably plead the Covenant, even though
we be guilty of many sins. 2ly. When people are guilty, God makes them offer of
the Covenant. Isa 1.18. Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be made
white as snow, though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. Psalm.
68. Though ye have layen among the pots, ye shall appear as doves, etc. And
since God offers the Covenant, when we are most guilty, may not we warrantably
rely on it? 3ly. God has given experience in Scripture; of his accomplishing
his Covenant to them, whose house were not so with God; the great Instances we
have in David, in Solomon, in Manasseh, in Paul and Peter, who are now walking
in long white Robes in Glory, they all prove, that he holds fast and
accomplishes his Covenant, though their house be not so with God. All these
laid together, evidence, and are the first ground of the point, that when we
come to be challenged for guilt, yet we may warrantably rely on, and plead the
Covenant.

2ly. The second ground is this, though it be true the Covenant be a created
thing, it is finit, yet the rise and Seals of it are infinite; there is nothing
properly infinite, but allanerly God, and consequently the Covenant is finit,
mercy is the rise of it, and truth is the seal of it, and they are essential
Attributes of God; so, though the Covenant and Promises be created things,
(though though they be finit) yet the fountain of the Promises, and the Seals
of them are infinite; now what ever guilt thy soul can be challenged for, thou
has something that is infinite in the Covenant, the rise and seal of it cannot
but be for finit guilt, a sufficient ground of relying on infinite mercy and
truth; if Peter should stand and say, Christ's righteousness, I have denied him,
if Paul should say, Christ's righteousness, I have blasphemed; his righteousness
will not cover my sin; that which is sufficient to cover the sins of all the
elect, is sufficient to cover the sins of any particular elect; there is ground
under challenges to rely on the Covenant, the mercy of it is infinite, and the
truth whereby it is sealed is infinite. 3ly. The great end for which God
challenges for guilt is, to drive sinners to the Covenant; it is the great end
for which he challenges and tells the person, my house is not so with God, it is
not to drive them from the Covenant, but to it; the Law in this case becomes a
Schoolmaster to lead to Christ; of all the Logic that ever I read, it was the
worst in Peter to say to Christ, Depart from me, for I am a sinful man; he had
rather ground to say, come to me, for he was the Savior of sinners, and he had
his Name Jesus on that score, because he saves his people from their sins. Now,
to say, Depart from me, to him, the case is so, as when we say, our house is
not so with God, and I cannot take the Covenant; the mo challenges, the greater
need of the Covenant; and here remember, that when challenges and terrors are
impediments to faith, they are like Jordan, flowing over all its Banks, they
are never kept in their proper limits, but when they rely on the Covenant, and
the mercy and truth, that are the springs and seals of the Covenant.

4ly. Take notice of this, as one ground of the truth of this, that challenges
and guilt should not drive us from the Covenant, but to the Covenant;
ordinarily a rejecting of mercy, is a dismal sin; hardly is there a greater
injury done to Christ, than when challenges, or sense of guilt, puts us to cast
at his mercy, and his Covenant; I like the Divinity of one, that tells, Judas
did Christ a great wrong in betraying him, but a far greater in despairing of
his mercy; in betraying him he labored to take away Christ's life as man, but
in despairing of his mercy, he labored to take away the life of God; there is
no greater sin, than when we cast at his mercy; it is despair, to entertain
challenges and dwell on them, and not rely on the Covenant; now despair of all
sins against God, it is one of the most hellish like, and one of the greatest
sins: I will let you see four evils that ly in this sin of despair, and are
peculiar to it. 1. Despair opposes God in his greatest Commands, the greatest
Command that ever he gave, was to believe in his Son, 1 John 3.23. This is his
Commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ; now
despair is unbelief in the highest degree, therefore it opposes God in his
greatest Commands. 2ly. It opposes God in one o^ his chiefest Attributes, the
great end why he made the world, was not to be glorified in his Power, in his
Wisdom, in his Justice, but in his Mercy and his Grace, there is the great end
of Creation and Providence, that he may be exalted i^ his Mercy and his Grace,
and despair opposes him in this. 3ly. Despair it enrages the soul against God,
the damned in Hell that are despairing of Christ's mercy, are weeping and
howling, and gnashing their teeth, they would even bite God if they could reach
him; they are compared to a Dog gnashing his teeth, in the place of the damned,
there is nothing to be heard there, but howling, and cursing, and gnashing of
teeth, and that for ever and ever; the reason is, they despair of Christ's
mercy: had they hope after a million of years to come to glory, they would lay
by their howling and cursing but that hope is past them, the door is closed and
they are enraged, and fighting desperately, and none fights so desperately, as
Soldiers that expects no Quarters. 4ly Despair makes every sin unpardonable;
the smallest sin committed in the course of our life, becomes an unpardonable
sin, if it be venomed with the venom of despair, so ye see despair, of all
sins is most dreadful, and most dismal to God, and he that casts at the
Covenant when he is challenged for guilt, must despair, and so eminently
dishonor God Lastly, We are not to cast at the Covenant, in regard there is no
way of an outgate from challenges, but from the Covenant; let folk turn
themselves where they will under terrors, there is no way of an outgate but
from the Covenant, and readily they that seek their contentment in other
things, and cast at the comforts of God under their terrors, they are driven
to seek an outgate in their lusts; I remember a Passage of famous Mr.
Hutcheson, having one day to deal with a person under the terrors of God, with
whom he had been several times, he made offer of the Covenant to him, but the
man did cast at all the offers of the Covenant, and was overwhelmed with
terrors, and after several Arguments he pleaded with him thus, says he, if ye
stubbornly refuse the comforts of God, ye shall at length seek your comfort in
your lusts; and a little after, the man turned profligat, and continued
profligat and profane. Now lay all these together, and ye will see the truth
of the point, that when God challenges for guilt, it is not our part to cast at
the Covenant, but the more firmly to adhere and cleave to it and assert an
interest in it.

Before I apply it, there are two cases I will clear; First, one may ask, Shall
every one under challenges, lay claim to the Covenant? There may be a twofold
difficulty here: First, I am not sufficiently humbled to lay claim to the
Covenant, great sins should have great repentance; Manasseh was a great sinner,
and the Scripture says, he humbled himself greatly before God; Or Secondly,
readily one may say, I come short of grief for sin, and of the tears that an
hypocrite will have, and shall I lay claim to the Covenant, and assert an
interest in it?

For removing of these, the truth of this will hold, that when we come to be
challenged for guilt, we are not to run from the Covenant, but to rely on it,
and assert an interest in it; this Objection overturns not the truth of the
point; For 1. There is a twofold suitableness of humiliation unto the sins we
have committed, there is a Legal humiliation, and an Evangelick; a Legal
humiliation requires an exact proportion of repentance, to the degree and
measure of the sin; an Evangelick humiliation requires a sincere and upright
repentance; now, when we come to be challenged for guilt, and we would stand at
embracing the Covenant, upon the account there is no suitable humiliation to
the sin, consider, it is true, if it be an unsuitable Evangelick humiliation,
that is not sincere, thou cannot plead the Covenant, but though it be not legal
humiliation, thou may plead the Covenant. A man in his grief for sin, before he
come to plead the Covenant, he should do as a man coming to a deep Water, O!
says he, I will drown before I come to the middle of it, therefore he casts
about to see if he can get a Bridge; the truth is, the Gospel-suitableness is a
Bridge to a Legal suitableness; many take the Water, and ask not the way to the
Bridge, therefore their terrors distract them, and it is as it were the
beginning of Hell to them. But I add 2ly. A hypocrite may have mo terrors when
they are humbled, and possibly more joy at another time, than a sound believer
will have, for terrors and joy are but pendicles of Grace, viz. of their
Faith, Love, and Delight in God, they are concomitants of the great Graces of
the Spirit; a Hypocrite may out strip a sound Believer in terrors, and flashes
of joy, but they cannot outstrip them in believing, loving, and delighting in
God; certainly Judas sorrow for sin, when he hanged himself, as to the degree,
was greater than Peter's. I like the distinction Divines have, betwixt terrors
of conscience, and terrors in the heart; the least wound in the heart is
dangerous, the pain of the heart is deadly, it does not admit of splutio
continui, as Physicians say, but there may be a Fire and a Hell kindled in the
Conscience, that little affects the heart; though a hypocrite outstrip thee in
terrors and flashes of joy, yet if thou has win to the Bridge that leads over
the deep Water of legal Humiliation, it is Evangelick Sincerity, if in thy
mourning thou has looked on him whom thou have pierced, it is Evangelick
Humiliation.

There is another case occurs; By what rules may a sinner know that he is
humbled for sin, that he may go and apply the Covenant? How shall we know that
even Evangelically our Humiliation is such, as we may go and make use of the
Covenant? We say not (for answer) that all sinners, and all humbled sinners,
may ay run to the Covenant; that great Antinomian Crisp, he makes use of that
word, a sinner reeking in sin, immediately after they have committed the sin,
says he, they have no more ado, but go to the Covenant; but we say, they must
repent, and be humbled, and believe, and go to the Covenant: we say, that thy
legal Humiliation not be^^^ (...) dew, there are others they will get it like a
deludge. But 2ly. As Gods way is diverse in bringing to the Covenant, so there
are three qualifications of humiliation for guilt, that whatever person has
them, they may in that place warrantably go, and rely on the Covenant, and
apply it 1. When the soul comes to be humbled for that which is worst in sin;
the worst is not that it is damning, but that it is dishonorable to God; and
when the sinner comes to be humbled for guilt, as it is dishonorable to God,
as having in it rebellion against his Law, ingratitude against his mercy, and
contempt against his Majesty, when a soul is grieved for that which is worst in
sin, in that case they may apply the Covenant, and rely on it, and have some
sweet grounds of the accomplishment of the Promises of the Covenant. 2ly. When
the soul is so humbled, as it is content to take the Covenant on the terms of
the Covenant, without the alteration of any of the terms, they are content to
take him for a Savior, and as content to take him for a King: Oftentimes we
would alter something in the order and method, and nature of the Covenant; but
when we are content to take it for good and ill, for duties and privileges,
when the soul is so humbled, as it is content to take Christ for King, Priest,
and Prophet, and to take him in all the Articles of it as it stands; in that
case the Soul is Evangelically humbled, and may plead the Covenant, and rely
upon it. 3ly. When the soul is humbled not only for the guilt of sin, but for
the blot of sin, that it has defiled; a believer in his humiliation, is like a
man that will not touch a Coal, some will (...) to do to take my Covenant in
thy mouth, Psalm. 50. since thou hates to be reformed? No, your hands will be
knocked of from the Covenant; all that grip to the Covenant, and has not
Evangelick humiliation, your hands shall be knocked off. I tremble to see many
dying persons pleading the Covenant, and hoping for mercy, yea, even some in
old age dying, and pleading to the Covenant, and knows neither what Legal nor
Evangelick humiliation means; take heed any of you that visits the sick, that
ye send them not in to Hell reeking, and flattering them with a delusion in
their right hand.

There are some plead the Covenant too slowly, they think they are never right
but when they are under terrors, and they cannot long enough travel under
them, they are ay wading the Water that goes over their head, and goes not
about to the Bridge, It Is righteous with God to give them their fill of
terrors, and to do with them as he did with that great Divine Mr. Lawer, who
prayed unto the Lord that he would give him terrors, that he might know what
they were, and the Lord gave him his fill of them, so that he went to the
Grave, forbidding all men to pray for terrors.

I will only exhort one another of you, that are now and then put to this, My
house is not so with God, to take the Covenant; be not driven from it, and I
will give you three Rules in pleading of it. 1. Plead the Covenant in the right
method of it, remember ye of the ordering of the Covenant, the absolute
Promises are to be taken before the Conditional, the Promises of the first
Graces before the second; plead the Covenant in the right method of it, if ye
cry Lord, give me pardon, and has never gotten Repentance; if ye cry Lord, give
me peace, and has never gotten pardon, ye pray out of the order of the
Covenant; the order of the Covenant is, we must first repent, and then have
pardon, we must first have pardon, and then have peace; thou that presses the
Covenant out of the order of it, thou art not praying in Faith, thou art
tempting God, and bidding him overturn the Covenant, that is well ordered in
reference to thy particular case; and if thou have never had the Promises of
the first Graces, thou will not get the promises of the second, thou will never
have peace, until thou get a new heart, and repent. 2ly. I will give you this
Direction, know, that though there be not a proportional sorrow to your guilt,
nay though possibly ye can hardly discern it Evangelically, yet plead the
Covenant; Some all their terrors, or the great flood of them, are in the
beginning of their Conversion; others get them in the progress of
Sanctification, many have their praying, believing, and reading, mingled in
with terrors; if thou has a sound work the day, thou art baptized, it is well,
or if he give thee thy terrors by drops, after thou have closed the Covenant,
it is well. 3. I exhort thee in pleading the Covenant, if thou has been humbled
enough, and relied on it, and have gotten any clearing of thy Interest in it,
make not a daily dispute of thy Interest to it; it were good, when we have
gotten any clearing of our Interest, to lay down principles, that we would walk
by, in the whole course of our life; it is sad to have God ay renewing our
Evidences every day, or then we will not only dispute them, but deny them.

SERMON XL.
2 Samuel 23. Verse 5. Although my house be not so with God; yet he has made
with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is
all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


THE latter Words of this Verse I will now handle, Although he make it not to
grow; The scope of them is, to answer an Objection, against Gods making a
Covenant with David: there were many Providence trysting David, seemingly
inconsistent with the Covenant, as he had guilt in his house, so he had
Crosses, and grounds of fears for the future, all these are summed up in these
Words, Although he make it not to grow, the word in the Hebrew is from a Root,
that signifies to sprout, or bud; some take it as borrowed from a Bird being
with Egg; Junius renders it, non facit pulullare; Montanus renders it, non
germinare facit; both these Translations confirm our Translation, that he does
not yet make it to grow; but like a flower in the bud, or a bird in the egg, in
due time it will grow; The Lord has made with me an everlasting Covenant, and
though Providence answerable to the Covenant, do not yet appear, they will
appear, he will make them to grow, although he make it not yet to grow. Without
insisting more to clear the words, I will take two or three brief Observations,
and shall only name the two first, and speak a little to the third, and with it
close the whole verse.

First, Ye may remember, it is employed in this part of the verse, that
sometimes, when we would lay claim to the Covenant, Providence stand up to
hinder us.

Doctrine, It Is a most difficult p^t, to believe the promises against the
stream of providence; remember the word Gideon answered the Angel, any would
have thought, considering Gideon as a Believer, and he is recorded (...) that
spoke it, The Lord is with thee, thou valiant man, when he was threshing his
Wheat for fear of the Midianites, if the Lord be with us, says Gideon, how is
all this come upon us? The providence that Israel and Gideon was trysted with,
made him doubt the Promise, even out of the mouth of an Angel.

And here I would have you notice three things remarkable. 1. Several times the
Promise, it seems to point a very direct cross way to the Providence of God;
the Providence will seem to be walking toward the east, as it were, when the
Promise is walking to the Airt direct contrary; so ye will find, if ye take the
strain of the Bible; who would think but the godly should have prosperity?
should have answers of Prayer? have many days of communion and fellowship that
they want? who would think, but that the wicked should be broken? having all
the Plagues written in the Bible coming on them? yet take this Bible, both in
the Promissory or Threatening Part of it, and ye shall find the Promises, as it
were quite contrary to the Providence; Asaph is corrected every morning, and
the wicked their eyes stand out with fatness; Psalm. 73. 2. Notice this, that it
is a very ordinary thing for Satan in his Temptations, to bring Providence
against the Promise, the Lord will give him a Commission sometimes, as he did
to Job, take his cattle, take his sheep, and then take his Children, and then
he put his body in his power, excepting only his Life; and when he has done
all this, he brings in his friends to call him an Hypocrite, and brings his
Wife, to bid him curse God and die; never gets the Adversary more advantage,
than when our back is at the wall, under the cross, and then he puts us to
doubt of the Promlse; Temptations never have such a back, as when they are
backed with Affliction; so that as the Providence and the Promise seem
contrary, the Politic Adversary will take advantage of the Providence, and put
the Soul to doubt of the Promise. 3. Note this, that a Believer, though he be
called to live a life of Faith, and to be endeavoring it, yet he is strongly
inclined to live a life of Sense; there is nothing more natural to us than
this, of all the difflcult things that Luther found, he professed it to be one
of the greatest, to trust in a correcting God, and believe in a withdrawing
God; men have such an inclination to live by sense, that the generality of the
world, for a long time were enemies to Christians, on this ground, O! say they,
they call us to believe in a crucified Lord, and he that was not able to save
himself, is he able to save his People? so, since Providence go contrair to
the Promise, and since Satan will argue from providence against the promise,
and find his advantage in our nature, to be inclining us so strongly to live by
Sense, and not by Faith, no wonder it be a considerable Objection against the
Covenant, that he makes it not to grow. This Truth, if it were beat out, might
be singularly useful; I believe many has found it, that God's Providence, and
his Dealings with the Church, has inclined you to the opinion of Ranters, that
they are half Fools, that will credit one Promise, when they find all
Providence rolling against that Promise; and how many times are ye put to it
in your particular case, like Rebecca, ye have the Twins struggling within you,
why am I thus, says she, under such terrors and afflictions? there lies the
great exception ye have against the Promise, and the Providence, that he makes
it not to grow; Learn to guard against this, I will offer you three or four
remarkable things, that may contribute to guard against it. 1. Consider,
Christian, the chiefest Believer may have no considerable providence, when the
providence is made an argument against the Promise; what (...) trials had
Abra^^^; ^^^ith? the (...) ^he should bear a Son, but she has a dead womb;
another time he is told by the Angel, that he must take his Son Isaac, and
offer him up in Sacrifice, even though the promise ran, in Isaac shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed; might he not well argue, will all the nations
of the earth be blessed in a burnt-sacrifice? He must take off his Head, and
offer him upon an Altar, but he considered not the deadness of Sarahs womb, and
staggered not at the Promise, but gave glory to God, and believed, that out of
the Ashes of Isaac, he could accomplish his Promise. So that God's choicest
friends have not had considerable Providence, when they were made use of, as
Arguments against the Promise. 2. Take notice of this, That all Providence
work together in their ultimat end, for accomplishing the Promises; it is true,
He whose way is in the Sea, and whose paths are in the deep waters, His motion
is like the wheels of a Clock, any that would look on them, and see them move
cross one to another; would wonder whereto they tended, but all these motions
tend, to make the Clock strike when the hour comes; all the Providence of God
do tend to the accomplishing of the Promise, it is true, we see not their
tendency; but they all tend, and in end, they all resolve in the accomplishment
of the Promise. 3. Ye would notice this, that Providence are not a Believers
Rule; I confess there is a sweet use of Providence, he that observes them,
will understand much of the loving kindness of the Lord; there are some godly
men of this Church, now in glory, there was nothing could befall them, but they
were constantly put to turn it over, even the smallest of things, that they
might read out some message from God under it, and yet never took them them to
Providence for their Rule, they took them to the Word, and to to the Promises
for their Rule; Providence are not our Rule, it is the Word of God, and the
Promise, that we are to walk by; so that, be the Providence what it will, a
Believer has a Key to open it with, and interpret it by; therefore be the
providence what it will, they need not stagger at the promise. 4. I will add
this, that seldom is a Christian trysted with such Providence, but in one
thing or another, they have the accomplishment of the promise, there is either
one promise or another accomplished; if God deny one, he is making out another,
and the accomplishment of one promise, may be a seal of the whole Covenant; I
will say no more of this Truth, only guard against it, that Providence put not
you to stagger at the Promise.

Doctrine, There is another word lying in this, Although he make it not to
grow, and it is this. That however God delay in his providence to accomplish
promises, yet a Believer has the promise in the seed, or in the bud; The word
signifies to spring, though he make it not to spring, a metaphor taken from a
Plant, that is not yet above the ground, though Believers find not the Promises
springing and growing, yet they have them in the Seed. There is a threefold
Seed, that accomplishes consolation to Believers, in their greatest
difficulties. 1. The Seed they are looking for, is in the decree and purpose of
God; I know what thoughts I have to you ward, thoughts of peace, and not of
evil, to give you an expected end; The Lord is sending them to Babylon, and to
encourage them, he says, I know what thoughts I have to you ward, my hand is
carrying you to Babylon, but my heart is to give you an expected end; the mercy
that they look for, though it grow not, yet they have it in the Decree and
Thought of God. 2. Things hoped for, though they grow not, yet they are often
in the Seed of Secondary Causes, and the Tendency of them may bea Seed, out of
which they may grow; the Lord sometimes may remove his enemies, and put
divisions among them, and put them under Challenges, and yet they may be the
See^ of an out-gate to the Church, readily he will tryst them with such
providence, as in the beginning, none will see whereto they tend, and yet in
the end, he will bring out of them the accomplishment of the Promise. 3. He
will bring out the Seed out of the Providence themselves, the days will come,
when holiness shall be written on Horses Bells, and the Wolf and the Lamb shall
ly down together, and none of them shall hurt other; and possibly the Child is
unborn, that shall see these days of the mercies made over by the Covenant; and
though they appear not, yet a Believer has them in the Seed, they are like
Seed sown in the Ground, and a Spring shall come: and here is a special
encouragement, a Believer may have doubting and trembling thoughts, about the
case of the Church, and astonishment whiles about thy own case, even for what
appears above ground, but the Seed of Deliverance to the Church, and other
mercies to thee, are in the Promise; wait till the Spring come, and the Winter
be over and gone, and thou shall see them sprouting, as ever thou saw a Plant
spring and sprout ^n the Spring time.

Doctrine 3. Thirdly Observe, That even when Providence make against the
Promise, yet a Believer should rely on the promise, and on the Covenant, though
he make it to grow; yet it is sure. it is ordered, it is all thy salvation, and
all thy desire, it is everlasting. So this point falls in natively here, and
there are three things I will speak a little to her. 1. In what cases a
Believer should rely on the Promise, when providence make against it. 2. On
what grounds they should rely on the Promises. And 3. I shall apply it.

First, In what cases a Believer should rely on the Promise, when the
Providence makes against it? And here I will instance four or five Cases. 1,
When we pray, and God delays to answer; we ought then to take our answer out of
the Promise; ordinarily we pray in the day time, and in the night time we are
not heard, our throat may be hoarse with crying, and our eyes fail with looking
up, and get no answer; in that case, a Christian is to take his answer out of
the Promise, the Promise ought to supply, and make up the room of the
Providence, the more patiently one wait for answers in prayer, and ly still
until the Promise come, and take the Bible, and the Promise, and feed on it,
until the Providence come, the more peace when it is come. 2. Though
Providence seem contrary to the Promise, yet we are to rely on the Covenant,
and that even when God is writing bitter things against his Church; several
times his Providence are plucking up that which has been planted, and pulling
down that which has been built, he may bring a Vine out of Egypt, and bring a
wild Boar out of the Forest to trample it down; in that case they are to take
them to the Promise, they should credit and rejoice in the promise, and take up
the Psalm Book, and sing upon the credit of the Promise. A third Case wherein
they are to hazard on the Promise, when Providence seem contrary to them, is,
when God withdraws and hides, and readily becomes a terror; several times he
will do so, do ye not find him do so? Though he be your hope, will he not
sometimes be your terror? any that read the Bible may think, if I be redeemed,
how is he my terror? Thou host forgotten the promise, and he has put thee to
read over forgotten Promises, and that ^s to put thee to take the Promise,
until the Providence come. 4. In all c^ses of Affliction; the Lord takes away a
Husband, a Wife, a Child, and may be takes away Prosperity, and gives thee
Adversity; in that case, he will take away the Providence from thee, and have
thee to feed on the Promise; there ^s no case, wherein the Providence seems
hardly comparable with the Promise, but he would have thee to feed on (...)
Promise, and take the Promise in the place of the Providence.

Therefore, I shall show you on what grounds, when God makes not the thing to
grow, and we can see nothing above the ground in the Providence, that we should
then especially adhere to the Covenant. 1. Let Providence be what they will,
all the Seals remain at the Covenant; it is Sealed with the Oath of God, with
the Blood of his Son. thou have gotten it Sealed with the Seal of the Spirit of
Promise, Ephesians. 1.13. Let Providence be what they will, God has not taken
away one Seal from the Covenant; grant it be ill with the Church of God, grant
thou gets no answer of Prayer, grant thou be haunted with Terrors, and
outwardly with Crosses, yet always the Covenant is sure; he has not broken off
one Seal from the Covenant, it stands as at the beginning, it is sure, and the
Oath of God is at it, the Blood of God is at it, and may we not then firmly
rely on the Covenant? 2. I would have you notice, That feveral times God trysts
Christians with cross Providence, purposely to make them rely on the Covenant;
oftentimes the design of Crosses is, to try if Faith will take a naked promise
upon the credit of God, and rejoice in it; some afflictions come for
chastisements of Sin, but some comes merely for trial, Job's Afflictions were
of this nature, it is true, he was a sinner, yet all that came on him, was not
for sin, but for trial, the Lord bids Satan examine him, Have thou considered
my servant Job? and how well can he fay his Lesson, this was designed for
trial, to see if he would keep by God, and to the Covenant, in the midst of all
that trial; therefore, like a Master triumphing in his Scholars, the Lord
tells Satan, he still retains his integrity, though thou have moved me against
him without cause; in the midst of all his trials, he will not take with it,
that he was a Hypocrite, as there are some, they cannot be persuaded but they
are Hypocrites, so there are some, none can persuade them that they are
Hypocrites, I will maintain my integrity before him, that is, I will maintain
it to his face. 3. Take notice of this, that hardly is there any thing more
honorable to God, than to rely on a Promise, when all Providence seems
against it; this gives glory to God eminently; but when we, like Thomas, will
not believe except we see, and put in our hand in the print of the nails: it is
dishonorable to him, James 2.23. Abraham believed God, and it was counted to
him for righteousness, and he was called, the friend of God: Abraham could not
kyth himself more God's friend, in any thing he could do, than in believing,
that out of the Ashes of Isaac, he was able to fulfill his Promise; and that
though Sarahs womb was dead, yet he staggered not at the Promise: There is
nothing more honorable to God, than when we can trust him against sense, and
as Abraham believed in hope against hope. 4. Consider this, That relying on the
Promise against Providence, as it is honorable to God, and excellently
improven, when we are tried, and all the Seals appended and continue firm at
this Covenant; So Fourthly, Consider, that Providence they are all to be
examined by the Promises, but the Promises are not to be examined by the
Providence; if ye would know a Providence, if it be an Act of Mercy, or an Act
of Wrath, ye are to try it by the Word, ye are not to try the Promises by the
Providence, the Promise is the Touchstone, by which the Providence is to be
tried; on this account it comes to pass, one may have a Rod in Mercy, and
another in Wrath; and one may have ^^^^p Dispensations in Mercy, and another
may have them in Wrath. M^ (...), despise not thou the chastisement of the
Lord, for every (...), he chastens, and if ye be without chastisement, ye are
(...).

Use, For Use, I would press ^he practice of this in two Cases, First, in
reference to the desolate Case of the Church of God; O! but Providence look
unlike the Promises, in the Case of the Church, what? shall we, because his
small handful are so Tossed, so Divided and Rent, and the Adversaries so great,
so High and Potent, shall we therefore cast away Hope, but that he yet will
arise, and revive his Work in the midst of the days? No, so long as there
stands a Bible, and so well ordered a Covenant, and Promises, and in these
Promises Scotlands Peace is concerned; therefore, whatever Providence seem
contrair to the Promise, cast not away Hope, take the Promises, and read them,
and apply them to the Churches Case; and feed on them, until the Providence
come. 2. Improve it, any of you that is Clogged in Spirit, Alas! ye know not
what to say of your Case; Guiltiness and Terror stares you in the Face; but is
there any Seal taken from the Covenant? Is it not Ratified by the Blood of his
Son? and want ye ground of Hope, so long as it is so well Ratified; and though
it grow not so well as to the outward man, yet ye have a Rich Charter, be not
driven by Crosses from the Covenant; learn this, that ye would now believe, and
credit the Covenant, and Promises, Although he make it not to grow.

Now from all that has been said on this Verse, I will only say these three
things. 1. I shall give you a brief account of what led me to this Text, I
found the Refuge of the Soul in Distress, to ly in the Covenant; sometimes at
the Gates of Death, when other Refuges failed them, they found no other; I my
self found no other for my Soul, but to run to the Covenant in the Latitude and
Freedom of it, and since it appeared so sweet, it was somewhat troublesome to
me; that I had not handled it ere now; but in handling of it, I gave an account
of the nature of David's Security, and then I handled personal Covenanting, The
Lord has made with me; ye heard ten or twelve Sermons on that head. And 2. I
came and handled the Properties of the Covenant, that it was Everlasting, Sure,
and Ordered in all things, where ye heard several things on the Order and
Method of the Covenant, that a Christian should keep, to keep him from
delusion, and false Peace in the Covenant. 3. I came to the Superstructures,
This is all my Salvation, and all my Desire; I showed you that that man that
will plead for Mercy and Grace, and has no right to the Covenant, he has no
ground to plead them, more than the Devils have, for they know that he is
Merciful and Gracious, the thing that makes the Devils have no claim to his
Mercy and Grace is, because they have no claim to his Covenant. I have now
studied the Covenant, and laid it out before you, as the great Foundation of
Sanctification and Consolation, and as the great Charter of Justification; Now
I say, having gone through all these, I would put all of you, that has been
hearing these Sermons, to these three Questions. 1. I would inquire, What more
light have ye of the Covenant than before? The secret of the Lord is with them
that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant, Psalm. 25. What know ye more
of the Covenant than before? of the nature of it? nay, of personal Covenanting?
of the Properties of it? of the Sweetness and Consolation that comes from it?
if ye have no more light, and knowledge of it than before, the Lord, and the
Stones and Timber of this House, shall be a witness against you in the day of
reckoning, that this Covenant has been holden out to you, in the Latitude and
Freedom of it, and among all things that ye have heard, it may be a sufficient
witness against you, when ye meet your Judge in the Valley of Decision. But 2.
Another Question is, Whether has what ye have heard from the Covenant, (...)
enter in a Personal Covenant with him? I have several days sent you home,
beseeching you to enter in a Personal Covenant with him, and I have given you
Doctrines and Helps how to do it, and has the wind blown it all away, and ye
have done nothing? have ye not Covenanted against the corruptions that the
heart inclined you most unto? have ye Covenanted to accept of his Son on the
Terms of the Covenant? I close this Text with wondering how ye have gotten it
sit out, if ye have not yet set about it, I exhort you in my Masters Name, in
the close of this Text, that now ye would Indenture, and make a Personal
Covenant with him, Go and Indenture and Covenant with him, otherwise the Lord,
and this place of Scripture, shall one day join together, and say, Depart from
me ye cursed, I know you not. 3. A third Question is, Ye that have been hearers
of me, whether now, when ye have heard me all out, ye have heard Christ
commended, ye heard the Contract was well drawn, ye heard what Grounds of
Salvation, and what Satisfaction to Desires, is in the Covenant, and have ye
not heard, how a person may plead the Covenant, under many challenges? Now,
whether or not are ye content this day, to accept Christ on the Terms offered,
after ye have heard all I could say, or read about it, are ye content to accept
him; say ye, Amen, even so I take Him? are ye content on these very Terms
holden out in the Covenant, to accept of him? I testify unto you, that at the
Gates of Death, neither ye, nor I, will know of another way for refuge from his
wrath, but to run to this Covenant; are ye saying now, even so I take him, as
he is offered in the Covenant? then have him, and his Fathers blessing with
him, a Bargain be it, there wanted nothing twenty years since, but thy consent,
the only thing that delayed the Marriage was thy consent; and if in the close
of this day, this be thy Note thou have gotten, even so I take him, according
to the Tenor of that Covenant, this shall be the place of Scripture, that thou
shall bless the day, that ever thou heard it opened to thee, that thou was
content to accept and embrace this Christ, on the credit of the Promise, thou
may take him, and hazard all thy life on him.

FINIS.

