A Lawyer's Advice TO THE Devil's Agents: OR, Some Strokes at the Unfruitful
Works of Darkness, Tending to their Destruction Made with a Weapon taken out of
the Armory of the MOST HIGH.

(...). By William Watson, Student in Law.

LONDON, Printed for J.P. Bookseller, at the Corner of Breadstreet, in
Cheap Side. 1693.

A Lawyer's Advice TO THE DEVIL's AGENTS, etc.
ALBEIT Men are apt to disagree in the Performance of Holy Duties, and every
one adheres firmly to that Way, which in his own Opinion seems best; yet they
can very readily lay aside all terms of distinction, and unanimously conspire
in the Commission of Wickedness. It Is deemed a gross Pollution, by many
ignorant Zealots, to join with those of different Tenants in the Worship of
God; but they shall scarce make any Scruple to join with them in Drunkenness,
and other Acts of Intemperance; and then, as they vainly fancy, make Atonement
for it, by breaking forth into passionate Disputations about Religion, and
magnifying that, which they profess, above all others in the whole Universe,
whilst, poor deluded Creatures, they are acting quite contrary to the Rules of
that Religion, they pretend to speak so highly in Commendation of: which may
serve to inform us of the great depravity of our Natures, and the absolute
command the Devil bears over our Faculties and Powers, when we are so ready to
give Obedience to him, and follow his damnable Dictates, and engage in his vile
Service, and be such forward and ambitious Practitioners, in the Unfruitful
Works of Darkness, which will be our utter ruin, unless we speedily renounce
them, and instead of delighting in, and practicing of them, and building them
up, detest them, and use our utmost Endeavors to pull them down and destroy
them. And therefore it is mine intent to try if I can write somewhat that may
tend to their Destruction, which I propose to do by considering,

First, What the Unfruitful Works of Darkness are.

Secondly, That we are not to converse with those that we know to be guilty of
them, unless it be in order to their Conversion and Amendment.

Thirdly, That it is the Duty of all though chiefly of Ministers, earnestly to
endeavor their Abolition, by a continual reproving of them.

All those Sins that are forbidden in the Gospel, as unbecoming the pure
Professors thereof, and daz'ling the luster of their Profession, which should
shine forth, and illuminate those that live in the obscure parts of the Earth,
without the knowledge of God, and help to guide them to the true knowledge and
Worship of him, may be properly called the Works of Darkness; because they were
ethe continual Practice of those wicked Gentiles, that walked in the Vanity of
their Minds, and had their Understandings darkened, and were alienated from the
Life of God, through the Ignorance that was in them, because of the blindness
of their Hearts, which were past feeling, and dark'ned, and they were unwilling
to retain the Knowledge of God and his Laws any longer, and began to abound
with horrible Ingratitude toward him: And even as they did not like to retain
God in their knowledge, so he, in his just Anger, gave them over to a Reprobate
Mind, (...), to a Mind void of Judgment, so that they were filled with all
Unrighteousness, and involved in the Unfruitful works, of Darkness; of which
you have a Catalogue in the first Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, from
the 29th Verse to the end of the Chapter, which are these, Unrighteousness,
Fornication, Wickedness, Covetousness, Maliciousness, Envy, Murder, Debate,
Deceil, Malignity, Whispering, Backbiting, Hating of God, Despightfulness,
Pride, Boasting, Inventing of evil Things, Disobedience to Parents, Being
without Onderstanding, Covenant Breaking, Want of Natural Affection,
Implacableness, Unmercifulness, and which is the highest Aggravation of these,
and if there are any other such like Works of Darkness, besides the doing of
them, the taking pleasure in them that do them. But why are these Works called
Unfruitful? Evil Works have fruit, as well as good ones; but here lies the
difference, he that does good works, labors for himself, and reaps the fruit
of them; but he that does evil works, labors not for himself, but for the
Devil, and he reaps the fruit of them; and therefore they are said to be
unfruitful to the Person that does them, because not he, but the Devil has the
fruit of them; and he will pay him his wages, which will be everlasting
Torments in that dreadful place, where the Worm that gnaws upon the Conscience,
never dies, and the fire is not quenched. Isa. the last Chapter, at the last
Verse. The Consideration of which sad effect of these Works of Darkness brings
me to the second part of my Discourse, to wit,

That we are not to converse with those we know to be guilty of them, unless it
be in order to their Conversion and Amendment.

First, Because we were sometimes Darkness, but now are we Light in the Lord,
and know that it is the Will of God in Christ Jesus concerning us, that we walk
circumspectly, and keep our selves as free, as possibly we can, from all manner
of Pollutions, and endeavor both to know and do what is acceptable and well
pleasing to God, which we cannot do, if we converse with the Wicked; I mean by
conversing, bearing a part with them in the acts of wickedness, and running to
the same excess of Riot, that they may not speak evil of us, as Sinners
frequently do of those that decline their evil Conversation, and will not be
their Companions in sin, 1 Pet. 4.3, 4, 5. For the time past of our Life may
suffice us to have wrought the Will of the Gentiles, when we walked in
Lasciviousness, Lusts, Excess of Wine, Revellings, Banqueting, and abominable
Idolatries. Wherein they think it strange, that ye run not with them to the
same excess of Riot, speaking evil of you: Who shall give account to him that
is ready to judge the Quick and the Dead. And what is more common than for a
Commpany of Drunkards, which perhaps, in politer Language, call themselves, A
Merry Society, to upbraid one that shall refuse to go to one of the Houses of
Intemperance with them, with the reproachful Terms of being an Avaricious
Person, and one possessed with a Spirit of Covetousness in an intense Degree;
and that'tis not out of any dislike or aversion to the thing, because he thinks
it a Sin, that he refuses to go with them, but because he is loath to part with
that, which, according to their rash and unadvised Sentiments, he looks upon as
an inestimable Treasure, and not lightly to be parted with, his Money, And thus
with vain and uncharitable Arguments drawn from groundless suppositions, and
mixed with a few derisive Expressions, they strengthen and confirm themselves
in their sinful Practices, and as brisk Agents for Hell, endeavor, as much as
in them lies, to bring others into them also. But suppose this person thus
under Derision, because he resists these Solicitations to Vice, should be
addicted to Covetousness, it cannot properly be said to be that which keeps him
from this Sin, neither can he in the least be said to be guilty of it, by
abstaining from it; for he only is the Covetous Man, who, when it is his part
to receive, receives more than he ought; and when it is his part to disburse,
disburses less than he ought; and desires that, which of right belongs not unto
him, and through Oppression and Injustice increases his Substance; and not he
that refuses to waste what is justly his own in sinful Extravagancies. And as
we ought not to speak or think evilly of, or envy those that by their honest
Industry, and refraining the wastful Conversation of the Uagodly, improve what
they have; but to praise and commend them, and endeavor to imitate them; so
neither ought we to envy those that enrich themselves by Oppression, or choose
any of their ways, as the Wise Man says, Prove. 3.31. Envy thou not the
Oppressor, and choose none of his ways. And here those evil-minded People, that
are apt to envy their Neighbors, because they live in better Reputation, and
grow richer than they, may see their Folly and Sin in disobeying God's Command.
For if they get them fairly and justly, they are the Blessings of God, and it is
his Pleasure they should have them, because he knows if they will employ them
to a good use; and he that is angry, and through envy repines at this, repines
at the Mercies of God, and is in effect angry with God, though he may level his
Anger only at the Man envied, and vainly think it terminates in him, because he
gives Riches and Honor to that Person, which he is unwilling should have them;
as if he knew better how to bestow God's Gifts, than he himself does; and this
is no small Reflection, though perhaps he thinks not of it, upon God's
Omniscience, and by consequence a most heinous Sin. And on the other side, if
they get them through Dishonesty and Injustice, we are under the like
Obligation not to envy them; for though God may suffer them to flourish for a
while, yet when he sees fit, he can soon stop their sinful Progress, either by
extending his pardoning and preventing Grace, if they reform, and sincerely ask
for it, or by exerting his Power and Justice, if they presevere and continue
obstinate in their wickedness, and casting them down into Destruction. And the
thoughts of this soon made the Prophet David understand his error in envying
the Prosperity of the Wicked, when he went into the Sanctuary to know the
reason of it, Psalm. 73.16, 17, 18, 19. v. When I thought to know this, it was
too painful for me. Until I went into the Sanctuary of God then understood I
their end. Surely thou did set them in slippery places, thou castedst them
down into Destruction. How are they brought into Desolation as in a moment?
They are utterly consumed with terrors. And moreover, a Man cannot envy
others, without vexing and disquieting himself, he carries a Tormentour in his
own Breast; and therefore the Holy Spirit of God so severely declaims against
this Sin in Sacred Writ, because he would not have Men so foolishly sinful, as
to afflict and punish themselves, Prove. 24.19, 20, Fret not thy self because of
evil men, neither be thou envious at the wicked. For there shall be no reward
to the evil Man, the candle of the wicked shall be put out.

Secondly, We must not converse with the Wicked, because we shall not only
defile our selves, and help to strengthen and confirm them in their ungodly
Courses, but entice others by our evil Examples to do the like; for evil
Examples will be sooner imitated (if we may credit daily experience) than good
ones, especially amongst such People, as this Profane Age abounds with, which
have naturally so strong a Tendency and Inclination to wickedness. For if ever
we had occasion to take up the Prophet Hosea's Complaint, Chap. 4. Ver. 2. Now
is the time, for by Swearing, and Lying, and Killing, and Stealing, and
committing Adultery, they break out, and Blood touches Blood. The word in the
Original for Blood, is spoken plurally (...) Bloods, to express the great
quantity that was spilt. And what was the cause of all this Bloodshed, but the
Sin of the People? And has there not been of late, and is there not still, a
great deal of Blood spilt amongst us that call our selves Christians, from the
same cause, when such Multitudes fall by the Sword? Which we report only as
matter of News, little considering that our wickedness is partly the occasion
of their violent and sanguinary Deaths, and that so far as we by our Sins have
been accessory to their Deaths, so far, without a speedy and sincere asking of
Pardon and Forgiveness, we shall be obliged to answer for them. And how can we
ever expect, that God should bless our Forces with Success abroad, if we lie
thus shamefully wallowing in wickedness at home? But we are so foolishly
favorable to our selves, as to overlook this, and attribute these Wars and
Commotions to other Causes; we know, and find there are, as in times past,
tyrannizing and persecuting Princes and Potentates in the World, and we fancy
they are the sole Causes of them, to satisfy their Ambition, in enlarging
their Dominions, and rendering themselves more absolute. It Is true, they are the
Cause of Wars and Devastations; but it is only the Instrumental, not the
Efficient Cause, that is Sin. Wicked and Ambitious Princes and Rulers are the
Instruments of doing mischief, and making confusion in the Earth, but it is the
sin of the People, as well as their own, that sets them on Work. For God
suffers wicked men to bear Rule, that they may declare themselves Enemies to
the Inhabitants of the Earth, and punish them for their Iniquity. And
whenever a potent Enemy or Enemies begin to disturb the Peace and
Tranquillity of a Kingdom, or Commonwealth, they may assure themselves,
whatever other Reasons they may imagine there are for it, that their ways are
not pleasing to God. For if they were, he would force them to be at Peace with
them, Prove. 16.7. When a Man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his Enemies
to be at Peace with him. God draws such a Line of defense about good Men, that
live (...) and Service, that their most inveterate Enemies have not power to
hurt them. 1 Pet. 3.13. And who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of
that which is good? But wicked Men lie open to the Wrath of God, and the fury
and malice of their Adverfaries, and must never expect any real peace and
comfort, unless they return from the error of their ways, if the Scripture be
true; for God says plainly, there they shall have no peace, Isaiah the 57th. at
the teo last Verses, But the wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot
rest, whose Waters cast up mire and dirt. There is no peace, says my God, to
the wicked. And hence we may learn the Reason why we cannot enjoy Peace, it is
because we don't seek it in the right way, we don't seek it in Righteousness:
for it is not a great number of Men with Swords and Spears that can procure it,
without it; and if ever we would have our Nation exalted, it must be by
Righteousness, Prove. 14.34. Righteousness exalts a Nation, but Sin is a
Reproach to any people. And what pleasure and satisfaction can a considering
person take in going in Company, or Conversing with the workers of Iniquity,
and walking with wicked Men, whose very Actions carry so much shame and
reproach in them? What does it avail any one to be accounted a brisk Man, and
of a pleasant Conversation amongst his airy and injudicious fellowsinners, and
so have their Friendship and Commendation; when in the mean time he does that
which is hateful to God, and provokes his anger, the effect of which will be
his utter overthrow, and the confusion of his own Face? Jer. 7.19. Do they
provoke me to anger, says the Lord? Do they not provoke themselves to the
confusion of their own Faces? But you will say, the World is very full of wicked
people, and therefore you must needs converse with them, unless you go out of
the World. True it is, you must needs converse with them in a civil way of
Commerce, and Offices of kindness, and to endeavor the reforming of them; and
such a Conversation the Holy Men of former Ages have been forced to have with
the wicked, by living amongst them, though much to their grief and Vexation, as
righteous Lot was vexed from day to day with the ungodly doings of the filthy
Sodomites. And the Prophet David laments it as his great Unhappiness, that he
was forced to live amongst ungodly Men, Psalm. 120.5. Woe is me that I sojourn in
Mesech; that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar. As if he should have said, I am
sorty that this place, which I sought to dwell in, hoping it had been a godly
place, should, contrary to my Expectation, and to my grief, be so ungodly, and
that the Works of Darkness should so much abound here, as the signification of
the words Mesech and Kedar seems to devote unto us; for by Mesech, which
signifies either seeking, or prolonging, is to be understood a People of Arabia
that sprang of Japhet, Genesis 10.2. where it appears, that Mesech was one of
Japhet's Sons; and by Kedar, which signifies blackness or darkness, is to be
understood the Ishmaelites, for Kedar is reckoned among the Sons of Ishmeal,
Genesis 25.13. And these were the wicked Israelites that had degenerated from
their pious Ancestors, and made continual Oppositions against those that were
faithful, and endeavored to retain the Piety and Integrity of their Just and
Godly Patents, as you may see at the last Verse of this Psalm, I seek Peace,
and when I speak thereof, they are bent to War. But, though this must be granted
as true, yet I hope we are nto under a necessity of joining with them in their
wickedness; we may continue in the World, and live amongst them, without that,
and must, if we will imitate those Worthies that are now in the glorious
Regions of eternal Happiness, as the Holy Psalmist, who would not suffer a
deceitful person to dwell within his House nor a Liar to tarry in his sight.
And the Patriarch Jacob, that would not come into the Secrets of Ungodliness,
or connive at it, though in his own Sons, as in the case of Simeon and Levi, who
had defiled themselves with Blood, by killing a Man in their anger, but
passionately cries out, Instruments of cruelty are in their Habitations; as it
is in the English Translation; but according to the Hebrew, (...) Instruments
of Violence are in their Covenants, Treaties, or Assemblies; unless we choose
rather to follow R. Salom his Explication of the word (...) who makes it to
signify Swords; then we must read it thus, Their Swords are Weapons of wrong,
or violence. O my Soul, come not thou into their Secret, unto their Assembly
mine honor be not thou united; for in their anger they slew a Man, and in
their self-will they dug down a wall. Cursed be their anger, for it was
fierce, and their wrath, for it was cruel; I Will divide them in Jacob, and
scatter them in Israel, Genesis 49.5, 6, 7. And one would think you should seek
your own good so far, as to endeavor, in imitation of these pious Men, to
refrain the Society of the wicked; but lest you should not, I Will enforce it
with the command of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.11. But now I have written unto you
not to keep Company; if any Man that is called a Brother, (as all Christians
are, and ought to live as Brethren) be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an
Idolater, or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such an one, no,
not to eat. Except it be for the same end that our Savior did eat with
Publicans and Sinners, that is, in order to their Conversion and Amendment, and
to have an opportunity of reproving of them, and contributing as much as you
can toward destroying the unprofitable Works of Darkness, which is the Duty of
all, though chiefly of Ministers, as I am now to prove.

It Is not enough for us to absTain from sin our selves, and thence take
occasion to pride our selves in our own Righteousness, and boast of it, and
deride the Failings of others; but we must use our utmost Endeavors to keep
others out of sin also, by a friendly and compassionate rebuking of them,
whenever we see them like to fall under Temptation, according to the express
command of God, Lev. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy heart; thou
shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him, or as the
Original words, (...) more properly signisie, That thou bear nto sin for him,
or against him. So that we may see we cannot withhold reproof from Offenders,
without being guilty of bearing sin against them, and breaking God's Command.
And hereupon St. Jude instructs us how we should do it, in the 22d. and 23d.
Verses of his Epistle, to wit, by making a difference, and calmly persuading
the more ignorant and flexible Sinners, that will hearken to one reasoning with
them for their own good, implied in those Words, And of some have compassion:
But to the more brutish and obstinate offenders, that despise calm and friendly
Reproofs and Admonitions, you must use Arguments, that have somewhat of terror
mixed with them, and try if you can fear and affright them out of their
wickedness, and then keep them from falling into it again, by a pious severity,
implied in those words, And others save with fear, pulling them out of the
fire. That is, pulling themout of Sin, which is Metaphorically and eventually
called Fire, because it will as certainly consume and destroy the Soul (though
for the present we may not be sensible of it) as the Fire would the Body, if it
were cast into it. And thus far private Men are obliged to reprove Sinners; as
for Magistrates, and Men in Authority, they are obliged to go farther, and if
these Methods will not do, inflict punishment upon them; for they are the
Ministers of God, and Revengers to execute Wrath upon them that do evil, Romans
13.4. And it is recorded to that good Governor Josiah's Praise, that he forced
the Israelites to serve the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 34. at the two last Verses, And
Josiah took away all the Abominations out of all the Countries that pertained
to the Children of Israel, and made all that were present in Israel to serve,
even to serve the Lord their God. And all his Days they departed not from
following the Lord the God of their Fathers. And such punishment would not only
be a means of restraining the Offenders, upon whom it is inflicted, but of
making others also beware of offending, for, Smite a Scorner (says Solomon) and
the Simple will beware, Prove. 19.25. And if the punishment that the Law
appointe for obstinate and notorious Offenders, such as profane Swearers,
Drunkards, Adulterers, Thieves, and the like was duly and impartially
inflicted, such horrid Cri^^s and Offenses would not be so common amongst us,
as to the shame of our Profession of Christianity, which most se^^^ely forbids
them, now they are. And this war the method that Moses commanded the Prople of
Israel to take to put a stop to presumption, the making the presumptuous person
suffer, Deuteronomy. 17.12, 13. And the Man that will do presumptuously, and will net
hearken unto the Priest, (that stands to minister there before the Lord thy
God) or unto the Judge, even that Man shall die, and thou shall put away the
evil from Israel. And all the People shall hear, and fear, and do no more
presumptuously. But alas! these things are now neglected, and this Duty of
reproving sin his been so long, and by so many suspended, that it is commonly
looked upon as a Soloecism, or fault in a Man's Manners, and a Reflection upon
his Education to do it. But these Excuses are to senseless, and have so little
weight in them, that one would think no one should be so soolish as to omit it
upon this, or any such like account, especially if he has recourse to St.
James's Saying, in his last Chapter, at the two last Verses, Brethren, if any
of you do err from the truth, and one convert him, let him know, that he which
converts the sinner from the error of his way, shall save a Soul from Death,
and shall hide a multitude of sins. And certainly it is better, and he gains
more that saves a Soul from Death, that is, Damnation, which is called the
second Death, or Death everlasting, as it is opposite to Salvation, which may be
said to be the second Life, or Lise everlasting, Rev. 21.8. than he that gains
an Empire: For a Soul is more worth, than all the riches in the World. And now
consider, shall I that carry about so precious a Jewel, through neglect and
carelessness, suffer the Devil to steal him away from me? What, spend all my
time in taking care of the corruptible Continent (I mean the Body) which will
e're long be turned into Dust, and neglect the incorruptible thing contained in
it, the immortal Spirit, which shall live to all Eternity? Why shall I suffer
the Devil to cast his venomous Dart through the wide Breaches, that sin
continually makes into my Soul? Should not (...) use my utmost endeavors to
prevent an Enemy of wounding my flesh, and shall (...) putiently permit tghe
greatest and most malicious Enemy, the Devil, to wound my Soul unto Death, and
eternal Damnation But oh, the wonderful subtilty of the grand Adversary of
Mankind! He covers his may licieous designs under pretense of gratifying Men's
Lusts, and rendering their Live more pleasurable, and slily persuading o^ them,
that these things are consistent with the liberty of the Gospel, which, as the
wicked Simon Magus, that great Factour of the Devil, used to say, was not
intended to abridge Men of their carnal Delights and worldly Pleasures, and
telling of them, If they believe the Scriptures, and are called Christians, and
come now and then to their Assemblies, they need not be so strict and
circumspect in their Lives, nor so solicitous about their Salvation; which
according to his deceitful way of arguing, is so easily attainable. And thus he
hardens Men against the loving Calls, and earnest Entreaties of Christ, in his
Holy Word, and so draws them from sin, to sin, from a less to a greater, 'till
at length he brings them to that degree of wickedness, as to commit sin with
greediness, as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4.19. Who being past seeling, have
given themselves over unto Lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with
greediness. and now he thinks he has them secure, and if at any time their
grieved Consciences represent to them the miserableness of their condition, and
they are terrified with the distracting thoughts of their ensuing misery into a
weak resolution of endeavoring to get out of this lamentable state, he derides
them, and tells them, It Is too late, the Season for doing it is over, and they
were as good take what pleasure they can here, for it is in vain for them to
coepect any hereafter, for Christ will nto accept those that are so loaded with
Iniquity as they are: But, to their unexpressible comfort, if they will turn
from the evil of their ways, and diligently follow after Righte-ousnesss, they
shall immediately hear Christ contradicting this Father of Lies, and kindly
inviting of them to come unto him, and graciously promising of them rest,
Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me, all ye that are heavy laden, and I Will give you
rest. And here take notice of the extraordinary Love of Christ, who thus kindly
invites Sinners, which have been his greatest Enemies, and despised, and
disobeyed his Holy Precepts, and so plunged themselves into that trouble and
vexation, which they are in no wise capable of getting out of, without his
assistance, to come unto him for relief. Who but a Madman would disoblige him,
and refuse to accept his Invitation, when it proceeds from the pure motions of
his Love toward us, and an earnest Desire of our being everlastingly happy? If
one Savior indeed did entreat us, like many frail Mortals, ambitious of Empire
and Greatness, to give Obedience to his Commands, and live Soberly,
Righteously, and Godly in this present World, only for his own Interest and
Advantage, the case were somewhat altered; but it is purely for our good, that
we may escape the eternal Damnation of Hell, and reign with him for ever in the
Kingdom of Heaven, and behold his Glory, John 17.24. Father, I will that they
also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my
glory, which thou have given me. And now what a strange pass are the people of
this Impious Generation come to, that they will rather obey the Devil, that never
did any thing for them, but always acts against them, as in their first
Parents, so ever since, and continually endeavors their ruin; than they will
God, who created them, and redeemed them from that dreadful and everlasting
Punishment they were rendered obnoxious to by the Fall, by the most ignominious
Death of his dear Son, and continually protects them with his preserving mercy,
without which, they would long ago have been consumed and swallowed up in the
Gulf of Destruction, Psalm. 124.1, 2, 3. If it had not been the Lord, who was
on our side, now may Israel say: If it had not been the Lord, who was on our
side, when Men rose up against us: Then they had swallowed us up quick, when
their wrath was kindled against us. And yet the Alinrements of a Woman, that
makes Profession of Obscenity, or the Incitement of a Companion in wickedness,
shall sooner draw a man into Adultery, Drunkenness, profaning of the Lord's
Day, and other horrid Vices than the most tender and bleeding Disswasives of a
Crucisied Jesus shall keep him from them: and with their foolish Mirth, and
vain Discourses, they drown the Voice of God, crying, Oh that there were such
an hearth in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my Commandments
always, that it might be well with them, and with their Children for ever,
Deuteronomy. 5.29. But if this calm, soft, and requesting Language from God will not
prevail with them, to turn them from their Iniquities, they must expect to hear
him speaking to them in another strain, and that very terrible, Mal. 3.5. And
I Will come near to you to Judgment, and I Will be a swift witness against the
Sorcerers, and against the Adulterers, and against false Swearers, and against
those that oppress (or defraud) the Hireling in his wages, the Widow, and the
Fatherless, and that turn aside the Stranger from his right, and fear not me,
says the Lord of Hosts. God will not always wait, though he does with many
obstinate Sinners a long time, with the offers of Mercy, if they will not
accept it in that time and manner, that he thinks fit to bestow it upon them;
for a Man may defer making his Reconciliation to God so long, 'till he may
withdraw his assisting Grace from him, and let angry Justice take place of
abused Mercy, and then it can never be done, but he must be content to be
amongst those, whose end is Destruction, and may sadly apply that Saying of our
Savior. Luke 19.42. to his own particular case, If thou had known, even
thou, at least in this thy Day, the things which belong unto thy Peace! But now
they are his from thine eyes. And you may see an Example of it in wicked Esau,
who could find no place of Repentance. though he sought it carefully with
Tears, Heb. 12.17. And if a Man did but seriously consider, to what a
prodigious height of wickedness the World (...) now grown, he may have just
cause to admire at the great patience of the Almighty in bearing with such
gross Impieties, and no drawing the Sword of his Justice, and cutting the
profane Committers of them from the Face of the Earth; for they are grown more
impious than the Idolatrous Ancient of the House of Israel, for they did their
wickedness in the dark, every Man in the Chambers of his Imagery, for they say,
The Lord sees us not, the Lord has forsaken the Earth; and so endeavored to
conceal it at least they fansied it would not be take so much notice of by the
Almighty, Ez, 8.12. but these are more impudent, and commit the most heinous
sins in the face of the whole World, and are so far from being ashamed, that
they glory in it, and think it an addition to their Reputation, which they
foolishly imagine is highly increased by approving themselves men of greater
Abilities in Acts of Debauchery than other men: Otherwise, why do our
immoderate Drinkers take such pleasure, and so applaud themselves, in that they
are able to drink down others of more infirm Bodies and weaker Brains, and not
only triumph over them for the present, but frequently report it afterward, as
if it tended to their credit, with a kind of rejoicing? But let them know
themselves to be wicked in so doing, and that the rejoicing of the wicked is
not good; and sure I am, that when Men thus rejoice and glory in their sin,
they glory in their shame, as the Apostle says, Philip. 3.19. And as they thus
deal with God in wickedness, so must they expect he will deal with them in
fury, Ez. 8. at the last Verse, Therefore will I also deal in fury; mine eye
shall not spare, neither will I have pity; and though they cry in mine Ears
with a loud voice, yet will I not hear them.

But have not those whose profession obliges them to be the most earnest and
careful Reprovers of Sin, been defective in it, and so permitted this Flood of
Wickedness to flow in upon us with greater violence than otherwise it would? We
will see what their Office is, and how they discharge it, and we shall soon be
resolved: They are set as Watchmen to the People, and are to cry aloud and
spare not, and to lift up their voice like Trumpets, and show the people their
Transgressions, and the House of Jacob (that is, the whole Family of Believers)
their sins, Isa. 58.1. And this they do in alarming Sinners, though with too
much coldness and indifferency, some of them, from the Pulpit; but this is not
all they ought to do, for if they find that sin grows so strong amongst their
Auditors, that public Preaching will not suppress it, they might do well to
speak unto them by dissuasive Letters, if they are capable of reading and
understanding of them: but if they are of so perverse and reprobate a mind that
they will not do; then let them try the last Remedy, and have frequent personal
conference with them, and not suffer sin, the Devil's Standard bearer, to
display his triumphant Banners in the hearts of their people without control.
But ease and idleness will soon frame excuses for them, and tell them, this is
the ready way to be accounted busy impertinent persons, and become the common
objects of contempt and derision amongst their hearers, and what is this, but
under color of being afraid of offending their Hearers, being unwilling to be
too buhe for God, and the good of their Souls, and disobeying the command of
the Apostle, who bids them be instant in season, out of season, reprove,
rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine? 2 Timothy 4.2. For I would
fain know how that Minister keeps a diligent watch over the Souls of his
Congregation, as he that must give an Account, when he knows any one of them to
live in a continual course of Swearing, Drunkenness, and other damnable sins,
and does not follow him earnestly with private reproof, when he may better
state his case to him, than in a public Discourse; although, I think, Divines
might descend more to particular Cases in their public Preachings, than many
of them do if they did not aim more at a learned and exact Method, than a plain
edifying Discourse. For why should not a Minister, that is preaching against
any particular sin, that he knows one Man in his Congregation to be more
addicted to than any of the rest, speak plainly to him, as the Prophet Nathan
did to David, and say, Thouart the Man; for some must be reproved openly, that
others may fear, 1 Timothy 5. 20. Them that sin, rebuke before all, that others
also may fear. But what if he should take offense at this, and grow more
obstinate in his sinful Practices? Then take a convenient opportunity of
discoursing with him in private about it, and calmly show him the
reasonableness and necessity of it, and try whether Arguments drawn from the
Mercies of God, which he thus shamefully abuses, will work him into a
Reformation, and if that will not do, make forcible application of the Threats
of God against obstinate Sinners, and raise an Epitome of Hell in his Breast;
wound his Conscience to the quick, and dress the Wounds with Fire and
Brimstone, and never suffer him to be at rest 'till he reforms; ye that make
mention of the Lord, keep not silence, and give him no rest, till he establish,
and 'till he make Jerusalem (this Nation, every one's particular Congregation)
a praise in the Earth. You have Instruments put into your hands for the doing
of it if you would make good use of them, The Word of God, which is quick and
powerful, and sharper than any two-edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing
asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the Joints and Marrow, and is a dncerner of
the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart; and would soon separate, if it were well
applied, between sin and the sinner. But many Pastors now-adays, are too much
like those blind Watchmen the Prophet Isaiah inveighs against, Chap. the 56th.
at the three last Verses, to do this; His Watchmen are blind; they are all
ignorant, they are all dumb Dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping, lying down,
loving to slumber. Yea, they are greedy Dogs which can never have enough, and
they are Shepherds that cannot understand; they all look to their own way,
every one for his gain, from his Quarter. Come ye, say they, I will fetch
drink; and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant. And these
are they, against whose evil Example the Apostle forewarns us, when he bids us
feed the Flock of God, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind, 1 Pet. 5.2,
3. Feed the Flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof not
by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind:
Neither as being Lords over God's Heritage; but being Exampes to the Flock. But
now Men seem to endeavor rather to feed themselves of the flock, than to feed
it, else, why should any one desire two or three Benefices, when through
infirmity of Body, weakness of mind, or both, he is not able to serve one, as
he ought? And I doubt the very end in taking to the Ministry in some is not
good; that it is rather to get wherewithal to live after the Lusts of their
corrupt Flesh, than to do God Service by instructing the people; otherwise I
cannot see how they should be so exemplary in Wickedness instead of
Righteousness, and live such loose and debauched Lives as they do, and not
regard God, complaining of their spoiling his Tabernacle, and destroying his
Church, and telling them, for their punishment, they shall not prosper, and
their Flocks shall be (as they are already too much) scattered, Jer. 10. 20,
21. My Tabernacle is spotled, and all my Cords are broken; my Children are gone
forth of me, and they are not; there is none to stretch forth my Tent any more,
and to set up my Curtains. For the Pastors are become brutish, and have not
sought the Lord; therefore they shall not prosper, and all their flocks shall
be scattered. Others there are, who seem to be a little more conscious of their
ways, and abstain from these public and scandalous Enormities, and are apt to
complain of their Congregations scattering, and going from them, and running
into Errors; but they don't take a right Method to prevent it: For, if they
know that those Assemblies, to which they adjoyn themselves, are erroneous
either in their Doctrine, or their Practices, why don't they go to them, or
send for them, and show them their Errors? No, it is beneath them to enter into
a Disputation with an ignorant Mechanic, he is not capable of judging of the
strength of an Argument.

Sure he must be a very ignorant person, that is not capable of judging when he
is showed to be in an error from plain Scripture Proof, which is the only
Fountain, from whence a Divine ought to draw his Arguments, for convincing of
Gainsayers. And in truth it is a lamentable thing for a Minister to suffer any
one in his Parish to live in Superstition and Error, and not show him it, and
endeavor by frequent conversing with him, and advising of him, to work him out
of it, because he would be accounted a meek and quiet Man: Meekness indeed is a
very excellent Virtue, and our blessed Savior was very meek in suffering, and
when he was reviled, he reviled not again; yet he was as fierce as a Lion
against sin and error, and in defending his People from the Snates of the
Devil, and his Emissaries; and therefore called the Lion of the Tribe of Judah,
Rev. 5.5. A Minister may do his Duty in this particular, as well as in any
other, without losing the Character of a meek and peaceable person, and shall
be better esteemed of by all good Men, if he does it, than if he omits it, and
be so accounted of as the Minister of Christ, and Steward of the Mysteries of
God, when they see that he is faithful in the business, whereunto he was
called, and as an obedient Servant to his Master Christ, is careful and exact
in the discharge of his Duty. But I suppose I may give a more probable reason
of their neglect in this point, for ought I know they may be afraid that these
ignorant Mechanics, as they call them, that seek instruction elsewhere, though
they are not so well skilled in Languages, and have not read so many old
Moth-eaten Authors; yet they may be almost as well acquainted with the
Scriptures, by making them their daily Study, as they themselves are; and if
they cannot free themselves from thence from the errors and mistakes, that are
alleged against them; yet they may be able to prove, that they, to their great
shame and reproach, do frequently contradict their Doctrine by their Practices,
and lead Lives disagreeable to the true Apostolical Rules; which they might do
prudently to consider of, and try if they can retrieve their sinking
Reputation, by keeping the Law of Truth in their Mouths, and not suffering
falsehood or contradiction to be found in their Lips or Lives, by walking with
God in Peace and Equity, and in turnig many away from Iniquity, and in striving
continually to subdue Sin, and make Holiness, which is now much eclipsed, and
in very great decay, to revive, and shine more brightly amongst us; lest they
fall deeper, than they are some of them already fallen, under that severe
Accusation of the Prophet Malachi against the Priests of his time, when he
first told them what their duty was, and then accused them for neglecting of
it, Mal. 2.7, 8, 9. For the Priests Lips should keep knowledge, and they should
seek the Law at his Mouth; for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts. But ye
are departed out of the way; ye have caused many to stumble at the Law, ((...))
ye have caused many to fall in the Law) ye have corrupted the Covenant of Levi,
says the Lord of Hosts. Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base
before all the People, according as ye have not kept my ways, but have been
partial ((...)) and have accepted Faces) in the Law. And yet for all this, they
keep up to their former strictness and rigidity, in retaining things in the
Church that are indifferent, and merely ceremonial, and in no wise essential to
the Worship of God, to the great hinderance of peace and unity amongst us, in
the worship and service of the Almighty, under pretense it is for the grandeur
and dignity of the Church; but I suppose it is more for the advantage of the
Churchmen, that by keeping others out they may have the whole Harvest to
themselves, and because they are afraid, that by being more painful in the work
of the Ministry, and leading Lives more strict and conscientious, they would
be a reproach to theirs, which are commonly more idle, loose, and profane. And
what though the Worship of the Jews was by God's allowance attended with a
pompous Train of Ceremonies, to raise among the People the greater esteem of
it, because they depended on Christ only in promise, whereas we have him in
possession (I mean in his Gospel) and therefore we have not the like need of
them, that they had; especially if we consider what a vastly different, and
contrary effect they have upon us: For as they strengthened and united them in
the Worship of God, they weaken and disunite us. And certainly God takes not
pleasure in Ceremonies, but in sincerity of Obedience. And therefore when terms
of reconciliation in this point are proposed, they are much to blame that keep
not close to the Scripture in their Reasonings, but by quoting of Councils,
Fathers, and School men, and by learned and subtle ways of arguing, and by
multiplying Distinctions, puzzle and weary their Opponents, and drown them with
a flood of words, and then revile them, and triumph over them, as if they had
got the Cause; and so rather than they will suffer a diminution to their
Learning and Judgments, and lose the repute of being able to worst those they
argue against, whethere they have right on their sider, or no, they will
imprudently keep a foot at least, if not widen our Diffeences still, though to
the offense of their Brethren. But this being an occasion of offense to their
Brethren. by refusing to comply with them in things indifferent, is not to
imitate, but to act quite contrary to the Apostle St. Paul's, who siad, If his
eating flesh did make his Brother to offend, he would eat not more whilst the
world stood, 1 Cor. 8. at the last Verse. He would not let his weak Brother,
for whom Christ died, perish through his knowledge. And spresume we may
reasonably infer from hence, That if any Garment, which he wore, when he
instructed the people, had been offensive to them, and likely to have
occasioned their departing from him, he would not have refused to have laid it
aside, and removed their Scruple. For he commands the Corinthians to give
offense to none, according to his own Example, in things indifferent, I Cor.
10. at the two last Verses, Give none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the
Gentiles, nor to the Church of God: Even as I please all men in all things
(meaning indifferent things) not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of
many, that they may be saved. It Is strange there should be such a disagreement
amontst us in matters of Religion; did we not all spring from the same root?
Have we not one Father? Has not one God created us all? And have we not one
Savior, one Holy Ghost, one Hope, Faith, and Baptism? And as Christ is our
Head, and we his Body, by the like proportion as the Members of a natural Body,
tend all to the mutual Decency, Service, and Succor of the same Body, so we
should do one for another, to make up the mystical Body of Christ, 1 Cor.
12.27. Now ye are the Body of Christ, and Members in particular, And what is
the reason we don't do this? It Is because we are Carnal, 1 Cor. 3.3. For ye are
yet carnal; for whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and divisions,
are ye not carnal, and walk as men? ((...); and walk according to Man (...),
not according to God) And the only way to remedy this, is to become more
spiritual, and to endervour to abound as much in the fruits of the Spirit, as
we have hitherto in the fruits of the flesh; and then we shall not be so
desirous of vain Glory, nor so apt to provoke and envy one another: But it is to
be hoped one party would as readily ascend, as the other should descend, and so
they would meet, and agree in the mean; which they must do, if ever there be a
lasting Reconciliation amongst them: For both Parties are in fault, the
Dissenters in requiring too much alteration in our public way of worship; the
Chruch of England in being unwilling to allow enough. And thus having shown the
failings of your Pastors and Ministers toward you, that I may not be liable to
an Accusation of partiality, and besupposed to have done it out of any
prejudice toward them. I shall now show yours to them, that both Priest and
People may see their Errors, and forsake them, lest as they are alike in their
offenses; so also they should be alike in their Punishments, as the Prophet
Hosea says in his 4th. Chapter at the 9th, and 10th. Verses, And there shall be
like People, like Priest, and I will punish them for their ways, and reward
them their doings. For they shall eat, and not have enought; they shll commit
Whoredom, and shall not increase, because they have left off to take heed to
the Lord.

And First, You are apt rashly to censure your Ministers, and affirm that they
do not take pains enough in their Stations, and therefore do not Preach to you
with that liveliness and earnestness that otherwise they might; but don't
consider that you your selves are in a great measure the occasion of it. For
what can more discourage a Minister, than, when he has preached ten or twenty
years against gross and heinous sins, to find them reign as much or more in his
Congregation, than when he first came to it, and that almost all his Labor is
lost, as to the reforming of his sinful Hearers, and his Doctrine despised and
neglected? Is not this the way to help to stop and hinder the Utterance of your
Ministers, instead of praying that it may be given to them, according to the
Apostle's Command, that they may be bold to make known the Mysteries of the
Gospel? Ephesians. the last Chapter, 18, 19, 20th. Verses. Praying always with all
Prayer and Supplication in the Spirits and watching thereunto with all
Perseverance, and Supplication for all Saints, and for me, that utterance may
be given unto me that I may open my mouth hodly, to make known the Mystery of
the Gospel: For which I am and Ambassador in Bonds, that therein I may speak
boldly, as I ought to speak. And if St. Paul had occasion for the Prayers of
the People to enable him to speak as he ought; much more occasion have the
Pastors of our times, who are far inferior to him in gifts and knowledge: But
truly if they could not in some measure speak as they ought, without them, I
know not when they would; for I doubt many People seldom think of praying that
their Teachers may be able to teach them as they ought, much less do it. But
let them know that their forgetting or neglecting of it, does not in any wife
make it cease to be their Duty.

Secondly, You have not that Estimation for them that you ought, but generally
contemn and despise their Office and Authority, and set less by them tha the
temporal Physician, and the Professor of the Law; for, though you will advise
with the one, when your Bodies are arrested by a dangerous Disease, and if your
Title to your Estate be any way scrupled, you will not be any means omit
consulting the other; yet you think it beneath you to advise with your
Minister, though your Souls are in danger of perishing through Sin, and your
Title to Heaven be never so doubtful, and will imprudently rely upon your own
Judgments in this respect, although it is a matter of the greatest moment to ye
in the whole World, and that which you are highly obliged to be as well assured
of, as possible yo can: And hereupon it is you are so earnestly exhorted by the
Apostle to make your Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the
rather, Brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure. But
this may serve to inform us, and that much to our disgrace, that we are
generally more careful in the preservation of our Bodies and Estates, which are
mortal, and perish in the very using, than we are of our Souls, which are
immortal, and can never cease to be, either happy, or miserable. And hence it
comes to puss that your Ministers are not worthy to be sent for in your
sickness, no, not in the greatest extremity of it, even at the point of Death;
but perhaps you think it is their Duty to come: I shall not say it is not, for I
suppose it is, if they know it; but I am sure if they do not come without
sending for, it is your Duty to send for them, Jam 5.14, 15. Is any sick among
you? let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him,
anointing him with Oil in the Name of the Lord: And the prayer of faith shall
save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up, and if he has committed Sins,
they shall be forgiven him. But this Text of Scripture is some what intricate,
and the true meaning of it may not easily be comprehended by a vulgar Capacity,
and therefore I shall not think it impertinent a little to explain it. Elders
is a Title of Dignity rather than of Age, and there were two sorts of them, the
one took care of the Government and Behavior of the Congregation only, the
other besides that did pray and preach to them also: And both these Orders were
very honorable, as appears from the saying of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.17. Let
the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double Honor, especially they
which labor in the Word and Doctrine. But methinks I hear some conceited
ignorants say, How shall any one send for the Elders, there are none in our
Church? But that is their mistake: All Ecclesiastics completed in sacred
Orders, by what Titles soever they are dignified, or distinguished, are Elders;
and so were the very Apostles also, as they frequently style themselves, 1 Pet.
5.1. The Elders (that is, those that are Pastors, and have the care of the
Church, as you may easily gather from the following Verse) which are among you
I exhort, who am also an Elder. But then you will say, Why don't we call them so?
We do in effect so call them; for our word Priest is the original word for
Elder, which is I (...), contracted, or shortened. And as for the word Bishop,
which many seem to take offense at, it is derived from the Saxon word Bisceop,
and that from the Greek word (...), which is the very Title by which those of
the highest Dignity in the Church were styled in the Apostles days, Tit. 1.7.
and signisies an Inspector, or him to whom the Oversight of the Church
belongs; and this Name I take to be given to them for reason, because, as it
was the Office of him that was called by this Name among the Heathens, to see
that their temporal Food was duly administered to them; so it is the Office of a
Bishop to take care that Christians may have their spiritual food duly
administered to them: And though some, that delight in Novelties, choose rather
to call those that officiate in their Churches, Ministers, and Superintendents,
than Priests and Bishop are the same thing, only Priest and Bishop are derived
from Greek Fountains, which is the Original Language of the New Testament, and
Minister and Superintendent, the one is a Latin word, and the other derived
from a Latin word; and if they abhor the Doctrine of the Latin Church, so much
as they pretend, I wonder why they should have such an esteem for its Language,
as rather to let it enter into their Church by their Ecclesiastical Titles,
than the Greek, or words derived from it, which is the Language Apostolical.
And truly those persons act very imprudently, that raise Controversies about,
and contend against, and hate the innocent Names, by which those of the Holy
Function are distinguished, for the Offenses of the Persons called by them; for
they neither occasion their offending, neither can they restrain them from it.
And whereas mention is here made of the sick's being saved, and raised up, and
his sins forgiven, through the Blessing of the Lord upon the Prayer of Faith;
we must understand, that the Elders in the Apostolical Days, were endued with
miraculous Gifts, as the Apostles themselves were, so as to be able through the
strength of their Prayers and Exhortations to heal the sick, and take away the
principal cause of Distempers from them, which was their sins, by procuring for
them the forgiveness of them. And the anointing with Oil was used as the sign
of this miraculous Gift of healing, and obtaining the forgiveness of sick Men's
sins by their Prayers, which our Church has very judiciously laid aside, as not
necessary, seeing healing, the thing signified by it, as well as all other
miraculous Gifts ceased, when the end, for which they were designed, which was
a Confirmation and Establishment of the Gospel sufficient for its support,
increase, and further propagation without them, was accomplished: which was, as
some Church-Historians tell us, about the end of the third, or shortly upon the
beginning of the fourth Century, which is about thirteen hundred years since.
And those superstitious persons that still make use of this anointing the Sick
with Oil, as the Elders in the Primitive times did, unless they could in the
like miraculous manner perform the ting signified by it, and restore them to
Health, and obtain the Remission of their Sins, without the use of other means,
as they did, do but show their folly, and render themselves obnoxious to
Ridicule and Derision amongst People of Understanding, that have not renounced
their Senses, and imprudently yielded themselves up to fraudulent persons
Impositions, and captivated their Belief to the Conduct of Impostors and
Deceivers, which are forced to pretend to these, and such like wonderful
performances, to bear up their Reputation amongst those they have so far
deluded, as in part to satisfy their Ambition and Covetousness by making
Merchandise of them, as the Apostle foretold of them, 2 Pet. 2.3. And through
Covetousness shall they with feigned words make Merchandise of you, (but let
them read the remaining part of the Verse, and see how fast Judgment and
Damnation are coming upon them for it) whose Judgment now of a long time
lingers not, and their Damnation slumbers not. And these are the evil Men, that
by grossly abusing their power in the Church, have made the People unwilling to
allow the Reformed Churches so much power as Christ has given them, and will
scarce be induced to believe that they ought, or that it is to any purpose for
them, if their Consciences are loaded and disquieted through any grievous
Crimes they have been guilty of, to make confession of them to their Pastors
and Teachers, and ask their Advice, and desire them to put them in the best and
most effectual method toward the getting of their Grief removed, and their
sins pardoned, and that they would help and assist them, by bestowing their
servent Prayers upon them, toward the doing of it, although the Apostle
expressly commands us to confess our Faults one to another, and pray for one
another that we may be healed, Jam. 5.16. and them gives an encouraging reason
drawn from the powerful effect of Prayer; The effectual fervent prayer of a
righteous Man avails much. And if we are obliged to confess our faults one to
another, and pray one for another toward the healing of them, much rather to
the Minister, that he may pray for us toward the healing of our Offenses. Nor
does the true and faithful Minister's power end here. in hearing the
Confessions of his people, and praying for them; but it extends further, and
authorizes him, when he finds the Offender has performed those acts of
Repentance, which God's Holy Word requires, to apply the merciful Promises of
God to repenting Sinners, in the forgiveness of their sins, unto him, and
declare his Crimes pardoned, through the great Mercies of God, and the Merits
of his dear Son Jesus Christ, and so reconcile him to God, as having received
from him the Ministry of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.18. And all things are of
God, who has reconcited us to himself by Jesus Christ, and has given to us the
Ministry of Reconciliation.

Thirdly, Some of you think them burdensome, and that their allowance is too
great, and above their Deserts; and hereupon argue that Tithes are not of
Divine Institution, and that you are no where commanded to pay them in the New
Testament. But in what part of the same Testament are you forbidden to pay
them? And although they are not ordained in express words in the Gospel by
Christ; yet he has ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of
it, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. Do ye not know that they which minister about holy things,
live of the things of the Temple? And they which wait at the Altar, are
partakers with the Altar. Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach
the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. And can you find out any better way of
raising wherewithal they may live upon, than by giving of them Tithes? And this
I may say for the Lawfulness and Authority of them, that our Savior told the
Scribes and Pharisees that they ought to pay them; which I suppose he would not
have done, if he had intended to abolish them, and that they should not have
been paid under the Gospel, Matt. 23.23. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees,
Hypocrites; for ye pay Tithe of Mint, and Anise and Cummin, and have omitted
the weightier matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith; these ought you
to have done, and not to leave the other undone. And here observe that this Woe
is not denounced against them, because of their exactness in paying Tithes,
even to the very Herbs; but because of their Hypocrisy, in not being as exact
in things of greater concern, as making right Judgment in deciding of
Controversies, showing Mercy, and relieving the oppressed, and being as
faithsful in the performance of their Promises, as they were in paying of
Tithes, both which ought to have been done with the like exactness. And this
may serve to admonish us, as well as let us know that our Savior allowed of
paying Tithes in his time, against the folly and error of such Hypocrites, as
will be very exact and careful in things of less moment, and remiss and
careless, and apt to pass over those things that are of far greater concern.
And the reason of the Apostle's not requiring Tithes, may be this, because they
would not hinder the progress of the Gospel, by giving them the least occasion
of thinking they preached it more for their own profit and advantage, than for
their Good: And hereupon the Apostle says, he wrought with his own hands that
he might not be chargeable to any of them; not but that he had power to forbear
working, and live by preaching the Gospel, as well as others; but he did not
use this power, but rather suffered all things, lest he should make his
Doctrine the less esteemed, and hinder the Gospel of Christ, 1 Cor. 19.12. If
others be Partakers of this power over you, are not we rather? Novertheless, we
have not used this power, but suffer all things, lest we should hinder the
Gospel of Christ. But if the Ministers of our Times were obliged to do the
like, we should soon have but mean preaching, and a very ignorant and
contemptible Ministry: and instead of answering the Controversies and
Objections of our learned Adversaries with our Tongues or Pens, we must answer
them with our Swords, which I think will hardly be allowed to be the true
Evangelical, or Gospel-way of answering of them. For it pleased God to furnish
the Apostles with extraordinary means to preach and declare his Will; so that
if they were disposed to supply their Necessities by any servile Occupation (as
St. Paul did by Tent making. Act 18.3.) it could not any ways disinable them
for teaching and instructing the People; for what they were to speak and teach
was infused into them, without any pains or study of theirs, in that very hour,
in which they were to speak it, Matt. 10.19. But when they deliever you up,
take no thought how or what ye shall speak; for it shall be given in that same
hour what ye shall speak. But God has thought fit to let ordinary means take
place in these latter Ages, and Men must or ought at least, by continual study
and industry to qualify themselves for the Work of the Ministry; and must be
supported of those they instruct, in the doing of it, and this they ought to do
freely, and not to count it a great thing, but most reasonable, that they
should reap their carnal things, which sow to them spiritual things, 1 Cor.
9.11. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we
shall reap your carnal things?

Fourthly, If they inveigh sharply against sin, and a little terrify you with
the forethoughts of Hell and Damnation, you are ready to exclaim against the
severity of their Doctrine, and to say, It Is the ready way to preach you to
Desperation; but this is your misunderstanding of them, they intend not to
preach you to desperation in that sense you take the Word in, that is, so as to
make you despair of attaining Heaven, but only to make you despair of attaining
of it in the condition many of you are now in, (which sort of Desperation may
be a means of putting you into the way of Salvation) for to what purpose is it
for you to hope to go to Heaven, whilst you continue in those sins you are told
from God's Word will keep you thence? It Is impossible for you that are
Drunkards, Thieves, Swearers, and Adulterers, and are in the way to everlasting
Destruction, without a speedy Reformation and Amendment to ^^he^ it the Kingdom
of Heaven; unless you can get the Decrees of the Almighty revoked, and make the
Apostle a Liar, for he expressly says you shall not, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Know ye not
that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived;
neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Essominate, nor Abusers
of themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor
Extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God. And again, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.
having summed up the Works of the Flesh, he says, of the which I tell you
before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things,
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Read the Verses, and see what the Works
of the Flesh are, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasiviousness, Idolatry,
Witchcrast, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies,
Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like; and know assuredly,
that if you are guilty of any of them, you must forthwith ask pardon of God for
it, and forsake them, otherwise they will keep you from the Seat of the
Blessed. Nor is it enough for a Man to abstain from these grosser Sins toward
the escaping of everlasting misery, but he must abstain from all sins, as much
as is possible, though never so small; for the least sin is in it self
damnable: and therefore the Apostle commands us to abstain from all appearance
of evil, 1 These. 5.22. And if your Ministers should pass this lightly over, and
preach unto you smooth things; toplease and delight your Fancies, and not rough
and severe things to disturb and awaken your Conseiences, and disquiet you in
the enjoyment of your seemingly pleasant sins, they would do the Work of the
Lord deceitfully, and ruin you, and pull down a Curse upon themselves, and
your Blood would be required at their hands as God tells the Prophet Ezlekiel,
that as the Blood, that was lost in the Land by the Sword, through the neglect
of the temporal Watchman, in not warning the people of their Enemies coming,
should be required at his hands, so he would require the Blood of those that
perished in their Iniquity, through his neglect in warning of them at his
hands, whom he had made a spiritual Watchman. So thou, O Son of Man, I have set
thee a Watchman unto the House of Israel; therefore thou shall hear the Word at
my Mouth, and warn them from me. When I say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou
shall surely die; if thou do not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that
wicked man shall die in his Iniquity; but his Blood will I requie at thine
hand. Nevertheless if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from it; if he do
not turn from his way, he shall die in his iniquity; but thou have delivered
thy Soul. Ezekiel. 33.7, 8, 9. So you see the great necessity that lies upon them
of using terrifying Discourses to you, both in reference to you and themselves;
if you would but once renounce your affections to Sin, and endeavor to arrive
to some perfection of Holiness in the fear of God, no doubt, they would soon
turn the course of their Preaching, and instead of talking of Hell and
everlasting Burnings, speak to you of nothing but the Gracious Promises that
are made to you, and giving you the best Description, that, according to their
most deliberate Conceptions of it, they could, of Heaven, and the everlasting
Joys thereof: which are so great, that there are no earthly Joys, although they
should much exceed that of the Israelites, at the Coronation of their Peaceable
King, which, (as, (...) the original words of the sorneth Verse of the first
Chapter of the first Book of the Kings declare) was so great, that the very
Earth rent with the sound that they made in expressing of it, can be compared
to them. But I doubt you will scarce be so kind to your selves and them, as
immediately to forsake your Sins, that they may do this; you will rather continue
in them, and presume upon the Mercies of God for pardon; but the Mercies of God
are conditional, and you have no right to them, unless you perform the
Condition. The wicked must forsake his way and the unrighteous Man his
thoughts, and return unto the Lord, if he will have mercy and pardon:
ontherwise he cannot have it; for Christ came not into the World to maintain
people in sin, but upon their Faith and Repentance to forgive them their Sins;
this is the only way in which he will be a Savior unto you, as you may learn
from hes own Words, Luke the 7th. Chapter, at the last Verse. This you will say
you know very well, and that you must part with your sins, or lose Heaven; but
you vainly think it is time enough yet, and so defer it from Day to Day, from
Week to Week, and form Year to Year, 'till you are habituated to wickedness,
and so make it the more difficult to cast it off; and what if by deferring it
thus from time to time, you should be suddenly, as many are, taken out of the
World, where are you then? I shall not speak my thoughts, but leave you to
judge what your place and your Portion must be for ever; very miserable, I fear.

For I must tell you, it is a great presumption, and very dangerous for any one
to think of doing that in time to come, which God bids him do presently; it is
as if he knew better when it were to be done than God: And if God says, To day
if you will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts; and tells you, That this is
the day in which you should begin to seek after Salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. Behold
now is the accepted time, behold, now is the day of Salvation; How dare you
defer seeking after it 'till to Morrow, much less for a longer time, as
hereafter, as you call it? Is to this the ready way to provoke God to anger,
and to make him Swear in his Wrath, as he did to (...) stubborn Israelites,
Psalm the 95th. at the last Verse, That you shall not enter into his Rest? And
then you are undone to all Eternity. For, although God's Mercies are great, yet
we must not carelessly and wilfully forget his Commands, and rely so much upon
his Mercy, as to forget his Justice: for as he is merciful, so he is just; and
a Man may run on in Wickedness so long till he becomes merciless, and then
God's Justice will take hold on him, and destroy him, Jer. 13.14. And I Will dash
them one against another, even the Fathers and the Sons together, says the
Lord, I will not pity, nor spare, nor have mercy, but destroy them: And if you
will prevent the passing of this dreadful Sentence upon you, now is the time.
Seek ye the Lord whilst he may be found, call ye upon him whilst he is nigh.
Consider you have a whole Eternity to labor for, and you have, many of you,
lost a great deal of time already; therefore make the better use of what is to
come, it may be shorter than you are aware of. Ask Forgiveness forthwith, under
all the Circumstances of Humility, on your bended knees, for all the Sins you
have hitherto been shamefully guilty of, (for those Knees, which are now too
strong to ply in God's Service, will be too weak one day to stand in his
Presence) and keep a strict Account of all your Thoughts, Words, and Actions
for the time to come, and every Night, before you compose your selves to sleep,
bestow a little time in considering how you have spent the day, and see what
evil you have committed, and what good you have omitted, that you may certainly
and sincerely crave Forgiveness for it; which is the properest and most likely
method for getting into a Habit of Virtue and Goodness, especially if you are
careful to return Thanks to God in the Morning for preserving of you from the
perils of the Night, and earnestly desire that his Favor and Blessing may
attend you throughout the whole Day, and that he would prevent your evil
Actions, and bring your good ones to perfection: And not adventure to lie down
in the Sins not only of that Day, but of many Years, as too many careless
People do, it is much to be feared, lest you should sleep the sleep of Death,
spoken of in Psalm 13.3. and the Wrath of God should seize upon you, and cast
you into the dismal place of eternal misery: But immediately fix your
Resolutions for the glorious Kingdom of everlasting Happiness, and let Piety be
your continual practice, which is the certain way of attaining of it.

Cease to do evil, learn to do well, and be not weary of it, but be diligent
Followers of them that through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises; and in
due season you shall reap your Reward, and be owned by Christ, when he comes in
the Glory of the Father, with the Holy Angels, and appears to those that look
for him the second time without sin, unto Salvation.

FINIS.

