A REPLY By T. W. Citizen of Chester, To a VINDICATION of Mr. M. H's Brief
Enquiry into the true Nature of Schism, from the Exceptions of T. W. etc. By a
Person who conceals his Name.
THE Prince of Peace Blessed for ever, laid this Command upon his Disciples,
Mark 9. v. 50. Have Peace one with another; and that this Command might have
the deeper impression in their minds, he left it as his Legacy, Joh. 14 v. 27.
Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you; how numerous soever they
might in all Succeeding Ages come to be, this was to be the Badge and Character
by which his Disciples were to be known to the world, and to one another: now
whosoever he b^ that in any Case violates this Command, and sets at naught this
Legacy, is no longer a Disciple of the Holy Jesus the Prince of Peace, unless
he repent and return.

Yet notwithstanding all this, there has scarce any Age since the Church of
Christ had a being, been free from some or other, who have pretended to be the
Disciples of Christ in an extraordinary manner, and yet have had no regard to
this holy Command, nor any value or esteem for this Sacred Legacy.

For they are most notoriously Guilty of breaking this Law, and contemning this
Legacy, who revile and oppose that Government of the Church which was
instituted by our Blessed Savior; founded in his Apostles, and conveyed by
them to their Successors, and so has continued in a right Succession to this
present time; of this sort our Dissenters in England are, and some or ot^^r of
them, are frequently putting out Pamphlets wherein they endeavor to acquit
themselves of this great Crime by Justifying their Separation from the
Government of the Church.

To this purpose Mr. M. H -- ry Printed a Pamphlet the last year, which he
called, a brief Enquiry into the true Nature of Schism; there was not much more
of the Nature of Schism, than of the Philosophers Stone in it; however the not
Answering it gave it the more Credit, and swelled his Disciples with Triumph,
so as some of them boasted in my hearing, that it could not be answered by any
Clergyman; this made me uneasy, and considering how unsuitable it was to any
Clergyman to concern himself with it, and withal considering, that this might
be an Argument to proselite the weak and more unstable people. I under took it
in hopes that the Catholic truths laid down (tho by so mean and weak a hand)
might put a stop to their boasting, and it had these effects: First, few
believed but that it was done by some Clergyman who prevailed with me, to
print it in my name. And secondly, that Mr. M H -- ry for all the fullness of
Gifts his Disciples boasted to be in him, thought as I may reasonably (from his
calling in aid) suppose it was above his Talent to meddle with.

Now lest the neglect of a Reply should be fatal to them, and stagger their
blind Proselytes in Chester, and parts adjacent; they sought and found out a
man of great Size to attack me, a chosen Vessel, one of the First rate, who has
fired all his Guns at me, and shot a great deal of Venom, and little else,
which I hope in this following Paper shall make to appear.

This great man conceals his Name, and perhaps not without good reason. In the
front of his Book he tells us, That man must be a great stranger in England,
who knows not what unhappy Fl^mes have been kindled among us about matters of
Church Government and W^rship; and he must be as great an Enemy that would not
contribute his utmost to the extinguishing of them; a great deal has been writ
on both (...), to convince the world where the fault of our Division lies.

That the Government of the Church by Episcopacy was of Apostolic Institution
and Ordination is evident, (...) Government of the Church by Epi^copacy is of
^ivine Institution.
for that Timothy was made Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus of Crete by Apostolical
Ordination and Institution, is very clear in St. Paul's Epistles to them both.
That the seven Ci^ies in Asia which received the Christian Faith, had each City
a Bishop, in e^ident by the Title St. John gives an his Letters to them,
contained in the Second and Third Chapters in the Revelations.

And that after the Apostles time, wherever the Christian Faith was received in
the early Ages of Christianity, this Government was set over them, and that
then all Christians owned and submitted to this Government, is sufficiently
proved by the concurrent Testimonies of all the Fathers in those Primitive
times, and from those times this Government received no interruption, nor was
at any time controverted or questioned, except by Aerius, Ischyras, and one or
two more, (who were condemned for Schismatics) till the last Age, and then by
this sort of Men, by setting up a new mistaken Notion of Parochial and
Congregational Episcopacy with Lay Elders, to share in the Government of the
Church, never heard of before.

To Church Government disputed, he adds Worship, (by which I suppose he means
the Worship of God) which chiefly consists, of the unfeigned belief of the
Articles of Faith delivered by the Apostles; the Offering up Prayers,
Intercessions, The Worship of God in the Church of England, as ^ure as in any
other Church whatsoever.
Thanksgiving and Praises unto God Almighty, according to his Will declared in
the Holy Scripture; presented in the name of his Son, Christ Jesus, with all
Reveence and Humility and Gestures expressing the same, the word of God read
and duly and truly preached; the holy Sacraments Babtism and the Eucharist
rightly and duly administered.

Now all this is done with as much Reverence and ^ravity, Simplicity and Gospel
purity in the Church of England as in any Church whatsoever; owned to be so,
and highly honored and esteemed for it, among all the Reformed Churches, except
those men of Violence, your Brethren of the Kirk of Scotland, with whom we have
nothing to do, only to pray for them.

They of Rome indeed, Dissenters kindled, the flames of Division.
were the only men who first opposed the reformed Worship of our Church;
purified and cleansed from their Innovations and Corruptions as it stands
established both by Canon and Statute Laws; and these Dissenters have pursued
Their Game, and in this made themselves Their Partners by continuing and
increasing those Flames to this day, not without hopes to complete what the
Papist so much endeavored, and still with these men earnestly desire, viz. the
overturning and suppressing of this reformed Worship. So the Flames were
kindled by the Papists first, and then by these men, by their Disputing and
Arraigning the Established Worship.

The Church Government and Worship being thus stated, it easily appears, that
the Dissenters in England are they who kindled the unhappy flames (this Gent.
talks of) among us. Now let us see how they may ^e extinguished, where the
fault lies? and who are the Enemies that will not contribute their utmost to
quench them?

Men who are not mad, will go far for Water to quench those Flame; which else
would destroy their dwellings, They will not contribute to quench them.
but these men need go no farther but do their duty and the flames are out. To
disobey the Orders of our Governors, is to transgress a plain Law of God. If
these men have any thing imposed on them by our Governors that is sinful let
them show it, and their Plea must be allowed, but they are forced to confess
the Terms of Obedience imposed, are but indifferent things, mere trifles; Now
for a man to disobey his Governors and have no other plea but this, it is too
mean to excuse him from the transgression of a known Law. Obey them that have
the Rule over you is the command of the holy Apostle. Heb. 13.17.
Nor can indiffernt things, or what they acknowledge, mere trifles, be a
pretense sufficient to bind the Conscience, against an express Law of God, for
as if the blessed Apostle had foreseen these men's Plea; he Commands Obedience
to our Governors for Conscience sake, Romans 13.5. I hope by what is said, it
will be allowed by all impartial men, and sound Christians, that I may conclude
without breach of Charity, that the Dissenters in England, are they who kindle
the unhappy Flames about Church Government and Worship, and that they are the
great Enemies that will not contribute the least (not so much as do their Duty)
to quench them; and that (notwithstanding all the Writing he talks of) the
fault of all our Divisions lies at their door.

He goes on; The word Schism has been tossed like a Tennis-ball, from one side
to another, till by such motion those violent heats have been caused that have
much endangered both our Church and State.

By this Rhetoric I suppose is meant the Opposition and Disputes made by these
men against the established Church of England; that by these means, these men
not only endangered, but for some years involved both Church and State in Ruin
and Desolation; had I brought no arguments, yet by sad experience is
sufficiently proved.

He says, Great endeavors have been used to fasten the Guilt upon such as
impose unnecessary and suspected Terms of Communion, and it has been is fur^^ly
retorted upon those who comply not with those Terms.

Here the Terms of Communion are Unnecessary and Suspected (only;) but who are
to ^e Judges of what things are necessary, or what Unnecessary, they that bear
Rule over us, or they that owe Subjection? Government always implies
Subjection; and how can bare suspicion discharge a man from the dury of
Obedience? This is certain, that if a Father command his Son to do something
which is in it self not Unlawful, and if the Son tell his Father it is
Unnecessary, and that he Suspects it to be so, and if only for that Reason will
not obey, that Son is a Transgressor against the fifth Commandment; and its as
certain that this is truly applicable to these men; all their Expositers
affirm, that Obedience to their lawful Rulers and Pastors, is required by that
Commandment. But because the whole Controversy which these Dissenters, have
against our Church mainly depends on these two perticulars mentioned by this
Gent. viz. Church Government and Worship, it will be very necessary to lay down
some irrefragable Instances to prove what was the Practice of the Church, in
respect of its Government in the times next after the Apostles; Episcopacy the
Government of the Church in the times next after the Apostles.
and this I do because by referring thereto, I shall answer many passages which
follow in this Gentleman's Book.

I begin with the Canon of the Apostles, which I find thus Translated by a
person of great worth, both for Learning and Veracity: Let not the Presbyters
or Deacons do any thing without the Consent of the Bishop, for he has the
people of the Lord entrusted to him, and there shall one day be required of him
an account of their Souls. Here the Bishop has the Power of Governing the
Presbyters and Deacons. Of what Authority these Canons are, Justellus has made
evident, in his account of the Code of the Universal Church.

Clemens Romanus who was an Adjutor of the Apostles, and as Linus Succeeden St.
Peter, and Cletus Lanus, so he Succeeded Cletus in the Bishopric of Rome, where
all others in Holy Orders were called Presbyters, except Deacons only; who
speaking of the Apostles in his Ep. ad Corinth. p. 57. says, That they
foreseeing that there would be Contentions and Emulations about the Name or
Dignity of Bishop, or Episcopacy, they set down a List or continuation of
Successors, that when any dyed, such a certain person should Succeed him.

Ignatius Bishop of Antioch and Martyr, who saw Jesus and lived in the Apostles
age, whose Authority many of later times, Enemies to Episcopacy, have opposed
yet never could suppress the plainness of it. In his Epistle to the Smyrneans,
he says, But avoid Divisions as the beginning of evils, and be all of you
observant of the Bishop, as Jesus Christ was observant of the Father; and
observe the Presbyters as the Apostles; and reverence the Deacons as the
Command of God. Let no man presume to do any thing in the Church without the
Bishop. And let that Eucharist only be accounted firm, which is either
performed by the Bishop himself, or by his License. And a little further; He
who honoreth the Bishop honoreth God; but he who does any thing without the
Bishop's approbation, performs a Service to Satan, etc.

In his Epistle to the Ephesians: Therefore (pursuant to something before) it
becomes you every way to glorify Jesus Christ who glorifies you, that being
perfected and knit up in the same Subjection, and being of one mind, and of one
judgment, you may all speak the same things, and being Subject to the Bishop,
(which Onesimus then was) (...) Presbyters, may be Sanctified in all things.
Again in the same Epistle, As Jesus Christ (...) who is our into uparable life
did follow the judgment of the Father; and the Bishops who are designed to the
ends of the Earth, follow the judgment of Jesus Christ; therefore it is a
comely thing for you to concur in the ^^^^ment of the Bishop, as also you do;
for your Presbyters most worthy of Praise and of God, is so adapted to the
Bishop, as strings are fitted to the ^^rp, insomuch that Jesus Christ is
Celebrated through your unanimity and agreement in Love. And in the same Ep.
Therefore let us endeavor to be in subjection to the Bishops, that we may be
Gods Subjects.

In his Epistle to the (...); For I was accounted worthy to see Dam^s your
Divite ^^^^op and the worthy Presbyters Bassu^ and Apollia^s, and S^ti^n the
Deacon, my Fellow Servants, whom I would enjoy, because (...) subject to the
Bishop as to the Grace of God, and to the Presbyters as to the Law of Jesus
Christ. A little further he says; For some in ^eed there are, who own the
Bishop in name, but do all things without him: such men appear to me, to ^e men
of no good Conference, because they hold Meetings not established by
Commandment, etc.

I could heap up many more Instances, but that would be tedious; I will
therefore conclude with the Council of I aodicea, Can. 55. which I find by an
eminent Doctor in our Church, thus Translated. The Presbyters must do nothing
without the Consent of the Bishop.

That the Authority I have brought to prove, that the ancient Government of the
Christian Church was by Bishops and (that it was an Order Superior and had
power of Jurisdiction over the Presbyters and Deacons) should be undeniably and
firmly received and Submitted to, by all Christians, I offer these Reasons.

1 First, It was this same Authority which gathered all the writings of the
Evangelists and Apostles, and declared them to be the word of God, the dictates
of the Holy Ghost, and all Christians have so received them and do hold them to
be Canonical and use them and reverence them as such to this very day.

2 It was by the same Authority, that the first day of the week was Declared to
be the Lords Day (there being no Precept Commanding it in Scripture) and all
Christians have yielded Obedience to it, and do set apart that Day to Celebrate
the Worship of God in a most Solemn manner as if Commanded by Holy Scripture.

3 And lastly, this Authority of the Ancient Fathers and first General
Councils, which affirm the Government of the Church to be Episcopacy, is one
great means by which the Pious and Learned Divines of our Church (if this Gent.
will give me leave to call 'em so) have clearly evinced and discoverd the
Innovations and Corruptions imposed by the Church of Rome on all in her
Communion, to be fictitious and no way agreeing with the practice of the
Primitive Church.

Now if upon the Authority of the Primitive Fathers and Councils, Obedience was
universally given to acknowledge and receive the New Testament as the Word of
God; and the Lords day celebrated as if commanded by Divine Precept, which is
infallibly true; Is it reasonable now, to dispute their Writings and Decrees,
their practice and usage, concerning the nature of the Government of the
Church, which they were fully assured was established by the Apostles
themselves?

And now I return to wait upon this unknown Gentleman. In his 2. p. he says,
Some have fancied the severe Execution of Penal Laws, by Fines, Imprisonment,
Exile, etc. would have put an end to that Separation, etc. but Experience has
convinced them of a quite contrary effect.

This Gent. will carry all before him if credited; I could certainly procure a
Certificate under some hundreds of Hands of very Honest and Good men in
Chester, that the Penal Laws when executed there, had brought all the
Presbyterians, except a very small inconsiderable number to Conformity; ay, and
one of the oldest and stoutest of them, acknowledged to the Rector of the
Parish he lived in, that he, viz. the Rector had so thoroughly satisfied him,
that he did not partake at the Eucharist out of fear of the Law, but for the
satisfaction of his Conscience, and that he would continue to do so; but no
sooner came the Indulgence out, but this old Puritan, and pretended Convert,
set the Church at defiance, and with many more of that Tribe returned to their
Separation; and thus it was said to be in most part of England; it is certain,
that had not that Indulgence come out in King Charles the Second's time, which
was procured by the Duke of York for some special Service designed by him for
the Romish Church, there had been but a few in Conventicles, except Anabaptists
and Quakers, who are incorri^a^le and above all others hardened, almost beyond
hope; and yet this Gent. so confidently affirms, that the Penal I a^s by
experience had a quite contrary Espect, which is much more bold than true. In
his 2 page he says further, Others have pers^aded themselves when ever such
enforcements were laid ^^^e, the controverted Ceremonies would of course fall
into Contempt, for being (by acknowledgment) things purely indifferent, etc.
without any native worth or strength, they cannot be rationally supposed to
stand any longer than they had those external props to bear them up; And er^in
they have not been altogether disapo^nted, for they hear of five or six of the
Clergy, and those not of the me ^^est sort, that have ch^sen to quit their
preserments (...) ease of their Consciences, etc.

To he (...) (he says) some had, I shall again oppose matter of Fact; the (...)
times of ^^^rpa son which (...) ^ed more than Twelve years, all which (...)
^af^rc^^^a^s were laid and, and the external props were (...); and yet even
^^en, the far greater (...) of the best people (...) persevere in their
Affection and Communion with the Church of (...), man are the great care taken
by the then Rulers; the (...) Parliament (as then called) required, that no
person should have a (...) Book found in Custody, upon pain of being Indicted
and F^^^d at the pleasure of the then Judges, who were their implacable Enemies
(here the Enforcements were thought necessary on the other fide) and the vast
numbers of these who retained Communion with the Church, (notwithstanding the
Enforcements to the contrary) appeared with hearts full of Joy and Gratitude
upon the Rest^^ration.

As for the Five or Six of the Cler^^, who he says are gone from us and are
none of the meanist, I know not who he means; had they been Eminent men we
should have heard of 'em; this is trifling, or I can tell him of Dr. Dillingh^m
Vice Chancellor, Dr. Connant Rector of Exeter College, Vice Chancellor and
Regis Protessor of Divinity, and many more (tho he perhaps is ashamed to name
our Diserters) of the other party, who Conformed notwithstanding the Indulgence.

In p. 3. he says, That since neither Disputing nor Penal Laws have hitherto
brought English Protestants to an exact Uniformity, it is worth every honest
man's Enquiry how under these different Modes of Worship, all men may be induced
to live quiet and peaceable lives, etc.

The Apostles Rule is, 1 Cor. 1 10. Now I beseech you Brethren, in the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, that (...) all speak the same things, and that there be
no Divisions among you: different M^des of Worship are here forbidden, and an
exact Uniformity in the Church of Corinth required, and I hope that this Gent.
will not deny that this Rule is in force in the Church of (...) lan^; and if
this Gent. would press this Doctrine, he needs not puzzle men with any farther
En^^^ry how they may be induced to live quiet and peaceable lives. And I
presume here to tell him, that against such who will not live quiet and
peaceable lives, there are Penal Laws still in force. And this answers his next
Paragraph, where he gives his Brother Mr. H -- ry high Encomiums for his very
modest and ingenious attempt, in his Book of the Nature of Schism,
notwithstanding which, it does appear that the Wars and Fightings irretated by
them against the Church proceed from their Lusts, which would be at an end,
where they entirely subject to Reason and Virtue, as the Gospel requires.

In p. 4. this Gent. would induce us to believe, that he is well skilled in
some strange Art, for he says, that I am a furious Zealot and a Debauchee, and
that he knows by the Complexion of my Book. This Gent. may take the Liberty to
censure me for a furious Zealot, because I have in my former paper affirmed the
Dissenters in England to be Schismatics; I do with the poor Publican cry, God
be merciful to me a Sinner; but there is not an jota in that paper which in the
least tends to Debauchery. In p. 5. he is very angry that I give the Titles of
Pious and Learned to our Episcopal Clergy, etc. and he says, that I call the
Dissenters Fools and Schismaties, and is at a great Expense of Rhetoric upon me
for these.

I cannot mention our Episcopal Clergy without Reverence; they are the Stewards
of the manifold Mysteries of God, and Ministers of Reconciliation; and tho my
calling them by those Titles contributes not a mite to their worth, yet it was
my duty to give the Titles due to them, especially in a paper I intended to
Pu^lish. I said (indeed) the Folly and Schism of our Dissenters has been
clearly evinced, etc. It is an ordinary way in speaking, to join the word Folly
with a Crime, and so by Folly and Schism I intended no more than the Folly of
Schism, one act of Folly denominates not a Fool; but if this Gent. will
misconstrue and pervert my Words, and thereby proclaim himself and his fellow
Dissenters Fools as well as Schismatics it is out of my Power to help; indeed
these are not worth a man's notice, only to show, that this Gentleman's temper is
too peevish for the Gospel, who at such little things so causlessly takes an
occasion to cavil.

The next thing he quarrels at, is in p. 6. That I muster against them the great
names of Hooker, Bramhal, Sanderson, and diverse others, and wonders why
Parker, Dryden, and L'Strange with their Learned and Elaborate Writings should
not come in for a share of honor with them.

Sir, Hooker and the others I named; for Piety and Learning are honored all the
world over, and your detraction and all the Art you have, cannot lessen 'em.
But Sr. as for Parker, Dryden, and L'Strange, who you named to share with them
in that Honor, there can be no reason; They stand fairest for your Calendar; I
had been a Criminal should I have robbed you of 'em, for they joined hands with
you in your Addresses to King James the 2d. to Congratulate and Applaud his
Excellent Government, in granting Liberty of Conscience; and they readily
consented with you to the taking often the Penal Laws and Test, and in allowing
the Dispensing Power.

Here I think a proper place to answer what you say, in the beginning of your
6. p. where you (...) france some words of mine, and say, They have been (...)
Terms, to do the ^^rk of a common ^oe, in ruining those that were more early
aw^^e of the adva^ces of Popish Designs then some of their Neighbors, etc.

Sr. by this word Neighbors. I apprehend (and that truly) that you mean they of
the Church of England, Why! they were the men who in time of extremity and
danger, opposed the advances of Popery, and with Si^e^^i^y and Courage stood in
the Gap; and this they did in two respects, First by resusing to take off the
Penal Laws and the Test, and disowning the Dispensing Power. The Penal Laws,
which by God's good Providence, were raised as a Fence to preserve us from
Popery being about to be laid wast, and Liberty of Conscience without exception
already granted, (an Witness your Addresses.
Artifice by which most if not all your Party were gulled ^^d cheated into a
compliance with the times) The Archbishop of C^^terbury, with six more
Bishops, induced from a deep sense they had of a Design then visible, to bring
in Popery, from a holy Zeal, and a deep sense they had of their Duty, to
preserve the Church from the sad effects of that Design, presented their
Petition to the King, declaring their readiness to have tender Consciences
considered, so it might be done in a Parliamentary way; but for their
Noncompliance with the Dispenceing power, and those other things, wherein you
so readily complied, by which you very much promoted the advances of Popery;
they were all made Prisoners in the Tower, which suffering of theirs, God
blessed with a very happy event. And Secondly they of the Church of England put
a stop to the advances of Potery, by their Industrious and Learned Writings
against Papists; a Popish Pamphlet from the Savoy or Wild-house, in those days
could scarce be dry, ^^t some or other Learned Divine of our Church, stopped its
Carrier with such answers as silenced and shamed them; strengthened the weak
and stag^e^u^^, recalled many, and gave joy and satisfaction to all the Members
of the Church in ^en^^al.

My Author says in p. 6. But if we thought sit to imitate his P^de^^^y,
(meaning my ^^ming Hooker, etc.) we could t^ll him of Reynals, C^itwright,
^^^ndel, Ames, Daille, Owen, Baxter, etc. (ay, and John a Leyd^n too)

This Gent. condemns me of Pedentry, yet his Gravity imitates me in the next
breath even in that. The first he names, is Reynalds, he (alas) was s^^sible
of their Schism, shook^^ ands with 'em and dyed an eminent member of our
Church. Cartwright was contemporary with Mr. Hooker, and let all Sober minded
men Judge if the Ecclesiastical Polity Writ by Mr. Hooker, has not out-weighed
by far, not only Cartwright, but all other Dissenters who have written any
thing of the Rites and Ceremonies and Government of the Church; So has Dr.
Hammond, Dr. Stillingfleet and many others against Owen, Baxter and the rest of
that Gang. I must beg his pardon that I can have no good opinion of Owen and
Baxter.
such who have spent their time and study to break the Order, Peace and Unity
of the Church.

His first Paragraph contains the whole Controversy; I therefore thought it
necessary to give that a full answer: So I have endeavored to all his
reflections that followed hitherto, but all he says to the remainder of my
Preface, is either such mere Droll or Cavil and so foreign to the Controversy,
that it is not worth paper to answer: I therefore now consider what he says to
my Answer.

In his 9. pa. He says, I blame Mr H -- ry for not choosing the true Standard
whereby to disco^^er Schism; He says Mr. H -- ry chose (...) other but the
Sacred Scripture, which ^^ing the great Law for the Government of men, and must
certa ^^^be the truest Touch stone of Sin and Duty, etc. He says further; this
is a hopeful beginning of Controversy to decline the Sufficiency and Propriety
of Scripture as the Standard of good or evil. But will this man assign a
better? Yes (the IXth Article of the Apostles Creed, I Believe the Holy
Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints) etc. and concludes, a happy Omen,
when the first Paragraph contains a plain affront both to Scripture and common
Sense.

Sr. the holy Scriptures is the great Law for the Government of men, and is
certainly the truest Touch stone of Sin and Duty. But Sr. whoever he be,
Scripture ought not to be Interpreted contrary to an Article of Faith.
that expounds H^^y Scripture in contradiction or not consonant to an Article
of Faith, his exposition cannot be true, and I am assured so, by that Article
of Faith it contradicts or agrees not with. As for example; the Socinians have
with so much cunning and plausibility expounded even those texts of Scripture
which are express for the Divinity of our Blessed Savior, in favor of their
Heresy, that they have staggar'd and perverted many persons of considerable
understanding; but when the Article of Faith is considered, viz. And I Believe
in one Lord Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of God and God of God, very God
of very God, being of one Substance with the Father, etc. every Christian is
infalliably assured that the Exposition of the Sacred Scripture made by the
S^inians are false, because it is in contradiction to an Article of Faith. So
when I saw Mr. H -- ry had expounded the holy Apostl's Precept I beseech you
Brethren etc. 1 Cor. 1.10. that there be no Divisions among you etc. and other
Texts of Scripture, in favor of your Separat Communion to acquit that from the
guilt of Schism, I was firmly assured that his Expositions were false, because
they clash'd and agreed not with that IXth Article of Faith I Believe the Haly
Catholic Church the Communion of Saints; a Separate Communion being altogether
inconsistent with that Article of Faith: I therefore recomended that Article of
Faith as a better and more easy way for him to find out the true nature of
Schism, than his so unskilful expounding Scripture, which the Apostle says 2
Pet. 1 20 is not of any Pri^a^e Interpretation. Sr. I know not who, nor what
you are, but I must tell you, that to affirm that an Article of Faith is a
plain affront to Scripture is the nearest to the language of an Heretic that I
have met with.

In p. 10 he says, I ^ffer to their Consideration, the Origination or first
Existence of the Catholic Church, and that I said it was before the day of
Pentecost; but he says, how long before that day I tell 'em not, and then he
takes an occasion to let us know that he has read of the Babilonish Captivity.

I did set down the Text, Acts 1.15. The number of the Names together were
about an hundred and twenty, which was sufficient to denote the time, and he
owns that he knows my meaning; but to exercise his abundant wit, he says, here
is a Discovery worthy of its Author; no body can think that I mentioned it as
the Discoverer, but as necessarily previous to what followed. But (he says) had
God no Churche^ then among the Jews? must they be Excommunicated too? for what
cause pray? (and then reproachfully answers) Not for want of Ceremonies, or a
Pontiff I hope. Then he says, the man told us in his Preface, the Angels in
Heaven were the most Glorious Members of the Church. How must we lay these
things together? were the Angels Originated at the day of Pentecost? Had they
their first Existence then? Or did the Members of the Body Exist before the
Body? Let the Citizen, or any other of his Cabal^ solve these Riddles, and he
shall be my great Apollo.

That God had a Church from the beginning of the World, Church not called
Catholic before the day of Pentecost. Psalm. 2.8. Ephesians. 2.14.
that the Angels in Heaven were from their Existence Members of it, being
Created for that end; an^ that ^he Church of the Jews was Gods peculiar Church,
are all infallibly true; but until the Promise was fulfilled. Desire of me,
and I shall give thee the ^^eathen for thine Inheritance, and the utmost parts
of the Earth for thy Possession: Until the middle Wall of the Partition was
broken down (which was not 'til the Church was changed from Judaism to
Christianity) the Title Catholic, was never, nor could properly be attributed
to the Church; now unless this Gent. will show, that the Church was called
Catholic before the Day of Pentecost I mentioned, all these Riddles and
Philosophical questions are of no more worth and value, than his great promise
to make me his great Apollo.

In p. 11. he questions not, that the Apostles and Disciples were the Church
nor the power Christ gave the Apostles to Preach the Gospel to all the World;
and says that I well observe Christ's Commission and Charge, that in every
Natian they that believed might be Baptized and made Members of the Church?
(but says he) how well they have observed their Commission who refuse to admit
of Church Members upon their profession of Faith, unless they will also comply
with some significant Rites of their own, that are alien to Scripture Rules,
etc. and then in his 12 p. he says, its plain from this man's Confession, that
to be a Disciple or Believer, would make a man a Member of the Church in
Apostolical times, etc.

It is true that Faith is the necessary Qualification of a man's admission to
Baptism, and that persons are thereby made visible Members of the Church,
Members of the Church to observe the Peace and Unity in the Church.
but this is but the Initiation or beginning of Christianity; Obedience to
Spiritual Rulers and Governors, being in this always supposed and imp^y'd; to
Faith and Baptism must be added a strict Observation of the Order, Peace and
Unity of that holy Society into which they are admitted by those Qualifications
above mentioned; and this is most strictly enjoined by the Holy Jesus, the
Prince of Peace, and God of Order in the words mentioned in the beginning of
this paper, and diverse other Texts in Scripture. As for calling them Rites and
Ceremonies of their own, that are alien to Scripture Rules, what ever tends to
Order and the Beauty of Uniformity in the Church, is in the Power and Wisdom of
the Apostles Successors, the Bishops, to impose, tho not expressed in
Scripture; there are no express terms in Scripture for Infant Baptism, nor for
Women to partake at the Eucharist, yet allowed and required by the Authority of
the Church, and submitted unto from the Primitive times by all Christians,
except Anabaptists, who deny the former. And this fully answers his following
Paragraph, which he closes with much bitterness and venom against our Clergy,
and serves only to show what Spirit he is of.

In p. 13. he says, But though the Apostles did propagate the Gospel far and
wi^ie, yet that they did actually preach it to all Nations, is a thing we never
beard of before T. W. told us so; and we must have better Evidence before we
believe it.

This is a mere Cavil, but he thinks he has sufficiently showed my nakedness;
The Gospel preaced to all Nations.
I did not use the word Actually: I said that according to our Saviors Command
the Apostles did Preach the Gospel to all Nations; I could tell him out of very
good Authoritys, the vast Countries in the Roman Empire in which St. Paul did
actually preach the Gospel and that St. James did so in the Regions of
Palestine; St. Mark in Alexandria, and the Countries far about it, St. John in
Asia, St. Andrew in Achaja, St Thomas in India and of the other Apostles
Propagating the Gospel in other Countries, ay, and Ordained Bishops and
Presbyters in 'em too; But the Scripture says, There were dweling at Jerusalem
Jews, Acts 2 5.
devout men out of every Nation under Heaven; to these the Apostles preached
the Gosple, so in this respect, what I said is true; I had no great reason to
fear that I had committed an unpardonable Crime; and if upon the Evidence given
in Scripture he will not believe it he is at his liberty.

He goes on; Whither the Seven Churches in Asia had Seven Bishops Presiding
over them, neither more nor less is a thing that no way affects our present
Controversy, nor can any thing be concluded from thence in favor of our English
Prelacy; till the Pawer of these Bishops, the extent of their Diocesses, the
Quality of their under Officers, etc. be proved the same with ours, viz. or
liable to the same exceptions, etc. I understand not this last Sentence, or
liable to the same exceptions, unless he would make the Primitive Church liable
to the same exceptions.

That there were seven Bishops is unquestionable, unless he will not give
Credit to St. John's Testimony; that the extent of their Diocesses may in some
measure be right estimated, it will be necessary to consider, what this Asia
does signify, which Dr. Hammond describes thus: Asia here does not signify
the fourth part in the Division of the World, but in another Notion, known to
Geographers; the Lydian or proconsular Asia, thus the word is used, Acts 19.26.
where St. Paul is said to persuade much People not only at Ephesus, but almost
through all Asia; now in this Asia, as there were many Cities, so there were some
Metropoles, Chief or Mother Cities, to each of which, the lesser adjacent were
subordinate. Of this sort the first was Ephesus, says Vlpian, l. Observe D. de
Off. Procons. Such again was Thiatira, says Ptolemy, l. Geog. 1st. Cap. 2.
Such was Phyladelphia, of the Province of the Lydians. Of the same Rank are
Laodicea, Sardis, Smyrna, and Par^amus, affirmed by Pliny ( Not. Hist. l. 6. c.
29.) as Cities wherein the Roman Proconsuls residing, kept Courts for all the
adjoining Cities to resort to; by which it appears that all the Seven Cities
here named, were Metropoles, and accordingly under these Seven, all other
Christian Churches were contained. And it is evident in Ignatius's time (which
was not long after) that Magnesia, and Trallys, upon the Banks of Meander,
(says Stephanus Bizantius) being consequently included in this Asia, were
Episcopal Churches, or Cities, Damas being Bishop of one and Polybius of the
other, and so subordinate to the Metropolitan of Ephesus. After this the Doctor
Translates out of E^^ebius; part of which I here insert, (viz) Who can recount
the multitudes of Assemblies in every City? Who can describe the Confluxes to
the Oratories, and the spacious Churches which they built from the foundations,
not contenting themselves with the ancient Edifices? To these I will add but
two more instances viz. Jerusalem and Rome: That the Seven Churches in Asia,
Each City in the Primitive times but one Bishop.
and the Churches in Jerusalem and Rome had each of them but one Bishop, is the
voice of all the Christian world, except the small number of your mistaken
persuasion; and that each of these great and populous Cities contained very
many Congregations nothing can be more evident; and further, that it was
impossible that all the many Congregations in each City could be Administered
unto, by one Bishop without the assistance of Presbyters: And now lay all this
together, English Prelacy the same with the Primitive.
and see if in favor of our English Prelacy every one is not forced to
conclude, That the Prelacy or Diocesan Bishops in England is an exact parallel
to the Churches above mentioned? Primitive Churches; and that nothing but
Obstinacy, Pride and Interest can bind or hold my Adversary and his Brethren
any longer in that fond and groundless Opinion of Congregational or Parochial
Episcopacy.

As for the Power wherewith our Prelates are invested, it is from Heaven; the
Son of God to whom all Power in Heaven and Earth was committed, Episcopacy of
Divine Institution and perpetual. Mat. 16. v. 19. Joh. 20. v. 23. Ibid. v. 21.
Mat. 28. v. 20.
first promised it to St. Peter, and I will ^ive thee the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven; afterward he gave it actually to all the Aposties; whosoever sins
ye remit they are remitted unto them, and whosoever sins ye retain they are
retained: this is called the power of the Keys of binding and loosing; the
power of Ordaining and Governing is given in these words; as my Father sent me,
even so sen^ I you. And that this Power was to continue by Succession until the
second coming of our Lord, is manifest in these words; and lo I am with you
always even to the end of the World. And accordingly this Power has descended
by Succession from the Apostles to this present Age. Now here is Episcopacy
both name and thing (as you call it) according to the Primitive Standard
proved, which you seem to desire; and now be not offended nor angry that you
are (as you term it) run down, which is, that your Erroneous Opinion, contrary
to all Antiquity is so plainly discovered, not (as you say) by a bare word
only, but by most firm and undeniable Testimony.

The under Officers you mention, are owned to be no other than of Prudential
Institution for dispatch of business, but are established by Law, to whom
therefore your Obedience is due.

I wonder you mention your Scotch Presbytery; it can be for no other purpose
than as a Rod shaken at us to beware of you, Scotch Presbytery a Caution to us
for they have sufficiently explained what is meant by Comprehention, to wit
the expultion of Episcopacy, and have assured us that our Bishops and Clergy,
will meet with the same barbarous usage here, if ever it come into your Power.

In p. 14. he modestly says, he will not take upon him to contradict those
Learned men, who think the Angels (mentioned in the Revel. by St. John) were
Bishops; he having granted this, is all my desire, and therefore all his witty
Animadversions which follow, are not worth my answering. It would be but
needless Repetition to say any thing to his following Paragraph in his 14. p.
having fully answered it before.

In his p. 15. he says, What do I mean in saying in these Multiplied Churches
there was no Variation; and then very disingenuously changes my word, for a
word very different in signification, and asks, Was there no variety at all in
any Circumstance of Worship? and says, the contrary may be proved even in the
Apostles times, and instances that which he calls a Scuffle, Acts 15. betwixt
the believing Jews and Gentiles, about Jewish Ceremonies.

Here were no such different Circumstances as to divide their Communion,
therein there was no Variation, their Unity was preserved; the Jewish
Ceremonies, which the Converted Jews would have imposed on the Christian
Gentiles were no Circumstances in the Christian Worship; the Council at
Jerasalem thought therefore necessary to forbid those Impositions; now in this
very Case the necessity of Apostolic Jurisdiction does appear, that by a
decisive and definitive Sentence of Ecclesiastical Authority, it may not be in
the power of private Christians to impose their different Sentiments upon one
another, and that there may be no Variation nor breach of Unity in the public
Worship of God. So that this Instance is not at all for his purpose. He says if
I mean, there was no variation from Scripture Rules (tho we are afraid that
will scarce hold, yet) we wish it had been so still.

By Scripture Rules here, he certainly means the New Testament; if this Gent.
had any regard to Ecclesiastical Antiquity, he would never have talked of
Scripture (that is New T^^^ment) Rules before they were written.

He says, We have a Notion of Unity l^yed down (in my p. 2.) in which we freely
concur with him; these are my words (for he has not transcribed them fairly)
They are all one with that Church first mentioned at Jerusalem, and (which he
omits) all one with one another; being all United into one Spiritual Society or
Body, under one Head Christ Jesus, etc. (and which he has omitted too) and are
in all things the sune with that first Church, United in one Baptism, and one
Faith, and all partakers at the same Eucharist, etc.

That, (says he) is the same for substance, for in that they all agreed in the
Primitive times, in the same Circumstances such a Unity we hold; and doubt not
but in our Congregations this Unity may be found. And so he runs on in his 16.
p. and endeavors to persuade all men (just like the Donatists) that these
Dissenters are more truly Catholic than we.

That the Power delegated by our blessed Savior to his Apostles was to be
conferred upon their Successors, is certainly employed in the promise, Mat. 28.20.
Lo I am with you always, even to the end of the world. The Church of England
truly Apostolical.
That the Church of England was Planted, either by some of the Apostles or some
of their Successors and that the Succession of Bishops has continued in this
Church from that first propagation; by as strong proofs as human Authority is
capable of, viz. by Records and Histories may appear; and consequently that the
Church of England is as truly an Apostolic and Catholic Church as Jerusalem,
Alexandria, Antioch and those other Churches which were of the first Planting.

Her Orders then are to be equally obeved, Her Unity and Peace as strictly
mantained and whatsoever amounted to Schism in any of them must be so in her:
your Uniting then in a Communion Separate from this Church, bears no similitude
with Primitive Unity, being contrary to their Practice. And being that in your
Congregations the Divine Authority is wanting, there can be no such Unity found
among you, as Primitive Unity.

He Says the Eucharist was the same for Substance in the Primitive
Congregations, and that they all agreed in the same Circumstances; It is very
true, for no difference would be allowed; Christians then, durst not entertain
so wicked and uncharitable a thought, as that of setting up a Separate
Congregation as you do; They devoted themselves to the Command of their master,
to have Peace one with another. Mark 9.50. Heb. 13.17.
They for Conscience sake observed the Command of the Apostle, Obey them that
have the Rule over you; If you would tread in their steps, you would as
Relgiously observe the Unity and Peace of the Established Church wherein you
live in all Circumstances as they did.

All his next Paragraph Pa. 17. is the same, in different Phrases; He says, the
description I have given of Church Unity ruins my whole Book and Cause (an
hasty Sentence) for says he, if this be the true proper Unity of Churches, then
there may be true Church-Vnity without the Uniting of many particular Churches,
Ministers and People into one Diocesan Church under the Jurisdiction of a
Prelate and his Officers etc. Then he is not much against the convenience of
Parochial-Precincts, but says according to my Definition, it is not De essentia
Vnitatis.

It is plain, all that he drives at here is that there may be true Church Unity
without Episcopacy, I have answered this before by showing, that all Presbyters
with their Particular Congregations, that is Ministers and People now resolved
into Parochial Churches, within the Dioceses of the Respective Cities, were
United under the Jurisdiction of the Respective Bishop of each City; So that
the Uniting of many particular Churches, Ministers and People into one Diocesan
Church, under the jurisdiction of a Prelate, is true Church Unity as used in
Primitive times, by which it appears, that this Gent. Doctrine, viz. 1 Cor.
11.16.
that there may be true Church Unity without Episcopacy, is a mere Innovation,
there being no such custom in the Churches of God as the Apostle speaks.

As for their Officers they have the Sanction of our Laws to Authorize them; an
Authority far greater than can be showed for Lay Elders; Officers subserviant
to the Minister of every Congregation, and tho generally ignorant, and many of
them cannot write their Names, yet are made judges of their fellow Christians
sufficiency in faith; a novelty created by Calvin, and how reasonable let the
impartial judge. He says, so a man may plead to the jurisdiction of a Diocessan
Prelate, may step over Parish bounds, etc.

So did Korah and his Congregation against Moses and Aaron, Nam. 16.2. and 10.
their Controversy being the very same with yours against the Church; they
were for leveling the Priesthood, so are you; they were for setting up a new
modeled Congregation, so are you; God showed his displeasure against their
Pride and Disobedience, by a most terrible destruction; and the Apostle says,
Romans 15.4.
Whatsoever things were written aforetimes, were written for our Learning.

In the end of p. 17. and in 18. he lays to my charge, that I distinguished not
betwixt the extraordinary power which was properly Apostolical, and that
ordinary Pastoral Power which was eminently comprehended in the other.

The Authority and Government of the Church must have expired with the
Apostles, had not this Power been conveyed by their Delegation to their
Successors, by virtue whereof the ordinary Pastoral power, viz. Power to Preach
the Gospel, Administer Sacraments, Absolve Penitents, etc. was and is conferred
upon the Presbyters: the extraordinary and Apostolic Power of Ordaining and
Governing, of Binding and Loosing, being entirely reserved in the Bishop, the
Apostles Successors; and this too, of the ordinary Pasteral power is (to use
his own words) e^inently comprehended in the Diocesan Bishops, as it was in the
Apostles. Other distinction than this, cannot be truly made as I suppose. Then
he maliciously mentions the Archbishop of Canter^ury; what Christian temper or
good manners he shows therein, let the Reader judge? For it is written, Thou
shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy People. The Nature and Extent of the
Episcopal Office being fuily stated, answers what he says in the bottom of his
18 p. He says, Dr. Hammond tells us that all the Elders we read of in the
Scripture, were Bishops, and that every particular Church had one of these.

This Gent. has this quality, he never mentions the place where the thing may
be sound in any Author he quotes, which is not fair. Dr. Hammond says indeed;
That the Bishops in every City were the Successors of the Apostles. Dissert. 3
c. 3.
In his Anot. on Acts c. 11. b. and in his Tracts of the Power of the Keys;
Asian Bishops called Angels; and Bishop and Elder terms equivalent, (which were
written in Vindication of his Dissertations, from the exceptions of the
Assembly of Divines (as they were called) wherein he has, by Scripture, the
Primitive Fathers and undeniable Arguments evinced (to the silenceing of the
Assemblers) that the word Bishop in Scripture did always signify a Prelate or
a Diocesan Bishop; and that the word Elder had the same signification; so that
if this Gent. will be concluded by the Author he has cited, his pretentions to
Parochial and Congregational Bishops are at an end.

P. 19. he says, it is pretty to hear him say, these two (that is Timothy and
Titus) were ordained Bishops by the Apostles; was there any Apostle concerned
besides Paul in it? Here lies the trick, etc.

Whether they were Ordained by St. Paul alone, or with others conjunct, it was
all one, being I was only to prove, that their being Ordained Bishops was by
Apostolic power, which being done tho by St. Paul alone is sufficient. Nothing
but prejudice and ill nature could see any thing of a Trick in this.

Then he puts the Question; and how (pray) could Timothy and Titus succeed the
Apostles in the Sea of Ephesus and Crete, whilst the Apostles were living? And
then he is pleased in his 20 p. to Droll and scoff at 'em, and then says, to be
the Apostles Successors, the Apostles yet alive, and in plenitude of Power is a
very great Mystery, (so is all the Gospel) then he closes, making himself merry
with the ignorance of a Vicar of Newport (who, by the way is said to have been
a Nonconformist) which in a matter so momentous, carries too much levity for a
Minister of the Gospel.

I said in my p. 3. this Apostolical Succession was begun in Timothy and Titus,
etc. They could not have been said to be Successors of Apostolical power, if
the Apostle moved by the Holy Ghost had not whilst living, conferred it on them;
could the Apostle have Ordained them after he was dead? The Apostle by
Ordaining them in his life time, secured the Succession to them, and the
Government too in the Apostles absence, even whilst he was living; so that it
was not improperly said, that this Apostolic power was begun in Timothy and
Titus, they being the first mentioned in Scripture, who were invested with
Episcopal power of Jurisdiction, by Apostolical Ordination; that this
Succession of Bishops is (as he scossingly calls it) a very great Mystery is
very true, the Bishops being by virtue of this Succession, as truly the
Representatives of Christ Jesus, as Ambassadors are of Kings.

In p. 20. he says I affirmed that no Presbyters had power to Ordain, He
desires me to try, how I will reconcile this with Dr. Hammond, who says these
Presbyters were all Bishops; 1 Timothy 4.14.
or with Scripture it self, that says even Timothy received the Gift, by the
laying on the Hands of the Presbitery.

I have tried, and find it easily reconciled with Dr. Hammond, for his Judgment
is, that those Presbyters who joined in that Ordination were Apostles, which
you may see in his Paraphrase on the abovementioned Scripture, and he refers
to Note on Acts chap. 11. f. for his reasons. Mere Presbyters a ^umea power to
Ordain, first found in the Church of Rome.
The first clear Instance of mere Presbyters assuming the power to Ordain, is
to be found in the Church of Rome, as the learned Primate Bramhal tells us, p.
164. and in p. 431. he says, We may justly ascribe the reviveing of the Aerian
Heresy to the Dispensations of the Court of Rome, who Licensed Ordinary Priests
to Ordain and Confirm, etc.

In p. 20. he further says, for propagation of Apostolical Succession, etc. I
inform 'em, that Linus by Apostolical Consecration Succeeded the Apostles in
the Sea of Rome; here is a double blunder again, Linus succeeded whilst the
Apostles were alive. How else could he have Apostolical Consecration, etc.

The best way to determine this, is to observe the Rule which in great Wisdom
our Law has appointed for Jurors, to bring in their Verdict according to their
best Evidence: The best Evidence in this Case, are the writings of the Fathers
who lived in the next Age, among whom, Irenaeus is accounted the most exact
Notary of the Succession of Bishops to the Apostolic Sees; L. 3. C. 3.
he affirms, that Linus was made Bishop by the Apostles, and that he Succeeded
St. Peter in the Sea of Rome, and that next after him Cletus (by some called
Anen Cletus) Succeeded in that See: and with him Lib. 1. adv. Her. Sect. 6.
Epiphanius agrees; and with these diverse others; now this is so far from
being a blunder, that it is a clear Manifestation of the great care the
Apostles had of providing for the Succession in their life time, which no man
can object against, much less profanely Ridicule (as my Adversary does) who
will consider that otherwise the Succession must have failed, and been extinct
if neglected whilst the Apostles lived.

In the 21 p. at the bottom, he says, That my affirming, that this line of
Apostolic Succession of Bishops, has continued in all Ages to this present
time; Succession of Bishops from the Apostles without interruption to this Age.
is (says he) an assertion without the least shadow of proof; yea contrary to
the acknowledgment of all Church Historians.

If this Gent, had mentioned where any Church Historian of Credit, is of his
Opinion, and showed when any interruption happened, he had done something for
the support of his opinion. But let him examine from this present age, to the
days of Lucius King of the Northumbers, (who is credibly said to be the first
King that Embraced the Christian Faith in this Isle) and if he can assign one
Breach of this Succession, he out does his predecessors, but if not, he stands
guilty of bringing a false Accusation against all truly Catholic Churches. For
not only the Church of England, but all other Established Catholic Churches do
assert the Succession of their Bishops, to descend from the Apostles: And it is
in every Diocese as sacredly Recorded as the Succession of Rings and Emperors
to their Thrones.

But in p. 22, he says, The very Papists themselves, confess that there are
insuperable difficulties about the Succession of Popes in the Roman See. My
Adversary would rebuke such boldness in me; I never discoursed with any of that
Church who did not zealously assirm the Succession; and I believe they may
challenge him to name any of them, or show any Books of theirs, wherein he can
find such a Confession as he alleges. In the days of Valentinian, there was
great strife about the Claim of that See; yet none was put into possession who
had not Episcopal Consecration, in which respect the Episcopal Succession was
preserved; so that the insuperable difficulties, are but his bare Allegation.

But pray how can there be a Priest without this Line of Apostolic Succession?
Can a man receive Priestly, i. e. Spiritual Power, by laying on of the hands of
them who have not Power to confer it; it is St. Paul's question, Romans 10.14, 15.
how shall they hear without a Preacher, and how shall they Preach except they
be sent, etc. which is a strong affirmation, that no man ought to preach
without Divine Mission. The great Bishop of our Souls was sent of God, the
Apostles received their Mission from him, and no man can say he is sent, (that
is) can truly be a Minister of the Gospel, who has not Apostolical Mission,
and no man has power to send, who has not received it by Succession from the
Apostles: and this Succession must be by an uninterrupted Line from the
Apostles, or it ceases to be Divine; so that the absolute necessity of an
uninterrupted Line is a sufficient reason to prove it. And now I may affirm,
that great Catholic truth (it remaining firm and unshaken) set down in my
former paper, p. 3. (viz.) who ever he be that is out of this Line of Apostolic
Succession, and Exercises any Ministerial Office, without the Commission of
Episcopal Ordination, can be no more or other, then a Lay Impostor and a
Schismatic, and that without exposing Christianity it self (as he says p. 23. I
do) or without leaving the Consciences of all the men in the World, at an utter
uncertainty; whether they have a true Ministry. or true Ordinances or no; for
there is no other way wherein a true Ministry and consequently true Ordinances
can be found, and this is so far from Leaving men's Consciences at an
uncertainty, that it is the only foundation of certainty and assurance of a
true Ministry, and consequently true Ordinances, and from whence we receive
real comfort in the Participation; for other Foundation, says Saint Paul, can
no man lay, than that is already laid, which is Jesus Christ; (1 Corinthians,
3. verse. 11.) Jesus Christ has founded his Church upon the Holy Apostles, and
so as not to be demolished, or expire with their lives, but to continue firm in
their Successors to the end of the World; to deny this is both to distrust the
power and providence of God, and to make void the promise of our Lord, made,
Mat. 28.20.

But this my Adversary does; for (says he in p. 24.) in how many Cases may this
Line be broken, and all the Apostolic power conveyed there, be spilt and lost,
etc. Is not this man's Faith too weak in the power of God, and in the promise of
his Son? Which is, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against her, Mat.
16.18. that is his Church; and shall the devices of men out do the Gates of
Hell? shall the fancy of this man and his Brethren overthrow that against
which, God has promised the powers of Hell shall not prevail? And because
these men infatuated by Error, despise this Church, whose Foundation was laid
by the blessed Jesus, and has the power of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven
committed to her, must she be made a Prey and a Sacrifice to the blind
Ignorance, Pride and Lusts of these men's minds, to make way for the Whimsy and
Invention of man; not known or heard of in the Church of Fourteen hundred
years? Must the power of Preaching the Gospel, Absolving Penitents,
Consecrating the Holy Sacraments, etc. be lost and made void by being
translated into profane hands, to be Officiated by those who are not sent of
God? All which, are the unavoidable consequences of this man's Doctrine. For he
says p. 24. Where this Line is broken all this Apostolic power is spilt and
lost.

The Abbot of Hy was objected by a Popish Writer to prove our Church
Schismatical, and it is now brought by this Dissenter against the Apostolic
Succession, which in his p. 25. he names in the Margin. The most Reverend
Primate Bramball, in answer to the Papist, writes a just Vindication of the
Church of England, etc. In p. 131, and 135, of his works, you have an account
at large, where he clears the Northumbrian Bishops from Receiving Consecration
of the Abbot of Hy, and shows, that they had their Consecration from the Bishop
of Derry, (then called Derry-magh) under whose Visitation this Abbot lived: The
Primate tells us, the Records were to be seen at Derry before the Irish
Rebellion; and this story you have much to the same purpose, in the Lord Bishop
of St. Asaph's Historical account of Church Government, etc. Chap. 5. so that
this Dissenter has no more advantage with the Popish Writer against our Church,
by casting this Imputation out of this Story, to break the Succession, then the
Papist had to prove us Schismatics; nor is any intercision hereby proved which
my Adversary pretends.

In the same p. 25. he desires to know of me, or any who encourages me to write
little Books, Whether this Line of Succession may be continued in a
Schismatical Church; and the Apostolical Power conveyed thereby? (says he) if
by Schism men and Societies are cut off from the Universal Church, then such
Schismatical Churches are no Churches, etc.

What occasion I gave him for this question, you may see in my 3d. Page; after
I affirmed the Apostolical Succession of Bishops, and inferred from thence,
that who ever Exercised any Ministerial Office out of this Line of Succession,
and had not Episcopal Ordination, No true Ordination out of the line of
Succession.
could be no other than a Lay Impostor and a Schismatic; then I inferred
further, and consequently all Societies of Christians who withdraw themselves
from the Government of their Bishops; who are the Apostles Successors, and from
Communicating with those Presbyters lawfully set over them by Episcopal
Ordination and Institution: and frame themselves into any other sort of
Government, are guilty of Schism; such Societies are Schismatics, and cut
themselves off from the Catholic Church, but can in no sort properly be called
Churches, and therefore I understand not his Logic in this, (viz.) If by
Schism, Men and Societies are cut off from the Universal Church, therefore
Schismatical Churches are no Churches. The Donatists were such
Churches they are, tho Schismatical; whilst they retain the Apostolical
Succession, they retain also the power and Authority of Ordination, Preaching
the Gospel, and Administering the Sacraments, and so retain the name of a
Church. Dissenters no right to the Succession.
But what are our Dissenters concerned herein? They disclaim the Succession,
and deny any power or Virtue to be derived from it, and therefore have no
Commission to preach the Gospel, or Administer Sacraments, etc. and
consequently no right to the name of a Church; but by the word Societies they
would have Churches understood, that thereby their Unlawful Assemblies might
pass under that Title.

I must here put one question to these Dissenters; many of the Clergy of the
Romish Church have embraced Communion with the Reformed Churches; I desire to
know whether Reordination in this case was ever required? the answer must be
in the Negative, their Ordination being derived from the Apostles Successors;
in vain then is this Gentleman's attempt to Un-church the Church of England (as
in his p. 25.) for that our Bishops have derived their Consecration from the
Church of Rome, it being the Judgment of all Reformed Divines, that formal
Schism cannot invalidate the power of Regular and formal Ordination.

In p. 26. he says I would Exclude all the Reformed Churches beyond Sea that
have not those Governors, etc. by those Governors, I suppose he means Diocesan
Bishops.

To this I answer; That many very Learned and Pious persons among them, have
declared their longing desires for the Episcopacy, but living in Popish
Dominions, cannot have any but those of the Romish Communion. Others there be,
that approve of it, yet live in Republic Governments, and they will by no means
admit of Episcopacy in that Regiment; invincible necessity is upon these, and
therefore in Charity cannot be charged with Schism, being in their desires
Catholic; but as for those who with you, and your Brethren in England, deny its
Authority, and obstinately refuse Subjection to it, they with you are notorious
Schismatics, and can in no wise be excused.

As for that fanciful supposition of a Company of Christians cast upon a remote
Island (which he talks of in p. 26.) or if all the Pastors in a Country should
be put to death, etc. He cannot bring one instance of either, and if it should
so happen, all the Laymen and mere Presbyters in the World cannot make one
Evangelical Priest; cannot empower them to Preach the Gospel, not Consecrate
Sacraments, etc. but what can be expected from Invincible necessity? They have
a God to pray to, whose mercies are infinite, who will fulfill the desires of
them that fear him, and will hear their cry, Psalm. 114. v. 19.

In his 27 p. he says, But if we assent to the Whimsie of a constant
Succession, as if power were conveyed like water in a Conduit, after a Phisical
manner, by contact passing through the Fingers ends of the Prelate, into the
noddle of the person Ordained, etc.

A Whimsie I take it, signifies some Phantastic Device, or the Creature of an
unstable, or unsettled brain; which being applied or imputed to Prelates, who
bear the Authority of Christ, deriving it Originally from him, can be no less
(I think) than Blasphemy, for our blessed Savior says to his Apostles, and in
them to their Successors; He that despises you, despises me, and he that
despises me, despises him that sent me; Luke 18. v. 16. no man that has not
arrived to the highth of wickedness, and given himself over to a reprobate
mind, would thus revile the Ambassadors of God; he can be no better than a
filthy Dreamer, who thus despises Dominion, and speaks evil of Dignities.
Jude, v. 8. How wantonly does this man sport himself in holy things? and by
vilifieing and contemning the Evangelical holy Priesthood make void, and a
kicshaw (as much as in him lies) of our holy Religion, exposing and
prostituting it to the contempt and scorn of Infidels and Atheists.

What he mentions in p. 28. viz. The Lewd Extravagant Caresses that have
happened between the ambitious Princes, and astiring Churchmen concerns us
not, for he cannot name any such aspiring Churchmen that have been in England
since the Reformation, and tho he could, the order being of Divine Institution
cannot be dissolved for any man's miscarriage; if by this he means any thing of
the Church of Rome, we abjure her Jurisdiction over us. Dr. Sancroft
Archbishop of Canterbury, with six other Bishops, in their Address to K.
James, declared against the Usurping of any absolute Empire, over the Civil and
Religious Rights of men, and this was done so publicly, that it is more than
probable, the fame of it is gone through the World, so that this Insinuation of
his, is a mere malicious calumny.

In my p. 4. I proved that to love as Christians in Scripture sense, is to love
as members of Christ, and that this obliges Christians to preserve the Body (
i. e. the Church) from Rents and Schisms, which (says he) we never deny. He
implicitly confesses that they ought to preserve the Church from Rents and
Schisms, and yet shamefully denis it in practice every day. I have so fully
spoken of this before that I need say no more in this place.

And here again are the Ceremonies objected, which tho I have proved to be no
sufficient ground for their Separation, yet for further satisfaction I will
here Recommend the Reasons given by the Convocation, why the Ceremonies were
retained; They are affixed before the Book of Common Prayer, and are important
enough, to satisfy the Conscience of any sober Conscientious Christian.

In p. 29. he says, for our further Conviction we are told (the Communion of
Saints is one External visible Communion in the Christian Church) which is so
far from explaining the thing, that it makes it much darker; what I said above,
had reference to the Christian Church when it was first called Catholic. And
was not the Communion of the Church then One? and ought it not to be so still?
and was not the Union External and Visible? but I did a little after explain by
showing wherein this Communion does more particularly consist: In my p. 5.
(viz.) in the same Articles of Faith; The Communion of Saints in Faith.
I named the Apostles, Nicene and Atharasian Creeds, which have been received
and used in the Catholic Church, from the times they were first published, and
appoint'd by the Authority of the Church; the Creeds are Compendiums and brief
Comprehensions of the Objects of our Christian Faith, and do contain all things
necessary to be believed; every Article being a principle of the Christian
Religion, which every Christian is bound to profess, and is the Test to
distinguish between Heretics and sound Christians; and now this profession and
agreement of Christians in these Articles of Faith, may be truly called the
Communion of Saints in point of Faith. But my Adversary is not very fond of
these Creeds; and why not in Scripture (says he) Why! every one who truly
believes the Scripture, believes the Articles of Faith, and every one who
believe the Articles believe the Scripture. He says, They are but Human
composition. They were Composed by those to whom the Care and Authority of the
Church was committed, and every Article for the benefit of all, even the
meanest Christians, being formed and Collected out of Sacred Scripture, are of
Divine Authority.

He says, I shut out the Greek and other Eastern Churches. This is but his own
Conception, for they agree with us in all Articles of Faith; they do not indeed
express the Article of the Holy Ghost in the very same words, but they
acknowledge that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father by the Son, which
differs not in sense, and they Worship the Trinity in Unity, and Unity in
Trinity, so that in Articles of Faith we and they hold Communion. Well! I
perceive tho my Adversary relishes not, and speaks with but indifferent Respect
of the Creeds, yet he says, however he is so far in Communion with us, so in
this, he will be no Schismatic; or rather no Heretic. The Communion (...)
Saints (...) the Eucharist.


Another particular (which I mentioned) required in this Communion, is
partaking all at the same Table; (which tho it be not individually yet
Spiritually it is the same; and being every where called the Lords Table, could
be no otherwise meant; but that this Gent. will be very witty, and take
exceptions at every thing. The Apostle calls it the Lords Table. The Cup of
Blessing which we bless, 1 Cer. 10.21. v. 16. v. 17.
is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? We being many, are one Bread
and one Body, for we are all partakers of that one Bread. All true Christians
partaking at the Lords Table are one Body in the Apostles Sense; the bread not
only signifieing the Body of Christ, but the Unity of the partakers also; and
this is the Communion of Saints at the Lords Table. Here, says he, we are with
him still. I wonder at his confidence; he would say sure, h^re we ought to be
with them, for they are not with us. By comparing our Church with the Primitive
Churches, I have proved her to be a Church truly Catholic; her Jurisdiction as
truly Apostolical as they were; from whence it follows (as I have said) that
her Orders are to be equally obeyed; her Unity and Peace as strictly
maintained, and what soever was Schism in any of them must be so in her.

To refuse Communicating with any of them at the Lords Table, and to have set
up another Table in opposition to any of them, must in this Gentleman's judgment
have been criminous Schism; then of necessity it holds true against our
Dissenters; they refuse Communion with that Church which most certainly holds
true Communion with the Universal Catholic Church, and consequently with the
Son of God, who is the Head thereof, and the Principle and proper Object of all
Christian Communion: Our Dissenters have set up a separate Table in opposition
thereto, robbed her of her Members, and broke her Unity; all this being
notoriously the breach of Christian Charity, is in this Gent. and Mr. Hery's
Sense too, Schism; which Mr. Hery calls an Arch-Rebel, (but not so properly) as
an Infamous Rebellion in Christ's Kingdom; and thus they are Schismatics in
Separating from the Communion of Saints at the Lords Table. What he talks here,
of deriving our Succession from the Church of Rome, is already answered.

A third particular required in this Communion, I affirmed to be, Communion of
Saints in the same Prayers.
the joining all in the same holy Prayers and Supplications, Intercessions and
giving of thanks, according to St. Paul's express Command.

To this he says, I cannot mean, that in those Dutys we must necessaryly use
the very same words, etc. for then I exclude all the World but them of my own
persuasion, and a great many of them too.

I exhort therefore (says St. Paul) that first of all, Supplications, Prayers,
1. Tim. 2. v 1.2.
Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made for all min; for Kings and all
that are in Authority, etc. Here is a sufficient ground from Holy Scripture,
for Liturgies, or Forms of Prayers in the public Worship and Service of God;
and St. Paul gives his reason for it in his Ep. to the Romans; that we might
with one mind and one mouth, Glorify God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Romans 15. v. 6.
According to this command, Forms of Prayers or Liturgies were Composed early
in the Catholic Churches, and have been used ever since, that there might be an
Unity in their Supplications and Prayers, and in their Thanksgivings and
Praises, that nothing should be omitted, nor any thing more in our Petitions
expressed, but what our holy Religion requires, and that there should be no
rudeness, or undecency in words (in which respects, conceived and Extempore
prayers are very liable to be faulty) and in these, they were all obliged to
join where ever they came together for the public Worship and Service of God:
Herein they had Communion with God the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ,
who was in the midst of them, Mat. 28. v. 20.
and in whose name they were presented, and with one another; Uniting all in
the same Prayers; here is the Communion of Saints in holy Prayers. It is true,
that the Respective Provincial or Diocesan Churches had not every one their set
Forms of Prayers or Liturgies in the very same words; every Bishop having power
to Compose a Form for that Church of which he was Over-seer: Yet they were the
same for substance, so that every Christian was obliged to Communicate not only
with the Bishop, or his Presbyters under whose Jurisdiction he lived, but all
Catholics coming to remote Churches did, as bound by the Rules of Catholic
Unity, Communicate with their Fellow Christians to what Church soever they came.

That in this the Church of England (as in the former particulars) holds
Communion with the Primitive Catholic Church will appear, Pream Quinto and
Sexto Ed. 6 ti. cap. primi.
if we consider that the CONVOCATION in the Reign of Edward the Sixth, by whom
our Liturgy was Reformed; with one consent agreed upon one Set Form of Prayer,
Administration of Sacraments etc. to be used in the English tongue in every
Dioces through out the Realm; In the Reforming and Composure whereof, they had
before their eyes, the Word of God and the Primitive Church for their
imitation: the Glory of God, the Comfort and Edification of the People for
their End: and all their Supplications and Prayers therein, are directed to God
Almighty, presented in the name of the blessed Jesus; and all we supplicate for
in them, is for no other, than what is allowed of, and required in our holy
Religion, and is a reasonable Service.

To this I will add two things more, viz. Mr. Calvin's Letter to the then
Protector of England, which is to this purpose. For so much as concerns the
Prayers and Ecclesiastical Rites, I much approve that they be determined, so
that it may not be Lawful for the Ministers in their Administrations to vary
from it; and he gives his Reasons. That it may be a help to the weakness of
some; That it may be a Testimony of the Churches Consent, and that it may stop
the desultorious levity of those who are for new things,

The other is what their Learned Mr. Baxter says, Disp. of Liturgy Prop. 10
viz. The constant disuse of Forms, is apt to breed a giddiness in Religion,
and may make men Hypocrites, who shall delude themselves with conceits, that
they delight in God, when it is but in these Novelties and Veriety of
Expression that they are delighted, and therefore he advises Forms to fix
Christians, and make them sound. Thus these two great Guides of theirs.

It being clear that there is a Communion of Saints in Prayers as in other
Offices of Divine Worship; the refusing to Commnuicate therein, is a Breach of
Unity, and of the Communion of Saints. Nor can I stand charged (as my Adversary
affirms) with Excluding all those from the Communion of Saints who use not the
Liturgy of our Church; every National Catholic Church having equal Authority
to enjoin its own Liturgy, in which every Member therein is bound to
Communicate by the very nature of Unity required in the Gospel.

St. John declares, Revel. 5.9. etc.
that the Four and Twenty Elders in his vision sung a new Son^, and sets down
the Form of words wherein the Angels, the Beasts, and the Elders, all with a
load Voice glorified the Lamb, etc. Now what ever else this may signify, it
certainly Represents the Uniformity of Divine Service above; and it is to be
considered, that the Church on Earth is the Type of that glorious part of the
Catholic Church Triumphant in Heaven; and tho the perfection of that Unity
which is above, cannot be attained unto in this imperfect State which is below,
yet that which is above is proposed for our imitation, and shows the great
delight the Glorious Trinity the One God has in the Unity, of his Service. The
nearer we on Earth Resemble that Unity which is above, the more perfect we are.
The Church of England, in Immitation of the Church above, enjoins Unity in Her
Prayers, Intercessions, etc. and in all the Worship and Service of God; but in
contradiction to this, our Dissenters can by no means endure it.

A Fourth particular (mentioned by me) required in the Communion of Saints, is;
Communion of Saints in subjection to Governors.
To be Subject and Odedient to our Spiritual Rulers, and Governors (who have
derived their Authority from the Apostles by a due Succession) in all things
pertaining to Godly Life, Decency and Order.

To this he says in p. 31. and 32. We are very desirous to give due Honor and
Obedience to our Spiritual Governors, who derive their Authority from Christ,
which is more proper than to speak of deriving it from the Apostles, for Christ
is the only Fountain of Authority and the Stream; are derived rather from the
Fountain than the Cistern; it is observable, the man's expression is sunk from
an Uninterrupted Succession to a due Succession: To observe the Apostolical
precepts in Government and Worship may make it up a due Succession, but there
is more in an Uninterrupted one than so; now before he can say we want this
Qualification for Communion, he must prove that Diocesan Bishops are made our
Spiritual Rulers by a Divine Command.

For any man living to affirm that he has Received Authority to be a Minister
of the Gospel from Christ Jesus immediately, is contrary to the current of the
Gospel and the voice of all Antiquity since the Apostles: Who but the Apostles
can this be attributed unto? St. Paul, tho after the miraculous descent of the
Holy Ghost upon the other Apostles, had indeed a Commission from Christ Jesus
immediately, yet it was conferred in an extraordinary manner, by a voice from
Heaven that it might appear to be no cheat, ( Acts 13.3.) and he entered not
upon his Office without the Imposition of the hands of the Church. No spiritual
Power is received from Christ Jesus, by any man immediately; it is conferred no
other way, but from Christ to his Apostles, and by a Succession from them to
our days, the Original and Foundation thereof being Christ Jesus. If any man
will pretend to an immediate Authority, and prove it not by some Miracle or
Revelation, he can pass for no other than a mere Enthusiast and an Impostor.
This Doctrine of his, is the false bottom upon which many Heresies, strange and
pernicious Opinions have been built, and is the Parent of our Schisms, and
Separations; if a man by this Suggestion can but gull the weak people, into a
belief of such a Commission to be immediately from Christ, How do they follow
and admire him? Withdraw their Obedience from their lawful Governors and
Pastors, break the bonds of Charity, and all the Rules of Peace and Order? and
all this only to be the Disciples of such a man. All the Honor and Obedience
these men give, is not to Spiritual Governors who are so by the Institution of
our Lord. Jesus, to whom alone the promise of the Assistance and Operation of
the blessed Spirit is given, to Guide and Govern the Flock of Christ; but to
them who enter not by the door, but climb up some other way, i. e. those, who
are set up by their own Authority. That in many particulars these Dissenters
differ from the Church of England, wherein she agrees with the Primitive
Churches, does by this time fully appear.

My using the words, d^e Succession here, does not (as he pretends) sink the
sense of an Uninterrupted Succession; for that cannot be called a due
Succession, which is not an Uninterrupted Succession. So this is but a mere
^ingle.

I have before sufficiently proved the Government of the Church by Diocesan
Episcopacy, to be the Institution of our Blessed Savior, and that our Diocesan
Bishops in the Church of England are invested with this Divine Authority by an
uninterrupted Succession, and so are made our Spiritua^ Rulers by the same
Divine Authority. Now these Dissenters having this Divine Authority among 'em;
it follows by my Adversary's acknowledgment, that the Dissenters in England
want this Qualisication for Communion, by which Communion must be understood
the Communion of Saints.

In the same p. he says, A single person taking upon him to Govern some
Thousands of Congregations, by such Rulers and Officers as our English Prelacy
uses, and this by the Nomination of the Civil Magistrate without the consent of
the people, or the Ministers within the Diocese, is a Creature we find not in
Scripture, nor in Primitive times, and therefore can be no Spiritual Governors
of ours by Divine Right, etc.

That the Jurisdiction of English Prelates is of Divine Right being proved,
this Creature (as he scoffingly calls it) which he says, they can neither find
in Scripture, nor in Primitive times, is evidently found in both, and no other
Creature, that is no other Government of the Church can be found in either; so
that his objections against Congregations being numerous in a particular
Diocese comes to nothing.

Their Rulers and Officers are mentioned before. But it is worth Observation to
see, how the Regular Accession of a Bishop to his Diocese, is maliciously
called by him, a single Person taking it upon himself, as if it were mere
Usurpation.

But that which he seems to be much Scandalized at, is their Nomination by the
Civil Majestrate without the consent of the people, or the Ministers of the
Diocese. If it would not swell my papers too much, I could give him very many
Instances to prove that for many Ages the Nomination of Bishops has been in
the Right of Christian Emperors and Christian Kings; and that it has been so,
very Anciently in England, and there is great reason it should be so, for they
were the Founders of Bishoprics; who else then can of Right lay claim to the
Patronage of presenting to them? what confusion would be the result? how
endless the Feuds and Animositys in every Dioces, were their Elections
Tumultuary and Popular? By the Presbyters of the Dioces they are Elected, the
Dean and Chapter in every Dioces being their Representatives, and this is to
prevent Animosities and Divisions among the Clergy, in the Election of
Bishops; and the Clergy or any other Person as well without, as within the
Dioces have liberty to put in any Allegation they have against him, and the
Crime, if proved Judicially, invalidates the Election and all proceedings
therein. So that all their Quarrel in this, is only against the Ancient Right
of the Crown, and the wisdom of the Clergy in preventing strife and contention.

That Diocesan Bishops are our Spiritual Rulers by Divine Authority being
proved, answers all he says in his 32 and ends in his 33 P. His words are
these, When this man or any one for him, has made it appear that the Authority
of a Diocesan Prelat, Dean, Lay Chancellor etc. over all in the Diocese is as
Sacred as that of Moses and Aaron, we will not dare to dispute it for sear of
Corah's doom etc. I hope he will not take it amiss if we be not frighted out of
our wits by such misapplied passages etc.

The Dean, Lay Chancellor etc. are Prudential Officers and have not a Divine
but a Legal, tho humane Authority; But the Authority of a Diocesan Prelate,
conferred by, and derived from the Son of God must be as Sacred as that of
Moses and Aaron, for the Apostle St. Paul in his Epist. to the Hebrews puts a
far higher value and esteem upon the Evangelical than the Aaronical Priesthood;
then certainly, to set up Congregations in defiance and combination against
Evangelical Priesihood, viz. Diocesan Prelacy, is a Crime of as deep a Die as
that of Corah and his Congregation. Now tho I have more Charity than to have
these men frighted out of their wits, yet I heartily wish, that they may be
frighted into a sense of their guilt and into a fear of disputing, the Crime
being of the same Complexion with that of Corah; for although God does not now
usually avenge himself, against such proud and obstinate Offenders as he did to
Corah by the imediate execution of his Judgments, yet he has reserved a Day,
wherein his wrath against all despisers of his Authority and all other
unrighteousnesses of obstinate and impenitent Sinners, will be revealed.

He says Such misapplied pasages ( viz. as that of Corah) they have often heard
urged to back the Do^rin of Non-resistance and all those Principles of Slavery
some men have be: endeavering to instill into our minds etc.

Be the consequences what ever they may happen to be, the Doctrine of
Non-resistance was the Doctrine of the Holy Apostles; These are the words of St.
Paul, Let every Soul be Subject to the Higher Powers, for there is no Power but
of God: the Powers that be are Ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists
the Power, resists the Ordinance of God: and they that resist receive to
themselves Damnation. Rom 13.12. These Precepts of the Apostle are to continue
eternally and are unalterable and irreversible by any human Authority
whatsoever; To the observation whereof and obedience whereunto, all Christians
are infallibly obliged. Now tho this Gent. may be above my advice, yet it will
be his wisdom not to preach any Doctrine contrary to this Divine Precept; not
only because it is contradicted by the Court of Rome, but because the
Government will punish it as Seditious

He says in Pa. 33. In what Bounds he will six the Primitive Church we know
not; certain it is a Century or Two made a considerable change in the seatures
of the Government and Worship etc.

Let him and all his Fellow-Dissenters lay their heads together, and if they
will be so kind to themselves, as to search the Histories of the Church, and
the writings of the Fathers concerning the Government and Worship in the Church,
and show if they can, any change in the Government and worship in the three
first Ceuturies, which until they perform my assertion stands firm. As for the
change of Government which he so confidently affirms barely upon his own
Authority and Fancy, is notoriously false, for what the Government was then, it
has continued to be in all Catholic Churches to this day, so as that therein,
there has been no change at all.

But says he in Pa. 34. If we must take our measures by these Churches that are
truly Primitive, we fear not to put our selves to the Trial etc. Well! tho we
have no Security that upon this Trial they will stand to the Verdict, yet let
it be Tried.

He says, That our Congregations have this Agreement in Faith none will deny.
Dissenters agree not with the Primitive Church.
It is not the Agreement they have in their Congregations with one another that
can make them Catholics, but Agreement with the Primitive Catholic Church,

In the truly Primitive Church, all true Christians did make a formal
Profession of Faith, by distinctly repeating the Creeds with an audible voice,
as we do in our Churches at this day, which practice seems to be intimated in
St. Paul's Injuction to Timothy; Hold fast the Form of sound Words which thou
have heard of me, etc. 2 Timothy 1. v. 13.
What ever the Faith of these Separate Congregations may be, is unknown to us;
the formal profession of Faith which was constantly used by the Primitive
Christians, as the badge of Christianity, being in the Congregations of our
Dissenters laid aside. Now that they in this respect agree with the truly
Primitive Church must be denied.

He says, I have not proved that they differ from the Catholic Church in the
Essentials or integral parts of Gods Worship, or in any considerable
Circumstance.

2. In the truly Primitive Churches they held strict Communion with their
Bishops, who were the Apostles Successors, and the Presbyters set over them by
Episcopal Ordination and Institution, not only in Essential, but in all
Circumstances in the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church also; as in the having
all things Common, to this they yielded Conformity: The Love Feasts, and the
Holy-kiss, mere Ceremonies, no Essentials of Worship, yet enjoined by the
Apostles as significative of the ardent Love and Christian Charity, which
Christians had for one another, and continued for some time after the Apostles
days, till through Corruption grown to be Scandal, and then, tho Instituted by the
Apostles, were abolished by the Authority of the Church.

Now our Dissenters denying all Communion with our Bishops who are the Apostles
Successors, and the Presbyters set over us by Episcopal Ordination and
Institution; this, together with their Usurping the Priestly Office without
Episcopal Ordination, sufficiently demonstrates that our Dissenters differ from
the Primitive Catholie Church, in Essential, and considerable Circumstances,
without any further trial.

In p. 34. he further says, And that this Divine Worship and Service is
Visible and External, this Gent. is but too sensible, and it is a very great
Eyesore to such as he, that it is so much more visible than formerly it has
been. That it is visible is true, but that it is Separate and out of the
visible Catholic Church is as true.

He is pleased to call it Divine Worship and Service which it cannot be I
suppose but only in respect of the Object; when they have a lawful Spiritual
Authority, that is Episcopal Ordination and Institution without which there can
be no true Ministry (which I have proved) and consequently no true Ordinances,
it may be called Divine Worship and Service, but till then, let they who are
best able to judge, say what kind of Worship and Service it is (...) S^
lenatius will resolve him in his Ep to the S^^rn. He says (...).


That its being more vi^ble than formerly is a great ^ye ^^re to such a^ I am
is a mistake. I have known it more visible than now it is; when all the
Churches in the Kingdom were Usurped into the possession of the Presbyterians,
Independents, Anabaptists, etc. (those were evil days) to see the Noble
debased, the base and the vile made Rulers over us, Religion the pretense of
Rebellion; the Church buried in Disgrace and Calumny, called the Scariet Whore,
etc. He was admired for the H^li^^ man, the greatest Saint, who was most
improved in the Art of Rev^^ing and Speaking evil of Dignities; the quitting
Communion with a truly Catno^^c Church; the taking of a Rebellious Covenant
(see his p. 54.) or human Composure, with significant Ceremonies; submitting to
Lay Elders a Novelty not formerly known in the Christian Church; these, with
many other Miseries and Calamities endured in those days, were great (...) to
me and such as I am. But we have learned by the Doctrine which our Church
Teaches, Acquiescence and Submission to the Legislative Power; (a Lesson which
out Dissenters could never yet put in practice) T^^y have granted you a
Toleration, and we are so far from envying it, that we Acquiess and submit, so
as to me and such as I am, it is no otherwise an ^^e^o^e, than in Christian
Charity to pity your mistakes, and heartily wish, that in your practice you
would be more conformable to the Gospel of Peace, and that there be Peace in
the end.

In his last Parag. p. 34. he says my asserting the Succession of Bishops from
the Aposiles, etc. is inconsistent with other parts of my lo^k, and (sav^) he
supposes he has sufficiently made it man^^^, and in p. 35. he calls my
affirmations in my former paper, Crude and Co^^^^ apprehension; he is so kind,
as to plead my capacity to excuse me for my Blunders, (as he calls 'em) but
says it will by no means lesse^ the fault: my O^^^ious and Confident
i^^^^r^^en^y, in meddleing with things I so little understand.

This is but Condemning me by the lump, and being past his skill to show such
^^^^sistency in my Book, it is false, and those which he calls my Blunders, I
have proved to be undeniable Truths; all the ill is, that what ever these men
speak or write, be it ever so repreachful or false, their Disciples believe and
swallow it for truth: But with Impartial men, Railing will never pass for
Conviction, nor morose and uncharitable Censures for true Judgment; nor can the
Imperious Language he so liberally bestows upon me, add one mite to their
Cause, nor one mite lessen that esteem (how undeserved soever) I have among
many good men; but I have learned to forgive him, should be offend Seventy
times seven.

Having made the Episcopacy Established in the Church of England, appear to be
an exact parallel with the Catholic Churches in the Primitive times, what I
mentioned of the Fathers, (in my p. 7.) holds good against my Adversary by his
own Allowance, as you may see in his p. 35. at the bottom, his words are these.
We are no way concerned i^ the Citation of the Fathers ^ro^^ht in against us,
till he has proved that Episcopacy then, was the same thing it is m^^, and that
the Terms of Communion we scruple were ever impesed (...) them. The former
part, that the Episcopacy in our Church is the same as it was then, is proved.

That the having all things common, the Love Feasts and the Holy-kiss, mere
Ceremonies; no Essentials in Religion, yet were Terms of Communion in the
Apostles time, being very plain: That the Ceremonies appointed by our Church,
tho they are not specifically the same (which this man seems to insist upon)
yet being in Nature the same with those above mentioned. and being enjoined by
the same power and Authority derivatively, which the Apostles had; this Gent.
or any other ought no more to scruple the Terms of Communion imposed by our
Church, than the Primitive Christians did scruple the Terms of Commanion
imposed^^ the Apostles.

In the bottom of his 35 p. he says, Ignatius charges the Bishop to take
Co^^nizance of every Member of his Church, not excepting the very Servants, and
that it was the Custom then, in every Congregation to receive the Sacrament
every Lords day, and that they never received it but from the Hand of the
Bishop. Hence he concludes that such Bishops must be the Pastors of single
Congrezations; and adds, that this Argument has been copiously managed by
Blundel, Baxter, Owen, Clarkson, and others.

This Gent. as in all other Quotations, leaves me to find this; I have met with
the passage in St. Ignatius's Ep. to Polycarp Bishop of the Smyrmans; where he
says, Converse with all, man by man as God shall ena^^e thee; he says
further, Let nothing be done without thy Sentence, etc. A little farther he
says, Let Congregations be gathered more frequently, and take the names of all
Persons: Let neither Men nor Maid Servants be despised by thee. And in the same
Ep. he says; Be mindful of the Bishop, that God may be mindful of you. I could
give my Life for those persons who are Subject to the Bishop, Presbyters, and
Deacons.

Let the Reader consider all the parts together and then Judge, how reasonably
Congregational Bishops can be hence inferred?

1. It is evident that Polycarp was not Bishop of one Single Congregation only;
by these words, call the Congregations together etc. in the Plural Number.

2. His Jurisdiction and Authority over the Congregations, is manifest in these
words, Let nothing be done without thy Sentence.

3. The Subjection (...) to the Bishop from these Congragations, contained in
this Exhortation to them; Be mindful of the Bishop that God may be mindful of
you.

4. The Distinction of the three Sacred Orders in the Church (about which these
men have made such a bussle in the world) are plainly set down and overthrows
all their pretentions to Congregational Bishops, for says he, J could give my
life for these persons who are Subject to the Bishop, Pres yters and Deacons.
Here is a plurality of Congregations and a plurality of Presbyters and Deacons
and but one Bishop. From his not reading, or concealing the most material parts
in this Ep. wherein lie the true Sentiments of St. Ignatius, how Triumphantly
does he conclude for Congregational Bishops; whereas the whole is altogether
against it. Then he glories in the copious management of this Argument, by
Blundel, Baxter, Owen, Clarkson, and others: Alas, all these have been
judiciously Answered by Bramhal, Hammond, Morris, Stillingfleet, Dodwell, etc.

In his 36. p. says he; It is observable in the passage cited out of Irenaeus,
the Presbyters are said to have their Succession from the Apostles; and infers
from thence, that the Presbyters are the Apostles Successors as well as
Bishops, and must conseq ently have the same power.

How frequently in the writings of the Fathers, and in Scripture, are Bishops
called Presbyters, as that word signifies Seniority or Dignity? and are not
they sometimes called Deacons too? but as it would be very absurd to infer
from hence an Equality of Bishops and Deacons, so would it be unreasonable to
conclude concerning Bishop and Presbyter.

That our Author is mistaken in St. Irenaeus's sense of the word Presbyter,
appears by the words immediately subjoyned, which are these; Qui cum
Episcopatus Successione Charisma veritatis certum, Secundum placitum Patris
acceser^nt. L. 4. C. 43.
Who (that is the Presbyters above mentioned) with the Succession of
Episcopacy, have received the Infallible Gift of Truth according to the Will of
the Father. It is plain that no other can be here meant, but those of the
highest Order in the Church; Bishops.

My Author p. 37. accuses me, that I designed not fair dealing with Mr. H-ry;
it was a great omission in me, I therefore take his (tho very sharp) Rebuke
very kindly. Mr. H-ry in his 19 p. Parag. 6. very Orthodoxly says: Separation
from Communion with those that we have joined our selves to, without a Cause;
give me leave to call it Separation for Separation sake, without any regard had
to any think amiss in the Church we Separate from, or any thing better in that
we join our selves to; is Schism. Then he proves the truth of this Proposition,
from his own description of Schism; and then concludes, When we quite cast off
Communion with our Brethren out of Ambition, Animosity to their persons,
affectation of Novelty and Singularity and the like. Now our Author, lest this
truth so plainly set down by Mr. H-ry, should carry too sharp an edge upon 'em;
in p. 37. brings in his Insinuation (as he in vain supposes) to guard them
from the stroke they must naturally receive from the applying of it to them:
For (says he) We all grant, that for persons wilfully to withdraw themselves
from such particular Churches as are framed according to Scripture Rules, and
impose no new and needless Terms, is to act Schismatically, because such
wilful Separation cannot be without the breach of Charity. The difficulties
which my Author (which indeed are none at all) would put, lies in Churches
framed according to Scripture Rules, etc. It is Schism in Mr. H-ry's Judgment
to Separate from a Church without any regard had to any thing amiss, Let it be
Examined if in our Church there be any thing amiss?

Are not all the Arcicles of saving Faith truly taught? No just cause of
Separation.
the Holy Sacraments duly Administered, the Moral precepts, and all the Rules of
the Christian Religion plainly and constantly recommended unto us, and pressed
upon us for our Exercise in the whole Course of our lives, in the Sermons of
our Clergy in all our Churches? are not all things pertaining to a Godly Life
and Salvation by our Church fully exhibited to us, so as that no man can
miscarry but by his own fault? Here, then sure can be nothing am^ss. Can these
men maintain and justify then, the truth of their Doctrine, and separate
themselves from us without pronounceing themselves Schismatics? either their
Doctrine is not true, or these men are Schismatics in practice by their own
showing. All the false and shiftless pretense they have is, that the Church of
England is not framed according to Scripture Rules, and imposes new and
needless terms, and therefore Separation from such a Church is no Schism.

That our Church is truly Apostolical, and as truly framed as Jerusalem,
Antioch, Alexandria, and all other Primitive Churches according to Scripture
Rules; according to Christ Jesus's own Institution, is fully proved in these
papers. So that, that Objection is clearly Answered, and is indeed vain and
frivolous.

Now let his other as vain and frivolous Objection be considered; viz. the
Imposing new and needless Terms, by which is, I suppose, meant Geremonies; I
must here crave leave to mention what I have before; viz. the Love-^cast, the
Holy. kiss had no intrinsic virtue in them, were no Essentials of Religion (see
his p. 2.) mere Ceremonies; and as this Gent. calls our Ceremonies, without any
native worth, or strength, yet were made Terms of Communion in the Apostles
days, and continued for some time after. The Ceremonies in our Church are of
the same Nature; only have so much worth and strength, that they beat the
pleasant fruit of Decency and Order; they are falsely called New, being Customs
of great Antiquity in the Church, and being enjoined by the same power
derivatively which the Apostles had, (by my Adversatys good leave) cease to be
needless: It necessarily follows, that all persons within the Juris^iction of
the English Church, have the same Obligation to submit to her Terms of
Communion, as the Christians had to submit to the Terms o. Communion with the
Apostles: Seeing then, that there is nothing amiss in our Church i. e. not any
thing that can give any just occasion to separate from her Communion: Seeing
too, that She is a Church framed according to Scripture Rules, and that her
Terms of Communion are neither New nor Needless; the Conclusion necessarily
follows, that whoever they be within her Jurisdiction, that Separate from her
Communion, do Separate for Separation sake, and have no other Motives
thereunto, than those in ^at^ Vices of the mind, mentioned by Mr. Hery, viz
Ambition Animosity, etc. to close this; These men are Notorious Schismatics
from their own Principles, and thereby give themselves the Title of Arch-Rebels
in Christ's Kingdom.

I will t^^ this Question upon the Dissenters, and Examine what account they can
give or their being a Church framed according to Scripture Rules, and whether
all they impose as Terms of Communion be by express Rules in Scripture?

That Church cannot be framed according to Scripture Rules where the Priestly
Office is exerci^ed without the Divine Mission; my Author may as tr^^l ^ affirm
in respect of his ^atural Generation, that be is an immediate Son of Adam, as
what be in his 31 p. affirms of Ordination, viz. that their Spiritual Govern^rs
i.e. their Pastors derive their Authority from Christ, which by the words
sub^oyned, must be immediately from Christ, for he says, it is mere proper than
to speak of deriving it from the Apo^l^^, etc. No Commission was ever known to
come immediately from Heaven without some extraordinary Testimony to evince the
Truth of it. The immediate Mission which these men pretend to, requires an
extraordinary Testimony, or no man in his right Wits can believe or assent to
its Authority, or esteem it for any thing but mere Delusion, or Usurpation.

The Cretian Church must be allowed to be framed according to Scripture ^^les
(I keep to this Gentleman's term) in that Church, St. Paul appointed Titus to
Ordain Elders in every City; none in the Scriptural Churches (as this Gent
Phrases it) was to enter upon the Pastoral, or Priestly Office, without
Episcopal Ordination. Our blessed Savior says, J^^. 10.1. Verily I say unto
you, he that enters not by the door into the Sheep sold, but climbeth some
other way, the same is a Thies and a Robber: Not entering in at the Door
signifies, entering without that Authority which the Author of our Religion has
Ordained in his Church; without this Mission, ( i. e. Episcopal Ordination) no
man has Authority to Preach the Gospel, administer Sacraments, or exercise any
thing appropriate to the Priestly Office; unless these men can manifest that
they have this Mission, they are so far from being a Scriptural Church, that
our blessed Savior pronounces them to be Thieves and Robbers. By this account
of the Frame of their Church (supposing, but not granting it to be a Church) it
appears to have no Foundation of a Scriptural Church, but on the contrary is
Condemned in the H^ly Scripture.

Let it now be examined whether All they impose as Terms of Communion, be by
express Rules in Scripture?

1. First, Then I desire they will inform us, where did our blessed Savior, or
his Apostles appoint the first day of the Week for Celebration of the Public
Worship?

2. What precept have they in Scripture for choosing a Text as is now used to
Preach upon, or the erection of a Pulpit?

3. What Divine Command have your Brethren for the Form of Public Penance, the
Stool of Repentance, imposed by the Kirk of Scotland and the Presbyterians in
England? These are I suppose, Terms of Communion with you; I am not disputing
against the Practice of these things, but hence it appears how unreasonable and
false, that Principle you so much contend for is, to wit; that nothing is to be
done about the Worship and Service of God, without Rules and express Command in
the Holy Scripture. But I farther demand of you,

4. What Divine Warrant, or where in Scripture did your Predecessors find those
three significant Ceremonies, imposed without the Regal Authority, at the
taking the Solemn League and Covenant, which you at this day justify? First
the Takers must be uncovered. 2ly, they must stand up. 3ly, The right hand must
be lifted up bare; all these Ceremonies in this Religious Solemnity, signifying
the Submission and Assent of the parties to that Rebellious Covenant, were
Instituted by the Presbyterians.

In his 37 p. he says, We desire the Rules of the Gospel may be carefully
looked into, and a model of Government and Worship taken from thence, such as
may be likely to answer the great ends of Church Societies, etc. Here Is our
Government and Worship supposed to be inconsistent with the Rules of the
Gospel; thence a necessity of Reformation; and who can deny so fair an Offer?
The Model these good men will set up, shall be a Model for Church Government
and Worship (not like our Unscriptural Church, but) taken from the Rules of the
Gospel. But here its demanded.

5. What Rule or Command is there in all the Sacred Scriptures, for private and
Unauthorized persons, such as these men are, under pretense of Reformation, to
supplant a Catholic Church, truly Reformed in Government and Worship, to
primitive purity (as I have showed) and established by all the Authority that
can be had on Earth from God or Man? Conceited men! Think ye that those Pious
Martyrs who Reformed our Church inspected not the Rules of the Gospel as
carefully and Conscienciously as you? and are not the ^reat ends of Church
Society answered, (viz.) the Christian Faith truly professed and maintained;
the Holy Sacraments duly administered, and such an Unity and Christian Charity
observed and practiced according to the Rules of the Gospel in our Church, as
exactly and amply as in any Church on this side Heaven?

His next words in p. 38. are, That nothing may be imposed but what is either
expressly commanded; or has a natural and proper tendency to promote that which
is so, etc. This is Answered before.

He says farther; Then would the Worship and Service of God appear like
itself, Rational, Grave and Majestical, becoming reasonable Creatures, etc.

Here are all men to be persuaded, that the Worship and Service in their
Conventicles is eminently more Rational, Grave and Majestic than in our
Churches. The truth of this will best appear from their practice.

None of their Addresses to K. James the second were presented, 'till the
Composure and Form thereof, was deliberated and well weighed by more than One,
by the whole Classis of a County: The Preacher says, Eccles. 5.2. Be not rash
with thy Mouth, and let not thine Heart be hasty to utter any thing before God,
etc. But they, in their Conventicles, Address the Majesty of Heaven, they rush
upon and approach his presence, with the rash and Sudden thoughts of one single
person, with a Prayer newly Coined, but whether Sterling; true, according to
Standard, being never tried, is uncertain, for the people know it not, nor the
Orator, till it be out; they showed more Fear and Reverence to an earthly King,
than they daily do to God Almighty. Is this Rational? Is this Grave?

In their Conventicles, at the reading the Holy Scriptures, among which the
Psalms, consisting of the highest strains of Devotion, they Sit or Loll, and
are covered; is this Grave and Majestic?

When the Minister (as they call him) offer up his (rash and unconsider'd)
Prayers to God, the People are in confused, and irreverend postures, as if
there were some unconcerned and trivial thing in hand; is this Grave and
Majestical?

He who Administers in their Divine Worship (as they call it) has no other
Habit than what is due to, and becomes a Tradesman, or any other Layic in the
Congregation (and indeed therein they are very modest; the Minister for the
most part having no more claim to Priestly Garments than his Auditors) is this
Grave and Majestic?

The truth is, these men are so humorsome, that what is Rational they condemn
as Senceless; what is Grave and Majestical, they condemn for Superstition; and
on the contrary, what is Rude, Irreverend and Foppish, they esteem as Rational,
Grave and Majestical.

By this time it is very evident, that the Dissenters in England do Separate
from a Church, wherein there is (to use Mr. H-ry's words) not any thing amiss;
i. e. not any thing that can give any just occasion to Separate from her; and
that the Communion (for I cannot call it a Church) or Society they join
themselves to, is so far from being better, that in many Respects which I have
mentioned, it is so much worse, that its an absurdity to compare them.

The Inference then, drawn by Mr. H-ry from his own Proposition is clearly
against them, Mr. H-ry p. 19.
that their Separation from our Church is clearly for Separation sake, and is
necessarily an Uncharitable Alienation of Affection, and is consequently
Schismatical.

Having also considered my Authors Notion of Schism; to wit, p. 37.
for persons wilfully to withdraw themselves from such particular Churches, as
are framed according to Scripture Rules, and impose no new or needless Terms,
is to act Schismatically, because such wilful Separation when no cause is
given, cannot be without breach of Charity with our Fellow Christians, which is
the Scripture Notion of Schism. Having showed, that our Church is truly framed
according to Scripture Rules, and that she imposes neither New nor needless
Terms; this Inference of his, is necessarily against them too, viz. That the
wilful withdrawing of these men from such a particular Church as our Church
is, is to act Schismatically, etc. If any thing would prevail upon the
O^^^inacy of these men, here is conviction from their own Reasoning.

(...) fair dealing with Mr. H-ry at this time, will make an Attone^^^^ (...)
^^^mer Omission, and allay my Adversaries bitter thoughts against me.

In my (...) paper, p. 7. I instanced the Authoritys of Ienatius, Iren^us,
^^^^ian, and A (...), who were all Bishops and Mattyrs, and agree, T^^^ for
(...) to dis^^ey then Bishops and Presbyters appointed and set ever them; and
to S^parate (...) them, o^ to set up distinct Conventicles, is (...). Is not by
this understood di^^r^ty or Separation of Com^^^^ (...) is not this properly
Sc^^sm? Yet for this my assirmation, he does in his 45 p. peremptorily charge
me (and consequently those Pious Ma^yrs) with giving St. Paul the Lie. It St.
Paul condemned the Corinthians for admiring, and barely pre^^^^ing one Minister
before another, of Schism; shall that far greater and blacker Crime, the
f^^saking, and Separating from them, (^o which the (...) were not then arrived)
be excluded from Schism? Shall a cut in the Arm be truly called Schism or
Schissure; and shall not the lopping off, and Separating the Arm from the Body,
(which is the Dissenters Case) be accounted so? Wherein do I give St. Paul the
lie? This Gent. is a topping Accuser.

The rest of his Book contains chiefly, Bitter Invectives, and Scurrilous
Reflections; at his bitter reviling of me, I wonder not; But stand amazed at
his hardyness, and indeed horrid and gross Impiety, with so much Venom and
Malice, to take into Royal Sepulchers, and render our Four Protestant Monarchs
Infamous; see his p. 61. (of K. Charles the 2d he says) not to be paralelled
in Story.

I Q. Elizabeth's Reign, our Church was again Reformed; all the Innovations and
Superstitions, which by a long series of time, the Church of Rome had
introduced into the Church, and Consecrated with the Title of the Did Religion,
abolished; the inestimable Blessing of the truly Ancient Catho^e Religion,
revived and established; this Religious Queen, and all those pious Prelates, to
whom under God, the praise of all that Glorious work was due, escape no^ his
malice, but in one breath blackens and defames them all; these are his words in
p. 75. That great Princess had s^^^thing of the Sire in her, and there wanted
not Prelatic breath to blow the Spark into a Flame.

The Universal Fame this Great Princess had for Wisdom and Piety; the Turbu^en
Humor, and Insolent behavior of the Dissenters toward Her, you have an
account of, in Bish. Barnet's A^r^dgment, etc. the 4th Book, p. 381. Now
notwithstanding, that this man says in his 2d p. that Penal Laws had a quite
contrary effect; and in his 3d p. that they have not hitherto brought
Protestants to an exact Uniformity; this Queen in the year 1592, made Penal
Laws, which being Vigorously Executed, contrary to his maxims, had the good
effects and proper ends for which they were made; suppressed the Ringleaders,
and put an end to their Conventicles, and brought so many of them to
Conformity, that during Her reign afterward, she had no more disturbances from
them; and this I suppose to be the chief incentive of this Malcontents
displeasure against this Great and Matchless Princess.

In his 56 p. concerning K. James the first, he says: For when King (...)
Englands Throne, the Prelatic Party dreading least the Pa^^tans (...) great a
share in his Favors, upon the account of his Ed^^tion, (...) the Scottish
Nobility and Ministry might have upon hi^, (...) Studies to creat a prejudice
against them; and f^^ing no (...) take with him, as the extending of his
Authority, and enlarging (...) P^rogative, etc. They Flatt^red the Ambition and
Vices of that Prince, and there^^ made him entirely their own.

To show how false this Affirmation is, I will here set down the Opinion which
that Learned and Judicious Prince, had of the Scottish Puritans, from a long
experience; Published and declared in Print at Edinborough, some years before
his Accession to the Throne of England. He calls the Presbyterian Government,
animagined Dem^cracy; and says, AILIKON D OPON
That they fed themselves with the hope to become Tribuni Plebis; and so in a
popular Government, by leading the people by the Nose, to bear the sway of all
the Rule, etc. And a little farther: p. 39. p. 41. p. 42.
Take heed therefore my Son, to such Puritans, very pests in the Church and
Commonweal; whom no deserts can oblige, neither Oaths not Promises bind;
breathing nothing but Sedition and Calumnies; aspiring without Measure, railing
without Reason, etc. And a little farther, after comparing them to Hi^ land, or
Border-Thieves for ingratitude, Lying and Perjuries, he says; And suffer not
the Principals of them to brook your Land, if you like to sit at ^^st: except
ye would keep them for trying your Patience, as Secrates did an evil Wife.

Now had this man the least grain of Shame or Modesty, common to Human Nature,
he would never have exposed himself to so plain and known a c^^tradiction: That
the English Prelates slatter'd him into an ill Opinion (...) the Plu^i^ans, is
so far from being true, that it was founded upon his (...). Experience, and
Published long before he had any converse with the ^^glish Prelates. And that
he should accuse that King of Ambition and Vices, who was so eminently Famous
for Piety and Virtue, is horridly wicked. Here is great Reason for this man to
conceal his name.

Against K. Charles the first, he masters up a Roll of all the heinous Crime
the can Imagine, which I could answer particularly, but for his Vindication from
this man's malicious Calumny; it is sufficient to refer the Reader to the Rolls
and Acts of Parliament (of which he mentions not a word) and all other
Transactions which pass^d in his time, not yet out of mem^ry. What did that
Pa^li^ment (...) ask, which He did not grant, except the Tower of (...) and the
M^^^^a? which because he thought it too (...) to Separate from the Monarchy,
they Se^z^d by Violence: Never was a King to food (...) a Parliament (witness
His passing the Bill for not Di^^^^ving them without their co^^ert) and never
were there such ungrateful returns; He ^e^i^ed (...) the Peace and Tranquillity
of the Nation, and they were for ^^^^ying it into Co^vulsions and Rebellion: He
was for preserving and mainta^^ing the Church, in all Her Ancient just
Established Rights, and they for de^^roying both Her and Him. They indeed
contrived and gave him Op^^ ^^^ies, to his Eternal Fame, to show how eminently
the Grace of God was in him; never did any Prince, since the Prince of Peace,
show more Catistian Courage, Patience, Meckness, and Hamili^^, even to the
Admiration and Astonishment of His most Barbarous and Cruel Enemies. Now
whilst this man contracts the guilt of the Murder of this Royal Martyr, by
justifying all those irre^ular and Horrid proceedings of the Presbyterians
which brought it about, I do heartily with all good men keep the Anniversary
Fast and pray with our Church, that His memory may be ever blessed among us:
and that this Land may be freed from the Vengeance of his blood etc. Here is
Sufficient reason for this man to conceal his name.

The Violation of Promises, which in that 61. pa. he charges upon the Church
and Court party upon the Restoration, can be nothing else but Fi^ti^n and
Forgery, to prove which, greater Evidence cannot be for any thing, than the
Acts of that Parliament which K Charles the 2d immediately called; upon whom,
without Reserve he relied, not only to reform and forgive all the
Irregularities, but to renew the very Foundations, and to R^^establish the
Government of Church and State; both which, were O^^rturned and laid in
Rubbish, by an Unnatural Rebellion, fo^^^^d and carried on, by the
Presbyterians and their Adhaerents, (Witness their Illustrious Solemn League
and Covenant) and accor^^^^l all things were by that Parliament Re-established
and confirmed, to the satisfaction o^ the Nation in General; and this was the
Cons^^mation of that Treaty at B^ed^. Where now is the Violation of Promises?
The and^^^^us ^^eflections of this man, Laden with so much Malice, against our
Four Protestant Monarchs; is rather the Character of a Jesuit, than of any
other Society, it is so like them. This man Conceals his Name, and let it be
so; for the Name of the Wicked shall rot, Prove. 10. I will close this with the
complaint of the Royal Prophet; What shall be done unto thee O thou false
tongue. Psalm. 10.7.

But Blessed be God, says he in pa. 62. We have a King upon the Throne, that
understands, and loves the tru^ Interest of England, etc. It is well He is
(...) the Throne, and God gr^nt him long to be so; But who can account (...)
men's praises to a King on the Throne, for any thing but Flattery and Hypocrisy,
that knows five years are not yet expired, since these men uni^^rsally ^^ater's
King Jame^, with ^^osan^^^^'s far beyond this, in their ^an^gyties to him, when
on the Throne. But would you know the true Interest o^ En^^^nd? Learn of him
who infalibly understood it, He says, That a Kingdom divided against it se^f
cannot stand. Mar. 3 24. Unity in Religion being the Surest ^^^work, and the
most approved preservative of a Kingdom from dividing, is certainly the truest
Interest of England; ^he Dissenters then, who creat Divisions, making Parties
and Factions about matters not ^^sential to Religion, according to our blessed
Savior's Maxim, neither understand nor love the true Interest of England.

In his 66. p. he says, We hold Communion with you in all that is necessa^y,
either to the Being or Welfare of a Church, and by your unnecessary Trifles,
(...) break with us, and not we with you, if any breach there be. To which ^
answer.

To the Being of a Church, it is necessary that the Government be of Di^ine
Institution, which I have showed to be Episcopacy; And that the Mem^ers be
United in a peaceable Subjection to the Government, is absolute^^ necessary to
the Being and Welfare of a Church; for without this, not ^^ly the Peace, which
is the Welfare, but the very Being of a Church, must be Dissolved and Swallowed
up in Division and Confusion. Now ^our setting up a Government Distinct and
Opposite to the Ancient Government, Established in the Church, than which the
blessed Saints and Mar^^rs of old knew no other, and under pretense of
Unnecessary Trifles, (as ^ou call 'em) to withdraw all Obedience and
Subjection, which is plainly ^estructive, not only to the Welfare, but the very
Being of a Church, and ^et so confidently to affirm, you hold Communion with us
in all that is ne^essary thereunto, is to impose upon our very Senses; and to
believe it, ^ere to degenerate into Senseless Brutes.

But alas! should the Church condescend to gratify your Humor, strip ^^e
Priest of his Habit, the Emblem of Innocence, the Color o^ the Robes (...) St.
John's Vision, and in which all the Messengers from Heaven appear^^? Should she
for your sake, abandon the Sign of the Cross, so anciently used in all Catholic
Churches? Should she yield to rob her Members of their Ancient Right; by
Cancelling and Oblitterating the Liturgy, which for Matter and Order how useful
and necessary for Public Devotion, let it self Testify? And instead thereof
allow Extemporary Prayers, which, what crude and indigested matter for the most
part they are, we have heard and know; and which cannot possibly without the
Stamp of Authority (which they are not capable of) or be made appear to be the
dictates of the Spirit, tho programed before Ten thousand people, bear the
Title of Public or Common P^ayers. Should the prohibit Kneeling, and enjoin us
like Crowns and B^^^^s, to (...) we Celebrate the Commemoration of the Death
and P^^^ion of our bless^^ Redeg^er in the E^charist? Should she forbid bowing
i^ my De^^tion, at the saving name of J^^us, and paying Co^^^^al Ad^^^tion to
God (...), which the very light of Nature teaches? And should she (...) which
you a ^^^^ingly call Prifles? Alas! She must betray^^er Tr^^^ (...) level the
Priest-ho^d she must Surrender and part with the Government ^^tabli^hed by
Divine Institution, or you will never be fatis^yed: this is evident in the
whole strain of your Book, and is the avowed and Darling Principle of all
Dissenters, of what persuasion soever; were their Divisions more numerous than
the points in the Compass, yet they will all agree and Center in this, viz. the
Expulsion of Diocesan Bishops from the Government of the Church: not
considering that they contend and strive against the Ordinance of God, the Care
and Charge of all the Churches, being entrusted and committed to them; and who
through all Ages from the Apostles, as faithful Overseers of the Church of God,
have handed down, and delivered to us, the Holy Scriptures, the Articles of
Faith, ^he holy Sacraments, and all that is Sacred, and conducive to Holiness,
Unity and Charity here, and to that future happy Estate of perfect Holiness and
Unity Eternal hereafter. Ungrateful men! is their Extirpation and Destruction a
meet reward for conveying to us such inestimable Ble^sings? Are ye the meek
Servants of the meek and Holy Jesus, who m^rme^ and Rebel against them that
bear his Authority? Can ye be the Disciples of Christ, who abjure and declare
against his Ambassadors? Or can ye be e^^^^ed the Subjects of the Prince of
Peace, who sow the Seeds of Contention, and are the Authors of Separation, of
Division and Confusion in the Church of God? No, no, He has formded our
Religion in Charity and (...), in Peace and Obedience; and (...) one can be his
Disciple, who is a viol^^^^ of C^^^^tian Charity, making no Conscience (under
pretense of Con^^^ence) to disturb the Peace, and dissolve the Unity of the
Church, not only by disobeying the Governors thereof, in those things which our
Savior having lest indifferent, has left in their Power to impose and Command;
but by despising them, and endeavoring their utter Extirpation. As the Tree is
known by its Fruit, so are you by your Works; If any have been Guilty of Schism
ever since the Ascension, or can be till the Second Advent of our Lord, our
Dissenters are manifestly so. And as the Confute of the Church, judicially
pronounced against Scandalous, Lend, and disorderly persons, excludes them from
the Congregation of Christ's Flock, which St. Paul calls, deliv ring up unto
Satan. So these Dissenters, 1 Cor. 5. v. 5. 1 Timothy 1. v. 20.
by despising and renouncing the Government of the Church, by withdrawing and
Separating themselves from Communion with her, involve and hurry themselves
wilfully, into the same State and Condition with those, who by judicial
Sentence are put out of the Congregation of Christ's Flock; how deplorable
soever it is to be so, this is the true state of the C^se of all who as our
Dissenters, are guilty of Criminous Schism, they exclude themselves from the
Catholic Church.

The Holy Scriptures abound with Remedies against this, but I will presume to
mind them only of these, prescribed by St. Paul. The first is; Mind not high
things, but condescend to men of low Estate; be not Wise in your own conceits.
Now not to submit in things Indifferent, Romans 12. v. 16.
which being Commanded by our Lawful Governors, are made a Duty, is very
contrary to this Command of condescending to men of low Estate. And they must
be Wise in their own Conceits, who occasion the breach of Charity and Unity, by
preserring and obstinately contending for their own private Opinions, against
the deliberate and United Councils and Decrees of their Superiors, in those
things wherein the Essentials of Religion are not the least concerned. The next
is, Follow Peace with all men, and Holiness, Heb. 12. v. 14.
without which, no man shall see the Lord; Holiness is but pretense, and if I
may call it so, mere Pageantry in Religion, in those who do not follow Peace
with all men, much more in them who will not be at Peace with their Lawful
Spiritual Governors; for he who has not Peace as well as Holiness, shall never
see God. And now more full of Charitable desires, than hope of the Conviction
of these men to Christian Peace and Unity, with a Resolution never to give them
any more trouble of this kind; as I began with our Saviors Command, and
Blessed Legacy of Peace, so I conclude with St. Paul's Exhortation; Be of one
mind, live in Peace, 1 Cor. 13 v. 11.
and the God of Peace shall be with you.

FINIS.

