New Prayers AND MEDITATIONS WITH Pious Exhortations FOR Fast-Days, Pursuant to
their MAJESTY'S King WILLIAM and Queen MARY'S Injunctions to Suppress
Irreligion and Profaneness.

By Tho. Watts, Vicar of Orpington, and St. Mary Crey in KENT.

Except ye Repent, ye shall all likewise Perish, Luke 13.3, 5. LONDON, Printed
for John Salusbury at the Rising Sun in Cornhill. 1692.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO HIS Ever Honored Friend the Reverend William
Asheton, D.D. Rector of Beckenham.
Reverend and worthy Sir,
YOur late Approbation of my good and zealous design herein (however meanly
managed by so young, helpless, and unqualify'd an Author) emboldens me to this
Publication under your Name; which has so well merited of the Christian Church;
That I cannot but find Protection hereby, from the Insolences and Affronts of
Scorn and Prejudice; and from all the open Injuries of unjust Censure, and
uncharitableness: Though Pride, Worldliness, and Hypocrisy, may still prove
irrefragable, and constantly undermine the Plain-dealer: Yet alas! this
Grievance is nothing to that common Infidelity, Profaneness, and Irreligion
uncontroulably revelling in this confused Age; and impudently confronting every
thing Just, and sacred; doing all possible despite to God, and his Church.
This intolerable madness, with those many-headed Monsters, every where rending
Christ's seamless Coat, cry aloud for speedy suppression; or woeful vengeance
upon a stupid People; which latter nothing surely can now prevent, but either
an Universal Reformation, and unanimous Piety; or a due execution of Primitive
Discipline, which the Gospel authorizes; which our more Zealous and Godly
Forefathers exercised under the hottest Persecutions; which the Greek Church
has all along maintained under Turkish Bondage; and which alas! our holy
Established Church could not thus long have only wished, and annually hoped for
in vain; were not here more fatal and general Corruptions, and more daring
Impiety, than any where else; as consequently more dreadful will be our
Desolation, which nothing certainly, but Gods infinite mercy, through the
merits of our gracious Redeemer, hearkening to the Prayers and Tears of some
faithful Sons of Abraham amongst us, has hitherto delayed.

Now therefore since only gentle persuasion remains; since we are to preach in
Season, and of Season, to Rebuke and Exhort, and not wilfully to neglect any
means of informing our selves, or instructing others: And since we must be
careful of mistakes, and resolvedly honest, not to concel any part of our Duty
from our Flocks: And since it is high time for the Priests, the Ministers of
the Lord, to weep between the Porch and the Altar; and to say, Spare thy
People, O Lord, and give not thine Heritage to reproach. Who can blame me for,
or how can I excuse my self from such poor endeavors, as my double charge and
circumstances can allow, which otherwise perhaps might produce something more
correct, and elaborate, and thus far more useful, etc.

However give me leave, Sir, thus to attend you as my Gamaliel; and in an
humble (tho faint) imitation, and even in as great a distance as your noble
endowments, and excellent Abilities have set me; thus to presume upon
admiration of your Zeal and vigilance, your Piety and goodness, your public
Spirited Charity and Justice, your profound Judgment and Prudence, and your
constant meekness and affability, so well know to the World, in your many
Beneficial Writings and Conversation at home and abroad. This without
Compliment or flattery (which cannot be here, and which has always been far from
my Temper) I shall only mention, and thus beg your favorable acceptance
hereof, in Testimony of those many condescending favors bestowed upon your
unworthy,

and ever Obliged Humble Servant, Thomas Watts.
Orpington, Jan. 23. 1692.
THE PREFACE.
TO HIS Beloved Friends AND PARISHIONERS. Grace, Peace, and Love be multiplied
for ever.
My Friends and Brethren,
THis small Treatise I present you with, now, as a seasonable New years gift;
desiring your candid acceptance, and serious perusal hereof; and most humbly
beseeching our Heavenly Father, so to influence us all with the graces of his
holy Spirit; that we may see our Errors, amend our lives daily, and both know
and do the things which belong to our Peace, before they be hid from our Eyes:
For sudden Desolation, or impending Ruin may fall upon us; and however Death
(which is appointed once for all Men) will be our infallible Lot; and then we
shall be past doing our selves any good; for in the Grace no Man remembers
God, or gives him thanks in the Pit; and after Death follows certain judgment;
and then we shall have nothing, to do, but see our selves either saved or
damned to all Eternity. Wherefore as we value either, and as we believe we have
immortal Souls within us, which will once be separated from our Bodies, and be
united to them again in the general Resurrection, at the great aad last Assize
of all Mankind: So we should be careful of our behavior in this Life; and
constantly endeavor our utmust Conformity to the will of our Almighty Creator
and Redeemer: Which all of us must needs in some measure understand, and which
not the meanest Capacity among us can plead invincible ignorance of; and no
other is in the least excusable; especially, under this clear shining Light of
the Gospel, and the frequent due Administration of Gods Holy Word, and
Sacraments in the Communion of a visible Church, which we have all been long
miraculously blessed with, insomuch that we (above will People in the Earth)
have the greatest inducements and obligations, both upon the safe Principle of
our truest Interests, and upon the nobler divine Principle of Love and
gratitude; to worship and obey our mereiful Lord; to glorify his holy Name
before the World, in an universal and ready performance of our Religious
Duties; and thus to work out our own Salvation with fear and trembling: Yet
alas! how lukewarm, yea how cold and indifferent are the generality of us
herein? Even to a downright Profaneness, Irreligion in some, and a Supine
Neglect and Stupidity in others; and a superficial careless observance hereof
in most: How do we thus obstinately or idly contemn and disregard the common
means of grace, and Salvation, ordained by our Lord himself, in his Church
Militant here? Wherein (to be short) all such are most eminently sinful and
guilty; whom the learned Doctor Sherlock most piously and rationally confutes,
and instructs, in his Practical Discourse of Religions Assemblies, (a Book
worthy the Perusal of every Christian) out of which I shall crave leave to
enumerate them:

A^^l. Those who wholly, or for the most part absent themselves from the
Public Assemblies, of Christians; and these are of three sorts:

First, Those who forsake Religious Assemblies out of Profaneness, for want of
a due Sense of any Religion, or in contempt of it.

II. Those who forsake Religious Assemblies for want of a due sense of the
necessity and advantage of Public Worship; who do not go to Church, because
they think they can Worship God as well at home in their Closets or Families.

Thirdly, Those who plead Conscience for their separation, and set up distinct
Communions of their own.

Secondly, Those who profess to live in Communion with the Church of England,
and yet are too notoriously guilty of some great miscarriages in Public
Worship: Such as these:

1st. The forsaking the Communion of their Parish Churches without just cause
for it.

Secondly, Irreverence in Worship.

2dly, The neglect of a due attendance on the Public Prayers of the Church.

Fourthly, The neglect of the Public Administration of Baptism.

Fifthly, That they neglect or refuse to submit their Children and Servants to
public instructions.

Sixthly, That either never receive the Lord's Supper, or very rarely. The very
naming of these things (says he) must needs convince all Men, who have any
Sense of Religion, how seasonable this Discourse is; for there was never any
Age, wherein there was more need of it. And since Religion has so great an
Influence upon the government of Men's Lives; the neglect or miscarriage of
Public Worship, does not only tend to Corrupt Men's manners, but has a very ill
Aspect upon public Affairs; which you may read in P. 17, 18. And so for entire
satisfaction in all these particulars; I refer you to the excellent Book it
self: Proceeding to recount some few more scand lous Offenders herein; as those
who dishonor God, defame and injure their Neighbor, and defile and ruin their
own Souls, Bodies and Estates, by the commission of such heinous Transgressions
as these, viz. Blasphemy, Perjury, common swearing and Cursing, propharation of
the Lords Day, disobedience to Parents, either Natural, Civil, Ecclesiastical,
or Oeconomical; Murder, Envy, Revenge, Malice or any manner of
uncharitableness; Fornication, Adultery, Theft, Lying, Deceit, covetousness,
Oppression, Injustice, Luxury, Pride, Drunkenness, and any intemperance, etc.
Now here we may observe, that there are no Vices or sins more positively and
expressly forbidden and condemned, than these, both in all natural and revealed
Religion; in all the Morals of the Ancient Heathens; throughout the Old and New
Testamen; and in our Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Common Laws; particularly, ever
since Kings and Queens have become Nursing Fathers and Nursing Mothers to our
Church; have interwoven her in the Security and Privileges of the State, or
Commonwealth; and thus freed her from the burning fury and violence of
Persecutions; insomuch that thus now it becomes the more indispensible duty of
all that are in Authority, truly and indifferently to minister Justice to the
punishment of all such wickedness and vice; and to the maintenance of God's
true Religion and Virtue: which if neglected, nothing can be more satal to a
sinful Nation: since nothing can more daringly provoke Heavens vengeance upon
it. And now too may we not justly conclude, that those persons, who will break
through all these Sanctions, bid defiance to all the dictates of right reason,
and the sacred injunctions both of God and Man, by continuing in those
notorious impieties, presumptuously or desperately in despite of Justice: are
the greatest Enemies in the World, not only to their own Souls, and private
concerns, but to their Neighborhood round them, and to the public good of any
Church and State? As on the other side, the truest and best Friends to all, are
the Godly, Righteous, and sober persons; for may we not find innumerable
instances hereof, both in reading and observation, how God Almighty has
recalled his angry Rod upon the Prayers and Tears of the Righteous, or
Penitent; and has destroyed whole Cities, People and Kingdoms, yea and once a
whole World for the persisting obstinate wickedness of them that dwelt therein,
allowing the Just the salvation of their own Souls only? And now, Lastly, (to
refer the prosecution of these Remarks, and exhortations to the Conclusion, and
to proceed to our Meditation) May we not all easily apprehend this chief cause
of that stiff-necked and general Iniquity, which overspreads our Land, viz. The
want of consideration, of divine Thought, or Meditation, which renders us rash,
headstrong, and precipitate, and even mere unthinking, and irrational Animals:
not but that we are some way reasonable and thoughtful; but in that we fix our
Minds upon wrong Objects, upon mere earthly things; and place our treasure and
hearts here below; madly suffering our selves to be deluded by empty Charms,
fatal Nothings, the fading and transitory Wealth, Honor, Pleasure, and
Vanities of this Sublunary World; and all the while neglecting the more solid
Joys and Raptures of an Immaterial Soul; the true Exertion of her Faculties and
Powers; the right use of that soaring Reason, and improvement of that divine
Image stamped upon us in our Creation; which alone ennobles our Natures, and
distinguishes us from the Beasts that perish; and which alone can render us
amiable in the sight of our Heavenly Father, and consequently make us truly
happy both here and hereafter. Oh! this therefore let us all learn and
experience in divine Meditation; beginning it with the great fundamental Duty
of Repentance; a Duty always necessary and incumbent upon the best of us; since
none can pretend to be so Just or Holy, as to need no repentance: Hereto then I
beg your diligent attention: Most heartily praying for the Illuminations and
Aids of the Holy Ghost, to make the words of our Mouth, and the Meditations of
our Heart always acceptable to God, and beneficial to his Church.

New Prayers AND MEDITATIONS, FOR Fast Days, etc.
AWake up my Soul, and consider whence thou art? What is thy business here, and
whither thou must go? The Entrance.
Consider whose Image thou bear, after whose likeness, and by whom wast thou
Created: And call to mind what Laws and Commands thine Almighty Father has
imprinted upon, and revealed unto thee; and then remember thy frequent and
innumerable Transgressions, with the folly and danger thereof: Add to this some
thoughts of thy great Creators infinite Wisdom, Holiness, Goodness, Justice,
Mercy; how wonderfully has he contrived for thy Felicity? With what amazing
Condescension has himself wrought thy Redemption, and how he daily calls upon
thee for a reasonable and blessed performance of thine own Engagements? And now
he thus invites thee upon the most gracious terms, to fly into the Arms of his
Eternal Love? And yet how sloathful and backwards thou art? How blind and
deformed do thou make thy self? And how rebellious, loathsome and ungrateful
do thou prove? Oh think then, what will be the fatal consequences of this
stupidity and madness? See the roaring Lion ready to devour thee; behold Death
(the Wages of sin) coming to arrest thee; and look down upon the Bottomless
Gulf of Hell, gaping for thee, and thus think how thou can escape their
dreadful Jews: How thou can avoid their Terror, Sting and endless Tortures,
but by speedily harkening to thy Lords merciful Voice; immediately turning from
thy evil Ways, presently bewailing thy Fall and Misery; lamenting in dust and
ashes, and thus exercising timely and unfeigned Repentance. Awake then quickly,
thou drowsy polluted Soul; rouse up thy corrupted understanding and depraved
Will; lay thy self prostrate before the Throne of Grace; cry mightily to God
for Pardon and Mercy; and begin now to wash off thy filthiness in the Tears of
Penitence, fly to the laver of Regeneration; and pray for divine help in the
due knowledge and performance hereof; and for this end, consider my Soul, what
is this Repentance, is it not a Sorrow for sin? A due sense and acknowledgment
with an utter abhorrence of all Impiety, 2. The descrip. and division.
and an entire Reformation of Life: Is it not a Mourning in a more doleful
manner, than was heretofore signified by the external signs of Sackcloth and
Ashes? And is it not a weeping, an inward roaring, disquietness and grief, with
stronger crying and Tears, then can be expressed by rending the Hair and
Garments, and besmearing the Face? For this is a rending of the Heart,
afflicting the Mind and Soul, creating such a troubled Spirit, such a broken
and contrite Heart as God may not despise; and thus true and sincere Repentance
consists of these three Parts; Confession, Contrition, and firm Resolution of
Amendment, with actual Deeds of a new and thoroughly Reformed Life.

O set about this then betimes, and view thy necessary Obligations and
Encouragements hereto; do not the Commands of thy Creator and Redeemer at all
move thee? 3. The Causes.
Does not Love, Justice and Gratitude compel thee to this Duty? Will not the
experienced Abomination and Odiousness, the ridiculous Folly and Vanity, the
sordid, irksome drudgery, the manifest Evils, Mischiefs and dangers, and even
the self-punishment of sin force thee to Repent? Or may not the most benigh and
bountiful Offers of heavenly Grace and assistance, the assured hopes of Gods
favor here, and glory hereafter; or the inevitable privation of these in
insuportable Misery, and an Eternity of Torments, drive thee to work out thy
own Salvation with fear and Trembling? Oh will neither the greatest benefits,
the most earnest invitations, and charming Inducements on the one hand, nor the
dreaded displeasures, certain Vengeance, and Terrors of the Lord on the other,
persuade thee? Or do thou not remember thy Baptismal Vows, and repeated
Promises and Resolutions, with thy manifold breaches thereof, adding the worse
of Perjury, Rebellion, and Treachery to the black and dismal Catalogue of thine
innumerable transgressions? But further, do not Nature and Conscience check and
inform thee? Do not the invisible Motions, and secret whisperings of the
Blessed Spirit instruct and reprove thee? And do not the sacred Ordinances of
God and his Church, whereof thou art a sworn Member; or the ordinary visible
means of Grace and Salvation in the solemn Administration of God's holy Word,
Rites and Sacraments, remind thee of all? And do not thus thy lawful Pastors
and Teachers, those Stewards of the unfathomable Mysteries, and Ambassadors of
Heaven, cry aloud, lift up their Voices like Trumpets, and call frequently upon
thee to turn from thy Evil Ways, and live.

Enough, enough, I groan under the intolerable weight of sin, my bones are
broken, my heart is contrite, my Spirit Heavy; my flesh, 4. The Effects.
my wounds stink, and are corrupt; I am abominable and loathsome; I abhor my
self in dust and ashes, in great bitterness and anguish I cry unto the Lord; I
call upon my blessed Physician for ease, comfort and freedom; for help and
Pardon; I loath the mire which I have been long wallowing in; I run with
horror and amazement from the fatal Precipice which I was tumbling down; I
have laid hold upon the Horns of the Altar, and fled to the Sanctuary, and now
methinks, I am almost raped up into the third Heaven; I am risen from death; I
am flying in Ahrahams Bosom; I admire and love the Life of the Saints, and I
long to be triumphant with them above: Since now, my God, thou have mercifully
cleansed and healed me, thou have purged me with Hyssop, thou have washed me,
and made me whiter than Snow, yea thou have made me hear of joy and gladness,
in turning thy Face from my misdeeds, blotting out my Transgressions with thy
Blood, nailing them to thy Cross; and renewing in me a clean Heart and a right
Spirit; therefore will I rejoice in thy Salvation; I will love thy gracious
Precepts, and in love will I ever obey thy holy, good, and just Laws: O
stablish me with thy free Spirit, that I may teach thy Ways unto the Wicked,
and Sinners shall be converted unto thee: O satisfy me with the Pleasures of
thy House; let me dwell in thy Temple, and wait at thine Altar; yea thus let me
live, that I may never be disappointed of my hope: O come Lord Jesus, come
quickly, and let thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven.

But Lord, what is Man, that thou should be thus mindful of him, 5. The
Subjects and Adjuncts.
or the Son of Man, that thou should so regard him? Man whom thou did make
after thine own Image; did indow with Innocence, seat in paradise, and gave
him Dominion over all the works of thy hands; yet Man who so soon fell, and was
so wretchedly tempted to a fatal sin by the miserable Serpent: Man, who thus
brought the Devil, sin, Death and Hell, with all Temporal and Eternal Curses
and Plagues upon himself; Yet Man, whom thou have prodigiously, through mere
Compassion, and infinite loving kindness, redeemed, O Father, by the
Incarnation and Blood of thine own eternal and only begotten Son; and Man, of
whom thou requirest no more than Faith and Repentance, and a godly, righteous
sober living, according to thy most reasonable and upright Laws; which alone
can render him happy both here and hereafter; For is not Godliness, O my Soul,
profitable unto all things, having the promise of the Life that now is, and of
that which is to come? and yet, O Man, why do thou sin, why do thou remain
still disobedient, and prove the only Rebel of the whole Creation? Do thou
not know that God is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity? Do thou not see
the Devil prevailing upon the weakness of thy Flesh, alluring thee with Worldly
Vanities, enslaving and fettering thee, only to secure thy Soul and Body for
his eternal Torments? do thou not perceive thy barbarous Ingratitude, in
making thy dear Savior bleed afresh, by thy blasphemy, profaneness,
irreligion; by thy Covetousness, uncharitableness, oppression, cruelty,
prodigality, worldly-mindedness; by thy Luciferian pride, arrogance,
presumption, hypocrise, Schism, Heresy, Ambition, Lust, Rage, Intemperance,
with all the Brutal Vices, Diabolical Villainies, and innumerable wilful
Transgressions, daily and impenitently perpetrated in the World: Why do thou
not cast off this old Man? Why do thou not seek to be renewed? O seek to the
Lord, to heal thee of these Ulcers, and to expel these torturing Fevers; have
thou not the means before thee, can thou not fast and pray? (without which
this kind goes not forth) can thou not abstain, and mortify, and bring thy
Body in Subjection to thy Soul? can thou not deny thy corrupt Appetites, and
resist Satan, that he may fly from thee? Can thou not sincerely repent, and
thus, religiously and constantly, use all the means of Grace and Salvation? Oh
can thou not thus take upon thee Christ's Yoke and Burden, which thou will
soon experience to be most easy, light and pleasant.

And now consider, O my Soul, what a blessed Change is this to be the Servant
of God, instead of the Devil's Bond-slave; 6. The contrary and Comparison.
a Son and an Inheritor in the Kingdom of Heaven, instead of being a Factor
for, and Heir of Hell: Is it not better here to live innocently and with a
quiet Conscience, than to be always in a Hurricane, to be ever guilty, restless
and uneasy? Is it not better to make for thy self an Interest with the
Almighty, and become a Friend of the Lord, than to make God and Man, and thine
inward Accuser, thy just Enemies and Avengers. Is it not more Eligible to be
truly rational, than altogether senstive; to be a Man, than a Beast; to be a
Christian than an Infidel; is it not better to adore and worship thy great
Creator and Redeemer, to renew thy Baptismal Covenant frequently at the Lord's
Table; and to lay hold of all opportunities for doing good, and offering to the
Lord the devout Sacrifices of Prayer and Thanksgiving, which is thy bounden
Duty, and reasonable Service, than to blaspheme and profane God's holy Word,
Ministers and Ordinances; and to neglect all, and thus dare and provoke
Heaven's Vengeance against thee? And thus too, is it not better and easier to
remember thy Creator in the days of thy Youth; to repent and live well betimes;
than to run the bazard of an uncertain morrow and futurity; to continue
impenitent till thou art hardened in sin, and chained fast in the Old Serpent's
Trap; till thou art reprobated, and have no place left for Repentance? And is
it not safer to live under Gods protection, and be sure both of his temporal
and eternal Blessings; to be holy as he is Holy; and thus to anticipare
Heaven's Joys, and resemble upon Earth the inconceivable felicities and glories
above; than to be discarded an abandoned to the roaring Lion, and all the
Calamities, Accidents, and Miseries of Life; and at length to be certain of
nothing, but frying in everlasting Flames, in unquenchable Fire, and be gnawed
by the Worm that never dies?

O turn ye, turn ye then from your evil Ways, 7. The Names and Testimonies.
ye sinful Worms, that ye may live, and not dye: Oh be converted, and the Lord
will heal you; confess thy sins unto the Lord, and he will forgive the
Multitude of thy Transgressions: Smite thy Breast, and pray to God to be
merciful to thee a sinner; eschew Evil and do good, seek peace, and ensue it;
weep and lament, and learn the ways of God's Commandments, and be steadfastly
purposed to observe his statutes, and keep his righteous judgments: Refrain thy
Lips from Evil, and thy Tongue from speaking guile; wash thy hands in
innocence, and so may thou compass the divine Altar: Examln thy self, try
thy Reins and thy Heart, and search our all thy ways; acknowledge with righteous
Job, I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of Men, Job
9.20. Relent, cry, and be sorrowful with Holy David, and the Lord will pardon
thy sin; run to Christ with Mary Magdalen, and lie at his feet weeping, till
his grace and compassion raise thee up: Call to mind all thine impiety, and
then retire with St Peter, and weep bitterly, Luke 22.62. Know, that the Lord
is gracious, long-suffering and of great goodness, and that he wills not the
death of the Wicked, Exodus 33.11. but that the Wicked turn from his way and
live: O turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye dye, O house of Israel?
Now this does God admonish his Ministers (under the Title and duty of
Watchmen) to forewarn his people of, denouncing death to either of them that
neglect their Duty, as may be seen in the beginning of this Chapter: Draw near
then, thou stubborn or ignorant sinner, come for thy Souls good to thy
Spiritual guide, as thou would for thy Body and Estate to the Physician, and
the Lawyer? Yea, is not thy Soul more precious, and ought thou not to be
more zealous for, and careful of it? And so in all its sickness, to send for
the Elders of the Church, thy lawful Ministers to pray over thee, as St. James
directs, Chap. 5. v. 14. And know what God declares by his Prophet Malachy, c.
2. v. 9. That the Priests Lips should keep knowledge, and they should hear the
Law at his Mouth, for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts. O therefore
attend upon our sacred Ministry, keep holy the Lords day, and join with us at
all times possible, in all our public Duties, especially in that most
necessary one at the Lords Table, in devout obedience to our dying Savior's
own holy Institution and Command, to eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood; that
we may have eternal Life, and he may raise us up at the last day; and that we
may dwell in him, and he in us, according to his gracious Promise in John 6.54,
55, 56. And thus too as Christ has most exceedingly loved us, so ought we to
love one another, which is his positive Commandment, in Joh. 15.12. and upon
this has he left his blessed Legacy of Peace amongst us: Now how can the
Transgressors of these Commands pretend to be Christians? Who can know them to
be Christ's Disciples? and how can they hope to be saved contrary to the Gospel
Covenant? Oh therefore consider this, thou irreligious Soul, and know thy self
to be in a state of damnation, as long as thou continuest in this state of sin:
Oh consider and repent quickly; and so for this end, as the Apostle to the
Hebrews advises, c. 13. v. 16, 17. To do good, and to Communicate forget not,
for with such services God is well pleased. Obey them that have the Rule over
you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your Souls, as they that must
give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief, for that is
unprofitable for you. Pray for us, for we trust we have a good Conscience, in
all things willing to live honestly. And as St. Paul admonishes, 1 Cor. 4.1.
Let a Man so account of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the
Mysteries of God. Moreover it is required in Stewards that a Man be found
faithful: And accordingly will God protect us in our Duty, vindicate our
Wrongs; and (for instance,) even accounts the defrauding of our very temporal
maintenance, a robbing of himself; for does not God thus expostulate with the
sacrilegious herein, by his Prophet Malachy, chap. 3. v. 8, 9. Will a Man rob
God? yet ye have robbed me: And ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? in Tithes
and Offerings; You are cursed with a Curse; for ye have robbed me, even this
whole Nation. And now that this is applicable to us under the Gospel; and that
we have the same divine Right and Support herein, is clearly evident in 1 Cor.
1.13, 14. Do ye not know, that they who minister about holy things, live of the
Sacrifice; and they who wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar? Even
so has the Lord ordained, that they who preach the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel: And the reason hereof is plain, in verse 12. If we have sown unto you
spiritual things, is it a great matter, if we shall reap your worldly things?
And further, to add a few more Scripture Testimonies for a general Reformation:
Ought not every Parent and head of a Family, to resolve with Joshua c. 24.15.
As for me and my house we will serve the Lord. And with holy David, That only
they who fear the Lord, shall dwell in his House, that a Liar shall not dwell
in his sight, that the ungodly shall be far from him, and that he will not know
a wicked Person. And with Solomon, To train up their Children in the way they
should go, that when they are old, they may not depart from it, Prove. 22.6. And
for effecting all this, use good Conversation, Reading, and Praying with thy
Family; and constantly resort to God's House of Prayer, with all Reverence,
Devotion, Humility, and Piety, behaving thy self in all decently, orderly,
according to the most excellent Rules of our established Church, wherein hold
ye fast the Profession of your Faith without wavering, not forsaking the
assembling of your selves together, as the manner of some is: For thus God has
showed thee Man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but to
do justly, to love mercy, and walk humbly with thy God, Mic. 6.8. Thus I draw
to a conclusion; proceeding to the remaining Rules of our Meditation: As,

O taste then, my Soul, and see, how good the Lord my strength is! 8. The Taste
of our Meditation.
Choose now to go to the House of Mourning, rather than the House of Feasting.
Is not one day in the Lords Courts better than a thousand? And who would not
rather be a Doorkeeper in the House of his God, than to dwell in Tents of
Ungodliness? Yea, would thou not choose rather Affliction with the People of
God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a Season? But O how amiable are thy
Dwellings, thou Lord of Hosts! My Soul has a desire and longing to enter into
the Courts of the Lord; my Heart and my Flesh rejoice in the living God.
Blessed are they that dwell in thy house; they will be always praising thee.
Blessed is the Man whose strength is in thee, in whose Heart are thy ways, who
going through the vale of Misery, use it for a Well, and the Pools are filled
with Water; they will go from strength to strength, and unto the God of Gods
appears every one of them in Sion.

But O my vileness and corruption! 9. The Complaint, the Wish, the Confession.
behold I was born in sin, and in iniquity did my Mother conceive me: My Nature
is wholly tainted and defiled; I am all over wounds, and bruises, and
putrefying Sores: I have too long lived in Ungodliness; I have Eyes to pluck
out, and hands to cut off; I have too many bewitching Darlings to part with;
and I am overwhelmed with evil, pestered with infections, covered with
guiltiness, and surrounded with charming and violent Temptations. O would to
God I had never known these! Would I had begun the real renouncing of them
sooner! Would I had endeavored after a more early Innocence, and more timely
performance of my Vows and Duty! But yet, O Lord, thou will not cast me off
uttely; thou only can raise me, and make me clean: Though my horrible
guiltiness makes me tremble to approach thee; yet where shall my polluted Soul
be washed, if not in the Fountain which thou have opened for sin, and for
uncleanness; tho the Flesh is weak, yet the Spirit is ready, and willing; and
though after all, my best Righteousnesses will be but as filthy Rags; and when I
have done my utmost, I must still acknowledge my self an unprofitable Servant:
Yet say the word only, O my God, I will, be thou clean.

O Lord God of Hosts, hear my Prayer; hearken O God of Jacob; 10. The Petition
and Enforcement.
have mercy upon me O Lord after thy great Goodness, and according to the
multitude of thy Mercies, do away mine Offenses: Accept of my infirm Faith and
Repentance, and grant me the application of my Savior's Merits and unsinning
Obedience; then and thus alone can I be presented pure and unblameable, and
unreproveable in thy sight. This, O Lord, I believe upon my sincere Repentance;
this thou have promised; and thus have thou received returning Sinners; yea,
thus have thou met the Prodigal Sons.

Why do thou doubt then, O my Soul? 11. Lastly, the Assurance, Confidence,
and Thanksgiving.
Why art thou so full of heaviness, and so disquieted within me? Put thy trust
in God, for he is thy Helper, and the strength of thy Salvation; thou art
secure and happy in the Divine Word; thy Conversion, Humility, Contrition, thy
Love and Devotion are accepted; the guilt of thy sin is washed away in thy
Savior's Blood; and the power thereof subdued by his grace: Thy loathsome
Issues are already stanched, and thy Sicknesses will not be unto death, but to
the glory of God's Mercy in pardoning, to the glory of his grace in purifying
so polluted a Wretch. Christ is thy ransom, the Holy Spirit thy guide, and the
Almighty Father thy qeconciled Friend and Protector. Fear not then, my Soul,
only sin no more; beware both of Presumption and Despair; and in an holy awe
and reverence endeavor to sight manfully under Christ's Banner, against Sin,
the World, and the Devil, and to continue his faithful Soldier and Servant
unto thy lives end. For the Lord God is thy Light, and Defense; the Lord will
give Grace and Worship, and no good thing will he withold from them that live
a godly Life. O sing Praises, sing Praises unto our God, sing Praises to our
King and Savior! O sing ye Praises with understanding! While I live will I
praise the Lord; yea, as long as I have any breath, I will sing Praises unto my
God. Glory be to the Father and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, as it was in
the beginning is now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

Now thus have I briefly gone through the Rules laid down by the Godly and
Learned Bishop Hall in his Art of Divine Meditation; whereto, as also to the
pious Dr. Horneck 's Great Law of Consideration, I refer the Readers, for your
complete Instruction in this useful, excellent, and necessary Duty; which
ransacks our deep, and false hearts, weans us from the World, finds out and
expels our secret Enemies, which prevents temptations, chears up our
Solitariness, tempers our occasions of Delight, gives more light to our
Knowledge, more heat to our Affections, and more life to our Devotion,
Repentance, and holy Living, wherewith we ought to begin, proceed, and end
every Year, and Day, to our last hour. Thus may we grow to be (as we ought)
Strangers and Pilgrims upon Earth; and out of a right estimation of all earthly
Things, into a sweet fruition of invisible Comforts. In a word, thus we see our
Savior with Stephen; talk with God, as Moses; and are ravished with St. Paul
into Paradise; and so qualified for the eternal Hallelujahs above.

A Morning Prayer for Family or Closet, extracted out of the Whole Duty of Man,
and our holy Liturgy, etc. and composed according to that most excellent Form,
which our Lord Jesus has taught, and left us, Mat. 6.9.
O Thou that hear Prayer, unto whom all Flesh should come, have thou respect
unto the Prayers of thy Servants, and to our Supplications, O Lord our God, to
hearken unto the cry, and to the Prayers, which thy Servants pray before thee
this day, 1 King. 8.28.

O Lord, who dwell in the highest Heavens, thou art the Author of our Being;
thou have also begotten us again unto a lively Hope, and carryest toward us
the tenderness and Bowels of a compassionate Father. O make us to render to
thee the Love and Obedience of Children! and that we may resemble thee our
Father in Heaven, that place of true Delight and Purity; give us an holy
Disdain of all the deceitful Pleasures, and foul Pollutions of this World, and
so raise up our Minds, that we may always have our Conversation in Heaven, from
whence we look for our Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ.

Strike such an awe in our Hearts, that we may humbly reverence thee in thy
Name, which is great, wonderful, and holy, and carry such a sacred respect to
all things that relate to thee, and thy Worship, as may express our Reverence
to thy great Majesty. Let all the People praise thee, O God, yea let all the
People praise thee in a firm Belief, due Sense, and grateful Acknowledgment of
all thy wonderful Works of Providence; particularly, let us praise thee for our
common Creation, Preservation, and all the Blessings of this Life; but above
all, for thine inestimable love in the Redemption of the World by our Lord
Jesus Christ; for the happy and visible means of Grace, and hope of Glory, so
miraculously continued to us within the Pale of an holy Communion, in the due
Administration of thy sacred Word and Ordinances: And now thus more
particularly, O Father of Mercies, let us thine unworthy Servants, render thee
most humble and hearty thanks for all thy goodness and loving kindness, as to
all Men, so to us, and ours, day, and night, (here mentioned particular
Blessings, both spiritual and temporal:) For these and all thy gracious Wonders
of the right hand, and the left, tending to this life, and a better; let our
Souls magnify the Lord, and all that is within us praise his holy Name.

Establish thy Throne, and rule for ever in our Souls; and by the power of thy
grace subdue those Rebellious Corruptions, that exalt themselves against thee;
they are those Enemies of thine, which would not thou should reign over them:
O let them be brought forth, and slain before thee; and make us such faithful
Subjects of this thy Kingdom of Grace, that we may be capable of thy Kingdom of
Glory; and Lord Jesus come quickly.

Enable us by thy grace cheerfully to suffer thy will in all thy Afflictions,
and readily to perform it in all thy Commands; give us of that heavenly Zeal,
to thy Service, wherewith the blessed Angels of thy presence are inspired, that
we may obey thee with the like fervor and alacrity, and that following them in
their Obedience, we may be joined with them to sing eternal Praises in thy
Kingdom to God, and to the Lamb for ever.

And, O merciful God, who have made all Men, and hate nothing that thou have
made, nor would the death of a sinner, but rather that he should be
converted, and live; have mercy upon all Jews, Turks, Infidels and Heretics,
and take from them all ignorance, hardness of heart, and contempt of thy Word;
and so fetch them home, blessed Lord, to thy Flock, that they may be saved
among the remnant of the true Israelites, and be made one fold under one
Shepherd, Jesus Chrit our Lord. O incorporate all Mankind into thy holy Church,
and regenerate all with thy Holy Spirit, receiving us for thine own Children by
Adoption; and thus graft in our Hearts the love of thy Name, increase in us
true Religion, nourish us with all Goodness, and of thy great mercy keep us in
the same, and give unto us the increase of Faith, Hope, and Charity; and that
we may obtain that which thou do promise, make us to love that which thou
do command. Give us that continual supply of thy grace, which may sustain and
nourish our Souls unto eternal Life; and be thou pleased also to provide for
our Bodies all those things which thou see fit for their support, through this
our earthly Pilgrimage; and make us cheerfully to rest on thee for them, first
seeking thy Kingdom, and the Righteousness thereof, and then not doubting, but
all these things shall be added unto us. O God, the Protector of all that trust
in thee, without whom nothing is strong, nothing holy; increase and multiply
upon us thy mercy, that thou being our Ruler, and Guide, we may so pass through
things temporal, that we finally lose not the things eternal. Prevent us, O
Lord, in all our doings with thy most gracious Favor, and further us with thy
continual help, that in all our works begun, continued and ended in thee, we
may glorify thy holy Name, and finally by thy mercy obtain everlasting Life.
Grant O Lord, that the course of this World may be so peaceably ordered by thy
governance, that thy Church may joyfully serve thee in all godly quietness. And
grant, that all those who do lean only upon the hope of thy heavenly grace, may
evermore be defended by thy mighty power.

Heal our Souls, O Lord, for we have sinned against thee; let thy tender
Mercies abound toward us in the forgiveness of all our Offenses: [Here mention
particular Transgressions:] And grant, O Lord, that we may never forfeit this
pardon of thine, by denying our's to our Brethren; but give us those Bowels of
Compassion to others, which we stand in so much greater need of from thee; that
we may forgive as fully and finally upon Christ's Command and Example, as we
desire to be forgiven for his Merits and Intercession.

O Lord, we have no strength against those multitudes of Temptations that daily
assault us, only our eyes are upon thee; O be thou pleased either to restrain
them, or assist us, and in thy faithfulness suffer us not to be tempted above
that we are able; but in all our Temptations make us a way to escape, that we
be not overcome by them, but may, when thou shall call us to it, resist even
unto Blood, striving against sin; that we being faithful unto death, thou
may give us the Crown of Life. O remember not, Lord, our iniquities, nor the
iniquities of our Forefathers, neither take thou vengeance of our Sins; but
spare us, good Lord, spare thy People, whom thou have redeemed with thy most
precious Blood. Spare us good Lord, and deliver us from all Evil and Mischief,
from Sin, from the crafts and assaults of the Devil, from thy Wrath, and from
everlasting Damnation; from all blindness of Heart, from Pride, Vainglory, and
Hypocrisy; from Envy, Hatred, and Malice, and all Uncharitableness; from
Fornication, and all other deadly Sin, and from the deceits of the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil; from Lightning and Tempest, from Plague, Pestilence, and
Famine, from Battle and Murder, and from sudden Death; from all Sedition, Privy
Conspiracy, and Rebellion, from all false Doctrine, Heresy, and Schism, from
hardness of Heart, and contempt of thy Word and Commandment, good Lord deliver
us.

O Lord, our heavenly Father, Almighty and Everlasting God, who have safely
brought us to the beginning of this day, defend us, we pray thee, in the same
with thy mighty Power; and grant that this day we fall into no sin, neither run
into any kind of danger; but that all our doings may be ordered by thy
governance, to do always that which is righteous in thy sight. And vouchsafe, O
Lord, we beseech thee, to direct, sanctify, and govern both our Hearts and
Bodies in the ways of thy Laws, and in the Works of thy Commandments; that
through thy most mighty protection, both here, and ever, we may be preserved in
Body and Soul, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Almighty and everlasting God, who by thy holy Apostles have taught us to make
Prayers, and Supplications, and to give thanks for all Men; we humbly besseech
thee most mercifully to receive these our Prayers, which we offer to thy Divine
Majesty; beseeching thee to inspire continually the Universal Church with the
Spirit of Truth, Unity, and Concord: And grant, that all they that do confess
thy holy Name, may agree in the truth of thy holy Word, and live in Unity and
godly Love. We beseech thee also to save and defend all Christian Kings,
Princes, and Governors; and especially thy Servants William and Mary, our King
and Queen, that under them we may be godly and quietly governed: And grant unto
their whole Council, and to all that are put in Authority under them, that they
may truly and indifferently minister Justice, to the punishment of Wickedness
and Vice, and to the maintenance of God's true Religion and Virtue. Give
grace, O heavenly Father, to all Bishops, and Curates, (more particularly to
those under whose care thou have placed us) that they may both by their Life
and Doctrine set forth thy true and lively Word, and rightly and duly
administer thy holy Sacraments: And to all thy People give thy heavenly grace,
(and especially to us, and ours, all sorts of Relations, Friends, Benefactors,
and even to our Enemies) that with meek hearts, and due reverence we may ever
hear and receive thy holy Word, and Ordinances, truly serving thee in holiness
and righteousness all the days of our Life. And we most humbly beseech thee of
thy goodness, O Lord, to comfort and succor all them, who in this transitory
Life are in trouble, sorrow, need, sickness, or any other Adversity (especially
our afflicted Friends, etc.) And we also bless thy holy Name for all thy
Servants departed this Life in thy faith and fear; beseeching thee to give us
grace so to follow their good Examples, that with them we may be partakers of
thy heavenly Kingdom. Grant this, O Father, for Jesus Christ's sake, our only
Mediator and Advocate. Amen.

Hear us, and graciously answer our Petitions; for thou art the good King over
all the Earth, whose Power is infinite, and art able to do for us above all
that we can ask or think; and to whom belongs the Glory of that good thou
workest in us or for us. Therefore Blessing, Honor, Glory, and Power, be unto
him that sits upon the Throne, to our God for ever an ever. Amen.

All this, O God, and whatsoever thou know best for us, in respect both to
this life, and that which is to come, we do earnestly and penitently beg
through the satisfactory Merits and Intercession, and in the sacred Name and
Words of our glorious Redeemer, as himself has taught, and commanded us when
we pray, to say,

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the fellowship of the
Holy Ghost be with us all evermore. Amen.

Holy Vows and Meditations.
GOOD Prayers never came weeping home. I am sure, I shall receive either what I
ask, or what I should ask.

It is the basest Love of all others that is for a Benefit; for herein we love
not another, so much as our selves: Though there were no Heaven, O Lord, I would
love thee; now there is one, I will esteem it, I will desire it: Yet still I
will love thee for thy goodness-sake; thy self is reward sufficient. As it is a
happy necessity that enforces to good; so is that next happy which hinders
from Evil.

Not only commission makes a Sin; a Man is guilty of all the Sins he hates
not: If I cannot avoid all, I will yet hate all Sin, and abstain from all
Appearance of Evil. I will loath every Evil for it is own sake: I will do good,
but not trust to it: If it be well-accepted, it is well; if not my thanks is
with God. I will not be more afraid of doing good things amiss, than of being
proud, when I have well performed them.

The Godly sow in Tears, and reap in Joy; the Seed-time is commonly waterish,
and lowering; I will be content with a wet Spring, so I may be sure of a clear
and joyful Harvest.

Nothing shall more joy me, than my inward Quietness.

Whatever become of my Body, Reputation or Estate here, I will ever labor to
find somewhat added to the Stature of my Soul.

In having, I will account that my good, which does me good. I account it the
only valor to remit a wrong; and will applaud it to my self, as Right, Noble,
and Christian, that I might hurt, and will not. If it be ill with me on Earth,
it is well my Torment is so short, and so easy: I will not be so covetous to
hope for two Heavens. Henceforth I will envy none but a good Man; and I will
pity nothing so much as the prosperity of the Wicked.

An Evening Prayer for Family or Closet, etc.
Lord, we call upon thee, haste thee unto us, and consider our voice, when we
cry unto thee: Let our Prayers be set forth in thy sight, as the Incense; and
let the lifting up of our hands be an Evening Sacrifice, Psalm. 141.1, 2.
O Holy, Blessed, and Glorious Trinity, three Persons and one God, look down
from Heaven, the habitation of thy Holiness, and of thy Glory, with Mercy upon
us miserable sinners; and purify, we beseech thee, our carnal Hearts,
enlighten our Understandings, and exalt our Affections to a pious Contemplation
of thy glorious Attributes; to a Religious sense and admiration of all thy
wonderful Works, and condescending gracious Benefits to Mankind.

Thus let us learn in the profoundest Reverence, to adore and magnify thy holy
Name: And thus let us bless and praise thee for our Reason and Senses, Health
and Strength, Food, and Raiment, with all the temporal Comforts and Necessaries
of this Life: (Particularly for the Mercies of this Day, etc.) But most
especially for thy spiritual Blessings, and for the Fountain and Foundation of
them all, thy miraculous and inestimable Love in the Redemption of the World by
our Lord Jesus Christ, for all the means of grace, and hope of glory. O Father
of mercies, thou art kind even to the unthankful; yea, thus must we ever
acknowledge our selves to have abundantly experimented that gracious goodness
of thine: For notwithstanding our daily Provocations against thee, thou still
heapest mercy and loving kindness upon us. All our Contempts and Despisings of
thy spiritual Favors, have not yet made thee withdraw them; but in the riches
of thy goodness and longsuffering, thou still continuest to us the offers of
grace and life in thy Son: And all our abuses of thy temporal Blessings, thou
have not punished with an utter deprivation of them, but art still pleased to
afford us a liberal portion of them. The Sins of this day thou have not
repaid, as justly thou might, by sweeping us away with a swift destruction;
but have spared and preserved us according to the greatness of thy mercy. [Here
mention all particular Blessings.] What shall we render unto the Lord for all
these benefits he has done unto us? Lord, let this goodness of thine lead us
to Repentance; and grant that we may not only offer thee thanks and praise, but
may also order our Conversations aright, that so we may at last see the
Salvation of God. Grant that we may render thee not only the fruit of our lips,
but the obedience of our lives; that so these Blessings here might be an
Earnest of those richer Blessings thou have prepared for them that love thee in
Christ Jesus our Lord.

And Forasmuch as without thee, we are not able to please thee, mercifully
grant, O God, that thy Holy Spirit may in all things direct and rule our
hearts; to withstand the Temptations of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil;
and with pure hearts and minds to follow thee the only God. And thus may it
please thee to endow our Souls with these heavenly Graces and Virtues, of
Faith, Hope, Love, Sincerity, Devotion, Humility, Fear, Trust, Thankfulness,
Contrition, Meekness, Chastity, Temperance, Contentedness, Diligence, Justice,
Charity, and perseverance in all good. O thus be pleased to make us partakers
of thy Kingdom of Grace here, and Glory hereafter. And thus reign in our hearts
by thy Graces now, that thou may receive us into thy blissful Mansions
above. Oh! let there be always Oil in our Vessels, and our Lamps burning, ready
to attend our glorious Bridegroom at the uncertain hour of his coming either to
Death or Judgment.

And, O everlasting God, who have constituted and ordained the Services of
Angels and Men in a wonderful order; mercifully grant, that as thy holy Angels
always do thee Service in Heaven; so by thy appointment they may succor and
defend us on Earth: And that we may ever imitate their cheerful and absolute
obedience to thy Commands, till we are translated hence to sing with them the
everlasting Hallelujahs.

And O Almighty God, who see, that we have no power of our selves to help our
selves; in thy bountiful goodness provide for us daily; and keep us both
outwardly in our Bodies, and inwardly in our Souls, that we may constantly be
supported in both; and may be defended from all adversities which may happen to
the Body, and from all evil thoughts which may assault and hurt the Soul. O
continue ever to feed our Souls with the due and solemn administration of thy
holy Word and Sacraments, and with all those happy means of Grace and Salvation
thou have blessed us with in the Communion of thy holy Church; which enable us
to observe thankfully and devoutly, especially in thy visible public Worship:
O may all, both Priests and People unanimously and piously offer up the
constant Sacrifices of Praise and Prayer; duly celebrate thy Sabbaths and holy
Days, and frequently approach as worthy Guests to thy holy Table; thus often
commemorating, and beseeching thee, O Christ, O Lamb of God, that take away
the sins of the World, to grant us thy peace, and have mercy upon us, and never
remove thy Candlestick from us miserable Sinners. And be thou pleased to
provide for our Bodies Food and Raiment, with whatever else thou see
convenient and necessary for our well-being here; giving us grateful and
contented hearts for all, and guiding us in such a right use of all, as may
tend most to thy honor and glory, and our eternal welfare.

And O Merciful God, who have made all Men, and hate nothing that thou have
made, and do forgive the sins of all them that are Penitent; create and make
in us new and contrite hearts, that we worthily lamenting our sins, and
acknowledging our wretchedness, may obtain of thee the God of all Mercy,
perfect Remission and Forgiveness; and thus O Lord, we beseech thee to Absolve
us from our Offenses, that we may be delivered from the Bonds of those Sins,
which by our frailty we have committed (especially this Day, etc.) O Lord, we
bewail all these our manifold Sins and Wickednesses, which we from time to time
most grievously have committed, by Thought, Word and Deed, against thy Divine
Majesty, most justly provoking thy Wrath and Indignation against us. O Lord,
mercifully relieve us by the comfort of thy Grace; and grant unto us, and to
all thy Faithful People Pardon and Peace; that we may be cleansed from all our
Sins, and serve thee with a quiet Mind. And thus too we pray thee, O God, to
enable us entirely to forgive at all times, as we desire to be forgiven; to do
in all things, as we would be done by; and so to love one another, that all Men
may know us to be Christ's Disciples: O thus may our Light so Shine before Men,
that they may see our Good Works, and Glorify our Father which is in Heaven.
Thus, O Lord Jesus, come quickly, and deliver us by the Mystery of thy Holy
Incarnation, by thy Holy Nativity and Circumcision, by thy Baptism, Fasting and
Temptation; By thine Agony and Bloody Sweat, by thy Cross and Passion, by thy
Precious Death and Burial, by thy Glorious Resurrection and Ascension, and by
the Coming of the Holy Ghost: And Good Lord Deliver us, In all time of our
Tribulation, in all time of our Wealth, in the Hour of Death, and in the Day of
Judgment.

O God, who know us to be set in the midst of so many and great dangers,
that we cannot always stand upright; grant to us such strength and protection,
as may support us in all dangers, and carry us through all Temptations. And O
God, who art the Author of Peace, and Lover of Concord, give unto us thy humble
Servants that peace which the World cannot give; O deliver us from te fear of
all our Enemies both Spiritual and Temporal, that we pass our time in rest and
quietness: and lighten our darkness, we be beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy
great Mercy defend us from all perils and dangers of this Night; and now and
evermore be pleased, O Lord, to save us, and all Mankind in all dangers Ghostly
and Bodily; and to keep us from all Sin and Wickedness, and from our Ghostly
Enemy, and from everlasting Death. And particularly, we pray thee, O blessed
Lord, whose Mercy is over all thy Works, to have Mercy upon all Men; and grant,
that the Precious Ransom which was paid by thy Son for all, may be effectual to
the saving of all. Give thy inlightning Grace to those that are in Darkness,
and thy Converting Grace to those that are in Sin. Look with thy tenderest
Compassions upon the Universal Church. O be favorable and gracious unto Sion,
build thou the Walls of Jerusalem; unite all those that profess thy Name to
thee, by purity and holiness; and to each other by Brotherly Love. O blessed
Lord, how long shall Christendom continue the vilest part of the World, a Sink
of all those Abominable Pollutions, which even Barbarians detest! O let not our
profession, and our Practice be always at so wide a distance! Let not the
Disciples of the Holy and Immaculate Jesus be of all others the most profane
and Impure! Let not the Subjects of the Prince of Peace be, of all others, the
most contentious and bloody! but make us Christians in Deed, as well as in
Name, that we may walk worthy of that Holy Vocation wherewith we are called: O
may all with one Mind and one Mouth Glorify thee the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Have Mercy on this desolate Church, and sinful Nation; thou have moved the
Land, and divided it, heal the Sores thereof, for it shakes; Make us so truly
to Repent of those Sins which have provoked thy Judgments, that thou also
may turn and repent, and leave a Blessing behind thee. Bless those whom thou
have appointed our Governors, whether in Church or State; so rule their
hearts, and strengthen their hands, that they may neither want Will, nor Power,
to punish Wickedness and Vice; and to maintain God's true Religion and Virtue.
Have pity, O Lord, on all that are in Affliction, be a Father to the
Fatherless, and plead the Cause of the Widow; Comfort the Feeble Minded,
Support the Weak, Heal the Sick, Relieve the Needy, Defend the Oppressed, and
Administer to every one according to their several Necessities; Let thy
Blessings rest upon all that are near and dear to us, and grant them whatsoever
thou see necessary, either to their Bodies or their Souls. (Here name all
Relations, etc.) Reward all those that have done us good; and Pardon all those
that have done, or wished us Evil: and Work in them and us all that good, which
may make us acceptable in thy sight, through Jesus Christ.

And, O Merciful God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who art the
Resurrection and the Life, in whom whosoever believes, shall live, though he
die; and whosoever lives and believes in him, shall not die eternally: we
meekly beseech thee to raise us all from the Death of Sin, to the Life of
Righteousness, that whenever we depart this life, we may rest in him; and that
at the General Resurrection in the last day, we may be found acceptable in thy
sight, and receive that Blessing which thy Well-beloved Son shall then
pronounce to all that love and fear thee, saying, Come ye blessed Children of
my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the
World, Amen. Therefore, with Angels, and Archangels, and all the Company of
Heaven, we Laud and Magnify thy Holy Name, evermore Praising thee, and saying,
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Allmighty, Heaven and Earth are full of the Majesty
of thy Glory; Glory be to thee O God most high.

And thus Finally, we beseech thee, O Lord, to Pardon the Wanderings and
Coldness of these and all our Petitions; and deal with us not according either
to our Prayers or Deserts but according to our Needs, and thine own rich
Mercies in Jesus Christ, in whose blessed Name and Words we conclude these our
imperfect Prayers, saying,

Our Father, etc.

Unto thy Mercy and Protection, O God, we commit our selves this Night and for
evermore. O Lord bless and keep us. Lord make thy Face to shine upon us, and be
Gracious unto us. Lord lift up thy Countenance upon us, and give us Peace both
now and evermore, Amen.

Holy Meditations and Vows.
AS Christ was both a Lamb and a Lion; so is every true Christian a Lamb, for
Patience in Suffering, and Innocence of Life: A Lion for boldness in his
Innocence. I would so order my Courage and Mildness, that I may be neither
Lyon-like in my Conversation; nor Sheepish in the Defense of a good Cause.

I will not strive for Victory, but for Truth.

I will keep my Passions bare, and Impotent.

I shall rather Bow than break to God; but for Satan, or the World, I had
rather be broken in pieces with their Violence, than suffer my self to be Bowed
unto their Obedience.

A Just War is a Thousand times more happy, than an Ill-condition'd Peace. In
mine own Wrongs I will hold Patience laudable; but in God's Injuries, Impious.

Though I find my Brother this day my Friend, and to morrow mine Enemy; though
my Reputation's Blasted with the Fire of Hell's Engine, the Malicious Tongue;
though his Corroding Envy and Hatred increase by Unjust Jealousies; though he
often deceives me by Hypocrisy, and Persecutes me with Inveterate Prejudice;
yet I will bear all Meekly, will forgive him until Seventy times Seven, and
will ever Love my Neighbor as my Self.

I had rather wrong my self by Credulity; than others by Unjust Censures and
Suspicions. I will so remit Wrongs, as I may not encourage others to offer
them; and so retain them as I may not induce God to retain mine to him.

I will ever Believe in, Worship and Obey God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost: I
will Piously and Constantly attend the Public Administration of God's Holy
Word and Sacraments; I will serve the Lord daily according to his own most
Sacred Ordinances; and will thus Religiously abide in the Communion of his
Church: I will Conscientiously observe all our Divine and Human Laws; and not
meddle with those who are given to Change. I will have but this one Care to
live well; to God's Glory, and the Salvation of Souls. So let me be Free,
Noble, Rich, Wise, Happy to God: I pass not what I am to the World: Glory be to
the Father, and to the Son, etc.

FINIS.

