A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF Mrs. ABIGAIL COSTIVELL, Widow, In the
Church of Little Brandon in Norfolk.

By JESSOP WEBB, M. A. Rector of the same Church.

Printed as directed in her Will.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCXCV.

A SERMON preached at the Funeral of Mrs. ABIGAIL COSTIVELL, Widow.
REVEL. xiv. 13. And I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write,
Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth; yea, says the
Spirit, that they may rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them.


IN this Chapter we have the Lamb come to the Destruction of Babylon, who is
described by his Company and Attendance, and the Success of his Advent, which
is either the Ruin of the Enemy, ( ver. 10, 11.) or the Happiness of his
Friends, (as in ver. 13.) In the Text we have a Promise of Consolation, wherein
I shall observe;

1st. The Promiser, God set out by his Nature, He is said to be a Spirit.

2dly. The Recorder, John, who is set forth by his Effect, I heard a Voice from
Heaven.

3dly. The Thing promised, Blessed are the Dead: With two Reasons why they are
so:

1. Because they rest from their Labors. 2. Their Works follow them.
I shall not have time sufficient to run over* all these, therefore omitting
them, I shall fix my Discourse as this present Occasion requires: Blessed are
the Dead which die in the Lord.

In which we have this Observation, That it is a blessed thing to die in the
Lord.

Now to die in the Lord, is to die in the Faith and Fear, in the Favor and
Love of Christ.

It is opposed here to Backsliders, who begin well, but end ill; who begin in
the Spirit, but end in the Flesh. As if he should say, it is a good thing to
begin well, but better to end so. It is well that we have made a Profession,
but better that ye hold it out to the end. He is not blessed that begins in the
Lord; but blessed is he that dies in the Lord. In Eccles. 7.1. Solomon says,
that the Day of ones Death is better than the Day of ones Birth; which I know
not know to make good, unless we understand it, either of the Flesh which
thinks Death to be the end of all Evils, or else that this corporal Death is
the entering into Life everlasting. This must be understood of the Children of
God, for the Death of wicked Men is worse than the Day of Birth. It were happy
for them, if they should never die, as it had been for Judas if he had never
been born.

Some Antiquaries have given some Reasons why the Day of ones Death is better
than the Day of ones Birth.

1. Because the Day of his Birth is the beginning of his Miseries, but the Day
of his Death is the End thereof. A Man is born to suffer, as Sparks fly upward,
says Job; but when he dies, his Miseries end; for then should I have lien
still, and been at Rest, Job 3.13. The Grave is the Receptacle of those Souls
to keep them from the Oppressor and Avenger; it secures them from the Blows and
Stripes of the Persecutors, they sleep quietly from the Noise of Slander or
Scandal. When they once lie in the Dust, their Bodies are freed from Sickness
and Diseases: Hunger and Thirst dwell not there; neither is there any fear of
any malignant Humor to make it look pale and wann; only that Corruption that
Mortality gave it, and Putrefaction which nothing escapes: There the Righteous
rest from their Labors.

2. Because in the Day of our Birth we are born in Sin, and brought forth in
Iniquity. That Original Filth that was molded up in the Clay of our first
Father, sticks close to our Bones, and renders us as miserable as that can make
us.

But in the Day of our Death we die in the Lord, our Sins and our selves then
shake Hands, and bid an eternal Farewell to one another. The Gave says to our
Sins, as God to the Sea, Hitherto shall thou come, and no further. It is the
blessed Dying in the Lord that makes that Day better; it is their departing in
Peace, dying with a good Conscience, in the Fear, Faith and Favor of God, that
renders that Day happy; whereas the Day of the Death of the Wicked is more
bitter than the Day of their Birth: For I may say of the Wicked whom the Son
never kissed, that when they die they go to the Damned. That Day is the
Beginning of Evil, for as Christ said to the penitent Thief, This Day thou
shall be with me in Paradise: So he may say to the Wicked, This Day shall ye be
with the Devils in Hell. As the Righteous die to live for ever, so the Wicked
die to die eternally. From this Day of Death, of thine infinite Mercy good Lord
deliver us. Blessed are they that die! Why then so is Judas and Caiaphas, Herod
and Pontius Pilate blessed: Why then it is no matter how we live, if
Blessedness will crown our Death. No, cursed are all those that die if they die
not in the Lord. It is the dying in the Lord that makes our Death blessed:
Which Blessedness is nothing else but an Accumulation of many good things
together which concur in the Death of the Godly.

First; It renders his Death sure and safe. Secondly; Sweet and comfortable.
Thirdly; Good and honorable. Fourthly; Advantageous and beneficial.
First; Sure: Whereas the Death of the Wicked is uncertain; they are to seek
when they die: as for Example it is said of Nero that wicked Tyrant when he
died, Whither will thou go, my Soul? or what will become of thee I know not.
But the Souls of the Righteous, when they die, are committed into God's Hands;
Into thy Hands I commend my Spirit, faith Christ. The Viper nor the Adder shall
not hurt them. If God takes our Souls into his Custody and Charge, they are
safe and sure.

Secondly; The Death of them that die in the Lord is sweet and comfortable.
Death at worst is but a grim Servant, a lean pale-faced Messenger, to let the
Child of God into his Father's House: or, like the Breathing of a tumified
Sore, there may be a little Smart, but there follows a great deal of Ease. So
the Death of the Godly may be full of Agonies and Grief, full of Dolours and
Tortures, but there follows as much Ease and Tranquillity as before was Grief
and Misery.

1. It is called as Sleep, for the great Refreshment it brings them: for as
Sleep was ordained to cherish the Bodies after their Labors, so was Death to
deliver the Righteous out of Troubles. In the 7th Chapter of the Acts we read,
St. Stephen in the Shower of Stones fell asleep, which was strange he should
rest so quietly with the Noise of Stones about his Ears. Although sometimes
they die in great Agonies, yet they die sweetly that die in the Lord.

2. It is called a Departure in Peace; Luke 2.29. Lord, now let thou thy
Servant depart in Peace, according to thy Word. Although hitherto I have born
about me the Rebukes of many, have carried about me the Marks of the Lord
Jesus, yet my Mind is satisfied, my Heart is at Rest; let now thy Servant
depart in Peace.

3. It is called a gathering to our Fathers: Good King Josiah was gathered to
his Fathers. As the Wheat when it is ripe is gathered into the Granery; so the
Righteous when they are ripe with good Works, when they are in the Prime and
Well-liking, when they are fit for the Lord, then he gathers them to himself.
It is to the Godly as an Harbor after a Storm (when the Mariner had many Fears
and more Storms in his Voyage) is sweet and comfortable. So when the godly Man,
after he has been tossed with the Waves of this troublesome World, when he has
escaped this Gulf of Fear, and the other of Despair, when he has shunned this
Rock of Vexation, and that Shelf of Calamity, how gladly does he commit his
crasie Vessel to that Harbor which will secure him from all these.

After the long and tedious Journey which the Wise Men took to seek him who was
born the King of the Jews, the Text says, they rejoiced exceedingly. Now if
they rejoiced to have found him in a Manger, Luke 2.7. what would they have
done to have found him in a Palace?

Now when the Godly Man dies, he finds Christ not with a Cross but a Crown; not
in a Manger, but in those amiable Courts of Heaven, which must ravish his Soul
with that beautiful Sight.

Thirdly; Their Death is good and honorable, fit and seasonable. When the
Sinner dies in his Sins, he is like the untimely Fruit of a Woman, he shall
never see the Son. When Sisera fled to the Tend of Jael, he said to her, If any
Man ask for me, say I am not here: but she took a Nail and smote the Nail into
his Temples, and so he died with a Lie in his Mouth; Judge. 4.20, 21. Behold
Zimri and Cozbi committing Fornication, as the last Exercise of their Lives,
were slain by Phinehas, Eleazar's Son; Numb. 25.8. Behold Ananias and Sapphira
committing Sacrilege and Lying in their Hearts, fell suddenly down dead; Acts
5.5.

Behold Nicanor raging against the Jews, caused his Troops to march and give
Battle on their Sabbath, supposing that their Day of Rest would make him a
better Market of the Enemies Blood. In whose Army there were some Jews, either
compelled by Necessity or a voluntary Apostasy, who desired not to destroy so
cruelly and barbarously, by reason that that Day was dedicated to Rest. To whom
he blasphemously replied, Who is he that ordained that Day to Sloth? They told
him it was the God of Heaven that had set it apart for his Glory. Whereupon he
said, That that God of Heaven should content himself to make Laws in his own
Dominions: But he that was Almighty on Earth, commanded them to march for the
Business of their King. Whereupon when the Battle was ended, they knew that
Nicanor lay dead in his Harness; and, as an Example to all Blasphemers, had his
Head cut off from his Shoulders, and the Hand that he had stretched out against
the Holy Temple of the Almighty hanged up as a sad Spectacle to all the World,
and his Tongue that had blasphemed God cut out, and given as a Prey to the
Fowls of the Air; 2 Macc. 15.

Thus unseasonable are all the Deaths of the Wicked, whose Lives have been a
continued Series of Impieties; yet I never read of the Righteous, to whom a
good Conscience is a continual Feast, that he died in his Sins. Although he
dies in his tender Age, in his full Strength, or in old Age; although his
Agonies were great, his Pains searching, and his Troubles many, yet he has
wiped off the black Score of his Sins, by the Tears of a melting Heart, and so
dies seasonably. Their Death is honorable; The Name of the Wicked shall rot,
but the Righteous shall be had in everlasting Remembrance. The Wicked while
they live here, it is possible many admire them more for the Crumbs than their
Persons, more for the Loaves than their Goodness, more out of Fear than Love:
But when they die they go down to the Dust with Dishonor, and their Ashes are
scarcely suffered to lie quietly. But the Godly, while they live, are
persecuted, derided, hated of their Neighbors: So persecuted they all the
Prophets; but when they were dead, then they built them Tombs and Sepulchers.
David when he was alive, the very Drunkards made Songs upon him; but when dead,
esteem him a Man after God's own Heart. Joseph, when he was in Egypt, they cast
him into Prison; but when he slept with his Fathers, they mourned for him.

It is an Honor when a Man comes home from his Journey to be welcomed with
great Attendance.

But when a Christian arrives to the end of his Heavenly Journey, the Angels
stand ready to carry him into Abraham's Bosom; ^ake 16.22. then Christ he
ushers them into the Presence of his Father. Is it not a great Honor for a
Subject to be brought by the King's Son into his Father's Presence; and there
tells him what a good Subject he has been to him; and thus and thus has he
done for me, reward him as it seems in thy Pleasure? So Christ takes his
faithful Servant, and brings him to the Presence of his Father, tells him what
Gain he has made of his Talent, and desires him that he may enter into the Joy
of his Master.

Fourthly, and Lastly, Their Death is advantageous and beneficial to them to
live is Christ, and to die is Gain, Phil. 1.21. He that loses his Life for my
sake shall save it: and he that forsakes Father or Mother for me, shall
receive an hundred fold: and those Treasures that Moth does not eat, nor Rust
corrupt, shall be their Reward. Godliness is great Gain both in this Life and a
future Estate, it affords us a necessary Supply of all our temporal Wants, it
procures us a good Name abroad, and a good Conscience within us; yet these are
but the first Fruits of our Labors, we only sow in Corruption, but we reap the
Harvest in Incorruption.

But in our future State, when this Mortal shall have put on Immortality, at
the second Coming of Christ; 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. And the Dead in Christ shall rise
first, and then live with him, and live with him for ever: These are the things
that make the Death of the Righteous profitable.

1. They shall live. 2. They shall live with Christ. 3. They shall live with
him for ever.
Live! Why,so did Korah, Dathan and Abiram; the Wicked live and have Riches in
Possession, and so do the Beasts that perish. Is it such a Matter to live? No,
not in Sensuality and Lust: in this Case it is better to die than to live. But
they that die in the Lord live with Christ, not in the Tents of Ungodliness,
not in the Habitations of Mesech but the King's Palace, amongst Scepters and
Crowns, Stars and Intelligences, with Angels and Archangels, and all the Host
of Heaven. They live with Christ not for a Moment or a Month, not for thousands
of Days or Millions of Years, but for ever. If one Day in God's Presence is
better than a thousand Days we now enjoy, how much better will a thousand Years
be than one Day? The natural Body that is nourished with external Aliments and
natural Food, no longer does it last than they uphold it: when they decay, Man
turns to his Dust. He that lives upon the Creature, when that perishes he
fades. He that lives upon his Credit, if that dies he cracks; but they that
die in the Lord live for ever.

Let a Man go into a Garden that is never so great, take his Pleasure and
Pastime, wallow in Beds of Roses, yet he must retreat and go out again. He that
has a good Lease for two or three Lives, it will end at last, Time concludes
all things: But they that die in the Lord, the Clock of Time strikes Eternity
to them, they live for ever. Now if you are curious to know the Reason how this
comes to pass, be it known unto all here present, that the Death of the
Righteous is a great part of his Jointure. There is a Marriage between Christ
and the pious Soul; when the Soul is given to Christ, the Jointure is made to
the Soul; 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. Therefore let no Man glory in Man, for all
things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the World, or Life, or
Death, or Things present, or Things to come, all are yours; and ye are
Christ's, and Christ is God's.

Behold here is a large Enfeoffment, a greater Dowry than the Devil promised to
our Savior Christ: if he would vouchsafe to honor him with his bended Knee,
if he would fall down and worship him, he promised him the Gift of the whole
World: Yet he does not say, Life and Death, Hell and the Grave, Things present,
and Things to come, are yours. Consider then our Savior Christ suffered for
our Sins, underwent the heavy Wrath of his Father's Displeasure for us. He was
the Scapegoat, who having the Sins of the whole World cast upon him, went into
the Wilderness, insulted over the Devils, triumphed over the Grave, and led
Death captive in spite of her Sting: O Death, where is thy Sting! O Grave,
where is thy Victory!

Thus when he had suffered in Golgotha, where his Blood run down upon the
Graves of the Dead that were buried there, he lay down in the Grave himself:
Thereby so perfuming it, that we may safely lie down in that Bed which his
blessed Body lay in; from whence it is that they that die in the Lord are
blessed, that is, freed from that Curse that Adam brought upon them. But here
some may say, How is their Death that die in the Lord blessed? for oftentimes
their Pains are so great, that it makes them senseless; their Miseries so
searching, as makes them shrink under their Burden; and their Diseases
sometimes so noisome, as bereave them of the Comfort of their Relations. Now is
their Death that die thus comfortable and blessed? I answer, Although the Old
Man decays day by day, yet the New Man increases: And although their Bodies
may smart with Sores, yet their Souls may be comforted with the Joy of the
Spirit. Although St. Paul carried in his Body the Marks of the Lord Jesus, when
in danger of his Life, yet he is comforted with the Hopes of a Resurrection.
The more sharply their Bodies are tormented, the sooner are they freed from
their Pains, and the sooner is their Soul delivered from the Burden of the
Flesh. Have we not read of those Martyrs that daunted the Malice of their
Persecutors in the midst of Flames, their greater Joy overruling these lesser
Pains? What although their Agonies be so great that they take away their Sense,
when their Souls are ravished with the Contemplation of those more generous
Joys they are presently to be Mistress of in Paradise? And what if their Bodies
be ulcerated with Sores and Putrefactions, if in Patience they possess their
Souls?

It was the Saying of a good Man, that if his Father should send for him by the
meanest Servant he had, yet will I go. The most loathsome Disease imaginable is
a Servant of God, sent from our heavenly Father to bring us to him. Let our
Sickness be never so, it brings us to our heavenly Father. We will go, Lord, we
will go to thee, for thou have the Words of eternal Life. We may see here the
happy Condition of the pious Soul, let his Life be what it will, yet his Death
is blessed. The Wicked while they live are enclosed in their own Fat, they come
into no Danger like other Men; they talk of Vanity every one with his
Neighbor, and their Blasphemies are against the most High. Lo, these are they
that prosper in the World, and have Riches in Possession: Here they have the
World in a Sling, and do even what they list; while the pious Soul, to whom it
is Meat and Drink to do the Will of his heavenly Father, is tormented and
distressed, of whom the World is weary: yet in their Deaths one is comforted
and the other tormented. And if there be so much Happiness in his Death, what
abundance of Peace, Joy and Comfort is there for him in the Life to come? If
the Light (says Christ) that is in thee be Darkness, that Darkness must need
be great. So I say, If the worst piece of a Christian's Life be blessed, what
Heart can conceive the best? Let this then be instilled into the Hearts of all
that want the Comfort of a godly Life; and if you repent not, ye shall want the
Comfort of a godly Death. For most certain it is, that blessed is the Death of
the godly Man, while cursed are all those that forget God, and go down to the
Dust in their Sins.

2dly. If the Death of the Just be so blessed, then there is no Reason why we
should mourn and grieve at their Departure. Let the Dead be mourned for, yet
not those that die in the Lord, not those that have made their Peace with God;
but let such Dead be mourned for that go from one Torment to another, from the
Wicked in this Life to the Damned in Hell, from their Sins on Earth to their
Punishment in Flames, that go from Death to Death. When Absalom died, David
wept for his Friend, but it was because he died in his Sins: Although he had a
fair Body, he had a foul Soul. But when his Child died, he rejoiced, rose up,
and washed himself, and eat Bread. It is hard for dear Friends, for near
Relations, to part with one another, to see the Corpse of a Father or a Mother,
a Husband or a Wife, etc. lie upon the cold Floors, without the Expression of
some Tears. It is hard to stop the Floodgates of Nature, Flesh and Blood is too
weak to master our Passions. Sorrow we may, weep we may, but not without Hope,
for them that sleep in the Lord.

To conclude therefore, If the Death of the Godly be so blessed, as it requires
our Joy to perfect their Felicity, let us wipe away all Tears from our Eyes,
since after they have lived the Life of Nature they are to live the Life of
Glory: Since their Life was a Probation of those Patterns and Precepts Christ
left them to keep and observe: Since they have gained so much by their Talent
that was entrusted to them, in spite of any Opposition, never let it grieve us,
that they now enter into their Master's Joy. Now if their Death, and only
theirs is blessed, why then, O all ye that forget God, endeavor to make your
Lives answerable to theirs. Every one of you, like the Sons of Zebedee, desire
to sit with Christ in his Kingdom, but none shall sit there but such as can
drink of his Cup: None but they that can suffer with him shall be glorified
with him. Therefore let your daily Labor be, to conform your Lives answerable
to his most holy Will and pious Examples, that your Death in his Name, and
through his Merits, may be blessed for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

