A PERFECT DESCRIPTION OF THE PEOPLE AND COUNTRY OF Scotland.



LONDON.

Printed for Rich. Lownds.

1659.

A Perfect Description of SCOTLAND.
FIrst for the Country, I must confess it is good for those that possess it,
and too bad for others, to be at the charge to conquer it. The air might be
wholesome, but for the stinking People that inhabit it. The ground might be
fruitful, had they wit to manure it.

Their Beasts be generally small, Women only excepted, of which sort there are
none greater in the whole world. There is great store of Fowl too, as
foul-houses, foul-sheets, foul-linen, foul-dishes and pots, foul-trenchers, and
napkins; with which sort, we have bin forcaed to say, as the children did with
their fowl in the wilderness. They have good store of fish too, and good for
those that can eat it raw; but if it come once into their hands, it is worse
than if it were three days old: For their Butter and Cheese, I will not meddle
withal at this time, nor no man else at any time that loves his life.

They have great store of Deer, but they are so far from the place where I have
been, that I had rather believe, than go to disprove it: I confess, all the
Deer I met withal, was dear Lodgings, dear Horse-meat, and dear Tobaco, and
English Beer.

As for Fruit, for their Grandsire Adams sake, they never planted any; and for
other Trees, had Christ been betrayed in this Country, (as doubtless he should,
had he come as a stranger) Judas had sooner found the Grace of Repentance, than
a Tree to hang himself on.

They have many Hills, wherein they say is much treasure, but they show none of
it; Nature has only discovered to them some Mines of Coal, to show to what end
he created them.

I saw little Grass, but in their Pottage: The Thistle is not given them of
naught, for it is the fairest flower in their Garden. The word Hay is
Heathen-Greek unto them; neither man nor beast knows what it means.

Corn is reasonable plenty at this time, for since they heard of the Kings
coming, it has been as unlawful for the common people to eat Wheat, as it
was in the old time for any, but the Priests, to eat show bread. They prayed
much for his coming, and long fasted for his welfare; but in the more plain
sense, that he might fare the better: all his followers were welcome, but his
guard; for those they say, are like Paraoh's leane-Kine, and threaten dearth
wheresoever they come: They could persuade the Footmen, that oaten-cakes would
make them long-winded; and the children of the Chapel they have brought to eat
of them, for the maintenance of their voices.

They say our Cooks are too saucy, and for Grooms and Coachmen, they wish them
to give to their Horses, no worse than they eat themselves; they commend the
brave minds of the Pentioners, and the Gentlemen of the Bed-Chambers, which
choose rather to go to Taverns, than to be always eating of the Kings
Provision; they likewise do commend the Yeomen of the Buttery and Cellar, for
their readiness, and silence, in that they will hear 20 knocks, before they
will answer one. They persuade the Trumpetters, that fasting is good for men of
that quality; for emptiness, they say, causes wind, and wind causes a Trumpet
to sound well.

The bringing of Heralds, they say, was a needless charge, they all know their
pedegrees well enough, and the Harbengers might have been spared, sit^ence they
brought so many Beds with them; and of two evils, since the least should be
chosen, They wish the Beds might remain with them, and poor Harbengers keep
their places, and do their office, as they return: His Hangings they desire
might likewise be left as Relics, to put them in mind of His Majesty; and
they promise to dispense with the Wooden Images, but for those Graven Images in
his new beautified Chapel, they threaten to pull down soon after his
departure, and to make of them a burnt-offering, to appease the indignation
they imagined conceived against them in the Breast of the Almighty, for
suffering such Idolatry to enter into their Kingdom; The Organ, I think will
find mercy, because (as they say) there is some affinity between them and the
Bag-pipes.

The Shipper that brought the singing men, with their Papistical Vestments,
complains that he has been much troubled with a strange singing in his head,
ever since they came aboard his Ship. For remedy whereof the Parson of the
Parish has persuaded him to sell that profane Vessel, and to distribute the
money among the faithful Brethren.

For his Majesty's entertainment, I must needs ingeniously confess, he was
received into the Parish of Edenburg (for a City I cannot call it) with great
shouts of joy, but no shows of charge for Pageants; they hold them idolatrous
things, and not fit to be used in so reformed a place; from the Castle they
gave him some pieces of Ordinance, which surely he gave them, since he was King
of Engl. and at the entrance of the Town, they presented him with a Golden
Basin, which was carried before him on men's shoulders to his Palace, I think,
from whence it came. His Majesty was conveyed by the Younkers of the Town,
which were about 100 Halberds, (dearly shall they rue it, in regard of the
charge) to the Cross, and so to the high Church, where the only Bell they had,
stood on tip-toe to behold his sweet face; where I must entreat you to spare
him, for an hour I lost him.

In the mean time to report the Speeches of the people, concerning his never
exampled entertainment, were to make his discourse too tedious unto you, as the
Sermon was to those that were constrained to endure it. After the Preachment,
he was conducted by the same Halberds, unto His Palace, of which I forbear to
speak, because it was a place sanctified by His divine Majesty, only I wish it
had been better Walled, for my friends sake that waited on him.

Now I will begin briefly to speak of the people, according to their degrees
and qualities; for the Lords Spiritual, they may well be termed so indeed; for
they are neither Fish nor Flesh, but what it shall please their earthly God,
the King, to make them. Obedience is better than Sacrifice, and therefore they
make a mock at Martyrdom, saying, That Christ was to dye for them, and not they
for him. They will rather subscribe, than surrender, and rather dispense with
small things, than trouble themselves with great disputation; they will rather
acknowledge the King to be their head, then want wherewith to pamper their
bodies.

They have taken great pains and trouble to compass their Bishoprics, and they
will not leave them for a trifle; for the Deacons, whose defects will not lift
them up to dignities, all their study is to disgrace them that have gotten the
least degree above them; and because they cannot Bishop, they proclaim they
never heard of any. The Scriptures, say they, speak of Deacons and Elders, but
not a word of Bishops. Their Discourses are full of detraction; their Sermons
nothing but railing; and their conclusions nothing but Heresies and Treasons.
For their Religion they have, I confess they have it above reach, and God
willing I will never reach for it.

They Christen without the Cross, Marry without the Ring, receive the Sacrament
without reverence, dye without repentance, and bury without Divine Service;
they keep no Holy Days, nor acknowledge any Saint but S. Andrew, who they said,
got that honor by presenting Christ with an Oaten Cake, after his forty days
fast. They say likewise, that he that translated the Bible, was the son of a
Maulster, because it speaks of a miracle done by Barley Loves, whereas they
swear they were Oaten-Cakes, and that no other bread of that quantity could
have sufficed so nany thousands.

They use no prayer at all, for they say it is needless, God knows their minds
without prattling; and what he does, he loves to do it freely. Their Sabbaths
exercise, is a preaching in the Forenoon, and a persecuting in the Afternoon;
they go to Church in the Forenoon to hear the Law, and to the Crags and
Mountains in the Afternoon to louze themselves.

They hold their Noses if you talk of Bear-baiting, and stop their Ears, if you
speak of a Play: Fornication they hold but a pastime, wherein man's ability is
approved, and a woman's fertility discovered; At Adultery they shake their
heads; Theft they rail at; Murder they wink at; and Blasphemy they laugh at;
they think it impossible to lose the way to Heaven if they can but leave Rome
behind them.

To be opposite to the Pope, is to be presently with God; to conclude, I am
persuaded, That if God and his Angels, at the last day, should come down in
their whitest Garments, they would run away, and cry, The Children of the
Chapel are come again to torment us, let us fly from the abomination of these
boys, and hide our selves in the Mountains.

For the Lords Temporal and Spiritual, temporizing Gentlemen, If I were apt to
speak of any, I could not speak much of them; only I must let you know, they
are not Scottishmen, for as soon as they fall from the breast of the beast their
mother, their careful sire posts them away for France, which as they pass, the
Sea sucks from them that which they have sucked from their rude dams; there they
gather new flesh new blood, new manners, and there they learn to put on their
clothes, and then return into their Countries, to wear them out; there they
learn to stand, to speak, and to discourse, and congee, to court women, and to
complement with men.

They spared for no cost to honor the King, nor for no complemental courtesy
to welcome their Countrymen; their followers are their fellows, their wives
their slaves, their horses their masters, and their swords their Judges; by
reason whereof, they have but few laborers, and those not very rich: their
Parliaments hold but three days, their Statutes three lines, and their Suits
are determined in a manner in three words, or very few more, etc.

The wonders of their Kingdom are these; the Lord Chancellor, he is believed;
the Master of the Rolls, well spoken of; and the whole Council, who are the
Judges for all Causes, are free from suspicion of corruption. The Country,
although it be mountainous, affords no Monsters, but Women, of which, the
greatest sort, (as Countesses, and Ladies) are kept like Lions in Iron grates;
the Merchants wives are also prisoners, but not in so strong a hold; they have
Wooden Cages, like our Boar Franks, through which, sometimes peeping to catch
the Air, we are almost choked with the sight of them; the greatest madness
amongst the men, is Jealousy; in that they fear what no man that has but two
of his senses will take from them.

The Ladies are of opinion, that Susanna could not be chaste, because she bathed
so often. Pride is a thing bred in their bones, and their flesh naturally
abhors cleanliness; their breath commonly stinks of Pottage, their linen of
Piss, their hands of Pigs turds, their body of sweat, and their splay-feet
never offend in Socks. To be chained in marriage with one of them, were to be
tied to a dead carcass, and cast into a stinking ditch; Formosity and a dainty
face, are things they dream not of.

The Ointments they most frequently use amongst them, are Brimstone and Butter
for the Scab, and oil of Bays, and Stave-sacre. I protest, I had rather be the
meanest servant of the two of my Pupils Chambermaid, than to be the Master
Minion to the fairest Countess I have yet discovered. The sin of curiosity of
ointments, is but newly crept into the Kingdom, and I do not think will long
continue.

To draw you down by degrees from the Citizens Wives, to the Country
Gentlewomen, and convey you to common Dames in Sea-coal Lane, that converse
with Rags* and Marrowbones, are things of Mineral race; every whore in
Houndsditch is an Helena; and the greasy Bauds in Turnbalstreet, are Greekish
Dames, in comparison of these. And therefore to conclude, The men of old did no
more wonder, that the great Messiah should be born in so poor a Town as Bethlem
in Judea, than I do wonder, that so brave a Prince as King James, should be
born in so stinking a Town as Edenburg, in Lousy Scotland.

FINIS.

