Believers Privileges and Duties, And the exercise of Communicants; Holden
forth in several SERMONS: Preached on diverse Texts and at several occasions.

By the Learned, Pious and laborious Servant of JESUS CHRIST, Mr ALEXANDER
WEDDERBURNE First Minister of the Gospel at Forgan in Fife; and thereafter at
Kilmarnock in the West.

Part first.

1 Timothy 4.7. Exercise thy self unto Godliness.

Heb. 11.4. He being dead yet speaks.

Printed in the Year, 1682.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THis ensuing piece contains some Sermons, preached upon diverse special
occasions, by the Laborious and worthy Servant of Christ Mr. Wedderburne. The
good providence, which offers them to the Christian perusal, is much to be
adored, putting so sweet and useful a piece into thy hand, in a time of so
much distraction and distemper; wherein others, in stead of bread, give the
children-stones, and by perplexing debates and thornie contentions, does rather
Avocat and Divert the Christian from, ^^an further him in, his soul's
edification. The Reverend Author, albeit Eminently endued with a singular
Faculty for discussing contraversies (wherewith his time abounded), yet much
more Delighted in practical and case-divinity, as the Sweeter and nobler
Exercise of a Man of God, and more suitable to the sweetness of hsi Spirit, and
more profitable to the Church and people of the Lord. And in this he did
excel, having the tongue of the learned, to speak a word in season, both to
the weary and secure. His lips did feed many, and his Doctrine drop like the
Dew, to water the withered, revive and refresh the heavy and languishing soul,
and make the Wilderness blossom. Ane little ensample whereof, these few Sermons
gives you. He needs no Elogies, especially from so mean a hand, as mine. His
praise is in the Churches, and his memory blissed, His Name fragrant, and the
Fruits of his labors witnessing for him, among the People over whom the Lord
did set him. His Epistle Commendatorie is largely written in the Hearts of many
in Forgan and the parts adjacent, where he first served in the Gospel, and had
a most succesful Ministry, both for Conversion and Edification. Many a blessed
Communion, and Excellent days of the Son of Man, did God Honor him with,
there: and scarce have I seen a sweeter face of a Congregation, then that in
Forgan used to be: His Auditorie was usuallie dismissed with another stamp,
then they came, such a power and blissing did ordinarily attend his preaching.
Nor was he at Kilmarnock without a remarkable Seal of his Ministry, though in
a time of General Desertedness and upsitting among People; so rich a blissing
did follow and accompany, wherever the Master did send him; and this, even to
the Conviction of many, who were carried away with the Contradiction of these
reeling times. But, having served his Generation by the will of God, with whom
he walked and keep'd intercourse in his Life, and wrestled and prevailed, like
a Prince, as one of the Seed of Jacob, a considerable time before his Death, he
there fell asleep, and now Rests from his Labors, and this piece of his works
follow him. Being Dead, he yet speaks thereby; and it is hoped, serious and
sober people will not want an Ear to Hear. Doubtless these Sermons will be
very acceptable to many in Fyffe, who were wont to think it edifying to have
the least of private converse with such a spiritual and savorie Servant of
Jesus, and to be refreshed even to see his face in a pulpit. Had he lived to
have polished them for the press, they might have comed forth to public, more
accurat and in a finer dress, yet as they are, you will find them precious,
material, and of singular use for promoting the power of piety. And, though a
Posthumous work, (published by his hopeful Son, who not willing to detain such
a Talent hid by him, lets thee now have it for public use) no more needs be
said to Recommend it to thy serious perusal, but to tell thee; they are Sermons
of Learned and Holy Mr. Wedderburne. Which if they get a favorable
intertainment, and be well improven to thy edification, more may follow;
notwithstanding the Discouragements of this iron-age.

It remains then, that you read and ponder them: and by Meditation and Prayer
work them upon thy Heart. There can be no better Fence against Popery, and
other Evils of the Time, than to become serious Christians, and Grow in Grace,
and Communion with blessed Jesus, 2 Pet. 3: 17, 18. Is it not Formality in
Religion, living strangers to the Power and Exercise of Godliness, that provoks
the Lord to let loose Delusions on many? 2 These. 2:10, 11. Want of Real
Christianity under a Protestant Profession, Paves the way for Antichrists
re-entry, Rev. 13; 3, 8. Matthew. 12: 43, 44, 45. Those who are only of the
outer-court are a ready prey to the Romish bewitcheries, easily captivat and
brought into bondage, when the wind blows from that airth, Rev. 11: 2. Let
Religion therefore, in the power of it, go to thy Heart, and Grace will stablish
you in the Truth, when Notional light will not hold out against batteries, but
be easily overborne by Tentation and Carnal Interest, when the hour and power
of Darkness comes. Now, to help you in this, is the purpose of these Sermons.
The same Spirit and blissing, which wont to be with the preaching, be with your
Reading, thereof, and make it prosperous, for this blessed end.

This is the cordial with of Thine in the Lord Jesus J. B.

SERMON
On Romans 2.22. Thou that sayess, thou shall no^t commit adultry does thou
commit adultry, thou that abhorrest Idols does thou commit Sacrilege?


FRom the 17, Verse of this Chap: the Apostle is confuteing, a received opinion
amongst the Jews of his time, that they should be justified by the knowledge of
the law, and their being able to instruct others out of it. The Apostle
supposes all alonge their light to be so great as to approve the things that
are most excellent, yea, and that they are able to teach others. But since they
practiced not answerable to their knowledge, the Apostle finds in their
condition rather matter for accusation then justification thou that teaches
another teach thou not thy self? In the preceding verse, which is amplified
in this verse; thou that say thou shall not commit adultry. The Apostl's
scop then in the words is to show them, that their knowledge and profession
would profit them little, so long as their conversation and way was so
unsuitable to it; and in the Apostl's argument to evince this, we have a
concession and a correction; the concession, the Apostle supposes them to have
in reference to adultry and idolatry not only ane outward profession of
aversness from them but an inward antipathie against them; they not only said a
man should not commit adultrie, but inwardly they abhorred Idols; the word in
the Grek language (...) from (...). it signifies properly to hate a thing for
the filthy smell it has; so specious a profession had they against adultrie,
and such an abhorrencie of the Idolatry of the heathen, that they said a man
should not commit adultrie and they abhorred Idols.

The correction contains, as Interpreters generally observe, an aggravatione
of the guiltiness of their practice from the concession, does thou commit? the
proponing by way of question is very emphatick, as if it were so absurd for
them that said so much, that positively he will not assert it.

Some move a question why the Apostle changes the word Idolatry into
sacrilege? He says not thou that abhorrest Idols, does thou commit Idolatry,
but Sacrilege? I purpose not in this Sermon to search into the name of the
things mentioned in the verse, adultery, idolatry and sacrilege; only to the
question, some say the change is only in words, not of things, for Idolatry is
an eminent kind of sacrilege, in regard it robs God of the worship institute
by himself, and gives unto an idol false worship. Others think the kind of sin
is varyed indeed, and, which is most probable, the change having a special
Emphasis in it, the Apostle by it saying this much to them, that though they
abhorred some kind of sins such as pagan idolatry, yet they practiced of
another kind no less dishonorable to God, and dangerous to themselves. I shall
say no more for opening the meaning and scop of the words. There is only one
observation from them I purpose in this Sermon to insist upon, but shall name
two or three arising from them, ere we come to it.

OBSERVATION I. That the bare knowledge and profession of divine truths,
without an answerable conversation to them; can profit nothing before God.

THough knowledge, in excellency, be a qualification nixt unto grace, yet where
separat from practice, it produces only a being beaten with many stryps, yea,
to own a profession of holiness without the practice, like to some
change-houses where ye shall find a sign of an Angel before the door and
nothing within but rioting and drunkenness. This is but from our profession to
agrege the guilt of our conversatione. If any by the present occasion here, get
no more but the naked knowledge of somewhat they knew not before, and do not
bring it home to practice, hes but coled the candle to let them see better to
the chambers of hell: no that ye are to despise knowledge, much affection and
zeal many have without this is like to one who has two strong legs for an
journey, and with all two blind eyes: Especially it is requisite in a time
wherein so many deluded with error, and wherein we are called out to give a
reason of the hope that is in us.

OBS. 2. That one may have not only an outward profession of holiness, but also
some inward work on the affections and yet be in a very dangerous estate before
God. So these Jews, they not only said, but they abhorredIdols.

WHat a length an hypocrit may go at a like occasion to this, we did lately
handle, only now learn, not only not to glory in a profession, as I fear some
among you do; ye know what he was who said Come see my zeal for the Lord.
Beware of glorying of this, but rest not, Even upon somewhat beyond some inward
work amongst the affections: thou may taste even of the powers of the life to
come as the Author to the Hebrews Heb. 6. testifies and yet want the thing that
must accompany salvation.

OBS. 3. That some may be abhorring evils of some kinds, and yet wallowing in
others no less dangerous nor dishonorable to God.

THey abhorred Idols, but committed Sacrilege.

The Jews were so punctual observers of the Sabbath day, that they will not
suffer the bodies to hing on the cross: John: 19.31. because of the Sabbath
day. But they stood not upon the murder of Him whom even Pilat judged an
Innocent. Here is great neid of watchfulness, whill our zeall runs out against
evils of our neighbors, we be not intertaining worse in our selves, often it
is but an Imaginary evil we condemn in others, whill real ones are
fostered in our own bosom, Math: Parisiensis tells us of a Bishop of Cremona,
who was sent Legate from Rome to England, and in a Synod at Londone enveyed
exceedingly against the married Clergy, often saying it was an shame for an
man to rise from the side of an whore and consecrat the body of Christ, and
the same night he was taken in bed with an whore himself. It is true, perfect
cleansing, though it be commanded, yet it is no where promised, nor can it be
expected here, yet how dreadful is it to be wallowing in things worse or as
evil as that we condemn in others. How many seem to close out that thief at
the door which by the window comes in and Robs them. While thou condemns the
adultry, drunkenness, swearing, of others, (which is thy duty), watch left thou
be guilty of the hypocrisy, earthly mindedness, that abounds in others. If
thou shall say, this is even the thing the openly flagitious tells us when we
reprove their sins, that we are Hypocrites. But how sinfully soever they act in
reproaching thee, thou ought do with their charge as Moses did Exodus 3. with
the Railling of the Hebrew, who told him, who made thee a judge, will thou kill
me, as thou did the Egyptian; Moses goes not to revile him again, but searches
what good use he may make of it, surely, says he, this thing is known, and he
flies to Midian. Do thou so with their reproaches, search if there be not some
truth in the thing, and fly to a place of refuge. But I come to that
observation I purpose to insist on, and which is the chief scop of the verse.

OBS. 4. That it is a great aggravation of the guiltiness of our lives and
conversations, when our acknowledged and professed principles may be brought as
a witness against them.

THus here the Apostle agreges the Guilt of their committing of adultry from
this, thou say, thou shall not commit adultry, this being the scop of the
verse, we shall insist upon it, Is It, prove it from Scripture; then give some
grounds of it, and so apply it.

The truth of the point is evident from Scripture, two instances we shall give
in the Old Testament, and two in the New.

CVI. Psalm, the scop of which Psalm is to exaggerat the guiltiness of Israel
when in their passage throw the wilderness, they tempted God, and lusted in the
wilderness, and all aggravated from this, viz. that at their passage through the
red Sea they believed God, and sang his praise: and if you will look to the
song they lung Exodus 15.11. Who is God save the Lord, say they, who is like
unto the Lord among the Gods? who is like, say they, and yet in that Psalm. v.
20. they changed their glory into the similitude of an ox; that they should
say, who is like unto the Lord among the Gods, and yet change the Lord.

Thus Nathan aggravats David's, guilt in his murder of Urijah. 2. Sam. 12. Is It,
gets him to confess this principle, that the rich man who had wronged the poor
of his one little lamb deserved to die; David's sin was contrair to the
principle he himself had laid, and from this Nathan aggrava^s it.

The like in the New Testament, the Pharisees laid this for a principle, that
Moses and the Prophets should be believed, and Christ frequently aggravats the
guilt of their despising him, and from this very principle. So Peter aggravats
the sin of Ananias and Saphira, calling it a lying to the Holy Ghost, they laid
this principle, that it was good to sell their goods and lay them done at the
Apostles feet, and yet kept back a part; had they never laid such a ground it
had not bein a lying to the Holy Ghost. Many such instances we might bring to
confirm the truth of the point, and there be these things which tend further to
confirm it.

1. To sin against professed principles has in it all the aggravations that a
sin against knowledge has; for to profess and acknowledge any thing for a
principle, necessarily supposes the knowledge of it, now sins against knowledge
are by some well resembled to cloth which has an scarlet die upon it, it is
the same sin an other commits, but in the ignorant, it is of an whit color, in
comparison of what it is when committed against knowledge; there are two great
aggravations sins against knowledge have in them, is it, there must be a
predominant love to the sin. and hatred to its contrary. Though affections are
not the guide of the mind, yet they often bind it, and it is from them men act
contrary to known truth, 15. John toward the close, but now they have both
hated me and my father. Hated me, why more now, then before? sie the reason why
it must be hatred of me, if I had not come and spoken to them. Christ had
convinced their understanding, and yet they embrace him not: this must preceed
his hatred. 2dly, sins against knowledge, their greatness appears in this, that
they are not so easily pardoned, as sins done ignorantly, as Paul's persecuting
the Church, which he did ignorantly, had he done it after he had changed his
principles, he had not so easily obtained mercy.

Secondly, to sin against professed principles will make heathens in their
religion's to witness against us, often the Lord aggravats Isreal's sin from
the practice of the heathen have any of the nations changed their God? if we
should look through all religions, whereof histories are full, we shall find
the fondest and foolishest careful to come up to their principle, the Romans
abounded in sacrifices because the principle they had drunk in from Numa
Pompilius taught them so. The Lacedaemonians were famous for the like strict
conformity to their principles and laws: Specially the Lacedaemonians were
famous for abstinence because Lycurgus laws, which were their professed
principles, led them to it. Accosta the Jesuit, in his Indian History, tells
us, that among them the most tenderhearted Mothers would cut the throats of
their own children, because their Idolatrous principle led them to such
sacrifices; Do not Mahumitans abstain from Wine, Papists undergo the most
painful peregrinations and scourgings, multitude of Saints days, and all that
they may not contradict their principles. Now all this witness against us when
our professed principles contradict our way.

3dly, To contradict our professed principles makes a man a witness against
himself. The man who had the one talent is at a great disadvantage when his
judge tells him, from thy own mouth I condemn thee. He had laid his principle
that his Lord was an hard man, and reaped where he did not sow, thou ought
therefore, says his Lord, have put my money to the exchangers. This stops a man's
mouth at first, and makes him utterly unexcusable, when his professed
principles depons against his practice, Romans 2.1.

Fourthly, to sin against acknowledged principles supposing the principles to
be divine, is the highest contempt of God that can be, so Psalm. 50. Consider
this ye that forget God, least I arise and tear you in pieces: forget God, who
are these? sie them in the preceding part of the Psalm, ye who take my
Covenant in your mouth, and yet when you fie a thief, rune with him, and become
partner with the vile adulterer. They professed his Covenant, and practiced
adultery, and such are called forgetters of God, and such he will arise and
tear in pieces, when there shall be none to deliver. To sin against
acknowledged principles, has in it a despysing of the Law; and he that
despyseth the law, says Isaiah, despyseth the lawgiver.

Fifthly, to sin against acknowledged principles, has affinity to the sins of
those who are most signally marked for sin in the Scriptures. Saul professed
with tears, David was Innocent, and more righteous then he, and professed he
knew the Lord would make him King in his stead, yet we find him shortly after
in arms against him. Judas knew Christ an Innocent, and called him Master, and
yet betrayed him. Pilat declared him an Innocent, and yet delivered him to be
crucified. It evidenceth the rage and dominion of any lust in the heart, when
the accomplishment of it is driven over our very light, like Saul to make a law
to expel all witches out of Israel, and yet himself to seek to one, it
evidences indeed the Lord had departed from him.

All these and many more might be brought to evidence the truth of the point,
that to sin against acknowledged divine principles, is an great aggravation of
our Guiltiness.

Application.

There is only one use of this I shall insist upon, it serves for humiliatione
and convictione of such as contradict in their practice, their professed
principles; it is a sad complaint the Lord has of Israel, Jer. 2.10, 11. Pass
over to the Isles of Chittim and sie -- if there has been done such a thing as
this; has a nation changed their Gods, and caet. but my people has changed
their glory for that which does not profit.

Heathens follow their acknowledged principles, and are ours any worse, or any
thing more questionable then theirs? But that this point may be the more
pressing, I shall not insist in opening the contradiction of the principles,
which even by the light of nature heathens have been taught to lay, which
multitudes in their lives full of adultery, drunkenness, swearing, lying, make;
But there are these 4 things which by the Scriptures we are taught to lay for
principles, and let us enquire a little how they are contradicted in our lives.

1. It is a principle in our religion, that the great happiness of the creatur
stands in communion and fellowship with the Creator, Philosophers have wandered
indeed so in the search of man's chief good, that some have reckoned up some
hundredth of opinions about it. But there is none among us who can answer but
the first question of our common Catechism, which is the chief end of man?
but can tell, it is to glorify God and enjoy him; now if thou believes this for
a principle and proposes it in the very entry of thy Catechism, I shall say
to thee, as Samuel did to Saul, when Saul told him he had fulfilled the command
of the Lord against Amaleck, what means then, said Samuel, the Bleating of
these Sheep? If thou take this for a principle, what means, First, thy
contentedness without communion with him, not counting the want of it thy
affliction and cross? what account of his going and coming in his ordinances?
can it be thy chief happiness, and yet thou content without it? Secondly, what
means so many steps of darkness in thy conversation, by which thou art
incapacitat for communion with him? if we say to we have fellowship with him,
and walk in darkness, we deceave our selves, says the Apostle John; if we
indeed believe this to be our chief happiness, would there not be more care to
be kept in frame to intertain it, then there is? may I not then say to thee,
as the Apostle here to the Jews, Thou that says man's chief end is to enjoy
God dare thou walk in darkness, and art thou contended without it?

A Second principle we all lay in our religion is, that there is an absolute
necessity of the practice of Holiness, in order to our attaining glory, without
it, we all profess we believe none can sie God, what ever difference there be
in the Christian Church about the nature of Holiness, yet that there is an
absolute necessity about the practice of it, is a thing wherein Papists,
Socinians, Arminians, Lutherians, Antinomians, and Anabaptists, and all unit.
Now let us sie how this principle is contradicted, 1. How exceeding little of
that wherein the life and power of it consists! mortification, the exercises of
faith, love, delight in God, and such like! possibly some care of some duties
of the second table, which being rightly performed are acts of obedience to
God, but the far greater things neglected! many in these be like a servant who
being commanded by his master to sweep the house and look to his child, is
careful to sweep the house, but lets the child fall in the fire: how would the
master look on such a servant his obedience? that is the case with many. Beside
Secondly, what a great deal of Antipathie with the followers of Holiness! Many
amongst us are like to some who have such an Antipathie with some meat, that
not only they cannot eat of it themselves, but cannot endure to sie it upon an
others truncheor; How much hatred of the Professors of holiness, and yet all
professing they believe the absolute necessity of it. Yea, Thirdly, the
holiness we profess to be so necessary, is a laborious painful work; in the
Scripture it is called a striving, a fighting, a running, a working; But the
way that's generally taken about it, is, as if it were a going to a dancing or
some pastime, thou that say that Holiliness is so necessary, does thou so
heartlesly follow it?

But let us come to a third principle; all of us acknowledge that without a
real change of our estait, our way and practice can never be acceptable to
God, That which is born of the flesh, is flesh, all our service to God, while
in the estait of nature, is but the service of an enemy, Romans 7.4. Ye are
married to another that ye may bring fruit to God: if we be not married, we are
like to a woman that bears children, and has not a husband, they are all
bastards. Now this is not minded in our way, if services be done, whither we be
in a state of reconciliation or not, all is one. Hence all our services are
never directed to a right end, they proceed not from a right principle; Bruits
act not, say Philosophers, for an end, because they act not from a principle of
reason; neither do Christians for the honor of God, because not from a
principle of regeneration: Hence also our hatred of sin is so servil, we fear
it as daming only, like some that will not touch a coal, because it is hot, for
fear it burn them; but others will not touch it because it is black, lest it
defile them. yea, hence our services are fruitless; we pray and are not heard,
they are the requests of one in a state of enemity. Now thou that say
regeneration is necessary, that all thy worship may be accepted, whence is it,
that it is so little minded? does not thy practice herein contradict thy
principle?

Lastly, that I may come to a close, it is one great principle of our religion,
that our great work ought to be the exalting of Christ. This is it that we that
are Ministers have especially in commission to preach, He is an elect vessel,
to lift up my name before the Gentiles, said the Lord to Ananias of Paul Acts
9.15. this we are bound to by all the ties of duty and gratitude, this is the
very scop of our religion, but how exceedingly is it contradicted? how little
are we in conference of Christ's excellency in our meetings together? Our
discourses are like Pharaohs to Jacob, how old art thou, and what is thy
occupation? who would have thought but something would have come from Pharaoh
concerning the God of Abraham, who was famous amongst the Heathen, even at this
time? yet nothing of this. If our discourse of him be little, our meditation is
less, our delight lest of all; our hearts are little in Boiling, as the words
in the first language, Psalm. 45.1. imports, this good Master, though all his
garments smell of Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia, yet our distemper is such, as this
smell relishes not.

All these and a great many more principles, we openly own, are as openly
contradicted in our conversation; and how great matter of Humiliation there is
in this, will appear in these things, 1, we not only not walk by principles we
profess, but by principles we all disown; none will defend drunkenness,
swearing, Sabboth-breaking, or such like; all even the most profane disown
them: and yet, as if there were a law for them, so are they practiced. Now how
lamentable is this, that not only these things which God has made principles
to us are disowned, but these things that he has forbidden are practiced, as
if they were principles? Secondly, if our principles were not sure, our
contradiction to them were the less deplorable; But so sure principles, having
all the wit of man can imagine, to confirm them. Many popish principles are
pretended to be no higher then some Pop's decrees. But these named proceed from
him who laid the foundations of the great earth, and streatched out the heavens
as a curtain, who weighs the mountains in balances, and holds the watters in
the hollow of his hand; and that they are proceeded from him we have all the
security reason can require or imagine. Now that such principles should be
contradicted, how lamentable is it! Thirdly, the principles as they are sure,
so are they exceeding sweet; David had more joy in Gods testimonies then in all
riches All the contentment Ranters have in their carnal pleasures are but as
swyn in a dunghill, their glass goes soon out; an hours communion with God,
though in a prison, yea the reproach of Christ, as counted by Moses, who was
learned in all the wisdom of Egypt, is greater riches then the treasures of
Egypt. And Paul, who was not a little learned in the Grecian wisdom, counted
all these dung, for the (...), the superlativenesse of the knowledge of Christ.
Thirdly, It is yet the more lamentable, that there is abundance of strength
allowed to follow our principles, if it were depended upon, the rock follows
us, and the rock is Christ; he is not only ready to do what we ask, but above
all we can ask or think; he deals with us, as Naaman with Gehazi, when he run
after him and prayed him to give him one talent, I pray thee (says Naaman)
take two: It is indeed much to walk up to our principles, but we baike beside
meall, we are able to do all things throw him that strengthens us; and yet to
contradict our principles, is sad!

Lastly, it makes it yet more lamentable, that there are such excellent
encouragements, and so great are ward abiding the walking according to them;
neither is it long to the time, when he that sows in the spirit shall of the
spirit reap Immortality and life everlasting: we are not threshing in the
waters, but sowing in a certain expectation of a harvest of glory, and yet to
contradict our principles! All these laid together evidence how lamentable our
contradicting our principles is. I shall only add 3. helps for walking up to
our principles, and so close.

1. Consider often that there are many things we do out of obedience to the Law
of God, we abstain from murder, adultery, wait on ordinances, think it
necessary to be somewhat more circumspect about the time of a Sacrament; how
unreasonable is it then, to contradict the laws of the same God, in other
things, no less peremptorly commanded, under no less penalty? God spoke all
these words, saying, is the preface to all the commands of the law. If some of
them had only proceeded from God, and others from Baal, or the God of Ammon, we
might easily dispute and dispense with our selves, but God spoke all these
words.

2. Keep up constant intercourse with Christ, as the fountain of
sanctification; do not with him as some do with the old cloak, that they will
take about them when their is a shoure, and cast it off as soon as it becomes
fair again: Some in sickness seek their pardon, as one would run into a
ruinous house when their is rain, but would not dwell there. If we were
dwelling in him and abiding in him, and walking in him, it would be lightsome
to walk by our principles, the want of these influences, exceedingly occasions
our contradiction to them.

3. Stand not upon reproaches that often lie in the way of following these
principles; These men are drunk with new wine, said the multitude, of the
Apostles, when the spirit descended on them, no, says Peter, Acts 2.16. this
is that which was spoken by the Prophet Joel, if thou can produce a line of the
Bible thou walk by the Kings Law, which ought to rule all the subjects;
reproaches then are the fruits of their distemper.

A SERMON
On Ephesians. 5.25. Husbands love your wives, even as Christ also loved his Church,
and gave himself for it.


THere is nothing more suitable to a feast of love, then to treat of that love
which gave a rise to the feast, this is to handle the Gospel of the day, often
believers at such occasions, are so much in tossing their fears and doubts,
that they forget obedience to that precept, do this in remembrance of me. My
purpose therefore in this Sermon, is to glance a little from the words read, at
the love of Christ manifested in the work of redemption; The Apostle from 22.
verse. of this Chap. is leaving directions for the right ordering of relations
among men, showing to each one the duties of their relation: among the rest,
these words contain a rule for husbands.

And in the rule we have a precept, and a pattern; The precept, Husbands love
your wives; the Parterne, as Christ loved his Church, and gave himself for it.
The note of similitude, As, which does knitt the precept and pattern together:
does not import any equality in degree, that ought to be betwixt the love of
the husband to his wife and the love of Christ to the Church, but only some
similitude in kind. For 1. This equality is simply impessible; not only for
the nature of man corrupted, for so many things God has commanded are
impossible, so all gracious qualityes are impossible; but it is impossible for
the nature of man, even as it is created, and pure Adam could not perform
obedience of infinite value and merit as Christ has done, in loving his
Church, and giving himself for it. Beside 2. God cannot in justice require of
mere man, obedience proceeding from a personal union of the divine and humane
natures, such as Christ's love manifested in giving himself for his Church was:
Hence divines prove well, that Christ's obedience to the death, was properly
meritorious, because it was actio indebita, for tho Christ-man, be tied to
obey, yet not to perform so noble obedience, in regard Christ, as God, can
come under no law oblidging to obedience: So that neither could God, require
such perfect love, nor was it possible even for Adam to perform; Therefore all
imported in the note of similitude, is some kind of resemblance betwixt the
Husbands love and Christ's to his Church, as is evident from several other
Scriptures where the same is used, Gal. 4.14. Ye received me as an Angel of
the Lord, yea even as Christ, this imports not an equality in degree, betwixt
the receaving of Paul and Christ, but some similitude and resemblance. Thy will
be done in earth as it is in Heaven, in that perfect pattern of prayer, and many
such we might instance in the Scriptures.

But since in this Sermon I purpose not a particular handling of the words, I
shall not insist in a particular explication of them, I shall only take one
general observation from them, and insist upon it at this time.

Observation. That the love of Christ manifested in the work of redemption is
matchless, and may fitly be made a pattern and copy to the love required in the
most intimat relations.

In prosecuting this point which so Genuinly arises from this Scripture, there
are two things I shall premise for opening of it. First, my purpose is not to
speak of the love of Christ in the full latitude of it, as it comprehends the
love of benevolence and beneficence, and is the root and fountain whence
issewes all the acts of grace, terminat to believers, in time and eternity, but
only of the love manifested in the work of redemption, this being proper to the
Text, He loved his Church and gave himself for it. Neither 2dly, can we speak
of this love according as the nature of it requires, since it is a mystery,
into which even the Angels desire to pry, all that we can do, is, to do as the
painter who being defired to draw the Sun, did take a black coal to draw it
with, since he found it impossible for him to find any thing whereby to
resemble it in the beauty and brightness thereof.

Only for opening the point a little, we shall insist on these two, we shall
prove it and apply it. For the proof of it, that it is matchless, and may be a
pattern for the love required in the most intimat relations, we shall
demonstrat this from Scripture and reason: and first from Scripture, there be
five or six things in Scripture, which all tend to prove it.

First, the Scripture calls it the love of God. 1. Joh. 3.16. hereby perceave
we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us. Every thing in God
is matchless, even these attributes which are called communicable, there are
but some shadows of resemblance of them in the creatures, but there is a
special reason why we should look on his love as such, since it is not only
termed the love of God, but God himself: He that dwells in love, dwells in
God, for God is love. 1. Joh. 4.8 God is love, not only loving, but love it
self.

Secondly, the Scripture proclaims this love incomprehensible, Ephesians. 3.19. there
is breadth and length and depth and hight. Philosophers will not admit of four
dimensions, but here the Apostle, who was abundantly learned, ascribs four to
this, as to a thing passing all dimension, yea and immediately on this subjoins
an expression any would think one part of it inconsistant with an other, and to
know the love of Christ that passes knowledge, to know it, and yet it passes
knowledge, in the perfection of it, though a little of it may be known.

Thirdly, the Scripture assimilats it to the love wherewith the Father loves
the Son: the love of a woman to her sucking child, or Jonathan to David, are
unfit resemblances of this. There is no love to resemble it by, but one, 15.
John 9. as the Father has loved me, so have I loved you. How great the Fathers
love is to the Son, is testified twice by an immediate voice from Heaven, My
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. The Prophet I saiah calls him the
delight of his Fathers Soul, Isa. 42.1. and Christ himself Prove. 8. Testifies
that er the foundations of the world were He was daily his delight; and yet as
the Father has loved me, so I you.

Fourthly, it is frequently in Scripture made the pattern and copy of love to
all the creatures, Not to multiply instances, ye find twice so in this same
chapter v. 2. Walk in love, as Christ also loved us, and gave himself for us.
And here again, in the verse read, love your wives, as Christ loved his Church,
and gave himself for it. There are indeed some copies wherein a scholar may
out-reach his master, but here, as in the first verse of the chap., we must be
followers of God as dear Children.

Fifthly, whenever our love to him, yea even of his choice Apostles, are
brought in competition with this love to us, it is so far undervalued that the
name of love is denied to it, like the stars that disappear as if they were
no lights, when the Sun arises. 1. Joh. 4.10. Herein is love, not that we
loved him, but that he loved us. It is strange the Apostle gives our love the
name of love through all the precepts of that Epistle, where love is commanded,
But when it is set beside his becoming a propitiation for our sins, the name of
love is denied to it, not that we loved him.

Sixthly, It is in the Scripture made the fountain and spring, out of which
issewes all his peoples love to him, as the sun that is the fountain of all the
light in the moon or stars; Our love, yea of all his elect in all ages, is but
a ray, reflecting back again on the sun whence it proceeded, 1 John 4:19. We
love him, because he loved us first.

All these in the Scripture laid together, prove it to be such as it is
delineat in the point.

In the second place, to demonstrat yet further the truth of the point, we
shall consider his love manifested in the work of redemption, in a fourfold
referrence. 1. Consider it with a respect to the person loveing. 2dly. With a
respect to the persons loved. 3dly. In the properties of it. 4thly In the
effects that it has produced. And all the four will contribut to clear how
matchless it is, and how fit to be a pattern to the love of the most intimat
relations.

First, Consider it with respect to the person loveing, it is the love of a
person who is both God and Man, which adds a great deal of weight to it. 1. It
is the love of a person who is God. Divyns say, it renders the sacrifice of
infinite value, that it was the blood of God. Practick divyns say, that the
sympathy Christ has with believers, is of infinite excelencie, because it is a
Sympathy proceeding from a person that is God, for so he can be affected with
the evils they feel, and the evils they feil not; and why not an infinite value
in his love because it is the love of God? We read in histories of singular
testimonies of love from parents to their children, wives to their husbands,
and they reciprocally to them. But no man can put more liquor in a quart
bottel, but an quart, he were mad that should attempt to put the Ocean in a
cockil shell. Secondly, it was the love of a person who was man; in his humane
nature, beside all the infinite habits that wherein him, beyond what were in
Adam, he was anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows. Beside
that, I say, he was content to learn by experience, how to be compassionat; He
was tempted that he might be the more able to succor these that are tempted.
He knows the heart of a stranger, as the Lord spoke of Israel, Exodus 16. for
he was once a stranger himself in the Land of Egypt. Now love proceeding from
a person, in whom both these natures are united, cannot but be matchless.
Remarkable is that word of Bernard, Dilexit nos Christus duleiter, sapienter,
acfoeliciter; Dulciter, quia carnem induit, sapienter, quia culpam cavit,
fortiter, quai Deus erat, it is sweet and strong, proceeding from one that is
God and man.

Secondly, consider with respect to these he loved, and this also will prove it
matchless. Love usually is less singular, if there be any thing in the object
attractive of it, as there is when we love him; but here nothing such, if we
consider whom he loved, under a threfold notion 1. as base and ignoble, 2dly,
as loathsome, and filthy. 3ly. as not only in a State of enemity, but fraughted
with actual enemity, against the person loving, 1st. as base and ignoble, we
have indeed some instances in history of love descending from noble to ignoble;
But to descend so low, as to love that that is farther below him, then the
basest worm can be below us, there being an infinite disparity, which cannot
be between mere creatures, what histories can parallel this? Beside baseness,
there is filthiness, and loathsomness, which being added to the former, makes
it admirable Ezekiel. 16. when thou was lying in thy blood that became a time of
love. We were as the word is, Psalm. 14. altogether become filthy, there was
none that did good, no not one, and yet to love us? But the 3d added that we
were fraughted with enemity against him who loved us. Augustus Caesar, because
he could not marry a mean woman who loved him, commanded yet a vast soume to be
given here, to testify his respect to her love. But Romans 5. God commended his
love to us that when we were yet enemies, Christ dyed for us.

Thirdly, take a view of the properties of this love, and it will appear more
matchless: amongst many properties of it, I only mention at present these four.

1. it was altogether free, there was no necessity of nature, for he is
admitted by a Covenant Isa. 42. yea we find him offering himself to the work of
redemption, when man's case is seen to be desperate, Psalm. 40. Sacrifices and
offerings thou did not desire, and what could man do for reconciliation
beyond sacrifices and offerings? and when it is thus, then said I, behold I
come.

2dly, It was also strong and vehement, it was indeed a love many watters
could not quench, God so loved the world, that he gave his Son; so loved,
there is a great emphasis in that so; Amongst other things, it imports the
transcendent fervency of that love manifested in the work of redemption.

3dly, It is a discriminating love, to men, and not to Angels. The Prophet
Malachie commends the love of Jacob from this, that he hated Esaw: though Esaw
was Jacobs brother, there was nothing in us to cast the balance. Angels were
more excellent natures, it is true some in the schools say. 1. the sin of the
devil was greater then man's, because their natures were more perfect, and they
sinned without a tempter. Yet even this they cannot deny, but the price paid
for lost man had been sufficient for their restoration, had it been intended
for them. Beside even those say, man's sins had several aggravations, theirs
wanted, so that there was nothing antecedent in the objects, to excite this
love to the one and not to the other, and O how great a difference makes it.

Lastly, it is an everlasting love, that his delight was with the sons of men
Pro. 8. before the mountains were brought forth, so it is to everlasting. He
cannot be budded to alter or change this love; Balaam attempted it with one and
twenty sacrifices, to turn him from loving Israel, and to curse them, but it
would not Esaias 54.7. With an everlasting kindness will I have mercy on the,
says the Lord-thy Redeemer.

Fourthly, If we considder this love in the fruits and effects of it, and we
shall like ways herein find it matchless. The Apostle to the Thessalonians
speaks of a labor of love, if ever there was love that might be called a labor
of love, it is here. Amongst many things to manifest this, consider only to
what a low eb he was brought in giveing himself for his Church, which is the
Testimony of love the Apostle pitches on here, and there be only two things to
pitch upon, to evidence this. 1. The names that are given him. 2. The
sufferings that he did undergo, in testifying his love to his Church. 1. The
names that are given him, he is called ane Angel, which was far below him; ane
Apostle, which was yet lower; a man, and the sone of man, a Babe, a messenger,
aservant, a shepherd, a worm and not a man, a curse, and if there can be any
thing yet lower, he became fin for us, that we might become the righteousness
of God in him, what a wonderful testimony of love is here! He that thought it
no robbery, to be equal with God, and was his fellow, to become a curse and sin
for us! the Apost: 1 Timothy 3. v. last. counts it a wonderful Mystery that he
was at all manifested in the Flesh; But to be so manifested, how wonderful is
it! But in the 2d place, if we should take a view of his sufferings that he did
undergo in his humane nature in testifieing this love, when he gave himself
for his Church, what reproach, what torment what, A gony in his Spirit: it was
strange to hear that come from Him, my soul is heavy, and what shall I say, He
was bruised or as the word imports in the first Language, Baken, for our
infirmities. Nether can Bellarmin, nor any other Jesuit, prove that he merited
any thing to himself by his suffering, but it was wholly intended for us. This
testimony of his love is that which we are come together the day to commemorat,
and which is represented in the breaking of the bread and pouring out of the
wyn.

Now let us lay all these together, and see if the point be not proven, that
his love is matchless, and may be a copy for the most special and intimat
love, required in the nearest relations.

Application.

There is only one use of exhortation, which I shall follow from this point
thus opened, and we shall divide it in two brances. 1. It serves to exhort to
admire and praise his love. 2. To render love to him for love.

1. First, It serves to exhort to admire and praise his love. Let men disput as
they will whither Christ as Mediator be the object of divine worship, we may
saffly determine that his love manifested in the redemption of lost man, is a
fit object of admiration and praise. Saul much admired it and commended it in
David when he found him in the cave and did not kill him, will a man find his
Enemy (said Saul) and will he not kill him? But how would Saul have spoken of
this, for a man to find his enemy and willingly be killed for him! May we not
all sit down at this table, crying with David when he heard of the death of
Jonathan, O Jonathan, Jonathan, how wonderful was thy love to me! It was beyond
the love of women! And that we may make the better progress in this work of
admireing and praising his love; I shall offer you some helps to it. There are
some confiderations, and some practices, whereby we may be furthered in it.

First, Consider, admiring and praising his love is the constant work of these
who are in glory, John in his Revelation tells us he often heard them crying;
Worthy is the Lamb who was stain, This is the song of Moses and the Lamb,
that is sung there, and in conformity to this he breaks off the Revelation,
Rev. 1: v. 5. with these words, Now to him that loved us and washed us from our
sins, in his own blood, to him be glory and dominion for ever. If we would have
a communion day resembling heaven, this must be our work also.

Secondly, Consider this is the proper work of the day; However beleivers be
taken up with tossing their doubts and fears, yet there may be something of a
tentation in this, to divert them from something more suitable to their present
work, it is ane unanswerable Argument some bring to prove that the primitive
Church did not kneel in reception of the Sacrament, because they did not kneel
for some Centuries on the Sabbath at all, looking upon it as a day of joy for
Christ's resurrection. It is true in this Sabbath we are met to commemorat a
death, and that the death of the most loveing husband that ever had a being.
Yet since it is the death of one who has overcome death, and who has sent us
word, Revel. 1: 18. I am he that was dead, and am alive; our work ought to be
praises and admiration.

Thirdly, Consider there is nothing we can repay for all the love He has
manifested yea there is nothing else he requires but praises and admiration.
The deliverance from Egypt cost Israel many of their best and cheiffest catel,
there is nothing such here, Offer to me the sacrifices of thanksgiving is all
that is demanded, and when will this sacrifice be offered, if not upon such a
day?

But this and many such considerations; though they may convince the mind,
that the thing is rational yet not sufficiently help to it, if these practices
be not added.

First, Labor to get the heart in frame for praises and admiring this love;
from what thou have heard, thou may perceave thou have ane excellent song,
but if the instrument be out of tune, it may be spilt, as many a good tale is
in the telling, the 108 Psalm. begins well, My heart is fixed, Lord, I will
sing, get thy heart fixed, that is possibly like Israel in Eliahs time, halting
betwixt two, then praise.

Secondly, repel the tentations that would put thee by from praising and
admireing this love; say to them that which Felix said to Paul I will hear thee
at a more convenient time; shall thou come to a mariage-feast, where thou art
called to singing in thy mourning suit? Or is Christ's love in giveing himself,
any thing the less worthy, that thy heart is ill?

But some will say this is easier said then done, they are not tentations but
well-grounded reasons, that keep me back from admireing and praising this love.
Christian what are they? 1. Some say let them praise and admire who are
interested in it and advantadged by it, but thou art not such a one; but 1.
thou commends many things thou art not much advantadged by. The courage of
Alexander; the Policy of Hanibal, the wisdom of Solon; the bounty of
Vespasian, ar all much commended in Histories, and yet the writters of all these
Histories not much profited by any of them: Christ's love is admirable to
mankind and praise worthy, be it terminat to thee or not: Beside, many praise,
such as the glorified Angels, that are not interested in it; if thou shall say
He is to them a Mediator of Confirmation; many great divyns say so indeed, and
others deny it, and as it is not easy to prove from Scriptur, so not easy to
answer The objections brought against it. However, He was not to them a
Mediator of redemption, and yet they admire and praise him.

Thirdly, thou may have interest in it, and yet not descerne it. Christ, say
practical divines, has delivered believers from all danger of vindictive
wrath, but not from all the fear of it, till they come to glory: Thy fears
then are no proof of thy danger. But if all these will not do, get interest
yet in it; it is the scope of the work of the day to make an offer of it.
Embrace his offer, it is free, and so praise.

Others say, they cannot praise; though they will not deny their interest in
it, yet they are under a present desertion, and so cannot praise nor admire.
This objection Sion makes Isay 49. v. 14. The Lord calls on heaven and earth to
sing, because of the Covenant of redemption: Sion says, sing who will I will
sing none, Sion said I am forsaken, my God has cast me off. It is true, it is
with us as the Marygold that opens and shuts or closses as the Sun rises and
goes down, yet be doing it as thou may; the Lord sometimes denies assisting
grace, that his accepting grace may shine the brighter. If he give the poor
widow but two mits to cast into the treasury, it is all one, if he Counts the
two mits: The purest obedience; though, I confess, not the most comfortable, is
to do duties under a desertion, praise it then and admire it.

But I go to the second branche of the use. If his love be so matchless, render
him love for love. It is reported of holy Bredfoord, that some times the tears
would be running down on his truncheor, when sitting at his meat, and when he
was asked the reason of it, he said because he could not get fervent enough
love to Christ, our obligation to Christ is such that the coldness of our love
is wonderful; especially the exercise of love is suitable to this feast.
Zenophon in his Cyroped, tells of one Lygranes, King of Armenia, who was taken
with his Queen captive by Cyrus on a time, Cyrus asked him if he desired his
liberty, and to have his Kingdom, and his Wife restored to him; Lygranes
answered him, For my liberty and my Kingdom I praise them not much, but if my
heart blood could redeem my Wyffe, I would cheerfully give it: afterward Cyrus
having restored him all, and he was comes home in his Kingdom, he asked his
Queen what a one she thought Cyrus was; she replied, she knew not, my heart
and my mind (said she) was so much taken up with the man who would have given
his blood for my ransom, that I could think upon no other. If a Heathen could
say so much of one who made but ane offer of his blood for her ransom, O how
much more we of Him, who has gone far begond offers. He has loved us and
washed us from our sins in his own blood. But since the exercise of love is so
suitable a work to a feast of love, and one great part of our communion with
him in the sacrament, herin, I shall only give their things to try the sincerity
of our love, and so close. 1. Thou most take up a-right the nature of love;
many think they love him because they do not hate him; quid est amor, said
blessed Austin, nisi quaedam vita duo aliqua copulans, vel copulare appetens,
quod scilicet amat, and quod amatur. This indeed is ane love which cannot be
satisfied without enjoying of Christ; is thine of this nature or art thou
content without him.

Thirdly, love to him darkens and abats love of all other things in the soul.
This Character usually practick divins give of it. Tanto quisque (said Bernard)
a superno amore disjungitur, quanto inferius delectatur. It sets well in trial
of our love, to ask our hearts the question he himself asked Peter, Simon, sone
of Jonas, love thou me more then these.

Lastly, love to him is always attended with love to his people and interests.
1. Epist. Joh. 2. The Apostle is large in proveing this, If we love him that
begetts we love also them that are begotten. It is true our love to them ought
not to be so fervent as to him, but yet it still keeps a proportione to it, as
the sune in the dyall, though it move not so fast as in the firmament, yet it
keeps a proportione to it, it cannot be goeing forward in the firmament and
backward or standing still in the dyall. Try by these your love, and finding
it, ye may the ore cheerfully come to a banquet of love.

SERMON
On Jonah. 1: 6. So the Ship-master came to him, and said, what meanest thou O
Sleeper?


THis Prophet prophesied in the days of Jeroboam the second, we find him
mentioned, 2 Kings 14: 25. where he is called a Prophet and servant of the
Lord, and though he prophesied of prosperity, yet with small success in so
corrupt a time. Wherefore the Lord sends him to Nineve the Chief city of the
Assyrian Empire, which he is loath to undertake, partly from fear, and partly
(as some think) loath to Carry a Message from the Jews to the Gentills:
wherefore he resolves to flee by sea to Tarshish. The Lord follows him with a
storm; and when all in the Ship are at prayer to their Gods, he is asleep. For
which, in the words read, he is reprehended by the Shipmaster, what meanest
thou o sleeper?

The words, though they be the words of ane heathen, yet they contain a
deserved reprehension of a prophet of Israel; and in them are 2. things. 1. A
description of the persons reprehending and reprehended, and both descryved
from their present work and condition, the one is the Shipmaster, and the
other a sleeper. 2dly The reprehension itself, what meanest thou, or, as the
word in the first language, what to thee? A short pathetick speech, expressing
anger in the reprehender, and unreasonablness in the reprehended. There is
nothing difficult in the words, that we need to insist in explicating;
sleeping, however in be taken figurativly in scripture, some times denoting the
carnal security of one in a natural condition; as Ephesians. 4. awak thou that
sleep; sometyms the quiet repose a believer has in God, as Psalm. 3: 4. I
will lay me down and sleep, yet here it is taken properly, yet so as it
denotats also untymous security, when there was so great a storm; and all at
prayer that were in the Ship with them.

There is one Observation I purpose to insist upon, but we shall speak a word
of ane other, ere we come to it.

Observat. 1. That security, when dangers are imminent, is unreasonable; even
in the eye of nature.

For 1. Sudden and unexspected surprises add much to the weight of any danger;
as in the days of Noah, Peter makes it a great agravatione of their stroke,
that they were eating drinking, marying and giveing in marriage, and the deludge
came; a trial has no small advantage of us when it finds us asleep. David
could take Saul's spear from his head in the midst of his Army, when he assaults
him asleep. Nature teaches men to flee to some beeld when clouds gather that
threatten rain; Its true the Lord would not have his people anxiously vex
themselves with thoughts of the cross before it come, sufficient for the day
are the sorrows of it; If he bring thee to the Wilderness, he can also rain
Manna; In it the promises of God are the promises of a Father, and such a
Father as in the First Article of our Creed, we call a Father Almighty, and so
let our sorrows, which are threatening us, let them be what they will there is
sufficient ground of a sweet and quiet repose in God; But this maks nothing
against the truth of the point; we do not only counteract to the positive
Laws of God, but to the very dictats and precepts of nature, If trials that
are making so loud a noise shall find us secure and asleep. As it is our great
mercy to be so long warned before the stroke, the axe (as it were) lying at
the root of the tree before it smit; So they rightly improve these warnings,
that does as the Apostle Heb. 11. says Noah did, By faith Noah being warned
by God, and moved with fear, prepared ane Arc to save himself and his Family.

But I come to the observation I purpose to insist on.

Observat. 2d. That the worshipers of the true God are sometyms outstriped, and
may be justly reprehended, for their neglect of worship, by the worshipers of
Idols.

Thus is Jonah a Prophet of Israel and a Servant of the Lord, here by a Heathen
Mariner. The like we find, Genesis 20: 6. Thus was she reproved; this word is very
remarkable to our purpose, Abimelech said to Sarah, behold I have given thy
Brother a thousand pieces of Silver, and then it is added, thus was she
reproved; Abimelechs upright and liberal dealing reproves Sarahs deceit: Sarah
is not only outstriped, but even deservedly reproved by Abimelech ane Heathen.

My purpose is not in prosecuting this point, to compare together Idolaters in
their moral induements, or the performing of the duties of the second Table,
with the worshipers of the true God, none that are acquaint with the Histories
of their lives or their writings, but will easily discern, how far they have
outstriped us; Here it is no disparagment to Constantine the Great,
notwithstanding of all his victories recorded by Eusebius, to say, that
Alexander the Great outstriped him in magnanimity and fortitude; And if I
should insist but upon three of them, who among the worshipers of the true God,
can go beyond them, for excellent moral precepts? Plato, who for his precepts
is called divinus, and is thought by some to have conversed with Jeremiah in
Egypt, which opinion Augustine at length con^uts in his book of the City of the
God, showing that Plato lived ane hundredth Years after Jeremiah his being in
Egypt, and flowrished threescore years before the septuagints translatione; or
if I should name Seneca, whose Epistles contain such excellent precepts for a
moral life, that some think he exchanged Epistles with Paul at Rome; Or Cicero,
for whose salvation Erasmus does plead, as one who had improved nature to the
outmost; I say, my purpose is not to compare the worshipers of the true God
with them in these moral Qualifications, in which, at least some, have far,
very far exceeded us.

My scop is only to compare with the worshipers of the true God in their
worship; to this only my text leads. It is for neglect of this, that Jonah is
reprehended and I shall labor to make it evident that, how false soever their
worship was, yet they have far outstriped and may justly reprehend the
worshipers of the true God in the exercise of it.

First, though their Gods were no Gods, but Devils, falsehood and vanity, had
eyes and saw not, ears and heard not, yet did they highly esteem them, and
reverence them, Micha. 5. Every natione walks in the name of their God, amongst
other things imported in walking in the name of their Gods, this is one, they
did boast and triumph in their Gods, so the Ephesians, Acts 19. all with one
shout cried, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. Idolatrous Micaah, though he made
his God himself, yet can say of it, My God, and what have I more? And if I
should tell what Them cydydes reports of the esteem the ancient Grecians had
of their Gods; or Livius of the Romans, how highly they punished the least
dishonor done to the Gods, I might take up a long time; now let us compare
this with the worshipers of the true God, who triumphs in God or makes their
boast of him? as David said his soul did; is he exalted as God? or confided in
as God? or do we walk in the name of our God as every nation does?

Secondly, as they did highly esteem their Gods, so they were painful and
frequent in the worshipping of them; even idolatrous Israel when they are
imitating them, Jer. 8: 2. see what ane account Jeremiah gives of their
diligence, Whom ye have loved, whom ye have served, whom ye have worshipped, and
after whom ye have gone. So many words to express their indefatigablness in
their Idolatry. The Heathens having such a multitude of Gods, one almost for
every thing, could not choose but but be put to ane great deal of pains in
holding up their worshipe; Amongst Lycurgus laws one asked him why he
appointed so little for one sacrifice, to them he answered, because he had
appointed men to be very frequent in sacrificeing to them; Now compare this
with the way of the worshipers of the true God: it is true our principles teach
us a necessity of diligence in worship, the Kingdom we Aim at suffers
violence: But who runs, strives, fights, labors, according to their
principles? or of whose way can there be such account given, in reference to
God? Whom ye have loved, whom ye have served, whom ye have worshipped, and after
whom ye have gone. It is but some feckless thing we do, and rarely we do that.

Thirdly, As they were painful in their worshipe to their Gods, so they were
very frequent and zealous and intent upon it. Isai. 57. v. 5. Israel is
challenged there among other things, for inflamming themselves with Idols: They
were inflammed as a whore is with her lust; Numa Pompilius appointed some in
the Roman processions to go crying, hoc agite; and Pythagoras forbad sacrifices
to be offered when doing or thinking upon any other thing. compare this with
the way of worship to the true God, though our rule oblige us to this, be
fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord, yet how often is our heart in his worship
like Israel in Elijahs time, halting betwixt two? What wandering, what vanity of
the thoughts, abounding, even when about his worshipe? Do we not ordinarily
worship him, as one taking up a starr through a prospect, who has an shaking
arm, sometimes he has a glance of it, and presently loses it again? Who
prays as if they were making intercession for their life? or hears as the
hungry man eats his meats or sings making a melody in their hearts to the Lord?
are we not then outstriped in fervency?

Fourthly, They preferred the worshipe of their Gods to their dearest and
sweetest enjoyments, Jer. 35: 5. They made their Children pass through the fire
to Motech: This was a dreadful thing: Molech, as some writ of it, was a great
image of brass, within which they did put their Children, and then set a fire
round about the Image, and as the Children did heat and burn in it, the
Mothers went about it danceing and singing, that they might not hear the cry
of their Children; And in the 106. Psalm, the Lord taxes Israel that they did
imbrew their hands in their Childrens guiltless blood, when they offered them
to the Idols of Canaan. Sozomen tells us that at Alexandria, after Constantin
did begin to reign, it was incredible to see what bones of thousands of
Children were to be found in some places of the City, who had been offered in
sacrifice; And this same was, as Acosta the Jesuit reports, frequent among the
Indians in their worshipe; Certainly, these parents wanted not natural
affection to their young ones, yet they postponed that to the worshipe of their
Gods. Now compare this to the worshipers of the true God; what mote appears not
ane insuperable mountain in the way of his worship? Some will not come to the
wedding because he has a yoke of oxen to look after, some ane wedding etc. Ah!
what would we hazard for his honor or worship? Go we not near to the way of
the Gadarens, who desired Christ to depart out of their coasts, because of
their swyne? in a word, who can say upon serious search of his way, that he
prefers the honor of his God to his dearest enjoyments in the World?

Fifthly, they were much in dependence on their Gods in every thing they could
be concerned in; If they were at sea, they had a God to look to and depend on
for safty; of their corns they had a God to depend on for fruitfulness; of
their wyns a God for that. The Romans went never out to any wart but they
multiplied sacrifices in their Capitol; if they had the victory, they eyed
their Gods for it, as the Philistines who brought the Ark with songs to the
Temple of Dagon, and set it up there as Dagons captive; compare this with our
way to the true God, do we acknowledge God in all our ways, that he way bring
it to pass? or do we in every thing make our requests known by prayer and
supplicatione? what a sweet life might we lead, if every difficulty gave us an
earand to him with a petitione, and every outgate with a song? but our way is
far from this; the Lord is sometimes put to complain of his people thus, They
say we are Lords, and we will come no more near thee.

Sixthly, They, to testify their esteem of their Gods, did highly esteem of the
sacred ty of ane oath. Cicero in his officials de juramento, it is wonderful to
heart a Heathen speak so reverently of ane oath read by invocating the Name of
the Gods: The Story of Regulus returning to Carthage, because he had given his
oath to return, is well known, though he knew he should be put to exquisit
tortures, if he returned, yet ere he falsified his oath made in the name of his
Gods, he would return. But how little we esteem, either in making or keeping of
them, our constant practice abundantly declare. All these six then laid
together, which I have pitched upon amongst many I might have brought I hope
sufficiently confirm the truth of the point.

Application.

There is only one use I shall prosecut a little from this point. Is it so that
idolaters and worshipers of false Gods, do often outstrype and may justly
reprehend the worshipers of the true God? It serves for lamentation and
humiliation; Tell it not in Gath and publish it not in the streets of Askelon,
least the Daughters of the Philistines rejoice: But to us what matter
lamentation is it? Especially if we consider these six things.

First, The excellency of our God beyond theirs; Our God is the Lord who made
Heaven and Earth; Our God is in Heaven, and does whatsoever he will; who is
like unto the Lord among all the Gods? Their Idols are Silver and Gold, the
work of men's hands; they have ears and hear not, and eyes and see not: but how
excellent is his name through all the earth? Now so excellent a God and yet
worse served, how lamentable is it?

Secondly, Our principles and ground we walk by, and whereby we are bound to
painful, zealous worship to our God, are infalliblie sure; all that the wit of
man could imagine to demonstrat the certainty of our principles and obligations
to worship, we have it; the sone comeing down from the Fathers bosom and
revealing our duty to us, and a voice from Heaven witnessing to the truth of
his being his beloved sone, his being so ratified by so many properties,
confirmed by so many miracles, so divine doctrine proceeding from him, as has
a clear stamp of a divin hand upon it. It is ridiculous to hear of the original
of some of their Gods, to whom they offered sacrifices, often they were the
work of their own hands, or some of the creatures which God had made their
servitors; now how lamentable is it we should be outstryped in worship then,
having so much reason to surpass.

Thirdly, If ye shall consider the sweetness of the duties, wherein we are
called to perform worshipe to our God. An Idol signifies sorrow; what a grief
do you think behoved it to be to tenderhearted mothers to imbrew their hands
in the blood of their own guiltless Children? But the duties we are called to,
make a degree of Heaven on Earth; In keeping of thy Commandments there is
great reward: Not only for keeping of them, but in keeping of them. What ease
to a burdened mind is prayer, what joy in praises, what refreshing consolations
from the meditation of God as reconciled through a Mediator, and so in all
other parts of worship. I rejoiced when they said unto me, let us go unto the
House of the Lord: now so sweet duties enjoined us, and yet outstryped, how
lamentable is it.

Fourthly, They never pretended to that obligation to worship their Gods, that
we owe to ours; though they thought they gave them corn and wine, and victory
over their enemies, yet they never pretended that any of them dyed for them, to
prevent their eternal ruin: But by this unspeakably-great ty we stand bound to
our worshipe; when our loss was desperate, he was broken for our iniquities, and
in his stryps we are healed; and one of the ends he had in this was, that we
might be zealous worshipers of Him, He gave himself (Tit. 2.) for us, that he
might purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works: And we have
his Apostles, whom he sent out in the World to gather a Church to him, pressing
our duties on us, on this very foundation; Ye are bought with a price, and are
not your own, glorify God in your bodies and souls; Now after such an
obligation, yet to be outstriped, how lamentable is it?

Fifthly, We have incouragments in our worship from the expectation of a far
more excellent reward, then ever they could dream of or hope for, in their
Elysian Feilds, which Seneca comforted himself with, when at Nero's command he
was cutting his veins, where he hoped to meet the soul of Socrates, were not
only fancies, but suppose they hade been real, how low a reward were they,
being compared with that excellent, exceeding great, and eternal weight of
Glory? Notwithstanding of all that is told us of our reward, that ear has not
heard nor eye has not seen, nor can it enter into the heart of man to
consider, what God has prepared for them that love him, and that yet we should
be outstriped, how sad is it?

Sixthly, They never dreamed of assisting influences from their Gods to help
them at their owrshipe; all they did, they did in the strength of inherent
virtue, natural, or acquired. Socrates could tell that his Philosophy made him
patient and bear reproaches. And Diogenes, that his Philosophy made him
contemn riches, and delight in poverty. Ay but we have the influences of
asisting grace secured to us by the word of him who cannot ly, to help us at
our worship. If we know not how to pray, nor what to pray, the Spirit helps
our infirmities; there is a spirit of faith, and a spirit of love, and a spirit
of a sound mind; Their waters came out of broken Cisternes, that could hold no
waters; But the rock follows us, and the rock is Christ.

All these, laid together, evidence what matter of lamentation aryseth from
this point. But that I may come to a close, by what means may we come to
outstrype them in our worshipe to the true God? Since it is so far that we are
outstryped, and so much to our reproach, that it should be so, it will be
necessary to answer this.

And for answer to it, there were some things helped them in their worship,
which we are to imitat: And there are some things they neglected, of which we
are to be careful. And by this we may come to outstrype them.

First, For the things they did, that we are to imitat, I shall name these
three: 1. They were kept much in fear and awe of their Gods; in reference to
the Heathen it will in some measure hold true, primos in orb fecit deos timor:
They were still affrayed, if they neglected their worshipe, their Gods would
fall upon them and be avenged of it. It is true, it is too servil a principle
of Gospel-worshipe; Fear should not be the pace that should make our wheels
go, it should be love; if thou love me keep my Commandments: Yet where fear is
wanting, usually worshipe is wanting also. Eliphaz in one of his discourses to
Job, joins these two together, though He misapply them to Jobs case, Surely
thou restraines prayer, and castest off sear. We have need to excite us to
worship oftentimes, the Argument the Apostle uses in the end of the 12. of the
Hebr. Let us have grace, says He, to serve Him with reverence, for our God is
a consumeing sire.

Secondly, They were much kept to their worship by this, that they judged
they had need of their Gods for every thing they enjoyed, of corn, or wyn, or
water, or success in war, or peace, or childbirth, or wisdom or what else, and
therefore had a God for each of them: This impression would contribute much to
help us in worship, He has told us himself, that without Him me can do
nothing, and also He has told us, that a man can receave nothing except it be
given him from above. If we seriously believed that both our doing and our
receaveing depended on him, our addresses to him could not but be more frequent
and fervent.

Thirdly, They were much heartned in their worship by the responses they had
from their Oracles; It is true, their responses were often dark and ambiguous,
so as whatever way the event fell out, the response could be made to hint at
it, as Croesus found by sad experience, yet Histories tell us that these
responses cost the many dear and costly oblations. Certainly were we noticeing
the answers God gives to prayer, we should have more delight in it, and so,
more frequency and fervency in it, we think our worship fruitless, and so loses
heart of it; Verily he is a God that hears prayer, but usually we wait not
for our answer, nor stands not on our watch tower to hear what he will say, but
like unto a Post delivering a letter, cares not what become of it, if once he
get it delivered. Now if we could imitat them in these things that kept them
to their worship; we might readily come to outstryp them.

I shall only add two things they omitted, which being done, makes our worship,
not only for the nature of it, but for the manner of it, far beyond these,
which we are also to practice.

First, Though they were diligent and intent upon their worship, yet they never
dreamed of any gracious qualification in the person that presented the worship;
Natur's ledder was too low to scal the fort of a natural heart; But if thou can
reach a change of thy estate, and to partake somewhat of the divyne nature, and
to be borne of water and of the Spirit, it will give thy worship another
luster; by faith Abel offered a more acceptable Sacrifice then Cain; Cains was
the first fruits also as well as Abels was, but Abels had the ingredient of
faith that Cains wanted, and so was more acceptable.

Secondly, Though their sacrifices were numerous and some of them costly and
cruel, yet they never dreamed of a High priest who stood with incense in his
hand, which is the prayers of the Saints. This is the great ground of a
believers hope in Christ, that he sitts a High Priest not only to make
interessione for the iniquity of his holiness, and to cover the imperfections
of his worship, but to present it, and to second it before the Throne of God:
He knows that broken words and groans and suchlike sacrifices, performed with
the incense of righteousness of such a Mediator, can have acceptance;
therefore to outstrype them, put thy sacrifice ay in Christ's hands, pray in his
name, praise in his name, and do all through Him, and thus thy worship will be
refined and prove eminent.

A SERMON
On John 3: 29. He that has the Bryde, is the Brydegroom.


IN these words and the following, we have John's last testimony concerning
Christ, the occasion of which was this, some of John's Disciples came to him and
regrat that Christ was brought so much in credit, that John and his baptism
was like to be deserted, He, say they, to whom thou bear testimony beyond
Jordan, behold he baptizeth, and all men follow him. Whereto John replies, to
the end of the Chapter. 1. What Christ did he did it by a warrant from Heaven,
A man can receave nothing, except it be given him from above verse. 27. Then
2dly, He shows some considerable differences betwixt Christ and himself, among
which one in the words read, that Christ was the Brydegroom and Husband of the
Church, for himself, his joy was fulfilled to be among the Friends of the
Brydgroome, who did stand by and hear his voice. So that in the words there be
these two parts.

First, One difference betwixt Christ and John, Christ is the Brydgroom of the
Church, which John was not.

Secondly, An argument taken from a common known custom amongst men, proveing
this difference, He that has the Bryde is the Brydgroome. The denomination of
the Brydgroome being grounded in the having of the Bryde, and the Church being
only Christ's, none else could be the Brydgroome, for none else had the Bryde.

There be two things in the words necessarly to be cleared: 1. What is meant by
the Brydgroome and Bryde: and 2dly, Why the relation is expressed in these
terms, and not of Husband and Wyffe

For the First, By Brydgroome is meant Christ, as they that run may read, for
of him the discourse runs all alonge, and by the Bryde, the Church: He that
will usurp the name of head of the Church, which even Gregory the Great called
seelestum illud vocabulum, usurps Christ's special prerogative. Though John, of
all that was borne amongs women, he was the greatest, yet thinks fit to
disclaim it. But why is the relation betwixt Christ and his Church expressed
in these terms.

1. Because that made best for John's purpose, which was to prove that Christ
ought to have the pre-eminence above him in all things, since nature and reason
teach men to give this to a Brydegroome, and not to his friends that stand by
and are to attend him.

Secondly, The terms of Brydegroom and Bryde, suited well to express the
nature of the relation betwixt Christ and the Church. For 1. The marriage is not
yet fully completed. At the great day (Revel. 4.) the Bryde shall be made
ready and she shall be brought into the Palace of the King. Beside, by this
John shows, that Christ love and affection to his Church is still tender and
fresh, as of persons in their mariage-day.

But Thirdly, And especially, by this similitude is showed the sweetness of the
mariage-fellowship betwixt Christ and his Church, which though it endure to all
eternity, is still as it were but beginning. How sweet soever the
mariage-fellowship betwix: husband and wyffe be in the continuance of their
marriage, yet there is not always such feasting and mirth, as on the
mariage-day; but here the husband is still in his mariage-robs, and the Bryde in
hers, and the feast and mirth of the wedding day still as they were but
beginning, and they are both still as Brydgroom and Bryde.

There be several pertinent observations to the present occasion, arising out
of these words, but I shall only take one general, and follow it a little.

Observe. That there is a mariage-relation betwixt Christ and believers; He is
the Brydegroom, and they are the Bryde.

This point, as it is clear here, so it is frequently asserted in other
Scriptures, Psalm. 45. all throughout, in a type of the marriage betwixt Solomon
and Pharohs Daughter, the same marriage is expressed, there we have the
Brydegroom in state, all his garments smelled of mirrhe and aloes and cassia,
and the Bryde in raiment of needle work, brought unto the King. Isai. 54: 5.
The Lord comforts his afflicted people there, with the representation of this
marriage, Thou shall forget the shame of thy youth, and no more remember the
reproach of thy widdowhoode, for thy maker is thy Husband, the Lord of Hosts is
his name. The same we have the Apostle asserting Romans 7: 4. for for ye are
married unto another, that ye may bring forth fruit unto God.

In prosecuting this point we shall follow this method, 1. Inquire a little in
this Allegory of a marriage betwixt Christ and believers. 2dly, Enquire how can
there be such a marriage, especially parties; and 3dly, Shall apply it.

For the 1. of these, there is nothing more suitable for a mariage-feast, then
to be inquiring into the nature of the marriage, neither do we stretch the
allegory beyond its scope, when we find these four betwixt Christ and believers
employed in this marriage betwixt Christ and his Church. 1. A near and a firm
union, which in marriage has not a parallel. 2. Intimat fellowship and communion
which results likewayes from marriage. 3. The performing the several duties of
their several stations in their married relation. Lastly, A reciprocal
communicating of what belongs unto the one party unto the other. All these four
are in a marriage, and all four concur in this marriage betwixt Christ and his
Church.

First, There is an union betwixt them, which though it be mystical, yet ceases
not therefore to be real, it is frequently expressed in Scripture by
similitudes taken from the union of the head and members, root and branches,
fundation and building; but that which I am to evidence is, that it is the
nature of a mariage-union, and there be two properties of it will evidence
this. 1. In the Scripture we find the union of many relations joined together
to express this union alone, take one place for all, Mark. 3. v. last. For
whosoever shall do the will of God, the same is my brother, my sister, and my
mother. How nearly are they united, that are stated in all these relations, as
brother, sister, and mother? He that does the will of God, is so to Christ.
Beside 2dly, The union betwixt Christ and his Church is not only nearer then
that which is betwixt him and standing Angels, he having united the humane
nature to the divine; But it is nearer then that which was between God and Adam.
Divyns say, that betwixt God and Adam there was soedus amicitiae, but not
foedus conjugale, there ws such an union, while he stood, as is betwixt two who
are intimatly friends. But this is foedus conjugale, where the union is so near
that the Church is not only called the Bryde of Christ, or the body of Christ
which is nearer, but sometimes gets the name of Christ himself, 1 Cor. 12:12.
For as the body is one and has many members, and all the members are one body,
so also is Christ: A strange name to be given to the Church, so also is Christ;
but so near is the union, that the Church has the very name Christ given to
it: Is not this then a mariage-union? But if we shall in the 2d place add to
this, the firmeness of the union; neither adultery, nor death can dissolve it,
which usually loose the mariage-union. Not adultery, Jer. 3: 1. Thou have
played the harlot with many lovers, and yet in the 14. Turn backsliding
Children, for I am married unto you: the marriage not dissolved, no not for
adultery. Yea, death does not dissolve it; The woman, lays the Apostle Romans
7: 2. is bound by the Law to her Husband, while the Husband lives, but if the
Husband be dead, she is loosed; but here death loses not the law of the
marriage, Revel. 14. Blessed are they that die in the Lord, as they trusted in
the Lord and walked in him, and delighted in him, so they die in him, yea
whither they live or die, still they are the Lords; so that the union is a
mariage-union.

We come 2dly to show the intimat fellowship and communion, which concurs to
make up this marriage, and which is the 2d thing we proposed from the allegory.
It is true though the mariage-union be even in this life as firm and sure as
ever it will or can be, yet the mariage-communion is far from the perfection
it shall have; there is notwithstanding real communion betwixt them, Truly our
fellowship is with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 1: 3. Truly, it
is not then a fancy, and that truly there is such a mariage-fellowship betwixt
them, is evident, among many things, from these two, 1. Their near conversing
together. 2dly, Familiar communication of secrets one to another.

1. Their familiar conversing together, which in the Scripture is holden out,
in these and such like expressions, of walking with them, of dwelling in them,
in comeing to them, and supping with them and they with him, of rejoicing over
them to do them good, as the Brydegroom rejoices over the Bryde; and if all
these be too little to express it, he putts them in his bosom, Isai, 40.11.
the Lambs that are not able to walk, he puts them in his bosom. Does not all
these, laid together, evince a free and a familiar conversing together.

But if we shall add to this, the 2d, the free and familiar commutation of
secrets, the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and the Spirit of
the Lord. Christ can tell his Disciples, John 15 I call you not Servants but
Friends, because he had put them so far on his secrets which usually is not
done to mere Servants. I have told you all, says he, I have heard of my
father. Is there not here a commutation of secrets, upon Christ's pairt? The
like is also upon the Churchs, David puts it in one of his Psalms, All my
complaint is before thee, and my groaning is not hid from thee. My groaning,
there are many things we groan for, that we would tell none on earth; But my
groaning is not hide from thee. Is there not then here a mutual commutation of
secrets? There be many other things wherein communion betwixt Christ and his
Church consists, but their two tend most to prove a marriage-communion, their
familiar converse together, and their spiritual commutatione of secrets. I go
to the 3d.

In the third place, if we shall consider, for constituting this marriage,
their mutual performing the duties of this relation; we find them in Scripture
proposed as paterns to all that are in marriage relations: Husbands love your
wyves, as Christ has loved his Church, and Wyves be subject to your husbands,
as the Church is subject unto Christ. The love, which is the sum of the
husbands duty, upon his part, Ephesians. 3. Passes knowledge, thee can no love be
found to resemble it, but one, John 15. as the Father has loved me, so have I
loved you; how lovingly speaks he to the Church throughout the song, usually in
such terms as these, My love, my dove, my fair one: and on the other part, the
Church is subject unto him, she obeyes him even as Sarah obeyed Abraham, and
called him Lord: That is true, the obedience is imperfect, and has many craks
into it, yet she esteems all his commandments, concerning every thing, to be
right, and He graciously accepts of the will in stead of the dead.

Lastly, There is in this marriage a reciprocal commutation of what belongs to
the one party unto the other: 1. Upon Christ's part, it is impossible to
enumerat all the particular Jewels, far less the high inheritance, that is
given the Church by Him; we must rest upon that the Apostle has, 1 Cor. 3.
toward the end, all things are yours, and ye are Christ's, all things present,
and things to come, amongst the rest, death is yours, it is no longer your
enemy, but your servant, for ye are Christ's. Now whatsoever may be comprehended
under all things, He communicats to his Church. It is true the Church has
nothing to give him. Let Pelagians talk of their preventing God, and Papists
of their merit, and of their supererogating, what they will, believers know
their goodness extends not unto him, Only she gives herself, and she gives her
debt. 1. She gives herself, the Apostle commends this in the Macedonians, that
they gave themselves unto the Lord. And 2. their dept, because his he pays it,
and discharges their debt, the hand writting of ordinances which was against
them, and contrary to them, by nailing it unto the Cross. Thus we have briefly
showed wherein this marriage consists.

The 2d thing we proposed is, how can such a marriage be possible, especially
considering the vast odds betwixt the parties. For clearing this, I shall
briefly say only these things.

First, Believers in their eternal election are given to Christ by his Father,
it is true, we know but little of the manner and way of the eternal
transactions betwixt the father and sone; and some are too bold with Gods
secrets in determining herein: that is sufficient to our purpose, to know that
the father has from all eternity made a gift of his elect unto Christ, and in
this is laid the first foundation of their mariage-union and communion; All
that the Father gives me, shall come to me, and again, of all that the Father
has given me, I have lost none: so that whatever they be in themselves yet
since they are the fathers gift, in their election, there is in this a
foundation laid for a marriage.

Secondly, The love of Christ, however it be high in regard of the person
loving, yet withal it is very condescending in reference to the thing loved,
yea the more condescending it be and the less attracted by any excellency in
the object, the more of the nature of pure love there is into it, amor purus,
said Bernard, non est mercenarius. His love then being altogether free, (hence
it is stouping) can and does very well condescend to bestow this highest
love-relation upon basest worms: even so great a God to love with such a great
love such as we. Now from the love which is pure love proceeds this marriage,
and who can hinder his love?

Thirdly, How low soever our naturs be in regard of creation, being made a
little lower then the Angels, yet not a little advanced above the angelical
nature, by reason of the personal union of the humane nature, with the divin in
the person of the Mediator, Godman having sit down at the right hand of the
Father, to which of the Angels said he at any time, Sit thou down at my right
hand. Ahasuerus in his marriage with Esther did make her no more noble in blood
then she was before: But in this Brydegroom, this is singular, that he hes
lifted up the nature of his Bryde in the union of the same nature with the
divine, it is nothing so strange then there be a marriage.

Lastly, As for the moral distance betwixt Christ and his Bryde, this is also
removed by washing her in his own blood. It is needless to debar whither our
union with Christ or out justification preceed in order of nature, since in
order of time the odds cannot be great. But we are all washen before our
mariage-communion with Christ, and as Esther, perfumed with the incense of the
righteousness of Jesus the Brydegroom: Now lay these four together, and the
marriage, notwithstanding the wast odds betwixt the parties, will not appear so
strange. But I go to the Application.

Application.

There is a threefold use we shall follow from this point. Is there such a
marriage betwixt Christ and believers? Then let all admire and praise the
Brydegroom for this admirable condescendency; thy Maker is thy Husband, are
words of wonder; there be these things that make the marriage truly admirable.

First, The majesty and greatness of the Brydegroom. The Apostle forbidds us to
be unequaly yoked, but how unequaly is he yoked, the brightness of the Fathers
glory, the express image of his person, he that thinks it no robbery to be
equal with God, the man that is his fellow, whom all the Angels adore, thus to
condescend how admirable is it?

Especially if in the second place we consider the baseness of the Bryde: Might
not the Church say as Abigail said to David, when he sent to take her in
marriage, 1 Samuel 24: 4. Behold let thine Handmaid be a servant to wash the feet
of the Servants of my Lord: How base and polluted are we, and yet admitted to
such a marriage, and taken into his bosom!

If thirdly, We consider how earnestly he suited us, and how many repulses he
endured, before he could gain our consent! How often he did stand at the door and
knock till his locks were wet with the dew of the night! How often did he put in
his hand at the hole of the door, and his fingers dropped myrrh! How often did
he entreat, beseech, alure with promises, and yet we greived his Spirit,
despised it, quenched it! How often was he made to sit down and weep over us, as
he did over Jerusalem, and say, Oh! if that thou in this day had known the
things that belong to thy peace! How often hes he pyped unto us, and we have not
danced, and mourned unto us and we not lamented!

Fourthly, Consider the admirable privileges we are advanced to, by this
marriage, the Church in the 2d of Hosea after she hes tried all other lovers,
verse. 7. I will go and return to my first husband, for then it was better with
me then it is now. How noble a Husband, and how sure an inheritance! What
sweetness of content in fellowship with him! I sat down under his shadow with
great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste, says the spouse, in the
song; the half of the truth cannot be told of the greatness of this
privilege, and how much, especially at the mariage-feast, ought we to be
admiring it.

The second use, If there be such a marriage, labor Christian to attain it,
this is that we have in commission to offer to thee: Ministers are sent out, as
Eleazar Abraham's servant, to seek a Wyff to their Masters Sone; do not despise
thy own mercy. If thou ask what shall thou do in order to thy closing with it;
I shall offer the these helps briefly.

1. Thou must renounce all treating with thy other lovers, with whom either
thou have contracted or art about to contract a marriage, thou cannot be married
to both; If any man be in Christ he is a new creatur, and old things are past
away. Thy drunkenness, swearing, sabboth-breaking, carless walking, hypocrisy,
or what else, it is but adultery thou committest with them. The man whom now
thou hes is not thy husband, said Christ to the woman at the well. Stand not at
it, to give up with these, the bargan we drive the day, is like to a mother who
offers her Child an apple to quit the knyff, he has in his hand, that would
cut his fingers. What ever promises these lovers make, thou will come in the
end to say of them as Poets fable Ariadne said of her husband Theseus when he
left her desolat and alone in an Island of the Sea, Mitius inveni quam tegenus
omne ferarum.

But 2dly, If thou will attain this marriage, hearken to his wooeing-motions, I
shall in this, name but two or three steps of his procedour in his fuit of
marriage, and see how thou cariest to him in them.

First, Possibly the Lord by his ordinances darts in some beams of light into
thy understanding; so that thou who was formerly ane ignorant, comes by it to
see the evil of some sins thou has delighted in, or can discourse
rationally of some truths of the Gospel thou wast ignorant of, take Heed how
thoug hes this candle of the Lord lighted in thy bossome; If thou continue in
that sin after it, or only pride thy self in thy knowledge, thou hes resisted
of his wooeing-motions. He has been standing at the door knocking, and thy
answer hes been, I have put off my coat how shall I put it on? And, that thou
was resolved to continue a-bed.

Secondly, Readily Christ proceeds farther in his suit, by his Spirit
fortifying the light in the understanding, and making it set the conscience in
fire with the sense of sin, and the apprehensione of wrath; this is one of his
ways of wooing, how unsuitable soever it appear at first to mariage-love. Now
see how thou caries to this, take heed where thou brings watter to quench this
fire, if thou divert it, or like Saul take an Instrument of music to cure it,
and dar not entertain it till thou get water drawn out of the wells of
salvation thou extinguishes one of his wooing-motions.

Or thirdly, if he go farther yet in his suit, and stir in thy affections some
desire after Christ, thou say from the commendations thou hear of him, O
if he were mine! But readily to morrow when the Sacrament is by, thou look
on it as a man will do on a bargane he made in his drunkenness, rue it, and do
what he can, to cast it again; this is to despise the marriage. In a word learn
carefully to intertaine his suit. Many, especially at Sacraments, are like some
leafy servants on whom in the morning their Master calls, and they answer
coming, and falls a sleep again, and if he call again the second time, the same
answer, but falls asleep again; this in his wooing is his entertainment, He
says in his ordinances arise my love, my dove, my fair one, and come away, for
this is not thy rest: We answer at the ordinances while the cry lasts, coming,
and then falls asleep again; this is to despise the marriage.

These three helps I have given you to attain to this marriage; do not stand
disputing thy unworthiness or thy unsuitableness to this marriage, at least cast
not at it because thou art not his match: Abigail judged her self bad enough to
wash the feet of the Servants of David, yet she ryses and goes with the
servants of David, to take him to her Husband. What if God willing to show
mercy on the veshels of mercy, says the Apostle, who art thou O man that
replyest to God. If he offer the a marriage and his offer is sincere, it becomes
not thee to charge him with imprudency, call thy self as unworthy as thou will,
yet with Abigail up and go with the messengers, and accept of the marriage.

Third Use, Is it so that there is a marriage betwixt Christ and his Church,
then in the third place, let such as have attained this high privilege learn
to improve it, especially in these following particulars.

First, Thou may come with confidence and cheerfulness to his table in this
ordinance of the Sacrament: the Master of this Feast is thy espoused Husband,
as he that has the apple tree has a complete right to all the fruit that
grows upon it; this is one part of the mariage-communion, which refults from
the mariage-union. He says to thee, take eat this is my body which is broken
for you.

Secondly, By virtue of this marriage thou have an excellent answer to all
intyseing tentations, thou can tell the tempter in his suit, thou art already
married, and what has he to do to entyse another Wyff. Ahasuerus could not
endure to see Haman falling on the Bed of Queen Esther: What will he force the
Queen before mine eyes, said he. Thy husband is a jealous God, tell this to the
tempter.

Thirdly, Thy being clothed with this Husband affoords the ane easy way how to
manage any thing above thy strength; put it over upon him, thou art to do as
Manoahs Wife did when the Angel came to her and told her of the birth of
Sampson, Stay, says she, till I call my Husband.

But some say, there is no question of incouragments a new resulting from this
marriage: But I doubt if indeed I be married unto him; take then some marks to
try it by.

First, If thy marriage-love be only reserved for him; A woman may love her
children, friends, and, with some kind of love, her possessions, but her
mariage-love ought only to be reserved for her Husband, Psalm. 73. v. 25. There
is none on earth that I desire befide thee, the bensil of thy love is for him,
and other things loved with a reference to him.

Secondly, How does thou take with his absence? is it thy affliction or not,
Matthew. 9. Can the children of the marriage chamber mourn so long as the
Brydegroom is with them, but the day shall come, he shall be taken from them,
then they shall fast; does thy joy eb and flow with his presence, and absence?
this is a good symptom he is thine.

Thirdly, Try it by thy subjection to his laws. The woman is bound by the law
of the Husband, so long as the Husband lives, Romans 7:2. by his being a
Husband he ceases not therefore to be a Lord, Psalm. 45. For He is thy Lord and
worshipe thou him: The more love, the more obedience: If ye love me, keep my
Commandments; Its not some flash of a desire after him at such a time as this,
will prove a marriage, but where there is a constant tract of obedience to him
as a Lord, there is a sweet proof of his being thy Husband. Amen.

SERMON
On Isai. 45: 24. Surely shall one say in the Lord have I righteousness and
strength.


IN the entry of this Chapter, we have the Lord comforting Israel, who were
hopeless that ever they should return out of Babylon, by nameing Cyrus an
hundredth years before his birth, whose right hand he would uphold, and that
they might the better believe, that notwithstanding all the power of the
Babilonians, Cyrus should deliver, the Lord tells them, He had done greater
things then that came to, He formed the light, verse. 7. and verse. 18. He formed
the earth and established it; this incouragment continues from the beginning of
the Chapter to the 22. verse. from thence to the end of the Chapter, we have a
prophecy of the calling in of the Gentiles, Look unto me all ye ends of the
earth and be saved; and in the words read we have the happy condition of the
believing Gentiles when they shall be called in; they shall find in the Lord
righteousness and strength, and in this they shall triumph and glory.

This being the scop of the words. In them these three particulars are
considerable. 1. A compend of the privileges of the believing Gentiles,
righteousness and strength. 2. The fountain of the privileges, In the Lord. 3.
The triumph the Gentiles shall make because of their privilege, Surely shall
one say.

Two things in them are necessary to be cleared: 1. What is meant by
righteousness and strength. 2dly, What is employed in these words, Shall one
say. For the 1. Some referr the two only to times of trial, making them to
relat to captivity in Babylon, and the meanning to be, in the Lord I shall find
righteousness, supporting strength, and faithful dealing, under the captivity.
But with Calvin, we take the words as the privilege of the Gentiles, who should
come to Christ, and so (as Calvin observes) comprehend the two main points of
our salvation, strength in Christ, and righteousness, for covering our defects,
in Christ. For the other, what is employed in, shall one say: It imports a
triumph, and glorying in these privileges, as usually the like expression
imports in this prophecy, In that day shall ye say, 12. Chapt. So that the
whole meaning of the words comes to this, that when the Gentiles should look to
Christ they should triumph in their condition, because of the righteousness and
strength they should find in him. There be several Observations we might take
notice of from the words, but I shall only pitch upon one, and prosecut it in
this Sermon.

Observat. That the strength whereby believers act in duties, and the
righteousness whereby the imperfections of their duties is covered, are both
to be found in Christ.

This point is clear from the words, the bleeving Gentiles, who look to him and
are saved, triumph in this, that they find righteousness and strength in him.
In prosecuting of it we shall take the doctrine in two parts. 1. Shall show
that our strength for duties, is in Christ: and 2dly, That the righteousness
that covers the defects of our duties, is also to be found in him.

For the 1. that the strength whereby we perform duties, is in Christ: we
shall 1. prove it from Scripture. 2dly, Give some grounds of it. 3dly, Apply
it. For the proof of it from Scripture, there be these things in the
Scripture, that tend to confirm it.

First, The Scripture every where declares man utterly impotent for performing
the meanest duty without God. If he be called to will, it is God that must
work it in him; If to do, it must proceed from the same God, Philip. 2: 13. If
to pray, the Spirit must help our infirmities, Rom, 8. If to hear, He must
awaken our ear, Isai. 50: Yea what ever we do, there is nothing of it we are
able to do of our-selves, no not of ourselvs to think so much as that that is
good.

2dly, What duties we are commanded to do, we are expressly commanded to do them
in the strength of Christ. If to resist tentations, we are to be strong in the
Lord and the power of his might, Ephesians. 6: 11. If to walk according to the
rules of the Gospel; we are to walk in him, Coloss. 2: 12. If to hope, he most
strengthen the heart, Psalm. 27. Last. If to carry a right under desertions, we
must trust in the name of the Lord, Psalm. 42: 6. and last. If fruitful in any
duty, we must abyd in him as the branch in the root, John 15: 4.

Thirdly, It is evident also from the names that Christ has given unto him in
the Scripture, as, Our life, Col. 3: 4. Our light, Ps. 27: 1. Our hope, Coloss.
1: 27. Our root, John 15: 4. Our consolation, Luke 2: 19. Our wisdom, our
sanctification, all which prove the truth of the point.

Fourthly, In the Scripture the Saints have ascribed the praise of whatsoever
they have, either of active or passive obedience to him. If they suffer
patiently, I can do all things through him that strengthens me, Philipp. 4:
v. 13. If they act in their duty, Not I, but the grace of God in me, says
Paul. Yea if they persever, thy right hand upholdeth me, Psalm. 63: 8. Yea the
praise of their life to him, I live, not I, but Christ that lives in me, Gal.
2: 20. All these laid together prove abundantly from Scripture, that our
strength for duties is in Christ.

As for the grounds of it, why the Lord has put our strength in the hand of
Christ, and not in our own, I shall name but these four.

First, By this, our strength under the Covenant of grace is surer laid up,
then it was under the Covenant of works: once our strength for works was in our
own hands. Adam, though the perfectest mere man that ever was, both for moral
and gracious induements, yet how soon did he make shipwrak of it! Yea the
patrons of universal grace, who assert that God has given sufficient grace to
men for attaining salvation, can neitehr say that it would be effectual for
salvation, or that it is not often lost, without the influences of assisting
grace: but by this way of making Christ the fountain of strength, our strength
is put into the hand of one who can not change, who is one and the same
yesterday, and the day, and for ever.

Secondly, Christ his becoming our strength for duties, suits well to the great
design of the Gospel, which is the advancing of his own glory: For 1. This
tends to keep up his peoples dependence upon him; This makes a thick court of
supplicants, which is much for the honor of a Prince. If we had a stock of
grace in our hand, we would readily say, as Israel did, We are Lords and will
come no more near thee. He that has riches enough of his own, despyseth
begging; and he that has health enough, seeks not after a physician. It is
true there is inherent grace given, in ef\fectual calling, to believers: But it
is as ane spark of fire in greenwood, which, if it be not continually blown
upon, it would dye out; whither Adam needed the influences of assisting grace,
notwithstanding of all his inherent grace, is to me beyond controversy: Neither
did it derogat from the perfection of his estat. But that we constantly need
it, and ought to be still dependent for it, who will deny? 2dly, As this
dependence is honorable for God, so by putting our strength for duties in
Christ's hand, his people hes still fresh and new matter of praises: Every new
enlargement of heart for any performance affoords thee subject of a new song,
and thus He is still glorified by them.

Thirdly, our strength being in the hand of Christ, tends not only to advance
the honor of Christ, but our obedience in the great duties, which are
eminently advanced by putting our strength in Christ's hand, Faith and
self-denial. 1 This way makes a great deal of work for faith, especially as we
live by faith a life of sanctification, every branch of holiness calls for ane
new act of faith; not only is faith to be acted in order to the acceptance of
our duty, but for strength to perform; and this eminently promoves
self-denyal^, when there is most enlargement of heart in duties, we must
remember it is dereived from ane-other; there is a remarkable word, Deuter. 8.
He fed them in the wilderness with Manna, which thy Fathers knew not, that he
might humble them. How could this humble them? Was it not Angels food? But it
was food He behoved to give them daily, and this tended to humble them. How
excellent soever the influences of grace from Christ be, yet since there is
fresh need of them daily, this tends to humble thee.

Fourthly, This putting our strength in Christ's hand makes Christ's yoke both
easier and sweeter to his people, then if their strength were in their own
hand. 1. It makes it easier. If a Father shall undertake to pay his sons
expense at every tavern he comes to, its more easy nor if he had given him
money in his purse to pay for himself. We have no more to do now, but ask and
it will be given us, and knock and it shall be opened unto us. Israel had more
ease in getting their food in the wilderness, nor they had when they tilled and
sowed for it in their ow^ possessions; they had here no more to do, but gather
what was rained down to them. It makes his yoke also sweeter, then if our
strength were in our hand. My beloved put in his hand a the hole of the door,
and his fingers dropped myrrh, that which drops from his fingers, it has to
his spouse the relish of myrrh; that he as our nurse must pout our meat in our
mouth, and that we are to be strong i^ the grace that is in Jesus Christ, is
the sweetes^ ingredient in our performances.

It were very pertinent with the point to enter here with Pelagians, who of old
did talk so much of man's being able by the power of natural qualifications to
prevent God, and merit the first graces from God by a merit of congruity:
against whom, Augustine among the Fathers, and profound Bradwardin in his Book,
De causa Dei, have written at great length; the Patrons of universal grace,
Papists, Arminians, who also are at best Semi-pelagians, in opposing the truth,
extolling man to the dishonor of Christ: but how pextinent soever this were to
the point, the unsuitableness of it to the present occasion shall make me wave
it, and come to the practick application of the point.

Application.

Use 1. Is it so that our strength for duties is put in the hand of Christ; in
the first place, take heed of making the wrong use of it, as if no attempt were
to be made at duties, but when we had actual influences of strength from
Christ; how frequent is this? Especially at Sacraments; How can I sail without
wind? Or can such a lame ones as I walk, If I be not borne? To obviat this I
shall offer these confiderations.

First, Our obligation to duties remains, though Christ should withdraw
strengthening influences of grace; our impotency is much acquired, and God
loses not his right to require obedience, though we have lost our strength to
perform it, a creditor has sufficient right in law to crave his debt, though
the debtor has deboshed away all his estat, and thereby becomes incapacitat
to pay him.

Secondly, we may do much as to the substance of duties, even under a
desertion, though the actual influences of grace be simply necessary for the
gracious qualifications of them; there is yet more in our power, yea even
suppose in an unregenerat estate, far more when only under a desertion and
wanting assisting grace, then we do; yea usually assisting grace is given when
we are active in exerting and stirring up inherent grace, Psalm. 27. verse. last,
Wait on the Lord and be of good courage and He shall strengthen thy heart.

Thirdly, The Lord often denies assisting grace, that his accepting grace may
shyn the brighter; as he gave the poor woman but two myts, yet he commended the
two myts, she did cast into the treasury; usually our prais^ are loudest, when
we find him accepting the duties that are mixed with manifest imper fections,
Psalm. 116. David says, The Lord heart him when he cried and graciously
inclyned h^^ ear when the cords of death took hold on him: an^ with all when
he considers the faintness an^ defects of his cry, that it was then when h^ was
in have saying, all men are liars, that suc^ a cry should be heard, see how he
is enlarged in praises, I will call on the Lord whill I live, (...) love him;
what shall I render to him, thy servant Lord! thy servant! If he give thee only
to groan, what if he commend that groan, and look on it as the groand of a
dear Child, as he did on Ephraims bemoaning himself, Jer. 31.18.

Fourthly, Christ sometimes gives strength for duties and it is not discerned,
Hosea 12^ v. 3, and 4. Jacob by his strength he prevailed with God and had
power over the Angels: the Angel wrestled all night with Jacob, and yet gave
Jacob even when he was wrestling with him, the strength of a Prince, as a
Prince he prevailed with God. Often we complain of the want of what we are
enjoying, Solom. Song cap. 4. verse. last. the Church prays, Let my beloved
come to his garden, my sister my spouse; she speaks of him as absent, but He
tells here be is present, some men will see^ their hatt when it is upon their
head; and you may have strength and not discern it.

Lastly, Suppose he should deny thee strength to act in thy duty: not only art
thou a debtor to him for obedience, and he is none to thee for assisting
grace: But also thou ought carefully to search, what it may be that impeds his
strengthening influences. We are often like orped children, that, when the
fathers frown on them, fret at their condition, but consider not their fault;
possibly thou hes abused assistance formerly given, quenched and grevied his
Spirit.

But I come to the two Uses of the point, having guarded against the abuse of
it.

First Use, Is our strength in Christ? It reproves these who set about duties
in their own strength. It is ane excellent resolution of David, Psalm. 71: 16. I
will go in the strength of the Lord, and make mention of his righteousness,
even of his only. There be these inconveniences which arise from our performing
duties in our own strength.

1. This makes many empty resolutions: When we hear of duties in preaching of
the Gospel, presently, at such occasions especally, we resolve to believe, to
consent, to walk more watchfully, and does not eye Christ for strength: This is
to bring butt the thing that's not there-ben. Can any gather graps off thorns,
or figgs off thisles, or can that which is pure, proceed from that which is
impure? This proves nothing, but clouds without rain.

2dly, The forgetting this makes the work of God a burden to us, we stryve to
wring our performance out of our own hearts; which are as dry herbs, that have
not the juice in them. We seek; and thus we toil and wrestle like one lifting
a burden above his strength: whereas if Christ were eyed for strength, his yoke
would be easy, and his Commandments not grievous. They that wait thus on the
Lord shall mount up as the eagle, they shall run and not be weary, and walk and
not be faint.

3dly, The neglecting of this produces a yielding to every light tentation; we
foolishly encounter it in our own strength, who art thou said Saul to David a
stripling, and he a man of war from his youth. Be strong in the Lord and in
the power of his might, is the first part of the rule Paul gives for resisting
of tentations.

4thly, The forgetting this makes our services unacceptable to God, and
fruitless to ourselves, as God relishes no service, but what proceeds from his
own spirit; so it is best, and here, In his own strength shall no man prevail.
Amongst other things imported in that whatsoever ye ask in my name, this is
one, in my strength, it is a sad challenge Christ has against even his own
Disciples, hitherto ye have asked nothing in my name.

Lastly, The not eyeing Christ for strength weakneth our confidence in our
approaches to God: If we could say as David, Psalm. 27. Thou said unto me, Week
ye my face, our next word with very much confidence might be, Hyd not thy face
from me. If a King endyt his subjects petition himself, the subject may be
little feared, it shall be granted. The case is so here, when Christ is our
strength in duties he as it were endyts our petitions, and will he reject the
bill he penned.

Ane other Use of the point; is our strength in Christ, then make use of him
for strength; Tell me, said Dalilah to Sampson, where thy great strength lies.
Know him for thy strength, and make use of him as such, many seek their
righteousness in him, that seek in themselves their strength.

If thou shall ask what shall thou do in getting his strength forth coming to
thee? take shortly these rules to help thee.

First, Often lay before him thy inherent weakness and insufficiency for thy
work, as David did often in his Psalms, Hear me O God for I am weak. Do thou
as those who would have their Clothes dried, they spread them out before the
sun, and there comes heat from the sun that dryes them; spread thy weakness
before Him, this was the course the poor, blind, lame, took in the Gospel: They
did cast themselves in his way with their blind eyes and lame legs; he is no
less compassionat now, then he was then.

Secondly, Labor to propose right ends in thy desyrs of strength from him: Do
not as Simon Magus, who would have had the gifts of the Holy Ghost that he
might become some great man. Our strength for duties is given, as noblemen
gives their pages livray-cloathes, that by them their masters may be honored,
not they; of him and for him are all things, to him be praise, says the
Apostle.

Thirdly, Take notice of the ordinary way how he uses to communicate strength
to his people. I say the ordinar way, for there are many ways He takes in his
communicating influences to his people, but the most ordinary way is, to make
something look out of a promise, after reading some part of his word, which
readily they have often read, but never discerned that into it before, as the
old blind man who had a boy reading to him, the 8th Chapter to the Romans, and
hearing the 1. verse of it, There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, Hold, said he, I have often read, often preached, on that verse, but now
I perceive something in it I never saw before, and was filled with such joy, as
he professed he never felt the like in his life; It is very remarkable in
Scripture, sometimes we will find the word which has less aptitude to convert,
sometimes have greater effect then that which has a great deall more, as, to
Nathaniel, 1 John, the word that Christ said, behold ane Israelit indeed, in
whom there is no guile, does not convert Nathaniel, though that was a sure
proof of Christ's being God, that he could say so much, but ane other word,
less apt, does it; I saw thee under the figg tree, thou art the Son of God,
says Nathaniel. wait till he make something look out to thee, of some part of
his word, and possibly even that thou thinks least of may be the chariot that
conveyeth thy strength.

Fourthly, Be following thy duty with the strength thou have till more come; It
is the Lords way to give his people strength when about their duty; I went
down to the garden, to see if the pomagranats buded, ere I was aware, my soul
was as the Chariots of Aminadab. If thou shall say, thou reads, prays, hears
etc. and finds nothing conveyed by these from Christ to thee: Christian! do it
again, yea so long as there stands a command for doing of it, be doing it
still; remember the answer Peter gave to Christ, when he asked him some meat;
Master, we have toyled all night and caught nothing, never-the-less at thy
command we will let down the net again, and it had good success. Though thy
former working has been but a toyling, yet whill there is a command, let down
the net again, and thou knows not what the fruit of it may be.

The point, in the last place, affoords singular consolation to believers, that
their strength is in Christ; let thy discouragments be never so many, from thy
duties, thy difficulties, or what may be, here ane answer sufficient to them
all. Hanibal the Carthaginian on a time sent out his brother Mago to view the
Roman Army, and when he returned, he told him the Roman Army were many
thousands more then they were; Thou art mistaken, says Hanibal, how many
thousands counts thou me for; There is a great deal of counting in the strength
of Christ, thy treasurer, if thou can lift thy eyes to the Hills, from whence
thy help comes. Thou art now like Sampson possibly in the way to his marriage to
Timnath, there came out a young Lion and roared against him, But the Spirit of
the Lord came on Sampson, and he did tear the Lion as he would tear a kide, The
Lion had not only a do with Sampson, but with the Spirit of the Lord, that
came upon him. Thy adversary has to do with the strength of Christ, against
whom no weapon that is formed can prosper.

But I go to the second branch of the doctrine: That, as our strength so our
righteousness is in Christ. This point is much debated betwixt us and the
Papists. What is controverted in it, I shall pass, and since it is the very
heart of the Gospel, as it were, I cannot but regrait, that we are so little in
preaching it to you, and pressing it upon you.

I shall not speak any thing of inherent righteousness, which, otherwise
excellent Mr. Baxter, has advanced too high, in order to a sinners
justification before God. And though he go far enough from the Papists, yet
he goes too near the Socinians, in his asserting that faith justifies as it is
a work, including love in the nature of it.

I shall only, in the Close of this Sermon, briefly set down what is necessary
for you to know, and believe, in reference to Christ's righteousness becoming
ours; and shall do it in these four particulars.

First, I shall show you that the best works of the Saints stand in need of
imputed righteousness, to cover their defects that are into them. 2dly, That
this righteousness is clearly to be found in Christ. 3dly, Shall show a little
of the way how this righteousness becomes ours. And lastly, shall apply it.

First, That the best works of the Saints, I say even their best works, stand
in need of a righteousness to cover their defects. There be three ways how the
godly stand in need of a righteousness without them. 1. When they do these
things, which in their very nature God has forbidden. In which case, all will
confess they have need of Christ's righteousness; David for his adultery, Peter
for his denial of Christ. 2dly, When they do these things, that for their
substance are commanded, but not in a right manner; as, if they pray, but not
in faith: here is a great defect, which brings them under the need of the
righteousness of Christ. 3dly, Suppose the work they do, be, for the matter,
commanded, and also right in the manner, be done in love and faith, yet there
is still a defect in the measure, It is no perfect faith nor perfect love; to
which we are bound by the law. Now this brings us under a necessity of Christ,
since, suppose in our best actions, there is not a perfection, such as the law
requires, there is a sinful defect, and consequently need of a righteousness
from Christ.

For the second, That this righteousness is alenarly to be found in Christ. 1.
There is no possibility of it upon man's part: His active obedience is all debt
to God, and his passive, although it should mount to ane eternity of suffering,
could not reach a satisfaction to God, for the defects of his active obedience.
2dly, Christ's obedience is a most proper satisfaction to justice, it was his
own: He restored more glory to offended justice then Adam and all his sons
could take from it. Yea all the torments of the damned in Hell do not amount
to any thing worthy to be compared with the merit of the sufferings of Christ.
They pay their debt in farthings, but can never complete the soume; and though
they could perfectly satisfy, it would not merit. But Christ paid all in a
lump together, and that which he paid was of infinite value.

Thirdly, How this becomes ours? 1. There is a legal onness betwixt Christ and
us: The debt is one, the solution one, and, in a forensick and legal sense, the
persons are one. So that there cannot come another reckoning upon the debtor
after the surety has paid; this righteousness of Christ, being the
righteousness of our cautioner, is imputed to us, or accounted ours, as if we
ourselves had satisfied.

Application.

First: Behold the great privilege of believers, how defective soever their
inherent righteousness be, their imputed is the righteousness of God.

Secondly, Labor to share in this righteousness: And for this, see thy need of
it, all our righteousness is as ane unclean thing.

Thirdly, Believe there is no more required to make it thine, but to accept it,
and rest on it, on the terms as it is offered.

Fourthly, Do not abuse it: It is dreadful to turn the grace of God into
wantoness: We ought also to be diligent, as if Christ had done nothing, and yet
so denied to our diligence and so much in thristing after this righteousness,
as if we had done nothing ourselves.

Fifthly, Improve it, there is in it a full sufficient ground to answer all
fears and challengs: Our only consolation is grounded upon it. Melander in his
Jolasia has a Story of a dying man to whom Satan appeared visibly in the room
where he was lying, and setting himself down by him, told him he was came to
writ up the sins of his life before him; and after he had written down
several and read them over, writ next (said the dying man) for all these my
cautioner has already satisfied, and in him I am discharged, and therewith
Satan evanished. What truth there may be in this Story, I know not; but sure I
am, the only ground of our plea before God results from this righteousness,
without it we are altogether undone, Tutius est recumbere in Christum, was
Bellarmins dying words, whatever he wrott.

SERMON I.
On Heb. 12: 1. Wherefore seeing we are also compassed about with so great a
cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin that does so
easily beset us, etc.


THis verse contains the application of the doctrine handled by the Apostle in
the preceding Chapter. In which, from the creation of the world, to the times
of the judges in Israel, the Apostle, by the experience of many believers,
shows what great things have been brought to pass by says.

The scope of this verse, and of the Chapter to the 14. verse, is to press
constancy, in adhering to the profession of faith of the Gospel, on these
Hebrews, amids the many tribulations they met with, from the experience of
these worthies. And I know nothing more suitable to Gods present dispensations,
and our condition, then to open the force of the Apostles encouragement in the
verse to you; which that I may do; In the words consider these two. 1. A brief
abrigment of the doctrine delivered in the former Chapter, Wherefore seeing we
are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses. 2dly, Ane inferrence
from it, Let us lay aside, etc. Of the first of these, in this Sermon: The
other, to morrow.

The words in the first language, (...), a cloud of Martyrs: But here it is not
put for such as did witness for Christ only passivly, but also actively;
especially they did testify the great things that can be brought to pass by
faith; they are called a cloud, for their multitude: Densum, says Calvin on
the place, opponitur raro. And they compass us about; There is ane alusione to
the pillar that guided Israel through the wilderness, that went before them in
the day time, but this cloud compasses us about, so that wherever we cast our
eyes, in what ever estait, they may be in our view.

There be some questions staited by interpreters on the words, which I pass,
not being of great weight nor futing the present scope; I intend to take only
one Observation from the words and handle it in this Sermon.

Observation. That it is a great encouragement to patient running in our
Christian course, that we are compassed with such a cloud of witnesses, as are
from Abel in the former Chapter. Or more clearly, That the examples of the
famous worthies under the Old Testament, ought to influence our Cheerfulness in
wrestling with the cross in our Christian course.

This Observation is the Apostles scop here, and we have the same Argument used
by other Apostles, to press the same conclusion, Iam. 5: 10. Take my Brethren
the Prophets, for ane example, of suffering affliction, and of patience. The
Prophets for ane example! Let Romans talk of their Camilli, their Fabricii,
their Scipio's: Philosophers, of their Aristotle, Plato, or Pithagoras: We are
to take our copy from the Prophets, all of which have been eminent for patient
sufferings. It is not my purpose to insist in opening what force there may be
in example, to induce us to patient sufferings; I shall briefly say only these
things of it.

First, That example is not that which formally oblidges us to patience
in-sufferings: The obligation refults from the Law of God: His precepts, though
there were no example at all, make patience our duty, we ought in this case to
say with Josua, Though all men should forsake the Lord, I, and my house will
cleave to him. But they are excellent encouragements to excit and encourage to
obedience to the precept.

Secondly, They are encouragements suited well to man's nature, who is more led
by his eye, then his ear. What am I better then my Fathers, said Elijah? Can we
look for more privileges, nor the Prophets? Minors are ashamed when they
cannot endure, what men of an higher order indures; such reasonings as these,
suit better with our nature, then any precepts whatsoever. I cannot here pass
what a lait Author, Doctor Stilling fleet, has written in a lait Book for the
Churches peace, that scriptural examples, except they be practices consonant to
the principles of moral equity, or to some positive Law of God, have no force
to oblidge to imitation, although they were Prophets and Apostles. This
doctrine has need to be better cautioned, then that author does; for if it
hold true, in the latitude He delivers, he shall not only depryve the Church of
several things constantly practiced in it, which have no other foundation at
all but Apostolic practice, such as Imposition of hands in ordination of
Ministers, the keeping of the first day of the week for the Sabbath; But upon
his principle, Apostolic practice has no more force to oblidge then
Diabolick: For if what they do, be consonant to the principles of moral
equity, or to some prositive Law, as their confessing of Christ, why may not we
do the like? The Apostle thinks so, 1 Cor. 10: verse. 11. But not purposeing to
insist on the force of example, since the A postle proposes the example, we are
to imitat here, under the metaphor of a cloud of witnesses, I shall, (that we
may the better find out what ground of encouragement we have from it) 1.
Enquire what these witnesses does depon. 2dly, How valide their testimony is,
which the Apostle furnishes ground for, in calling them a cloud, and such a
cloud, and a cloud compassing us about.

For the First, What is it that these witnesses does depon, that may be for our
encouragement? And here I shall only pitch upon these things. 1. They depon
what will be the lot of a Christian in following Christ. 2. What is his duty
under this lot. 3. What are his fittest in couragements. First, They depon what
will be a Christians lot in following Christ. They all depon that this will be
the cross; see in the preceding Chapter, from Abel, who is the first of the
witnesses, to Samuel, who is the last, and you shall find all their experiences
witnessing to this. It is true, their crosses were of different natures, Abel
murdered, Noah tossed with a deludge, Abraham to sojourne in a strange land,
and Moses to be hide when newborn, for fear of Pharaoh's Murderers: some met
with the violence of the fire, some with the edge of the sword, some tortured,
yet all met with some kind of cross or another.

But ye may say what incoutagement is there in this part of these witnesses
testimony? There is very much init. For 1. It takes away the opinion of the
singularity of the cross. 2dly, It taks away the reproach of the cross.

First, It takes away the opinion of the singularity of the cross: The Apostle
Peter proposes as ane encouragement to the Christians to whom he wrott, Think
not strange concerning the fyrie trial, as if some strange thing did befall you.
It discouraged even Elijah, I alone am left, and they seek my life. But when
Abel killed, Abraham banished, Isaiah sawn asunder, etc. We are not left alone.

Secondly, It takes away the reproach of it. The cross usually carries with it,
in the esteem of the world, ane challenge of guiltiness, you are ane Hypocryt,
said Jobs Friends to him, because so corrected. But when we see the righteous
Abel murdered, and faithful Abraham so tried, and Moses the Friend of God;
Where is there place for this reproach? Beside, the cross usually renders men
out wardly despicable, and under the Old Testament, before Christ suffered, it
was certainly (as many divyns think) more reproachful nor it is now fince
Christ suffered. But among other things, this takes off the reproach of it,
that such a cloud of witnesses did under go it; Am I better then my Fathers,
said Elijah: we are not the first that has committed ship to the sea of
affliction. So that this part of their testimony is eminently comfortable.

But secondly, They depon what is man's duty under the cross. And this is also
comfortable: There be these three things they depon to be man's duty, under it,
in reference to affliction. 1. To prepare for it before it come. 2dly, To
submit the determination of our lot to God, and follow his rule, though we see
the cross before us. 3dly, To believe and credit his promises: even when under
it.

First, They depon of it as a Christian's duty to prepare for it ere it come.
This Noah depons, verse. 7. Being warned of God he prepared ane Arc to save
himself and his Family. Thus Rahab the Harlot, who received the spies, who
perished not with them that believed not, verse. 3. Thus David, Gideon,
Jephtath, verse. 5. and indeed this is a very necessary duty in referrence to
affliction, lest it find us unawarse, and surprise us, crying Peace, peace.

Secondly, They depon it is man's duty to submit the determination of their lot
to God, and follow his rule. Thus Abraham went out of his own Country to a
stang Land, on the call of God, though he knew not whither he went. Thus Moses
chosed affliction with the people of God, and despised the treasures of Egypt,
and fled to Midian. Thus Israel passed through the red Sea, verse. 24. And thus
many others of them, and indeed this also is a very suitable duty to these who
are afflicted, to subscry be God a blank, to writ down in it what he pleases,
and though we see not what will be the event of his way to us, yet as one in a
mi2ty day, if we can have as much light as to see where the high way, he calls
us to walk in, lies, that says we are about our duty.

Thirdly, They all depon, all this wholl cloud of witnesses, for the usefulness
of faith under affliction. By faith Abraham, Noah, Sara, Isaac, Jacob, etc.
did endure. It is not for naught that faith is called our victory, whereby we
overcome the World, and in this their faith, there are these three very
remarkable: 1. The variety of conditions, as to the knind of the cross, was
very great; Some killed, some banished, some long barren, some tortured; yet
the duty they all follow is one, that is to believe. 2. The inducement they had
to believe, was one in all of them, they considered all who he was that made
the promises; Noah warned of God believed, Abraham called of God believed; even
Rahab, who was one of the worst of them for personal faults, could tell the
spies, God will deliver us into your hand; to consider the promises as
proceeding from God, who is a Father, and so means honestly in them, and a
Father Almighty, who out of the ashes of Isaak can accomplish them; This makes
them easy to be believed. 3. Though all their faiths was not of one pitch, yet
all had comfortable out gates by it; Sarahs was not like Abraham's, these who
went through the red Sea, their faith not like Moses's yet all came throw as
well as Moses, so that, if our faith come not up the hight Moses and Abraham's
did, yet we may find the sweet of it under the cross; as Sarah whose faith we
can scarely read of in Genesis, yet by faith she received a son. If you ask,
what is this for our encouragement, that these witnesses depon these to be our
duty? Surely very much: amongst many things, I name but these two: 1. Often, in
times of affliction, we are bemisted about our duty, one that can preach
suitable duties to the cross, and press them on others in prosperity, yet will
find his mind in adversity like a troubled fountain, where the mud is mixed
with the clear watter. Now to have this cloud of witnesses, by their testimony
goeing before us, and having a road among the snow in a winter day, to us what
ane encouragement is it?

Beside secondly, though the same duty be prescrybed us, which they depon, in
the preceptive part of the word, for Christ bids us often believe under
affliction; yet to have them, after trial of what is commanded, deponing the
usefulness of such and such a duty, what ane encouragement is it? It is as if
one should take a recept of Physic, and come to a sick person, and tell him.
when my disease was as yours is, I tried this potione and it cured me, this is
very encouraging. And this leads to the 3d branch of their testimony, in which
they depon what are the most excellent cordials under affliction, especially
these five.

First, They considered what they were in themselves, who were called out to
meet the cross, Pilgrims, strangers, verse. 13. these all died in faith,
confessing that they were pilgrims and strangers on the earth. The cross meets
not a believer in his own country, but, like a dog, barks at a stranger; could
we come to confess that we are pilgrims, we would not stumble at a pilgrims
intertainment.

Secondly, They did consider how much honor did arise from the cross in the
way of duty, beyond sinful prosperity; thus Moses esteemed the reproach of
Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt, which he could not enjoy
without complying with the oppressors of Israel. The Lord sometimes states the
case so to his people that they must either suffer or sin, and in such a case
the cross is their hyding place from sin.

Thirdly, They considered how useful their sufferings would be for the Church
of God, after their times: This comforted: see v. 34. They quenched the
violence of fire, they stopped the mouths of lions, escaped the edge of the
sword, What? How holds this true? I shall not dislike the opinion some
interpreters have on the sense of that place, that their victory was as great
by faith, as if they had quenched it, etc. But I like better their gloss, who
think that their being devored of the fire, they quenched it for others; that
should come after them: The blood of the Saints is the seed of the Church. And
when a believer looks on his sufferings, as that which may be a comfortable
seed for others, as the blood of the primitive Martyrs was for us; It tends to
make the cross very comfortable, and them cheerful under it.

Fourthly, They did frequently meditation the glory to come: Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, were content to dwell in Tabernacles, they looked for a City that had
foundations. Moses had ane eye to the recompense of reward, the light momentany
afflictions of this life being not worthy to be compared to the glory, that
is to be revealed; the comfortable views of it, as of a sweet summer after ane
winter, and a pleasant harbor after a storm, how refreshing is it.

Lastly, In the mean time they had frequent intercourse with God: Noah warned
of God, Abraham called of God, Moses endured as seeing him that is invisible;
all the rest will be like ciphers without their figure, that makes no number,
if this be wanting in affliction.

Thus we have opened the first thing we proposed, what these witnesses do
depon. But if the things they depon be false, and hold not true how comfortable
soever they be, they are of no weight. Therefore in the second place, let us
consider how sure and valide in law their testimony is, and to evidence this we
shall first consider them as a cloud. 2dly, As such or so great a cloud. 3dly,
As a cloud compassing us about. For all the three, the Apostle sets down in the
text for the argument, to prove the weight and validity of their testimony.

First, Consider them as a cloud and this, interpreters think may be taken
under a twofold notion, either as it is a Meraphor, signifing somewhat that is
not expressed, or as it is ane Allusion to the Lords way in conducting Israel
throw the wilderness in the day time by a pillar of a cloud. Now in both the
two it is very weighty to our purpose. 1. As it is a Metaphor it imports a
multitude, Densum (says Calvin) oponitur raro. A cloud of witnesses is a
multitude of witnesses; and this tends much to confirm the testimony, In the
Mouth of two or three witnesses shall every testimony stand firm, says the
Apostle: but here, not only two or three, but a great multitude, all uniting in
deponing the same thing for substance. I know not if the Observation of some
will hold true, but it is remarkable, if it do, that the number of Christians
was yet never so great in any one age of the Church, as the number of Martyrs
have been in different ages, under the Heathen, Arian and Popish persecutions.
So, that is the first thing confirms the testimony, the witnesses are so many.

But 2dly, Consider it as alluding to the pillar of cloud in the wilderness,
it imports that they are witnesses purposly called to depon for our
encouragement. The pillar of cloud was for Isreal's conduct in the wilderness,
as in this they were witnesses Infallibly guided, so purposly called to depon
in our case, which adds not a little to the validity of the testimony.

Secondly, They are not only a numerous cloud so purposly called, but they are
such a cloud, (...), if witnesses be not faithful understanding men, their
testimony is little worth, let them never be so numerous. But they are such a
cloud: 1. Of men eminently learned; Noah is reckoned by Philosophers among the
Philosophers Ante-diluviani, and some of them writ of him that he forsaw the
deludge in its secondary causes. Abraham a famous Astronomer, Josephus writts
many things of his learning. Moses learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians.
So were they eminently wise and prudent; and how in esteem with God, is evident
from the testimony he records of them in the Bible, Noah a Phoenix in his
generation, Abraham his friend and faithful, Faithful Abraham. Gal. 4. Moses my
servant is dead, Jos. 1. None with such a perfect heart as my servant David.
Now a cloud of such witnesses, so learned, so wise, so eminently esteemed of
God, so little tainted with earthly mindedness, in a word, such of whom the
world was not worthy, how sure must the testimony be, deponed by them!

Thirdly, As it is a cloud and such a cloud, so we are compassed about with it,
(...). There be in this, two things imported, the fullness of testimony and the
clearness of it.

First, Their testimony is full: There is no case can be tristed with, but they
testify the usefulness of faith in reference to it. If banishment, Abraham
tried that; if the wrath of Princes, Moses found faith useful there; If
barrenness, Sarah found it successful; torture or what else, this testimony
reaches it.

Secondly, As it is full, so clear, we are compassed with it: They do not
depon in ambiguous terms, Dolosus versatur in generalibus, but so distinctly
and clearly, as what ever doubts be about the meaning of some places of
Scripture, yet who can question the clearness of their testimony to the
usefulness of faith in trials. In a word, they are a number of such, so
excellently qualified, and deponing so clearly, that their testimony cannot
choose but be looked on as valide and sufficient to confirm what they depone.

Application.

The practical part of this doctrine, and the most genuine use of it, is, that
which the Apostle makes in the 2d part of the verse, Let us lay aside every
weight, etc. of which we shall speak afterward. Only at present, I shall press
these few things from it.

First, Praise the Lord that we are not the first he has tristed with
affliction. There is a beaten road before us by a cloud of witnesses. He that
did first put ship to sea, Poets could call him, Ferreus ille. But now a man of
the least courage can go down in ships to the depths. It is very remarkable as
some have observed, that there have been few or none eminent in doing service
to God in their generation, either under the Old or New Testament, but have
been also remarkable for suffering. Are we better then our Fathers?

Secondly, Do not put a wrong construction upon Gods dispenfing of the cross,
possibly some in giveing thanks for the work of redemption at such ane occasion
as this, are ready to stop and say, what mean the clouds that are gathering! I
would see the outgate ere I praise. But suppose the worst thou can imagine to
befall thee, there is nothing singular in it. Look to the cloud of witnesses
before thee, If this suffice not, look to what is in the following verse,
Looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith, who endured the
cross. What stone has he laid in his Temple, that has not been hewed by
affliction? And would thou be singular?

Thirdly, Encourage and comfort thy self from the example of the cloud of
witnesses. there be especially these three things in this cloud very
comfortable: 1. Thou may see that God will sometimes most sharply chastise
them, whom he intirly loves. Abraham was his friend, Moses he spoke with him
face to face, David a man after his own heart, and yet all of them tristed with
afflictione. If thou shall go and conclude the contrary from the Rod, thou
shall offend against the generation of his children, Psalm: 73.15. 2dly, Thou
hes this encouragement from the cloud, that though the Lord has even a
controversy, even against his choysest servants, yet usually he trists their
sufferings, not for their sins, but upon some account he is concerned in
himself. Thus Abel dies for his sacrifice, Abraham suffers in following the
rule and command of God, Moses his reproach is the reproach of Christ There
were quarrels enew God had with Abraham and Moses, that he might have stated
their sufferings upon; God usually brings ungodly men to sufferings for their
adulteries, murders etc. But the marks his people bears about in their bodies,
are the marks of the sufferings of Christ. Soldiers glory, if they have the
marks of the wounds received in the service of their Prince; this is thy honor
if thou be a generous soldier. But 3dly, In this cloud we have this
encouragement, that we see many trials bitter in the beginning, may prove very
sweet and comfortable in the event. Abraham's offering of Isaac was so, Moses
despysing the treasures of Egypt and choosing affliction with the children of
God was so, Rahab the hazard she run for the spies was so, and very often that
which is matter of mourning to us in its beginning, is matter of praise ere it
close, Prima crucis scena, tragica, postrema, laeta, said pious Bernard; the
Lord uses not to suffer the rod of the wicked to ly on the lot of the
righteous, and though he do, they find it Physic, necessary for them, it will
end in rejoicing. 4thly, From this cloud of witnesses, learn to imitat them,
and trace their footsteps under affliction: they followed the call of God, so
do thou; they did not thrust themselves unnecessarly forward to meet the
cross, they were much in the exercise of faith, so do thou.

Some say, though this truth may suit the time, yet how suits it the present
work of thanks giving at the Sacrament? Ans. Well, for 1. Christ shutt up his
celebration of the first Sacrament of the Super, with telling his Disciples of
the cross, Verily all of you shall be offended because of me this night, etc.
So that we writ after our copy. 2dly, The consideration of our winter ought to
make us so much the more careful in gathering of our food in harvest. 3dly,
From this see what may be your lot, in standing to what in the Sacrament ye
have ingadged to God.

SERMON II.
On Heb. 12: 1. Let us lay aside every weight, etc.


IT is our great encouragement to have the example of so great a cloud of
witnesses, holding out the tried usefulness of faith to us under affliction.
Now we are to enquire how we are to improve it. Let us, says the Apostle, lay
aside every weight, and runn with patience.

Amongst other things, this phrase rends to prove the Epistle to be Paul's, who
frequently in his other Epistles alludes to the Olympic and pythick Games. So
here, it suits well to his style. In these Games, such as were actors did shake
themselves loose of what would hinder them.

Abstinuit venere and Baccho qui pithia cantat. There are some would limit this
weight to some particular, taking the following words as a limitation of the
sin that so easily besets us; understanding by it, either original sin, which
does indeed easily beset us; or our predominant sin, which easily masters us.
But judicious Estius on the place takes the words more generally; and, though a
Jesuit, yet very often a very sound interpreter. And this seems to have been the
mind of the Translators of this Scripture, who have rendered it, every weight,
which was also the custom of the gamiters, to whom the Apostle alludes. What
ever weight may be a hinderance, whither it be original sin, or our predominant
sin, or what else soever, we are to lay it from us, so long as the race lasts,
and not to take it up again.

But that I may come to what I design from this inference, we may consider
this part of the Apostles precept, Let us lay aside every weight, under a
twofold relation. 1. As it relates to the words going before, and is ane
inference out of them, inferred by ane illative therefore, having therefore
such a cloud, Let us lay aside, etc. 2. As they relat to the words following,
the running of the race with patience, and so ane allusion to the Olympic
Games. They contain ane introductory act to our running. First we must lay
aside weights, and then runn, and in both relations I shall speak a little of
them in this Sermon.

First then, Consider them as ane inference, any at first view may think they
are not a very apposit way of inference from what the Apostle has commended so
much in the cloud of witnesses, that which the Apostle has commended in them
is their faith all along throughout the former Chapter: And it would seem the
inference, where the antecedent is, Having such a cloud so eminent for faith,
ought to be, let us believe; and not this, let us lay aside, etc. Some
interpreters answer to this, that the Apostle, delighting to follow the
Metaphor of the Olympic games, proposed the inference thus. But this answer is
not sufficient to satisfy. They answer better that say, the Apostle supposes
faith to be necessar in laying aside weights. For, as Abraham by faith did
shake off the intanglements in leaving his country, and Moses by faith the
intanglements of Pharaohs Court, when he choosed the reproach of Christ, and
Rahab when she received the spies. So the Apostle proposeing that a Christian
is to lay aside the weights; understands, by faith, and it is more rethorical
then if he had expressed it. Taking it then for a thing supposed, we shall
briefly speak a little to this

Observation, That the only effectual mean, for laying aside intangling weights
in our Christian course, is faith.

Thus all the cloud of witnesses mentioned in the former Chapter found it.
There be two branches of the point. 1. That faith is ane effectual mean for
shaking off weights. 2dly. That without faith it is impossible to do it, For
the Apostle supposing it, gives ground for both.

For the 1st. To show the influence that faith has upon our laying aside of
weights, I shall desire these five things may be considered.

First, Faith helps to crucify the lusts and inclinations of the heart to these
intangling weights; it is not any intrinsic excellency in these weights that
makes them so ill to be laid aside, as the strength of our inclination after
them: As it is not the excellency of the bait that tends so much to entangle
the bird in the net, as its own inclination to it. Now faith takes away the
fuel that feeds this fire. It crucifies these inclinations, and purifies the
heart from them, Acts 15. God is said to purify the heart by faith.

Secondly, Faith does not only crucify our inclination to these weights, but it
discovers, them to a Christian in their native colors: Usually these things
that prove weights in our Christian course are so painted, that they appear far
more beautiful then they are, and so worse to be laid aside. But faith unmasks
them, so that a believer can speak of them in a far other strain then another
can do. See how Paul speaks of Agrippa and Bernice, fitting in the
judgment seat on him, Acts 25: 23. And when Agrippa and Bernice were come with
great pomp, (...), with a great many phansies, so looks Paul on all their pomp.
And on his external privileges, Phil. 3. as dung. (...), to be casten to dogs.
And what ever account Egyptians made of Pharaohs treasures, Moses saw them to
be but the pleasures of sin that endured for a season. Now when weights are
thus discerned, and thus they are by faith, how easy is it to lay them aside?

Thirdly, Faith possesses the soul with assurance of Gods care and provision of
these things that often prove weights to us. It is a remarkable word, Heb. 13:
v. 5. Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such
things as you have for he has said, I will not leave thee nor forsake thee.
There is enough for faith to be content upon, if it have, He has said, Not
that it destroys necessary means, Add to your faith virtue, 2 Pet. 1:7. But
when any thing becomes a weight to imped our running in our race, the soul that
believes can lay it aside, and trust God for what may be convenient in that
kind. Again, The life that I live in the flesh is by says in the Son of God,
Gal. 2: verse. 20. He loved me and gave himself for me, and for temporal things,
I will live by faith in him.

Fourthly, Faith puts the soul upon higher designs then these weights can
amount to, and so makes them easier to be undervalued, Psalm. 39:6. See how
David despyleth the intanglements of wordlings? Surely man walks in a vain
show, they disquyet themselves in vain, heaping up riches. What is this a vain
show? How cames the Psalmist to insert this paradoxe? See him in the next
verse, see him on a higher design, And now Lord what wait I for, my hope is in
thee, deliver me from all my transgressions. I am, said the great Alexander, a
King, and not a merchant, when Darius sen him ane offer of many talents to
return to Greece again; He told Parmenio, it might suit with him to take
Darius offer, but not with Alexander. When a believer confiders what ane
inheritance, what a marriage, how excellent ane husband, what sweetness of
Communion, what wonder these weights be easily laid aside! and this is done by
faith.

Lastly, By says the sprength of Christ is brought in, to help to lay aside
these weights: And thus it becomes easy. I know how to abound, Philipp. 4. and
how to want, I can do all things through him, that strengthens me.

As all these ways show how useful, faith is for laying aside these weights,
so in then next place, I shall show that without faith it is impossible to lay
them aside. For

First, The inclination of our heart is so strong to these things, that often
prove weights, that without faith it is impossible to subdue it: and
consequently, to lay them aside. All the light and strengt of natural
induements could never bring Heathens to mortification of these weights. Even
Seneca, who gave the most excellent precepts of any Heathen, yet was eminently
tained with earthly-mindedness. Yea even such as have some measure, yea a great
measure, of faith, have work enough with it. It is conceived by many learned,
that Satan tempted Christ with all the Kingdoms of the earth, Matthew. 4. because
he knew it was ane allutment by which he prevailed with the most eminently
Godly.

Secondly, Without faith a man cannot put and thing better in the place of
these weights, and therefore cna hardly lay them aside. Ane unbeleever, of his
riches must say, as Micha of his Idols, Ye have taken away me Gods, and what
have I more, But a believer, if he lay aside these, he can say as Alexander the
Great did when he had devyded all his Kingdom among his followers, and one
asked him, what he reserved for himself, he answered, Hope. They have hope as
ane anchor both sure and fast: Yea not only hope, but also something to rejoice
in for the present, Hab. 3: verse. 17. Although the figg tree should not
blossom, and the wine should not yield her fruit, and the labor of the olive
should fail, yet I will rejoice in God, I will joy in the God of my salvation.

Thirdly, Corrupt reason in man is no small friend to the retaining of these
weights, prone to suggest, even in a Peter, Master pity thy self. The
remarkable History of Francis Spira, written by Sleidan and others, is very
remarkable to this purpose, who, being allured by his relationes and
possessiones, did renounce the faith he had formerly owned, and how tragical
his end was all know. Now when reason appears such a friend to the retaining of
these weights, if there be not faith to counter-ballance, who can lay them
aside.

Application

See the way then, and the only way, how to get these weights laid aside, even
the same that influenced Noah's building of the Ark, and Abraham's forsaking of
his country. Many purpose and resolve against these weights, but, as without
faith it is impossible to please God, so, to lay these weights aside.

2dly, Look well to thy faith, which in this case I may say, as the Apostle
says in ane other case, Ephesians. 6. thou art above all things to take to thee. And
in order to this I shall only press these three things:

1. Take heed thy faith be not counterfite: For 1st. There is nothing keeps one
further off from the truth of faith, then the counterfite of it: As the
counterfite Religion Jeroboam set up as ane engyn to keep the ten trybs from
the true Religion which was at Jerusalem; So Satan sets up in many a
counterfite faith, which keeps them from seeking after the truth of it. Beside,
if thy faith be counterfite, all is but counterfite, thy prayer, thy hope, thy
praises; Thy laying aside of weights will be but a seeming act, it is with our
faith, as with a marriage, if a woman be not married all her children are
bastards; therefore look well to it, that thy faith be not counterfite.

Secondly, Be training and excercising thy faith. We use to walk upon the
credit of the promises, as one beginning to walk upon the ice, when first they
set their foot on, ay fearing it crack under us and we fall in: whereas, as, if
there were a training of ourselves to exercise faith on the promises, on
things of daily occurrence, as to be acting it for our meat, for our rest at
night, and see what account God gives of us in the moring, for our health, for
our inward peace, we should come the more easily, on the credit and faith of
the promise, to lay aside weights that imped us in our race.

Thirdly, Put forth acts of faith on Christ, not only for justification, but
for sanctisying graces. Usually all that are not Papists know that they must be
justified by faith alone; but for sanctification, a part whereof is the laying
aside of weights, we labor to wring it out of our own hearts, as if Christ
were not the author and finisher of it, and as if we did believe with Arminians
that Christ had not died to putchase faith to us, but it were in the power of a
man's will to believe or not believe, accordingly as he used his natural
induements: but this being done, the laying aside of weights becomes far more
easy, yea and pleasant, to us.

But I come now to consider this precept of laying aside weights, as it relates
to the words following, Let us runn with patience, in which consideration, by
ane allusion to the Olympic and Pithick games, they contain ane introductory
act to the running of the race. 1st The weights must be laid aside, and then
run, and thus they afford this

Observation, That the example of a cloud of witnesses will not be sufficiens
to influence our running our race with patience, if there be not mortifieation
to both outward and inward impediments.

Both are comprehended under weights here, and both must be mortified, it being
usual in Scripture to express mortification by this phrase of laying aside, 1
Pet. 1: verse. 2. Jam. 1:21. I shall briefly only prove the point and apply it.
For proof of it, Jam. 5: 10. Take, my Brethren, the Prophets for ane example,
who spoke to you in the name of the Lord, of patient sufferings; But will this
suffice? No, the Apostle thinks fit to add, be patient Brethren, stablish your
hearts, grudge not. Importing that if there be no more but examples, though
even of the Prophets, who spoke in the name of the Lord, it will not do the
turn, if there be not some work upon the spirit of a man himself.

It is indeed ane undeniable truth, examples are of excellent use in our
Christian course, sunt nonnulli, said holy Bernard, quos ad amorem patriae,
plus exempla quam praedicamenta succendunt. But there are two things in the
words, to pass many other, that I shall only make use of, to evince this, that
beside the example, there must be a mortifying and laying aside these
impediments. 1. They are weights. 2. They are sins that easily, and so easily
besett us. And in both, the Apostle intends arguments to lay them aside.

First, Consider them as weights; so they are very unsuitable to a race; if
they be not mortified, they produce two things, very unsuitable for a race,
they weaken us, and they entangle us.

1st, They weaken us. Our strength, how little soever it be, must be devyded
betwixt our journey and our burdens: It is not all to be spent upon our race.
Pcrerius thinks when Abraham was about to offer Isaac he did not tell Sarah,
for as strong as his faith was, there was work eneough for it, though Sarah
were not ingadged against him. Whereas he that lays aside these weights, is
not so overlayd, nor has he his strength divided. It was a remarkable answer,
Erasmus reports in Apophthegms, Diogenes on a time gave to Plato, Plato had
become somewhat less in reputatione, because he had gone to Sicily to the
Tyrant Dyonisius, and received great gifts from him, and on a day coming into
Diogenes Cell, he found hm dyning on roots; whereupon Plato said to him, if
thou could please Dyonisius, thou needed not eat roots: Diogenes replied, If
thou could eat roots thou needed not please Dyonisius. Diogenes thought Plato
weakened by this, he could not eat roots. He that is mortified to wordly
pleasures, has his strength entire for his race.

Beside 2dly, As they are weakening, so they are exceedingly intangling, no man
that warreth, says the Apostle 2 Timothy 2:4. intangleth himself with the
affairs of this life; (...), It is a word borrowed from a bird that is
entangled in a net, these weights are as a net round about us, that by
flightering we cannot winn out of. So that it may be said of such a person, as
Pharaoh said of I sreal, They are entangled, they are entangled; and how
unsuitable is this for a race?

But let us take the Apostles other expression, they do easily beset us, and
in this two things I would open. First, Show you that sin does easily beset.
2dly, What force is in this to press the laying it aside.

First, That it easily besets, is evident from these things.

1. How easily does the tentations to it take in thee, as sparks lighting among
tinder? Immediately, or straightway, He went after her, says Solomon, of the
young man and strange woman. God must draw us, we pull as it were against him.
But any tentation kindles us as it were in ane instant.

Beside 2dly, sinful suggestions, they seat so insensibly into the mind, that
even when we are in most spiritual duties, ere we are awar we find ourselves
overcharged by them. As Junius complained, that often when he was in prayer,
his mind was in the gallery he had seen in Rome. Yea even after we have
resolved and purposed against them, yet, like Hophni and Phinehas, we are ready
to commit uncleaness in the door of the Tabernacle of the congregation. And it
is no wonder, there is no sin but it has a party within us! We cannot say, as
once our Captain did, when we are to encounter tentations, The Prince of this
World comes against me, but he has nothing within me. It has much within us,
and therefore no wonder it easily beset us.

Secondly, Now there is a great deal of strength in his argument, to press us
to lay it aside.

For 1. That it besets us, has the force of ane argument into it. (...), as
the old latin renders it, circumstans, Beza, circumcingens. It is as a belt
round about us, or as a wall standing about us. If we look before us, or behind
us, or what ever way we will, we will find tentations from it; in what ever
part of our race, we will find a weight from it. Therefore mortify it;
otherwise, if called to active obedience, or passive, it will hing on, for it
besets us.

2dly, As it besets us, so it easily besets us; (...), this has the force of
another argument in it. If we mortify not, though our argument from examples
were never so great, we may conclude, tentationes and corruptiones will surely
hinder us in our race, for, they beset us, and easily beset us; we have good
reason of taking heed in casting sparks among flax, since it so easily kindles:
And no less in laying aside and mortifying corruptione, since in our race it so
easily besets us, being as a wall built round about us.

Application.

First, it reproves those who, in order to their encountering trials, labor
for no mortification of weights and sins that easily beset them. For 1. The
want of this makes a man altogether unmeit for difficulties in his race, 2
Timoth. 2:21. If a man therefore purge himself from these. he shall be a
vessel of honor meet for the masters use. He that is not purged, is like Green
wood in the fire, when difficulties in his race occur, It fryes and smoakes,
but burns not. 2dly, From the not laying aside these weights it flows, that
the allurments to decline the cross are so taking: the Apostle verse. 35.
preceding Chapter, speaks of some who being tortured, would not accept
deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection. They accepted not of
deliverance, they did not like the World so well, as to be willing when they
were so near heaven to be content to come back to it again, they had laid aside
these weights. It is a remarkable History: Beza writs of the noble Marquis of
Vico, Galeacius Caractiolus, who being converted at a Sermon by Peter Martyr,
resolved to leave Italy and all his possessions, and come to Geneva, and live
with Calvin; and when his Wife did hing about his arms, and some of his
Children about his legs, some lay down in his way, and all weept on him, to
persuade his stay with them; yet he shook them all off, calling to mind that of
Christ's, He that hates not father and mother for me, is not worthy of me.
2dly, He that has not laid aside these weights is entangled, and has not the
free use of his life, as a Byasboul, he must incline to the side the weight
lies on. Marcus Cato, it was said of him, Iste solus scit vivere; he had
retired himself from Rome to his Country House, that he might be free from the
noise of the city. None know how to live, but such as lay aside these weights.

Lastly, The point serves to stir up all to this work of mortification to
these weights; who would run their race with patience, rest not on light, to
make the cross appear rational; Some may discourse well in Sermons of the
necessity of affliction, of the usefulness of it, the encouragements under it,
from the example of Christ, and the cloud of witnesses: but when it comes to
the trial, such are found to be, like a man that has a good eye but a lame
leg, whereby he is unfitt for his journey. That we may be the better fitted to
lay them aside, I shall briefly offer these few directions, and so come to a
close of this Sermon.

First, Consider the Lord only calls thee to lay them aside, when they prove
weights. How excellent loever the merchant's goods be, yet when they overloade
the ship, and the retaining of them threatening his life, he will cast them
over-boord. The necessary use of the creature comforts he allows, but when the
retaining of them lies in the way of thy salvation, how reasonable is it then
to lay them aside! As the Martyr answered, when one asked him if he had no
regard to his Wife and Children, yes, yes, said he, I esteem any of them more
then the Duke of Brunswik's estate, but for Christ I can quite them all.

Secondly, If we add to this, to how much Christ was denied, and how much, (for
a while) he laid aside for us, He thought it no robbery to be equal with God,
yet made himself of no reputation, Phillip 2:7, 8, 9. Consider him that endured
such contradiction of sinners that ye faint not.

Thirdly, Be daily accustomating thyselfe to as work of mortification to these
weights. It was nothing strange to hear Paul lay at one time: I am ready, not
only to be bound, but to dye at Jerusalem, for the name of Christ; when at
another time he could say, I protest by my rejoicing in God, I die daily. He
that is dying daily, cannot choose but be ready to die when called to it.
Christians ought to be doing as porters who carry loads, ere they belayd on,
taking a lift of them, and seeing how they weigh, forecasting how it will
become them to leave such enjoyments: as Mr Bilney tried his finger in the
candle before he came to the fire.

Lastly, Often ponder how abundantly God is able to recompense any thing he
calls the to lay aside upon his account, Moses did run from the court and
treasures of Egypt, He had ane eye to the recompense of reward; how much
toyling will the sweetness of gain make a man endure? Here is a recompense of
reward.

SERMON
On Matthew. 5: 20. For I say unto you, except your righteousnses shall exceed
the righteousness of the Scribs and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven.


THese words are a part of that excellent Sermon Christ preached on the mount,
The scope of the whole Sermon overturnes the error of the Antinomians, who
teach that believers are freed from all obligation to the obedience of the
moral Law: in the 17. verse, He taxes the folly of their thoughts who thought
He was come to destroy the law, and by three strong Arguments presses that
obedience to it, is still and will be still required of men. The 1. Taken from
the immutability of the Law of it self, Heaven and earth shall pass away, but
one title of it shall in no ways pass till it be fulfilled. Another taken from
the great advantage shall redound to men by keeping the law, in the preceding
verse, They shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven. And a 3d in the
words read, taken from the danger of not being more exact in obedience to it
then the Pharisees and Scribs were, They shall in no case enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

In the words we have a doctrinal truth, and the confirmation of it: the
doctrinal truth, That except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Pharisees ye cannot enter the Kingdom of Heaven. The confirmation of it, I say
unto you.

In the doctrinal truth, there are two things to be cleared, what is meant by
the Scribs and Pharisees, and what by their righteousness. 1. A Scribe is a
name of Office, whereof some were civil, as Shimshai, Ezra 4: 9. Some
Ecclesiastic, who were interpreters of the Law, such was Ezra himself, and
such are meant here; they were also Priests, therefore Ezra is called both a
Scribe and a Prsest, Nehem. 8.9. A Pharisee betokens as Sect, not ane Office;
They had their name from separation, not from interpretation, as some would
have. There was three sorts of Sects among the Jews. The Essen's, who were like
our Popish Monks, living, in profession retired from the World, of whom
Josephus relates many things. The Sadducee's dwere another sort, they expounded
the law according to the letters and syllabs, and denied the resurrection of
the body. And these Pharisees were in highest esteem among them, they
interpreted the law according to the traditions they had received from the
Fathers. Many things are written by many, especially by Josephus, of these,
which I shall not need here to repeat.

For the righteousness which is twice mentioned in the verse; for clearing this
take notice that there is a twofold righteousness mentioned in Scripture; one,
imputed righteousness, which is wrought by Christ for the believer; ane other,
imparted, which is wrought by Christ in the believer. The 1st is the
righteousness of our justification. The 2d, Of our sanctification. Some would
have the meaning of your righteousness in the words, to be understood of
Christ's imputed righteousness. It is true our righteousness, in this sense,
exceeds not only the righteousness of the Pharisees, but of Adam before his
fall: But to understand it so here, suits not to the scope of the place, which
is to press more exact holiness and obedience to the moral law, then the
Pharisees had. Therefore we understand it of a righteousness of sanctification,
with best interpreters on the place.

But here there seems to be some seeming foundation for a very dangerous
error, which some of lait, who profess to abhor the way of Papists have
appeared very violent for, if there be, say they, in man ane inherent
righteousness or holiness, that the Scripture calls righteousness, why does it
not in some sense justify? Posita, say Philosophers, causa formali, ponitur
etiam effectus formalis. But the truth is, the way they take in this, is so
contrary to the Scripture, which speaks of our righteousness as ane unclean
thing, it is so derogatory to Christ establishing a righteousness besides,
whereby a sinner is just before God, it so exalts proud man; and (in a word) the
difference betwixt it and the way Socinians take, (who talk of the imputation
of faith in sensu formali, for a man's justification before God,) is so small
that it is justly abominat by all orthodox; and as for the name righteousness,
on which they build so much, why may not they also on this ground plead for the
justification of the Pharisees before God? For their way has also the name of
righteousness. But leaving this debate; the meaning of the words briefly is,
that except their holiness was more exact then the Pharisees, who pretended to
very much, they could not enter into Heaven.

I shall only take one Observation, which is the very words of the Text.

Observation, That except our righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribs and Pharisees, we can in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

This truth being the very words of the text, and so a doctrine which even ane
Anabaptist, who admits not of consequences, would admit of; We need not seek
after other Scriptures to confirm it.

Only for confirmation of it we shall a little consider the proof brought in
the verse itself. I say unto you, there be three proofs divyns usually bring
to confirm any truth: 1. Scripture. 2. Reason. And 3. Authority. We have all
the three concurring in this point, I say unto you, all that Scripture resolves
in what God has said either by himself immediately, or by the penmen whom he
has inspired: And there is no reason to prove a theologick conclusion like
that, however Schoolmen have labored to turn up the body of divinity into
aristotle's principles, lying axioms and maxims of natural reason to demonstrat
Theologick conclusions by, yet this is the primum credibile in divinity, Deus
hoe dixit; and a conclusion stands only then firm in divinity, when ultimatly
it resolves in this, God has saeid this. Yea, these things that are esteemed
parts of divine truth, and have no other foundations but from Pops Decretals or
Canons of some Councils, are conclusions that can never be resolved into the
principles of divinity. Yea 3dly, There is no authority like unto this, if it
were never so ancient, yea if all antiquity unanimonusly conspired in one, it
is but as the dust in the balance, that cannot weigh down this, I say unto
you. He is our King, he is our Lawgiver, and his dominion is so absolut, that
though there were no other reason, yea though there were never so many
appearances of reason, against what he has said, as in the doctrine of the
Trinity, or resurrection of the body, yet we are to silence reason, and rest
upon his naked authority. So that in this, Isay unto you, the point is fully
confirmed, both by reason, Scripture, and authority.

Yet ere I apply it, for clearing of the point, it shall be necessary to
enquire a little wherein the righteousness of the Scribs and Pharisees failed,
that thereby we may the better know wherein we are to exceed them, and what
righteousness is required, ere we can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. There
be especially two things in general, wherein the righteousness of the Pharisees
failed, and a righteousness failing in these two, makes it impossible for one
that has no more to enter into the Kingdom of God. 1. There was something
they omitted and did not, that was necessary to qualify those who enter into
the Kingdom of God. 2dly, the thing they did was defective in the
qualifications necessary to qualify the righteousness of those who enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven.

First, There was something they omitted and did not, that was necessary:
Though they were exact observers of the external letter of the law, yet they
did not regard the spiritual sense of it at all, and consequently neglected all
the parts of inward obedience to God, such as the mortification of inward
lusts, or performing acts of inward holiness. Now a righteousness failing in
this, cannot qualify a man for entering into the Kingdom of Heaven. For 1st,
That righteousness that does not exceed the righteousness of Heathens, cannot
be sufficient to qualify for the Kingdom of God, Do not even the Heathens the
same, is sufficient to cast our most specious performances. And how unblamably
Heathens have walked, as to the external duty the moral law, any acquainted
with the of Histories of some of their lives may easily discern. Beside 2dly,
There are none in the visible Church farther from Heaven then Hypocrites; what a
multitude of woes find we in one chapter denounced against them! And if they
were not outwardly blameless, they should not be Hypocrites. 3dly. To neglect
the Spiritual sense of the Law, is to be partial in the Law, and to ommit that
wherein the soul and life of Religion consists. Heaven is a place wherein no
unclean thing can enter, but he that is only outwardly blameless, is a rotten
sepulcher, that is full of dead men's bones within.

Secondly, As they ommitted the spiritual sense of the law, so their
righteousness was defective in the qualifications absolutely necessary to
qualify our righteousness, if we would enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Among
many qualifications, in which their righteousness was defective, I shall insist
only upon these two. 1. It proceeded not from a right principle, a principle of
regeneration; to this the Pharisees were altogether strangers, they not only
wanted it, but did not so much as believe the necessity of it. Now a
righteousness not proceeding from a principle of regeneration, as it is not
acceptable to God, so he that has but this cannot expect to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. For

First, Christ has, and that very emphatically, declared no less himself,
John 3: 3. Verily, I say unto you, except a man be born again, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom. It was spoken to Nicodemus, a Jew and Pharisie, not to a
Heathen: He says not, except a man leave his scandalous out-breakings, but
except he be born again. and he confirms it with a verily, verily, which has
the force of a very strong asseveration.

Secondly, Where regeneration is wanting, there is no union with Christ. Which
of the two are first in order of nature and time, we need not enquire, seeing
it is confessed by all they go inseparably together. Now the want of union
with Christ makes all our outward performances to be rejected. It is not fruit
to God, if he be not first married to Christ, Romans 7: 4, 5. as Children born by
a woman who has not a husband. Where there is not union with Christ, there is
wanting the influences of the Spirit to assist in duties, a propitiatory
Sacrifice to cover the defects of them, a Mediator of intercession to present
and second them, what wonder then they be rejected.

Thirdly, When regeneration is wanting, the person is in ane estate of enemity
against God, the estate of nature being such, Ephesians. 2. All that passes betwixt
God and such ane one, are but such transactions as pass betwixt two enemies.
What wonder then if the service be rejected, and the person far from the
Kingdom of Heaven.

Lastly, The Lord judges not of man's performances, as one man does of ane
others, only by the outward countenances, as Samuel did of Jesse's Sons, but he
judges the outward performance by the inward frame. He can tell Israel when
they draw near him with their lips, that their hearts are far from him; now the
heart of ane unregenerat, how naughty is it? Like the Temple in Christ's time, a
den of thieves. Lay all together, and it will be discerned that a righteousness
not proceeding from regeneration is not sussicient for our entering into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

2dly, As these Pharisees their righteousness proceeded not from a right
principle of regeneration, so it was not directed to a right end, the glory of
God, but what they did, they did it to be seen of men. Now a righteousness not
directed to a right end, is far from being sufficient to qualify one for the
Kingdom of Heaven. For

1. If even our natural actions ought to be referred to the glory of God, far
more our religious, 1 Cor. 10: 31. Whither ye eat or drink do all to the glory
of God. If they want this, they want that moral rectitude that ought to be in
them, and consequently cannot be accepted. But here it may be asked, if ane
actual respect to and intention of the glory of God be necessary for all our
actions, ere they can be accepted. Answ. Divyns distinguish a threefold respect
to the glory of God: habitual, virtual, and actual. Habitual is wheresoever is
the habit of grace, such as love, faith, etc. But this is not sufficient in
regard the habit may be idle, and consist with very gross sins, as in David and
Peter. Actual is, when there is ane actual intending of the glory of God. This
can hardly be attained here, it will be our happiness in Heaven, but here it
can hardly be looked upon as our duty, in regard there would be no room for
other duties. If ane artificer were still thinking on the end of his work, or a
traveller on the end of his way, it might exceedingly mar him in other things
very necessary for that end. Virtual is when ane action is done in the virtue
and force of some precedent explicit proposal of Gods glory as a supreme end:
As every step of a man's journey is virtually designed to the end of it. Now
this is simply necessary, and when any actions want this they are not
acceptable. Because

2dly, The same action; which for the matter of it is commanded by God, yet
through the want of this, is reputed simply sinful by God. Take one instance
for all to prove this. Jehu his cutting off the House of Achab, Hosea 14. I
will aveng the blood of Jesreel upon the house of Jehu. What will the Lord
aveng it? Did he not according to the word of the Lord which he spoke by the
mouth of his Servant Elijah? Yes surely, the matter was such; But he did it to
establish the Kingdom in his own hand, without any reference to the glory of
God, and therefore the Lord looks upon it as murder, and will be avenged on
his house for it. Beside, where a right end is not proposed to the honor of
God, the whole work we do is accounted empty and hollow, Hosea 10: 1. Ephraim
is ane empty vyn when He brings forth fruit to himself. What, brings forth
fruit, and yet empty? Yes, when it is to himself, and not to God.

Thus we see wherein the righteousness of the Scribs and Pharisees was
defective, and why those who have no more, cannot enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Application.

There is a twofold use of this we shall prosecut: One of humilation, another
of exhortation.

Use first: Is it so? It serves for terror and humiliation to those whose
righteousness comes short of the righteousness of the Scribs and Pharisees. How
many are there in the visible Church expecting the Kingdom of Heaven, who come
not up the length the Scribs and Pharisees did. Which that I may the more
clearly evince, I shall offer these things to be considered.

First, The Pharisees were not outwardly scandalous: They did make clean the
outside of the cup or platter: The Apostle Paul, while he was a Pharisie, says
of himself Philipp. 3. that he was, in regard of the law, blameless. They were,
upon this account, compared by Christ to painted sepulchers: Though sepulchers
yet painted. But how many among us declares their sin as Sodom: What a
continued tract of avowed drunkenness, swearing, uncleanness and such like,
which are not hide in corners? How do many account sobriety needless
preceisness? And think strange of others who will not sin on with them into the
same excess of riot.

Secondly, The Pharisees were very exact observers of the Sabbath; it is true,
they oftentimes quarrelled Christ for doing works of necessity and charity,
which were suitable to the Sabbath. Yet in the general it may be seen in their
carriage through many places of the Gospel, how exact they were herein. But
among us, though we profess we allow not of books of sports for the Saboth-day,
yet how few accounts it their delight, not speaking their own words nor
thinking their own thoughts, yea when public worship is ended, as if the
Saboth ended with it, so do we walk.

Thirdly, The Pharisees were very exact Observers both of ordinary and
extraordinary worship. He that came up to the Temple, Luke 18. could say, he
fasted twice a week, they had long prayers. However the grounds of fasting were
never greater, yet how little are we in humiliation this way; every family
shall pray a part is a promise. Zach. 11: 12. and what a multitude is there who
weary not of swearing and drinking whole nights and days, that account some
few sentences of prayer nauseating and tedious? They are as one out of their
Element in spiritual things, and therefore like Pilat a start of it and away
will serve them. Pilat said unto him, What is truth, and immediately he went
forth to the Jews.

Fourthly, The Pharisees abhorred to converse with the openly flagitious, they
would keep no company with the Publicans. It is true, they also foolishly
quarrelled with Christ for it, who was among them as a Physician among his
patients. But it is evident themselves abhorred it, as being in danger to be
infected by them the Society of the Ungodly. It is true, we must go out of the
World if we would altogether decline it, yet how much unnecessary fellowship
with them is there among us? And certainly there is not one thing by which the
Godly becomes more contaminat, and affoords them more grounds of challenges,
Woe is me, said David, that I dwelt in Meschech, and sojourned in the tents of
Kedar. It is as possible to walk on sire and not be burned, as converse with
them and not be defiled.

Lastly, The Pharisees were much in almesdeeds and acts of charity. It is true,
Christ tells them they did it to be seen of men; yet they did it. And how
exceedingly defective are we herein, though it be so much pressed in Scripture?
And what is done herein is lent to the Lord. Yet these who have enough to
deboach with, know not what it is to be communicative to the necessities of the
poor indigent members of Christ. All these and many more might be instanced, to
evidence how far short we come of the righteousness of the Scribs and
Pharisees, and what matter of humiliation there is in it will appear. amongst
many things might be brought, from that that is in the Text, they shall in no
case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. In which I shall only offer these three
things to be considered.

First, How great the loss will prove in being debarred the Kingdom of Heaven.
Glorious things are spoken of thee, O City of God! What ane exeellent report is
there made of it in Scripture? How glorious are the streets of it? How sure the
foundations? How excellent the light? How noble the Temple? And to be deprived
of all this, how humbling is it?

Secondly, Consider for what thou art not like to enter into it. Profane Esau
sold his birthright for a mess of pottage, are the glistering shows of vanity,
that abound among us, a sufficient compensation of such a loss? Does not this
rose grow out of a briar? And when it is grown, how soon does it fade, and
wither away? Art thou not like the dog in the fable, that did let the flesh go
that he might catch the shadow?

Thirdly, Consider that such as enter not here, must enter into the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone for ever and ever? Thou must either be within
this Kingdom, or without, where are dogs and swine? There is no mid place, let
Papists talk of their Purgatories or their limboes what they will, thou must
either be in Heaven or Hell. Now what matter of humiliation is this?

Use second, Of exhortation. Is it so, that our righteousness must exceed the
righteousness of the Scribs and Pharisees? Then Christian, labor by all means
to have thy righteousness exceeding theirs. In order to this I shall speak to
these two things.

First, Take heed of the defects that abounded in their righteousness,
otherwise we can never exceed them. And that this may be the better done, take
notice of these few defects in their righteousness.

1. All their zeal did run out on the lesser things of the Law, the paying tith
of mint and cumin, and such like, which Christ told them were not to be
omitted: But the greater, they did not so much as with their little finger once
touch. There is a natural pronness in our hearts to this. These things may be
duties in their own kind, to attend ordinances, to be charitable, not to be
scandalous: But if the greater, as mourning for sin, mortifying of it,
believing in Jesus for pardon of it, be forgotten, all the rest are but as
Ciphers without their figur, that make no number; how many possibly amongst you
in this place count your evidences only on such things as the Pharisees counted
upon? And are very hopeful of Heaven, though ye want the far greater things
which they also wanted? Take heed of this defect.

2dly, They were much more zealous of human inventions, then they were of Gods
Commandments. We find them often contending with Christ's Disciples about some
external purifications and eating with unwashen hands, and such like things:
And Christ tells them plainly that they taught for doctrins the precepts of
men. Now, if thou would exceed them in thy righteousness, take heed of this
defect. It is strange to see what bensil of affection some have for things of
man's devising, as of a holy day, a ceremony in worship, or such like, which
pretends to no other Father, but some ecclesiastic Cannon: Whereas their
affections, like a knyff blunted in cutting sticks, are little or none in duties
that are commanded by God himself.

3dly, The Pharisees, for as specious Professors as they were, yet they were
mere Hypocrites. Christ thunders woes against them, because of their Hypocrysie.
He descrybs them by no other name, but the name of Hypocrites. There is non's
condition more dangerous and incorrigible then the Hypocrites: Publicans and
Harlots shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven before them: It is true we read
of the conversion of some of them, Nicodemus and Paul: But very few. Therefore,
by all means take heed of Hypocrisy. Down right honesty here is our best
Policy.

4thly, Though their Religion was but ane empty profession, yet they were
exceeding proud of it, I thank God I am not like this man; though a believer by
the Spirit ought to discern things freely given him of God, yet he ought with
all to consider, that there are some graces, the more we have of them, always
we are the more humble; the more of faith, the more of repentance, the more of
self denial, always the more humble; and when any comes to be puffed up with
their Religion, they are too like the man who said, Come see my zeal for the
Lord, of whom he threatened to be avenged.

Lastly, The Pharisees were generally great opposers and blasphemers of Christ,
in whom alone the remedy of their other sins was only to be found. And thus,
like sick men, they did spill and cast over their Physic. This was the
cop-stone of all their other sins; possibly thou will say, herein thou
outstryps them; I will desire thou will search again: Though Christ has gained
so much credit, as not to be openly blasphemed among us, yet see if these
things be not yet in reference to him among us, which were among them.

First, The negarives and omissions, of which the Pharisees were guilty, they
did not esteem him as God, they did not employ him as Mediator, they did not
submitt to his Laws as King and Head of his Church; If I could insist here,
much of all these three is there amongst us still. May he not still stand and
cry, Ye will not come to me that ye may have life, I am despised and rejected
of men.

Secondly, The Pharisees were bitter persecutors of his followers. Paul went
from Jerusalem with Letters from them to Damascus; there is yet too much of
this amongstus. We pretend indeed often other things, as the ground of our
quarrels with his followers, but really the root of the quarrel is here, that
they are his Disciples, following his Laws and his Commandments.

Now, if ye would exceed their righteousness, especially labor to exceed them
in a high esteem of Christ, giving him much employment, submitting to him as
your King and Law giver; and take on his yok; and this will help with strength
for exceeding them in all therest.

SERMON
On Acts 26: 28. Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Almost thou perswadest me to be a
Christian.


THe occasion of these words is this, King Agrippa comeing to Cesarea to salut
Festus, the Roman Deputy in Judea, where Paul was prisoner, is desirous to hear
him plead before him. And after Paul had given a very rational account of his
being a Christian; he could not be disobedient to the heavenly Vision, and
showed the consonancy of his doctrine to the writtings of the Prophets, I know,
says he, thou beleevest the Prophets, yea he threaps it upon him that he
believed them; The words read contain Agrippa's reply, Thou almost, says he,
perswadest me to be a Christian.

In the words, there be these things considerable, 1 A preface prefixed by
Luke, Then Agrippa said unto Paul. 2dly, A confession; that he was persuaded to
be a Christian. 3dly, A limitation or restriction of this confession, (...), in
a little only, or almost.

Who this Agrippa was, it will not make much for the scop I design to insist
upon: He was the Son of that Herod Agrippa who cut off the Apostle James, King
of Chalcis, though afterward by his favor with the Roman Emperor he obtained
a larger tetrarchy: Ha had been brought up in the Jewish Religion, upon which
account Paul looks upon him as one that believed the Prophets.

There are two words in the Greek very Emphatick, the one translated to
persuade, (...), from (...), which signifies a cable-tow, it imports as much as
by the force of Paul's discourse he was drawn to Christianity as with a
cable-tow; the grounds were rational, which Paul produced; the writtings of the
Prophets, and the vision upon the way that Paul told him of, drew him so
strongly, yet he yields only (...), Erasmus translats it, Modica ex part, the
old Latin seems to be better in modico, in a little, and thus far drawn only
to be Christian.

The name Christian, which first the Christians had at Antioch; Agrippa
mentiones it; yt was at this time, as it is still, very odious to the Heathens;
But counted very honorable amongst the Christians themselves, seeing derived
from the excellent Name of Christ, And certainly those who are almost ashamed
of this so ancient and so honorable a name, and will needs be denominat from
the Name Jesus, Jesuits, are to be justly taxed, as if they were ashamed of the
name Christian, which even in Agrippa's time was common to Christians.

And truly, it is very remarkable how Jesuits themselves differ about the
original and rise of this name of theirs some of them, as Ribadeineira in vita
Ignatii, tells us of a Vision made to Ignatius their Founder, that gave a rise
to it; but though this Vision, which has many ridiculous incredible passages,
be talked of by several of them; yet others count it ridiculous, and therefore
Montaigue the Jesuit repels it, and ascribs it to the Pope, which he thinks as
infallible as if it had been a Vision from Heaven.

They are no less divided about the Etymology of it; all of them aggree not
about it. And Protestants finding them jarring how to find its original; some
thinks a letter may be taken away and in stead of Jesuits, they may be called
Esauits. Some think a letter may be added and they called Jebusits: But this
contraversie not fuiting this work, I will only touch the objection of
Gretserus, who tells us since all Christians are denominat from the Name of
Christ, as here in the Text, why may not their order be denominat from the Name
of Jesus? Hospinianus in his Historica Jesuitica gives him a clear reply to
this, that beleivers being by faith united to Christ are partakers of his
unction as the Oil Aaron was anointed with, which run down on his garments: But
we are not sharers with him in his saveing his people from their sins, from
which is the Name Jesus. But I cannot insist on this.

Having thus cleared the words, I come to take the Observation from them I
purpose to insist on, which is this.

Observation, That though Christian Religion stand upon most rational grounds,
vet some are but almost persuaded to be Christians, even within the Church.

This Observation is clear here, Agrippa was trained in the Jewish Religion,
and he confesses he was drawn as with a cable-tow, and yet almost or in a
little he was a Christian only.

In prosecuting this point it shall be needless to insist in prosecuting the
rational grounds upon which Christian Religion stands. Which, among the Fathers
Tertullian and Augustine have done at great length, in their debats with
Heathens. And in the reformed Church, eminent Du Please, in his Book De
veritate Christianae Religionis. Doctor Jakson, in his unreasonableness of
unbeleife. Yea, even among the Papists, parsons in his Christian resolution; in
these there are so many rational grounds set down, from the supernatural
design of the Gospel; from the penmen of it, from the miracles whereby it was
confirmed, from the voices from Heaven whereby it is attested, as are
sufficient to convince a Heathen of the reasonableness of it.

Yea, if we should only take notice of that Argument whereby Agrippa was almost
persuaded in the Text, which Doctor Hammond has amplified at some length, the
conversion of Paul, what considerable weight is there into it; A young man in a
way to persecut, among the Pharisees eminently learned, Festus told him he had
too much of it, eloquent so that the Barbarians judged him for that, one of
their Gods, ingadged not only by his former practices but by his present
resolutions and ingadgment to the Pharisees to persecute the Christians, and
yet by a voice from heaven to be suddenly changed, as to become a painful
promotter of it, and to lose so much for it, and at last cheerfully to seal the
truth of it with his blood, was it any thing strange that this did draw Agrippa
as with a cable-tow to be a Christian? But in those and many more that are
commonly brought I shall not insist. Only in prosecuting the point, I shall
propose these things to be followed. 1. I shall prove by ane induction of some
particular instances, that though Christian Religion stand upon so rational
grounds yet many are but almost, (...), Christians. 2dly, Shall enquire whence
it is that it is so. 3dly, Shall apply the point.

For the first, There be these instances under which a great multitude, who are
but almost Christians may be comprehended.

1. What a multitude deny many of the very foundamentals of Christian Religion,
as the satisfaction of Christ, which Socinians do; the deity of Christ, as
Arians do; the humanity of Christ, as Nestorians do. Yea, not to insist in
particulars, any acquainted in the least, either with ancient or modern
Histories of the tenets of diverse Heretics, will find what a multitude of the
fundamentals of it, have been questioned and denied; and so they but almost
persuaded to be Christians, who have denied them.

2dly, Some though they deny not Christ's satisfaction, yet they join together
their own works and duties with Christ's satisfaction, as causes of
justification before God, and so there is somewhat ascribed to Christ, but not
all; they are Christians in some part; this is the common opinion and doctrine
of the Papists, and the practice of many Protestants.

3dly, Such are guilty of this, who leave or embrace the Law of Christ as it
maks for or against them; the lesser duties they go about, and if God will be
content with what they can spare, they are content to give it him: But for the
greater duties of the Law, or such as have any difficulty in them, with these
they can dispense, except the show of practicing these can promove their
interest. Under this Head what a multitude are comprehended!

4thly, Time-servers in Religion come also under this, to be almost Christians,
who change their Religion with every spet and current, that set their watch
according as the town clock they dwell into goes, these are but almost
Christians. They are led by example and the practice of the multitude in their
way, and not by any of the precepts of Christ.

Lastly, Such as profess Christ but are given up to the Common sins and
scandalous outbreakings that Christ has so straightly forbidden, having eyes
full of adultery, their faces inflammed with wine, that declare their fin as
Sodom, such, says the Apostle, Tit. 2. verse. last, They profess they know God,
but in works they deny him, being reprobat unto every good work. Now how many
are there professing Christ, that are in one of these fyve but almost, or
(...), persuaded to be Christians?

For the Second we proposed, whence it is that, since Christian Religion is so
rational, so many are but almost Christians?

For clearing this, 1. There be somethings that are proper causes of it,
having a proper causal influence upon it. 2dly, Somethings that are but
causes, by accident, of it.

The First, That are proper causes of it, we shall name but these fyve.

1st, There may be a specious outward profession of Christ, where there is a
great deal of Atheism within. The whisperings of a natural conscience, and the
fear of being defamed, may cause one take on a profession of Christ, and where
Atheism is, no wonder one be but in somethings a Christian: For 1. The
fundamental principle that leads to respect the commands of any deity, is the
faith of his being. If this be questioned, who will regard the command? He that
comes to God, must believe that God is; yea all the incouragments to duty, and
all the threatenings against sin, are undervalued, where the faith of the being
of God is wanting; If this be not, they are but as devised fables. Now take
away the encouragements from promises and threatenings, and ye take off the
pace, that which makes the wheels go. No wonder then but almost a Christian.

2dly, Many are but almost persuaded to be Christians, because of the unbeleefe
that the Scriptures have proceeded from God, and consequently cannot hold true:
Notwithstanding they own a profession of Christ, like Gallio who accounted the
question of the resurrection only a question of names and words. That the
Scripture are given by divine inspiration, and that they are surer then Heaven
and Earth, are things not credited. Paul moved a question, if Agrippa believed
the Prophets. No wonder then he was but almost a Christian.

3dly, The heart in many is wedded to carnal interests, whichlyes as a mountain
in the way of their becoming altogether Christians. Man has but one soul, and
cannot leave it to two contrarieties in any bensil, the love of the World and
the love of the Father are inconsistant, like fire and water, they expel one
another out of the same subject, desire of the World is so great, and men so
intent upon it, that when Christ calls he is not heard, or in part only.

4thly, Most of the principles in man are contradictory to the principles laid
in the Gospel. Let us take but a short view of some of them. 1. Self-love is
natural to man. When thou does well unto thy self, all men will praise thee.
But it is one of the first lessons that he that is Christ's Disciple learnes,
If any man will be my Disciple, let him deny himself. 2dly, It is natural to
men to love, ease, the Gospel puts him to labor, stryve, take the Kingdom of
Heaven by violence. 3dly, Nature teaches men to esteem much of things present,
as more certain then these that are absent and to come; it is contrary quite
here, these things, that are present are but shaddows compared with those that
are absent. 4thly, Do, and be happy, is a principle nature teaches to men,
What shall I do to be saved? Renounce it, and trust in what another has done
to make us happy is taught here; a multitued of such contradictory principles
are natural to us. Now where there is such contradiction in principles: No
wonder many be but almost Christians.

5thly, Tentations from Satan and the World have a causal influence upon
those, If this Gospel be hide, it is hide to these whose eyes the God of this
World has blinded. Though Satan believe himself and tremble James 2. yet he
knows it is much for the design he is advancing in the World, to keep men off
from coming over wholly to Christ. Beside, man is a creature much led by
example, and given to imitation, and often ungodly company, if they do not
more, yet they blunt his zeal and keeps back from altogether being a Christian.

Beside these things which have a proper causal influence on many's being but
almost Christians: There be other things that by accident occasion this.

As First, Many of the contents of the Gospel are altogether supernatural;
Mahomet his Laws were suited well to man's corrupt nature; so were these which
Apolonius Lyanaeus gave to the Heathens: But here, if we shall either look to
the duties or promises of the Gospel, they are altogether supernatural. 1. The
duties are supernatural. as believe, deny thy self, take up thy cross, despise
things present; the promises are also of this nature; if they were but such as
these had under the law, such as if any man come not up to the feast of
Tabernacles the rain shall not fall upon his land, how would this make many run
to ordinances, who are nothing moved with the promises, of being in Christ, joy
in the Holy Chost, and such like.

Beside Secondly, As the contents of the Gospel are supernatural, so must they
be supernaturally discerned; as mere sensitive faculties cannot reach the
objects of reason, a man cannot with his eyes ane argument, so such as are
truly rational cannot reach what is purely spiritual without illumination from
the Spirit, Rom, 8: 7. The wisdom of the flesh is enemity against God, neither
can it be subject to the Law of God, for it is spiritually dicerned.

From all these it comes to pass that many are but almost Christians. But I go
to the Application.

Application.

First, Is it so that many are but almost Christians? It serves for humiliation
to all such as are but almost so. I shall not insist in prosecuting this use in
reference to such as are so in point of doctrine, in regard all of us own such
doctrinal principles as lead us up to be altogether Christians, but shall
follow it in reference to such as are so in point of practice; of how many may
the Lord complain as he did of Ephraim, Hosea, 7: 8. Ephraim is a cake
unturned, that is raw on the one side and baken on the other; In somethings,
Christians, especially such things as may consist with their interest, but in
other things denying it, especially such things as are most difficult, and of
most absolut necessity. And that this use of humiliation may prove the more
pressing, we shall offer these things to evidence what manner of humiliation is
meet.

First, There is in resting upon the being almost a Christian a secret contempt
of God. He that cuts and carves upon the laws of his Sovereign, taking what
makes for him, and rejecting what he pleases, contemnes the authority that
enjoined them: To do something at the command of God, and to reject others,
must flow either from some apparent iniquity in the Law, which is a high
reflection, or a despising of the authority that enjoined it, and both reflect
on God.

Secondly, To be in part a Christian, and not altogether, is a temper God
loathes. This was the temper of the Church of Laodicea, which was neither cold
nor hot, lukewarm, which has some degrees of heat and some of cold; and he
threatens he will spew her out of his mouth as one does a thing his stomache
loathes.

Thirdly, This puts a man to serve two masters, to be in some things for God,
and in somethings for his enemy, A double minded man, says James, is
unstable in all his ways, (...), a man that has a mind and a mind, he must
be like Israel in Elijahs time, halting betwixt two.

Fourthly, one may loss Heaven, though he do much for God, for not doing
more, there are some things absolutely necessary for salvation, if we should be
never so righteous in our dealing with men, yet he that believes not is
condemned already, because he bath not believed in the only begotten Son of
God. Now how lamentable is it to do much for Christ, and yet come short of
Heaven for not doing more?

Lastly, This, to be in part a Christian, deprives a man for the present of the
sweetest part of Christian Religion; the peace and joy promised in the Gospel
is attained by performing the most in ward duties of it, the neglect of which
makes many find godliness a kind of Labyrinth to them, they are continually
breaking shells that has no kirnel in them.

All these laid together evidence what matter of humiliation arises from this,
to be almost only a Christian.

Use second, Is it so that many are but almost most Christians, then in the
next place, labor thou to be not only almost but altogether a Christian. In
this Use I shall 1st Open to you the scope I dryve at into it. 2dly, Give you
some directions for promoving it.

The scope of it is not First, To press you to eshew a manger I hotchpotch
Kind of Religion, such as sometimes the Jews had of old, and the Papists have
of late. I shall suppose our tentations, blessed be the Lord, shall not carry
to so great ane evil as this. Neither, 2dly, Is the scope of this use to
condemn that Christian moderation which in lesser truths may be sometimes very
profitable, for the peace of the Church. Neither, 3dly, Is it to condemn all
kinds of zeal in following our greater duties in Christian Religion, which
ought always to be regulat with wisdom and knowledge. Neither, Lastly, Do we
suppose that a Christian in this life can reach ane absolut perfection in his
Christian course, without any defect at all. At these things this use does not
drive.

But it drives at pressing these things. 1 To exhort all, while they are
eshewing some sins in practice, whereby they become in part Christians, that
they sit not down contenteldy there, while they are practicing others no less
dangerous. While they eshewe, for instance, scandalous breach of the Sabbath,
they do not contendedly practice hypocrisy, naked formality. Or, 2dly, While
there is the practice of some duties whereby one becomes almost a Christian,
and not far from the Kingdom of God, there be not a voluntary neglect of
others possibly more necessary. Or, 3dly, To exhort the eshewing the practice
of Christianity at sometimes, when there is the quite contrary at another time,
ebbing and flowing in Christianity, as the Sea with the course of the Moon,
serving times and occasions with our Religion, and not keeping ane even pace,
at these the point dryves; and that we may be helped thus to labor to be not
only almost but altogether Christians, I shall offer these following directions.

First, Christian, labor to be very serious in the performance of holy duties,
be careful to join therein attention of mind, Ezekiel: 33. verse. 32. Singleness;
of heart, Psalm. 145: 18. Intention of affection, Romans 12: 11. Holy fear and
reverence, Heb 12: 18 The want of these makes even our Religious duties to be
performed but almost as Christians: There is not that reverence of God in them,
that delight, that intercourse and communion, with God, which they that
endeavor to be altogether Christians do attain. Therefore consider well the
nature of God whose service it is; His Majesty, Mal. 1. v, last. His Holiness,
Jer. 48: 10. Consider the nature of the service wherein thou hes to do with
him. Consider them as duties and a part of thy homage, not parts of thy
Christian liberty. Consider them as privileges, as indeed they are, as talents
of which thou art to give ane account to God. These and such like
considerations may influence more seriousness in our performances.

Secondly, If thou would not be almost but altogether a Christian, Labor to
get right thoughts of God, especially in these three. 1. In his Alsufficiency,
Genesis 17: 1. And that would keep thy heart steady and fixed in Religion. God is
our happiness and not the creatur. And therefore whither more or less of the
creature, it comes all to one, if God be ours. Next, the faith of his
omnipresence, Psalm. 139: 6, 7. This will aw us when we have secret
opportunities and tentations to sin, Genesis 39: 9. It will possess with godly
fear and reverence, 1 Cor. 11: 10. It will comforty in afflictions, Psalm. 23:
4. 3dly, Of his universal providence, extending it self to every thing that
comes to pass, even the least things, Math. 10: 28. Beside the occasions we
shall have hereby to adore the perfections of God, Job. 37: 14. Psalm. 107: 43.
It will help to thankfulness, Psalm. 40: 5. And keep from abuse of mercies,
Hosea 2: v. 8. To submit patiently to afflictions, 1 Samuel 3: 18.

Thirdly, To avoid this, be very careful not to neglect known duties. Usually
in Polemical divinity, the plainest truths are least studied, because they are
taken for granted, It is often so in practicals, our zeal spent on things that
are most doubtful, when clear acknowledged duties are neglected, as it was with
the Jews, Micha 6: 7. They were careful to enquire when they should fast, but
neglected the duties of moral equity. The best way, as one observes well, to
know more of the mind of God in what is duobtful, is to be bussy in doing what
is clear, John 7: v. 17. He is the best Christian that is most in the
fundamentals of a Christians duty.

Fourthly, Every night take ane account of the passages of the day, and examine
what the strain of the heart has been, what you have done, and upon what
grounds, for what ends, what ye have neglected; hereby ye come to know what
ground ye gain of your corruption, how long time yely in any sin unrepented of.
This record or journal of our daily walkings has been the practice of many
Godly men, as the writters of the records of their lives have mentioned; and
there is nothing, will tend more to prevent our resting upon being almost
Christians.

Fifthly, Propose the perfect pattern of Christ's life before you. It is true
all the actions of Christ are not imitable; He was not a mere man, but God and
man, and what he did as God or as Mediator betwixt God and man, we cannot
imitat, but there are diverse things wherein the Scriptures expressly proposes
him as ane example, as love, Ephesians. 5: v, 12. Meekness. Matthew. 11: 29.
Self-denial, Phil. 2: 3. Patiencs, 1 Pet. 2: 21. Making it his work to do
good, Acts 10: 38. This serves not only for our example, but for our
encouragement. There is nothing he calls us to but he did it, and is now
crowned. This answers all the weight can be laid on any authority from men;
Since his is one of the greatest, wisest, noblest that can be.

Lastly, If thou would indeed be above the being only almost a Christian, then
labor to do all thou does in the name of Christ, the stresse of Christianity
lies in this, Col. 3: verse. 17. to eye the authority of Christ as commanding or
forbidding what we are or are not called to, Math. 21: 23. John 5: 43. To do
in the strength of Christ Mark 16: 17. Acts 3: 12. And to do for the sake of
Christ, as for his honor. All these three are comprehended in doing in his
name.

But some may say, if we labor to come up to so much exactness as these rules
would carry us to, we have done with a mirry life in the world, and must go
under the repute of Phanaticks, and such like.

I shall, that I may not too far transgress time, only in answer to this say
one thing. Labor to know the true bounds of thy Christian liberty, not that ye
walk to the uttermost extent of it, for the satisfying of your natural and
carnal desires; but that you lay nothing in your Christian course to make
Christ's yoke weightier then he himself has made it; from the want of the
knowledge of this arises so many groundless censures of others, and casting
them out of our charity, for the practice of things wherein Christ possibly
has allowed them a liberty. The knowledge of this would make us endeavor in
many things to please our neighbor to his edification, Rom 15: 2. In a word,
if thou know not this, thy work in Christianity may be more burdensome then
thou art awarr of. So follow these directions, and by the blessing of God, thou
may become somewhat more then Agrippa who was only, (...), almost a Christian.

SERMON
On Genesis 22: 1. And it came to pass after these things that God tempted Abraham.


THe History of Abraham his offering Isaak is famous, both amongst sacred and
profane writters; The introduction to it, or rather a compend of the whole
History, we have now read.

The words have dependence on the former chapter, in which we have Abraham
treating with Abimelech as one Prince does with another; and after these
things, after the Lord had made him so great as to be sought to by Princes;
Josephus in the first Book of his Antiquities, Chap. 14 tells us, that before
the Lord told him of the sacrificeing of Isaac, that He reckoned up to him all
the mercies He had from time to time bestowed on him, and after these tempted
him.

And in the tentation there are three particulars remarkable, 1st, The time of
it: 2dly, The Author it: And, 3dly, The nature of it. The time of it, After
these things. The Author of it, God. The nature of it was atentation, God
tempted Abraham.

Pererius the Jesuit on the place goes near to tax Moses as defective in not
reckoning what age Isaac was of when this came to pass, and he spends a great
deal of time in confuting Abenezra, who said, Isaac was but 12. years old; and
in proving the common opinion that he was, 15. but we not looking on this as
material, it is sufficient the time is designed as it is After these things,
after so many and so great mercies bestowed on Abraham, God tempted him.

The only considerable difficulty in the words, is, to reconcile this place
with that of James 1: 13. Let no man say, when he is tempted, that he is
tempted of God, God tempts no man, and here God tempted Abraham. Passing the
floorishes of Jesuits in reconciling these two places, there is this one solid
answer. There is a tempting by way of trial, and a tempting by way of
seducement, God tempted Abraham with the first kind of tentation, and James
speaks of the second kind of tentations, that seduce and lead to sin, as is
evident, first, from the word used by the Apostle there, (...), which usually
is ^^^erstood of tentation to sin, (...), being the proper word for the other
trials or tentations: Thus the Devil is called (...) the tempter, Matthew. 4.
verse. 3. and in the Lords prayer we pray that we may not be led (...), into
tentation; Beside the Apostle in the Antithesis used in the verse, saves, God
cannot be tempted with evil, neither does be tempt, must be relative to that
same, (...), evil, before mentioned. Now these tentations, as they cannot
proceed from God, so for God to tempt by way of trial is ordinary for him, in
all afflictions.

There is one observation from the words I purpose to insist most upon, but
shall name some few ere I come to it.

Observation I. That often great mercits are accompanied with great tentations
and trials.

So here, after these things, Abraham was tempted. And the constant tract of
providence from Adam to Christ, proves the truth of it, yea scarcely in
Scripture one instance (which is rare in providential actings) against it. For
1. Great mercies are often accompanied with great abuses, and therefore no
wonder followed with great trials. The Lord does sometimes to his vineyard till
he come to say, What can I do more, and yet sour Graps, Isai: 5. What wonder
then he pluck down his hedge! Beside all that receive mercies do not receive
them with the like integrity, they fall sometimes as some drops of rain that
only makes a thistle or weeds to grow, and therefore need of winnowing by
tentations. Yea, 2dly, Usually those who are most in receiving mercies from
God, are most invyed by Satan; ye shall find him in Scripture choosing out
Gods greatest favorites and following them most with his tentations, such as
Job, David, Asaph, Christ, and Peter; I shall not dwell on this point, only do
not think God is out of the road way of his providence when he does this,
whither to his Church or particular persons; It is ane inlet to all apostasy
to be pleased with nothing but mercies here away from God: If thou has at this
Sacrament tasted of Abraham's manifestations, it shall be strange, if after
these things it come not to pass that thou taste of Abraham's tentations. Our
rose here must have thorns beside it: and therefore, say thou, shall we
receive good of the hands of the Lord, and not evil also? And bless him in both.

Observe. II. That it is very necessary when we remember or mention the
tentations God exposes his people to, to remember also the mercies he bestows
on them.

Abraham here, God tempted him, but it is after these things. So the Church at
length in the third of the Lamentations, so Jacob, so David Psalm. 44. and
there is good reason for it. For 1. This tends to keep up honorable thoughts
of God. If there be nothing minded but the tentations, we are ready to count of
him, as the man who had the one talent, austere and rigorous. Beside, this
tends to keep us from fainting under tentations, as Psalm. 13: 5. It may be
often the Lords quarrel with us in trials, which he had with Israel at the red
Sea, Psalm. 106. They considered not the multitude of his mercies, but at the
Sea, even the red Sea, they provoked him. The first trial they met with they
sorgat all the Lord had done for them in Egypt. Many pore only upon their
discouragements, especially in trials or at Sacraments, like one that would be
broding himself with the bryar of his role, and not smelling the rose itself.
Haman was a fool to quarrel that Mordecay bowed not his knee to him, since he
was so much in the Kings savor, he might have despised Mordecayes. What ever
besal the Church of God or thyself, still remember it is after these things.

Observe. III. That trials and afflictions are rightly looked upon by us, when
we look upon them as tentations.

Thus Abraham's trial, here called a tentation, James 1: 2. My Brethren count
it all joy when ye fall in diverse tentations. The Apostle means afflictions,
but thinks fit to represent it to them under the notion of tentation; So 1
Pet. 1: 6. Though now for a season ye be in heaviness, through manifold
tentations: It was the cross was on them, but the Apostle calls them
tentations: And there are several reasons why afflictions are so called, which
are worthy to be remarked.

1. Our trials often are nothing but tentations, our discouraged Spirits
creates fears and then tosses them so, that one in wrestling with their own
thoughts will suffer more then another on whom the cross is indeed inflicted.
And here by the way, it is worthy to be noted, how often we are in the wrong
to God suspecting him for his providence, when in the mean time it is but a
conflict with our own apprehensions: Like Hagar who was complaining for the
want of water, and yet close beside a fountain, but her eyes were not opened to
see it.

2dly, Trials are called tentations, because of the principal and chief scope
of affliction is to winnow and try, That the trial of your faith, being more
precious then gold, 1 Pet. 1: 7. the Apostle points our their affliction there
from the principal scop of it. And here I would have you take notice of these
three things. 1. Though God know us well enough, and though Saints try
themselves, yet we have need to be tried by affliction. There is a mystery of
iniquity as well as there is a mystery of godliness, oftentimes in affliction
there is something discovered to us, which for all our search of ourselves we
could not have found out, nor have believed had been in us: like a pool
troubled, so are our hearts in affliction, their comes up mud which we would
not have thought to have been there. Yea, 2dly, As the Lord delights in the
graces of his Saints, so he loves to have some occasion to commend them in his
Saints, He still retains his integrity, though thou movest me without a cause
against him; See how he boasts of Job, as a Master when a good Scholar is
examined. Therefore he loves to try by affliction, that He may have occasion to
say, O woman great is thy faith. 3dly, The Lord loves to discover his people to
others. For 1. By thy example, others may be encouraged; What is the end of the
Lords recording the valorous acts of his Saints, their reward is full without
this, but to encourage others? Yea, if thou faint in a trial, others may be
bettered by it. Why has the Lord recorded in Scripture the failings of some of
his Saints? Is it that the Lord loves to blot their names when they are gone?
No certainly: but that thou may reason for thy comfort, if such a Cedar was
blown over by the wind, though I be so, I need not despair.

Thirdly, Afflictions are cailed tentations, because there is no affliction,
but it also has a tentation accompanying it. And the Lord does not so try by
the affliction it self, as by the tentation that accompanyes it; See Psalm. 31:
22. and the 2d of Jonah, throughout. And here also I would have their things
considered.

1. That in every affliction a believer has a double advantadge by looking on
his affliction as accompanied with a tentation: 1st, Hereby he guards against
the strongest adversaty he has in his trial; Some get the victory over the
affliction that yet are taken captive by the tentation that accompanied the
affliction, as all that turn aside to sinful courses to cshew the cross are.
Yea, 2dly, We by this guard against the greatest hazard from affliction; The
least sin is worse then the greatest cross; And if we guard against the
tentation of the affliction, we are kept from the sin that Satan by the
affliction dryves at, as in Jobs case he did at that, that he should curse God
and die.

2dly, Whatever be the design of Instruments and secondary causes in our
affliction, yet it is certain Satan, who uses to take the advantage of our
affliction in misrepresenting God to us, designs principally that we should be
overcome by the tentation of the affliction; And a believer comes bravely
through his trial, when he can say as David, Ps. 18. (which Psalm was penned
when the Lord delivered him from the hand of all his Enemies, and from Saul, as
the title of i^ bears,) I was also upright before him, and I kept me from my
iniquity. The scope and use of this point is to press the people of God to look
aright on their afflictions as having tentations accompanying them. Ye are all
fearing a cloud gathering and are ready to be perplexed with the difficulty ye
forecast; But be exhorted to look most to the tentations: this warning Christ
gave his Disciples when he was about to suffer, watch and pray, that ye enter
not into tentation: he says not, into affliction, but into tentatione. And
they are guarding best against the cross they fear, that are most in prayer,
Lead us not into tentation, but deliver us from all evil.

Observat. IV. That a believer must not only expect tentations from Sarhan, but
from God, God tempted Abraham after these things, so Deuteronomy 13: 3.

I mark this point because some, if they take up a trial under the notion of a
tentation, they think it their duty presently to lay it aside. It is true, if
it lead to sin, it is wisdom to do so; but if it tend to discovery of sin or
grace, that is not thy duty. I shall not insist on this point, only offer three
characters, how ye may discern betwixt tentations from God and from Satan.

First, Usually God in his tentation assaults most the outward man, some duty
that is heavy to the Flesh, as to Job, David, and others, whom he tempted, and
here to Abraham. It is true, Satan sometimes assaults the body, but then as
some archers he seems to look one way and shoots another, his attempt is
against the Spirit principally, curse God and die, he barks only at the outward
man, but his byt is deeper, as in Peter, he winnowed him that he might deny his
master.

Secondly, They may be distinguished by the manner of their procedour, usually
when God tempts, it is to somewhat that nature loathes, as here to Abraham to
offer his Son, his only Son: Satan's practick, divyns say, observes what way
the tree bends, and shaks it that way, suiting his tentations to our
inclination.

Thirdly, God always attains his end that he tempts for, if discovery of
grace, or of weakness, or corruption, or what else; Satan may winnow, as he
did Peter, and yet his faith not fail.

But that I may come to the last Observation I purpose a little more largerly to
insist upon, it is one which I find both Popish and Protestant Interpreters on
the place, take notice of, partly out of Scripture, and partly out of some
Jewish Doctors, Abraham had ten trials before, as, To forsake his Country; To
flee again and again to Aegrpt, and Abimelech, where his life was in hazard: He
had controversies with his Friends; as with Lot, for wells; division in his
Family, Sarah and Hagar, and their Children wrangling; He was put to wrestle
with four Kings for Lot, and many such; Yet none of these goes under the name
of tentation, till it come to this, the offering up of Isaac, then God tempted
Abraham, not before, notwithstanding of all these trials, and so this affoords
us a new foundation for that Observation I will insist a little upon.

Observat. V. That though the Lord often exercise his people with lesser
trials, yet be usually reserves some great one for them, that may be fully
called a tentation, or, a least, after many trials, one may be reserved for us
of such a nature.

It is often Gods way by lesser trials to firt us for greater. I deny not but
sometimes he will measure out to some of his people their difficulty by smalls,
tender plants a flood together would drown them, which being distilled by drops
makes them grow and prosper. But often with others, this is his way, by lesser
trials to prepare them for greater, Revel. 3: 10. I will keep thee in the hour
of tentation, that seems to relat to some signal trial, which by a special
designation may go under the name of a tentation.

I will not go to search after reasons of this, how it may make for his
honor, and how his peoples case may sometimes require it should be so. Only I
shall enquire what should be the ingredients of which a trial is composed when
it may fittly be denominat a tentation; and in searching this I shall confine
my self to this trial of Abraham's, in which, as learned interpreters observe,
there was a threefold assault on Abraham all at once, 1. On his faith. 2dly, On
his obedience. 3dly, On his love to his nearest relations.

First, In this tentation Abraham's faith was assaulted. Abraham had received
two promises in reference to Isaac. In Isaac shall thy seed be called; and in
thy seed shall all the Nations of the world be blessed: And yet now at one
stroke, both those promises seems to be plucked up by the root; might not
Abraham have said what Asaph says in Psalm 77. What is become of the promise?
Abraham's faith hes nothing to lean to, but the power of God, He knew God was
able, etc. Hebr. 11. verse. 19.

Secondly, His obedience is no less tried then his faith. For 1. He is put upon
a thing that was contrary to a part of the law of nature, Thou shall not kill:
Blood has a cry, especially the nearer the relation be that sheds it, as Abels
had when Cain killed him; it is the next degree to self Murder, For a Father
to kill his own Son; so that Abraham has not only a question about the
firmeness of the promise of God, and how his Command was consistant with his
promise, but how it was consistant with his other commands, which by the light
of nature were planted in the heart of man.

Thirdly, To make his tentation the greater, his love to his nearest relations
is brought on the stage also. Interpreters observe on the words of the
following verse to what we read, that every word has a weight in it; take now
thy sone, thy only sone Isaack-whom thou love, and offer him, for a
brunt-offering. How great is the love of a Father to a Sone; especialy if he be
ane only Sone, Zach. 12: 10. they shall mourn as one does for his only
begotten. There is weight in his name Isaac, which signifies laughter, that
the sone and the only sone of his Fathers Laughter should be offered in a brunt
offering, where all is consumed to ashes, that was a trial indeed.

Now when these three concur in any trial, that one is called to be denied to
his nearest relations and to part with them, a mist also upon the understanding
darkning the mind as to their duty, and when they take them to the promises,
as a drowning man to a bush, the bush seems to come, and they cannot see how to
fasten on the promise, this makes a trial that may fittly be called a
tentation.

For, First, By this kind of dispensation a believer comes to be scourged with
twisted rods at once, as a load laid on above a burden. Job complained of his
friends as cruel, that they would deall so unkindly, when Gods arrows were
sticking in him, have ye no compassione on me, my friends, for the Almighty
has dealt bitterly with me. When one is put to quit with friends and promises
at once, it is like the wind that fell upon all the corners of the house where
Jobs children were feasting: A man in such a case is like Israel. who had the
read sea before them, Mountains on every syd, and Egypt behind them.

Beside, Secondly, a trial of this nature lets in affliction to the soul.
David complains the waters had come into his soul. So long as a trial affects
only the outward man, it is like a wound in the Arm, which proves not deadly,
if the heart be not affected: but when the wound is at the heart, who can bear
it. It is a pitiful account David gives of his case, Psalm. 116: 3. The cords
of death has compassed me about, and the pains of hell took hold on me, I
found trouble and sorrow: trouble from Saul, who persued him to death, and
sorrow from the pains of hell. Now when both a stroke on our outward condition
and ane other on our faith comes together, ^e Hercules contraduos.

Thirdly, It is usual with man to counterballance any loss by any stroke of
affliction by something he yet enjoyes or hopes for, as the cloud of witnesses
Heb. 11 did: many outward loss, we use to comfort ourselves from the promises;
but when these seem to yield, it is like ane tree plucked up by the root that
cuts off our hope of fruit afterward. How sad is that complaint of Asaphs,
Psalm 77. In the day of his trouble, his sore rane in the night, and ceased
not; I remembered God and was troubled. When his sore is running he thinks to
find ane ease by remembering God, and that failing him, his Spirit was
overwhelmed, as a boat in a storm, for which no hope.

Lastly, To evidence how great a trial this is, consider to what it has
driven many of the most excellent Sames of God, to speak unadvisedly with their
lips, to reflect on God, as one become cruel unto them, as Job, to brand his
Servants the Prophets, as feeding them with lies in stead of promises, as
David, Psalm. 116. I said in my haste all men are liars, Samuel among the rest,
who had told him in Gods Name he should be King; and many such like in
Scripture.

Application.

The scope of this point is to put the people of God to forecast with greater
trials then any they have possibly yet met with, when thou may be put to part
with thy nearest relations, and readily no small assault upon thy mind at such
a time, it is true the Lord usually commands his north wind to cease in the day
of the south wind, and sometimes it is otherwise; but we can loss nothing by
preparation for trials, that may fittly be called tentations. And I shall
briefly show you what encouragements he had under, this tentation and exhort
you when your trials shall grow upon you, to imitat him in them.

First, Abraham had the call of God to encounter his tentation, God said to
him, take thy Sone, thy only Sone Isaac; as a believer is not to sit the call
of God, when called to trials, nor flee from it, as Jonah did; so he is not to
rune to meet with the cross before it come, and be called to it by God. There
are some that like Goliath think themselves able to encounter ane host, who when
he comes to the trial, a boy and a peible stone out of the brook will lay them
on their back; the hope that his strength will be ours under a trial, is only
well grounded, when not our own simplicity or folly, or pride, or
unconsideratness, but his call, has brought us under it; when his truth calls
for it, he calls us. A Man that has the call of God knows this that
whatsoever the event of his trial be, he is about his duty, and there is a
great deall of peace refulting from this.

Secondly, Abraham as he had the call of God to this tentation, so he had
former experience of God to this tentatione, that what he called him to
renounce he brought it well about in the event. He had called him to forsake
his Fathers house, his country and kindred, to come among strangers, and there
he had made him a Prince for riches and honor. Now this is very comfortable
under any great tentatione, when one can produce experiences of Gods way
formerly to them, as Tamar did with Judah, when she was by Judahs command
brought forth to be brunt, she brought forth the ringe and the staff, and
asked whose these are; she said as much as, will the man that gave me these
things burn me. If thou say thou have not Abraham's experiences of this kind
against a trial; certainly thou have not observed his way to thee if it be so;
but if thou have none of thy own, take scriptural-experiences of Gods way; and
improve these under a tentatione, as the Church does, Psalm. 44. Our cars have
heard our Fathers tell what great things, what great things, thou did of old.
Even these are comfortable dounward to us, that we might set our hope in God,
Psalm. 78.

Thirdly. Abraham was not so much in considering what might be said against the
promises God made to him, as who he was that made them. Let Isaac be brought
to Ashes, yet Abraham will not stagger at the promise, so long as two attributs
of God remain, he judged him faithful that had promised, and he knew that he
was able out of the ashes of Isaac to accomplish his promise. However in a
tentatione the promise go out of thy light so that thou art put to say, what
is become of the promise? Yet go not to doubt of it, lest thou question or
deny either that God is faithful or that he is able; and O how honorable to
God is it to hazard on the credit of a promise of God, which is in appearance
by providence as overturned, on the account of the faithfulness and power of
God. Learn then to answer the objections against them as the Psalmist does,
Psalm. 56.4. In God will I praise his word, I will not fear what flesh can do.

Fourthly, Abraham did shalt himself loose of all the outward Impediments that
might entangle him and imped his obedience to God in this tentation; he told
not Sarah of it, and, as some Jewish Doctors relate, the cause of her death
which followed shortly after Abraham came home, was the report of so strange
ane attempt by Abraham, how then would she have taken it being told her before?
Beside, Abraham said, at the foot of the mount, to the Servants, abide ye here,
and I and the lad will go up to the mount; Ordinarily in tentations to which we
are called, we are entangled by our too much consulting with flesh and blood,
who always give Peter his advice; but if we could shake ourselves loose of
these intanglements, from all which we will shostly be loosed whither we will
or not, we should be fitter for a tentatione and have more cheerfulness under
it.

Lastly, Abraham in this tentatione though he could not see through it, yet he
was very confident the event would be well ordered by God, for his comfort; it
was a remarkable answer he gave Isaac goeing up the mount, when he asked him
my Father where is the sacrifice, my Sone said Abraham, God will proved, as
confidently as he had seen the Ram already caught by the horns amongst the
bushes: if we could, like obedient children, out of love to God follow our
duty to him, we needed not be anxious what will become of this or that, it
would satisfy us abundantly God will provide.

And indeed how dark soever this tentation was in the beginning yet there were
three things remarkable in it. Which three or one of them, may be found in the
event of what tentation God shall think fit to tryst thee with.

First, Abraham had a clearer discovery of the truth of his own grace then
before, by ane immediate voice, by this I know thou love me, love to Christ
in us is often times like fire in flint, if the flint be not stricken upon, the
fire appears not, and who knows but thou art much doubting of it at this
communion, if indeed thou love him? But the trials for the discovery of it
may be reserved.

Secondly, Abraham had a clear view of Christ in the Ram ready to be a
sacrifice for Isaac, to which some interpreters think Christ rela^s in the 8th
of John where he tells, Abraham saw my day affar off and rejoiced. And what
can thou tell but this may be the event also of the tentations thou art so
much afraid of? A clearer discovery of Christ then in all thy life before. Only
be content to go to the mount, if he call thee, saying God will provide.

Lastly, on the same mount, where Isaac was bound, his posterity saw ane
statly Temple, that was one of the wonders of the world, built by Solomon,
whereas any might have thought mount Moriah was the mount upon which the Church
was undone in cutting off the promised seed. Yet they saw the same mount the
place where the Temple did stand: So contrary are Gods thoughts often to ours,
and his ways to our ways, that light comes out of darkness and order out of
confusion, and life out of death.

SERMON I. On Josua 1: v. 2. Moses my Servant is dead.
THese words contain Mose's Epitaph: In which, a description of Moses from his
life, his original, and his end. His original, Moses, which signifies drawn
out; his life, a Servant; his end, he is dead.

We shall 1. clear the words, though not much difficulty in them.

First, His Original, imported in his name, Moses: It was given him, as we may
read Exodus 3:10. because of his being drawn out of the water, where his Mother
had laid him, in obedience to Pharaoh's Edict. The Lord would have his original
writ on his name, that he could not so much as lay to mind his very name, but
he behoved to remember that he was drawn out, for as eminent a servant as he
was, as among all the Prophets of the Old Testament none was like him, yet God
had him to fit for it, he found him not so, but drew him out when he was
destinat to death.

The second thing, is, his life, My Servant. A Servant is one who is not at his
own disposal, but at the beck of another; they are as Aristotle calls them
(...), liveing instruments, or tools, because they are at the will of another,
to be used at their discretion, So was Moses, but my Servant is ane eminent
elogy, he is called so in a threefold sense: 1. By way of distinction and
difference, some are Servants of Sin, serving diverse lusts and pleasures: Some
are Servants of Men, in opposition to God: some, as Romans 16. serve their own
bellies; but Moses; MY Servant. 2dly, My Servant, by way of special right and
propriety, being his by election, by purchase, 1 Cor. 6. yea and by Covenant,
which was made at the burning bush. 3dly, This, My Servant, has something of
glorying in Moses, as when the Saints say, My God, they triumph in their
portion. So when God says, My Servant, as Job 1. Hes thou considered my
Servant Job, there is a glorying in it; and this was Moses high Elogy, that he
was not a Servant of sin, or of men, but of God.

The third Particular, is, his End, He is dead. We have his Death threatened,
Numb. 20. because of his carriage at the waters of Meribah, and execute Deuteronomy.
last. where he goes up to mount Nebo and dies, and is buried in the plains of
Moab. Though He was a great Prophet, to whom none under the Old Testament came
near, eminently learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, though admitted to
so near communion with God, yet none of these can exeeme him from the common
lot of mankind, but he must dye, He is dead.

Having thus briefly cleared the words, we shall take some Observations from
them, and be brief in some of them, and insist on others.

Observe. 1. That often, Gods most eminent Servants, when first he finds them,
he has them to draw out of some condition very unlike their following work.

Thus was it here with Moses, as his very name Moses imports. There be three
things in this point, to which we shall speak briefly 1. From what God usually
draws his Servants out when he calls them to his work. 2dly, Why he chooses
this way, to call such Servants, as he must first draw out. 3dly, Apply.

In the First, We shall have plenty of Scripture proofs of the truth of the
point, from what, to wit, he draws them out; and here, take notice of these
particulars.

1st. Sometimes when he is about to employ Servants, He has them to draw out
of a very low and obscure original in the World. Its true sometimes he has
called them that are honorable in the World, as Isaiah to be a Prophet, who is
supposed to be of the blood royal of the Kings of Judah: But here he holds, not
many Noble, he chooses the things that are not. Thus, Christ his Apostles, a
company of poor fishermen, he made them Apostles; Amos, ane herdsman; David, a
Sheepherd; the famous Gregory Nazianzen had it often objected to him by the
Arians that he was the Son of him who was once a Beggar; Erasmus, a Bastard,
obscurely borne in Rotterdam.

2dly, He has them to draw out from a great deal of natural simplicity and
weakness, in respect of moral induements: So that they may say, as Moses, I am
not eloquent. It is true, some of them has been of excellent natural
induements, but often otherwise. Therefore Heathens used to draw the primitive
Christians, in their portratures, with the head of ane ass on their shoulders,
as noting the simplicity they saw in many of them, and yet eminent Servants.
How ignorant, how timorous, and despondent, were the Aposties, before the
pouring out of the Spirit? How childish were a number of their questions to
Christ, and how little affrighted them? And yet what excellent instruments for
Christ afterward?

3dly, He has drawn some out to service when their faces has been toward
another airth, and their employments lying another way in the World. It is
true, Jeremiah is supposed to have been a Priest ere called to have been a
Prophet, and Ezekiel the Son of a Priest; But frequently he called them goeing
at the plough, as Elisha; when keeping sheep, as David, or the cattle, as Amos;
when fishing, he has drawn them out, and made them Fishers of Men; when
commanding Armies, as the famous Ambross to be Bishop of Millan.

4thly, He nath drawn some out when ingadged in a great deal of opposition to
him; they have been, as Paul, persecuting him, and on the way to Damascus drawn
out, and made chosen vessels to lift up his name. How far was famous Augustine
ingadged in Manicheisme, whose principles tended to deny the Being of God, and
overturne his Law, and yet ingadged to be as eminent a light as any since the
Apostles times: Matthew the Publican, the first Writter of the New Testament,
and Mary Magdalen, out of whom he cast seven Devils, the first preacher of the
resurrection; and many other proofs of this.

5thly, He has drawn some out from under very great oppression and
persecution, and made them eminent Servants. Daniel, a captive boy, outstriped
all the Caldeans in wisdom and interpretation of hidden mysteries. What a great
deal did many of the worthy instruments at the Counsel of Nite suffer for him,
so that some bore the marks of their tortures, (as Paphunitius the want of one
of his eyes) about in their bodies? Multitudes of such might be instanced, and
all these will be the more remarkable, if we consider the way of the Lords
drawing out in these particulars.

1st, He has made his word the mean of drawing them out to his service, when
they themselves have been far from intending any such thing: Augustine came
from Rome to Millan, merely to hear Ambrose his eloquence, and yet by his
Sermon drawn out, though he little regarded his doctrine. Virgerius was set
down to writ a Book De Apostasia Germanorum, that he might vindicat himself
from the suspicion of Lutheranismt, and turning over Luthers Books, that he
might answer his arguments, was drawn out to the great opposition of Popery he
afterward manifested.

2dly, Some drawn out by occasional unexpected providence, from which no such
thing was expected. Justin Martyr came to behold the Martyrdom of some of the
Martyrs, merely as a gazer and looker on, and by their constancy and
cheerfulness was put to search after their doctrine, and drawn out to be ane
eminent Servant?

3dly, When they have only designed some bi^t of service to him, and to hold
there, when it were done, he has drawn them on step after step to great
things; there was no more designed by Luther at first but to overthrow Popish
Indulgences, but step after step he was drawn to overturne the whole body of
Popish doctrine. In a word, a small line in his hand, is strong enough to draw
out his most resolut adversaries.

The Second thing we proposed was, Why God so often choosed this way? Here take
notice of these three: First, He lays a foundation for his own praise. 2dly,
For humbling, his Servants. 3dly, For confirming the truths delivered by them.

First, For his own praise, especially of his power and grace. 1. His power
shynes in it, that he can take any stuff and make a vessel of honor off it,
to make a Rose grow out of a Thorn; what a great demonstration of power was it
to take Paul on his way to Damascus and draw him then out? Beside 2dly, That
demonstrats his Grace in the riches and freedom of it, that no native baseness,
no affliction, no opposition to him, can hinder him from honoring them with
his honorable service.

Secondly, It keeps his Servants humble, to remember how drawn out; not worthy
to be called ane Apostle, and why, I persecuted the Church, Eminent service is
apt to puff up even the best, but when they look on what they were, and how
drawn out, they must let their Feathers fall.

Beside, Thirdly, This tends to confirm the doctrine delivered by them, that
when they first did begin to preach it, their faces were another way, I was no
Prophet, nor Son of a Prophet, said Amos, and the Lord said unto me, Go
Prophesy at Bethel: It was no design of his who was looking over his kin. What
can be more rational then what Paul alleges in his own defense before Aggripa,
that he was once zealous in the Jewish Religion, and persecuted Christians, but
could not be disobedient to the heavenly vision.

Application.

By way of use briefly take these things. First, See the remarkable way which
God has been constantly using to build his Church. He has not found the
stones polished to his hand, which he has been laying in his temple, but had
them to hew out of a hard rock, and digg out of a pit; so much the more ought
we to admire his progress in the work; look but on the beginning of our
reformatione from Popery, and wonder at the instruments, that ve may ascribe
the praise to the principal agent. Luther in a Popish cell, Calvin a big of
Papist, Beza not only a Papist, but even loose, so that Papists by way of
reproach objected his Juvenilia to him, and he forced to tell they envyed to
him the grace of God; and yet what done by them?

Secondly, This may encourage, in reference to the case of the Church for the
time to come. Often we stand asking, by whom will the Lord deliver Israel? And
where are the instruments to be found fit for the work? But, cannot he, who
drew out Moses, draw out; Either he can raise up new or elevat the Spirits of
such as are, What a change did the pouring out of the Spirit make on the
Apostles? How boldly go they to the temple to preach? With what confidence and
freedom of speech appear they before Counsels, and witness for Christ? He is
the same he was then who did effectuat this.

Thirdly, This should make us hopefully pray for either such as are most
indisposed for service, or most reluctant to it, since we have to do with one
who can so easily draw them out, and make them Veshels meet for his use.
Augustine ascribed much to his Mother Monica's Prayers, who, even when he was a
Manichean, ceased not to wrestle with God for him.

Lastly, This should keep such as are honored with eminent service humble;
when they call to mind what once they were, and how drawn out to their work,
what have the best but what they have received? And if received, why glory they
of it, as though it had not been received? But I go to the second branch,
having dwelt too long on this: my servant, Moses his life and great Elogy.

Observe. II. That it is the greatest Elogy and highest commendation of a Man
after his death, that in his life he has been Gods Servant.

Thus it is here Moses his great testimony, my servant is dead. It is true, all
the creatures are in their kind subservient, and his great estenemies do his
work. But as this is not (...) operantis, so it is but some sins of common
service; but to be his as in the explication, by way of distinction or
propriety, as Moses, is a man's greatest elogy in death.

We shall, 1st, prove the point from Scripture. 2dly, Give some grounds of it.
3dly, Apply it.

From Scripture, these things will prove it. 1st. It is the name given to the
most eminent Saints, as their Title of greatest honor, Abraham my Servant, Job
my Servant, Jacob my Servant, David my Servant; The greatest Prophets and
Apostles glory in it, Paul prefixes it to some of his Episties, Paul a Servant
of Jesus Christ. 2dly, This Name is given to the greatest Princes;
Nebuthad^^zar, Head of the Assi^ian Monarchy, Jerem. 25.9. Cyrus, Head of the
Persian, Isal. 45. 3dly, It is given to the exellent Martyrs, Rev. 19.2. 4thly,
It is given to the Saints in glory, Rev. ^2:2. 5thly, To the blessed Angels,
Rev. 19:10. Lastly, To Jesus the Mediator, Isai. 42. Behold my Servant whom
etc. Behold all laid together prove it ane eminent testimony of honor.

To evidence it further, consider that there have been many things pitched on
in the world, as things commending men after their death, according to the
diversity of men's lives. Some have been commended for their honor, some their
courage, some their wisdom, some their riches, but where a concatination of
these are, (...) eminently commendable must that (...) be? And in spending the
life in service to God, a multitude of these concur. I shall, to demonst^at,
only pitch on these five. 1st, The wis(...) of life so spent. 2dly, The
honourableness of it. 3dly, The gainfulness of it. 4thly, The sweetness of it.
Lastly, The security of it. Where all these concur in the life, how deservedly
is the person commended?

First, It is the highest wisdom. His fear is the beginning of wisdom, and a
good understanding have all they that do his Commandments. If we sold take
even the rule given by Azistotle, whereby wisdom is discerned, all would agree
to his service. Moses is brief in determining wherein wisdom consists, Deuteronomy.
4:6. Keep his statutes, for this is your wisdom. Yea where his service is
wanting, the Scripture speaks of men as fools, Jer. 8:9. Since they have
rejected the word of God, what wisdom is in them? They are indeed foolish
Virgins who make no provision for the time to come; Though they should be able,
with Berengari^s to disput de omni scihili; Or with Solomon to travel nature
from the Cedar to the Hysop; yet he that walks not circumspectly, is a fool,
Ephesians. 5:16. So that if wisdom commend a Man at death, it is a high Elogy to be
his Servant.

Secondly, There is no trade of life so honorable, the way of life is above to
the wise. There be four things will discover how honorable a service it is.
First, they are taken up with the noblest objects. Philosophers call their
Metapnisicks scientia Nobilissima, quia tractant de en^e altissimo. They are
either meditating or delighting in God, or with Angels, doing his
commandments. Others, with Dioclesian, are spending their time with fleas. But
his Servants, like Caleb, have ane other Spirit, Numb. 14. constantly follow
him. 2dly, They act these great things from the noblest principles, Love
constrains, yea by regeneration they partake of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.
which elevats the Spirit far above what the most famous among Grecians, or
Romans could ever reach. 3dly, They drive at the noblest ends; such as the
glory of God, 1 Cor. 6. the good of his Church, the salvation of their own
souls. Others, like men of low Spirits, have but low designs, who will show us
any good? Psalm. 4. Lastly, They receive the noblest reward; Henceforth is laid
up for me a crown of immortal glory; blessed is that servant whom his Lord
shall find waiting, verily I say unto you, he shall make him ruler over all
that he has; what more can be imagined, if this be not? More, He will gird
himself, and stand, and serve him: So that, if true honor commend a man at
death, it is a high elogy then to have been a Servant to God.

Thirdly, As it is honorable, so it is truly gainful to be his Servants:
Godliness is great Gain, for it has the promises of this life, and that which
is to come, like ships that go to a far country, they keep a trade with
Heaven, where they have wine, and milk, and honey, and whyt linen, and
eye salve, without money and without price. No sooner does his elect Children,
though prodigals before, come to their Fathers house, but they are clothed with
the best rob, and fed on the fatted calfe, and have a ring on their hand, and
shoes on their feet. It is true, that which usually goes under the name of
riches, is not their portion, but their gain is more noble, and they lay up to
themselves where the moth cannot enter; so that if riches and still to gain,
can commend one's life, to be Gods Servant must be a high elogy.

Fourthly, As it is gainful, so exceeding pleasant, to be his Servant. We may
say, as the Queen of Sheba of Solomon's Servants, Blessed are those Servants
who stand by and hear the wisdom of thy words. This is the scope of the whole
Song, to show the delight of his Servants. Take but a view of their pleasures
in these three. 1. What excellent walks they have. 2dly, What excellent company
in these walks. 3dly, What sweet fellowship with this company. First, Their
walks are sometimes to the Green Pasturs, Psalm. 23. sometimes to the tillages,
sometimes to the gardens, to see if the pomegranats bud, sometimes to the
banqueting house; It is true, they walk sometimes also down to the wilderness,
Hosea 2:14. ay but there they are allured, and a door of hope opened to them.
2. What excellent company in these walks? Enoch walked with God, Genesis 6. If to
walk with the Wise be, in Solomon's eyes, so great a privilege, what to walk
with the only wise God? 3dly, What sweet fellowship in these walks? Sometimes
they fit down under his shadow, sometimes he kisses them with the kisses of
his mouth, sometimes he sups with them, sometimes he taks them in his bosom,
Esai. 40:11. How pleasant a life must this be? The Apostle thinks nothing, Ephesians.
4. to call it the life of God. Others, like the elder Brother, Luke 15. get
never a kid to make mirry with, but they delight themselves in fatness. Must it
not then be a high elogy to be his Servant?

Lastly, They dryve the sweetest life. Satan can tell God of Job, Have thou
not set a hedge about him, and about all he has? About all he has, is much;
Who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good? Who is
he? It is such ane expression as that of Ahasuerus to Esther, Who is he, or
where is the man, that durst presume to do this? It is the highest act of
boldness that ever the creatur attempted, to be a persecuter of them who have
salvation for walls and bulwarks, and are sheltered under the faithfulness of
God, as a bird under the Feathers of the Dam, Psalm. 71. Lay all together and
see if it be not a high elogy to be his Servant.

Application.

First, Is it so great a privilege to be his Servant? It reproves the
undervaluers of it. Many cast at it as a bondadge, even of such who call him
Master and Lord, but the lowest employments in his service, David preferred it
to a dwelling in the tents of wickedness. Some, like Canaan, are Servant of
Servants, and despise their own mercy. Rectify thy opinion of his service,
since it is the honor of Angels, who are oftener in the Scriptures denominat
from their service, then their natures, though most pure and excellent Spirits.

Secondly, Is it such a privilege to be his Servant? Then study to do his
service acceptably? There are these qualifications required in his Servants.

1st, They cannot serve two Masters, for they must cleave to the one, and leave
the other. Thou must give up with lusts, with Satan, the World, neither serve
men in opposition to him; these oppositions casts many out of his service and
with Gideons 22000 they return to their tents.

2dly, A Servant is not sui juris, but at the Beck of his Master, as the
Centurions, if he say to one go, he must go; ye must not stand and disput
your duty, his will is reason eneugh, though it were to suffer for
righteousness sake, though it were to walk on a sea of trouble, we ought to say
with Peter, Master, if thou will bid me, I will come unto thee.

3dly, His service must be done cheerfully, Psalm. 110:3. It is true, we are to
serve him with reverence, and godly fear, Heb. 12:28. yet this is not
inconsistant with cheerfulness. He loves not to have it wrung out of us, as
service to ane austere and rigorous Master, as the man who had the one talent
called him; but we are to rejoice in trembling.

4thly, We must study in every thing to do him service; Servants are to obey
their Masters, as the Servants of Jesus Christ; directing and referring to his
honor, their most ordinary employments.

Lastly, We must not lay stresse on our service, as if it deserved our fie,
When we have done all, we are unprofitable Servants. Yea, though he say, well
done, good and faithful Servant, yet out reply ought to be, When saw we thee
hungry, and sed thee?

Thirdly, Here is consolation for his Servants: Their privilege is great,
though their service were never so low; Especially since they are friends, als
well as Servants. Yea, he that does the will of Christ, he is his Father, his
Mother, his Brother, his Sister. Rejoice in your privilege though it should
have a mixture of the cross with it.

SERMON II. On Josua 1: v. 2. Moses my Servant i^ dead.
OFten the Lord makes his Servants honorable after their death, who wrestled
with much opposition in their life. Here he writs Moses Epitaph himself. Moses
my Servant is dead. The third particular in this description remains, his end,
he is dead.

In handling this, we shall, First, Consider somethings peculiar in Moses his
death which may yield us ground of very useful instruction. Secondly, We shall
speak of death, as a common lot, from which none of the most eminent Servants
of God, though as eminent as Moses, can expect to be exeemed: Moses is dead.

In the first place, in Moses his death, we shall take notice of these three
things very remarkable in it. 1. The cause of it. 2. The manner and
circumstance of it. 3. Some consequences that followed on it. In which three,
amongst other things, we shall have a notable discovery of the justice, mercy,
and faithfulness of God.

First, Take notice of the cause of Moses death. Ye have it set down in the
20th of the Numbers, where, at Meribah, the people thristing and wanting water,
the Lord bids Moses, v. 7, 8. take his rod, and speak to the rock, and Moses
smites the rock twyce with the rod, for the which the Lord threatens him, that
he should not bring the congregation to the land which he had given them. This
was the cause of his death, and in this I desire ye may mark these five things.

1st, How many proofs of faithful service to God had Moses given, who was
faithful, as the Apostle testifies, as a Servant, yet all his former service
cannot expiat this one sin, but he must die for it. It is the way of a great
many, upon commission of any sin, they think to expiat it by their former or
future obedience; but though our service were as eminent as Moses's was, it
cannot at all make a mends for one sin to God. It is good there is a cautioner,
who takes all his peoples debt on him, since it is impossible for us to expiat
sin, though we had never so many moral parts, (as Moses, learned in all wisdom
of Egypt,) never so great a Prophet, never so much zeal, or communion with
God, yet all this cannot remove one sin.

2dly, In this cause of Moses death, remark that it was not in doing any thing
contrary to the command of God, only a doing beside it, he exeeded his
commission; and indeed, what he did might have had many appearances of reason
for it. The rod had been the instrument of many mirackles in Egypt, and at the
red Sea, yea at Rephidim he did strick the rock with it and brought water: But
since his commission was to speak, his striking was his sin, for which he must
die. So dangerous a thing it is, in things relating to God, to act without his
warrant. Some tell us, they add no corrupting additions to the word, but
perfecting; But, as corrupting additions is a contradiction, so perfecting are
eminently reflecting both on the Law and Lawgiver. Ye may be pressed with
things which will be told you are lawful because not contrary to the word: But
if they be not consonant, ye are in danger of anger from him who has forbidden
all adding to his word, as well as taking from it.

3dly, Undoubtedly this sin, for which Moses died, was pardoned, as to any
guilt which should draw any eternal punishment after it. Yea more, many
friendly acts, after this smiting the rock, passed betwixt God and him, yet he
must die for it. Antinomians foolishly tell us that the sins of the elect,
being pardoned, there are no chastisements laid on for sin. Nay, the sin which
is pardoned, the person may yet be corrected for it; as is evident here, and in
Nathans words to David, The Lord has also put away thy sin, nevertheless thy
Child shall die. Argue not then from a temporal chastisement, to ane eternal
punishment; Since the very sin which is pardoned, may yet influence sad stroks,
yea and death it self.

4thly, This was but one sin of Moses, which he acted also when his meek Spirit
was provoked by a stiff-necked people, and yet it is followed by the same
outward stroke, with which their sins, who had tempted 40 years in the
wilderness, is followed; their stroke, Psalm. 95. Is, not to enter Canaan, but
die by the way; and for this one sin, Moses meets with the same. Is is very
remarkable, how sharply the Lord will chastise a little thing in his own, when
he will let others runn on till their cup be full. It is true, the sins of his
elect servants have many aggravations the sins of others wants, as being acted
against more light, against greater mercies, yet the thing in itself but little,
in comparison of what he will pass in another. Cast not at his service
notwithstanding of this; better to to have our way in sin hedged with thorns,
then strawed with roses. It is dreadful to have scope in sin, and when, like
Balaam in the way to Balack, have the Lord say to us, go.

5thly, Moses earnestly prayed, Deuteronomy. 3. that the Lord would have averted this
stroke, v. 25. I pray thee let me go over, and see this goodly Land beyond
Jordan, and that goodly Mountain, and Lebanon; fain would he have been there,
but there is no dealing, let it suffice thee, speak no more of this matter, is
his answer. How earnest will the best be for temporary mercies, and how
peremptor in prayer for them when yet their prayer cast out? It is true, a view
of Canaan, which Moses had by way of exchange, declares the prayer not lost,
though refused. Now in all these in Moses death, see how just God is in
reckoning for sin, even in the best of his Saints?

But in the next place, let us take a view of his mercy mixed in herewith, in
the manner of Moses death: which is the 2d thing proposed. And here also take
notice of five things.

First, However the Lord will have him die for this sin, yet he warnes him of
it a long time before he die; yea and determines both time and place, Got up to
mount Nebo and die. It is a great incouragment to the Saints in their death,
that it comes not on them as a thief in the night, yea and though it be not
revealed to them, as to Moses, yet both time and place are so determined, as
all their adversaries cannot alter the least circumstance, though one of them
die in his bed, another in the sea, the third in a foraign land, yet not one
hair of their head falls without their heavenly Father his providence; and
though secondary causes work contingently, yet the event follows necessarly,
as it is decreed.

Secondly, Ere he die, though the Lord chastise him for his sin, yet the Lord
gives him a view of Canaan before his death, Deuteronomy. 3:27. Get thee up to the top
of Pisgah, and behold it with thine eyes. The passage through the valey of the
shadow of death, is indeed dowisome, but a view of Canaan will make it so
lightsome, that some of the Saints have cried out on death for his slow motions
toward them, and when recovered out of sickness, that threatened death, have
half repyned that they should have been within sight of the land, and yet
driven back to Sea again. And wisely the Lord reserves these sights of Canaan,
till his Saints have death to graple with, that he may allay a little the bitter
pill, and suggar it better, before they swallow it.

Thirdly, This death of Moses, it was indeed a chastisement of his unbeleife,
yet withal a Reward of his faith, which he had ane eye to, Heb. 11. v. 15.
When he preferred the reproach of Christ to the treasures of Egypt. There is
indeed in death something bumbling to the Saints, but there is also something
comfortable: If it be a fruit of sin, and the wages of it, it is likewayes the
passage to glory; and the truth is, as in our life so till it end, betwixt the
views of sin and glory, our joys and sorrows eb and flow,

Fourthly, Moses death, though it proceeded from his disobedience, yet it was
in it self ane act of obedience, the same God who bid him go down to Egypt
and speak to Pharaoh, bids him now go up to mount Nebo and die, and he obeyes
the one als well as the other, up he goes and dies; as it is said of Christ, so
may it be said of his Saints, He was obedient unto the death, so are they.
There are some, their souls are taken from them, and they are carried to death,
as a prisoner unto ward by the officer, but his people give up the Ghost, when
it is called for; and as they lived obeying, so they die.

Lastly, Moses in his death was careful for Israel, that it should prosper
after he was dead; for this end he repeats the Law over again to them in the
book of Deuteronomy, allures, and threatnes them to stedfastness in it,
appoynts them a successor to him, and lays his hand on Josuae. There are two
acts we find performed, by two eminent Saints, in reference to the Church after
their death, and they that cannot do the one, to promove the good of it when
they are gone, may yet do the other: Moses leaves a written law to them to
walk by: Joseph acts faith on the promise, I know the Lord will visit you, and
he will have them swear to carry up his bones. If thou cannot writ books to be
standing monuments of the Church's duties, yet be, with Joseph, acting faith
for the prosperity of it, upon the promise, and thus one way or another, thou
may promove the good of it when thou art gone.

But in the third place, take a view of some consequences of Moses death. I
shall, for brevities sake, name but these three.

First, The Lord takes the charge on him of burying his Servant, Deuteronomy. last.
The Lord buried him in the plains of Moab. His care of his Saints bodies ends
not with their lives. It is the Fathers will that he should lose nothing of
what is given him, but takes it up at the last day, and gives it life eternal.
Mark, it is not no man, but no thing of any of them given him, the body that
did run, and act, and speak in his service, he casts it not off at death, as
ane unprofitable old Servant, but looks after it, even though the bodies should
be given to be food to the fowls of Heaven.

Secondly, This burial of Moses was so secret, as no man knew of it; the common
and indeed the true reason was, to prevent superstition, which readily Israel
would have fallen into, with these precious relicts. If the Lord ever had
intended such a high esteem of the relicts of the Saints, as some press, he had
never concealed the body of Moses: We have reason to praise, that we are not
intoxicat with the poison of those who adore the creature more then the
Creator, and delude the World with the forgeries of relicts, which, though
true, as they are not, yet ought not to be committed Idolatry with; the Lord
did here, as a wise parcht, take the knyfe out of the child's hand, least he
should cut his fingers with it.

Lastly, This Moses, though none knew what became of his body, nor where it was
laid, yet we find him afterward appearing glorious on mount Tabor, at the
transfiguration. It is in effect no matter what become of our bodies after
death, since the Saints may be assured, one day to appear and be like his
glorious body, let Philosophers debeat where are they that are eaten by fish,
and these fish eaten by men, and the bodies of these men turned into grass,
and that grass eaten by beasts, etc. though we can no more tell what is become
of them, nor Israel could tell what became of the body of Moses, it is
comfortable enough, he will make them like his glorious body, by the mighty
power, whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself. This much for the
things particularly observable in Moses death.

We come now in the second place, to speak of death, as a lot from which the
most eminent servants cannot expect to be exeemed.

Observation, That there are none, how eminent soever, in parts, holiness, or
communion with God, can expect to be exeemed from death.

Eminent was Moses in all these, yet Moses is dead; yea, see through all the
Scripture from Adam to Christ, Enoch and Elijah excepted, whose extraordinare
translation supplied vicem mortis, who are exeemed from it. Neither need we
insist on the reasons of this, since it is decreed for all, It is appointed for
all men once to die, and after death, to come to judgment. Yea 2dly, All are
interested in Adams sin, and so liable to the punishment of it, which in part
is temporal death. 3dly, Actual sin influences this, the wages whereof is
death. It is among the errors of Socinians to say, death is only a natural
fruit of the constitution of the body. It is true, it does indeed naturally
follow on it, but man being immortalized by Covenant before the fall, the loss
of that privilege makes death to him a punishment and the wages of sin, as the
Apostle, Romans 6: last. words it.

That which I shall insist a little on, is, to answer this Question, Why Christ
has not restored his Saints to ane exemption from death, which by Adam's fall
they have forfaulted? Answer, Though Christ has not done this, yet he has
done so much in reference to it, that the Apostle is not afraid, to say, he
has abolished death, and, brought life and immortality to light, by the
Gospel. We shall therefore insist a little in opening the differences betwixt
the death of the Saints through Christ, and the death of others.

There be especially this threefold difference betwixt them. 1. In respect of
the persons dying. 2dly, In respect of death it self. 3dly, In respect of the
consequences of it. This Balaam observed, when he said, Let my end be as their
end.

First, In regard of the persons dying, the difference is great, especially in
these three:

1st, The Servants of God, though they die, yet they die in Christ, Revel. 14: v.
13. Blessed are they that die in the Lord: As they believed in the Lord, and
walked in the Lord, and rejoiced in the Lord, so they die in the Lord; death
does not loose their union; not so with others.

2dly, They die in faith, All these die in faith, Heb. 11. having a good report;
they die in faith for themselves, for the Church of God, for their relations,
and in the faith of whatever promised: not so others.

3dly, They die in obedience; as Christ was obedient to the death, so their
very death is an act of obedience, Go up to mount Nebo and die, the doing
whereof was obedience, as well as go down to Egypt, go in to Pharaoh, or
such like commands as Moses obeyed. Not so others, their soul is taken from
them.

Secondly, The difference is great in regard of death itself. Mark especially
these.

First, Though the thing be a curse in it self, it is a blessing to the man,
Blessed are they that die in the Lord; the curse is not only removed, but
converted, it is now a privilege, 1 Cor. 3: last. All things are yours, and ye
are Christ's, whither things present, or things to come, death or life. Here
death is theirs who are Christ's, as a Servant is his Masters, Death is yours,
and ye are Christ's.

2dly, The sting of death is removed, 1 Cor. 15:55. It is now as a be that
cannot sting, 2 Cor. 9:21. It may well bumb, and make a noise, but sin and the
hurtful sting of it, is removed. It is not so with others: the sting and all
remains.

3dly, The dominion of it is removed, Romans 5:14. there are some, Psalm. 49. that
death shall have dominion over; not so in the Saints, Prevail it may, as they
have prevailing sins, which are not reigning, so also death, which is not
ringing: Now he that removes these three, may he not be said to have abolished
death?

Thirdly, The difference greatest of all is in regard of the consequences of
death. Where, 1. consider from what death liberates the Saints. 2. To what by
it they are advanced,

1st, They are taken away from the evil to come, Esaias. 57:1. As Methusaleh was
taken away before the flood: They are taken away from the vexations of Spirit
at the sins of others, from the polutions they would be in danger of readily
from the persecution and oppression to come.

2dly, By death they are delivered from the tentations of Satan. Grace here
may influence their not yielding to those tentations, but it cannot deliver
them from the tentation itself. On the contrary, if they are holy, the more
like they are to be tempted. Christ, Job, Asaph, and such like, most tempted;
Not so others.

3dly, They are removed and delivered from the being of sin; the Dominion of it
is indeed removed in sanctification, but now the being. And what a privilege
is that?

Secondly, Consider to what they are advanced by it; to count which by
particulars is impossible, the exellency of it is so great, being that which
ear has not heard, eye has not seen, nor can it enter into the heart of man
to consider. From all which it is evident, that though Christ has not exeemed
a Moses from death altogether, yet there is such a difference betwixt their
death and other's, that in some considerable sense, he may be said to have
abolished death.

I shall not insist in applying so frequently pressed a point; only, since it
is the common lot of all men, let all prepare for it. Our whole life is a
scoole wherein we should be learning to die. It is an eminent act of wisdom,
O that they were wise to consider their latter end! Even in our garden amongst
our greatest pleasures, we should be walking beside our grave, like Joseph of
Arimathea. So live, Christian, as thou go not out like a candle, that leaves
ane ill smell behind it.

FINIS.
SERMONS.
SERMON I. Romans 2:22. Thou that say a man should not commit adultery, do
hou commit adultery? Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege?
Page 1. SERMON II. Ephesians. 5:25. Husbands, love your Wives, even as Christ also
loved the Church, and gave himself for it. Page 21. SERMON III. Jonah 1:6. So
the Shipmaster came to him, and said unto him, What meanest thou, O Sleeper?
Arise, call upon thy God, etc. Page 40. SERMON IV. John 3:29. He that has the
Bride is the Bridegroom, etc. Page 58. SERMON V. Isai. 45:24. Surely shall one
say, In the Lord have I righteousness and strength, etc. Page 77. SERMON VI,
VII. Heb. 12:1. Wherefore seeing we are also compassed about with so great a
cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so
easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us.
Page 97. and 115. SERMON VIII. Matthew. 5:20. For I say unto you, that except
your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Page 133. SERMON IX. Acts
26:28. Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Almost thou perswadest me to be a
Christian. Page 152. SERMON X. Genesis 22:1. And it came to pass after these
things, that God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him, Abraham; And he said,
Behold, here I am. Page 172. SERMON XI, XII. Josua 1. v. 2. Moses my Servant is
dead. Page 192. and 209.
Courteous READER.
SOme few faults have escaped the Press, yet such as, it is hoped, will not mar
the sense to the considering Reader. Thy favorable acceptance of this first
Part, will procure the speedy publishing of some others.

Farewell.

