A SERMON Preached in the High Church OF EDINBURGH, At The ELECTION Of the
MAGISTRATES of the CITY.

On the 2d of October. 1694.

By JAMES WEBSTER, Minister of the GOSPEL.

EDINBURGH. Printed by George Mosman, and are to be Sold at his Shope in the
Parliament Closs. 1694.

Psalm 101, verse 1. 2. I will sing of Mercy and Judgment -- O when will thou
come unto me?
THE best, and most perfect model of Government ever obtained in the World, the
Jews enjoyed under their Judges; It being indeed a pure Theocracy; God himself
was their political Head and King, and (as it were) their Supreme Magistrate,
both Sacred and profane History, bear witness to this: In Him were Lodged all
the Prerogatives Royal, all the Rights of Majesty; He gave them their Laws
immediately from Heaven, went forth before their Armies, fought their Battles,
appointed their Rulers, Deputies under him, and exacted from them Tribute.
Briefly after a narrative of his Glorious Appearances, and mighty Works for
them, and of their deep Obligations to him; He Offers, and they accept of him
to be their King, And by a mutual Covenant they bind themselves one to another.

But His stupid People, ignorant of their true interest, and weary of their
Happiness, shake off the yoke of God, and exchange it for man's, call to Samuel
to give them a King; And by no means would be diverted from their Rebellion and
Treason; Having ('it is likely) a design at once to change their God and their
King, to throw off their Religion and their Allegiance together. However, in
Anger they have their desire, They get a King who lived Wicked and died
Miserable. To him does our Psalmist succeed, according to a promise the Lord
had given him; And betwixt the promise and its accomplishment, (as some think)
or immediately afte the accomplishment (as others) he composes this Psalm, where
he comes under solemn Engagements and Vows, not to abuse his power as Saul had
done; but to employ and manage it for God I Will sing etc.

The Psalm is one contiuued chain of David's Resolutions to Govern for the
Lord; And in our Text, he promises to have a particular regard to Righteousness
and Mercy, the two Great Virtues of a Ruler, and the two Great Pillars of a
Government: This Mercy is a Generous Compassion, inclining Rulers, to Observe,
Countenance, Hearken to, Judge and Reward, the Good, the Innocent, and the
Oppressed: He binds and obliges himself to this so necessary a Work. The
melancholy scene, and the great variety of Miseries people groan under, should
invite the Rulers Pity, Draw out his Bowels, and open his Eyes, his Heart and
Hand to their Relief: This is his proper Province; This is the Original Design
of Government. Mercy is not (as the Disciples of Zeno thought) a weakness of
Soul, a litleness and meanness of Spirit, and a downright Vice: No, Our
Psalmist puts a just value on it, and Vows it shall have a fixed residence, and
constant Lodging in his Royal and Religious Breast.

But least this compassion (to which (as is well observed by some) we are by
nature swayed, and by the very make and constitution of our Body prompted and
inclined) should by carrying us too far, degenerat, and bound into a vice, he
in great wisdom and discretion, Resolves to temper it with a mixture of
Justice, by discountenancing, punishing, and being terrible to Evil doers. I Will
sing of Judgment.

Magistrates at all times (especially now when Wickedness takes strength from
Forbearance and Indemnity, enboldens offenders, and the Government is in danger
of sinking under its own Mildness) should be Sons of Thunder, and imitat him
whose Ministers they are, who both gave his Laws, and Executes them in all
circumstances of Terror: Some difference is to be made betwixt Moses Rod and
Aaron's; This (to speak so) is silently Fruitful, without all noise and
observation, sends forth its Buds, Blossoms and Fruit: But that turns unto a
Serpent, Hisses, and stings unto Death. No sooner did Constantin (once an
Inhabitant of this Island) mount the Imperial Throne, then he sung of Mercy to
the Harassed and perlecuted Christians, and of Justice to the Pagan Idolaters,
to them he speaks in Lightning and Thunder, and is so severe and terrible unto
them, that its Prophecy Rev 6. is easily mistaken for a description of the last
Judgment.

David, to demonstrat the natural Delight, himself, and all Rulers should have
in a well tempered Government, sings his obligations and engagements to it, with
a Joyful emotion of Spirit, Voweth, when God shall come to him (as the words
may be read) i. e. (as Interpreters say) when he shall be King, To sway, and
weild his Scepter for the glory of God, and the good of his People. And whereas
he Promises, Then to execut justice and Mercy, it is not to be understood as if
he had neglected the same in his private station; But that when in power he will
be in a more public and better capacity to do it.

There is one textual difficulty to be removed, e're I go farther: Why does his
coming to the Throne go under the phrase of God's coming to him? we must
remember, he had God's promise of the Kingdom; and in Scripture, God is said to
come unto Men; when he accomplisheth his promise, and bestows any singulat
blessing on them. But more particulary to persons invested with civil power,
God's word of commission comes Psalm. 82. 6. I have said, ye are Gods, He speaks
to them, and with this Creating Word, confers upon them Power: The Serpent
flattered us with a Promise that we should be Gods, but the Lord does really
make some Men Gods The word of God mentioned John 10. 34. according to the best
Interpreters, is the divine warrant and commission to be Magistrates; For the
office and power is from God though handed down and conveyed by Men, and upon
that score called by the Apostle Peter an humane Ordinance. Farther as soon as
Men are clothed with Authority, God comes to them, and gives them another
Heart and a large measure of necessary and suitable gifts, by a plentiful
effusion of his Spirit, breaths into them noble Dispositions; which, together
with a Call from Men, are Heaven's credential Letters, that prepare their
Reception, and command obedience and submission from the people. And in fine by
phrasing it thus, the Psalmist, condemns all unjust practicing to get into
power, for though having been anointed by the Lords express Command, he had an
undoubted Title to the Succession, he has not the Ambition to shuffle his
Anointed Head under the Crown, till God by the vote of such as had right to
give it, comes and puts it on, which he knows, will make it to sit the surer,
and shine the brighter.

The proposition that lies before us, and is the scope of the words, is,
Persons in Authority should manage their Government with an equal mixture of
Mercy and Justice. A Government well tempered with them two, should be the
Magistrates delight Job 29 from 14 to 18. I put on Righteousness, and it
clothed me: my Judgment was a Rob and a Diadem. I was eyes to the Blind, and
feet was I to the Lame. I was a Father to the poor: and the cause which I knew
not, I searcbed out. And I brake the Jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil
out of his teeth. It appears from the History, Job was not only a Good Man, and
a Good Citizen, but a good Magistrate, and he answers this Character, by his
sincere Love to Justice and Mercy, like a Good Ruler, he makes the Impartial
Administration of Justice his chief Business and delight, his Ornament and
Glory, it is better in his account, than a Diadem and Robs, and indeed, one
single Act of Justice, is of far greater value than those; which without it,
are mere pageantry: A good Ruler puts on Righteousness in the Morning, wears it
all the day; and on the bench wraps it so closely about him, that no Temptation
can blow it aside. From the forcited place, it is evident, that Job has no less
regard to the Exercise of Mercy, I was eyes to the blind etc. Micah 6. God
reckons the Exercise of Justice and Mercy, the whole of our obedience, and
prefers it before Ten thousand Rivers of Oil and Romans 13, 4. the two very
different setts of Men, There, make the Exercise of Mercy and Justice equally
necessary, For he is the Minister of God to thee for good: But if thou do that
which is evil, be afraid for he bears not the Sword in vain: For he is the
Minister of God, a Revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil.

I shall follow forth this Head, First by taking a separate view of Mercy and
Justice, the two essential parts of a well managed Government. 2. Consider them
in Conjunction, as giving mutual help and support one to another. 3.
Demonstrat, that in all public Administrations, Magistrates should have a
particular regard to them. 4. Bring home all to practice.

As to the first, I shall begin with Mercy, not only because our Psalmist does
so, but because this sweet and gentle method, all Magistrates should observe:
Drawing the Sword is the last remedy, and never to be used, save in Extremity,
when all other ways prove uneffectual, and nothing else can serve the turn. God
himself Reckons Justice his Strange Work, a foreign part of his Providence,
and which he never works till constrained, and even then with some aversion:
Mercy is God's Darling and triumphant Attribute, the immediate offspring of his
nature, but for this divine affection, the World long since had fallen about
our ears: Mercy challenges the present scene as its own; And the conclusion of
time is almost All that is reserved for Justice?

The Mercy of Rulers ought to be a copy of that wondrous Compassion God showed
to a destroyed World, and as far as possible, an exact Transcript of that Grand
exemplar, and consists 1, In their protecting and defending the Innocent from
all unjust violence and oppression. They are by sacred Writters styled Gods,
and by both sacred and profane Fathers, for the great tenderness they should
Exercise toward their people that are their Children and creatures; A Cruel
Father, is an Unnatural, and a Cruel God is a Monstrous thing. Magistrates are
appointed to be Cities of Refuge, where the oppressed may take Sanctuary, and
therefore should be all Eye to spy out the peoples Burdens, all Ear to hear
their Complaints, and all Hands to relieve them, and avenge them of their
Adversaries. The Unjust Judge in the Gospel, is not branded with any wrongful
Sentence or Act of Unjustice, but with want of a Merciful Disposition, he had
not Bowels enough toward the injured Widow, who makes many a vain Journey to
his Lodgings.

This mercy, in the second place, is much concerned in regulating the Execution
of the Laws on Offenders; Magistrates may not go to the utmost rigor against
them, some considerration would be had of the disadvantageous circumstances
mankind labors under: Humane Frailties and Infirmities, Surprises and
ignorance, plead strong for some abatement and moderation; else the best and
wisest Law givers cannot so frame their Laws, as that a strict and rigourous
Execution of them, shall not be an unsupportable severity; for the highest act
of Justice, is a kind of unjustice; and it were hard to urge the letter of the
Law too far, when neither the intention of the Lawgiver, nor common Equity
(the standard of all Laws) are violated: and where the cause is doubtful they
should incline to mercy as the safer side; for better spare ten Guilty, then
destroy one Innocent; of the injury done the latter, no reparation can be made,
the fault can not be mended; but though the other may for some time fly from
the hand of justice, Vengeance will not suffer them always to escape. It Is
somewhat strange what is storied of a sentence of the Areopagi, the great court
of Athens, before whom a Lady was arraigned, and accused for killing her
Husband and Son, because they had killed a Son of hers by another Husband: the
Judges ordered her and her Accuser to appear before them, some hundred of years
after, declaring thereby, they would not absolve, and could not condemn her,
but leave the determination of the cause to the gods.

I come now to the Second, the Exercise of justice, the Magistrates wears not
God's Sword in vain, but to Manage and weild it as God himself Would, were he
on the earth.

A Godly Ruler Proposes to himself the best and most Excellent Laws, by which
he is to Govern, and takes up a fixed resolution, never to swerve from, nor do
any thing that is contrary or disagreable to them, Yea, in the smallest
circumstances, and on all Ocasions to exercise Justice, without being diverted
from the same, by any temptation, of promises or threats, or nearness of
relation; Justice is Blind, and has no regard to these foreign
considerations, but only to the merit of the cause.

Rulers are under the greatest obligation to this, whither we consider their
relation to God, or to the Law, or to the People: As to the first, They are the
Ministers of a righteous God who loves, and delights in Righteousness: to do
Judgment, is more to him, than all Sacrifices and whole Burnt-Offerings:
These, without That, are unprofitable, unacceptable and an abomination, Isa. 1,
11, 12, 13, 17. These Solemn and August Ordinances, though Commanded and
Rewarded by the Lord, yet when divorced and separated from Justice, are but
bright Sins in his account: He puts upon them a Slight, as solemn as their
Institution, Who required those things at your hands? The practice of Rulers
should have a conformity to the eternal Law of Righteousness; For the Power,
the Bench, the Judgment, are the Lord's, and must not be made Tools and
Weapons of Unrighteousness, this were to profane the most sacred Things,

They are likewise appointed to be the Guardians of the Laws, trusted with the
keeping and execution of them: They should be a living Law: The best Laws
without Execution are a dead Letter, they want edge: The Law must take special
hold of Persons guilty of gross Immoralities and Disorders, unsupportable to
any Government, such Disturbers of human Society, have need to be mortified;
For they are a Scandal to Christianity, a Reproach of Mankind, and draw down
Judgments on themselves and others: Compassion to the Innocent makes the
Punishment of others sometimes necessary; and the Perverseness of some Men
accents the Song of Judgment against them.

Lastly, Their relation to the People (who have lodged in them all exercise of
Power) is a strong Bond: They have trusted them with all their most precious
Things, their Estates, their Liberties, their Lives, and, which is to them
dearest of all, their Religion: Now, to betray under Trust, those unvalueable
Privileges, were an unpardonable Treachery.

We come now to the Second Thing proposed, the consideration of the Two, in
conjunction, and First, They make the Magistrate the lively Image of God, who is
both Merciful and Just, those Two Divine Attributes have their different
Actings on their proper Objects, without doing prejudice one to another, and in
the Proclamation God makes of himself to Moses, Mercy is the first, and Justice
the last part of his Name. Besides, his two eternal Decrees concerning Man's
final state, are commonly thought Acts of the highest Mercy and Justice, Romans 9
18. And farther his glorious Providence, shine bright with a wise mixture of
them: In every Dispensation, Mercy and Justice kiss each one other. Such an
Administration, is also an Enblem of the Great and General Judgment, which God
has designed for the Manifestation of his Mercy and Justice. Secondly, The
double Title of Father and Ruler, of God and Judge, the Magistrate wears, is to
be considered; The one Designation, is as full of Pity, as the other is of
Terror. Thirdly, They are a counterpart of, and fitly answer the two essential
Pieces of Sanctification, Love to Good, and hatred of Evil. Fourthly, By a
Government so qualified, God does in a manner, make straight that which seemed
crooked: What is wanting in immediate Providence, with respect to the Evil and
the Good, is here supplied: so that the Atheist has no reason to talk so much
of prosperous Wickedness, and oppressed Innocence.

In the Third place, I come to show, That it is very necessary and reasonable,
that Persons in Authority should in all their public Administrations, mingle
Mercy and Justice together, and here I shall confine my self to one main
Topic, as most proper for the Day, namely, The mighty and universal Influence
such a Government has on the public Happiness and Prosperity of human Society,
Prove. 14. 34. Righteousness exalts a Nation: Two things prove this, 1. The
Justice of the Divine Dr. Tillit Sermon.
Providence. Indeed as to particular Persons, the Providence of God are many
times promiscuously administered in this World; so that no Man can certainly
conclude God's Love or Hatred to any person, by any thing that befalls him in
this Life. But God does not deal thus with Nations; because Public Bodies and
Communities of Men, as such, can only be rewarded and punished in this World:
For in the next, all those public Societies and Combinations, wherein Men are
now linked together, under several Governments, shall be dissolved. God will
not then reward or punish Nations, as Nations. And a little after In the usual
Course of his Providence, he recompenseth Religious and Virtuous Nations, with
temporal Blessings and Prosperity. For which Reason Austin tells us, That the
mighty Success and long prosperity of the Romans, was a Reward given them by
God for their eminent Justice. -- This the Scripture declares to be the settled
Course of God's Providence; That a Righteous Nation shall be Happy, The work of
Righteousness shall be Peace, and the effects of Righteousness, Quietness and
Assurance for ever. Thus far the Learned Primate.

2. Their joint exercise, does in its own nature conduce to the public
interest. When Rulers do checker their Administrations with Mercy and Justice,
this tends to make men live together in Peace; and like a Cement to the Common
Wealth, unites and holds all fast together. There cannot be a more certain
presage of a declining State, than dissolution of manners, through the neglect
of Mercy and Justice.

But to come a little nearer, an equal mixture of Mercy and Justice, does by
ballancing the procedure of Rulers, prevent all the evil consequences of bad
Administration, For, as on the one hand, an effeminat Pity and undiscreet
Compassion makes both the Laws and Authority to be trampled on; so, on the
other hand, unmixed wrath turns men desperate, and we cannot tell what men
driven to extremity may do.

But let us yet take a nearer view and prospect of the matter, and we shall
observe how admirably the two are adjusted to the two great governing passions
of man, Hope and fear, that are as the helm of Societies; a well tempered
Government, by taking hold of Them, constrains men to Good, and restrains from
evil. Some Petsons are of a Good and Generous disposition; such are a proper
province for Mercy to gain; they must be drawn with Cords of a man, and bands
of Love; Others have a more ackward temper, and tempt the Ruler to instruct
them, as Gideon did the men of Succoth with Briers and Thorns. In fine, the
great variety of Peoples conditions and manners, and their different
circumstances, call for different treatment to some, the Melancholy tune of
Justice must be Sung, Others must be comforted with the calm and still voice of
Mercy.

I come now in the last place, to make some improvement of what is said, by
bringing it home to the business of the Day. And I beg liberty to address my
selt to those Honorable Persons, who had the Government of the City this last
year, and are now to lay down the Staff, and commit their power to Others. I
trust that ye with respect to your public management, have the approbation of
Heaven and the Testimony of your own Consciences, and honor from men, and, to
use our Psalmists Phrase, since God came to you, he has been ever with you, and
ye have walked with him, and been Just ruling in the fear of God, and as the
light of the Morning, when the Sun rises, as a morning without Clouds, as the
tender Grass springing out of the Earth, by clear shining after Ram, ye are
under the deepest Obligations, to preserve the power in its proper subject, by
handing it down to Faithful men; for ye are the Image of God, as ye are men, as
Christians, as Magistrates, and as Ministers of Mercy and Justice to the People,
look therefore that the Persons ye Elect this day, have the Qualifications
required in a good Ruler, Exodus, 18, 21. Moreover thou shall provide out of all
the People, able men, such as fear God, men of Truth hating Covetousness, and
place such over them to be Rulers, etc. Let this Text serve as an Authentic
Directory to your present Work, for, without a due observance of it in your
Election, there will be an utter neglect of Mercy and Justice. Ye are to choose
Men of great abilities of mind, Persons of good Judgment and prudence.
Magistrates should be wise as an Angel of God, of a discerning Spirit, and vast
comprehension; they are likewise to be such as fear God; Religion in a
Magistrate, (as one well says) strengthens his Authority, because it procures
veneration, and gains reputation to it, and in all the Affairs of the World, so
much reputation is really, so much power. The Magistrate must have the Greatness
of God, and the deformity of vice, and the condition, of the People full in his
Eye, which he cannot have, If his heart be not possessed with awful
impressions, and a lively sense of the Divine Majesty. This Holy and Religious
fear, serves as a powerful restraint on men's Natures, and makes them
invincible, though assaulted with the great temptations that accompany their
Office. They are also to countenance and encourage Religion by their good
example, The lewd practice of a Ruler (as one says) is very infectious, makes
a thousand fall at his side, and ten thousand at his right hand. The best of
men are in danger to turn a little worse by promotion, and how much Religion
soever they carry to the Bench, it will be sound little enough when it comes
there. Ye must likewise look out for men that are lovers of truth, Judges ought
to make a Critical Search, an exact and diligent inquiry after Truth, The Cause
I knew not, says Job, I searched out; They should copy after our Lord, who
judged not by the appearance of the eye. They must not be imposed upon, nor
abused by an artful representation, and cunning disguise of matters, and
guilding of falsehood with a fair show of Truth. And to complete the Character
of men fit to be chosen, they must be haters of Covetousness. i. e. Not only
innocent of, but full of aversion to that base Vice; it was the Emperout
Hadrian's common proverb, I am to enrich the People, nor my self and a saying
of Ptolmeus, the Riches of my subjects are my plenty. Its fit that Magistrars
have a flourishing and plentiful fortune, that in dispensing of justice, they
may have a single regard to the public interest, and no mercenary respect to
their own. And above all, they are to have a perfect indignation at that gross
perverter of all Justice, Bribery, Judges were wont to be pictured without
hands. To shut up this exhortation, see ye manage your Election with all
possible sincerity, consider ye are a Congregation of Gods, and the supreme God
is among you, observing and recording all your ways, and weighing your Designs,
and penetrating into the most inward and hidden Springs of your Actions; In the
midst of you, ^iff^sing his influences as the Center of your happiness.

In the second place, I have a word to you, to whom God shall come this day,
Take on David's vows, to sing of Mercy and Judgment; This has been God's way
with you, let it be your way with the people. Know, that though you be Gods on
Earth, ye are Subjects of Heaven, and accountable to Him that is Higher than
the Highest. Suffer me to give you a few Directions 1. Exercise Mercy and
Justice with Christian Courage, In the Lords cause be bold as a Lion; let
difficulties only serve to whett your Resolutions, kindle your Zeal, and be a
Spur to your endeavors. Solomon's Throne of Judgment was supported by Lions,
an emblem of Courage. The Cowardice of sorry Peasants is altogether unworthy
of your Character. He deserves not to wear God's Sword that has not a Heart to
draw it, put an entire confidence in the divine protection, and fear nothing.
Know, that Providence Exercises a peculiar care over Magistrates in the
practice and obedience of their Duty? He is with you in Judgment: Ye are
fenced and railed about with his Infinite wisdom, Almighty Power, and
unchangeable Faithfulness; Trust God for once, and be Jealous for him; Breath
Life into the laguishing Laws, by Executing them on Notorious Offenders; say to
the mighty, list not up the Horn, rise up for God against evil doers. Many
disorders abound in the City, make it your business to drain that deluge of
Impiety, that has over run it; Sin unpunished, blows up a Government; `tis
therefore your Wisdom, Interest and Duty, by the due execution of Justice to
prevent it. 2. Ye must do it speedily, this seems to be the Dictat of Nature,
Ezra. 7. 26. Slow paced Justice, is the next degree to Unjustice: And
unnecessary Delay in giving of Judgment is a great Grievance. 3. Yet ye would
act with great deliberation, which serves as a Check upon the former. Hasty and
rash Judgment is a most dangerous thing. An Omniscient God will not punish a
Sodom. though their Wickedness was notoriously known, till he first bring them
to a Trial The Ruler is to have two Ears to hear both Parties It was an
ingenious Check Machetas gave Philip of Macedon, for giving rash Judgment
against him, the King having slumbred all the while the Case was a pleading:
Machetas, at the giving of the Sentence, with a loud Voice, called out, I
Appeal, at which Philip being surprised, demanded, To whom, To yourself Sir,
said he, when you are well awake.

I conclude all with a serious Advice to the Magistrates and the People, to
Read, and Consider well that 13 Romans, where we have the true Measures of the
People Submission, and the Rulers Power.

FINIS.
At this time were Elected Magistrates, THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT CHEISLY,
Lord Provost,

John Robertson, George Hume, Archibald Rule, Adam Broun. Baillies.

Hugh Blair, Dean of Gild.

Patrick Thomson, Thesaurer.


