A WARNIING To all such who are making a PROFESSION OF God, Christ, AND THE
SCRIPTURES, And yet are in their blind zeal, Persecuting of those who are in
the Life of what they in words Profess.
By Christian Web.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1659.

I Being moved of the Lord, seeing the lark of so thick over the face of the
whole Earth, to declare unto you who having a Form of godliness and denying the
Power, who live in the shadows and have not the Substance, that you come to
that which ends all shadows, that is Christ Jesus the light which do shine
through the darkness, now you who are estranged from the light in your own
particulars, you have lost the sense and leading of Gods Spirit which would
bring you again into the right way if you would turn to that which checks for
sin and evil, that is the light Christ Jesus, but you who are making clean of
the outside as the Pharisees did, and inwardly full of all uncleanness, being
ignorant of Gods Righteousness, you go about to establish your own
righteousness, therefore are you warned of the Lord that you turn to the light
in your own particulars, that as you come to be obedient unto it in your selves
you will feel it to expel the darkness; for verily you are groping in the dark
night of Apostasy, and are gone from the true guide in your own selves, being
out of the knowledge of God you are seeking the living among the dead, for you
are seeking the Lord in your dead performances, and so you are feeding upon the
Swines food, now Christ Jesus does feed his Children with the hidden Manna
which is hidden from the wise and prudent of this world, and are revealed unto
the heirs of Gods Kingdom: Oh! you Professors, the Lord God have a tenderness
toward his own seed in you which lies groaning for deliverance in many of you,
as he had over Jerusalem in times past, therefore in the fear of the Lord that
you turn from the evil of your ways and turn to Christ the light in your own
Consciences, which reproves for every secret thought, and every secret motion
that comes from the corrupt mind; now all that will be heirs of Gods Kingdom
must feel something break forth in them which have been captivated by the enemy
of the Souls Peace; now you who are in the first Nature, and knows not the
second Birth which changes that Nature, you cannot be partakers of the Mystery
of Gods Kingdom; for the Kingdom of God stands not in outward Observations, as
Lo here, or lo there, but the Kingdom of our God is within; Now you who are
gazing out into the visible things without, you lose the sight of the
invisible; you who are talking of the Prophets words, and the Apostles words,
and out of that life they lived in that gave forth the Scriptures in them, that
will stand you in no stead when the Lord shall come to require his own amongst
you, and to separate the Sheep from the Goats; now you are to know that which
makes the separation, that separates the good thoughts from the bad, and the
good words from the bad, you are to come to Gods witness in your selves; Now
you outside Professors who are looking for something without you to save you,
and imagining of a God, afar off from you in your vain minds, and will not turn
to the light in your own particulars which makes manifest sin and evil,
therefore ye are ignorantly worshipping the Lord, putting for the Doctrine of
Christ the Traditions of men, and striving about Mint, Annis, and Commin, and
neglecting the weightier matters which is to love Mercy, to do justly, and to
walk humbly with the Lord; now all are to come to the light, and by it to try
what you are a doing, whether you are a serving of God or not serving of him,
bring your deeds to the light, Professors, and see whether the Lord will be
pleased with your out-side-services; No, no, the Lord loves Truth in the
inward parts, it is not lip-service that will please the Lord, it is the heart
that the Lord requires of you; See now you vain Professors how far you are
from giving God your heart when you are in the persecuting Nature which
persecutes the Servants of the Lord under a pretense of doing God service,
whose example do you follow, do you not follow the Jews who were Professors as
well as you, and had the Law and the Writings of the Prophets, and the outward
Observations, their now Moons and their Sabbath-Dayes, and their Fast-Dayes,
and were they not looking for Christ without them as you do, and did not they
put the Lord to death, and persecute his Servants, and hale them out of their
Synagogues, and had them before Magistrates as you do now? was this the
practice of the Servants of the Lord? when they were reviled they reviled not
again; know you not that Christ could pray to his Father for ten Legions of
Angels to withstand that power in them, but then their hypocrisy could not be
so clearly seen, neither could the scriptures be fulfilled; now these things
must come to pass, but woe be to you that do them, you are known by your Fruits
what Trees you are, a corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit; the Lord is
come and coming to cry all Nations of them that serve him and them that serve
him not, and to cast dung upon the faces of all the proud and lofty ones of the
Earth, for the Lord says in the Scriptures of Truth, That he will look upon
all the lofty and abase them, for the day of the Lord is coming that will burn
as an Oven, and all the proud, and all that work wickedness shall be as stubble
before him, when the Lord shall come and terribly shake the Earth, then that
which is not of his own planting shall be rooted up: Now know all you scoffers
and mockers that are mocking at the Truth and calling Quakers scornfully in
your vain mind, that so exceeding terrible was the sight that Moses the Servant
of the Lord saw, that he exceedingly feared and Quaked; now you who are in the
fallen estate, and have not seen the righteous Judgments of the Lord to shake
terribly the earthly Foundations, yea, and your heavenly too; it is evident
that you have not seen the light which makes manifest the darkness; now
therefore come to the light that make manifest sin and evil, you that know not
the Lord in his righteous Judgments, all that which you have gotten in the
imaginations, imagining of something like God, how vain are you taling of God
with your lips, and worshipping of him with your outside, and know him not to
be your guide; Therefore come out of your sins you vain Professors, do you
think that God will be pleased with your hypocritical services; Why do you not
search the Scriptures as the noble Bareans did, who the Apostle called Noble,
for that they searched the Scriptures to know whether that which the Servants
of the Lord spoke forth was according to the Scriptures yea or no; but the god
of this world has so blinded your eyes that you cannot behold the true light;
Now you Professors what Change is wrought in you, do you not run wiht the
multitude to do evil, do you not call them forth to help you to carry the
servants of the Lord where you will in your blind and ignorant zeal, will not
the Lord be avenged of such Professors as these? Yes surely, this was not the
Practices of the Lords People; but you say, you stand for Gods Cause when you
persecute them that live in Gods fear: Oh! you blind leaders of the blind, know
you not that the Lord will have none of your blinde-services, the Lord have no
need of your Carnal weapons to fight in his cause, nor your carnal profession
neither, for the Lord has a Sword to cut down, and a Fire to burn up all that
stubble that you in your imaginations are building; Therefore be warned all you
professors of England that are worshipping of a God afar off, somewhere without
you, but where you cannot tell, that you turn to Gods witness in your selves,
that will let you see who you are following, if you will be obedient to it, you
must take up that great ordinance which you are strangers to, even the daily
Cross and self-denial, the Cross of Christ Jesus and follow him; Now that which
crosses thy vain mind, and teaches thee to deny thy self, to that you must be
obedient, now the Cross of Christ to the Worldly wise is foolishness, but to
them that believe it is the Power of God to the saving of their souls; In the
fear of the Lord God am I moved to declare unto you, who say, that we tell you
of a Light within you, but you say, you hope to be saved by Christ that was
crucified at Jerusalem without you, which truth we own, and verily believe that
Christ Jesus was crucified without the gates at Jerusalem, and that he suffered
under Pontius Pilate, and that he was dead and buried, and rose again the third
day from the dead, and that he likewise suffered in Sodom and Egypt, but what
is this to you that has but heard of his fame, and have neither heard his
voice nor seen his shape? Now that which is to be known of Christ is manifested
within; now you that have put the Lord to death, and slain the just principle
of God in your selves by reason of sin and iniquity, this Testimony do I bear
for the Lord, that sorrow and great lamentation must come upon the head of the
transgressor before the ransomed of the Lord can be witnessed, you must all
come to feel that crucified in you that have crucified the just, before you can
have fellowship with the Father or with the Son Jesus Christ, you must feel the
Lord to strike the Rock, that a cleansing you may know in your selves, before
you can be refreshed with the pure refreshments that comes from the Fountain
of Living Waters; I say in the fear of the Lord that you must come to know a
cleansing in your own particulars, that that may be cleansed out which have
been gathered in the corrupt mind; You who live in sin and iniquity, and have
not felt the movings of Gods Spirit to cleanse, you have corrupted your ways,
and the Lord can take no delight in any thing which is not of his own
begetting; Therefore all turn to that which begets to Gods, the Light Christ,
and know that to be a Light to your feet, and a Lanthorn to your paths; now
that which sets free from sin is Light, God sent his Son into the World, that
whosoever believed in him should not perish but should have the Light of Life;
now Christ Gods gift sets free from the bondage of corruption; Now that the Law
could not do, by reason of the weakness and unprofitablenesse thereof, now the
Lord sent his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemning sin
in the flesh, that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in them that
believe, now all to feel the tender Plant that is of the Lords own planting to
grow and bud forth in the earth, that pure tender plant that lies low in you,
like a little grain of Mustard Seed under earth, the Plant lies low in the
earth, the ground must be opened and dug about it, and that taken away which
do hinder the growth of it before it can fructify and spring forth, you must
come to feel Gods tender Plant that he has planted in you to spring, that
which stands a witness in you against all your ungodly ways, this must you
all come to feel and know in your own particulars; Now in love to the Seed am I
constrained to declare that which my eyes have seen, and my ears heard, and my
hands handled, and I have tasted of the good word of God in measure according
to the manifestation of his powerful working in me.

Now you who are looking to the Mountains to cover you, and the Halls to
overshadow you, all in vain, for the Lord is making bare his own arm, and he is
riding Triumphantly to turn, and overturn, overturn, till he come whose right
it is to reign, and he will give it him.

Now all you Rulers and Governors of the earth, who are Ruling and Governing
in your wills, the word of the Lord God is to you, that you run not before the
Lord in your own wills, but you are to stand still and wait to be guided by
Gods pure witness in your own particulars, and to know that it is not in man
to direct his way, for it is not in him that wills nor in him that runs,
but in God who shows mercy, but you that are running before the Lord, and
wait not to be guided by Gods pure Principle in your selves, you condemn the
just and let the guilty go free; Therefore a lamentation is to be for you, as
it was for Jerusalem in times past, that had they known in that day the things
that belong to their peace, they would not have put the Lord to death;
Therefore are you warned you that rule in your wills, that you turn from the
evil of your doings, and be obedient to the Light Christ Jesus, before the day
of Gods anger overtake you, and before the day of Gods visitation pass away,
and then many of you may seek the blessing with tears, and may not find it,
while you are worshipping of God in the perishing things the blessing is not
felt; now none can know God the Father but as the Light does make him manifest,
that that makes the Truth manifest is that that reproves for sin and iniquity;
now you being ignorant of the way of the Lord, and not learned by his pure
Spirit, the Book is sealed to you; Now the Lord complains of such Rulers and
Professors, therefore says the Lord in Isa. 29. v. 13. Forasmuch as this
people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but
have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by
the precepts of men; Therefore behold you Rulers and professors, the Lord will
proceed to do a marvelous work amongst this people, and a wonder; for the
wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent
men shall be hid; Woe be to them that seek deep to hide their Council from the
Lord; therefore all come to the light, and wait at the Pool that you step in
and be cleansed.

Given forth by one who have tasted of the love of the Lord, through the Spirit
of burning, and who desire to be made manifest to your Consciences in the sight
of God,

THE END.

