The Way of Peace: OR, A DISCOURSE OF THE Dangerous Principles and Practices OF
SOME PRETENDED PROTESTANTS Tendered to the Consideration of all sober and
ingenious Persons.

BEING Certain Brief Collections

Out of the late Writings of several Learned Protestant Authors. With diverse
Additions persuasive to PEACE.

By the Author, a Protestant of the Church of England.

Nec mendacii utilitas est diuturna, nec veritatis damnum diu nocet. LONDON:
Printed for Henry Brom at the West End of S. Paul's. 1680.

A Letter of the Authors to a Gentleman in London, upon occasion of his sending
unto him the following Discourse.
SIR,
THE ardent affections I bear to my Religion, Prince, and Country, have
importuned me in order to Public Peace, to present the enclosed Papers to your
judicious view, hoping your Candor and Ingenuity will so far prevail with you,
as not to reject this bold address from an unknown hand. I leave them freely to
your perusal, and correction also; and if you correct them as it is said
Philoxenus in Plutarch, did the Book that was sent him to amend, with one great
great blot from the beginning to the end, I shall not be offended with you, for
probably they may deserve it. But if you shall think them, or any part of them,
may be useful for the public good, to commit them to the Press; or if not, to
the Fire. I see or hear of daily what mean and unworthy, yea, seditious and
wicked Pamphlets come abroad to abuse the Government, to corrupt and debauch
the Nation, and increase those flames, we ought all studiously to endeavor to
quench. I hope if mine shall happen to see the light, although very mean and
unworthy, Country-like, will not be hurtful to any, and will give offense to
none, but such as are certainly bad. I hope I may with modesty say thus much of
the main substance and matter of the Discourse; If it were (as it is nothing
but solid Truth) impressed upon all our hearts in this Nation, it would
certainly not only make his Sacred Majesty's Government more easy and portable
to him, but this Church and Nation happy. I hope Sir you will pardon.

Feb. the 4th. 1679. Your very humble Servant.

The way of PEACE: OR, A DISCOURSE OF THE Dangerous Principles and Practices OF
SOME Pretended Protestants, etc.
THere is nothing casts so indeleble a blemish upon Religion (as a late worthy
Author has it) as when the Professors of it are turbulent, impersuadable,
ungovernable; when that which should strengthen the hands of the Magistrate
shall weaken them; when that which should ease his care, and save the labor of
his animadversions, shall it self awaken and raise his jealousy; when that
which should enact his Laws in the very Consciences of men, shall pretend to
abrogate or dispense with them; when men shall smite the two Tables one against
the other, An inquiry into the cause of the present separation from the Church
of England, Printed, 1674.
and put other limitations and conditions upon Princes than God has --
Wheresoever this is done, That Prince or Magistrate need be a very devout man
indeed, that casts a benign aspect upon that profession which has so
malignant an influence upon his Government. And all considering men will with
great reason doubt, whether that Religion be of God, that gives such trouble to
his Vicegerent, and whether that will carry men to Heaven hereafter, that makes
Tumults, Confusions, and a Hell upon Earth.

The more raised and elevated any Religion pretends to be, the more it
professes a contempt of the World, the more it speaks of Patience,
Contentation, Humility, and the more it glories in the hopes of another world,
still the more horribly absurd, and contradictious will it be, that they that
profess it, should give countenance to disobedience and disturbance of
Government, Tertullian gives ample testimony, Apol. c. 37. We want (says he)
neither numbers nor Leaders, nor spirit to enable us for any attempt, but that
we have learned to suffer ill, and not to do it; to obey and submit, not to
contend with our Rulers. And Ammianus Marcellinus a Pagan Soldier in Julians
Army, gives this short description of the Christian Religion. Aut hoc non est
evangelium, aut no, non sumus Christiani.
Nil nisi justum suader and lene. Its faith is compounded of nothing but
mildness and innocence; it makes men just and honest; it fills men's hearts with
virtuous principles -- it teaches men not to be troublers of the world, but to
go quietly and inoffensively through it, with as little noise and provocation
as is possible, and so to arrive at eternal rest and peace in Heaven.

And as this is the known glory of Christianity in general, so it was
peculiarly of the English Reformation; it was established orderly by Law, and
did not force its way by popular Tumult -- and its pity it is glory afterward
should be stained by the insolence and impatience of those that pretend to it.

It Is a great blot in the Writings of Mr. Calvin, that after he had discoursed
rarely well of the power of Princes, and the duty of Subjects, he undoes all
again with an unhappy exception in these words, De privatis hominibus semper
loquor, a passage of that ill aspect upon Government, that it is suspected by
some. and not altogether without cause, that most of the Confusions of Kingdoms
which have happened since, and especially the troubles of these Nations, have
received encouragement, if not taken rise from thence: But whether that be so
or no, it is certain that it has furnished the Papists with a recrimination
upon the Protestant Doctrine. -- If it can be objected against us that our
Churches are always infested with divisions; and the States under which we
live, imbroiled in troubles, we have reason to be concerned; for it cannot be,
but either the seed must be very bad that brings forth such fruits, or the soil
very corrupt that makes good seed so degenerate; and whethersoever of these two
things be concluded on (as it is certain one must, and both may) we ill
consult, either for our selves or our profession, that by our Divisions,
Disputes, Turbuleneies, and Disobediences, make the aforesaid Dilemma
inevitable. And all the wit and courage we show in defending our private
opinions, and maintaining our several parties, when the common cause and
interest is by this means rendered odious and contemptible, is but like the
foolish solicitude of him that shall be adorning his private Cabin when the
Ship is sinking. If neither the consideration of the sin of Schism, nor the
dishonor to our Religion, by our divisions, will prevail to unite us, yet
perhaps the apprehension of danger may. It was observed of old, that the
Conquest of this Island by the Romans was facilitated by the intestine
divisions of the Inhabitants. Dum singuli pugnant universi vincuntur. And we
have too great cause to fear the Religious interests of this Nation now may be
endangered upon the same point that the Civil were lost then; I mean, that
while we contest with one another, and with our Rulers about little things, we
lose the main, and by the opportunity of our divisions and sub-divisions, a
common Enemy break in upon us. -- And therefore, unless we could be so fond as
to persuade our selves we have no Enemies; or so mad as to think them as supine
as our selves, it must be unreasonable presumption to think our selves safe in
this distracted condition.

Now further to illustrate the dangerous principles of the Presbyterians, and
other Dissenters from the Church of England, let us consider what King James in
the Conference at Hampton Court did first declare. That of all the Translations
of the Bible into the English tongue, that of Geneva was the worst, and that
the Notes upon it were partial, untrue, seditious, and savouring too much of
dangerous and tra^^erous conceits, Dr. Heylin his Animadversions on the
Church History of Britain, page 178.
his Majesty instanced in two places, the one in Exodus 1.19. when disobedience
to Kings is allowed of. The other, 2 Chronicles. 15.16. Where Asa is taxed for
deposing his Mother, and not killing her; a Note whereof (as the Author of the
said relation speaks) the Scottish* Presbyterians made special use of, not only
deposing Mary their lawful Queen, but persecuting her openly and under hand,
till they had taken away her life. Again, the Geneva notes upon Matthew. 2.12.
promise ought not to be kept, where Gods honor and preaching of his Truth is
hindered, or else it ought not to be broken. Now what a wide gap (as the said
Author further observes) does this open to the breach of all Promises, Oaths,
Covenants, Contracts and Agreements; not only betwixt man and man, but between
Kings and their Subjects; what Tumults, Rebellions have been raised in all
parts of Christendom, in England, Scotland, Ireland, France, the Netherlands,
Germany, under color that Gods honor and the preaching of the Truth is
hindered. If this once pass for good Doctrine, neither the King, nor any of his
good Subjects, in whatsoever Realm, can live in safety.

And as to dangerous practices, it is set out by Mr. James Howel in the Life of
Lewis the 13th. K. of France. There were thirteen Rebellions that King
suppressed; most, if not all by the Presbyterian Protestants of that Kingdom:
They being Enemies within doors; were made use of by discontented Princes upon
all occasions. In the 4th. luster of his said book.
And to testify what their principles were, the said Historian further relates
the speech of the Duke of Rohan, the Head and Leader of them all, to an
Assembly of the chiefest of them: Saying, Gentlemen, I pray do not ye think
that since our cause is conjoined with that of God, but that I continue as
strong a zeal and inclination as ever toward it -- Can we doubt but our
defense, though lawful, as being for Religion and liberty of Conscience -- For
although our Parsons cry out daily in their Chairs, that we ought not to
despair of Heavenly succor, yet receiving every day proofs of the Wrath of the
Eternal, there is more appearance to expect punishment for our sins, than
miracles for the re-establishment of our affairs -- If your wisdoms find it to
purpose that it be more expedient to seek our Conservation with the exercise of
our Religion and liberty of Consciences within the obedience which we owe to
our lawful Prince than in Resistance; which though just in it self, is held by
the Enemies of our faith no other than Rebellion and High Treason.

To which may be added the Testimony of the famous Grotius, who says, If we
inquire into the causes of the Wars which have so long wasted Europe, we shall
find the flame to have been kindled principally by them that should have been
the Preachers of Peace. That the Civil Wars of France, most of them, were
raised by them that style themselves Ministers of the Gospel, needs no stronger
witnesses than the fresh memory of Kings, Peers, and People, together with very
many Letters both of the Duke of Bouillon and Plessis complaining thereof: And
also the very Comentaries which the Duke of Rohan has written of the last
Wars. Yet I except Camero, who was ever of another mind, and fared much the
worse for it; if there were any more like him, I would not deprive them of
their due praise. We have seen a prodigious thing, Troops and Companies
mustered, Arms and Ammunition gathered under the name of the Reformed Churches:
Whence is this power, Grotius his Vote for the Churches Peace.
from Heaven or from Earth? For my part, being one who do not only dissuade
Subjects from taking Arms, but entreat Kings also to make a sparing use of
their Prerogatives, who think them to be less miserable that are Condemned to
the Galleys, than such as are devoted to an everlasting War. And the said
Author in another place, treating of some dangerous opinions, speaks thus,
Some opinions there be, that will not permit any State longer to be safe than
force is wanting. Many think that there is every where a certain Contract or
Covenant between God, the King, and the People upon such terms; that if the
King depart from God, the people also may desert the King. And the said Author
instanceth in diverse particulars. Those first, as they imagine depart from God,
that acknowledge the Popes primacy in the Church; for in all reason they must
lose that power which they have delivered up unto the Beast. Those next, who
attempt any Reconcilement with that Church that co-heres to the Roman Church,
that is, with the synagogue of Satan, as they please to speak. Lastly, those
who retain any of the Rites and Ceremonies used in the Roman Church, such as
are retained not in England only, but in the Northern Kingdoms, they are all
Papistical, and therefore Idolatrous -- And the same Author concludes thus,
These are in truth things somewhat ridiculous, but of a very sad consequence.

And further speaking of obedience to Governors -- I inculcate into Subjects
obedience toward them all according to the precept of Christ and his Apostles:
Let them desire the best, give God thanks for the middle sort, bear with the
worst for the doctrine and example of Christ; let them suffer even crafty Foxes,
such as Herod, cruel Lions, such as Nero. And when I speak of Subjects, under
that name I comprehend also inferior Magistrates, who in respect of the
highest power are but Subjects, sent by the King as St. Peter says: I preach
not Evangelium armatum, an armed Gospel -- not Obedience only, but Honor also,
and Reverence are due unto them, even to the froward; what else says
Sophocles, they are Princes: But St. Paul with Apostolical gravity, They are
Gods Ministers: And if the doubtful actions, even of private men, are according
to the rule of Charity to be interpreted on the better part; how much more of
Kings, who are not bound to render an account of their actions to any, nor can
they sometimes do it without peril of the Commonwealth. Also as a worthy Divine
heretofore of the Church of England, speaking of the duty of Subjects, says
thus, We must look to our place, where God has set us; Dr. Sibs in Souls
conflict.
if we be in subjection to others, their Authority ought to sway with us;
neither is it the calling of those that are Subjects to enquire over-curiously
into the mysteries of Government, for that both in Peace and War, breeds much
disturbance, and would trouble all designs. And the late Learned and Judicious
Doctor Hamond delivers himself thus: Practical Catechism.
You may discern (says he) how far from the practice and Gospel of Christ are
those doctrins of Ambitious men, which have made Christian Religion a ground or
excuse of moving and disquieting of States, and shaking, if not dissolving of
Kingdoms: All that will be useful to learn from thence, says that worthy
Author, is the Vnchristianness of those actions in Subjects, which are built on
such Antichristian principles as these; such are Rebellions, Treasons,
Sedition, attempting the Commotion of States on color of Religion. I shall put
you in mind of this great Truth, That Christ and his Disciples were of all the
Doctors that ever were in the world, the most careful to preserve the doctrine
and practice of Allegiance, even when Emperors were the greatest opposers of
the Christian Religion: And if we mean to be accounted followers of them, we
must go and do likewise.

In the Primitive times (as Lactantius speaks) believing was not an excuse for
disobedience, or a commutation for a holy life, but a foundation of obedience
to all the Laws of God and man; then all the professors of Christianity had one
heart and one lip. Defendenda Religio est, non occidendo, sed moriendo, non
saevitia, sed patientia, non scelere sed fide, illa enim bonorum sunt, haec
malorum. Lactantius his Admonition. And further (as a late Author speaks) It is
by Gods special appointment and designation that Kings are his Vicegerents in
the world: It is by his peculiar care and protection that their Authority is
preserved, and that their persons are at any time fenced from the malicious
designs, or the outrageous violences of wicked and unreasonable men. The nature
of Government in the world is such, that it requires a divine wisdom, and an
uncontrollable power to sustain it, and to maintain its interests.

To the same purpose the worthy Grotius aforementioned speaks, in his
excellent discourse of God and his Providence. That God permits not the
effects of malice to range whither they would, but restrains them so, that
Government might never be overthrown, nor the knowledge of divine Laws utterly
extinguished.

And it is a known wise saying of Tacitus (as a late Author also has it) Bonos
Principes expe^ere debemus qualescunque pati; Et quomodo sterilitatem, aut
nimios imbres, and caetera. naturae mala, sic luxum and avaritiam dominantium
tolerare. The world must be governed as it may be, not by Angels, but by men --
And there never was any lawful Magistrate so bad, whose Laws and Government
were not more conducive to the preservation of the common good, than his
oppression was to subver it. And it is wise to suffer a less evil, rather than
lose a greater good.

Now how dangerous and destructive the Presbyterian and Phanatick Principles
and Practices before mentioned are? How subversive of all Government, Order,
and Peace in the world? And how contrary to the Doctrine of the true Protestant
Church of England, I leave to all wise, sober, and ingenious Christians to
consider? more fit to be abominated and detested, and exploded out of the
Christian world, than cherished and countenanced. What more mischievous and
wicked principles in the world than these two Antichristian Doctrins? First,
that nothing ought to be practiced in and about the worship of God, but what we
must have an express rule or warrant for out of the Scriptures. Secondly, that
we may do wickedly, rebel against our lawful Prince, break our Oaths and
Promises for the sake of Religion. The first of which, at one stroke, cuts the
throat of all Ecclesiastical Government, and thereby lays wast the Church. The
second turns the world into a Shambles, brings in nothing but War, Blood, and
Confusion, and thereby lays wast the State.

And when we shall consider, as Dr. Stillingfleet has observed, Of the
Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, p. 372.
that the Jesuits furnished the Enemies to Episcopacy, and the Church of
England, with so many Arguments to their hands, to manage their bad cause with;
this way of proceeding makes men wonder at them and ask the question and say,
What other reason can be imagined, why these men of such intolerable and
insolent spirits and principles are now so earnest in prosecution of the
Romanists, from the worst of whom ( viz. the Jesuits) they take their
principles and practices; but only this, That certainly they are emulous of of
having the Papists to have a hand in doing that, which as the cause of God, a
noble and worthy achievement, they are resolved to do themselves; that is to
say, to ruinate and destroy the once famous and flourishing Protestant Church
of England, the Bulwark of the Protestant Religion; being resolved she shall
fall by no other hand but theirs, which in the end will assuredly prove no
other than the resolution of Samson, to pull that excellent Fabric down to the
ground, although they themselves perish also in the ruins thereof.

As for all such howsoever, who have been in integrity of their hearts formerly
engaged against their lawful Prince and Sovereign, and the Church of England,
upon Religious pretenses; that have since manifested their abhorrence of so
great a Crime ( Et nullus pudor est ad meliora transire) so they deserve to be
respected by all good Protestants: But as for such pretended Protestants (for I
cannot call all Dissenters from Rome, Protestants, for then John of Leyden, and
his Religiously mad Crew were such, which I cannot agree to) I say therefore,
as for such pretended Protestants as shall still persist in their said wicked
and destructive principles and practices, and are ready once more to involve
these Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland in War and Blood, upon the
account of Religion: I shall say no more but this, Quos Jupiter vult perdere
dementat prius. Let them beware, and that whenever they shall appear in action,
as they will be then certainly doing the works of darkness, so the Prince of
darkness will assuredly be their General, the innocent Blood of the Martyred
Charles the First, of blessed memory, will attend them, and the Lord of Hosts
will be against them, and the issue must needs be accordingly assured
destruction; for Pertinaciae nullum remedium posuit Deus. And they whose
wickednesses are winked at for a time, are wont to pay dearly for the
forbearance of their punishment, and must suffer what God shall command,
because what he commands they would not do, as Grotius speaks.

Now dear Country men, Truth has a Cognation with the soul (as one speaks) so
Lies and Impostors are no more able to make resistance against the power of
Truth breaking forth, then darkness is able to dispute with light. Yea, Truth
is the Offspring of God, and mother of Peace. Let us from the considerations
aforesaid be exhorted to abhor that which is evil, and cleave to that which is
good: Let us weigh things well in the balance of reason; for shall it be said
of us English men, that we are the greated Fools or Madmen in the world; that
when Nature has by our situation made us as it were impregnable as against
foreign Enemies; that when they have not been able to hurt us; that we have
destroyed our selves by our ungovernable and tumultuous tempers, by our
Disobediences, Rebellions, and Contempts of lawful Authority. Is not Order,
Rule, and Government the sinews of the Universe? Is it not that which upholds
Kingdoms and Nations, yea, the whole world? And can there be any such thing as
Government without due, orderly, and peaceable subjection of Subjects to their
Prince? the Prince to command according to his Laws, and his Subjects to obey.
And doubtless the just Prerogatives of the Crown, and the Subjects Liberties
are consistent one with another; and when there is no encroachments made on
either part, the Prince and People are very happy. Protectio trabit
subjectionem, and subjectio protectionem.

But alas! are we not become Fools or Children in understanding, and are not
able to call to mind the actions of the other day? Cannot we call to mind the
years Forty-one and Forty-two, with the mad and tumultuous proceedings of those
times, together with the sad and doleful effects thereof, what then was the
consequence of the loud clamours against Popery and Prelacy, and of the
seditious Petitionings, the factious supporting and countenancing of that
Factious and Disloyal Cabal, that Pest and Plague of the Nation, which involved
us in War, Blood, and Confusion, till at the last we had lost our Religion
Laws, and Liberties, and were reduced to a perfect condition of Slavery, to a
company of Red-coats, a Mercenary Army, and in that sad condition must have
lain to eternity, had not the Almighty miraculously delivered us, by the happy
Restoration of his Gracious Majesty that now is. And can we now hate the
effects, and yet be in love with the cause? And are we so void of reason, as
not to consider that now the same causes will (in all probability) produce the
like, or as bad effects, especially when there seems to be a Transmigration of
souls, when the same souls now seem to animate other bodies? Or rather that
there are the like ill spirits raised and conjured up from the bottomless pit
by some Diabolical and Schismatical Conjurers of our times, who make use of the
names of God and Religion, as charms to that purpose. Are we not yet sensible
that there are Juglers and Cheats in Religion among us, that the piae frauds
are not only to be found at Rome? But I beseech you consider, that the power of
Truth (as one speaks) is victorious in sober men, and will not suffer us to be
cheated with false shows. Oh what Religious and glorious pretenses have been
made use of in our late times of Confusion, for the effecting the horridest and
foulest facts? And can we be so senseless not to perceive that there are some
among us begin the same dance again, by clamoring against Popery and Prelacy,
and prosecuting lately Petitions, and thereby (as it may be justly thought)
counting their numbers as formerly? But let all true-hearted Protestants not
fear their thousands or ten thousands, so long as they cannot make God of their
number. And whereas to palliate, if not justify the proceedings of those times
of Usurpation, they would endeavor to make the King one of the three Estates.
To say no more, they may find their vain fanfie and opinion disowned even by
Calvin himself, in his Institutes, who there makes the Prince distinct from
the three Estates.

I beseech you, dear Countrymen, to consider, That true divine zeal (as one
observes) is no Coribantick fury, but a calm and regular beat, guided and
managed by light and prudence, always acknowledging a due subordination to that
Authority, Civil and Ecclesiastical, that is over us. And shall we be
nevertheless so infatuated and transported by our passions and humors upon the
discovery of a late Popish Plot, as to be Seditious, Tumultuous, and
Ungovernable, and not to be able to recover our reason again, and consult
soberly our own safety? and will we not be governed and ruled by our Prince and
Governor? Shall we rather like a company of mad men, with flambeaux and
firebrarnds in our hands, set all on fire about us? And may not the Papists
triumph at our follies, and say among themselves, what unwise people are we to
trouble our heads with Plots, and lose our Lives, Liberties, and Estates, when
we need run none of these hazards, but only sit still and have a little
patience, and the pretended Protestants in England will do our work for us;
that is to say, ruin and destroy the Church of England, the chiefest strength
of the Protestant Religion; yea, they will sooner effect it themselves, than we
can by all our plots and designs; Mark iii.25.
For a House divided against it self cannot stand.

And how can the Phanatick party in reason reproach and hate the Papists for
those Crimes and Villainies, of which they are so grossly guilty themselves? For
did the Papists plot and design the destruction of the King and State by the
Gunpowder Plot? And did not the Presbyterian and the rest of the Phanatick
party also afterward, by Gunpowder and Guns, Swords, Pistols, and Bullets, and
a cruel and wicked Rebellion, not only design, but effect and accomplish the
destruction of the King and State? There was this only difference between them,
The Papists were always unprosperous and unsuccessful in their wickedness; but
the Phanaticks were most prosperous and successful in theirs Now let all
impartial and sober men judge which of these two wicked Adversaries is most to
be feared and provided against, either the wicked Papist that has been
disappointed in all attempts, or the industriously successful and fortunately
wicked Phanatick; the first being not a fortieth part of the Nation; and the
latter (it is much to be feared) bearing the same proportion in number to true
Protestants in England, as the Mahumetans bears to the Christians at this day
in the world. The Plots also of the one, viz. the Papists, being fully
discovered, and thereby prevented: But the designs and subtle Contrivances of
the other (although in malice little inferior to that of the Papist) lying
still under ground undiscovered, saving what was manifest by the Scottish
Rebellion last year. And further, they are least under suspicion of any such
design of Subverting the Protestant Church of England, being Enemies within
doors, Pretended Protestants. It very nearly concerns us Protestants therefore,
I humbly conceive, to have a great care, that in avoiding Scylla, we be not
swallowed up in Charybdis.

And one would think that the said Phanaticks, although they are so zealously
bent to the Rigorous prosecution of the Papists, upon the account of the late
Plot, do not certainly believe there was really any such Plot, or that the
Papists were carrying on such grand designs against the Protestant Religion:
For if they did, surely they would not take that as an opporty to plot mischief
also against the Protestant Interest, as the Scottish Presbyterians did last
Summer; who upon discovering of the said Popish Plot, most wickedly Murdered
the Innocent, and after broke forth into open Rebellion: For could there be
such a Rebellion, and yet no Presbyterian Plot in Scotland? And did there not
at the same time, a Party among us here in England, so sympathise with them, as
to make loud clamours against our worthy Bishops, branding some of them as
Popish, yet could not endure to have the Scots styled Rebels, but would take
their parts? And therefore may it not be thought that the said Rebel Scots had
many Presbyterian Friends in England? And were they not formerly like Simeon
and Levi, or rather like Samsons, Foxes, tied together with firebrarnds in
their tayls? And in that posture did they not set all the three Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, in such a flame as could not in many years be
quenched, which was as bad (if not worse) as the Firing of London? And must the
Papists be only guilty, and these innocent, when as great wickedness, and from
as bad principles are acted by the one, as by the other? As if the Phanaticks
had a Dispensation from the Almighty to break his Laws, and that they might be
at once both Saints and Devils. Oh horrible! And shall that absurd and wicked
Doctrine and Principle still find entertainment in the world among Christians,
yea, among the Protestants; that we may do wickedly for Gods cause, Romans iil. 8.
that we may do evil that good may come; as if his honor might be advanced by
our transgression of his Laws? Do not these men miserably debauch and blaspheme
the holy Christian Religion, and make it resemble the Religion of Mahomet, that
tolerates the deposing and Murdering of their Princes; and that was born in
Arms, and breaths nothing but Arms, and by Arms is propagated? And do not their
tenants seem to be very much tinctured with that wicked Heresy? That Dominio
fundatur in Gratia, that Princes and Magistrates lose their dignity by great
sins, and no longer ought to be obeyed? But doubtless these cannot be the
principles and practices of good men, good Christians, how then can we give
them that appellation, except we will make our selves liable to that Curse, for
calling evil good? Isa. 3.20. But say we what we will, these must be the Godly
party; for let them do what they will, they are of the number of Gods elect and
chosen people, and that they are sure of, because they apprehend that benefit
by faith: These in truth are sad delusions, and of the number of those
opinions, which although they are ridiculous, yet are of a very sad
consequence, as the excellent Grotius has observed. But I would not be
mis-understood: I speak not this to disparage true Piety and Virtue, which I
highly honor and respect; but nothing is more hateful to me (and I think to
all good men) than Ahabs Fasts, when it was for the destruction of Naboth, for
doubtless, Simulata sanctitas est duplex iniquitas. They will nevertheless say
of me, that I am of a bitter persecuting spirit, and cruel toward them: But I
shall say this for my self, Those that have to do with stubborn and inveterate
maladies, it is cruelty in such to use Lenitives, and not Corrosives. To which
I may further add (in the words, as I remember of Zuinglius) In aliis mansuetus
ero, in blasphemiis in Christum non ita. I dare appeal to the Almighty, that I
have no ill will against their persons, but only their wicked principles. I
think I could be willing to sacrifice my Life to rescue them all from their sad
delusions, and my Nation from ruin. But however, let them go on to style
themselves the Godly party, etc. or what they please; this will prove most
certain, That when this Church and Nation is brought to desolation and
destruction, they will be as innocent of procuring the same, as Nero was of the
Firing of Rome, when he actually set it on fire. And what is more unjust than
for single acts of Murder and wickedness to be punished with death, and the
destruction of whole Nations to be gloryed in as an honorable Achievement and
a Righteous cause. But to my purpose, to persuade us all, if it be possible, to
Unity and Peace, I shall insert a notable story, I think it is related in Mr.
Stows Chronicle, as follows,

That upon occasion of a great Inundation and overflowing of the Country near
the Severn, there was a little Hill compassed about by the waters, whither had
resorted for safety, many Beasts of several kinds and several natures, as
Horses, Cows, Sheep, Foxes, etc. who being all encompassed with a common
danger, laid aside, or rather forgot their Antipathies, and abode there quietly
together, not any one offering to prey upon, or molest the others and when the
waters were gone, so parted in peace. May we not; dear Countrymen, hence learn
of Brutes? And shall we not by reason do what they did only by instinct, and
out of apprehension of danger; that is to say, lay aside our Prejudices,
Passions, and Animosities; in tendency to secure our selves from danger. I say
again: If our disaffected parties did really believe there were such a horrid
and destructive Plot, would they not follow the common dictates of reason, and
ingeniously confess and say, Alas! we now see by experience that our sad
divisions have encouraged our Enemies to Plot the ruin of all Protestants; but
we will for peace and safety sake, now lay aside our Animosities and stubborn
wills, we will come to Church, Baptize our Children, receive the Sacrament, and
Conform in all things to our Mother the Church of England, at least as far as
we can. Laws we know must not submit to us, but we to them; we will do any
thing that is required of us, if it be not as clearly and plainly forbidden by
Gods Word, as our obedience is there clearly and fully enjoined, we are willing
to do almost any thing for the securing the Protestant interest: We now see our
Adversaries are Vigilant and Industrious for to procure our destruction; but we
will be as Vigilant and Industrious for our Union and Preservation. But alas,
all the noise of the horridness of the late Plot, has not awakened us to take
one sober and wise stop toward the securing the Protestant Cause, but like men
in the water ready to be drowned, who lay about them for life, being filled
with the apprehensions of danger, yet take not one wise stroke to swim or save
their lives, but all their actions tend, to hasten their destruction and ruin.
Just thus it is with us.

It is true, there are a sort of people that are mighty zealous for prosecuting
Papists, the innocent as well as the nocent, and thereby to enrage and
exasperate them more against us. And will scarce suffer our wise Governors to
take sober and just measures in that grand Affair. But in the mean time take no
thought for Union among Protestants, in which consists principally our safety,
which is just as if a Captain of a Ship being engaged in a Sea Fight, who is
very eager to assault and mischief his Enemy, yet takes no care to suppress the
Mutinies in his Ship, or to stop her Leaks; And who sees not the speedy fatal
end of his Valor: It is Enemies within doors that by the universal suffrage of
mankind are always accounted worse than those without, hino illae lachrymae!

And may we not be fully convinced by experience of the sad Consequence of
unsound and wicked Doctrines and Principles, especially meeting with Men of
active Spirits, which makes them industriously wicked: happy were it, if it
might be said of them, Operose nihil agunt, but of these men it must be truly
said, Operose multum mali agunt. Dr. Sibs, in his Sermon on Cant. 1.2.
But as a worthy Protestant Divine heretofore taught in our Church. If we
desire assurance of Christ's Love, get a chaste Judgment, free from Error,
Heresy and Schism -- Christ is wonderful jealous of our Judgments -- Whosoever
is corrupt in Faith is corrupt in Obedience in that degree, evil Opinions breed
evil Life. To which I may add that saying Animus ager semper errat, And Ex uno
absurdo dato, consequuntur mill. Now although in other respects they may be
accounted sober men, yet it may be said truly of them, Quid prodest vinum non
bibere and ira inebriari? And do not these men place the main, if not the all,
of their Religion in endless scrupulosities about indifferent things,
neglecting in the mean time the more weighty things of Christianity? Is it not
incorporated into the very Principles of these men's Piety and Religion, to be
always murmuring and clamoring against Government and Governors both in Church
and State, to be creating and raising jealousies and fears in the hearts of the
People against their Prince, to aggravate his personal failings, when there is
any, to be dividing, separating and rending the Church and State into pieces?
And alas! to do thus wickedly is the way now adays to be accounted a godly Man,
a good Christian, a good Protestant. And those that are good and sound
Protestants, that love their Prince, make Conscience of observing the good
Laws, Orders and Constitutions of both Church and State, they are reputed and
represented presently as Papists, or popishly affected, Et si satis est
accusare, quis innocens? although by this imputation, how highly do they
tacitly and by Consequence, commend the Papists whom they so hate and
persecute. And except in our forsaking Rome, we will run along with them to
Munster, we must of necessity be all Papists, although they cannot but
acknowledge, that in medio consistit virtus. May it not therefore in reason be
thought, that if it were possible to raise Cranmer, Ridley and Latimer, and the
rest of the famous Martyrs out of their ashes, and that they were conversant
among us as heretofore, that assuredly they would be cried out on for Papists,
by these pretended Protestants of our times, and as such be put to a second
Persecution and Martyrdom also, especially if they should take a Journey into
Scotland. And what can this tend to in the end? Indeed as formerly; so still,
do these men consult that wicked Rule or Maxim, Audacter columniare, semper
aliquid haerebit. And here it may not I think be impertinent to mention a
passage of the before mentioned Historian, In the Life of Lewis the 13.
Mr. James Howel speaking of a fearful Combustion and Revolt of Catalonia from
the Spaniard, occasioned much by the preaching Friars and Monks, whence faith
he. This Aphorism may be collected, That the best Instruments being misapplied
do greatest mischief, and prove most dangerous, And as of the sweetest Wines is
made the sharpest Vinegar, so Church men who by their holy Function, and white
Robes of Innocence should be the sweetest of all Professions, who should breath
nothing but Peace, Unity, Allegiance and Love, if they misapply their Talent,
and abandon themselves to the Spirit of Faction, they become the bitterest
enemies, the most corroding cankers, and worst vipers in any Commonwealth, and
most pernicious to the Prince, in regard that they having the sway over the
Conscience, which is the Rudder that steers the actions, words and thoughts of
the rational Creature, they transport and snatch it away whither they will;
making the Beast with many beads conceive according to the Color of those Rods
they use to cast before them.

Let us, I beseech you, dear Countrymen, call to mind former things and learn
wisdom. How has this poor Nation suffered many times heretofore by our
intestine broils, as the Records of former times will inform us, And will we
not suffer the experience of these things to instruct us, are we resolved not
to consider? Does not Wisdom and Prudence direct us not to look only at the
surface or first appearance of things, but to view and consider them in their
true and natural Consequences, according to that saying, Quicquid agas
prudenter agas and respice finem? When we are in a Storm, is it time them to be
murmuring and mutining against our Pilot? Have we any reason to suspect his
wisdom or faithfulness? may we not in all reason presume that he that is at the
helm best understands the condition of his Ship both its course and working,
and therefore best knows how to steer her? And can we be so maliciously absurd
as to imagine that our excellent Prince and Pilot has not a very great and
intense Care for the safety of that Vessel in which he himself is embarked?
Will not Caesar take special Care of the security of the Ship that carries
Caesar and all his fortunes, Caesar and all his Subjects? Can it be otherwise,
but that the interest of the King and his Subjects must be both one and the
same? And for ever let them be accursed, may I say, that go about to divide
them. Is not the King and his Subjects as Hippocrates his Twins, that mourn or
rejoice together? When did ever diffidence and distrust, fears and jealousies
in Subjects of their Prince make them happy? Fears and jealousies in the People
must needs cause fears and jealousies in their Prince, and his fears increase
theirs, and so run round in this diabolical and dismal circle without end to
the ruin of both. And when was this Nation ever more happy than in Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, when where was so great affection in her People toward her,
and confidence in her good Government, that there was no place left for fears
and jealousies; although as Sir Robert Naunton observes in his Fragmenta
Regalia, she left more Debts unpaid taken upon the credit of her Privy Seals,
than her Progenitors did or could have taken up in an hundred years before her.
Yet (says he) we are naturally prone to applaud the times behind us, and to
vilify the present. It is certain when her Parliaments met, they never did
capitulate or prefer their private concerns to the public, viz. the Queens
necessities, but waited their times, and in the first place gave their
supplies, and according to the exigency of her affairs, yet failed not at last
to obtein what they desired, so that the Queen and her Parliaments had ever the
good fortune to depart in Love, and on reciprocal terms, although afterward in
her Successors Reign that happiness did not continue, by reason of some few
popular discontented persons, such (as with the fellow that burnt the Temple at
Ephesus) would be talked of, though for the doing of mischief. Thus speaks the
said Author. And doubtless it is not a Contesting but Compliance with the Prince
that tends to the honor and happiness of a Nation or People. If there were
(may I say) none other to give their Votes at Election of Parliament Men now in
our times, then was in queen Elizabeth's Reign; that is to say, none but good
and sound Protestants, who had a zeal for their Mother, the Church of England,
then we might expect the same good agreement in that great and illustrious
Assembly as She met with; but when there is so many men of desperate seditious
and Phanatick spirits, bitter Enemies to the Church of England, that give their
Voices at Elections, and use so many arts to put by Worthy men, I humbly
conceive so great good can hardly be expected, with any constancy or
continuance at least. Now as Cicero speaks, Nulla res vehementius Rempublicam
continet, quam fides. So I may say, if there was but affection toward, and
confidence in our gracious Sovereign, and his wise Conduct: And it is a true
saying, Qui diligit Legem diligit Regem: If we that are Subjects, would love
and honor our Prince (as I am sure we ought in duty to do) our Gracious Prince
could not but cast a favorable Aspect upon his loving Subjects, and what could
there then follow but a continual interchanging of affections with each other;
that blessed circulation of love and kindness, like the circulation of the
blood in the natural body: And what blessed fruits and effects might we enjoy
from this excellent Athletick and healthy temper of our body politic? And
there would be no fears and jealousies of the meeting and Assembling of
Parliaments, and no need of presenting one Petition for their sitting. But
doubtless, it is a lesser evil not to meet, than to meet and not accord. And
therefore dear Friends and Countrymen, methinks when Religion, Laws,
Allegiance, our own Peace and Safety, calls aloud to this duty of Love, how can
we withstand it? Disorder and Confusion also is so great an evil, and
Government so absolutely necessary to the subsistence of the world, and
happiness of mankind, and disturbance and subversion thereof so hateful to me
upon any pretense whatsoever: That if I were satisfied that my Religion did
enjoin or allow of any such doctrins and practices, I should for that very
cause forthwith renounce my Christianity, it being impossible for such a
Religion to proceed from God.

Oh! How can I but pity Caesar? What a vast burden now lies upon his
shoulders? He had need be an Atlas to sustein it. How have we his Subjects,
vile Wretches, taken a surfeit already of our peace and plenty, under his mild
and gentle Government? Have we had any cause justly to complain thereof? Have
we not sat under our own Vines, and eat the fruit of our own Fig trees in peace
and safety? Has not Religion and Property been secured to us? Whose Ox has he
taken? Whom of the meanest of his Subjects has he oppressed or injured? And
therefore what can hinder our happiness, if we will our selves? And shall we
suffer our own phansies to raise chymera's and delusions, fears and jealousies,
and then torment our selves with them? Will we be offended with our Gracious
Prince, because he is but a man? However (I am sure) he is Pater Patriae, the
common Father of his People. I beseech you therefore (if it be but for shame)
let us show our selves related to Shem and Japhet, and not to be of the
Offspring of cursed Cham. And if we apprehend any faults to happen in
Government or Governors, are we competent Judges in the case? When as Dr.
Stilling fleet observes in his Origines Sacrae, That a falsehood may frequently
seem truer to common understandings than truth it self. And doubtless this is
never more true, than in matters of Government. And if there be any fault in
Governors, are we that are governed faultless our selves? And are not the
miscarriages of Governors very often ordered and disposed by God as a scourge,
procured by the sins of the people (if our Bibles speak true) and when that
therefore shall happen to us, it may (I think) in reason, very 2 Samuel 4.1:
very much silence our complaints.

If Proroguing of Parliaments be an offense to us, is that any new or strange
thing under the Sun? Has it not been often done, even in tranquil and
peaceable times, and by the wisest of Princes? And although it must be
acknowledged that Parliaments are an excellent constitution, and of excellent
use, when they are not tainted by Prejudices, Animosities, and Faction, and do
not degenerate from their right ends and use, may they not be reputed as the
Physic to the body politic; and (if so made use of, and not as its constant
food) be of great benefit and advantage to the Nation. And here I shall insert
the words of one of the greatest Statesmen that the world ever had; the
Cardinal de Richelien, to the Assembly of the Notables in France, in the time
of Lewis the Thirteenth; he speaks thus, The Sick sometimes dye by too many
Remedies, as well as none at all. I am bound to tell you by the by, that to
reestablish this Nation or State in its first splendour, there is no need of many
Ordinances, but real executions, few words and many deeds will testify both
the good intentions and judgments of them whereof she is composed. But though
Parliaments are an excellent Constitution, are they not like other sublunary
things, subject to corruption and abuse, and we know Optima vitiata sunt
pessima. The best things when corrupted, prove the worst, which I think our own
experience has not long since, taught us in Characters of blood: For if a
General Council may err, can a Parliament be infallible. And what has happened
to that excellent Constitution, may it not happen again? But here by the by it
may be observed, That it is not so much a Parliament is desired by some among
us, as such a Parliament as might serve their designs; for those very persons,
some of them that not long since were altogether for dissolving of Parliaments,
viz. that blessed healing Parliament first called after his Majesty's
Restoration, are now the principal sticklers for a Parliament.

In the next place, if the decay of our Trade be an offense to us, may it not
be justly thought that our own fears, our own distractions are the greatest
cause thereof: And then do we deserve to be pityed, that suffer when we may
cure our own maladies? Let us confide and acquiesce in the wise conduct of our
excellent Prince, and his wise Council, and be satisfied, and our Trade will
return.

What shall I say? We in this Nation are a mass of Confusion, how miserably
divided in our minds, unanimous in nothing but in murmuring and complaining.
Yet God who is truth it self, is one, and unity, certainly is the fruit and
consequent of verity. Now what a strong Argument do we furnish our Adversaries
the Romanists with against us, when they shall argue and say unto us, Where is
that verity you so much boast of, when there is no unity but discord, strife,
and enmity among you. And as St. James speaks; If ye have bitter envying and
strife in your hearts; glory not, and lie not against the truth; this wisdom
descends not from above, but is earthly, Jam. 14.15.
sensual, devilish.

What should I say? What mortal can please us? What mortal Prince is able to
govern us? How readily disposed and bent are many among us, if it were
possible, to be pulling down as formerly what is established by Law? And yet
alas! If ever God should suffer such a great and fearful judgment again to fall
upon us, and that we should be able to lay all things wast as heretofore; will
we not (as heretofore) be like the Builders of Babel, Confounded, although not
in our language, yet in our different ends and designs, and never be able to
agree what to establish. I may further add, How is it possible for God Almighty
himself to please that people, of whom some will have fair weather, and some
foul, at one and the same time and place? Is it not just thus with us? What one
faction or party would have, the other nauseats and loathes. And what can our
gracious Sovereign do with us; and yet what showers of murmurings, clamours,
bitter invectives and reproaches have our Governors suffered patiently? But let
us consider, God is not in the storms, earthquakes, and flames of murmuring
and rebellious Subjects, but in the small still voice of humility and
obedience: All Murmurers and Rebels are and ever were the Children of Pride;
and we know God resists the proud, but vouchsafes his grace and blessing
only to the humble. How contrary are these things to our Allegiance to our
Sovereign Lord? Our Law says, Ligeantia est vinculum fidei, ligeantia est
legis essentia It is the bond of our faithfulness, the very essence of the Law.
And again, Ligeantia Domino Regi debita est Lex. It is the Law due to our
Sovereign Lord the King.

And it is worthy our observation, what has usually been the dismal effects of
Rebellion and defection from a lawful Prince. In that great defection of the
ten Tribes from the House of David, God did not vouchsafe them after it so much
as one good King to govern them, they were all stark naught, and at last were
carried away Captive, and totally destroyed, there remaining no memory of them
at this day. Yea, to omit other instances, has not our own late experience
also taught us the same, after our wicked Rebellion against our lawful Prince,
and imbrewing our hands in his Innocent blood? How did God Plague us by our own
divisions and confusions, and raised up a cruel Tyrant, Cromwell, to rule over
us with a rod of Iron, and at once to cut the throat of our Religion, Laws, and
Liberties, and made our very Nobles to stoop and lackquay after his Major
Generals, and reduced us all into a perfect condition of slavery. And can we
forget this sad Calamity we so lately suffered?

How has he, whose Person and Authority ought to have been Sacred among us,
suffered from his Subjects, not to be mentioned without abhorrence? Those that
are unfit to govern, yet will not be governed. So that I may say, what has
been spared to his Sacred Majesty but his Cown? what bold daring Petitions of
late promoted, and some presented to his Royal Hand, contrary to his express
Royal will and pleasure, which have signified no more but to let him know, that
the Petitioners were dissatisfied in his Majesty's Wisdom and Fidelity; that
they better knew how to direct and guide State Affairs than himself. Have we
not by our unworthy carriage toward him, as heretofore toward his Royal
Father, given credit to that bitter Invective against our Nation, that Rex
Angliae est Rex daemonum. Are we not ashamed at these things, to be thus
increasing our Princes burden of Government, vexing and torturing his Royal
heart? How monstrously absurd are we herein? We all pretend to be very tender
of his Majesty, to be mightily concerned for his safety, and cry out Vivat Rex,
let the King live; and seem to be much incensed against the Papists, because in
their late Plot they designed his destruction; and yet we are increasing the
burden he undergoes by our discontents, murmurings, and complainings, our
untractable, ungovernable tempers; as if we had a mind to take the work and
design of the Papists out of their hands; for can these horrid actions be the
way to prolong his days? But it is my hopes, and I think I have reason to
induce me to believe, that the late shakings of the Royal Oak, will cause it to
take deeper root, and thereby stand the stronger.

When I consider the state of things and persons among us at present, I am
ready to be filled with horror, and cannot but deeply resent his Sacred
Majesty's condition, the only support of my hopes is him, by whom Kings Reign:
When I consider the innumerable train of Atheists, not only those in practice,
but the bold daring professed Atheistical spirits, the smoke of the bottomless
pit, the reproach of human nature: Who dare be so wickedly absurd, as to
contradict the universal sense of all mankind from the beginning of the world
until this day, and say they were all fools but themselves; who daily make it
their sport and pastime to drol and jest at all Religion, blaspheme and defy
that God by whom they subsist, and Idolize and adore only themselves, who own
no other rule to walk by, but their interest, their pleasure, profit, and
honor. Now what good Subjects these are like to prove, I leave to all wise and
sober persons to consider? He that only for his interest will be Loyal, when it
is his interest and advantage will be a Rebel: He that defies and blasphemes
his God, can he honor and respect his Prince? Can he that is guilty of
Dei-cidium be offended with Regis cidium, especially when it shall be for his
present secular advantage. Animus meminisse horret!

And on the other hand, when I recollect the numerous Troops of Phanaticks and
disaffected of all sorts, where a man may sooner find (according to Samsons
Riddle) honey in a rotten carcass, than Loyalty to their Prince, further than
what tends to advance the interest of their several parties; for according to
the Standard of the Covenant, they will be true and faithful to their Prince,
but with this limitation and restriction, In defense of the Protestant
Religion, and the Liberties of the Subject: So that whenever they are disposed
to entertain fears and jealousies of their lawful Sovereign, and cry out Popery
and Tyranny; and take the confidence to say their Prince favors Papists, and
intends to introduce an Arbitrary Government, as that party falsely and wickedly
suggested against Charles the First, of blessed memory, then alas all their
Loyalty passes away as the morning dew.

Where shall I after this search, find good and loyal Subjects, that will stick
to their Prince in time of need? Even all the good and sound Protestants of the
Church of England, even so many, and no more good Christians may be reckoned
true and loyal Subjects. For he that is a true Son of the Church of England, a
true Protestant, will say, be my Prince what he will (if God so please to
permit it) so long as he is my lawful Sovereign, I dare not perjure my self,
and forsake my Allegiance; I must be just and loyal, Matthew. 22.21. Romans 13.2.
I must give Caesar his due; I must sacrifice my life at his command, in his
defense; I must not, I dare not resist in any case, for they that resist shall
receive to themselves damnation, Et mori non metuo sed, damnari metuo. If a
Prince has a just and undoubted legal Title to a Crown by the Laws of God and
Nature, and the Fundamental Constitutions of the Kingdom, I would willingly
know by what Law he can be deprived thereof? For can any power on Earth
nullify or make void the Laws of God, and make that just which God Almighty,
the great Lawgiver has made unjust. Is it not one of the maxims of our Laws
of England, That where contrary Laws come in question, man's Laws must give
place to Gods Laws. And further, how far our Oaths of Allegiance bind us to our
Prince and his Heirs, and lawful Successors, we are to be informed thereof by
our Prince, and present Governor, and his Council. For as the excellent Grotius
speaks concerning the force and obligation of an Oath, whereby Subjects are
obliged to the Magistrates, I conceive (says he) the Interpretation belongs to
Statesmen and Lawyers, not to Divines. This is unquestionably true, we must
not do or consent to any sinful act to save our selves from the greatest
sufferings; and I would have any one to show me any piece of Christianity to
justify me in doing otherwise. If I were sure that the next lawful and
undoubted Heir to my present Prince and Governor were of another Religion,
differing from mine; and knew certainly that he would persecute me, nay burn me
for an Heretic, I am bound in Conscience, nevertheless, and must of necessity
own and be faithful to his interest and just right; for to be disloyal, unjust,
to perjure my self knowingly, and with deliberation, would be assured damnation
to me: But to run the utmost hazard, to keep a good Conscience, and to suffer
Persecution, to lose my life for the best Religion in the world (for such mine
must be to me) would be the greatest comfort, happiness, and glory that I am
capable of in this life.

May I now also wish all health and happiness to that great and populous City
of London, of which I am an unworthy Member; and may I humbly represent these
few things to her worthy Citizens, their serious consideration, That they would
not be forgetful of those late heavy Divine Visitations, the dreadful
Pestilence; and more especially that horrid Conflagration, in which, whatever
hands of men were instrumental, doubtless there was much of Gods hand: For that
hand needs must be directed by more than an ordinary Providence, that shall
with a pair of Dice throw Siz-Cinque a hundred times together. May I also
present before them, that nunquam prospere succedunt res humanae ubi
negliguntur Divinae: As also what a Heathen observed,

-- Sic prophanatis sacris,
Peritura Troja perdidit primum Deos.
They lost their Gods before they lost their City Troy. And if Heathens
esteemed it an Infamy not to be pious, what a shame will it be if Christians
think not so also. Next therefore to their piety toward God, may I recommend
that which is inseparable to it, Loyalty to their Prince; as also the
preservation of the order and good Government of their City, under that prudent
and worthy Person that now Governs them; in all which undoubtedly consists
their safety, splendour, and prosperity. And that as they are very vigilant to
prevent Firing their Houses, so more especially that they would have a care of
such wicked persons, as by false rumors of firing of Houses, and the like,
drive on (it is much to be feared) a design to fill the peoples minds with
fears and discontent, thereby to inflame them into Sedition and Rebellion;
which if it should ever take effect, might prove the dreadfulest and most fatal
fire that ever befell that City. I make no doubt of the care therefore of all
those that are concerned in her preservation, as to prevent burning of their
Houses, so more especially of such misguided Zealots that disdain such pedling
wickedness of setting single Houses on fire; but are most intently bent to the
firing of whole Kingdoms, and that with the greatest vigor and industry
possible, as the cause of God, and advancement of his honor, and of the
Kingdom and Scepter of his Son Jesus Christ, to bind their King in Chains, and
Nobles in Fetters of Iron; and dare be so ridiculously impudent to keep Fasts,
and then beg of God to prosper the transgression of his Laws. And alas! how
many thousands of these Fireballs are to be found both in City and Country,
and very little consideration had of the danger of them; although by the
experience of the whole world, they have been ever found fatal to the Citys and
Countries where they have prospered and prevailed. And therefore it has been
said truly, That some men's Profaneness and Debaucheries may be with less danger
tolerated by the Magistrate, than some men's Religion, the very principles
whereof are many times subvertive of all Government, Order, and Peace. And
those Subjects who will not be satisfied without a general toleration of all
Religions (although it has been found by experience that such persons will not
give (when they have power) that to others which they now crave.) If their
Prince and Governor comply with their desires, I humbly conceive it will
oblige him to have a good standing Army to keep them at peace among themselves;
and to support his Government, and preserve himself in safety; for every
Sectary will take the Bible into his hand, and as readily will interpret it, as
read it, and say, here is the Infallible rule, and I have the spirit to
interpret it: And the consequence is, They make their own fancies and conceits
as the Oracles of God, either in opposition one toward another, or against
their lawful Prince and Governor. Something to this purpose the worthy Grotius
speaks, Some Protestants say, they are led by the public authority of the
spirit, in his word common to all Christians. As much was said by Socinus,
Brown, and so many others. See into what perplexities the hearers minds are on
every side involved. Here (says every Sect) is the Word of God pure and
sincere, according to the sense of the holy spirit: They know not whither to
turn themselves, but must abide there where their Birth or Education, or hope
of profie and preferment has placed them, and applaud their own men, speaking
loud and confident: Could any one free men out of this Labyrinth, were it not a
happy work, and worthy of all acceptance? Which question he elsewhere resolves
thus, Consuetudo veterum Christianorum est optima Scripturarum interpres. The
custom or practice of the Ancient Christians is the best Interpreter of the
Scriptures. For as the said Author further adds, Those Primitive Christians
best understood the sense and meaning of the Scriptures, and did best practice
the Christian Doctrine contained in the Scriptures. For doubtless, if we will
search for the Christian verity in its greatest luster and purity, we must have
recourse to the purest streams flowing nearest to the fountain, even the
Primitive times. But how can we but grossly mistake, if we will wrest the Sacred
Scriptures, and expressly in contradiction to St. Peter, Acts 2.17. apply the
promises of the spirits guidance to our times, which were intended for those
first times of the Gospel.

I shall conclude my discourse with an excellent and wise caution given to
Protestants by a Learned Divine of the Church of England, D. Cudworth his
Sermon at Lincoln-Inn, 1664.
which deserves to be imprinted upon all our minds that wish well to the
Protestant interest. That unless there be a due and timely regard had to the
commands of lawful Authority in indifferent things, and to order, peace, and
unity in the Church. It may be easily foreseen that the Reformed part of
Christendom will at length be brought first to Confusion by crumbling into
infinite sects and divisions, and then to utter ruin.

Now dear Countrymen, what can I do more, but bewail and lament our follies,
absurdities, and confusions? Oh! how great need have we of an Amphion with his
Lute, with his Charming melody to mollify and soften our rugged and stony
hearts: Or rather of the great Hermostes (as the aforesaid Author calls him)
that tunes the whole world, to put us in tune, to reduce us to the use of our
reason again, and cause us to live together in unity and peace? Oh that we were
wise, that we would consider; and that we might know in this our day the things
belonging to our peace, and that they might not be hid from our eyes. And let
it be all our Prayers, that we may be freed from all Pride, Error, Prejudice,
and Partiality, and understand and obey the truth, that at the great day of
reckoning, when we shall all be called to give an account of our deportment in
this weak and imperfect state, we all may be found not in the number of them
who have despised Dominions, speak evil of Dignities. But of those whose lives
have been answerable to the holy Christian Religion, which is pure and
peaceable.

That which once moved Croesus his dumb Son to speak, when his Enemies were
about to kill him (my affection to my Religion, Prince, and Country) has
extorted from me this mean and unworthy Essay in tendency to quench those
flames I fear are breaking forth among us. And let us beware, and be advised,
for if we persist in our wickedness, the very stones in our Streets shortly
will (it is to be feared) cry out in judgment against us, to our confusion and
destruction. Farewell.

From all thy wrath, and from all our sins, Good Lord deliver us.

FINIS.

