NEVVS FROM THE CHANNEL, OR The Discovery and perfect Description of the Isle
of Serke.

Appertaining to the English Crown And never before publicly discoursed of.

Truly setting forth The notable stratagem whereby it was first taken, The
Nature of the place and people. Their Government, Customs, Manufactures and
other particulars, No less necessary than pleasant to be known.

In a Letter from a Gentleman now inhabiting there, to his Friend and Kinsman
in London.

LONDON, Printed by John Lock for John Clarke at the Bible and Harp in
West-Smith-Field. 1673.

MR. Wearis keeping a Coffee-house next door to Symonds Inn in Chancery Lane
London, having lived several years heretofore in this Isle of Serke here
described, will be ready to gratify any Gentleman's curiosity that shall come
to him concerning the truth of all considerable particulars ^n this Narrative.

DEAR COZEN,
THe Anne of Bristow touching here homewards bound, brought safe those
Commodities I gave you the trouble to send me, and enricht me with the Treasure
of your more welcome Letter; To which though I cannot Answer in the same
handsome expressions and Embroidery of Language (a failure easily excusable in
a place where my Native Tongue is almost a stranger, and French generally
spoken more barbarous then that of Littleton) yet be confident I shall never
when opportunity offers it self come short in the real offices of Good Will and
Affection; I am glad some of our old Acquaintance are still so kind as to
preserve me in their memories, And could not but call Ned and Jenny to help
laugh at the pleasant Narration you make of the surprise many of them are in,
when you tell them I have left South-hampton to go dwell in the Isle of SERKE;
Some inquiring in which of the Indies that strange Island lies, others offering
wagers there is no such place in the World, but that it is younger Sister to
the Isle of Pines; Nor indeed can I condemn their wonder since although this
place has for about fourscore years paid obedience to the English Scepter, yet
scarce one Englishman of a thousand has heard or can give any good Account of
it; our Geographers have herein proved Land-Lopers, and the very Mapps wherein
oftimes Painters gratify their Wives with Joinctures of Imaginary Islands,
have been content to omit the real one; However to satisfy the curiosity of my
Friends, but more especially to comply with your desires (which I must ever
interpret commands) I shall venture on a brief Description of this little part
of the World where Providence has allotted me a pre^ent, and (I thank Heaven)
no uncomfortable Habitation;

SERKE the place whence this Letter comes to Kiss your hands Is an Island
situate in the Channel betwixt England and France, Lying at once in view of
the Banks of Norm^ndy, and of our Two other more eminent Islands of Jers^y and
Guernsey, and about 4 Leagues to the Southwest of the latter; Though its
Circuit or Extent can yield no great Temptation to any Princes ambition to make
himself Master of it, Its Dimensions being not above 5 miles in length, and
about 2 miles in fredth where it is largest over, in other places not so much;
Yet Nature, as if she had here stored up some extraordinary Treasure seems to
have been very solicitous to render it Impregnable, Being on every side
surrounded with vast Rocks and mighty Clifts, whose craggy Tops Braving the
Clouds with their stupendous height, bid defiance to All that shall dream of
forcing an entrance; Two only Ascents or passages there are into it; The first
where all Goods and Commodities are received called La-Soguien where for a
large space through a solid Rock there is a Cart-way cut by Art down to the
Sea, with two strong Gates for its defense, wherein most of the Storage for
Navigation, as Masts, Sails, Anchors, etc. belonging to the Island are kept,
And two pieces of Ordinance above always ready planted to prevent any surprise;
The other is La-Frickerce, where only Passangers can Land, climbing up a Rock
by certain Steps or Stairs cut therein to a vast height, and somewhat
dangerously; Nor is it possible there for above one person to come up at once.

This Description of its Situation I persuade my self, Cozen puts you unto a
little fit of longing to know by what means our Countrymen came at first to
make themselves Master of a place so naturally fortified; And truly in
discovering that, we shall acquaint you with a stratagem excelling most you
shall meet with in the Greek and Roman Histories and equalled by few of those
in the Low Country Wars, or any more modern expeditions.

In the Reign of our matchless Maiden Queen, this Island being wholly possessed
by French (as most of the Inhabitants not only thereof but of Jersey and
Guerns^y too, are to this day of that Nation) A Sea-Captain (whose name I at
present remember not, though it is pity it ever should be swallowed by oblivion)
apprehending Its neighborhood if it continued in the French hands might one
time or other portend no good to the Isles of Jersey and Guernsey the only
remaining Trophies of our French Conquests; solicited the Queen to Commission
him to reduce it to her obedience, who having received former Information of
it, told him the place was so small and the attempt so hazardous it would
scarce be worth while, and that she feared the loss of Men about it would be
more damage, than its taking of Importance or advantage; For you must note at
that time the passage down at La-Soguien was not made, nor did it appear half
so Accessible as now it appears; But our subtle Captain replied. If Her Majesty
would but give him Command and necessaries he durst assure Her to settle the
English colors there without the loss of a Man; The Queen seeing his
confidence yielded to his Importunity, who accompanied with about 100 resolved
Men puts to Sea, and after some time crusing up and down comes and lies before
this Island SERKE in quality of a Merchant-man homewards bound; And making out
his Boat with several taking Commodities the people suffered 3 or 4 of their
Crew to Land, and traded with them with much Amity for a day or two. At last
having insinuated into the good opinion of the credulous Islanders They told
them having been a long Trading Voyage in the Streights their Master was some
time since dead, but had engaged them not to expose his Corpse into the Ocean to
be devoured of the Fish, but to Interr it with Christian Burial in the next
place where they should touch ground, and therefore they desired that Christian
favor of them that they might lay him in their Churchyard, coming only some
few of them on Shore without any Arms to perform the Ceremony; The unwary
people consent, and our Captain with about 20 of his stourest Men with a Coffin
and much seeming solemnity get a Shore; The Natives assisting them to get their
Trojan Horse up the Precipice; but no sooner were they arrived at the Church,
but clapping to the Doors as if they had some private devotions to celebrate at
which the inhabitants might not be present, They break open their Coffin filled
instead of a dead body with Instruments of Death, and instantly arming
themselves slay that small French Guard that there offered resistance, and
retiring to the Landing place secure that, get in more of their company, and in
5 hours time without the loss of one Man, made themselves Masters of the whole
Island, which ever since that time has had the Honor to boast it self part of
the Dominions of the English Crown.

But since nothing is more necessary to the Life of Man, than those four
Elements whereof He together with the rest of the Universe is originally
composed. I shall in the next place observe how we are therewith accomodated.

Our Air considering the narrowness of the place, and how it is encompassed with
the Ocean Is much better then can be expected, our Heaven serene, and our Sky
generally free from that nasty dish-clout of Fogs and Clouds which in your
Marshes and City too are wont to mufflle up the Suns glorious face, In brief
it is so agreeable to nature, That although I know not one Physician in the
Island (and perhaps we live the longer for their absence) yet to meet here a
hearty old man of fourscore is nothing rare or infrequent.

Our water I confess is sometimes not very ready, and yet we have in the Island
no less than six very fine springs generally running, Whose water purified in
its underground passage, and by being drawn so high through Natures Limbeck,
Bubbles up so free from any smack of Brackishness, that it may compare with
your Lambs-Conduit, and for ought I know is no less miraculous for curing sore
Eyes than Crowders Well.

Our Earth or Soil Is for the most part hot and sandy, yet fruitful enough to
afford all necesseries to its Inhabitants, excellent for bearing all kind of
Roots, As Parsneps, Carrots; Turnips, etc. And very well stored with
fruit trees (for the most part planted of late by the good Husbandry of the
people) Furnishing us with Syder not at all inferior to your Herefordshire
Redstreak, and to render it the more wholesome it is generally boiled with a
little spice, which preserves it and gives it an incomparable Relish; Corn we
have of most sorts, but not in any extraordinary quantity; our pasture is but
short yet exceeding sweet and therefore we have rare Mutton, but no great
plenty of Beef, and Cows only enough to supply us with Milk and Butter, for our
Cheese we have generally from England.

Our Fireing (to speak of the most aspiring Element last) Is for the most part
Furzes and sometimes Turf, For we have but little wood, and no Timber at all
growing throughout the whole Island; so that we are forced either to make shift
with old Apple Tree for our Houses, or furnish our selves as well as we can
with Deal.

For Belly-timber our 3 staple Commodities are Fish, Fowl and Rabbets. Of the
first a little Industry will purchase us a hundred sorts, particularly a large
Fish we call a Vrack-fish which we split, and nailing it to our Walls dry it in
the Sun for part of our Winter provision; As also a large shel-fish taken
plentifully at Low-tides called an Ormond that sticks to the Rocks, whence we
beat them off with a Fosel or Iron hook; It Is much bigger then an Oyster, and
like that good either fresh or pickled; but infinitely more pleasant to the
Gusto, so that an epicure would think his pallat in Paradise if he might but
always gormondize on such delitious Ambrosia, To borrow Aretines phrase upon
his eating a Lamprey.

For Fowl your City cannot be better furnished with Wood-cocks or Widgeons,
besides the abundance of Duck, Mallard, Teal and other wildfowl, with
Clift-Pidgeons with which at some seasons almost the whole Island is covered.

Of Conies we have every where exceeding plenty, and yet least we should want,
nature has provided us a particular Warren, placing at a small distance in the
Sea an Island of about half a mile every way over, which is inhabited by
nothing else whether we commonly go a Ferreting and have thence such abundance
that it has been confidently told me some Families here have made 15 or ^0 l. a
year only of their Skins; If all this rich fare will not content you, we have a
most excellent Bo^tage made of Milk Bacon, Coleworts, Mackerel and Gooseberries
boiled together all to pieces, which our Mode Is to eat, not with the ceremony
of a spoon, but the more Courtly way of a great piece of bread furiously plying
between your mouth and the Kettle.

But least you should think we mind too much our Bellies take next a survey of
our political Government first for our defense we have a Captain with about 40
Soldiers, who continually keep Guard, and are maintained by contribution of
the Inhabitants; Then we have a Court of Judicature held every Tuesday where an
honest Fisherman we call the Judge, Another (at present his Son) that is
entitled Monsieur Le Provest, a Person that has the gift of writing, and
learning enough ^o read the Obligation of a Bond, serving as Clerk or Recorder,
with 5 other sage Burgers that are Justices or some of them meet, and without
any tedious formalities, Intricate Demurrers, special Verdicts, wiredrawn
Arguments, chargable Injunctions, multiplied Motions, or endless Writs of
Error, briskly determine all causes Secundum Aequum and bonum according to
their Mother-wit and grave discretions except in Criminals where Life is
concerned, in which case the offenders are immediately sent away for trial and
punishment to Guernsey.

Since the taking the place by the English Hugenote Ministers officiating, the
people have subscribed to the Discipline which beyond the Seas They call
Reformed, But wanting much of that beauty and decent order wherewith the Church
of England entertains her Children, The present Minister (whom I must
acknowledge a person of more Industry and parts than could be hoped for among
such people) has lately begun Teach Grammar to the Children with Writing and
Arithmetic, erecting a School for that purpose, so that who knows to that
prodigious Learning we may here one day arrive? Sure I am, the genius of the
people cannot but be docible, since they are naturally of a courteous affable
temper, and the least tainted with Pride that ever I saw any any of their
Nation; That apish variety of fantastic fashions wherewith Paris is justly
accused to infect all Europe, has here no footing; where every one retains the
same garb their Ancestors wore in the days of Hugh Capet and King Pippin, so
that I can give small encouragement to any of the Knights of the Thimble to
transport themselves hither, where Cucumbers are like to be more plenty than in
the backside of St. Clements; Each man religiously preserving his vast ^lew
Trunk Breeches with a Cod-peice larger than King Harry^s, and a Coat almost
like a Dutch Froes Vest, or one of your Watermens Liveries; Nor are the Women
behind hand with them in their Hospital gowns of the same color Wooden
sandalls, white Stockings, and Red Petticoats so mean they are scarce worth
taking up; Both Sexes on Festivals were large Ruffs and the Women instead of
Hats or Hoods Truss up there hair, The more Gentile sort in a kind of
Cabbidge-net, those of meaner Fortunes in a piece of Linen perhaps an old
dish-clout turned out of service, or the fagg end of a Table-cloath that has
escaped the persecution of washing ever since the Reformation; This they tying
on the Top make it show like a Turkish Turbant, but that part of it hangs down
their backs like a Veil, which might be of use to our wanton youngsters when
the Spirit moves them to a kissing exercise, but that we are never in such case
put to use violence. For though our Females for proportion and complexion are
perfect French, and may for the most part without any usurpation assume Don
Quixots Title of, Damsells of the ill favored Face, yet to compensate that
(and it is much this Sex should know their own defects) they are the most kind
and obliging in the World, so sprightly, frollick, and gay-humourd that I am
confident Mahomet can no where pick up more buxome Girls to stock his Paradise
with.

But it is more then time to release your patience, save that I persuade my self
you have not had enough to read half thus far, let me conclude with a word or
two of our Trade, which I confess is not very great to the Levant or either of
the Indies, Bristol and some other of your Western Ports being the furthest
places of our traffic: for the grand and almost only Manufacture of our Island
being knitting, which our People perform with a wonderful dexterity both for
Stockings, Gloves, Caps and Waste-coats, Men Women and Children being brought
up to it: so that you may commonly see 30 or 40 of them assembled in a Barn,
which you would take for a Conventicle of your sweet singers of Israel. for
though all ply their knitting devoutly, yet at the same time they tune their
pipes: and torture some old song with more distracted notes, than a Country
Quire does one of Hopkins his Psalms; these commodityes when finished we vend
into England at the places aforesaid, having several small vessels for that
purpose, and thence in return furnish our selves with necessaries.

I doubt not but by this time you repent your curiosity and confess that I have
sufficiently tormented you with the Isle of SERKE, nor know I any way to
receive your good opinion, which I am more than confident my tediousness has
forfeited, but by begging your pardon and drinking your health in a black Jack
of French Wine, which paying no custom we have here as plentifully cheap as in
Faance it self; I hope you will pledge me at the Bear, where if the old Bacchus
be still living commend me to him, assure all my friends that I shall return
their loves with usery, speak my respects particularly to Esquire D. Cap. S. and to
your self take me as I am,

All this though you read it not till Michaelmas was t^ld you at Serke this
1rst of April old style. 1673. Wholly and entirely your most affectionate
Kinsman and humble servant. F. W.

FINIS.

