A SERMON Before the SOCIETIES FOR Reformation of Manners IN DUBLIN: Preached
in NEW-ROW, April the 26th. School.

By NATH. WELD.

Published at the desire of the said SOCIETIES.

DVBLIN: Printed by Andrew Crook, for Eliphal Dobson, Bookseller at the
Stationers Arms in Castle-street, MDCXCVIII.

To the SOCIETIES FOR Reformation.
WHEN I was called to this Service, I considered that you had several excellent
Sermons already in your Hands, in which I found those Prudent Directions, and
Persuasive Arguments for promoting your Pious Design, that seemed to me to
supersede the necessity of adding more in particular; or of saying again what
was much better said before. I thought therefore I could not be more
Serviceable to this Good Work, than by Directing you to that Sacred Fountain,
from whence all your Supplies and Successes flow. This I have Attempted in the
following Sermon: And, though I am sensible the Performance is very mean, yet
since you Judge its Publication may be of some Use, I choose thus to Expose my
Weaknesses to Public Uiew, rather than decline any Testimony of my Zeal for
this Excellent Undertaking

And that it may prosper in your Hands, I stall not cease to Pray, that you may
have fresh Effusions of the Holy Spirit upon you, to preserve your Zeal from
Decays, and to carry you on with yet greater Alacrity: So that it may be
evident, it is not only the Novelty of the Attempt that Charms you into some
Fondness for it at the present, but that you are Acted by Nobler, and more
Steady Principles in this matter.

I do also hope you will be so far under the Conduct of the Spirit of Wisdom
from above, that your mutual Love and Correspondence, will not be Abated or
Interrupted by any unkind Insinuations, nor you be Diverted from your present
Work, to an unseasonable Enquiry how the Flame was first kindled, when our
utmost United Endeavors are necessary to Quench it. The Suppressing Profaneness
is visibly our common Interest, and we may make this Advantage of our unhappy
separate Communions, to provoke one another to an Holy Emulation.

Let us only contend, who shall be most Zealous and Exemplary in serious Piety,
and abound most in the Exercise of that diffusive Charity, that confines not
its self within the narrow bounds of a party, but Embraces all without
Distinction that appear to have the Character and Impress of Real Holiness: And
if we be thus affected toward one another, the mischievous Effects of our
different Apprehensions and Practices in lesser Matters, will be in a great
measure prevented. That this may be the amiable Temper of Protestants toward
each other, and particularly yours, and that in Acting Conformably to it, your
Pious Endeavous to Reform a Licentious Age, may be Crowned with Visible and
Glorious Success; shall be the Prayer of

Your Servant in the Gospel, N. W.

Isaiah XXXII. 14. Verses. Because the Palaces shall be forsaken, the multitude
of the City left, etc. Isaiah XXXII. 15. Verses. Until the Spirit be poured
upon us from on high, and the Wilderness be a fruitful Field, and the fruitful
Field be counted for a Forest. Isaiah XXXII. 16. Verses. Then Judgment shall
dwell in the Wilderness, and Righteousness remain in the fruitful Field. Isaiah
XXXII. 17. Verses. And the work of Righteousness shall be Peace, and the effect
of Righteousness, Quietness and assurance for ever. Isaiah XXXII. 18. Verses.
And my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and
in quiet resting places.
THE Degenerate Condition of Human Nature, is obvious to every Eye, and
administers just occasion of wonder and lamentation to all that have any free
and raised thoughts about their own Being and End. That Nature, which
originally was a bright resemblance of the Divine Purity, like Eden the Garden
of the Lord, is in its fallen State, a confused, deformed Mass, a barren
Wilderness. It is despoiled of those Moral Excellencies that were the Glories
of our Innocent State: It is perverted to that degree, that reasonable
creatures are under the power of disaffection to their true happiness.

And being maimed in that principal point, a deluge of all kinds of disorders
and miseries is broke in upon it. How is it oppressed by malicious Devils,
invaded by loathsome Vices, under the government of those defiling, dividing
Lusts, that make men even cruel to themselves, and enemies to one another! Who
that has any bowels of love to that Nature whereof he is a part, can behold it
laboring under these dismal ruins, and hastening to greater, with an
insensible frame, or refuse to contribute his utmost toward its relief? This
Generous Motive has (I hope) had its influence on you (my Brethren) who are
engaged in this Pious Design of promoting a Practical Reformation. A Work,
beyond exception, excellent at all times; and so highly necessary at this, that
without some considerable Advances in it, we may yet entertain the most dismal
apprehensions of our own Estate, and expect to be abandoned to all the
Calamities an Incorrigible People can deserve. And yet this necessary Work is
attended with such formidable difficulties, as would utterly discourage our
attempts, and make us conclude our Wound incurable; if we had no reason to
expect the concurrence and assistance of a Power above our own: To this
Glorious Spring of our help, my Text directs you, wherein an happy reformed
state of things is described, and amplified by the cause from which it flows,
and the happy Fruit it bears.

First, A Reformed State of things is described in part of the 15 and 16 v. In
it, persons whose hearts and lives were like a barren Wilderness, became
Fruitful in universal Holiness; and that to such a degree, that they who before
were accounted Fruitful, comparatively with them are but as the Forest: Among
them Judgment and Righteousness abound; Terms comprehensive of the Duties of
Piety toward God, and Justice and Charity toward Men: When a people are
thoroughly Reformed, these excellent Virtues will flow down our streets like a
stream.

Secondly, You have here the Cause that produces such an happy Change, viz. The
pouring the Spirit from on high: This is as necessary in order to it, as the
warm Beams of the Sun, and gentle fruitful Showers are, that the face of our
Earth may be renewed again.

Thirdly, You have the comfortable effects of this Reformed State in abundance
of temporal prosperity and peace, and the secure stable continuance thereof,
even to succeeding Generations 17 and 18 verses.

I am not concerned to enquire what particular time these Words refer unto:
Expositors generally agree, that they had a partial accomplishment upon the
return of the Jews from the Babylonish Captivity: And a fuller one in a
Spiritual sense at the coming of the Messiah; though some expect to see them
literally fulfilled in a Glorious state of things yet to commence. But my
design from the Words, engages me not to determine in this matter, for I shall
only improve the connection which the Prophet here observes, between pouring out
the Spirit from on high, and such a plentiful Increase of Judgment and
Righteousness. And this shall be the Subject of what I shall offer to you from
these words,

Doct. That the effusion of the holy Spirit is necessary in order to an
effectual and thorough Reformation.

Now the consideration of this Truth leads me,

First, To Enquire what we are to understand by this pouring forth the Spirit
from on high. Secondly, To show what Influence this effusion of the Holy Spirit
has upon an effectual and thorough Reformation. And when I have made some brief
Reflections on each of these, I shall chiefly insist on the Application of this
truth, to the present Occasion.

First, Let us consider what is to be understood by pouring the Spirit from on
high; and all that I shall observe to you under this head, shall be in these
Three Propositions.

First, That there are real communications of the Spirit of God to Men: That
Divine Spirit that garnished the Heavens, and moved upon the Face of the Waters
in the old Creation; has he no share of efficiency in the new? This is most
Incredible, and so much the rather, because the work of Application in this
Economy, pecularly terminates in him: Indeed by what display of his Divine
Power he works upon the Souls of men, is not easy to be expressed or
conceived: Doubtless, it is in a manner, that is accommodated to our rational
Faculties, and fully consistent with that Liberty that is Essential to a free
Creature. But tho the nature of these Operations be secret, like the Original
of the Wind, yet the Effects thereof, are as sensible as its sound and force,
to which they are compared by our Savior. John 3.8.
And why should it be thought Unreasonable, that this Blessed Spirit should
have access to ours, when Wicked Spirits may, and can fill the heart, and do
work effectually in the children of Disobedience: Acts 5.3. Ephesians. 2.2.
And even the Heathen world was wont to ascribe any extraordinary appearances
in men, to their having the Spirit of God; as Pharaoh concerning Joseph, can we
find such a man as this, Genesis 41.38. Dan. 5.14.
one in whom the Spirit of God is. And Belshazzar says to Daniel, I have heard
of thee, that the Spirit of the Gods is in thee. Let not such a Truth be
doubted among Christians, that extorted an acknowledgement of it self, by its
own Evidence from a Pagan World.

Secondly, These communications of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.4.
are of several kinds; for there are diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit,
he is the Sacred Fountain both of common Gifts, and special Grace, and may be
said to be poured out upon men with respect to both.

First, In the dispensation of common Gifts. In this sense many are anointed,
who are not truly Sanctified; they have a manifestation of the Spirit given
them to profit withal; they are qualified for some particular service to which
they were appointed; (...). 45.^.4.
as Cyrus is called God's anointed, tho he knew not God. Thus eminent
Qualifications for the Civil Magistracy, such as Wisdom, Integrity, Justice,
Fortitude, etc. are a communication from the Spirit: In this sense the Spirit
of the Lord is said to come upon Saul, when the Cruelty of Nahash raised his
Courage, 1 Samuel 11.6.
to deliver the men of Jabesh Gilead. Thus also Ministerial Gifts are a
Dispensation of the Spirit; in 1 Cor. 12.9, and 10 verses, the Apostle
enumerates several of them, both ordinary and extraordinary, and concludes
verse 12. All these works one and the same Spirit dividing to every man
severally as he will. Under this head we may also consider those common
Operations of the Holy Spirit, by which he enlightens the Minds, and awakens
the Consciences of many who are not truly sanctified: On this account, they are
said to be partakers of the Holy Ghost, Heb. 6.4. By those rational convictions
which he suggests to their Minds, Genesis 6.3.
the Spirit of God strives with the Spirits of Men; 1 These. 5.19. Isa. 63.10.
and when sinners do desparately outrage their own light, and Rebel against it,
they are said to quench and vex the Holy Spirit: So that this is a way of
expression familiar and frequent in the Scriptures, and we may well be allowed
to conform our selves thereto, tho, some profane Wits have attempted to expose
such kind of Language, as Cant Enthusiasm, or Mystical Nonsense, to the great
reproach of the Holy Scriptures, and dishonor of the Holy Spirit who Inspired
them.

Secondly, In the communication of special Grace: Thus God promises, Zech.
12.10. And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, the Spirit of Grace, and of Supplications, etc. The Holy Spirit is
poured out as a Spirit of Grace, both when he Implants Grace, and when he
Excites it.

First, When he Implants Grace; for he it is that forms those inward
dispositions, that are the Seeds and Principles of Holiness; and in this way of
Operation, he introduces a marvelous Change; he disingages men from a wild
purfuit of deluding happiness in sensible good, and causes them to become
rightly affected to God in a Redeemer, as their rightful Lord and Sovereign
satisfying good. Herein lies much of the Nature of true Conversion, which in
the Scripture dialect, is to be born again, and born of the Spirit. See John
3.3 and 6.

Secondly, He is poured out as a Spirit of Grace, when he excites it: Holy
Souls do experimentally know, that there are such things as Divine Influences,
by which, gracious affections are enlarged, and their Souls do follow hard
after God: Psalm. 63.8.
And why should it be thought strange, that the blessed Spirit should move upon
his own work, and raise and strengthen those Holy dispositions, which himself
has formed? Psalm. 63.12.
Does not David pray that God would uphold him with his free Spirit, and under
Spiritual Decays and Indisposedness for intercourse with God? How many vehement
desires does his holy Soul breath forth, for quickening Influences in that 119
Psalm. I come to the Third Proposition.

Thirdly, There are Seasons wherein these communications of the Spirit, are
more plenteous and abundant than at other times. Sometimes they may in a great
measure be suspended, our sloth and misimprovement may forfeit them; and then
the interests of practical Godliness, will lie in a languishing state, and the
good things that are in us be ready to dye. In this frame, we shall have little
delight in Converses with God, or Zeal for his Glory; our hearts will be
unready for self-denying; instances of Obedience, and generous designs of
usefulness to others, will be swallowed up by some poor low Interests which the
Flesh calls our own. But there are happy Seasons, wherein the Spirit of Life is
poured forth again, and these Spiritual ruins are repaired thereby; and when
this Blessing becomes General, the effects of it will soon be visible in the
World. It Is to such an eminent Dispensation that my Text refers; and from
thence the Prophet dates the beginnings of happy Times: How far we may think
our selves concerned in this matter, I shall inquire in the Application. I
proceed therefore to the Second General.

Secondly, What Influence has this Effusion of the Holy Spirit upon an
effectual thorough Reformation? You may take some account thereof in Two
particulars.

First, It Is by an Effusion of the Holy Spirit, that those Instruments whom God
is pleased to employ in this Work, are prepared for it, and engaged in it. This
great Event is not brought about by an immediate display of absolute power, but
the Wisdom of God is pleased to use suitable and congruous means, and he finds
'em not fitted to his hand but by pouring out his Spirit upon them, he makes
them so.

The Concurrence of the Civil Magistrate is ordinarily necessary, for producing
a general Reformation: If they be unqualifyed for their place, and negligent in
their work, if they Encourage profaneness by their practice; such neglects and
dangerous Examples, are likely to have a fatal influence upon their people;
Experience has taught us, how from such a poluted Fountain, Irreligion and Vice
will soon spread through a Land: As often as there were Idolatrous Kings in
Judah, the people generally complied with their Apostasy; and how rarely are
great men truly good. It Is but seldom that serious Piety is the ornament of the
purple Robe, though it shines with a most amiable luster, when it is found there:
When therefore a people are blessed with Wise and Religious Magistrates: When
that exalted Clay is molded into the Divine Image, we may well account them
the productions of Divine Power and Grace: They are anointed with the holy
Spirit.

It Is he alone that can speak effectually to the Hearts of Princes, and make
them zealous in the matters of their God. It Is by Wisdom from above, that they
come to discern it their true Interest to promote practical Godliness, that the
Throne may be established in Righteousness, rather than to study their security
by methods of carnal policy; as though they hoped to gain the worse, which is
commonly the greatest part, by an unrestrained Indulgence of their Lusts.

It Is he alone that can influence Subordinate Magistrates, so as to possess
them with a sense of their Duty, and dispose them to a zealous attendance on
it, that they may attain the end for which they bear the Sword of Civil
Magistracy in becoming a terror to evil doers.

Again, the Concurrence of the Ministry is ordinarily requisite, in order to a
National Reformation. It Is they that are to lift up their voice like a Trumpet,
and show the House of Judah and Israel their Sins: If they know not the Lord,
and stand not in his Counsel: If they be remise in their work, or under the
Influence of carnal sensual affections in their lives, they will disserve
Religion more by their Practice, than they can promote it by their Doctrine;
under such unhappy circumstances, from the Prophet and Priest, profaneness goes
out through the Land. They must be burning and shining Lights themselves, who
would be instrumental to kindle the flames of Piety and Zeal in others. Now it
must be by the effusion of the holy Spirit that the sons of Levi are purified:
It Is he that cloths his Priests with Righteousness: It Is a plentiful Anointing
they receive from him, that makes their faces shine, that puts a luster on
their Ministrations, that gives them an Authority in the Consciences of their
People, and so qualifies them for success in their Work.

I might add, that persons of some Eminency and Interest among the People, must
ordinarily help in this Work, to be exemplary to others, to call for Justice,
and to strengthen the hands of Magistrates and Ministers.

So that it is manifest so many persons of different Characters, Interests and
Stations, must be employed in this Work; that it requires more than Human
Wisdom and Power to engage and unite them in it: It Is therefore the Work of
that Powerful Spirit, who has immediate access to the heart, and an omnipotent
dominion over it; who can form the same inclinations in a multitude at once,
and cause a Nation to be born in a day, and when he is pleased to give forth
his Effectual Command, his word goes very swiftly.

Secondly, It Is by the effusion of the holy Spirit, that the Endeavors which
these prepared Instruments use, do become most effectual. I acknowledge, That
by the vigorous execution of Wholesome Laws and the concurrent influence of a
Faithful Minestry, open and scandalous Profaness may be in a good measure
suppressed; and even this is an invaluable Mercy, worth all our care and pains
(and it must be ascribed to the holy Spirit, as appears by the former Head.)

But the Work will not be carried far, nor last long, without some internal
operations o^ the (...), outward means can have but little success. The
dispensation of the Word will be but a Dead Letter, if it be not the
ministration of the Spirit: Human Laws and Penalties may put men upon seeking
greater seeresy as a shelter for their sins; but it is the holy Spirit
awakening men's consciences, and sanctifying their hearts, that must effectually
Reform them. Other Remedies do but cover the Disease, this cures it: External
applications do but set up a Dique against the Stream; the Sanctifying
operations of the Spirit, dry up the Fountain, and though there are but few truly
sanctified, yet many may be so convinced, and see such an awful efficacy in the
Considerations, which an enlightened conscience represents, as may be more
effectual restraints, than external severities: For eternal Rewards and
Punishments are confessedly of the highest and most awful importance to those
that indeed believe them, and therefore our hopes and fears that are conversant
about them, are the most powerful springs of action.

I say not this to discourage your Pious attempts of exposing Scandalous
Sinners to the punishment the Law assigns. For this is highly our duty, and
indeed necessary to the most of such offenders, who are so hardened and
stupefied by their lusts, that they scarce resent any punishment but what they
feel: Yet we should not satisfy our selves with this, but raise our thoughts
and desires higher, even to those victorious operations of the Blessed Spirit,
by which Sin may be mortified as well as restrained.

I proceed now to the application of this Truth to the present occasion; And
there are some things I would deduce from hence both for your Direction about
your work, and for your Encouragement in it.

First, By way of Direction, Would you manage your laudable Attempts against
Profaneness with happy success? Contribute thou your utmost toward obtaining
this Invaluable Blessing; even a fresh effusion of the holy Spirit. If he
withold or withdraw his help, the Work will lie languishing on your hands, and
even your own Zeal, that at present seems inflamed, will gradually abate, and
at length expire, and the whole Design prove abortive to the disappointment of
our Prayers and Hopes, and (...) Sons of Belial and Powers of Darkness. But if
the holy Spirit breath upon your Endeavors, the Work will go on prosperously,
and prevail mightily, till Satan fall like Lightning from Heaven before you,
and his Kingdom be visibly shaken.

Obj. But are not the communications of the holy Spirit arbitrary, like the
Rain that comes down from Heaven, which waits not for Men, and tarries not for
the sons of Men? Does not that sacred Wind blow where it lists? What then can
we contribute toward obtaining those Heavenly Gales that flow from Sovereign
Grace?

Answ. There are Means appointed, in the due use of which, this Blessing may be
obtained. That merciful God who is the best of Beings, denies not his gracious
Assistances, when we are not wanting to our selves in seeking them: And I
cannot offer any thing more serviceable to your Design, than by pointing out
the way how you may obtain those helps upon which the success of all depends.
And therefore,

First, Implore the effusions and assistances of the holy Spirit by humble
importunate prayer. This is a way wherein every one of you may be useful, and
it is a way you are directed to, by God himself, in Ezekiel. 26, 27 verse, you find
this mercy promised, I will (says God) put my Spirit within you, and cause you
to walk in my Statutes, and keep my Judgments, and do them. But then, this
promise is not fulfilled while we cast off the use of means, and therefore God
adds, in 37 verse, I will yet for this, be enquired of by the house of Israel
to do it for them. To excite you so to do, Consider,

First, This is a Mercy promised, and therefore we have ground and warrant for
our Faith and Hope in Prayer: Yea the promises of it are referred for their
fullest accomplishment to the latter days: Thus Acts 2.16, 17 verses, This is
that which was spoken of by the Prophet Joel. And it shall come to pass in the
last days (says God) I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, etc. There was
a communication of the Spirit under the Old Testament, but it was more
sparingly, like the watering of a Garden by a single hand; but he is dispensed
more liberally and universally under the New, like the Clouds pouring down Rain
upon the Earth: Upon all flesh, without distinction of Jew and Gentile. I am
sensible that the Apostle applies that Promise more eminently to extraordinary
Gifts, but I see no reason to confine it so as to exclude ordinary ones;
especially since the former were in order to the greater success of the latter.
I acknowledge also, that the Apostle speaks of that Promise, as fulfilled in
the Primitive times: But Judicious Expositors have well observed, That such
Promises as concern necessary Mercies, have not their full accomplishment at
once, they are fulfilled again and again in every Age, as the necessities of the
Church to which in common they belong, do roquire. The last Days are the whole
time of the Gospel, ^ Cor. 3.9.
and therefore the Apostle speaks of the Gospel State in general, as becoming
Glorious, by its being the ministration of the Spirit, though there may be some
particular seasons that do more exceed in glory: This then is a promised Mercy;
so that when we plead with God in Prayer for it, we may hold up his own Word as
our Warrant, and bottom our hope of success on his Faithfulness, as well as
Mercy.

Secondly, This is a necessary Mercy: And as the former Considerration should
raise our hope, so this bespeaks our Importunity: The growth of Irreligion, and
the decays of the power of Godliness are such among us, that without it, we
shall not be healed. We may try many remedies ('it is our duty to do so) and they
may have an hopeful and promising appearance; but alas all will be a dead
Image, if the Spirit of life breath not in it: The Stream of corrupt nature
will overbear and baffle all our feeble opposition, if omnipotent Grace do not
interpose and help: Let us then lay open our Wounds before the great Physician,
let us spread our necessities before the Father of Mercies, who has directed us
to argue from our own bowels, and to expect much more from his: Luke, 11.13. If
(says our Savior) ye being evil know how to give good gifts to your children,
how much more will your Heavenly Father give his holy Spirit to them that ask
him. Let us then both in our Joint Addresses, and Secret Retirements, send up
the earnest importunate Cries of Perishing Creatures: Let our hearts cry as
loudly as our wants do, that God would pour down his Spirit upon this declining
Generation; Oh what an happy Change would it make, and how soon would the face
of our Earth be renewed again?

Secondly, Wait for this Mercy in a diligent attendance on your duty: We must
set upon Action when God calls, and trust him for strength as well as success:
The assistance of the holy Spirit is not designed to indulge our sloth, or to
do the work without us, but to animate our Industry and help us in it: Apply
your selves to this present Service therefore with all your might: Up and be
doing, and the Lord will be with you, and let your frame and actings be such,
as may be likely to be thus owned from Heaven. In order whereunto, I shall take
the liberty to offer two Directions.

First, Labor to act from those principles in this matter, that are agreeable
to the word of God, and may render your endeavors pleasing to him: A bad End
may vitiate a good Action, and blast its usefulness to men, as well as hinder
its acceptance with God. Beware that you do not cover any Lust with the
Disguise of Zeal for God. Let not Passion, Malice, or Revenge, Influence you to
any of your Informations or Prosecutions: But let Zeal for the Honor of God,
Compassion to the Souls of men, and generous aims at the public good, be the
great Springs of your Actings.

First, Zeal for God and the Honor of Religion. All Sin has a manifest
tendency to dishonor the blessed God: It Is a Reflection on his infinite Wisdom
and Goodness, as though he had burdened our Nature with an heavy Yoke, an
unsuitable unequal Law. It Is a Denial of his Authority, as though he had no just
right to Govern his own Creature. It would cast down the glorious Jehovah from
his Throne of Supremacy over the Children of Men; and surely the attempt is
horrible, though it wants success, and the affront is more hanious, when Sin is
open and notorious, so that others see our contemptuous disregards of that
Supreme being: Let your Hearts be deeply affected with this malignity of Sin,
in all your endeavous to suppress it; and labor to revive the Power and
Practice of serious Religion with this end in your eye, that your Heavenly
Father may be glorified; for he is glorified by our bringing forth much Fruit,
John 15.8. The Holiness of the Members makes an honorable representation to
the world of their glorious head. It shows forth the efficacy of the Mediation
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the power of his Grace, when our barren Nature is
recovered to Fruitfulness. This would be the great honor of the Christian
Religion. It would represent it amiable and recommend it to the acceptance of a
blind prejudiced World Who could doubt of its divine Original, when they saw,
its divine Effects; in transforming the Hearts of men, Purifying their Lives,
and making them Fruitful in all instances of Virtue and Piety.

Secondly, Compassion to the Souls of Men, even theirs whom your duty obliges
you to expose to shame and punishment: Let Love to their Persons be flaming in
your Breasts, while you express a just detestation of their Sins: Believe you
do 'em a friendly Office, while they mistake you for their Enemies; look upon
your Informations against them, under the notion of a Remedy rather than a
Penalty, and beg of God that it may be effectual. This may be the first step
toward saving a Soul from Death; for they that are not capable of other
Arguments, may begin to learn by suffering, some part of the evil of Sin.

To excite your Compassions, consider the extreme danger of precious Souls.
What a fatal precipice is before 'em? Into what a dreadful amazing Gulf are
they hasty to plunge themselves, even a State of Everlasting woe? May not the
thoughts of it make our Flesh to tremble, and over whelm our minds if we do
seriously believe it: And are these things indeed so? Is this terrible Hell
more than a painted Fire? Is it a certain reality, near at hand? Are multitudes
of our fellow Creatures going down into it before our eyes? How should this
consideration raise our deepest Compassion, and (as the Prophet speaks) make
our very Bowels to sound as an Harp. My Brethren, if we have any Principles of
Tenderness, and Pity in our Constitution, let us express them by our utmost
endeavors, to prevent this dreadful ruin to Souls. Act from this Principle in
your present work.

Thirdly, Generous aims at the public good: We cannot more effectually consult
the welfare of our Lands, than by methods of Reforming them; for Sin brings
ruin upon Collective Bodies in this World, as well as upon particular Persons
in the next. But Righteousness exalts a Nation; Prove. 14.24.
it ingages the Indulgent favorable Providence of God on their side; his
Protection will be a Wall of defense unto them, his favor will make them
great: So that they shall be the Head and not the Tail, chief among the
Nations, and Princess among the Provinces: Where Justice, Temperance, Charity
and Piety abound, they put a luster upon such a People in the Eyes of others.
How effectually was this Exemplified in the Kingdom of Judah, when they were
zealous for the Law of their God, they were the Glory of all Lands, the Wonder
and Envy of other Nations; their Enemies submitted themselves on every side,
Peace and abundant Prosperity were the Blessings of their happy Times. So that
zeal for Practical Religion is the best Expedient for the welfare of our Lands,
whose good we are bound to seek under all manner of Obligations. If such
motives as these have the governing Influence over you in your present work,
you may comfortably expect that God will be with you in it.

A Second Direction is, carefully avoid every thing that may provoke the Holy
Spirit to deny or withdraw his Influence and Help; and among other evils that
have such a fatal Tendency. Let me use the freedom and faithfulness to caution
you against these four.

First, Cold Neutrality: Too many are ready to say, This is a matter that does
not concern me; am I my Brothers keeper? Yes you are, the Authority of God has
made you so, and you must be responsable to him for your neglect. It Is the
voice of God to us all at this day, and the voice of the Civil Magistrate; Who
is on my side, who? and here is no room for Neuters. If you are not with us,
you are in the righteous construction of God against us. Mat. 12.30.


It has been already proved abundantly by abler hands, who have appeared for
the Encouragement and Defense of this Cause; that private Persons are obliged
to promote Reforming work, as far as regularly they can; the most excellent
Laws avail but little, without a vigorous Execution. Now the Law cannot be
Executed unless the Transgressor be Convicted; and you know this Conviction is
devolved upon the hand of private Persons: So that the Interests of Practical
Religion need your help, and you cannot refuse it without incurring the heavy
displeasure of God, and exposing your selves to the Curse that was denounced
against those, who would not go forth to the help of the Lord against the
might: Yea by your neglects, you become accessaries to all the Sins you might
^revent, and so are chargeable with other men's Guilt, as well as laden with
your own. Oh then let not Sloth, or a base regard to your carnal Interests, or
indifferency in the matters of God, or fear of offending man, tempt you to a
neglect of this Duty. If we will not do as much as this, when the honor of
God, the good of Souls, and the public Interest require it, we seem to be a
reproach to the rational nature of man, and much more unworthy of the
dignifying name of Christian.

Secondly, Neglects of personal Reformation, to appear zealous against the
Lusts of others, and Indulge our own, would be such a piece of vile hypocrisy,
as would justly expose us to the Scorn of men, as well as the wrath of God.
Your undertaking obliges you to the utmost care to keep your Garments
undefiled, and to be exemplary in universal Holiness: This will give you
boldness before the Faces of men, and some Authority and respect in their
Consciences. Oh then begin impartially to practice Reforming work at home, and
go not about to pull a Mote out of your Brothers Eye, with a Beam in your own.

Thirdly, Pride and swelling Self-conceit, as tho we were the men, and Wisdom
and Holiness should dye with us: As tho we expected to be distinguished from
others, and preferred before them, as the zealous Reformers of the Age. This is
a Snare that younger persons are in most danger to be taken in; but whoever are
infected with it, it is hateful to God, who abhors the Proud. Isa. 57.15.
It Is humble Souls that are the Temple, the Throne of the holy Spirit; he
dwells with them, deligts in them. Oh then watch against Self-exalting
thoughts, and if God honor you to be of any Use, give him all the Praise, and
learn to say humbly with the Apostle Paul, By the Grace of God I am what I am.
1 Cor. 15.10.
Remember you are chargable with omissions, enough to make you Arraign your
selves as unprofitable Servants; and the defects of your best works are such as
need Pardoning mercy, and the attoning Blood of Christ.

Fourthly, Uncharitable breaches, and distances in affection from one another.
It Is a remarkable connection you have in Ephesians. 4.30, 31. Grieve not the Holy
Spirit of God, etc. and then it follows; Let all bitterness, and wrath, and
anger, and clamor, and evil speaking, be put away from you, with all malice,
and be you kind to one another. The holy Spirit is a Spirit of Unity, peace and
love. Dividing Spirits banish him: I am afraid we have been faulty on all
sides, in censures, envy, variance, wrath, etc. May such unhappy Flames expire,
and never be kindled more: For (my Brethren) Are we not one Body, as to
Principles of Truth, and the great Interests of Practical Godliness? Yea, Are
we not of one Communion as to the Essentials of Worship? And though there is some
Variety in the External Forms of Administration, and in Government, yet, why
should the lesser things wherein we differ, be more effectual to divide out
hearts, than the greater, wherein we agree, are to unite us: Oh let us show
that we have received Anointings from the Spirit of love, by our cordial
undissembled affection to one another. Let us banish envy, and narrow Designs
for the Interests of a Party to the prejudice of the Common Good: Let us
cherish noble generous Principles of Mutual Forbearance and Condescension: Let
us cover any untender, less obliging Passages that may occur with the Mantle of
Love, and silently offer up little provocations to new Heats, as a Sacrifice to
Peace; as considering our own Infirmities, and accounting it the Glory of the
Christian Religion, That it can unite our hearts, though our minds be not of the
same size: And if we thus live in Love, we may hope that the God of Love and
Peace will be with us.

And now let me enforce these Directions upon you, by putting you in mind of
that complication of Circumstances, that make it both an inviting and a
pressing opportunity for Reforming Work. And,

First, The great Mercies we have received, oblige us to prepare a
Thank-Offering for our God: The Light of Nature sufficiently dictates this
Duty, and will leave us unexcusable if we neglect ^t: How do Benefits when they
are great and many, and all from ^n unobliged hand; Engage, and even command
our hearts: Who can forbear to love and honor a great and generous Benefactor?
For such a good Man that lives for the good of others, that is a common
Blessing, some would even dare to dye. Romans ^.7.
And is ^^y so much our Benefactor, as the blessed God? Is not his dai^^
Providence an unexhausted spring of inumerable Favors? ^as he not made us
Wonders of Mercy in our own eyes, and to ^e astonishment of Europe, of late
Years? And surely the Be^^^^ are not the less, because the Giver of them is the
(...) Should not undeserved Blessings from the hand of God, make at least as
deep an impression upon our hearts, as they would do from our Fellow Creatures:
They owe us some service, God none; We can make some compensation unto them,
none unto God. But surely all the Laws of Gratitude bind us to express as far
as we are able a thankful temper toward him.

Now would you prepare him an Offering? You cannot find any more acceptable
than this: When the Psalmist's ingenuous heart was inquisitive, Psalm. 116 12.14.
What shall I render to the Lord? This is one great Instance he fixes on, I
will pay thee all my vows. i. e. The Vows I made about Reformation, and better
Obedience: Not, that God is a gainer by our services, or as though our
righteousness did profit him, but his Infinite Goodness is such, that he has
made our Duty and Interest, one; and is best pleased with us, when we are
kindest to our selves.

Secondly, We have now leisure for Reforming Work, while our Lands have rest
from War: Has God restored Peace, that we should indulge our selves in sloth?
God forbid that we should so abuse his Signal Favors: Should we not rather
Argue, that now we are in safety from our Enemies; we will more Resolvedly
pursue his, even our own and other Men's Sins: David was not permitted to build
the House of God, because he had many Wars. That Honor was reserved to crown
the Peace of Solomon's Reign: Thus, National Reformation is a Signal Duty when
we are in public danger, and under the Sword o^ War; but it is a great
difficulty to attend that service amids the Distractions and Confusions of that
Estate. But we shall be left without all excuse, if when God gives us leisure
from other Work, we should neglect his.

Thirdly, Our Lands are now brought under a new state o^ Probation and Trial
before the Lord. The devouring Swor^ is sheathed, that Controversy seems at
present ended: Not that we deserved it, but because an Indulgent God will not
always contend: But now we are constituted in critical circumstances, we are now
on our Good behavior: If therefore we car^^ well under our present Mercies, we
may hope they are but the Introduction to greater; and that God will treat us
as the F^vourites of his Providence.

But if under the Shades of Peace, we indulge our selves Pride, Luxury, Lust,
Irreligion, and so repeat our former provocations; what may we yet expect, but
that he will plead against us with Fury poured out; And his Armory is not yet
empty; The Instruments of Death are still within our sight, and how easily can
a provoked God take them into his hand again, and make us sick, yea, utterly
destroy us in smiting us: Let such Considerations excite your utmost diligence
to procure the pouring forth of the Spirit; no other Expedient will be long
effectual for our help. But I proceed,

Secondly, To add some things for your Encouragement in this Work, And the
great Encouragement I would offer, is this, That there are hopeful Indications
that we are under the beginnings of such a blessed Dispensation, that God is
pouring forth the Spirit from on high upon us.

May we not hope that some of this Sacred Oil is poured on our Soveraigu's
Head, the fruit whereof appears in his Zealous Resolves, effectually to
discourage Profaneness and Immorality, and in his late Excellent Proclamation to
that purpose. With what Transports of Joy should we hear such a Reviving Voice
from the Throne? And may we not expect that the Work will not stop here, but
that our King in his Wisdom, will scatter the Wicked, and bring the Wheel over
them: Prove. 20.26
That his Reign shall become yet more Glorious, by a Triumph over the Vices of
our Degenerate Lands, and those Infernal Powers that propagate and uphold them.
May we not hope that it is the word of the Lord to our Royal Zorobabel, That as
his hand has laid the foundation of our Deliverance, so his hand shall lay on
this completing Head stone also: That we may with Shoutings cry, Grace, Grace
unto it. Zech 4.7.9.


And should it not raise our hopes higher, to behold a portion of the same
Spirit resting upon our Public Councils? Are not those Excellent Laws against
some instances of Vice that have been lately Enacted both in England and this
Kingdom: And that Pious, Zealous Address of those Noble Senators in England,
the fruit thereof. Surely it is matter of great Encouragement and ground of
hope, that our Legislative Powers have thus owned and succored the languishing
Cause of Religion.

Yea several of those that are in Subordinate Authority, seem anointed with the
same Spirit. Among whom, the Magistra^^ of this City, and some persons of Worth
in the Commission for the Peace, near it, deserve a most Honorable
Remembrance, both for their active Zeal in punishing Offenders, and their
prudent care to cover Informers from Violence and Rage.

And is not this Sacred Anointing, upon the head of our Body Politic,
descended to the Skirts of our Garments, even to many Private persons, whose
Spirits God has stirred up to put their hand to this Work with Zeal, Alacrity,
Courage, and Self-denial: It looks as though God had some Merciful Design on
foot, when he has done such a new thing in the Earth, that private persons have
formed themselves into distinct Societies, that their Endeavors may be both
more Regular and Successful in executing our Wholesome Laws: And the Design seems
so much the more to be of God, that there is such a sweet harmony and accord
among persons of different Persuasions, in promoting the common Interest of
Religion.

And (that I may mention no more) It looks like a Token for Good, That so many
of the Rising Generation seem to have in their hearts, some good thing toward
the Lord God of Israel: That the Lord is pleased to rejoice in our Young Men,
that his Providence has so wonderfully secured any of them from the infection
of evil Examples, and preserved them from the Vanities and Vices, to which that
Age is commonly addicted. So that instead of Sensual Intertainments, they
associate for the Exercises of Religious Worship, and to provoke one another to
Love, and to Good Works.

Oh my Brethren, what an happy change may we see in the Face of our Affairs?
What a turn has God given to the Spirits and Inclinations of many? It would be
a denying to give unto God the Glory due to his Name, to ascribe so great an
Effect to a lower Cause: I conclude therefore, that there are some Effusions of
the Spirit from on high among us.

And, Oh what encouragement should you derive from hence, to go on with
undaunted Fortitude and Zeal. May I not apply to you the words of the Prophet
Haggai, 2.4. Yet now be strong oh Zerubbabel, etc. Be strong all ye people of
the Land, says the Lord, and work, for I am with you, says the Lord of Hosts.
This Consideration should be your great Relief against the difficulty of the
Work; you find it proposed for this end by the Holy Ghost, Zech. 4.6. -- Not by
Might nor by Power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord: and then it follows, Who
art thou O great Mountain before Zerubbabel, thou shall become a Plain.
Assistances from the Holy Spirit should raise our Hearts and Hopes above all
discouragement. It must be confessed, there are Mountainous Difficulties in the
Way; but what are they before the Spirit of God? How soon can Omnipotency
smooth and level them? Our Disease is indeed so inveterate; it has spread so
far, and prevailed so long, that our Case would be desparate in any other Hand:
But if that great Physician undertake the Cure of our sick Souls and State, the
work will prosper in his Hand.

This Consideration should also help you against the paucity of the Numbers
that are yet Engaged in this Work; it is yet but in its Infancy and Beginning:
If we do not sin away our own Mercies, this heavenly Dew will descend more
plenteously, and difuse its self more generally; so that this small Cloud shall
cover the whole Heavens: The work is in his Hand, who can of Stones raise up
Children unto Abraham. Let us not therefore despise the day of small things,
but persist in this way of known duty, and refer the Issue to the Sovereign
will of God: Though the Body of the People should not yet be Reformed, yet a
small number of Zealous Pious Persons, may be set in the Balance against all
the rest, and may prevail to obtain a longer space of Repentance for them; and
in order thereto, your Example may provoke others to an Holy Emulation; yea, it
has done so already. The happy Design was at first but in a few hands; all of
them Members of the Established Church. (This Honor God has put upon them, and
it should be far from being matter of Envy to Protestant Dissenters, who (I
hope) will bless God for it, and be ready to acknowledge it to their just
praise upon all occasions) But is not Jacob's Staff already become Two Bands in
this City? And does not the same design happily succeed in some other parts of
this Kingdom, and we hope will in a little time prevail in many more. May we
not see God going forth with us; and shall our Successes dishearten us? Shall
we faint with grounds of hope about us on every side? Oh remember you serve a
good Master; you are Engaged in a most Honorable Work. You have promises
concerning effectual help; and if a Season for an eminent effusion of the Holy
Spirit be at hand, Mercy will further show its pleasing Face to us on every
Hand; Glory will adorn our Lands, and great will be the day of Jezreel.

But whatever be the Issue; though Israel should not now be gathered; though these
attempts for Reformation should be fruitless (which God forbid) yet if your
Hearts be sincere in this Work, the Lord will not be Unrighteous to forget your
Zeal, and that Labor of Love which you have shown, and shall further show to
his Name in this matter.

FINIS.

