SOME REFLECTIONS ON THE Oaths and Declaration Appointed in an Act past in the
first Year of the Reign of King William AND Queen Mary, In reference to the
Roman Catholics of England.

By Sir D. W. Baronet, of the Church of Rome.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCXCV.

To my worthy good Friend.
SIR;
IT was not yet my hap to be tendered the new Oaths, but supposing that at some
time it may, since in the last Sessions of Parliament there were Agitations for
barring all Persons from Voices in Elections of Members for Parliament, and
from Practice in their Professions, besides the Penalties of this Statute, and
Payment of double Taxes, in case of refusing to Swear, and Declare, as by this
Act is required; These and some other Considerations (needless to
particularize) put me on search into the Quality and Sense of these Oaths, with
the Duty and Lawfulness of taking or refusing them. And first I observed, that
in these Oaths there is no declaring or swearing to the King's Supremacy, in
any Things or Causes, nor a Renunciation of the Rights or Titles of any other
Person, nor a Promise of Faith and Allegiance to the present Prince's Heirs and
lawful Successors, nor an Acknowledgment before God and the World of the King's
lawful Title to this Realm, nor a swearing to the plain and common Sense of the
Words; all which were Parts of the former Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance,
and might have raised Scruples, if inserted in these, that are now frivolous. I
likewise observe, that the nonjurat Protestants and the Catholics are not by
the same Reasons induced to refuse to take these Oaths, the one having sworn
the former, the latter generally refusing them. On the whole I have made the
Reflections, which I herewith present to you, my truly dear Friend. I will not
affirm to you, that I am so fully satisfied in this Enquiry, as that I am
resolved to take these Oaths, when required so to do; nor will I conceal from
you, that my private Opinion is, that I may, as a sound Catholic, with a safe
Conscience, without Hazard of Salvation, both take these new Oaths, and
subscribe the Declaration now framed by Parliament. The Matters therein
contained are entirely within the Consideration of the Laws of the Kingdom,
without any relation to the Mysteries of Faith; and therefore I believe you a
competent and proper Judge herein, and earnestly request you to give me your
Thoughts hereof. I would not that it should be said of me, Incidit in Scillam
qui vult vitare Charibdim. I resolve to be governed by your Sentiments of this
Affair, and ever to acknowledge to the World, that I very much honor you, and
am,

SIR, 1st May, 1695. Your real and affectionate Servant.

Because in reading these Reflections there may be occasion for comparing the
several Oaths, I have here set them down at large.
The Oaths and Declaration in the Act of 1 Will. Mar.
1. I A. B. do sincerely promise and swear, That I will be faithful, and bear
true Allegiance to his Majesty King William. So help me God, etc.

2. I A. B. do swear, That I do from my Heart abhor, detest and abjure, as
impious and heretical, that damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes
excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, or any Authority of the Sea of Rome,
may be deposed or murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

3. And I do declare, That no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or
Potentate, has, or ought to have, any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority,
Prehemmence, or Authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, w^thin this Realm. So
help me God, etc.

The Oath of Supremacy, framed in the Act, 1 Eliz. c. 1. which Oath is now
abrogated.
I A. B. do utterly testify, and declare in my Conscience, That the King's
Majesty is the only supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his
Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
Things or Causes, as Temporal; And that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State or Potentate, has, or ought to have, any Jurisdiction, Power,
Superiority, Pre-eminence or Authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within
this Realm. And therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all foreign
Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities and Authorities, and do promise, that from
henceforth I shall bear Faith and true Allegiance to the King's Highness, his
Heirs and lawful Successors, and to my Power shall assist and defend all
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminencies, and Authorities, granted or
belonging to the King's Highness, his Heirs and Successors, or united and
annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. So help me God, and the Contents
of this Book.

The Oath of Allegiance in the Stat. 3 Iac. 1. which Oath is now abrogated.
I A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify and declare, in my
Conscience, before God and the World, That our Sovereign Lord King James is
lawful King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's Dominions and
Conntries; and that the Pope, neither of himself, nor by any Authority of the Sea of Rome, or by any other means with any other, has any Power or Authority
to depose the King, or to dispose of any of his Majesty's Kingdoms or
Dominions, or to authorize any foreign Prince to invade or annoy him or his
Countries, or to discharge any of his Subjects of their Allegiance and
Obedience to his Majesty, or to give License or leave to any of them to bear
Arms, raise Tumults, or to offer any Violence or Hurt to his Majesty's Royal
Person, State, or Government, or to any of his Majesty's Subjects within his
Dominions. Also I do swear from my Heart, That notwithstanding any Declaration
or Sentence of Excommunication or Deprivation, made or granted, or to be made
or granted, by the Pope or his Successors, or by any Authority derived or
pretended to be derived from him or his See, against the said King, his Heirs
or Successors, or any Absolution of the said Subjects from their Obedience, I
will bear Faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors,
and him and them will defend to the uttermost of my Power, against all
Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his or their
Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason or color of any such Sentence or
Declaration, or otherwise, and will do my best Endeavors to disclose and make
known to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, all Treasons and traitorous
Conspiracies which I shall know or hear of, to be against him, or any of them.
And I do further swear, That I do from my Heart abhor, detest and abjure, as
Impious and Heretical, this damnable Doctrine or Position, That Princes which
be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their
Subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I do believe, and in Conscience am
resolved, that neither the Pope, nor any Person whatsoever, has Power to
absolve me of this Oath, or any part thereof, which I acknowledge, by good and
full Authority, to be lawfully ministered unto me, and do renounce all Pardons
and Dispensations to the contrary. And all these things I do plainly and
sincerely acknowledge and sweat, according to these express Words by me spoken,
and according to the plain and common Sense and understanding of the same
Words, without any Equivocation or mental Evasion, or secret Reservation
whatsoever. And I do make this Recognition and Acknowledgment, heartily,
willingly and truly, upon the true Faith of a Christian. So help me God.

REFLECTIONS ON THE Oaths and Declaration Lately appointed in the room of the
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance.
SInce the Supreme Power of this Nation has, for the Security of its
Government, enacted, that all Persons should either take these Oaths, or suffer
severe Penalties for their Refusal: It seems to be an Act of Charity, no less
than of Prudence, to consider the Reasons for taking or refusing them: I apply
my self to Catholics.

The first of these Oaths is barely promissory to bear Faith and true
Allegiance to the present Prince, who, whatever his Title be, has sufficient
Power to rule, Protection infers public Obedience.
govern and protect us: To him, whilst we live under his Government, we are
Subjects: As it is undeniable that he is King of this Realm either de jure or
de facto, or both ways, (which, matters not now to be considered, for no sort
of Right is here sworn to, as was in the former Oaths to our lawful Kings) so
it is plain, that we are his Subjects de jure or de facto, or both ways. The
Right of a Prince and Duty of a Subject are Correllatives, they live and expire
together. Thus whilst he is our King, we are his Subjects; whilst we are his
Subjects we owe him Duty and Fidelity, and ought not to scruple promising it,
when thereto required; to which we are now more strictly obliged, by the
Authority of the Kingdom commanding it.

In all Countries, as well Catholic as others, Fidelity is required from those
in Subjection, unto those who have the Dominion, whether it be gained by
Conquest, or otherways. In our own, Pope Gregory declared, that
(notwithstanding the Censures of his Predecessor Pius Quintus) the Subjects of
England ought to perform all Duty to Queen Elizabeth: and whatsoever might be
the Catholics inward Judgments concerning her Title, yet after the Parliament
had acknowledged her a lawful Queen, all Civil Obedience was exactly paid to
her. This Oath of Fidelity is generally taken in Ireland by the Catholics,
pursuant to the Articles for Surrender of Limerick, by Approbation of the
Primate and Clergy of that Kingdom. The Fathers of the Society of Jesus, In the
Provincial Congregation at Ghent, 5 July, 1681.
of the English Province, decree thus, Let us all profess, that as much
Obedience and Fidelity ought to be sincerely sworn and exhibited to our King
from every one of us, as is wont to be sworn and exhibited to any Princes
whatsoever from other Catholic Subjects. Here is no Distinction made between
lawful or unlawful Titles of Princes, but the Relation between any Princes
whatsoever and their Subjects allowed to be a Ground for Fidelity.

The second Oath is a part of the Oath of Allegiance, made in the Reign of King
James, 3 Jac. 1. cap. 4.
which Oath was freely taken by the chief and others of the Catholic Clergy
here in England, and by them the Nobility and Gentry were advised and exhorted
to do the same, declaring it to be a Duty incumbent on them by the Law of God.
Sixty of the Doctors of the Sorbon subscribed to the said Oath, these following
Words, We underwritten, Divines and Doctors of the Sacred Faculty of Paris, do
judge the Oath, as it is on the other side, ( i. e. the Oath of Allegiance) may
with Safety of Faith and Conscience be taken by English Catholics, etc. But
Pope Paul the Fifth sent a Breve into England, directed to the English
Catholics, wherein, reciting the said Oath at large, he declares, that this
Oath contains many things plainly repugnant to Faith and Salvation, and
admonishes and requires them not to take that Oath. This Breve his Holiness
seconded by another, and both were confirmed by succeeding Popes. The Fathers
of the Society in their Provincial Congregation aforementioned, decree thus
concerning that Oath, that the Oath ( i. e. the Oath of Allegiance) as it is
now sprinkled with many Heterodox Clauses, cannot be taken, as being condemned
by many Breves of Popes. These things considered, I Will suppose, that Oath might
not be taken by Catholics, because it contained many things contrary to Faith,
etc. and is sprinkled with many Heterodox Clauses; and lastly, because it is
condemned by many Breves of Popes. But then it must be granted to me, that this
Oath, now to be taken, is not that Oath which was required not to be sworn,
which was condemned: This Oath is but one Clause amongst many which compose
that Oath; the Pope does not declare that all the things in that Oath are
repugnant to Faith, etc. his Prohibition does not fall on any particular
Clause, the Fathers of the Society do not impeach every Clause in that Oath,
nor distinguish those Heterodox ones that are sprinkled in it: Both Pope and
Fathers allow, that some Things and Clauses in that Oath are not liable to
Censure: There are many Clauses in that Oath, whereof those which are
condemned, though called many, may be fewest in number. Now if this Oath be not
plainly repugnant to Faith and Salvation, there is no Ground for refusing it,
because it is a part of the former Oath: And that it is not plainly repugnant
to Faith, etc. to abhor, detest and abjure that damnable Doctrine and Position,
(mentioned in this Oath) the Word of God, the Council of Constance, the
Subscription of the Doctors of the Sorbon, the Decrees of the Parliament of
Paris, and Subscription of the Fathers of the Society to an Agreement with the
Sorbon, are full and sufficient convincing Evidences: To all or some of which
every one may easily apply himself for Satisfaction.

The Declaration annexed to these Oaths is not to be sworn to, This Declaration
is assertory of something past; it is an Act of Faith, depending on the
probable Evidence of what is past.
but only to be made, repeated, and subscribed to, as a Matter which the
Declarer believes to be true, according to a rational Judgment and moral
Certainty thereof, which yet may be consistent with an absolute Possibility of
the thing being otherwise: It is an Assertion of the Truth of a thing, as it is
in his Conscience or rational Judgment, not as it is in it self; and this moral
Certainty may secure the Declarer from a Lie, and justify him before God and
Man.

The Reflections I make being with Reference to the Catholics in England, I
will consider the Duty and Lawfulness of their making, or refusing to make this
Declaration distinctly from others.

1. And to shorten my Work I will here suppose, that by foreign Prince, Person,
Prelate, etc. is meant the Pope and his Successors.

2. That the Pope has, and ought to have, some Jurisdiction, or Power, or
Superiority, or Pre-eminence, or Authority, in this Realm.

3. That the Popes formerly had, and had a Right to, some Jurisdictions, etc.
within this Realm, which now are not enjoyed by them.

4. That the Jurisdictions, etc. which Popes formerly had, and now have not,
they ought not to have in this Realm.

To explain my self in my second Supposition, Catholics unanimously grant,
that Christ gave a Power purely spiritual to his Apostles, throughout the whole
World, and in them to their Successors, to preach, to feed his Sheep, to bind
and loose, etc. This Power being derived to the Pope, as Successor to St.
Peter, his Holiness has a Right to throughout the whole World, for thus large
is the Commission from Christ. King James in his Premonition, p. 46. Let the
Pope be Primus Episcopus inter omnes Episcopos, and Princeps Episcoporum as
Peter was Princeps Apostolorum.
And this Power being given by God, cannot be taken away by Men, nor be denied
by Christians, either in this Realm, or any other part of the World, without
Breach of Faith. The spiritual Power could not be exercised by Kings or
Princes, it did never belong to them, or to their Crowns, nor indeed was ever
claimed or pretended to in this Realm: therefore I will here only conclude,
that it is not probable that this Declaration intends to deny the Pope's Power
purely spiritual in this Kingdom. I shall endeavor to make this more plain
hereafter.

My third Supposition grants, that Popes had a Right to, and enjoyed
Jurisdictions, Powers, etc. These were in Courts and Matters called
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, as Cases of Marriage, Tithes, Wills, etc. These
Jurisdictions, etc. were merely external, political or civil, and came not to
the Pope jure divino. Our Savior declared, that his Kingdom is not of this
World, and therefore gave no Jurisdiction, Power, etc. besides that which is
purely spiritual, to his Apostles, or their Successors. The Crown of England
is, and of long time has been, an Imperial Crown, depending only on God, by
whom Princes reign. From the Crown diverse Privileges have been at diverse times,
either by the Piety or Inadvertencies of Princes, granted to Popes (in the
Language of those Days called the Church;) at other times Usurpations have been
made, when the Princes were weak or unfortunate: These Privileges being long
used, and their Origin either forgotten or concealed, have been commonly
looked on, and claimed, as the proper and inherent Right of those to whom they
were granted, or came. This Right being charily preserved by them, and freely
confessed by others to be a good Title, accompanied with a long and quiet
Possession, and called Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, came to be thought at last
to be a Right given them by God, whereas in Truth it proceeded from Men; and as
all humane things are subject to change, may, by the same Power from whence it
was derived, be taken away. And thus has it fared with the Pope's Power in
Temporals, 24 H. 8. c. 12. 25 H. 8. c. 20. 25 H. 8. c. 19. 25 H. 8. c. 21. 28
H. 8. c. 16. 1 Eliz. cap. 1. 5 Eliz. cap. 1. 1, 2 P. M. c. 8.
which he had and exercised in this Kingdom; sometimes they have been disputed,
other times taken from him and restored to the Crown, then again restored to
his Holiness, and about 130 Years since were again taken from him and restored
to the Crown, In France the Clergy published this Proposition, That the Pope
had no Power in civil or temporal Affairs, and that Kings are subject to no
Ecclesiastical Powers.
and so continue at this Day, which is a Matter so evident to every
Englishman, that no one of them can find Reason to believe, that the Pope, at
this time, has any Jurisdiction, Power, etc. (besides that which is purely
Spiritual) in this Realm.

The fourth Supposition intends, that since those Ecclesiastical or Spiritual
Jurisdictions, Powers, etc. which the Pope enjoyed and exercised in this Realm,
and which were not purely Spiritual, nor derived to him from the Apostles, but
came to him by the Grants of Princes, Consent of People, or by some other mere
humane means, as touching Appeals, Annats, Firstfruits, electing of Bishops,
Dispensations in humane Laws, to the Prejudice of the Crown, and impoverishing
of the Subjects, giving Licenses in abundance of humane Cases or Things,
putting Bishops into their Bishoprics, and Priests into their Parishes: since
I say these Powers, etc. came to the Popes by times, or by Concordates between
Princes on the one side, and Popes on the other, which could not be Divine or
Supernatural Powers, that is, Powers derived to him, or conferred on him jure
divino, are abolished as to his Holiness, and restored to the Crown, by several
Acts of Parliament, as anciently belonging thereto, it is as plain that the
Pope ought not to have those Jurisdictions, Powers, etc. of which he is thus
legally divested, as it is apparent that at this time he neither has nor
exercises them.

Now to enlarge somewhat on the Substance of the two last Suppositions, I will
instance in some few Remarks, what Interruptions the Popes have met with in the
Exercise of their Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Powers, etc. in Matters merely
Temporal in this Realm. King Henry the First gave the Bishopric of Winchester
to William Gifford, and forthwith invested him into all the Possessions thereto
belonging, though contrary to a Canon. The same King also gave the
Archbishopric of Canterbury to Radolph Bishop of London, and gave him
Investiture by a Ring and a Crosiers Staff. In the same King's Reign Thurstan,
elect Archbishop of York, got leave of the King to go to a Council held under
Pope Calixtus at Rhemes, giving his Faith to the King that he would not receive
Consecration of the Pope, but notwithstanding he obtained to be consecrate at
the Pope's Hand, which, as soon as the King heard, he forbad him to come within
his Dominions. King Edward the First prohibited the Abbot of Waltham, and Dean
of Paul's, to collect a tenth of every Man's Goods, for a Supply to the Holy
Land, which the Pope by three Bulls had committed to their Charge. The same
King impleaded the Dean of the Chapel of Wulverhampton, because the said Dean
had, against the Privileges of the Kingdom, given a Prebend of the same Chapel
to one at the Pope's Command. King Richard the Second, by Act of Parliament,
prohibited that any should procure a Benefice from Rome, under pain to be put
out of the King's Protection. Thus several Catholic Princes, in Catholic
times, disputed the Pope's Jurisdictions, Powers, etc. in several
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Matters. King Henry the Eighth (no less a
Catholic, and likewise in a Catholic time) by several Acts of Parliament,
consisting of Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, all Catholics,
deprived the Pope of several Jurisdictions, Powers, etc. which were supposed to
be usurped from the Crown, and the Exercise whereof were much to its Detriment.
1 Eliz. cap. 1. 5 Eliz. cap. 8.
Again, Queen Elizabeth revives all those Statutes made by her Father, restores
all ancient Jurisdictions to the Crown, and abolisheth all foreign Powers
repugnant to the ancient Jurisdiction of the Crown: And thus they continue to
this Day.

From what I have collected here it may appear, that no purely spiritual Power
has been by the Laws of this Kingdom taken from the Pope; that whatever Power
has been taken from the Pope, has been restored to the Crown, as its ancient
Jurisdiction, and no other: but since the Words of the Declaration deny any
Jurisdiction, etc. to be enjoyed by, or rightfully to belong to any foreign
Prelate, etc. I shall consider the Meaning of those Words, wherein, if I can
hit on the Sense which this Declaration by the Intent of the Imposers of it
bears, let that determine the Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of making it, for no
more is required of us.

This Declaration is verbatim a Clause in the Oath of Supremacy, 1 Eliz. cap.
1^ Entitled, An Act to restore to the Crown the ancient Jurisdiction over the
Estate Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, and abolishing all foreign Powers
repugnant to the same. 5 Eliz. cap. 1.
formed in an Act past in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; and in another Act made
in the fifth Year of her Reign, it is enacted, that the Oath made in the first
Year of her Reign, shall be taken and expounded in such Form as is set forth in
an Admonition annexed to the Queen's Majesty's Injunctions, published in the
first Year of her Majesty's Reign, that is to say, to confess and acknowledge in
her Majesty, her Heirs and Successors, no other Authority than that was
challenged and lately used by the noble King Henry the Eighth, and King Edward
the Sixth, as in the Admonition may more plainly appear.

In that Admonition the Queen says as follows: Admonition to simple Men
deceived by malicious.
For certainly her Majesty neither does, nor ever will challenge any other
Authority than that which was challenged, and lately used by the noble King of
famous Memory, If any Person shall accept the same Oath with this
Interpretation, Sense or Meaning, her Majesty is well pleased to accept every
such in that behalf as her good and obedient Subjects, etc.
Henry the Eighth, and King Edward the Sixth, which is, and was of ancient time
due to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, that is, under God to have the
Sovereignty and Rule over all manner of Persons born within these Realms,
Dominions, and Countries, of what Estate (either Ecclesiastical or Temporal)
soever they be, so as no other foreign Power shall or ought to have any
Superiority over them.

Now to show that King Henry the Eighth neither claimed nor pretended to any
Power purely Spiritual, let us see a Proviso made in an Act past in his Reign,
24 H. 8. c. 21.
Provided always that this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall be
hereafter interpreted or expounded, that your Grace, your Nobles, and Subjects,
intend, by the same, to decline or vary from the Congregation of Christ's
Church, in any things concerning the very Articles of the Catholic Faith of
Christendom, or in any other things declared by Holy Scripture, and the Word of
God, necessary for your and their Salvation. The Statute containing this
Proviso is revived and confirmed by the Statute of 1 Eliz. cap. 1. And it is
undeniable, that all Christendom, at that time, did own the Pope's Spiritual
Power, which was derived from the Apostles.

Further, to show, that the Queen who made this Oath, intended it only for to
distinguish those who denied the Pope's Power in Temporals, from others who
would not, and that therefore she doubted of their Loyalty. In the Act made
aforesaid is enacted, 5 Eliz. cap. 1.
That forasmuch as the Queen's Majesty is otherways sufficiently assured of the
Faith and Loyalty of the Temporal Lords of her Highness's Court of Parliament;
therefore this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall not extend to compel
any temporal Person, of or above the Degree of a Baron of this Realm, to take
or pronounce the Oath abovesaid.

It was notoriously known, that the Lords and Commons in that Parliament,
wherein the Oath of Supremacy was appointed, were mostly Roman Catholics,
which includes their holding and professing the Pope's Pastoral Power. It was
Treason and Praemunire to hold or profess what by the Oath was denied to the
Pope; but it was neither for a Lord or other Person to profess himself a Roman
Catholic, there was no Disloyalty in that. Thus then, I conclude, that the
Pope's purely Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Power is not denied in that Oath, and
that this is the Sense, in which this Declaration is to be made, as being a
part of that Oath. And this I am the more inclined to believe, because in these
Oaths there are no doubtful Expressions of swearing the Jurisdictions, Powers,
etc. to belong to any other Person; those which are here only declared, are,
that no foreign Prince, etc. has or ought to have. Nor is it to be past by
without notice, that the Powers taken from his Holiness by King Henry the
Eighth, were never meant to be other than those that were Temporal, for Queen
Mary, ^ 2 P. M. c. 8.
by Act of Parliament, restores to the Pope such Authority, Pre-eminence and
Jurisdiction, as his Holiness used and exercised, or might lawfully have used
and exercised, by Authority of his Supremacy, etc. without Diminution or
Enlargement of the same, and no other. Which demonstrates, that the
Jurisdictions, Powers, etc. which King Henry the Eighth deprived the Pope of,
were only such as an Act of Parliament could restore him to, which cannot be
meant of that purely Spiritual Power given by Christ.

To sum up this Discourse: The Pope had a purely Spiritual Power committed by
Christ to him, as Successor to St. Peter, to be exercised throughout the whole
World, that is, To teach, to bind, and loose, etc. This Power, we say, no
Temporal Prince ever had, or claimed, or could deprive him of. The Pope
likewise had in this Kingdom Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Power in Courts and
Causes, or Matters, called Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, as in Divorces, Tithes,
Oblations, Obventions, etc. This Power was external, political, civil, and
merely temporal, granted by or gained from the Princes of these Realms, which
being found to be exercised to the great Detriment of the Crown, and adjudged
to be so by the Estates of the Realm, has been by several Statutes divested
from the Pope, and restored to the Crown above 130 Years past, and so still it
continues. The Truth of this is assured to us by Acts of Parliament, and other
credible Histories, so manifestly, that there is no room for Scruple in
affirming, that ( rebus sic stantibus) no foreign Prelate, etc. has or ought
to have any Jurisdiction, etc. in this Realm, which is not derived from Christ,
and which the Laws of this Kingdom have deprived him of.

Here is Authority commanding us to take lawful Oaths, and to declare what we
may reasonably judge and be morally certain to be true, no competent Authority
admonishing or requiring the contrary: Here are the Opinions of great and
learned Divines for the Lawfulness and Duty of taking these Oaths: Here are the
highest of Evidences for the Truth of that Matter which we are to declare our
Belief of; the Catholics in England (generally) never took the former Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance, and therefore on account of some Branches in those,
they are not obliged to refuse the first of these Oaths: These Oaths neither
are in themselves, nor are intended to be distinctive Signs between Catholics
and Protestants, for the Acts lately made for amoving Papists and reputed
Papists, etc. and for disarming Papists and reputed Papists, appoint the
Declaration, made in the Reign of the late King Charles, 30 Carol. 2.
to be for the Trial and Discovery of them, and that Declaration is not
scrupled at by Protestants, who yet (some of them) refuse the first of these
Oaths: And had the Declaration which is annexed to these Oaths been a Denial of
the Pope's Pastoral Power in this Realm, there needed no other Test for
Discovery of Papists, since no Catholic would disown that Spiritual Power to
be in his Holiness. These things considered, I must own, that I know no Reason
for the Roman Catholics in England to provoke the Government, Johnson.
to fall under the Reputation of being entirely in the French Interest, and to
undergo severe Penalties for refusing these Oaths.

FINIS.

