SEVEN SERMONS ON Several Select Subjects, PREACHED BY Mr. Tho. Watson,
sometimes Minister of the Gospel, at St. Stephen Walbrook, London.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed, in the Year, 1689.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
HAving had these Sermons by me for a considerable time, and finding them of
singular Advantage to all who mind the work of their Salvation in earnest, I
thought I could not sufficiently discharge that Duty I owe to my fellow
Christians, if I did not contribute what I could to the good of others; and
therefore I have made them of Public use.

'Twere a Presumption in me, to offer to launch out upon the Praises of the
Worthy Preacher of them, as if he needed Encomiums from such as I am, to
recommend his Works to the World; since his Name is so savoury among all those,
that either heard him Preach, read his Writings, or were acquainted with his
Exemplary Life and Conversation (he having with that great Apostle taken
sufficent care, that while he Preached to others he might not be a cast away
himself) that 'twill be sufficient to recommend them to the perusal of all
serious Christians that they are his. Those that are only for a quaint polite
Discourse, may suit themselves where they think best; but such as are for the
plain Truths of the Gospel, and desire to drink in the sincere Milk of the Word
of God may find great profit by this Book.

Those Ministers whose only delight it is to make Elegant Discourses, busking
them up with a vain flourish of Words (as if the plain Truths of the Gospel
were not palatable, but needed some correctives to render them more grateful to
men's appetites) and those who perplex their Hearers with Intricate,
Philosophical Notions, seem more to hunt after Popular applause than sincerely
to endeavor the Conversion and Salvation of Souls: But those who design
faithfully, to discharge that great Trust committed to them by their Lord and
Master, will be sure to shun both these, and to deliver the Truths of the
Gospel in as plain and homely a dress as may be, that the way of Salvation may
be set forth to the meanest Capacities: Like the famous Gregory Nazianzen, who
(tho he was Master of as much Learning as any in his day, yet) was very plain
in his Preaching; and a Godly laborious Preacher here, sometimes since with the
Lord, who when he had written his Sermon, used to read it over to his Servants;
and if any thing in it transcended their Capacities, altered it, and made it so
plain, that he was sure nothing in it could surmount the Understandings of the
meanest of his Hearers. And all that ever heard the worthy Author or read any
of his Sermons, can sufficiently testify how well he acquitted himself in this
point: And those that have not, may fully be convinced of it by reading these
Sermons, which they will find as plain and obvious as can be desired, delivered
in as few words as possible, so as to leave out nothing neeessary in order to
explaining the true meaning of the Text. Were this golden Rule generally
observed much more Fruit might be expected by the preaching of the Gospel than
now is, and those who desire to be most serviceable in their Generation, would
not be misrepresented as Canters by men that speak evil of things they
understand not.

The Subject matter of these Sermons are Truths of very great use in Christians
Practice, whatever their case or condition be: So that there are few Spiritual
Diseases, but Remedies are here set down for them; viz. those who are groaning
under the Cross, Comforts are prescribed to them, those who are secure are
awakened, those that are worldly, Weaning Considerations are here proposed to
them, and those who are under comfortable Influences of the Spirit, Directions
are given them how to continue them.

It cannot be expected, since the Godly Preacher himself had not the perusal of
them, but that those that are too Nice and Censorious may espy some expressions
in them, that might have been better worded: And therefore I hope that they
will be so far from laying it on the Worthy Author, that they will even excuse
it in me; since through a desire I had for the public good, I rather chose to
incurr the censures of some men in publishing these Sermons, than out of a
sullen Modesty suppress that which might tend so much to the Advancement of
Holiness. Which that it may be the blessed fruit of this, and all other Works
of this Nature is, and shall be the Hearty Prayers of, etc.

ERRATA.
Page 27. line 4. for Disabling* read Disciplining, p. 30. l. 18. Disabling,
for r. Disciplining.

SERMON I.
Job 14.14. All the days of my appointed time will I wait till my change come.
THIS Book relates the History of Job's sufferings: he was a tall Cedar in
grace, yet this Cedar grew in a Valley of Tears. Religion gives no Charter of
Exemption from trouble. Job's trials were so sharp, that he began to grow weary
of life, and was willing to have a Writ of Ease; to have his pass and be gone,
Job 14.13. Oh that thou would hide me in the grave! This holy man was much
afflicted in his meditations of his latter end: He walked among the Tombs, and
walked into his Grave before it was dug, and by frequent thoughts labored
to make death familiar to him. All the days of my appointed time will I wait
till my change come.

The Text is a large Field; I shall only as I pass along, pluck some few ears
of corn.

In the words are these three general parts observable.

1. A description of Life; All my days. 2. The determination of Life; My
appointed time. 3. A holy Resolution; I will wait till my change come.
I begin with the first.

First, Here is a description of Life; All the days.

Doct. Job does not measure his life by years, but by days.

Nay, he calls life a day, in verse 6. of this chapter. Man's life is very much
resembled to a day in three or four respects.

1. Life is like a day for the shortness of it: men dream of a long life, says
Austin. Men they do think of such a thing as an earthly Eternity, but it is a
short day. Infancy, that is day break: Youth, that is Sun rising: Full growth,
that is the Sun in its Meridian: Old age, is Sun setting: Sickness, is Evening;
and then comes the night of Death. Life it is a day; and is it so short? but a
day; why do we then rather lose time, than live it?

2. Life is like a day for the vicissitudes that are in it. A day has much
alteration and change of weather; the Morning that shows clear and bright; at
Noon, black Clouds and Rain: one part of the day is calm and serene, the other
part it is blusterous and windy: Such is our life, it is like a day; what
change of weather is there in Man's life? What sudden alterations fall out?
sometimes health, sometimes sickness, sometimes prosperity, and sometimes
adversity: Here is change of weather; sometimes we see the White Lilly of
Peace, sometimes again the Red Rose of a Bloody War appears: Here is change of
weather.

3. Life it is a day for Labor: The day it is the time for working, Psalm.
104.23. The Sun rises, and man goes forth to his work. Death is a sleeping
time for the body: Life is a working time; a Christian has no time to lie
fallow, Phil. 2.12. Work out your salvation with fear and trembling. Work while
it is day, John 9.4. Still there is some work to do, either some sin to
mortify, or some grace to exercise.

4. And lastly, If a day be once past, you can never call that day again: so
when once this day of life is past and gone, you cannot call it back.

Use, Briefly.
1. The thoughts of this that our lives is but a day, may serve to cool the
intemperate heat of our affection to earthly things: we should not be much
raised in the enjoyment of them, nor much dejected in the want of them: These
under moon comforts they are not to be with us long; only a few days: Nay it is
but a day: Why then should we be too much taken with them? Our life being so
transient, made up of a few flying Minutes, it should much abate our affections
to all things under the Sun. Abraham, I read of him, that he bought the
possession of a burying place, Genesis 49. v. 30. The longest possession we have
here on Earth, it is the possession of a burying place. So much for the first
particular, a description of Life; it is not measured by years, but days; nay,
it is shorter, it is but a day.

2. The second thing in the Text is the determination of Man's Life, in these
words, My appointed time; the days of my appointed time. The Hebrew has a
double signification.

1. It signifies the days of my Warfare to militate; the days of my warfare,

Hence note this;

That a Christians Life here on Earth it is no other than a warfare.

1 Timothy 1,18. That thou may war a good warfare. It is not an easy life, a
life of sloth and pleasure; it is a warfare; all the days of my warfare. A
Christians Life it is a warfare in three respects.

1. In respect of Hardship. 2. Watchfulness. 3. Combat.
First, In respect of Hardships; a Soldier he does endure much hardship; he
has not his soft bed, nor his dainty fare, but goes thorough many a tedious
March; such is a Christian's life, 2 Timothy 2.3. Thou therefore endure hardship
as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ. We must not be, as Tertullian says, silken
Christians, but expect to wrestle with difficulties.

Secondly, A Christians life is a warfare, in respect of Watchfulness: We must
stand Sentinel, and be ever upon our Guard. The Soldier gets up into the
Watchtower, sends out his Scouts, lest the Enemy should surprise him. It was
Christ's watchword, Mark 13.37. I say unto you all, Watch. A subtle Heart needs
a watchful Eye. Watch lest sin does decoy you, lest Sat^n falls upon you when
you are asleep on your Guard: when you have been praying against sin, then you
must watch against temptation.

Thirdly, A Christians life it is a warfare for Combat. We all of us come into
the world as into Field-battle; we stand just as the Jews did, Nehem. 4.17.
Every one with one of his hands wrought in the work, and in the other hand held
a weapon. Just such is our Military posture, working and fighting in order to
this holy warfare; we must get our Spiritual Armor ready, the Breastplate of
Holiness, which can never be shot through; and having got this Armor, and the
Shield of Faith in our hands, we must now give battle to our Spiritual Enemies,
2 Timothy 4.7. I have fought the good fight of Faith; yea and we must maintain a
Combat with the flesh, and that for an Enemy Satan.

To encourage us in this Warfare, consider but these two things.

First, We have a good Captain, Jesus Christ, he is called the Captain of our
Salvation, Heb. 2.10. Christ not only leads us in our march, and gives us skill
to fight, but he gives us strength also. A Captain he may give his Soldiers
Armor, but he cannot give them strength to fight, but Christ does, Isa. 41.10.
I will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee.

Secondly, To encourage us in this warfare against Sin and Satan, having
overcome our Ghostly Enemy, then we shall have a glorious Recompense of Reward:
Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, 2* Tim. 4.8. A Crown, it
is not fit for every one; a Crown, it is not fit for every head, only Princes,
Kings, persons of Renown. After our Combat with Sin and Satan, God will call
us out of the Field, where the Bullets of Temptation did fly so fast, and will
give us a victorious Crown, then no more Battle, but there shall be Music, not
the Drum and the Cannon, but the Viol and the Harp shall sound, Rev. 14.2.

Use 2.
Is Life a Warfare? how unworthy and blameable are they, who have no Spiritual
Artillery, nor do make out against their Spiritual Enemies? they spend their
time in dressing themselves, but do not put on their holy Armor. And rejoice
in the sound of the Organ. They spend their days in mirth, as if their lives
were rather for Music than for Battle. I have read of one, he would have no
man's name written upon his Tomb, but he who died manfully in War. God writes no
man's name in the Book of Life, but such as die in this holy War, die in Battle,
fighting this good fight of Faith.

Secondly, Let us consider this word in the Text in the other signification,
The days of my appointed time; my appointed time,

Hence observe this;

Doct. That God has prefixed the just time and period of every man's Life.

Job 14.5. His days are determined; thou have appointed the bounds that he
cannot pass. God who numbers ours hairs, numbers our days. He has entered down
in his Decree how long our lives shall last, and we shall not live one hour nor
minute beyond the time prefixed. Therefore do not say, If such a casualty had
not happened, such a friend had not died so soon.

Obj. But is it not said in Eccles. 7.16* Be not overmuch wicked, why
should thou die before thy time?

Ans. There is a general time of life, and there is a limited time of life:
There is a general time, in regard of the course of Nature; and there is a
limited time, in regard of Gods Decree, how long such a person shall live. Now
a man that dies young, or dies a violent death, he dies before his time, in
regard of the course of Nature, but he does not die before the time that God
has limited and appointed.

Use 1.
First Use is, to admonish us all to beware of adjourning and putting off our
Repentance. Our days they are certain to God, but they are uncertain to us: The
Lord knows how long our Glass will be running; for ought we know there is but a
few Sands more to run; life may expire in an instant; when our breath goes out,
we know not whether we shall draw it in again. 'It is true, Hezekiah had a
Lease sealed him of fifteen years, but we have no such Lease; we are Tenants at
will, and may be turned out presently; our time of life is known to God, but
not to us; therefore take heed of procrastinating and delaying: death may be
sent to any of you this night with a Habeas Corpus: God may say, Give an
account of your Stewardships.

Secondly, Is the time of our life appointed, and the number of our days set?
why then, this should teach us courage for God; be not fearful of doing your
duty to appear for God, to own his Cause in an Idolatrous generation, to
vindicate Gods Truth, wherein his glory is so concerned; so the Text says, Our
time is appointed. Men can take away our Liberty when they will; they shall not
touch a hair of our heads till Gods time is come. This made our blessed Savior
so zealous for his Fathers Honor, so sharp in his Reproof against sin. Whence
was Christ so courageous? John 8.20. For his hour was not yet come. Christ knew
full well that all his Enemies could not take away his life, till the time was
come which his Father had appointed: This should make us like Athanasius, that
Bulwark of the Nation.

Thirdly, The third thing in the Text is Job's holy Resolution; I will wait
till my change come, that is, I will wait till death come.

Hence note this,

Doct. That death, whenever it comes, it makes a great change.

First, This change that death will make, it is a certain change; there is no
avoiding it, Psalm. 89.48. What man is he that lives and shall not see death?
Heb. 9.27. It is not strength, it is not courage, it is not any worldly
grandeur can exempt from death: deaths Sword cuts asunder the Royal Scepter.
The godly they must die as well as others. Though death does not destroy the
treasure of Grace, yet death breaks the Vessel that this treasure is in. Pliny,
he speaks of a golden Vine that is not subject to storms. The body of a Saint,
when glorified, shall be be like that golden Vine, but now it is a withering
Vine, and is soon blasted by death. We are not so sure to lie down in our beds,
as we are to lie down in our graves.

Secondly, The change that death makes, it is a visible change: how strangely
is the body metamorphosed at death, that one scarce knows their friends, they
are so disfigured by death! the Eyes hollow, the Jaws fallen; death carries
away all the goodly spoil of beauty; it changes a living body into a carcass,
Psalm. 39.11. Thou make the beauty to consume like a Moth. Take a body of the
finest spinning, the Lilly and the Purple, white and ruddy, when once death, as
a Moth, gets into it, it consumes all the luster and glory of it. Death puts
the body into a very frightful dress, that nothing can fall in love with it but
the Worms.

Thirdly, The change that death makes, it is often a very sudden change: death
steals upon some unawares; as one I have read of was suddenly choked with the
kernel of a Grape. What quick dispatch do several distempers make! death
oftentimes strikes, and gives no warning.

Fourthly and lastly, The change that death makes, it is an unalterable change:
As the Tree falls, so it lies to eternity. Death is a change that puts us into
an unchangeable condition.

Application.
First, See what a different change death makes to the Righteous, and to the
Wicked* both are changed at death; but there is a vast difference.

First, Death makes a dreadful change to the Wicked; it is a Trapdoor to let
them down to Hell. The Wicked that live here in gallantry and splendour, that
are clothed in Purple, and fare deliciously every day, oh but when death comes
they will find an alteration. Death will throw the Wicked down from the top of
the pinnacle of their honor, Rev. 18.22. I allude to it, The voice of the
Harper shall be heard no more in thee.

There is a River in America that runs in the day, but in the night it is dried
up: so these pleasures that now run in the lifetime in a full current at the
night of death, shall all be dried up. Nor will the ungodly only lose their
suggared things; but here is their misery, their Souls must be steeped in the
flames of Hell, Mark 9.44. where the Worm dies not. Such a fire is kindled in
Gods anger, that no tears can quench it, nor no time can finish it. We read
that the Servant under the Law, if he had a hard Master, yet at the seven years
end there was a Jubilee, a year of Release, when the Servant might go off from
him; but in Hell torments there is no year of Jubilee, Rev. 9.6. Men shall seek
death, and shall not find it. If a spark of Gods anger falling into a man's
Conscience, be so full of torture in this life; oh then how terrible will it be
to have the fire of Gods wrath to lie in for ever! Thus you see death will be a
sad change to the unrighteous: Therefore surely the very thoughts of death must
needs be terrible to a wicked man.

Secondly, It will be a glorious change to all Righteous persons; they shall
have their fetters of sin knocked off, and shall drink of the Rivers of
pleasure: Oh blessed change! from a weary Pilgrimage, to a blessed Paradise;
from Labor, to Eternal Rest. In short, death to a Child of God, it is a
friend: Death it is a pale Horse to carry a Believer home to his Fathers house.
Death gives a full possession of glory. There is a Freehold in Law, and there
is a Freehold in Deed. A Believer now has a Freehold in Law, that is, he has
a Right to Heaven, but at death he has a Freehold in Deed: He makes Entry of
it, and takes Possession. Death pulls down this old Building, this House of
Clay, and prepares for the Soul a better House, a House not made with hands; Oh
blessed change to the Righteous! and this may be comfort in the death of
Christian friends; whenever they are changed by death, they are sure to change
for the better; they go instantly into a blessed Eternity.

Second Use is of Exhortation.
Does death make such a change, a certain change, a visible change, and
sometimes a sudden change, and an unalterable change? Let us all labor to be
fitted for this great change. It is a very sad thing, as Job says, to have the
grave ready for us, and we not ready for the grave. When death surprises the
unprepared Soul, what a condition will he be in? he will say as those, Oh
death! I pray thee let me be excused one day more, one hour more, to prepare my
self; but death will neither be bribed nor courted. Job cursed the day of his
birth. Unprepared Souls will curse the day of their death. Oh then be fitted
for this last end! and for that purpose labor for a holy change: get grace
into your Souls; death cannot hurt grace: Grace is Armor of proof; it can
never be shot through. Grace, it is as needful for the Soul, as Oil is for the
Lamp. Christians, get holy hearts; be as Christ's Bride: get your selves ready;
dress your selves every day by the Glass of Gods Word: see your spots in that
Glass; and when you have seen them, wash them off by Repenting tears. Adorn the
hidden Man of your hearts with Love, Meekness, Holiness; and put on the Lord
Jesus, which is your clothing of wrought Gold. By having this holy change
wrought, you will be fitted for your last and great change.

To conclude all:

You that are prepared, live in a continual expectation of this great change;
so did Job in the Text; I will wait till my change come.

First, Live in hope till this change come.

Secondly, Be patient till this change come.

First, Live in hope till this change come. This word in the Text, I will wait,
in the Hebrew it is, I will hope till my change come. The Husbandman having
sowed his seed, he hopes for a crop: Having sowed the seed of true Repentance,
now hope for a full crop of glory at death.

Secondly and lastly, Be patient till this change come; I will wait, says Job;
in the Greek it is, I will be patient till my change come.

Indeed, the troubles that the Righteous suffer here, and that great preferment
they shall have in Heaven, may be ready to cause impatience to stay here any
longer; but take heed of this; we must not be our own Carvers: God knows the
best season when he will send for his Children home; therefore we must wait but
a while, then we shall enjoy our wish, and that is, to have Christ's sweet
Embraces, and to lie in the Bosom of Divine Love.

SERMON II.
This Sermon was Preached in the Parish of St. Margaret Moses.
Psalm 23.4. Thy Rod, and thy Staff, they comfort me.
THIS Psalm St. Bernard calls a noble and illustrious Psalm. The Jews did use
to repeat this Psalm when they sat down to their meat. In it David sets forth
two things: His Experience, and his Confidence: His Confidence, in the first
and last verses: In the first verse; The Lord is my Shepherd, therefore I shall
not want. In the last verse; Surely that goodness and mercy shall follow me,
all the days of my life; here is David's Confidence: His Faith was risen up
into a great degree of confidence. But that which I shall speak to is, of
David's Experience, in the words that I have read; Thy Rod, and thy Staff, they
comfort me.

What is here meant by Staff? a Staff is for support, whether it be the Staff
one walks with, to support the body; or whether it be the Staff of Bread that
supports the Life of Man. Staff is for support; so here in the Text; Thy Staff
comforts me. By Staff is meant metaphorically, the Staff of Gods supportation;
Thy Staff comforts me. Gods Providence it is a Wing to cover the Saints; it is
a Breast to feed them; and it is a Staff to uphold them. In the most calamitous
times, the Church of God has the Staff of Gods Supportation; and this is the
reason that the Church is preserved, in despite of all malice and opposition.
This Bush burns, yet it is not consumed. Though the Lion roar, yet the Lambs of
Christ's fold are in safety. Though the Rulers take counsel against the Saints
of the Most High, yet they are kept alive: Here is the reason, thy Staff does
comfort me. The Saints have always the Staff of Divine Protection: God secretly
preserves them, and sets an invisible Guard about them. We see the Staff that
smites the Godly; but we do not see the Staff that upholds them. We see their
danger, but we do not see their defense. God is their Staff of support. Gods
continual care of his Church, is as a Wall of Brass, against which the Gates of
Hell shall never prevail. The Church of God has God for her Guardian: The
Enemies must first overcome God, before they can overcome his Church, says
Luther.

For the Use of this briefly.

This is no small comfort to Gods Church; she has a Staff of support; God is
her protection. The Saints of God they have malignant Enemies to conflict with:
The Powers of the Earth are against the godly. We read the Beast in the
Revelations had on his head seven Horns and ten Crowns, Rev. 13.1. and this was
given him to make War with the Saints. You see the People of God was then in an
ill case; they had the Horns and the Crown against them: But the Saints, they
have the Lion of the Tribe of Judah on their sides; and Christ has a Staff to
protect them, and Teeth to devour all his Enemies. So much briefly for that
expression; for I only glance at it; Thy Staff does comfort me; thy Staff of
Supportation and glorious Providence, it is always with me; it does comfort me.
But that which I shall chiefly speak to, is the first of these in the Text; Thy
Rod does comfort me.

In the opening of this, the Quetion is;

Quest. What is meant by Rod?

Answ. This word Rod, when it is ascribed unto God, it is taken three ways in
Scripture.

First, For Gods destroying Rod.

Secondly, For Gods Pastoral Rod, as a Shepherd.

Thirdly, For his disabling Rod, or Rod of Affliction.

First, The Rod when it is ascribed unto God, which he uses toward his
Enemies, Psalm. 12.9. Thou shall break them with a Rod of Iron: This Rod of God
upon his Enemies does comfort the godly, Psalm. 58.10. The righteous shall
rejoice when they see the vengeance; Gods destroying Rod upon sinners, it is
matter of rejoicing and comfort unto the godly. We read of Deborah's song, her
triumphant song, and the Jews Festival before the destruction of Haman, Esther
9.22. The Rod of God upon the wicked comforts the godly.

Quest. But some may say, How far may the godly be comforted in the destruction
of wicked men? how far may they rejoice?

Answ. The godly may be comforted in the destruction of wicked men, so far as
now there is a stop put to their sins, and they cannot live any longer to
dishonor God.

Secondly, Gods destroying Rod upon the wicked, it is a matter of comfort to
the godly, as hereby Gods Justice is declared to all the world. Why did God
smite Pharaoh? for his Pride and Tyranny. The Saints rejoice and triumph to see
Gods Justice executed upon his Enemies, Exodus 15. v. 1. They are comforted to
see Gods Justice in punishing the wicked of the world.

Thirdly, It is comfort to the People of God to see a wicked man destroyed.
Gods ruining of sinners is a warning to others to make them fear sin; this is
clear from Deuteronomy. 17.12, 13. That man that does presumptuously, that man shall
die, and all the people shall hear and fear, and do no more presumptuously.
Gods Judgments upon wicked Persecutors, may make others afraid and tremble to
go on in their sin. Thus far Gods destroying Rod is a comfort to the godly;
they rejoice to think that this may be a warning to sinners, and may be a means
to reclaim many from their Impieties.

Fourthly and lastly, Gods destroying Rod upon the wicked, it is comfort to the
godly upon this account, as Peace and Deliverance arises to the Church of God.
When Pharaoh was destroyed, Israel had a Writ of Ease now granted them. Nay
further, the destruction of the wicked, such as are desperate sinners, does not
only cause Liberty to arise in the Church of God, but it does cause the growth
of Religion. A clear Instance; Herod being eaten up with Worms, the Text says,
presently the Word of God grew and multiplied, Acts 12.23. Thus far Gods
destroying Rod upon the wicked, flagitious sinners is a comfort to the godly;
Thy Rod does comfort me; thy Rod of Iron that does break the profane sinners
of the world, that does comfort me.

Secondly, As there is Gods destroying Rod which comforts the godly; so there
is Gods Pastoral Rod; or his Shepherds Rod, which he uses toward his Sheep,
conducting them to green Pastures, and still Waters: There is Gods Shepherds
Rod, by which he leads his Elect Sheep to the green Pastures and still Waters.
These green Pastures and still Waters, may be meant of the Ordinances: And that
sweet comfort the People of God find in the use of Ordinances; why, this Rod of
God, this Shepherds Rod, this Pastoral Rod, this Rod does comfort the godly.

Thirdly and lastly, There is Gods disabling Rod, or his Rod of Affliction;
this also is comfort to the People of God, 2 Samuel 7.14. I will chasten him with
a Rod of mine. And in Micah 6.9. Hear ye the Rod, and who has appointed it;
and in this sense I understand this Text of Scripture, Thy Rod does comfort me:
So then the Observation is this,

Doct. That Gods Rod, his Afflicting Rod upon his People yields matter of
comfort to us.

Thy Rod does comfort me. This I confess to flesh and blood it seems a Paradox;
it seems strange: What, that the Rod of Correction should give comfort! If
David had said, Thy Promises, Lord, they comfort me; or thy good Spirit, that
does comfort me, it had been no wonder; but that he should say, Thy Rod does
comfort me, how can this be? Is it usual for the Church to call pain comfort?
how then does David say, Thy Rod does comfort me? Who can of such Thistles
gather Figs? or of such Thorns gather Grapes? How can there be comfort from the
Rod?

I shall show you that there is much consolation gathered out of Correction;
Thy Rod does comfort me. The Rod of God it is not like Moses's Rod when turned
into a Serpent, but it is like Ionathan's Rod, which had Honey at the end of
it. The Rod of God, it is like Aaron's Rod, which brought forth buds, and
blossoms, and Almonds, Numb. 17.8.

Then the Question is this;

Quest. How does this Afflicting Rod give comfort?

Answ. In six particulars.

First, Gods Afflicting Rod does comfort us, as it gives us Instruction: where
it does teach, it does comfort, Micah 7.14. Teach thy people with thy Rod. How
does the Rod teach? why it teaches with Instruction: so it teaches with
Comfort. Luther says, There were many Psalms in the Bible he never rightly
understood till he was in Affliction. The Rod teaches to know God aright; and
is not that matter of comfort? 2 Chronicles. 33.11. When Manasseh was afflicted,
then he knew the Lord was God. And the Rod it teaches a man to know himself; he
sees that corruption working in his heart, that he never could discern before.
The Eyes that Sin shuts, Affliction opens. The Rod gives Wisdom; it is a
teaching Rod; and thus Gods Rod comforts. What though it makes us weaker, so it
makes us wiser?

Secondly, Gods Afflicting Rod has comfort in it, as it is a token of special
favor he bears toward us, Rev. 13.19. We think God cannot favor us, unless
he has us in his Lap; yet he does love and favor us, when he gives us the
bitter Diet-drink of Affliction. Gods Rod, and Gods Love, they both stand
together: Thus the Rod comforts, it brings us a token of Gods Love: It is no
love in God to let men go on in sin, and never smite; this was no love. Is it
any love to your Child, to let him take his course, and to let him run into the
water and drown if he will? To be without the Rod of Gods Discipline, it is a
sign of a Bastard Child, and a brandmark of Reprobation, Heb. 12.8. If God will
let any fall upon the Rock of Ruin, then he will suffer them to go on in sin,
and not correct them, Hos. 4.14. I will not punish your Daughters when they
commit Whoredom. Take notice; God spares the Rod in anger. Gods hand is
heaviest when it is lightest. God punishes most when he does not punish; but
now God smites, that he may save his People; and is not that love? And the Love
of God does allay and take off the smarting power of the Rod, and gives the
Soul comfort. Let me feel Gods hand, so I may have his heart.

Thirdly, Gods Rod comforts, as it makes way for comfort. Physic, though bitter,
yet it has comfort in it, as it makes way for health. The Rod, it is to make
way for comfort. The Rod of God, it is to beat out the dust, and make us purer.
If a Fuller dip his Cloth in Water, it is to whiten the Cloth. The Water of
Afflictions are to lay Gods People a whitening, Dan. 12.10. Many shall be tried
and made white.

Nay farther, Gods Rod upon his Children does not only make way for comfort;
but, which is more, this Rod distills comfort into the Soul. Even as the Fire
causes sweet Water to drop from the Still: So out of Affliction, God stills the
sweet Water of Consolation. A clear Instance for this, 2 Cor. 1.4. Who
comfort us in all our tribulations. Here is the Rod of God comforting. When
the Saints Trials have been sharpest, their Comforts have been sweetest. Behold
here Honey at the end of the Rod, John 16.22. Your sorrows shall be turned into
joy. Here is the Saints Water turned into Wine. That holy Martyr that was in
Prison, dated his Letter thus; From the pleasant Garden of the Lion Prison. God
does Candy his Wormwood with Sugar. The Saints never tasted so much of Gods
compassion, as in their deepest Affliction; and in this sense David might truly
say, Thy Rod does comfort me. So says the Apostle, God comfort us in all
our tribulations.

Fourthly, Gods Afflicting Rod has comfort in it, as it brings this good news
to the Soul, That this is the worst that ever shall befall him. The Lord comes
with a murdering Ax, to hew down wicked men; but he has only a rattling Rod to
his Children: This is all the Hell that ever they shall feel; is not this
comfort? 1 Cor. 11.32. But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord,
that we should not be condemned with the world. Is not this comfort to know
that this is the worst that we shall have? God lays upon us a light Affliction,
and saves us from wrath to come: Here is the Rod full of comfort. What is a
drop of sorrow that the godly taste, to the bottomless Sea of wrath the damned
do endure for ever?

Fifthly, Yet farther; The Rod, it is full of comfort, as it makes us happy;
and for this consult that Scripture, Job 5.17. Behold, happy is that man whom
God corrects.

Among the Philosophers, some place their happiness in Riches, some in Wisdom,
some in Pleasures, and the like; but, who ever placed happiness in Affliction?

The Worldlings cry, If this be happiness, the Lord deliver them from it. But
Job says this, Happy is that man whom God corrects: How is he happy? he is
happy who is made better by Affliction. The Cross, though it makes the outward
condition worse, yet it makes the heart better.

Again, he is happy who has God to visit him. Don't we account him a happy
person, who has a King to visit him? but much more to have a God to visit him?
Persecution, it is a Rod, yea, but for all that, it is a blessed Rod; it is a
healing Rod. A Rod, though it smarts, yet it saves the Soul. Well then may a
Christian say, Lord, thy Rod comforts me; this makes me happy. Happy is that
man whom God corrects.

Sixthly and lastly, Gods Rod has comfort in it, as it is a means to bring us
to glory. Gods Rod whips us to Heaven, 2 Cor. 4.17. These light afflictions,
which are but for a moment, work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight
of glory. Affliction is like throwing a Bag of Money at another; it may bruise
him, but it does enrich him: so Affliction, it may bruise us, but it does
enrich us; and this works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory.

In short, the black Rod prepares for the white Rod. Oh Christian! thou who art
now humbled by some sharp Affliction, shall shortly wear a Garland made of the
Flowers of Paradise: Thou shall have thy Soul set thicker with the Jewels of
Heaven, than the Firmament is with Stars.

Thus you see this Truth is verified, Thy Rod does comfort me.

Application.
First, Here are several Inferences; to name four.

First, See then from hence the difference betwixt the wicked and the godly:
God makes the worst things tend to the consolation of the godly; and the best
things tend to the condemnation of the wicked. Let the People of God meet with
Affliction, it is for the better. Gods Rod comforts. Let the wicked have
prosperity, it is for the worse. Cordials themselves kill them. To the godly,
evil things have good in them. To the wicked, good things have hurt in them;
this is clear Scripture; Their Table is a snare; I say, the wickeds Table is a
snare, Psalm. 69.22. Wicked men have mercy out of Gods hand, as Israel had
Quails; they were sawced with the wrath of God, Eccles. 5.13. A clear
Scripture: I have seen an evil under the Sun, Riches kept for owners to their
hurt. Like Hamans Banquet, which was a Prologue to his Execution. To wicked men
even spiritual mercies are turned into Judgments. The Word preached is a savor
of death to the wicked, 2 Cor. c. 2. v. 16. Nay farther, Jesus Christ himself
is a Rock of Offense to the wicked, 1 Pet. 2.7. Christ is as well for the
falling, as the rising of many in Israel, Luke 2.34. In short, Sinners stumble
at a Savior, and pluck Death from the Tree of Life. As for the godly, Gods Rod
comforts them: As for the wicked, Gods very Mercy ruins them.

Secondly, See then from hence, that Religion is not to be looked on as a
melancholy thing. Some persons discourage Religion, and draw it with a sour
countenance, and in a frightful dress; but we see the worst of Religion has
much comfort in it; the very Rod of God comforts the godly. See that Scripture,
James 1.2. Account it, my Brethren, all joy, when you fall into diverse
temptations; that is, Afflictions they are called temptations, because they are
for Trial: Account it all joy; joy, and all joy. Take the sourest part of
Religion (...) is sourest to the Soul, Repentance* and that which is sour to
the Body, Affliction; and there is comfort in both.

First, That which is sour to the Soul, Repentance; there is comfort in that:
For whom is the Oil of Joy prepared, but for Gods mourners? Isa. 61.3. A
gracious Soul is never more enlarged and comforted, than when he can melt
kindly for sin. Christ Jesus made the best Wine of Water. The best Wine of Joy
is made of the Water of true Repentance. The Hebrew word to repent, signifies,
to take comfort. None have such ground of comfort as a true Penitent: When God
makes him weep for sin, he goes away weeping for joy. Thus you see the sourest
part of Religion has comfort in it.

Secondly, Take that which is sour to the Body, Affliction; and it has comfort
in it. A parallel Scripture for this worth observing, 2 Cor. 6.10. As
sorrowful, yet always rejoicing: There is comfort in the Rod. A Christian is
like a Bird that can sing in the Winter season: He can pick comfort out of the
Rod, and with Sampson, fetch Honey out of the Lion. 1 These. 1.6. Having
received the Word with much Affliction, with Joy; here is Gods Rod comforting
that Christian which knows Affliction tends to the bettering him, making his
Grace purer, and his Crown brighter: He can rejoice in Affliction, and say as
David, Oh Lord, thy Rod comforts me. Thus you see Religion is no unchearful
thing.

Thirdly, A third Inference is this: If Gods Rod comforts, then it shows us
what good reason we have to choose Affliction rather than Sin. There is
something in Affliction to comfort us; but there is nothing in Sin to comfort
us. Sin it is evil, and nothing but evil: It is the spirit of Witchcraft; it
defiles the mind, disturbs the peace; it puts a worm into Conscience, a sting
into death, and a fire into Hell. This is in Scripture called the abominable
thing, Ier. 44.4. Do not this abominable thing which I hate. Sin binds the Soul
over unto Gods wrath for ever. Oh then, what wisdom is it to choose Affliction
rather than Sin! A Christian can say, there is comfort in the Rod; but he
cannot say, there is comfort in Sin. Sin puts the Soul into an Agony, and makes
it in the very suburbs of Hell. Moses chose Affliction rather than Sin for a
season, Heb. 11.25.

Fourthly and lastly, If Gods Rod comforts, then what does Gods Love do? If
there be any comfort, as you have heard, whilst God is afflicting us; what
comfort is there while he is embracing us? If there be any comfort in the
Valley of Tears; what is there then in Paradise? There is the Bed of Spices,
and the River of Pleasures. If God can make a Prison sweet; what then is
Heaven? If afflicting mercy be so great; what is crowning mercy? Did God make
one of the Martyrs flames a Bed of Roses; why then, how sweet is it to lie in
Christ's bosom, the Bed of Perfume?

The second Use is of Exhortation.

Use 2.
If Gods Rod has so much comfort in it to the godly; then be not too much
dejected and cast down in Affliction. If you meet with losses; if you meet with
Pirates at Sea, and Hornets at Land, you see God can turn all these to good; Thy
Rod comforts me. Therefore be not too much cast down. Though we are not to pray
for Affliction, for it is in it self penal; neither must we despond under
Affliction. Oh, says one, if God did love me, he would not have dealt thus
severely with me; he has bereaved me of such and such a dear comfort, which is
like plucking a Limb from the body. But Christian consider, that which thou
call a dear comfort that God has taken away, perhaps it was an Idol; it may
be thou lovedst it more than thou did God; and if thou had not lost this
comfort, thou might have lost thy Soul and Heaven too; why then, has God in
taking away this comfort done thee any wrong? there is mercy in all this: May
not thou say at last, Thy Rod comforts me?

The third Use of Trial.

Use 3.
Let us examine whether we have had any Honey out of the Lion, any comfort out
of Affliction. Has the Rod of God upon us blossomed and brought forth Almonds?
It Is certain we have met with Affliction in one kind or other; but what benefit
have we got by Affliction? what advantage for our Souls? Can we say indeed as
David, Lord, thy Rod comforts me? Can we say, We have met with such and such a
sore Trial, and it has brought us nearer to God, and weaned us from the world?
it has conquered our Pride, and tamed our Covetousness? When Gods Rod upon us
fetches Water of tears, and makes us weep bitterly for our sin, then it is a
good Rod.

In short; If Gods Rod has made us better, it has made us Reform, and break
off iniquity; when we can say with Ephraim, Hosea 14.8. What have I to do with
Idols?

To conclude all; Let it be our daily prayer to God that we may find some
comfort in Affliction, some Honey mingled with our Gall. David speaks of
comfort in Affliction, Psalm. 119.50. This is my comfort in Affliction.
Affliction it is not joyous, but grievous: Oh but when the Lord does bless and
sanctify it to us, now it brings comfort with it. Let us pray that we may hear
the voice of the Rod, and kiss the Rod, and bless the hand that holds it. Let Us
pray unto God that we may see his hand in every Affliction, and wherefore God
contends with us, that we may turn to him that smites, and say as David does
here in the Text, Oh Lord, thy Rod and thy Staff they comfort me.

SERMON III.
John 16 33. These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have
peace: In the world ye shall have tribulation; but be of good cheer, I have
overcome the world.
THESE words were spoken by our blessed Savior not long before his suffering.
The Chapters foregoing are full of spiritual sweetness: This blessed Sun of
Righteousness did it seems shine more glorious and bright a little before his
setting. Our Savior Christ, he was now about to leave the world, and go to his
Father; and therefore having endeavored to comfort the hearts of his Apostles
and Disciples, he knew they would be sorrowful; therefore the more he
endeavors to comfort them; and this is the great Cordial he gives them before
his death: These things have I spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace.
Christ foretold that Sufferings would befall his Apostles and Disciples: In the
world, says he, ye shall have tribulation: the Greek word for tribulation, it
is a metaphor that alludes to Grapes that are squeezed in the Wine press till
the blood of the Grapes comes out: So says Christ, In the world ye shall have
tribulation: You shall be put into the Wine Press, and perhaps the blood of the
Grape may be pressed out. Tribulation it is the Saints Diet-drink; it is bitter,
but it is wholesome* All that God does in afflicting his Children, it is but to
make them better, and to try them, and make them white, Dan. 10. v. 12. Is it
not far better to swim through the main River, the Red Sea of Affliction to
Heaven, than to swim through the perfumed Joys and Pleasures to Hell and
Damnation. In the world, says Christ, you must look for, ye shall have
tribulation: But Christ having told of this bitter Pill, he gives them some
Sugar of comfort to sweeten it, and make it go down the better. In these words
of the Text; These things I have told you, that in me ye might have peace.

First, Here is the dark side of the Cloud, tribulation.

Secondly, The bright side of the Cloud, that in me ye might have peace.

Doct. That the Lord Jesus Christ, who is our Peacemaker, gives his sweet
peace to all his people; that in me ye might have peace.

That peace meant here in the Text, it is spiritual and sacred; it is the
immediate fruit and product of our Justification, Romans 5.1. Being justified by
faith, we have peace with God. This spiritual peace the Lord Jesus procures by
his Blood, conveys by his Spirit, maintains by his Intercession.

First, This peace Christ does purchase and procure by his Blood; it swims to
us in the Blood of Christ* the Justice of God being wronged by us, Jesus Christ
laid down his life as a price: that he paid for our peace: it is his blood that
does cement us and reconcile us to God the Father, as it is in Col. 1.20.
Having made peace through the Blood of Jesus.

Secondly, Christ conveys this blessed peace by his Spirit; he does procure it
by his Merit; and he does convey it by his Spirit, John 16.7. The Lord Jesus
left this peace to us as a Legacy: And the Spirit it is Christ's Executor, to
see that his Will be made good; and that we should have ^his peace: And now God
being at peace with us through Christ, Conscience that is at peace too. If the
Heavens be quiet and serene, and no tempest there, nor wind blowing, then the
Sea is calm. So if the great God be but at peace with us, and there is no
tempest in his face, then Conscience that is quiet, and all is calm.

Thirdly, As Christ does procure this blessed peace by his Blood, and does
convey it by his Spirit: So thirdly, He does maintain this peace by his daily
Intercession. What Saint alive does not sometimes offend God, and cause the
fury of his anger to rise up in his face! Now when the case is thus, that we
offend God, and are ready to break his peace; then Jesus Christ he stands up as
an Intercessor, and he speaks to God the Father on our behalf; and it is his
request that God would lay aside his anger, and that he would smile upon his
people again; and therefore in Scripture Christ is called our Atonement to make
peace; and he is called our Advocate to purchase peace. When we break our
peace, Christ he pleads our cause, and makes up this peace again by his
Intercession, 1 John c. 3. v. 7.

To make some Application of this*

Use 1.
First, By way of Inference; See then here to what Coast we must trade for this
Pearl; whither we must go for this spiritual peace that is our consolation in
life and death: Go to Christ for it; That in me ye might have peace.

Says Cyprian, peace it is in Christ, as sap is in the Root of the Vine, as
water is in the Spring; That in me^ ye might have peace, says Christ. This
blessed peace that Christ gives, it is worth going to him for; it is superior
to all other peace. Peace in a Kingdom, it is very desirable; peace it is every
ones Vote. Peace, it is the very quintessence of earthly blessings: To sit
quietly under our Vines and Figg-trees, surely better, a great deal better is
the sounding of the Lute and Viol, than the roaring of the Cannon. See what a
sweet promise God makes, Isa. 2.4. He will break their Swords into Plowshares:
all shall be peace. But what is this peace to the peace Christ gives to his
People that is sacred? This peace our Savior gives, it has these two
properties, or these two qualifications, to name no more.

First, It is an Emboldening peace.

Secondly, It is a Lasting peace.

First, It is an Emboldening peace. Friends that are at peace, they use a kind
of freedom and boldness one with another: So we having peace through Christ's
Blood conveyed by his Spirit, may be bold to make use of Gods Promises. There
is never a Promise in the Bible, but a Believer may pluck a Leaf from, and be
at peace with God through Christ. We may now use a holy boldness in prayer. We
may come to God as Children to their Father, Heb. 4.16. Let us come with
boldness to the Throne of Grace. God is our Father, and he being at peace with
us, he will not deny any thing that may conduce to our real good. This may make
us come with boldness to the mercy Seat: That Is the first: It is an Emboldening
peace.

Secondly, Christ's peace that he gives, as it is an Emboldening peace; so it is
a Lasting peace: Here is a peace that will hold. For all Earthly peace, to
speak properly, it is rather a truce than a peace; a truce, that is but for a
small time, and it ends: Yea but this peace that Christ gives, it is for ever.
Once in Christ, and ever in Christ. Once justified, and ever justified: Here is
a Lasting peace, Isa. 54.10. The Covenant of my peace shall not be moved, says
the Lord. The peace of a Believer, it is but begun here in this life; it is
perfected in the Kingdom of Heaven, Isa. 57.2. He shall enter into peace: Here
is a godly man's privilege; when he dies, he dies in peace; and as soon as ever
he is dead, he enters into peace; he shall enter into peace; that is, he shall
go to the Jerusalem above, that City of peace. Here the Saints peace it is but
begun; it is but in the seed, there it shall be in the Flower. Here it is but
in its infancy, there it shall be in its full growth. That Is the first; see to
what Coast you must trade for this peace: Go to Christ for it; That in me ye
might have peace.

Use 2.
See what a sad condition all wicked men are in, that live and die in their
sins: They have nothing to do with peace. What! Shall they have peace that make
War with Heaven, persecute Christ in his Members? Shall they have peace that
deride and grieve the Spirit of God, whose very Office it is to drop peace into
the Conscience? What, a sinner to have peace! 2 Kings 9.22. What peace, so long
as the Whoredoms of thy Mother Jezabel and her Witchcrafts are so many! A
wicked man is a worker of iniquity: As a man works at his shop; so he works at
the trade of sin; and what has he to do with peace? and how deplorable is his
case! What if a Foreign. Enemy should come; sinners would be in a storm, and
have no where to put in for Harbor. It is a very sad thing to be in Saul's
condition; the Philistines upon him, and God departed. It is a very sad thing
to have fightings without, and fears within; to have the Bullets shooting
against the Ship, and the Ship leaking within? Isa. 57.21. There is no peace to
the wicked, says my God: And if God says it, he knows it to be true. The
wicked perhaps they may delude themselves, and presume, that though they go on
in sin, yet they shall have peace; but to undeceive them, turn to that one
Scripture, Deuteronomy. 29.19. And it come to pass when he hears the words of this
curse, that he blesses himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though
I walk in the imagination of mine heart. Verse 20. The Lord will not spare him;
but then the anger of the Lord and his Jealousy shall smoke against that man.
One may as well think to suck health out of Poison, as to suck peace out of
Sin. Sinners they may be quiet, or rather secure for the present; but as 2 Samuel
26. it will be bitterness in the latter end. Guilt will sooner or later raise a
storm, says Chrysostom. Sin will conjure up the Winds and Storms into the
Conscience. I have sometimes thought it is with sin, as it is with poison;
there are some sorts of poison that will lie a great while in the body and not
work; but at last it does wring and torture the bowels; a fit resemblance of
sin. Men, they drink this poison, and they may be quiet a while; but at last,
especially at death, then it begins to work, and then the poison begins to
touch the Conscience. The great God of Heaven and Earth has set up his
Standard, and proclaimed open War against every impenitent sinner, and it will
not be long, if men go on in sin, before Gods Cannon Bullets will begin to
fly. Gods wrath may seem to be like a sleeping Lion; but this Lion will awake,
and roar, and tear his prey. I will say but this, I confess God may bear long
with wicked men, let them alone; he may bear long with them in respect of
punishment, when he does not remit the sin; but it will be sad with the sinner
at last, a sad hour at death; the Body and Soul must part; and Christ and the
Soul must part. There is no peace to the wicked, says my God. Can they have
peace that strike against the Crown and Dignity of Heaven, and make War with
Christ, and God, and Heaven?

A second Use is of Trial.

Use 2.
Let us then search and examine; Have we this secret and sweet peace in our
Souls flowing from the Lord Jesus? You may know it these three ways; and they
are three sure Notes that will never fail.

First, Such as have Christ's peace in their Souls, they are ingrafted into
Christ; they are one with Christ. Mark the words of the Text; In me peace.
First, we must be in Christ, before we can have peace from Christ; in me: Then
peace* The Graft or Scien must first be inoculated into the Tree before it
receives sap and influence from the Tree. We must by faith be inoculated into
Christ, before we can receive of his fullness. The wicked they may presume to
have peace, and that they shall have peace; and yet they are not acquainted
with Christ. Do they think ever to have an Interest in Christ's peace, that have
no Interest in Christ's person? it cannot be. A Christless Soul has no more to
do to lay claim to Christ's peace, than a Woman has to do to lay claim to a
Man's Estate that was never married to him. In me, says Christ: First in
Christ, and then you shall have peace from Christ, sacred peace; it is a Legacy
that Christ bequeaths: he gives this Legacy not to strangers, but to his
friends; such as are united to him. First the Pipe must be laid to the Spring
before it receives Water from the Spring: so we must first by faith be united
to Christ, laid to this Spring by faith, before we can receive the sweet
influences of peace from him. That Is the first.

Secondly, Where ever Christ gives peace to any Soul* there he always sets up
his governing Scepter to bear sway in that Soul. A pregnant Scripture for this,
Isa. 9.7. Of his Government and Peace shall be no end. First, there must be
Christ's Government set up in the Soul, before there is peace. Whenever the Lord
Jesus comes with an Olive branch of peace in his mouth, he always comes with a
Scepter in his hand. A parallel Scripture for this, Zech. 6.13. It is a promise
of Christ; He shall Sit and Rule, and he shall be a Priest upon the Throne.
Observe, Christ as a Priest, he makes peace, but he will be a Priest upon the
Throne; that is, he will bring the heart, where he gives peace, into a full
subjection to his Laws; he will be a Priest upon his Throne.

Now let us examine; Have we given subjection to Christ Jesus? do we submit to
his blessed Laws? does Christ Sit and Rule in our hearts as a Priest upon his
Throne? then all is well. There are many people would have Christ to speak
peace to them, but they will not suffer him to bear Rule: they would have his
Olive branch, but they will not endure his Scepter.

Thirdly, If Christ has given us this blessed peace; then we shall know it
thus; then he has made us to be of a meek, quiet and peaceable disposition.
Where ever Christ does give his peace, he makes the heart to be peaceable, Isa.
11.6. The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb; the Leopard shall lie down with the
Kid; that is, after grace is brought into a man's heart, and Christ has given
him peace, this man becomes of a peaceable and quiet disposition* Now, the Wolf
shall dwell with the Lamb; the fierceness of the Wolf shall be turned into the
meekness of the Lamb. It was a saying of Bernard, that good man; he was a man
of a peaceable spirit; and at any time when some fell out with him, says he* I
will be at peace with you, though you go on in trouble. Such turbulent spirits
that are troublers of the common peace, they are like the Salamander, that
lives in the fire of Broyls and of Contention; and they love to live in this
fire. Surely, where Christ gives this peace, it makes men of a peaceable
spirit; it turns the Brier into a Myrtle Tree. So by this we may know whether
Christ has given us this peace or no.

Third Use is Hereditary.
And here I will turn my self to such as are acquainted with Christ, and this
blessed Peace.

First, Have you this blessed peace from Christ? then be not overmuch troubled
about the afflictions and encumbrances that are incident to this present life.
It is true, our lives, they are full of vicissitudes and troubles: it will be
so. He that does not expect some trouble, must go out of the world. Fear and
grief are the two constant companions of Man's Life. You may as well separate
weight from Lead, or moistness from the Air, as trouble from the Life of Man.
Does not the Text say, In the world you shall have tribulation? But here is
that which may sweeten the troubles of Gods People; Christ gives peace: Here is
an Antidote against your fears and troubles; and none like a Scripture
Antidote; That in me, says Christ, ye might have peace. This is a glorious
peace indeed; it is a peace that will hold out in a Storm and Tempest; it turns
a Prison into a Paradise; it turns our Mourning into Music; it turns our Sighs
into Songs and Triumphs. As that holy man dated his Letter thus; Written from
the pleasant Garden of the Lion Prison. David he had Christ prepared* and
therefore let the times be never so stormy, he would lie down in peace, Psalm.
4.8. I will lay me down in peace. It was a very tempestuous time: David was
flying from his Son Absalom: Now, says David, I will lay me down in peace: I
will take a nap, and sleep sweetly upon this good Pillow of Conscience: I will
sleep in peace. David, he was in danger of losing two Jewels at once; but there
is a third Jewel he could not lose, and that was a good Conscience. I read of
one that had a precious Stone, and it was of that brightness, that it made it
be like the Ark when it was tossing upon the Water. Let me allude to it: If
Jesus Christ has given us this peace; this will give light to the Soul when
the Clouds do gather, and thou art tossing upon the Waters of Affliction.

Secondly, If Christ has given thee a well grounded peace; oh! be thankful for
this great gift: No Rhetoric, no Tongue of Angels can set it forth in all its
glory. Peace of Soul, it makes a harmony in a Christian: Though there be never
so many discouragements in the world; yet he enjoys a harmony in his own Soul.
This inward peace, it is the best still Music: That you may be thankful for
this peace, consider how sad it is to want this peace, because this is the
contrary of it.

I argue thus;

If the Devil, and horror of Conscience, be so dreadful; then certainly inward
peace of Conscience flowing from Christ must needs be very sweet: to have
Conscience vex and trouble, it is, as it is well called, a sharp fury. Spira, he
had that inward horror of Soul, when he had sinned; that he died with the fear
and terror of Hell in his Soul; he thought Judgment less than that. Now if the
sting of Conscience be so bitter; then the peace of Conscience must needs be
sweet. Has God set thy Soul, which was once like a troublesome Sea, now to be
calm and peaceable? Oh! then sound thy Harp and Viol: Admire this God; sing
forth praises and acclamations unto Christ this blessed Prince of Peace.

Lastly, If Christ has spoken peace; if he has dropped this blessed peace into
your Souls; then let me beseech you, that you would be careful not to lose this
Jewel. Labor to preserve this peace in your Souls: preserve your peace, as you
would preserve your lives. And to that end,

First, If you would preserve your peace; take heed of Relapses; they are
dangerous. Do not tamper any more with sin. Dare not to feed sin in a corner.
Sin is the peace-breaker, Psalm. 85.8. The Lord will speak peace to his people:
But what follows? but let them not return again to folly: Let not them return
again to their sins any more. There is a great deal of folly in our relapsing
from a strict and holy life.

Secondly, Would you preserve this Jewel in your bosoms; this blessed peace;
then make up your Accounts with God daily. Often reckoning keeps God and
Conscience friends, Psalm. 4.4. Commune with your own hearts; that is, call your
selves* to an account, and make up your account; make them even; see how things
stand betwixt God and your Souls: observe your Affections whether they are
lively: examine your Evidences, and see if there be no decay in your graces; no
loss of first love. Oh! keep the Reckoning even betwixt God and you; that is the
way to keep your peace.

Thirdly, Walk closely with God every day: Live as under the continual
Inspection of Gods Omniscient Eye: Live holily: Peace and purity they go
together: The way to preserve our peace, it is to preserve our Integrity. Oh!
keep your constant hours every day with God: Turn your Closets into Temples:
Search the Scriptures: The two Testaments are the two Lips by which God has
spoken to us. Love the Word: Love Prayer: Love the Sabbath, Psalm. 119. v. 165.
Great peace have they that love thy Law. Thus you may sweetly enjoy your
selves; and this Jewel of peace will be preserved in your bosoms.

SERMON IV.
Psalm 2.12. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when
his wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that put their trust in
him.
HOly David, in the beginning of this Psalm, shows us how all the powers and
gallantry of the world do rage and confederate against the Lord and his
anointed, that is, Christ, verse 2. Rulers take counsel against the Lord and
his Anointed. That power which he did put into their hands, they do employ
against him; but their attempt is in vain. In the first verse; The people
imagine a vain thing; as if the holy Psalmist had said, The Lord will have a
Church in spite of Earth and Hell, Matthew. 16.18. The Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it; that is, neither the Power of Hell, nor the Policy of Hell
shall prevail against his Church: Neither the Serpents subtilty, nor yet the
Dragons fierceness shall prevail against it. We read that the Ship in the
Gospel was tossed on the Waves; but was not overwhelmed: The Ship was tossed,
because sin was in it; but not overwhelmed, because Christ was in it. Christ is
in the Ship of his Church; and the more opposition is made against the Church
of God, the more it increases: It grows by opposition, Exodus 1.12. The more
they were afflicted, the more they multiplied, (says Chrysostom.) It is just
like the Torch, the more it is beaten, the more it flames. Religion is that
Phoenix, that is always flourishing in the Ashes of Martyrs: Therefore let the
great ones conspire and take counsel against the Lord and his Christ, they do
imagine a vain thing.

In the 4th verse we read, that when the wicked sit plotting, God he smiles at
them: He that sits in the Heavens shall laugh at them. God laughs to see men's
folly, to see poor weak Clay go to take head, and to strive with the Potter.
But let the wicked remember, that God is never more angry with them, than when
he laughs. He will speak to 'em in a fair Language, as you may read in verse 5.
After his laughing, then he shall speak to them in his wrath: And what does he
say? verse 6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy Hill of Zion. In spite of all
the powers of darkness, Jesus Christ shall have a Throne to sit upon among his
People: And the Crown shall flourish upon his head. I have set my King; that
is, I have anointed Christ to be King, and poured on him the Ointment of grace
and gladness. I will have my Son to reign, and such as will not bow to his
golden Scepter* shall be broken with his Iron Rod, verse 9.

Then after this the Psalmist makes the Inference. Before he had been making
the Doctrine to Kings and great ones of the world, and now he makes the Use, in
verse 10. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings! Be instructed, ye Judges of the
Earth: Serve the Lord with fear: As if he had said; Come at last to your wits;
don't stand out any longer in contest with God and his Son Jesus Christ; but
rather bow to him; throw your Crowns at his feet; make your peace with him:
Serve the Lord with fear; so the Text ushers in: And it is a part of the good
counsel the Holy Ghost gives; Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish
from the way.

Kissing of the Son, it denotes two things.

First, Adoration: It was an ancient custom to kiss the Son when they admired,
Job 31.27. So Ierom and others read the word; Admire the Son. Adoration, it is
a Crown Jewel, proper to Christ, and to his Crown. Admire the Son; that is the
first.

Secondly, Kissing the Son, it denotes subjection. So we find 1 Samuel 10.1.
Samuel kissed Saul when he anointed him King: He kissed him in token of homage
and subjection to him. So that is the meaning of the Text; Kiss the Son, that
is, admire him. The Text falls into these two parts.

First, Here Is a duty; Kiss the Son.

Secondly, The reason of it, and that is very cogent; lest he be angry.

So here are two Propositions do result from the words. I shall only speak to
the first, and draw in the other in the Application.

Doct. 1. Jesus Christ is the Son of God.

Doct. 2. It is a great point of prudence, highly to value and love; to kiss
and admire this blessed Son of God.

First, Jesus Christ is the Son of God; Kiss the Son; he is the Son of God, not
by creation, as the Angels are said to be his Sons; but he is his Son by
eternal generation, Heb. 1.3. Who being the brightness of his glory, and the
express Image of his person. Observe, Jesus Christ is the Son of God; for he is
the brightness of his Fathers glory. You know that the brightness that is^ues
from the Sun, is of the same nature with the Sun in the Firmament. So Jesus
Christ he is the brightness of his Father; he is of the same nature with his
Father, as the Beams, they are of the same nature with the Sun: Therefore
Christ speaks thus, John 14.9. He that has seen me, has seen my Father. Again
observe, Christ he is called the brightness of his Fathers glory. The glory of
the Sun in the Firmament, it lies in the brightness of it. So the incomparable
glory of the Father does most shine in Jesus Christ; he is the brightness of
his Fathers glory: And this is enough to demonstrate to us, that Christ is the
very Son of God. And as Christ is the Son of God; so he is a Royal Son; he is a
Son, as he is a King: I have set my King upon my holy Hill of Zion, Psalm. 2.
Jesus Christ he is said in Scripture to be the Prince of the Kings of the
Earth, Rev. 1.5. All Kings they hold their Crowns by immediate Tenor from
Jesus Christ, Prove. 8.15. By me Princes reign. So that Christ he is a Royal
Son: he is so a Son, that he is a King. Indeed he has the Titles given to him
of a King.

1. He is called high and mighty, Isa. 9.6. the mighty God.

2. As he is a King, he has his Ensigns of Royalty, he has his Sword, Psalm.
49.3. He has his Scepter in his hand, Heb. 1.8.

3. Again, Christ as he is King, he has his Prerogative Royal. As for
instance; he has power to make Laws: he has power to pardon offenders, which
are Jewels belonging to the Crowns of Princes.

4. Again, he has his Subjects, and they are the most noble and excellent
Subjects in the world, in a threefold respect.

First, All Christ's Subjects are made free, John 18.36. His Subjects* do fear
him from an ingenuous principle of Love; they do not serve Christ out of
constraint, but out of choice: they are of a free, noble spirit.

Secondly, Christ's Subjects they have the spirit of the Living God in them:
they have the in-dwelling of the Holy Ghost, 2 Timothy 1.14.

Thirdly, All Christ's Subjects, they are of the Blood Royal of Heaven; they are
Kings, Rev. 1.8. Thus you see, Christ he is a Son, and he is a King; he has
his Subjects.

5. Again, Christ as King, he has his dominions: There are some Princes have
titles, but they have not dominions: But Christ has dominions as well as
titles of honor: He has Lands belonging to his Crown. Christ's dominions are
famous for three things.

First, They are large dominions: God has given him as King the uttermost
parts of the Earth for his possession: His Kingdom reaches all over the world.

Secondly, Christ's dominion is famous for its spirituality. The Lord Jesus sets
up his Throne and Kingdom where no other King can: He rules the hearts of men;
he gives Laws in their Consciences; he binds their Souls by his Laws: Here Is
the spirituality of his Kingdom.

Thirdly, Here is the eternity of his Kingdom or Dominion: Thy Throne, O God!
is for ever and ever, Heb. 1.8. What King can say so? It Is true, he has many
Heirs; (for all Believers they are his Heirs) yet he has no Successors.
Earthly Crowns fade away, tumble in the dirt, and those that wear them. Does
the Crown endure to all generations? No; there is a worm that feeds in this
gold. But Christ's Throne, it endures for ever. As the Lord Jesus has the
largest possessions, (for so he has) and they shall endure for ever and ever.

And thus much for the Doctrinal part. Jesus Christ he is the Son of God; the
brightness of his glory. And he is a Royal Son; he is so a Son, as he is a King.

Now to make some Application.

Use 1.
First, By way of Inference. Is Jesus Christ the Son of God? a King full of
glory and majesty? then it informs us thus much; That all matters of fact must
be brought before this Son of God. It is the Son of God, his Royal Son, by whom
all Princes reign. Learn from hence, That all matter of fact must be brought
before this Son. Christ he has the power of life and death in his hand, John
5.22. Observe, The Father has committed all Judgment, all Government, to the
Son. That blessed Lord Jesus that once had a Reed put into his hand, by way of
scorn and contempt; he shall shortly have a Royal Scepter put into his hand as
some great King. That Jesus who once hung upon the Cross, he shall shortly sit
as Judge upon the Bench. God has committed all Judgment to the Son. The whole
world must shortly come before the Son. That Is the last and great Assize, from
whence there is no Appeal. This blessed Son of God is fitly qualified to be the
Judge of the world, in respect of these two things.

First, Jesus Christ has wisdom to understand all Causes; he is the Son of
God; he is God; therefore will search to the bottom of all Causes; therefore he
is described with seven Eyes, to denote his Omnisciency to judge of things.
Jesus Christ he weighs the spirits of men as it were in a balance, Job 16.2.
He is said to weigh the spirit. Christ does not only judge matter of fact, but
he judges of men's hearts. Many men's actions may seem in this world to be good,
but their hearts are not good, 2 Chronicles. 25.2. Now Christ, this great Judge, he
has this Touchstone to try the heart.

Secondly, Jesus Christ he has not only wisdom; but has strength too, whereby
he is able to be revenged upon all his Enemies: Therefore in Scripture it is
remarkable, that Christ's seven Eyes, they are said to be upon one Stone. Seven
Eyes upon one Stone, to denote the infinite strength of Christ; the power and
mighty strength of Christ. As Christ has his balance; so he has his sword to
cut off offenders: He can easily strike through the Loins of his Enemies, Psalm.
110. Thus the Son of God, this Royal Son, he is to be Judge, and all Causes,
and all Matters will be brought before his Judgment Seat. Christ's Court is the
highest Court of Judicature: if men are once cast there, there is no Appeal to
any other Court.

A second Use that I would make of this point, is an Use of Exhortation; and it
has three or four branches in it.

First, If Jesus Christ be the Son of God, so full of glory and majesty, and
shall sit upon the Bench of Judicature; then let all great ones take heed how
they employ their power against Jesus Christ: It is Christ that does give them
their power. By me (says Christ) Princes reign, Prove. 8. v. 15. Power and
Sovereignty it is a Talent that Christ does entrust men with; and he will
shortly call them to an account what they have done with this Talent; and if it
be found that they have employed this Talent against Jesus Christ, O what a
dismal account will they have to make! Christ is set up to be a King; and
whoever oppose Christ in his Kingly Office, that say, We will not have this man
to reign over us; why, these will find that Christ will be too hard for them.
For men to lift up themselves against Christ, it is as if a little Child should
go to fight with an Arch Angel, Isa. 8.9. Associate your selves, O ye people,
and ye shall be broken in pieces. This is the voice of Gods Church speaking to
its Enemies. The Church of God having such a Champion of her side as the Lord
Christ is, she insults over all her Enemies.

Secondly, If Jesus Christ be the Son of God, then let us labor all of us to
become one with Christ; then we also shall be the Sons of God. Christ makes all
the Saints to become Sons; Sons of God, Romans 8.17, 18. Christ is a Son by
eternal generation; and Believers they are his Sons by Adoption. David thought
it a great honor to be Son-in-law to a King, 1 Samuel 18.18. What an infinite
honor is it to be the Sons of the most high God! As Christ is the Son of God;
so grace makes us to be the Sons of God. God accounts all his Sons to be
honorable; and they must needs be so. Such honor have all his Saints; for
they are born of God, and they fetch their pedigree from Heaven, Isa. 43.4.
Since thou wast precious in mine eyes, thou have been honorable. Their tears
are put unto Gods own bottle. He gives the Saints a partnership with Christ in
his glory. God lays up a portion for all his Sons: he gives them a Kingdom when
they die, Luke 12.32. It is my Fathers good pleasure to give you a Kingdom. O!
who would not labor for grace? As Christ is the Son of God; so grace makes us
to become the Sons of God; and being Sons, we are Heirs to all Gods promises.
The promises, they are a Cabinet of Jewels; and God has bestowed this Cabinet
upon his Sons: Therefore Saints they are called Heirs of the promises, Heb. 6.
v. 17. and Heirs of eternal life, Titus 8.7. O ye Saints of God! think of this.
If ye are Sons, why, though you may lose and suffer the spoiling of your goods,
as the primitive Saints did, Heb. 10.34. yet you shall not lose your portion;
for your heavenly Father will keep a portion for you in his Kingdom.

Thirdly, If Christ be the Son of God, then let us all be willing to hear
Christ's voice whenever he speaks to us. This I ground upon that Scripture,
Matthew. 17.5. This is my beloved Son, hear him. This is the Inference that God
himself makes. When Jesus Christ calls for us in his Word to believe and to
repent; now he is said to speak from Heaven to us. O then let us hear the Son!
God knows how long we shall hear the Son speaking to us. Shall we hearken to a
lust? shall we hearken to a temptation? shall we hear the Serpents voice? and
shall we not hear the Sons voice? O let us not despise the voice of the Son of
God! If God should speak to us now as he did to the people when he gave the Law
with Thundering and Earthquakes; then we should tremble as they did, Exodus
20.18, 19. Let not the Lord speak to us, lest we die; but when God speaks to
us, Heb. 1.2. with a still small voice of the Gospel; when God wooes and
beseeches us by his Son, 2 Cor. 5.19. Turn ye, turn ye; why will ye die? Ezekiel.
18.31, 32. Hear, and your souls shall live, Isa. 55.2. shall we not now hear
the voice of the Son of God? If we will not hear Christ's first voice; Come unto
me you that are weary and heavy laden, Matthew. 11.28. we shall never hear
Christ's second voice; Come to me, ye blessed, Luke 25.34.

Fourthly, (which is the main thing of all) If Christ be the Son of God, a King
full of glory and majesty, as you have heard; then take the counsel in the
Text; Kiss the Son, lest he be angry. Kiss Christ this blessed Son of God with
a threefold kiss. Kiss him, 1. With a kiss of Faith. 2. With a kiss of Love. 3.
With a kiss of Obedience.


First, Kiss Christ the Son of God with a kiss of Faith. This is indeed to kiss
him, when we believe in him; so it follows in the words of the Text; Blessed
are they that put their trust in him, to believe and confide in his merit. This
believing kiss, it is that which Christ looks for to affect our thoughts and
confidence in the merit of the Son of God. This kiss of Faith (says Austin) it
is as it were to set footing in Heaven, when we begin to believe, we have got
one foot in Heaven. It is the main thing in the Gospel, to believe in the Son,
Act. 13.39. By him all that believe are justified. We may believe sometimes
when we don't know we believe. As there may be life, when there is no lively
sense; so in Faith, we may have Faith when we don't know it. I am not justified
because I believe; but because I know I believe. This kiss of Faith, believing
in Christ, it is the best kiss we can give to Christ. This he takes most kindly
at our hands: For when we believe, then we honor the Son as we honor the
Father. It sets the Crown upon the head of Christ.

Now because there is so much weight lies upon this believing in the Son of
God; I shall show you first, What is this to believe in him?

I answer: It is not only an assent that Jesus Christ is the true Messiah; but
there must be a fiducial recumbency, a leaning on Christ as the Spouse did. Who
is this that comes leaning on her Beloved? Cant. 8.5. All other Pillows will
break but this Pillow: this Pillow you can never lean too hard upon. Jesus
Christ is a golden Pillow, that bears all that is laid upon him. This believing
in Christ, it is a catching hold of his merit. One that is ready to drown, he
catches hold on the bough or twig to keep him from sinking. O! nothing will
keep us from eternally sinking in the Sea of Gods wrath, but a catching hold on
Jesus Christ. Believing, it is a holy adventure upon Christ: as Queen Esther,
she adventured into the presence of the King; If I perish, I perish, says she.
This is the language of Faith; If I perish, I perish. Who ever perished
believing?

Secondly, This kissing of Christ by Faith, it is hard; it is not an easy
matter. It is easy to profess this Son of God; but it is not easy to kiss
this Son. That which makes this work of believing, lies in these two things.

First, Because man sets up the Idol of Self-righteousness: he is apt to think
he has something of his own growth in him; righteousness of his own: his
prayers, his tears, his alms, he would make a Christ of them. Instead of
kissing the Son, he does idolize himself. Man's a proud piece of flesh; he
would see some worthiness in himself; he would give part to himself, and part
to Christ: he is loath to be beholden to grace only; he would grow upon his own
Root, and not be grafted upon the Stock of Christ's righteousness, Romans 10.3.
Going about to establish a righteousness of their own, they have not submitted
themselves to the righteousness of God. O! it is wonderful to see a proud sinner
humble; to go out of himself to Christ for righteousness. That Is one thing.

Secondly, That which makes this work of believing so hard, is this; because
believing, it is a work above the power of nature to produce; it is a work of
supernatural infusing, John 6. v. 29. Faith is called the work of God: It Is the
work of God to believe. Faith is a new Creation. The creation of the world, it
is called the work of Gods finger; but the creation of faith, it is called the
work of Gods arm: The Lord does as it were set all his strength awork. It is
called the exceeding greatness of his power, Ephesians. 1.20. Surely to raise Christ
from the dead, required a great power; he had a heavy Gravestone laid upon
him; the sins of the whole world. Why the same power God does put forth in the
producing of faith in the Soul: so that this kissing of Christ by faith, is not
so easy as most do imagine.

Thirdly, Where ever this blessed work of faith is, it has some virtue goes
along with it; it has a refining, consecrating virtue. The kiss of faith, it is
a holy kiss; it purifies the heart, and makes it holy, Acts 15. Faith is in the
heart, as fire amongst metal; it purifies it, and takes away the dross. A kiss
of faith, it has the same virtue as the touching of Christ by faith. The Woman
touched the hem of Christ's garment by faith, and immediately she receives
healing virtue from that touch, Mark 5.34. Thus faith touches Christ and heals.
True faith draws a sanctifying and a mortifying virtue from the Lord Jesus.
Justifying faith may be called a faith of spiritual miracles; for it removes
mountains of sins, and throws them into Christ's blood. Whoever does kiss the
Son by faith, he is presently made holy: The truth is, faith does argue a man
to holiness; it falls to reasoning with him: O my Soul* has Christ done so
much for me? has he forgiven me so many debts? has he purchased such rich
mercy in his blood? and will thou abuse the Love of so dear a friend! Will thou
make the wounds of thy dear Savior to bleed afresh! is this to kiss the Son? O
my Soul! how should thou give up thy self to Christ in holiness! And then
faith reasons; If that my tears will wash Christ's feet, will thou not pour them
out? If thy Estate be a precious Ointment, wilt not thou pour out this Ointment
upon part of Christ's body, and relieve his Members? Now the Soul cannot
withstand these melting reasons, but presently yields to all. Faith it is a
holy gift; it does consecrate the heart wherever it comes.

Fourthly, To kiss the Son by faith, it is the most excellent way of worshipping
of him: there is nothing like believing. Let me a little set forth to you the
excellency of faith.

First, This is the main thing the Scripture does hold forth and press you to.
If one should be asked this Question; Why the Scriptures were written? The
Answer is; to point us to Christ the true Messiah, and that we should embrace
him by faith, John 20.31. These things are written, that you might believe that
Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that believing you might have life
through his name. This is the marrow of the Gospel. It Is the sovereign Cordial
of a fainting Soul, that by believing on the Lord Jesus Christ he may be saved.

Secondly, This blessed believing, kissing the Son by faith, it is the most
excellent of all graces; it excels all others, even as Gold among Metals. Every
grace is very lovely, but this of faith excels them all.

Consider these four or five particulars.

First, Faith is the uniting grace; therefore this grace excels; other graces
conform us to Christ, but faith unites us to Christ; it espouses us to him:
Other graces make us like Christ; but faith makes us one with Christ: Other
graces make us pictures of Christ; but faith makes us branches of Christ.
That Is one.

Secondly, Faith it is the heart, vital grace. By kissing Christ we fetch life
from him: The just shall live by faith, Hab. 2.4. By believing we fetch life
from Christ: I live by the faith of the Son of God, says the Apostle, Gal.
2.20. As the arm lives by drawing life from the heart; so faith it lives by
drawing life and strength from Christ. Other graces are useful, but faith is
vital.

Thirdly, Faith it is the justifying grace, therefore it is most excellent,
Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith. It is not repentance that justifies, nor
self-denial, but faith: Faith it is the most proper grace of all to justify a
sinner; for the hand is more fitter to receive the food, than the eye: so faith
is the most proper to justify, because when we believe, we don't give any
thing to Christ, but we fetch something from him.

Fourthly, It is a world-conquering grace, 1 John 5.4. This is the victory over
the world, even our faith. Faith overcomes all the allurements of the world,
the riches of the world, the delights of the world; and it does it thus; by
showing the Soul a better world than this is. Faith gives it a prospect of
prosperity: it carries a Believer to the Mount of Transfiguration; it makes it
to see things that are not seen by the eye of sense, Heb. 12.1. Faith leads the
Soul to Christ the bright morning Star; it gives the Soul a view of him, and he
is known in the embroidered Robes of his glory. Faith shows a man a Kingdom; it
trades above the Moon; and when once a Soul has a shadow of these things, it
despises all the pleasures of this world.

Fifthly and lastly, Faith is a suffering grace; it inables us to wade through
the deep waters of affliction, Heb. 11.25. By faith Moses he chose rather to
suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasure of sin for
a season. Faith is a Furnace grace; it gives the Soul a right notion of
suffering. What is this suffering? says faith, it is but light affliction, 2
Cor. 4.17, 18. The Cross is light in comparison of the Cross which Christ
conformed to. The Cross is light in comparison of the weight of glory; and thus
faith makes the Soul go through affliction.

Thirdly, This kissing of Christ by faith, pleases God more than any thing we
can do besides; it is better than to give God Rivers of Oil; it is better than
Sacrifice: it is faith that pleases God; this is the savoury meat which God
loves to taste of: And the reason why believing is thus pleasing to God, is
this; because, by believing, we bring a righteousness into Gods presence, which
is perfectly meritorious. We don't bring the righteousness of Adam into Court,
or the righteousness of Angels; but we bring the righteousness of God; and this
is that which makes believing so pleasing to God. If then to kiss Christ by
faith, be the great work under the Gospel; why then let us labor thus to kiss
the Son of God by believing in him, and putting and placing our full hope in
him. That Is the first thing: Kiss him with a kiss of faith.

Secondly, We must kiss the Son of God with a kiss of Love. Indeed Christ he is
the wonder of beauty: he is nothing but Love. God is love, 1 John 4.8. Christ
has that majesty in him, which may draw reverence: and he has that mercy in
him, that may draw love to him. The Lord Jesus, he is a whole Paradise of
delight; why then, kiss him with a kiss of love. Let it be a sincere love, 1
Cor. 16.21. Grace be with them that love the Lord Jesus in sincerity and truth.
Don't kiss him with a Judas kiss, to betray him; but love him sincerely; that
is, love his person more than Jewels. Love Christ more for what he is, than for
what he has; and then love Christ with a superlative love; a love above all
things whatsoever. Christ has loved you more than others; you that are
Believers; he has loved you with such a love, that he does not bestow upon the
wicked. You have Electing love, you have Adopting love: let your love to Christ
be such a love, that none else but Christ may be a sharer, that is, give Christ
a love that is joined with adoration. Don't only kiss Christ with your lips,
but worship him in your hearts. That Is a second: Kiss Christ with a kiss of
Love; he deserves your love most, and he deserves your love best.

Thirdly, Kiss Christ with a kiss of Obedience. This is to kiss Christ, when we
submit to him, when we obey his Laws, when we are under his Jurisdiction. There
are many in the world give Christ a complemental kiss; they seem devout and
zealous; they bow and cringe; O but they don't obey the Son! they kiss Christ
as their Savior, but they will not submit to him as their Prince. The truth
is, they would have Christ and their lusts together; they would embrace his
Promises, but they will not obey his Commands. O kiss the Son with a kiss of
Subjection! We should be like the Needle that points that way which the
Loadstone draws. Those persons that will not have Christ's Laws to rule them,
they shall never have Christ's Blood to save them.

Now to persuade you to kiss the Lord Jesus with a kiss of Obedience, consider
these two things.

1. The first is in the Text: lest he be angry. Anger is not in Christ as a
passion; but anger is said to be in Christ as a displeasure in him. And his
punishing of offenders, is the effect of his displeasure. Who knows the power
of his anger? O therefore kiss the Son, lest he be angry! See that place in
Rev. 6. v. 15. The Kings of the Earth, the great men hid themselves in the
Dens, and in the Rocks of the Mountains; and said to the Rocks and the
Mountains, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on the
Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. Now the Lamb of God is turned into a
Lion; and therefore they cry out to the Rocks O hide us from the wrath of the
Lamb! He that has no part in the Blood of the Lamb, will have a part in the
wrath of the Lamb. If you will not kiss the ^on, and lie down at his feet, and
submit to him; then you must fall into his hands; and the Apostle says, It Is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living God, Heb. 10.31. It is good
for to fall into his hands when he is a friend; O but it is sad to fall into his
hands when he is an adversary! God is the sweetest friend, but he is the
sourest enemy. When but one spark of Gods wrath does light upon a man, it is so
terrible, what is it then to have the whole Furnace of his wrath! How easily
can the Lord Jesus crumble us to dust? he can unpin the whole world? O then
kiss the Son, lest he be angry. The Mountains quake at his presence; and will
not the sinners heart quake? Perhaps you think this Lion is not so fierce as he
is painted. Look into one Scripture, Ezekiel. 22.14. Can thine heart endure, or
can thine hand be strong in the day that I shall deal with thee?

2. Secondly, If we kiss the Son by believing in him, and by obeying him,
Christ will answer Love with Love: he will smile upon us; he will kiss us with
the kisses of his mouth, Cant. 1.8. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his
mouth; for his love is better than wine. Christ will lay us for ever in his
bosom; and if we give him a kiss of Love, he will give us a Crown of Life, Rev.
2.

The last Use.
Here Is a word of terror to wicked men; instead of kissing the Son, they
disobey him, dishonor him, vex his Spirit, do all they can to spite him: They
take counsel against the Lord and his Anointed. Are there not many that do all
they can to overturn Christ's Interest? they would stop the Conduit-pipes that
transmit the Water of Life, Rev. 17.14. They shall make war with the Lamb, and
the Lamb shall overcome them. Christ will get the Victory; he will come off
Conqueror. Jesus Christ, he will lay his Saints in his bosom; but he will put
his Enemies under his feet, Psalm. 110.1. I will make mine enemies my footstool.
Those that will not be ruled by Christ's Royal Scepter, his Scepter of grace,
they shall be broken by his Rod of Iron. In short; All those that do oppose
Christ, they shall be as so many ripe clusters of Grapes, to be cast into the
great Wine Press of Gods wrath, and to be trodden by the Son of God, till their
blood squeezes out. The Lord Jesus, he shoots his Arrows very deep into the
very hearts of his Enemies, Psalm. 54.5. His Arrows are sharp in the hearts of
his Enemies. The Persians, they dip their Arrows in poison, to kill more
mortally. So Jesus Christ, he shoots his Arrows of poison; and because they
cannot endure the wrath of the Lamb all at once, they will be enduring it to
all eternity. So therefore here is terror to all them that do not kiss the Son.

SERMON V.
Psalm 112.7. He shall not be afraid of evil tidings; his heart is fixed,
trusting in the Lord.
A Word fitly spoken, says Solomon, is like Apples of Gold in pictures of
Silver. In which respect I have chosen this Scripture to treat on at this time.
When the Winds begin to rise, and a Storm threatens, it is time then to get our
spiritual Tackling ready, and to cast Anchor. The Mariner casts his Anchor
downward; the Christian casts his Anchor upward, within the Veil; he does in
the deepest danger cast out the Sheet Anchor of Faith, and is not afraid: So
says the Text; He shall not be afraid of evil tidings, his heart is fixed,
trusting in the Lord.

In this Psalm you have described the character of a righteous man; v. 1. He
delights greatly in Gods Commands: he does not only keep Gods Commands, but
he loves them; they are the joy of his heart; he delights greatly in Gods
Commands.

Secondly, In this Psalm is set down the righteous man's happiness, several ways.

First, His Children shall be blessed; verse 2. His seed shall be mighty upon
earth. Righteousness entails mercy upon posterity.

Secondly, His Estate shall be blessed; verse 3. Wealth and riches shall be in
his house. A man is no loser by being righteous; it makes his Estate flourish.

Thirdly, His Soul shall be blessed; verse 9. It is righteousness shall endure
for ever; that is, the joy and comfort of it endures for ever: his grace shall
be crowned with glory: This Flower of Paradise does not wither.

Fourthly, The righteous man's name shall be blessed; verse 6. The righteous
shall be had in everlasting remembrance; that is, his name shall be honored;
it shall live when he is dead. The righteous man, he carries a good Conscience
with him when he dies, and leaves a good name behind him: He shall be in
everlasting remembrance. And so I come to the Text. This righteous man shall
not be afraid of evil tidings; his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord.

The Text consists of these two general parts.

First, The righteous man's privilege; He shall not be afraid of evil tidings.

Secondly, The ground or reason of it; His heart is fixed, trusting in the
Lord. I begin with the

First of these briefly: The righteous man's privilege; He shall not be afraid
of evil tidings. When there are rumors of evils approaching, the godly man he
shall not be discomposed in his mind; he shall not be in a pannick fear: Yet
let me insert this for the right understanding of it.

First, Not but that the righteous man is sensible of danger; or else how can
he humble himself under Gods mighty hand?

Secondly, Not but that some clouds of natural fear may arise in his mind.
Grace, though it does subdue, it does not expel nature. But the meaning of the
Text is this; He shall not be afraid of evil tidings; that is, first, A
righteous man, he shall not be afraid with a distracting fear; such a fear as
takes him off from duty, untunes him quite for Gods service.

Secondly, He shall not be afraid of evil tidings, with a fainting fear, so as
to have his heart die within him; as it was with Saul, 1 Samuel 28.20. Saul fell
straightway all along upon the Earth, and was sore afraid; he fainted away in
his fear.

Thirdly, A righteous man shall not be afraid of evil tidings with a despairing
fear; he shall not so fear, but that still the heart does sweetly rest upon
Gods promises. It is with a godly man in time of danger, as it is with a Ship
as it lies at Anchor: A Ship at Anchor, it shakes a little upon the Water, but
it is fixed, being at Anchor. So though there may be some shakings and tremblings
in the flesh; yet a Christian is not so tossed with fear, but he is like a Ship
at Anchor; His heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord.

Use briefly.
See the difference betwixt the godly and the wicked: the godly man he is not
afraid of evil rumors; he does not fear with a distracting or desponding fear;
still hope is preserved and kept alive in the Soul: But the wicked, when danger
approaches, are surprised with heart-killing fears, Isa. 33.14. The sinners in
Sion are afraid: Fearfulness has surprised hypocrites. Guilt is the bladder of
fear. When Adam had stole the fruit, then he began to tremble: I was afraid,
says he to God, and hid my self. Sinners fall into Convulsions of Conscience.
Cains mark was a shaking in the flesh: And a wicked man, he has a trembling in
his heart, Isa. 13.8. They shall be afraid: their faces shall be ashamed. They
shall be afraid: The Hebrew word for fear, signifies such a fright as casts
Women into travail, and makes them miscarry. So sinners* they shall be cast as
it were into such a fright, as their faces shall be ashamed: What is that? that
is, when troubles do arise, their faces do wax pale. So much for the first
thing in the Text; the righteous man's privilege; He shall not be afraid of
evil tidings with a distracting or desponding fear.

Secondly, Here is the ground or reason why a godly person shall not be afraid
or amazed at evil tidings, in these words, His heart is fixed, trusting in the
Lord; there is the ground. This makes him as the Leviathan, without fear; His
heart is fixed trusting in the Lord.

So the Observation is this;

Doct. It is the genius and temper of a true Saint, in times of imminent
danger, to have his heart fixed, by trusting in the Lord Jehovah.

His heart is fixed trusting in the Lord. For the illustration of this
Proposition, I shall answer these three Questions.

First, What it is to trust in God in times of danger?

Secondly, Why we ought to trust in God?

Thirdly How faith does fix the heart, and makes us to trust in God?

I begin with the first of these.

I answer, It is called in Scripture our casting our burden upon God; the
burden of our care, the burden of our fear, the burden of our wants, the burden
of our sins, Psalm. 55.22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain
thee.

Secondly, Trusting in God in Scripture is called a staying our selves upon
God, as a man that is ready to fall, he stays himself upon some prop or pillow.
Thus a Christian, he stays himself upon God, Isa. 50*10. I shall describe
trusting in God thus; It is an Heroic act of Faith, whereby we roll all our
care, and lay the stress of our Salvation only upon God.

Now there is required in this trusting in God, an absolute necessary, 1.
Knowledge. 2. Acquaintance with him.


First, Knowledge of God, Psalm. 9.10. They that know thy name will put their
trust in thee.

Secondly, In this trusting in God is required acquaintance with him through
Christ: without acquaintance there can be no trust. One cannot well trust a
stranger; there must be some acquaintance with God, Job 22. v. 21. Acquaint thy
self now with him, and be at peace. That Is the first; What this trusting in God
is:

Secondly, Why we must repose our trust in God?

I will give you but these two Reasons.

First, Because God does call for this trust, Isa. 26.4. Trust ye in the Lord
for ever; Psalm. 62.8. Trust in him at all times. Though you are in never such
straits and fears, yet remember to cast Anchor upwards: Trust in God at all
times: The Lord would take off our confidence and trusting in all other things
besides, Ier. 17.5. Cursed be that man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his
arm. We break our Crutches, because we lean too hard upon them. God would have
us make him our trust: And the truth is, trust and affiance is the chief part
of the Worship we ascribe to God.

Secondly, We must trust in God in all our straits and dangers: He is the
proper object of our trust. My Brethren, the Creature is not a fit object of
our trust; as it appears thus: It has two ill qualities that we cannot repose
our trust in.

First, The Creature it deceives.

Secondly, It fails.

First, It deceives; it is but a sugared Lie: Where we think to suck Honey, we
only taste Wormwood. And as it deceives, so it fades and withers; like a Rose,
the fuller it is blown, the sooner it sheds. So that we cannot make the
Creature the object of our trust: But God he deserves our trust; he is called
in Scripture a strong Tower, where you may have safety, Prove. 18.10. The name
of the Lord is a strong Tower; he is Elshaddi, God Almighty, Genesis 17.1. There
is no condition we can be in, no exigence, but he can relieve; he is God
Almighty. In particular; there are two glorious Attributes in God, in which we
may safely repose our trust: The one is his Mercy. The other his Truth.


They are both joined in one verse: Thou will perform thy Truth and thy Mercy
to Abraham.

First, We may rest and stay our Souls upon Gods Mercy, Psalm. 13.5. I have
trusted in thy mercy. Though I have sinned, mercy can pardon me* Though I am in
want, mercy can relieve me. Gods mercy it is infinite: it is a Honeycomb for
sweetness, and it is a Rock for safety.

Secondly, We may safely rely on Gods Truth or Faithfulness. Remember this;
Truth is the object of Trust. Heaven and Earth may sooner fail than Gods
Veracity, Psalm. 89.33. I will not suffer my faithfulness to fail. Good reason
then we should trust in God. Where can we pitch our Faith but upon Gods
Faithfulness?

Thirdly, The third thing is to show you, that trusting in God is the way to
have the heart fixed: His heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord.

Note two things, first, That it is an excellent thing to have the heart fixed.

Secondly, It is only Faith does fix the heart.

First, It is a rare thing: It is excellent to have the heart fixed; as appears
two ways.

First, Fixing of the heart shows solid efficacy of spirit. A heart unfixt, it
is just like a Ship without Ballast, blown up and down in the water.

Secondly, Fixing the heart fits it for holy duties. He whose heart is fixed
upon God, he serves God with delight, with cheerfulness. Indeed, a heart unfixt
is a heart unfitted for duty. A shaking hand is not fit to write. An unfixed
heart is unfit to pray or meditate; it runs after other vanities. Sure then a
fixed frame of heart is an excellent frame of heart. You know when the Milk is
settled, then it turns to Cream: So when the heart is settled and fixed on God,
it is ever in the best frame. That Is the first.

Secondly, That trusting in God does fix the heart: The heart is fixed,
trusting in the Lord; that is, it is fixed by trusting. Faith, it frees the
heart from those commotions which cause trembling and quivering; it fixes the
heart upon God; as a Star is fixed in its Orb, so is a Believers Soul fixed on
God. Faith makes the heart cleave to God, as the Needle does cleave to the
Loadstone. Faith fixes the heart. Such a fixed Star was Athanasius. Tertullian
called him an invincible Adamant; he could not be stirred or moved away from
the Truth: Faith had fixed his heart on God.

To make some Use of this.

Use.
First, Here you see the misery of wicked men; they are unfixed; they know not
where to rest when troubles come; they have no God to go to trust to. Sinners,
they are like a Ship without Anchor, tossed with the Storms, that has no where
to put in for harbor; they are like the Old World; when the Flood came, they
had no Ark to trust to. The wicked are like King Saul in an hour of danger, 1 Samuel 28.15. I am sorely distressed; for the Philistines make war against me,
and God is departed from me. A flagitious sinner is like a Soldier in Battle,
where the Bullets fly about, and he is without Armor, and has no Garrison to
trust unto. Beloved, it is Faith makes the heart fixed in troublesome times.
Faith does ingarrison the Soul in Gods Attributes, and makes it like a Tower
walled in with Rocks, that is impregnable.

Use 2. Of Exhortation.
Oh! Let us above all things labor for this heart-fixing grace of Faith.
Trusting in God does corroborate and animate, and bear up the heart in
death-threatning dangers: Oh get this heart-fixing grace of Faith! But alas!
who will not say, that he is resolved, and he is fixed? If a Storm does arise,
he for his part trusts in God: who will not say, he trusts in God? Therefore we
must bring our hearts to a Scriptural Touchstone: it is worth while: Let us try
whether our trusting in God be right or no. You shall know it thus.

First, If our Trust be right, then we commit our chief Treasure to God: our
Soul is the Jewel, the chief Treasure, and we commit this to Gods care and
custody, Psalm. 31.5. Into thy hand I commit my Spirit; we lay up all our hope
in God, Psalm. 39.7. What wait I for? Lord, my hope is in thee. As in time of
war, a man puts all his Money and Plate in a safe strong place, so must we lay
up all our hopes in God as a strong Tower.

Secondly, If we trust in God aright, why then we do in all our danger fly to
God. There are some, when troubles arise, they fly to their shifts; O! but do
we fly to God? Psalm. 143.9. Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemies: I will fly
to thee to hide me. When Satan shoots his fiery Darts of Temptation, then we
fly under Christ's wing to shelter us; even as the Dove when the Hawk pursues
it; it casts it self into the clefts of the Rock, and there it hides: So when
Satan pursues us with Temptation, we get into the bleeding wounds of Christ,
these clefts of the Rock, there we rest and are safe. Says Austin, I lay my
self softly, and rest* upon my Saviors bleeding wounds.

Thirdly, If we trust in God aright, then we can repose our trust in God when
all creature Refuges fail us, Hab. 17. Though the Fig Tree should not blossom,
can we rely upon God, upon his Promises, upon his Attributes? Can we trust in
God in the deficiency of second causes? Can we trust God without a Pawn? Can we
go to Heaven without Crutches? then our trust is genuine; a true trust. When
the Pipes are cut that use to bring us in comfort, can we say still, Yet all
our fresh springs are in God? Psalm. 87.7.

Fourthly, We may know if our trusting in God be right, by having a spirit of
courage infused into us. Unbelief breeds fear. Faith breeds courage, Prove.
28.1. The righteous man is bold as a Lion. Faith enables a man to appear in a
good cause, and to withstand all opposition, Dan. 3.18. Be it known to thee, O
King, we will not serve thy Gods, nor worship thy golden Images, Heb. 10.34.
Such an invincible Christian was Basil the Great, who feared not the threats of
the Emperor; he was like a Rock which no water could shake.

Fifthly, We may know our trust is right, when we obey God in all things he
calls for. There are two things in holy trust; there is Affiance, and
Obedience, Romans 16.26. Observe, they who expect what God promises, they will
perform what God commands, Psalm. 26.1. They have trusted in the Lord. Where was
the trial of this trust? Psalm. 119.66. I have kept thy Commandments. They
deceive themselves that say, they trust in God, and yet they will not serve
him; they deny to give God the kiss of Obedience.

Sixthly, True trusting in God is purifying; having purified their hearts by
faith. Faith purges out the love of sin, as Physic purges out the noxious
humors, 1 Timothy 3.9. holding the mystery of faith in a pure conscience. Faith
is the wedding grace, that marries Christ; and Holiness is the Child that Faith
brings forth. The Woman in the Gospel who touched Christ by faith, felt a
healing virtue coming from him. Let not that man say his heart is fixed,
trusting in God, who allows himself in any sin; what, trust in God, and yet
swear, and be drunk, and unclean! this is not trust, it is presumption. Just
like those Jews, Ier. 3.4, 5. Will thou not cry unto me, My Father? what
follows? behold thou have done evil things as thou could. Those Hypocrites
would call God Father, yet sinned as fast as they could.

Seventhly, True trusting in God, it is a patient waiting, a waiting trust,
Psalm. 37.7. Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him. Though a Believer
has not what he desires presently upon the return of prayer, those smiles and
love tokens from God as he desires; yet he is resolved he will be in a waiting
posture; he will wait till mercy comes. That Is a fine Scripture, Psalm. 123.2.
Our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until he have mercy upon us. That man that
has not patience to wait, he has no faith to trust. Remember that, Isa.
28.16. He that believes makes not haste. A Believer knows full well, the
longer he stays for a mercy, the richer it will be when it comes. As the
longest Voyages have the greatest Returns. Thus you see what this trusting in
God is, that fixes the heart in evil times.

Now let me in a few words reassume the Exhortation. O! let us labor for this
true Faith and trust, to have our hearts fixed on God in evil times. When all is
done, faith is the heart establishing grace, Psalm. 112.8. his heart is
established. The Hebrew word there for establish, signifies thus much; the
heart is shored up; it is a metaphor that alludes to an house that is shored up
by pieces of Timber. Thus faith shores up the heart when it is like to sink.
Oh! get this heart-fixing grace of faith; thus you come to be resolved and
undaunted, even in the worst of times and dangers.

Now that we may labor thus, consider but these two or three things.

First, There is nothing but God we can fix our trust in. Alas! whatever else
we trust to besides God, it will prove an Ark of Bulrushes; it will never
shelter us in an hour of danger: there is no trusting in Riches, Prove. 23.5.
Riches take themselves wings and fly. There is no trusting in Friends, they
may die; or, which is worse, they may deceive, Micah 7.5. Our Lord Jesus was
betrayed by a friend. There is no trusting in Great men; who can trust them
that are not true to God? Psalm. 118.9. It is better to trust in the Lord, than
to put confidence in Princes. There is no trusting in your own hearts; why,
alas! the heart is full of lust, full of deceit; it is a bosom Traitor, Prove.
28.26. He that trusts in his own heart is a fool. Oh! but my Brethren, trust in
God, he is a never failing Refuge. A little Boat or Pinnace, while it is tied
fast to a Rock, it is very safe: So when the Soul is tied by faith fast to
Christ Jesus the Rock of Ages, then it is safe, Psalm. 46.11. My God is the Rock
of my Refuge.

Secondly, Fixing our trust in God brings sweet peace with it. Peace is the
Olive branch that faith brings in its mouth. Turn to that excellent Scripture,
Isa. 26.3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee,
because he trusts in thee. Pray observe; perfect trust is blessed with perfect
peace. The word trust in God comes from the Hebrew, which signifies to nourish;
why so? because our trusting in God, it does nourish, it does cherish peace in
the Soul. Faith represents God as reconciled; this gives peace: he that trusts
in God, he has peace in the midst of storms and tempests; he is like Noah in
the Ark, when the Deluge came, he could sit and sing in the Ark.

Thirdly and lastly, Fixing our trust on God, it is that which brings in mercy,
and comfort, and deliverance to us, Psalm. 32.2. He that trusts in God, mercy
shall compass him about. Were it not a fine thing, in the midst of a fight, to
be compast about with a golden Shield, that no Arrow or Bullet could pierce? It
is true, Gods mercy, like a golden Shield, shall compass him about. O therefore
get this heart-fixing grace of faith. To encourage your faith, remember these
two things, you that Travel for the Churches deliverance; Faith and Prayer are
the two Midwives that deliver Gods Church when she is in Travel. I will give
you a clear Scripture, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. Help us, O Lord, there was prayer; for
we rest on thee, there was faith. When we build our Affiance and Confidence on
God, he of himself is obliged in point of honor, to defend and save us, Isa.
28.7. My heart trusted in thee, and I am helped.

To shut up all; Let us above all things labor to have our hearts fixed on God
by holy trust. Trust him where you cannot trace him. Trust God for protection
in this life, and Salvation in the other life.

My Beloved, trusting in God, it is a Receipt for all diseases: Faith it is the
cure. Does the Orphan trust himself and his Estate in the hands of his
Guardian? Does the Patient trust his life in the hands of his Physician? And
shall not we trust our Souls in Gods hand? 2 Samuel 22.31. He is a Buckler to all
them that trust in him. If ever we would get mastery of our fears and
disquiets, let us captivate carnal reason, and advance faith: So then you shall
not be afraid of e^il tidings, for the heart will be fixed, trusting in the
Lord.

SERMON VI.
This Sermon was Preached November. 17. 1678.
Psalm 112.4. Unto the upright there arises light in darkness.
CHrysostom calls the Scriptures a Spiritual Paradise. The Book of Psalms is
placed in the midst of this Paradise. David's Psalms are not only for delight,
but for benefit. Like those Trees of the Sanctuary in Ezekiel, which were both
for food and for medicine. The Psalms are commensurate and exactly fitted to
every Christians condition. If his affections be frozen, here he may fetch
fire: if he be weak in grace, here he may fetch Armor: if he be ready to
faint, here he may fetch Cordials. Among other Divine consolations, this Text
is none of the least; Unto the upright there arises light in darkness: which
words are calculated for the comfort of Gods Church in all Ages. This Text is
like Isreal's Pillar of Fire, which gave light in the Wilderness. Or this is
like the Mariners Lanthorn to serve to give light in a dark night; To the
upright there arises light in darkness. Give me leave a little to explain the
words, then I shall come to the Proposition: To the upright. Who are meant here
by the upright? Answer; The Hebrew word for upright, signifies plainness of
heart: The upright man he is without blushing or fraud; he is one in whose
spirit there is no guile, Psalm. 32.2. He that is upright, his heart and his
tongue go together; as a well made Dial goes exactly by the Sun. The words
following here in the Text may serve for a short paraphrase, to show us who
this upright man is; he is gracious, full of compassion, and righteous.

1. He is gracious, that implies his holiness.

2. He is full of compassion, that implies his charitableness.

3. He is righteous, that implies his justness.

The upright man he is gracious, therefore he fears God; he is full of
compassion, therefore he feeds the poor; he is righteous, therefore he does to
others as he would have them to do to him. The upright man is one that acts
from a right principle, and that is faith; by a right rule, and that is the Word
of God; to a right end, and that is the glory of God: this is the downright
upright man.

The second thing in the Text is, There arises light to the upright man: by
light is here meant metaphorically, viz. for comfort or joy, Esth. 8.16. The
Jews had light, and gladness, and joy; but by light is meant gladness. The
light, when it does spring* it does very much relieve. Joy is to the heart, as
light is to the eye, very exhilarating and refreshing.

Thirdly, Light arises in darkness: By darkness is meant trouble; any thing
that does disquiet either the body or the mind. Trouble is darkness, Isa. 8.22.
Look unto the earth, and behold trouble and darkness, Psa. 107.10. Such as sit
in darkness, and in the shadow of death. As darkness is very disconsolate and
affrighting; so trouble, where it comes, it makes every thing look like the
terrors of the night.

The Observation is this;

Doct. That when the condition of Gods people is darkness, God causes a light
to shine unto them. To the upright there arises light in darkness.

Here are two branches of the Proposition.

First, That the upright, such whom God loves, they have their night.

Secondly, That a morning light arises to them in the midst of all their
darkness.

First, The upright they have their night; it may be a very dark season.
Godliness does not exempt them from suffering; they may have a night of
affliction; a cloud may set upon their Names and Estates. God may lay an
Imbargo upon all their outward comforts, Ruth 1.20.

Secondly, The people of God, they may have a night of desertion: God may
withdraw the smiling beams of his favor, and then it is night with them
indeed, Job 6.4. The Arrows of the Almighty are within me: the poison thereof
drinks up my spirits. It alludes, says Grotius, to the Persians, who in their
War, do dip their Arrows in poison, to make their wounds more deadly. Thus God
sometimes shoots the poisonous Arrows of desertion at the godly, then they are
in the dark; they are benighted: though God has the heart of a Father, yet
sometimes he has the look of an Enemy: he may cause darkness in the Soul, and
shut up the beams of spiritual comfort.

First, He does this, that he may the more quicken the exercise of grace for
prayer may sometimes act highest in the hour of desertion, Jonah 2.4. I said I
was cast out of thy sight; yet will I look toward thy holy Temple. Faith and
Patience, like two Stars, shine most bright in the night of desertion. We are
taken with the comfort, but God is more taken with the acting of our graces.

Secondly, The Lord may cause a dark cloud to be upon the righteous, a cloud of
desertion, that he may hereby awaken, and stir up in his people a spirit of
prayer, that now they may cry mightily to God; that now they may stir up
themselves to take hold on God by prayer. Sometimes a Father hides his face, to
make the Child cry after him the more: so God may hide his face in a cloud of
desertion, that his Children may cry the more after him, Psalm. 140.7. Oh hide
not thy face from me! Desertion will make one pray, if any thing will.
Desertion, it is a short Hell. Jonah calls the Whales belly, the belly of Hell,
because he was deserted there; and if ever he would pray, sure it is now, that
he might get out of that Hell, Jonah 2.2. Out of the belly of Hell I cried unto
thee, and thou heardest my voice. That Is the first; The godly they may have
their night.

The second part of the Proposition.

That a morning light does arise in the righteous, in all their darkness.

To the upright there arises light in darkness, Psalm. 18.28. The Lord will
light my Candle; as if David had said, My comforts at present they seem to be
blown out, and I am in the dark; but the Lord will light my Candle, and will
cause light to arise. There is a twofold light that God causes to arise in his
people in the dark.

First, An outward light.

Secondly, An inward light.

First, An outward light shines, that is, God does oftentimes cause the light
of prosperity to arise upon his people; that is, a light in darkness. When God
causes peace and prosperity in the Tabernacles of the righteous, here is light
rises in darkness, Job 29.3. When his Candle shines upon my head; the Candle,
that is, the Candle of prosperity; a Lamp, that is, outward blessings. God has
on a sudden altered the Scene of Providence; and on a sudden turned the shadows
of death into the light of the morning.

Secondly, When Gods people are in the dark, God causes sometimes an inward
light to arise in them.

First, The light of grace; he makes that shine. In the midst of darkness, a
spark of faith in the Soul, it is a spark of light. When the Tree has no
blossoms or leaves to be seen, as in Autumn; yet there may be sap in the root
of the Vine.

So my Brethren, when our outward comforts are as it were dead, it is Autumn;
yet there may be the seed of God in the heart, and this spark of grace, it is a
dawning light to the Soul.

Secondly, God sometimes causes a light of spiritual joy and consolation to
arise in the dark and disconsolate Soul: And truly this light of spiritual joy,
it is the very glimmering of the light of Heaven, Isa. 12.1. Thine anger is
turned away, and thou comfortest me. This light of spiritual comfort, it is
sweet and ravishing; it as far excels all other joys, as Heaven excels Earth.
Thus you see in the midst of darkness or black clouds, God makes light to arise
and shine unto the godly: It is only God himself that can make it lightsom,
when the Soul is in a dark disconsolate condition. As when the Sun is set, none
can make it rise but only God: So when it is Sunset in the Soul, and the dew
of tears drop, none can make daylight in that Soul, but God himself: others
may preach comfort to us, while it is God that must make us feel comfort:
others may bring a Cordial to us, and set it to us, and by us; but it is God
that must pour in this Cordial, Psalm. 4.7. Thou, Lord, have put gladness in my
heart.

Quest. Why does God make light and joy to arise to the upright in their
darkness?

Answ. For three Reasons.

First, That he may fulfill his promises. He has said, He will give light to
his people when they are in darkness, Isa. 42.16. I will make darkness light
before them. Gods honor lies upon it to make good his promise; he causes
light to spring up in the disconsolate Soul: Gods promise it is his Bond. When
a man has given his Bond, he cannot well go back. Gods promises, they may be
long in travail, yet at last they bring forth. There are two things in God that
never fail.

First, His compassion fails not, Lam. 3.22.

Secondly, His faithfulness fails not, Psalm. 89.33. God may sometimes delay a
promise, yet he will never deny his promise: God may sometimes change his
promise, turn a temporal promise into a spiritual promise, but he will never
break his promise; he has said, He will cause light to go before his people in
all their darkness.

Secondly, God will cause light to arise in his people in all their darkness,
because they help to enlighten others, and therefore they shall not want light;
when others are in the dark of ignorance, they enlighten them with knowledge;
when others are in the dark of affliction, they relieve them; they are merciful
to them in giving them Alms, which administers light and joy to their hearts.
The Saints of God, they are lights to them that sit in darkness; when they are
benighted with any sorrow, they shall not want comfort; the Lord causes light
to arise to them in darkness.

Thirdly, God will cause light to arise in his people in darkness; either he
will support them in trouble, or deliver them out of trouble: He will cause
light to arise, because he sees his people have need, great need of some
dawnings of light; they would faint away and be discouraged, if there was
nothing but darkness, and no glimmering of light. Should the sick Patient
always have purging Physic, and no Cordials given him, he would faint away.
God knows our frame, and he sees our spirits would fail before him, if he did
always suffer a cloud to lie upon us; therefore in Judgment he remembers Mercy;
he causes the day star of comfort to arise upon his people. God will not let
it be always midnight, lest we should touch upon the Rock of Despair. The
Musician will not stretch the strings of his Viol too far, lest they break
asunder. Thus you see why the wise God sees it best to cause light to arise in
the midst of darkness. So much for the doctrinal part.

USE.
First, Here are several Inferences from this Text; see the infinite goodness
of God toward his people in all cases that fall out in this world, whether
affliction or desertion. Oh the goodness of God! the Lord does chequer his
work; he intermixes some Stars to give light: As the Limner mingles bright
colors with dark shadows. The condition of Gods people on Earth is never so
dark, but they may see a Rainbow in the cloud of Providence. Take that one
Scripture to verify this, Psalm. 138.7. Though I walk in the midst of trouble,
thou will revive me. Every step I take I tread upon thorns, I walk in the midst
of trouble. Joseph, he was in prison, there was darkness; but the Text says,
The Lord was with Joseph; there was light did arise, Genesis 39.21. Jacob had the
hollow of his thigh put out of joint, there was darkness; but at that very time
he saw Gods face, a dark glimmering of God, and the Lord blessed him; there was
light risen in darkness, Genesis 32.25. Job, that had lost all that ever he had,
struck with boyls and soars, here was a dark providence; yea but hereby Jobs
grace was perfected and improved, and God gave him an honorable testimony,
that he was upright, and gave him double Estate to what he had before; here was
light arisen to Job in the clouds of darkness, Job 42.10. Thus God does mix
light with his peoples darkness. As in the Ark, there was Manna laid up with
the Rod: So it is in Gods providence toward his people; with the Rod of
affliction, there is some Manna, some Light, some Comfort that God causes to
spring up. Manna with the Rod, oh the goodness of God! in the darkest night
that is, he keeps alive some spark of light amongst his people. That Is the
first.

Inference 2. If it be Gods work to cause light and comfort to the righteous;
why then, how contrary do they act, who make it their work to cause darkness
and sorrow to the righteous? Gods work is to cause light to spring in to the
godly; their work is to cause darkness. You know there is a woe belongs to them
that make the hearts of the righteous sad. God is creating light for his
people, and his enemies are laying snares for them. God is pouring Wine and Oil
into his peoples wounds, and his adversaries they are a pouring in Vinegar into
those wounds. How contrary do these act? those that are of the Romish Whore,
are at this day plotting to the ruin of Gods people, and would have the Church
of God lie in a field of blood. The Lord, he makes light to arise to the godly;
the wicked, they labor to make darkness and sorrow to arise to them. But such
as lay snares for the righteous, God will rain fire upon them, Psa. 11.6. Upon
the wicked God shall rain fire and brimstone. The wicked, they strike at Christ
through his members sides; but let them know, if they kick against the Rock
Christ, the Lord will be too hard for them at last. God ordains his Arrows
against the Persecutors, Psalm. 7. v. 13. and God never misses his mark; if he
has his Arrow upon the string, he will certainly shoot, and he never misses
his mark. That Is a second.

Inference 3. See here the difference betwixt the wicked and the godly; in all
their darkness they have some light, some comfort arises to them. The wicked in
all their outward comforts, they have some darkness arises up to them;
conscience chides them, and troubles threaten them. It is like the handwriting
upon the wall, Psa. 68.31. God shall wound the heads of his enemies, and the
hairy scalp of such a one as goes on still in his trespasses. The sinner in
his light time condition, in all his outward mirth, he may see some clouds of
darkness: Gods threatening Arrows are against him, and Gods Curse is against
him; and Gods Curse it blasts wherever it comes. An impenitent sinner, he
lives every day under the sentence of death, and there remains for him, says
the Apostle, a fiery indignation, Heb. 10.27. When the hardened sinner dies, he
will be but in a bad case; he drops into the Grave and into Hell both at once.
God has brewed for the impenitent sinner a deadly Cup, Psalm. 75.8. Observe
that Scripture; In the hand of the Lord there is a Cup, the Wine is red, it is
full of mixture, and the dregs thereof the wicked of the earth shall wring them
out, and drink them. This red Wine it is the wrath of God, and this Wine is
full of mixture; what is that? that is the worm of Conscience, and the fire of
Hell: Here is a mixed Cup, and the wicked shall be ever drinking this Cup. God
will never say, Let this Cup pass away. No, they must be for ever drinking the
dregs of this Cup of wrath. My thinks this Scripture should be a damp to all
their joy and mirth; darkness is coming upon them, 1 Samuel 28.19. It was sad
news to Saul that the Devil brought; says he, Tomorrow thou shall be with me;
dreadful news! Now men are sporting with their lusts and pleasures; now they
think they are in their gallantry; and to morrow may be with the Devil.

A fourth branch of Inference. Does God cause light to spring up in his peoples
darkness? then see here the difference betwixt Earth and Heaven. Here in this
world there is a mixture of darkness with the Saints light; in Heaven there
shall be nothing but pure light; no darkness there: It is called an Inheritance
of light, Col. 1.12. As the Philosophers say, Light is the very glory of the
Creation; it is the beauty of the world. What was all the world without light,
but a dark prison? Here Is the beauty of Heaven, it is a place of light; there
is no eclipse nor dark shadows to be seen there. Heaven is a bright body all
over, all over embroidered with light: there is the Sun of Righteousness
shining with the bright Orient beams of glory, Rev. 21.23. the Lamb is the
light thereof; oh how should we long for that place of Paradise!

Use 2. is of Consolation, For the Church and People of God.
This Text is a pillar of light, a breast of consolation: To the upright
arises light in darkness. Does God make light, and joy, and peace, to arise to
the righteous? why then should we despair? why should we despond, when it is
Gods great design to lighten his peoples darkness? I confess things have but a
bad aspect. England is like the Ship in the Gospel, almost covered with waves.
This may humble us, and set our Eyes abroach with tears: Yet let us not mourn
as without hope.

This Text methinks lets in some branches of light; it gives some spark of
comfort in our darkness. Let me come as the Dove, with an Olive branch of
peace: That it is some spark of light, that there are many upright ones in the
Land; and the Text says, Light arises to the upright. Indeed, were the godly
quite removed, as it is the desire of some to destroy them, God would soon make
quick work with the Nation; he would soon break up house here, Genesis 19.22.
Haste thee, escape thither; for I cannot do any thing till thou be come
thither. The upright that my Text speaks of, God will do much for their sakes:
The upright, they are the excellent of the Earth; they are the Chariots and
Horsemen of Israel; they are the very flower and cream of the Creation; they
are the glory of Christ, 2 Cor. 8.23. and for their sakes God may yet cause
light to arise, and his Arm may bring salvation.

Secondly, Another spark of light in our darkness, that yet God is pleased to
stir up in his people, is a spirit of mighty prayer; they cry mightily.
Certainly God will not say to this City and Nation, Seek ye my face in vain.
Prayer is the Wall and Bulwarks of the Land. It is observable, when the Lord
intends to pour out the Vials of his Indignation, he stops the sluices of
prayer, shuts up the spirit of prayer, Ier. 7.16. Therefore pray not thou for
this people, neither lift up a cry nor prayer for them, neither make
intercession to me; for I will not hear: God has not yet said so to us.

The Key of Prayer, oiled with tears, and turned with the hand of faith,
unlocks Gods bowels. Prayer, when it is important, staves off wrath from the
Nation, Exodus 32.10. Says God to Moses, Now therefore let me alone, that my
wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them. And what did Moses
do? he only prayed. Fervent prayer overcomes the Almighty. Prayer finds God
free, but it leaves him bound; it is as it was. This his hand staves off
Judgment; this lets in some dawning light to this Land, that God don't wholly
leave us, especially remembering this, that Christ Jesus praying over our
prayers again, presents them to his Father, and perfumes them with his sweet
odor* which makes them go up as Incense, Rev. 8.3.

Thirdly, Another spark arising is this, when we consider Gods compassion and
bowels of mercy. Mercy, it is Gods darling Attribute, that he loves most of all
to magnify, Micah 7.18. Mercy pleases him. Justice is Gods strange work, as
if he was not used to it; but mercy is his proper work; it is as natural for
him to show mercy, as for the Be to give Honey. Why may not mercy give the
casting voice for this Nation? according to that Scripture, In his love and in
his pity he redeemed them. Love and pity will do great things. Gods mercy, it
is not only free, sending out pardons where he pleases; but, which is more,
Gods mercy can as well heal, as it can save; it is a healing mercy, Hosea 14.4.
I will heal their backslidings. Observe, Gods mercy it can reclaim the
Persecutor, it can soften the Impenitent, it can bring back some that are gone
astray. Mercy can destroy the sins of the Nation, and yet save the Nation: it
is a healing mercy; I will heal their backslidings. These are the sparks of
light that God causes to arise.

Obj. But you will say, Still things look and seem as in the dark, and we would
have more light; What must we do? how must we carry our selves till God makes
light to arise to us in darkness?

Ans. 1. Let us in all dark Providence go into our chambers, Isa. 26.20. Come
my people, enter thou into thy chamber, and hide thy self: Enter thou into thy
chamber, that is, we must go and search our hearts by serious meditation, and
self-examination; go into this chamber of your hearts. Let us in the first
place search our Evidences for Heaven, bring our graces to the Touchstone; let
us see what faith we have, and what love to God we have: Does Conscience
witness, we not only serve God, but love him? Can we cry out for God, for the
living God? Are we carried up to Heaven in a fiery Chariot of love? Is it thus
with us? Oh let us search into the chambers of our hearts, and see how all
things stand betwixt God and our Souls!

My Brethren, when things are dark without, we had need to have all clear
within.

Secondly, Let us go, not only into the chambers of our hearts, but let us go
into the chamber of Divine Promises, and there let us a while judge our selves.
Oh! these sweet Promises of God, which our Souls may take comfort in: God has
promised comfort to all his mourners: God has promised that he will strengthen
the infirm, Isa. 40.29* God has promised a Crown of Glory, Rev. 2.10. He has
said, He will never leave us nor forsake us. Let us now by faith hide our
selves in these chambers. That Is the first thing we are to do.

Secondly, Having done this, let us under all clouds of darkness, in the next
place, commit our selves to God, that he would safeguard and keep us. This I
ground upon that Scripture, Psalm. 37.5. Commit thy way unto the Lord; in the
Hebrew it is, roll thy way upon the Lord: Commit thy self and thy cause to God
by prayer; as an Orphan commits himself under the care of his Guardian, so
should we give all our care to God: Commit thy ways unto the Lord. Let us do
our duty, and trust God with our safety. It is our work to cast care; it is
Gods work to take care.

Thirdly, Having gone into these chambers, the chambers of our hearts, and the
chambers of Divine Promises; so in the third place, let us now wait Gods time,
till he shall make light to arise in our Horrison, until God turns our darkness
into the light of the morning. God can of a sudden disperse the black clouds:
God can create light: God can strike a straight stroke by a crooked stick: God
can remove the Mountains that lie in our way, till light arises. Let us
patiently wait, light will spring up; the blessings that we are in expectation
of, are worth waiting for. To see the golden Fleet of Prayer come laden home
with rich returns of mercy: To see Peace and Truth united: To see Popery and
Profaneness abominated: To see the beauty of Holiness shining forth, like a
Lamp that burns: To see Christ ride in triumph in the Chariot of his Gospel:
To see the Righteous honored and renowned, and be like the wings of a Dove,
covered with yellow gold: These certainly are mercies worth waiting for;
therefore let us wait patiently: And to encourage holy waiting, I will shut up
all with that Scripture, Isa. 30.18. And therefore will the Lord wait, that he
may be gracious unto you; and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have
mercy upon you; for the Lord is a God of Judgment; blessed are all they that
wait for him.

SERMON VII.
St. John 10.14. I am the good Shepherd, and know my Sheep, and am known of
mine.
EVery line of Scripture has a Majesty shining in it: Jesus Christ is the very
center of the Gospel; if the Scripture be the Field, Christ is the Pearl in
this Field; and blessed is he that finds this Pearl; the Scripture gives
various descriptions of Christ, sometimes he is called a Physician, he is the
great healer of Souls, sometimes he is called a Captain, Heb. 2.10. Captain of
our Salvation, and here in the Text a Shepherd, I am the good Shepherd, and
this Shepherd has a Flock; so it is in the Text, I know my Sheep, and am known
of mine: These Sheep are the elect company of Believers, these are his rational
Sheep. First, I shall speak of the Sheep, then something of the Shepherd, as
they do relate one to the other.

First, Concerning the Sheep: I know my Sheep. The Wicked are compared to
Goats, the Saints to Sheep; Christ's People they are his Sheep, and there be
some near Analogies betwixt them; as,

First, A Sheep it is an innocent Creature, it is not hurtful, or ravenous, as
other Creatures are, but is very harmless and inoffensible, so those Sheep that
belong to Christ, and are of his fold, they are Innocent, Phil. 2.15. That you
may be blameless, that you may be harmless; the Greek Word is, without Horn, or
without Pushing, or Horning; that you may be harmless; Christ's people walk so
as near as they can, that they may give no just offense, they had rather suffer
wrong than do wrong, those that are set upon mischief, are not Christ's Sheep,
but they are Birds of prey: Those who would plot the ruin of a Kingdom, and
spill Protestant blood, these are none of Christ's Sheep; these are Wolves, they
have been suckled with the Milk of the Romish Whore; these are Goats, that
Christ will set at his left hand, Mat. 25.32.

Secondly, A Sheep it is noted for meekness in Scripture, it is a meek
Creature: Let the Shearer take its wool, it does not resist; if you strike a
Sheep, it does not snarl or fly in your face; all Christ's Sheep that belong to
him are meek spirited, 2 Samuel 16.12. Though a child of God may sometimes fall
into a froward fit, yet he grieves for it, and weeps for his unmortified
passion.

Thirdly, A Sheep it is a cleanly creature, it is neat and cleanly, it delights
most in pure Streams and clean Pastures; so Christ's Sheep they are cleanly, and
sanctified, holiness is the thing they pray for, Psalm 51.10. Create in me a
clean Heart, Oh God! Tho they are not perfectly Holy, yet they are perfecting
holiness in the fear of God. It is a neat creature, and would rather die than
go through dirty, miry places; so it is with Christ's sheep, they will rather
suffer any thing, than defile their Conscience, Genesis 39.9. How can I do this
wickedness, and sin against God? The wicked in Scripture are compared to swine:
they wallow in Sin, in their wickedness and uncleanness; they are steept and
purboyled in Sin: I but a good Christian, he breaths after sanctity; a child of
God he may unawares fall into Sin, as David; but he does not lie in Sin, he
recovers himself out again by repentance; a Sheep may fall into the mire, but
it does not lie there, gets out again.

Fourthly, A Sheep it is a very useful creature, not any thing that is of it,
but is of some use; the flesh, the fleece, the skin, so all Christ's Sheep, who
are the Sheep of his Pasture are useful, they are still doing good, they are
profitable to others, by their Knowledge, Counsel, Example, Prayers, good
Works; they are useful in their places, the wicked they are compared to Wood,
Ezekiel. 15.3. which is good for naught but fuel* Sinners are useless, their Life
is scarce worth a Prayer, nor their Death scarce worth a Tear, they live to
cumber the ground; but Gods people they are useful, they are called the
excellent of the earth, Psalm 16.3. They are blessings in the places where they
come.

Fifthly, A Sheep it is a very contented creature, it will feed upon any
pasture where you put it; put Sheep upon the bare Common they are content, they
feed upon that little they pick up in the fallow ground; a perfect emblem of
true Saints, who are the Sheep of Christ; let God put them into what pasture he
will they are content, Phil. 4.11. They have learned in every state therewith
to be content, Saint Paul, he could want, or abound, he could be any thing that
God would have him, he was content with that Portion* whatever it was that
Providence carved out to him; you who are apt to murmur and repine at your
Condition, and think you have never enough, think with your selves; Sheep are
content with their pasture, surely were I one of Christ's Sheep, I should be
content; you that have the least of the World, you have more than you know how
to be thankful for, he that has the least bit of Bread, he will die in Gods
debt. A Sheep is a contented Creature.

Sixthly* To name no more, a Sheep it is a timorous creature, it is very
fearful, if any danger approaches, or frighted by the Wolf; thus the Saints of
God, who are Christ's Sheep, they pass the time of their sojourning here in
fear, they are fearful of provoking God, of wounding their Peace* fearful of
Temptation, fearful they should come short of Heaven through sloth, Heb. 4.1.
It is an ear-mark of Christ's Sheep, they are indewed with the fear of God, Genesis
42.18. This is their ear-mark, men fearing God; it is true the Righteous, they
are as bold as a Lion, in a righteous cause; but timorous and fearful of sinful
fear; and let me tell you happy is he that in this sense fears always; holy
fear is the best antidote against Temptation; the way to be safe is always to
fear. To make some Use of this;

Let us all labor to be found in the number of Christ's Sheep. All the World is
divided into two ranks, Sheep or Goats; if you would be glad to be found in the
day of Judgment Christ's Sheep, and sit at his right hand, be much in Prayer;
pray unto God that he would change your nature, that he would take away your
wolfish nature, your fierceness, your frowardness; and that he would transform
you into his own Image. Labor to be amongst Christ's Sheep, to get into Christ's
fold, only one thing excepted, that you would not be like Sheep, for Sheep are
apt to wander sometimes from their fold; take heed don't straggle into bypath
of error and heresy; it is dangerous to wander, for fear the Devil that wolf
should catch you; don't go astray as Sheep, but in other things resemble Sheep,
in meekness, in patience, in usefulness, in willingness, and particularly in
this one thing, let us labor to resemble Sheep, that is, when the Shepherds
dog comes near, all the Sheep flock together; Persecution it should be like the
Shepherds dog, it should make all Christ's Sheep run together and unite: Do
Papists, and Formalists agree in persecuting Gods people? and shall not the
Saints of God agree to keep the unity of the Spirit ^n the bond of Peace? Love
is the ear-mark, by which Christ's Sheep are known, John 13.35. By this shall
all men know ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another. It was the Harlot
said, let the child be divided, it is the Jesuit that says, let the Church of
God be divided; it is Satan's great design to set his cloven foot amongst
Christ's people to make division and contention among the sons of Sion; the
Devils best Music is discord, Oh! let all Christ's people, his sheep, flock
together, and associate in love, those who hope to meet together in Heaven
should not fall out by the way: Unity it is the great Music in Heaven, Unity
in Trinity; and Unity among Saints would be a great blessing on Earth; for
Christians to unite it is their Interest and Wisdom, union is their Strength,
union it is their Glory, their Ornament; this was the honor of the Primitive
Churches, all of one Heart, Act. 2.1. There was but one Heart amongst them; let
the Sheep of Christ unite together; when the Saints are harmoniously united,
then they adorn their blessed Shepherd the Lord Jesus. So much for the first of
these, Christ's Sheep.

Secondly, To speak something of the Shepherd, I am the good Shepherd; a true
Epithet as ever was given, A good Shepherd, Zach. 13.7. 1 Pet. 2.25. You are
now returned to the Shepherd and Bishop of your Souls: Your Conscience, it is
the Diocese were none may visit but Christ, Christ is called in the Scripture,
the chief Shepherd of all, 1 Pet. 5.4. Ministers are but Shepherds under him,
to look to his flock, Christ is the chief Shepherd; so the Observation is this,

Doct. That Jesus Christ, he is the blessed Shepherd of his Sheep.

In Scripture, Christ is called the great Shepherd, and the good Shepherd, he
is called the great Shepherd, Heb. 13.20, 21. and here in the Text, he is
called the good Shepherd; Christ is the great Shepherd, as he made the Sheep,
and he is the good Shepherd, as he saves his Sheep; so you see he is both the
great and the good Shepherd; there are many Parallels and Analogies betwixt
Christ and his Sheep, I will instance in some.

1. A Shepherd is appointed to his calling; why, so Christ, he is the true
Shepherd, who entered in by the door, John 10.2. He entered in by the door:
What Is the meaning of that? that is, Christ he is lawfully called and appointed
to his keeping sheep.

2. A Shepherd knows his Flock, knows all his Flock; this is in the Text, I am
the good Shepherd, I know my Sheep, says Christ; Christ's knowing his Sheep
implies a knowledge of approbation; Christ's knowing his Sheep, that is his
Loving of them: this is a great Consolation, that Christ knows all his Sheep;
he knows every one of their Names, John 10.3. He calls his own Sheep by name:
He knows all their sighs and groans that they make, Psalm 38.9. My groaning is
not hid from thee; Christ knows every tear they shed, he bottels their tears as
Wine, Psalm 56.8. Put thou my tears into thy bottle. He knows all their
sufferings, Judge. 10.16. His Soul was grieved for the miseries of Israel:
Christ knows all their good works, all their works of Piety and Charity; and
will shortly say, Come ye blessed of my Father inherit a Kingdom: What a
Comfort is this? Christ knows all his Sheep by name.

3. A Shepherd he marks his Sheep, that he may distinguish them from other
strange Sheep; so Jesus Christ, this blessed Shepherd, he sets a double mark
upon his Sheep; one is the ear-mark of Election, I have chosen you, (says he)
and beside that, he has set another mark upon his Sheep, he seals them by his
Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30. The sanctifying Graces are the several badges and seals,
that Christ puts upon his Sheep; how will this raise the Saints Triumph in
Heaven! How will this make them bless God, that they should be marked out for
Sheep, when the most of the World are marked for Goats?

4. A Shepherd, he seeks his Sheep, when they are lost and gone astray, Luke
15.4. That is the office of a Shepherd, he seeks his Sheep: Let me assure you,
Christ's Sheep they are all lost naturally, they have strayed far from the fold;
and they are so lost, that they can never find their way home of themselves; a
Dog, or a Horse, if lost, can find the way home again, but if a Sheep be lost,
it can never find its way home; this is the case of lapsed Souls, they are so
lost that they cannot find the way; now Jesus Christ, this blessed Shepherd
seeks these lost Sheep: He left his Fathers Bosom, he came from Heaven on
purpose to seek after his lost, wandering Sheep, Luke 19.10. The Son of man is
come to seek and to save that which was lost: Zaccheus was a lost Sheep, a
great Sinner, an Extortioner; this lost Sheep was found upon a Sycomore Tree,
there Christ spied him, and called him, Luke 19.5. Zaccheus, make haste, and
come down; here was a lost Sheep brought home; Christ entered first into
Zaccheus his Heart, and then he entered into his House: This day is Salvation
come to thine House: There may be some, who are as yet lost Sheep; they are
wandered from God, and have gone on in the ways of Sin, but if they belong to
this good Shepherd, if you belong to Christ, he will at one time or other bring
home these wandering Sheep by converting Grace.

5. A Shepherd, he leads and guides his Sheep; and thus Christ, this blessed
Shepherd, guides his people, that they should not go wrong, John 10.3. He leads
them out: How does Christ guide his people, he guides them with his Eye, his
Eye is never off of them; though their Eye be too much off from him, Psalm
32.8. Thou shall guide me with thine Eye; that is, the eye of thy Providence
shall direct me. Again Christ guides his people by the Oracle of his holy Word,
Psalm 73.24. Thou shall guide me with thy Counsel; and Christ guides his people
by the sweet conduct of his Spirit, John 16.13. He will guide you into all
Truth; when the Spirit of Truth is come unto you, he will guide you into all
Truth: Besides, Christ appoints Ministers to be guides, if Christ's Sheep go out
of the way, his Ministers are appointed to bring them back again to the fold.

6. A Shepherd, he governs his Sheep; they have as much need of governing, as
guiding; he governs his Sheep, he orders them and brings them into a Decorum;
so the Lord Jesus governs his people, Christ's Pastoral staff, it is a Type and
Emblem of his governing the Saints, Isa. 9.6. The Government shall be upon his
Shoulders. In the Hebrew it is, the Priestdom shall be upon his Shoulders:
Christ's Sheep are apt sometimes to be disorderly, they are apt to slight their
Shepherd, to grow wanton, to despise their Pastor, to quarrel one with another;
but now Jesus Christ, this blessed Shepherd, he has his Laws to bind them, and
he has his Shepherds Rod to rule them, he does bring them into good order: We
want as well Christ's Rod to govern us, as his Blood to save us.

7. A Shepherd does relieve and feed his Sheep by the way: He will not see them
starve, the Greek word for Shepherd, signifies to feed; the Lord Jesus does
mercifully feed his Flock, he will not let them starve, Isa. 40.11. He shall feed
his flock like a Shepherd; Christ feeds his people in the Sanctuary: Gods Table
are this Shepherds Tents: Every Ordinance is a fresh pasture for the Saints to
feed in; Christ feeds Souls with the Bread of Life, he fed them with that
spiritual Supper at his own Table: Here is the love of Christ the great
Shepherd of Souls, he provides plenty of pasture, though some would rob Christ's
Sheep of their green pasture, and starve them, yet Christ will feed them; as
long as Christ has a spiritual flock of Sheep in the World, he will rather
work a Miracle, than they shall not be provided for: He shall feed his flock
like a Shepherd.

8. A Shepherd, he makes it a part of his work to look after his sick Sheep:
Christ's Sheep they are apt to be sick; some sick of Pride, and some sick of
Discontent, and some sick of Envy, and some sick of Covetousness; Christ's Sheep
are apt to be sick, and he cures all his Sheep, that they shall never die of
the Rott, Ezekiel. 34.16. I will bind up that which is broken, I will strengthen
that which is sick: Christ has those sovereign Oils and Balsams, that can cure
the worst distemper; he has appointed the Preaching of the Word to be a healer
of Sin-sick Souls, Ezekiel. 47. The Word preached is like the Waters of the
Sanctuary, both for Food, and for Medicine.

9. A Shepherd keeps a continual watch over his Flock, that they be not stole,
or devoured by the Wolf; so Christ does watch over his flock, by his
omnisciency that no hurt comes to his Elect, that they be not infected by Sin,
and ensnared by Temptation. Christ has his Shepherd Eyes to watch his flock,
and he has his Shepherd staff to beat off the Wolf.

10. A Shepherd has compassion of his Sheep; so Jesus Christ he has tender
Bowels to all his Elect, Isa 40.11. He shall gather the Lambs in his Arms, and
carry them in his Bosom; and gently lead those that are with young. Observe,
Christ Jesus is tender of his Lambs; he puts them in his Bosom, and such as are
weak, and ready to faint, he gently leads; Oh! the bowels of compassion of
Christ to the Elect: He is full of sympathy, the Lambs never cry, but their
cries go to Christ's Heart; therefore in Scripture Christ is said to be touched
with the feeling of their infirmities, Heb. 4.5. The Saints never bleed, but
Christ bleeds in their wounds, Isa. 63.9. In all their afflictions, he was
afflicted.

Thus much, as brief as I could, for the Analogies and Parallels betwixt Christ
and Shepherd: He is the Shepherd of his flock.

In the second place, I shall show you wherein Christ is better than any other
Shepherd, and does infinitely excel, and transcend them, as it appears in these
Particulars.

First, Christ is a better Shepherd than any other: In respect of the Glory,
and Dignity of his Person; other Shepherds, they are of the Earth, Earthly, but
Christ is a Shepherd from Heaven, he is of Divine Original; he is equal with
God the Father, Phil. 2.6. He has a Consubstantiality with God the Father.

Secondly, Christ is a better Shepherd, he excels other Shepherds, in that he
does cleanse and purify his Flock, Rev. 1.5. To him that washes us from our
Sins in his own Blood: Christ's Sheep while they are in the World will be apt to
get spots, for the World is good for nothing but to spot; one spotted with
Pride, another spotted with earthliness, etc. Oh! How do the people of God
deface Gods Image, by rubbing it against the Earth? and the Truth is, going too
much among the Goats does defile them; but now Jesus Christ, he does cleanse
and purify his Flock, washes away their spots; Christ's Sheep they are white,
and washed in the blood of the Lamb.

Thirdly, Christ excels all other Shepherds, in that he has an art that no
other Shepherd has, he teaches his Sheep; other Shepherds they guide their
Sheep, but they cannot teach them; but Christ teaches his Sheep, that belong to
his fold of Election, he instructs them in the mysteries of Salvation; and he
teaches them after the most excellent manner, who teaches like God.

First, Christ so teaches all his Sheep, that he makes them willing to learn,
Psalm 110.3. They shall be a willing people: Christ does not only inform the
Judgment, but does incline the will to embrace the Truth, makes them willing to
learn.

Secondly, Christ does not only teach the Ear, but he teaches the Heart, Acts
16.14. Lydia, Whose Heart the Lord opened.

Thirdly, Christ teaches his Sheep, not only to understand, but he teaches them
to obey, Isa. 2.3. He will teach us of his ways, and we will go in them: So
that Christ teaches his Sheep, after the most excellent manner, he does docifie
them.

Fourthly, Jesus Christ is a better Shepherd, than any on Earth was before or
after: Because Christ he prays for his Sheep, many Shepherds scarce pray for
themselves; Christ he prays for all his elect Sheep, John 17.9. I will pray for
them, as Christ knows every Sheep by name, so Christ prays for every Sheep by
name; I pray for them: And what does Christ pray for them? Why he prays that
they may not wander, that they may not tire or faint, that they may not die by
the way; and this is Christ's prayer for his Sheep, John 17.11. Holy Father,
keep them whom thou have given me: And this Prayer of Christ is prevalent, it
does prevail with God; if we consider Christ either in his Office, or in
Relation, his Prayer must be prevalent; consider him in his Office, as he is a
Priest; consider him, as he is in Relation* as he is a Son; if God could forget
Christ as he is a Priest, yet he could not forget Christ as he is his Son, John
11.42. I knew thou always hear me: And this Prayer of Christ for his elect
Sheep is perpetuated; there is not one minute, wherein we can say, Christ is
not praying for us; How can these Sheep that belong to Christ's fold miscarry,
when their blessed Shepherd is always watching over them, and praying for them.

Fifthly, Jesus Christ, he is a better Shepherd than any other; in that he
shows more dear affection, and tender love to his Sheep, than ever any Shepherd
in this World did; and no wonder Christ should thus love his Sheep: Because
they are his own, he has a propriety in them, John 10.27. My Sheep, my Sheep,
a man may be a Shepherd, when he is not owner of the Flock of Sheep. A
hireling, he may take the charge of the Sheep, when perhaps he never cared for
the Sheep, John 10.13. But Christ he is the owner of the Sheep; though the Pope
blasphemously call himself the Head of the Church, and Lords it over Christ's
flocks, yet the Pope is an Usurper; the Lord Jesus he is the right owner of his
Sheep, and hence it follows, that Christ has such dear affection, and tender
love to these Sheep, they are his own: Now that Christ bears more love to his
Sheep, than ever any other Shepherd did, appears in these three particulars. 1.
He does compassionate his Sheep. 2. He does comfort his Sheep. 3. He died for
his Sheep. Was ever any love parallel to this?

1. Christ does compassionate all his Sheep, and this I ground upon that
forecited Scripture, Isa. 40.11. He shall gather the Lambs in his Arms, and
carry them in his bosom, and gently lead those that are with young: Christ you
see is tender of his Lambs, and puts them in his bosom near his Heart; and such
as are faint he gently leads. Oh! the bowel Mercies of Christ to his elect
Sheep; that is the first, Christ loves his Sheep, he does compassionate them;
his bowels yern over them.

2. Christ does not only compassionate his Sheep, but he does Comfort them, the
people of Christ who are his Sheep, they are given to trembling; Sheep are a
trembling* a very fearful creature, and are apt to be discouraged; now Christ,
he comforts them, and revives them, Isaiah 12.1. Thou comfortedst me. Christ
comforts his people, two ways.

First, Christ Comforts them in the use of Ordinances, Word and Sacrament; in
the one we hear Christ's voice, in the other we have his Kiss and Embraces; in
the use of Gospel Ordinances, the Saints are oftentimes upon the mount of
Transfiguration; they feed upon Holy Embrocha, Christ gives them on a sudden
such inward revivings as carry them above the love of Life, and above the fear
of Death.

Secondly, Christ Comforts his people, the flock of his pasture, by his Spirit,
that is called the Comforter, John 14.16. The Spirit enables us to work out our
Adoption, to read our Names in the Promises; the Spirit seals up Gods love to
the Heart, upon which there is a current of divine Joy, runs into the Soul:
Here is Christ's love to his Sheep, he comforts them.

Thirdly, Christ shows his love to his elect Sheep, in that he shed his Blood
for them, John 10.11. I lay down my Life for my Sheep: The Death of the
Shepherd is the Life of the Sheep. Consider Christ's death in a threefold
Notion. 1. As it was painful. 2. As it was voluntary. 3. As it was Meritorous,
in all these ways he shows his love in dying for his Sheep.

First, Look upon Christ's death as painful; if the torment of the body was so
great: Oh! What was the agony of the Soul? The Lord Jesus Christ, he was
trodden, he was squeezed, in the wine press of his Fathers wrath; the
Evangelists use three Words worthy of observing to express Christ's agony; he
began, says the Text, to be amazed; he began to faint, Mat. 14.23. and he
began to be exceeding sorrowful, Mat. 26.37. He felt Hells torment in his Soul,
equivalent, though not locally; though Christ was anointed with the Holy Ghost,
though he was supported with the Deity, though he was comforted with Angels
from Heaven, yet for all that he swate great drops of Blood, the Text says:
Oh! the love of Christ in dying for his Sheep!

Secondly, Consider Christ's Death as it was voluntary: He did part with his
Life freely. It is true, Christ's death was necessary in regard of Gods decree;
but it was voluntary in this respect, that Christ cheerfully yielded to
suffering, John 10.18. I lay down my Life; the Jews could not have taken away
his Life, if he had not laid it down; nothing could have forced Christ to have
died for his Sheep, but love: Nothing could have bound him to the Cross, but
the golden chain of Love.

Thirdly, Consider Christ's Death as it was Meritorious: It is the inlet to all
holy benediction, it procures for us Justification of our Persons, acceptance
of our services, access to the Throne of Grace; it procures an entrance into
the holy, acceptable place of Heaven, Heb. 3.19. Behold, here is the Love of
Christ in laying down his Life for his Sheep: He has purchased glorious things
for us, there was no way for the Sheep to live, but by the Death of the
Shepherd; and for Christ Jesus to die as a Malefactor, having the weight of so
many sins lying upon him, it was more than if all the Angels had been turned
into dust.

Sixthly, Christ is a better Shepherd than any other, in that he can make all
the care and pains that he takes with his Sheep to be successful, which no
other Shepherd can do; other Shepherds, they may lead the Sheep to the water,
or to the pasture, but they cannot make the Sheep have a stomach, they cannot
make them have an appetite to feed, they cannot make the pasture to nourish
their Sheep; but Christ our blessed Shepherd, as he leads his Sheep into the
pasture, so he can cause an appetite in his Sheep to their food, he can make
them with a word speaking, hunger and thirst after Righteousness. Jesus Christ
he provides pastures for his Sheep, and he only can bless these pastures, and
make them nourishful to the Soul, 1 Timothy 4.6. Nourished up in the Words of
Faith: Christ can bless the blessed Sacrament, he can make the Elements through
the operation of his Spirit to be spiritual growth and nourishment in his elect
Sheep: Thus he is a better Shepherd, he can bless the pasture.

Seventhly, Christ is a better Shepherd than any other in the World; for he is
a pattern and example to all his flock, an example of meekness, and of
humility, and sanctity, he is a pattern for all his flock; and in this sense
observe, Christ is said to go before his Sheep, John 10.34. how did he go
before them? that is, by his holy Example, 1 Pet. 2.21. For even hereunto were
ye called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye
should follow his steps. Ierom having read the religious Life of Delyan, and
what an excellent end he made; now, says he, Delyan shall be the example that
I will follow. So let all the Sheep of Christ say, Jesus Christ he shall be the
example that we will follow and imitate: Christ's Sheep go astray, when they do
not tread in the steps of their Shepherd the Lord Jesus.

Eighthly, Christ is a better Shepherd than any other, and far excels them; In
that he keeps his Sheep so fast in his hands, that none can ever pluck them
out, John 10.28. Neither can any man pluck them out of my hand: Not one of
Christ's Sheep was ever lost; a Shepherd, though he is never so careful and
vigilant, yet sometimes a Sheep may go astray, and be devoured by the Wolf, but
not one of Christ's elect Sheep was ever lost, John 17.12. None of them are
lost, but the Son of Perdition. Judas was never given to Christ, he was not a
Sheep, but a Goat, none of his Sheep was ever lost; Christ's Sheep sometimes may
go astray by error, and may fall into the acts of Sin, as David; but Christ
will reduce them, and bring them off again by speedy Repentance, Christ's Sheep
they may be lame, and faint, and can hardly go, but yet Christ he has a care
of the weak Sheep as well as the strong Sheep; the bruised Reed he will not
break, the weakest Saint alive is so a Sheep, that he is part of his Shepherd:
Christ and Believers are one, the Sheep cannot perish, but the Shepherd must
perish likewise.

Ninthly, Christ is a better Shepherd than any other, in that he puts his Sheep
into a better pasture at last; takes them out of the Wilderness here, the
valley of Tears, and transplants them into Paradise, there to feed among the
Lillies; he gives them Eternal Life, John 10.28. I give unto them Eternal Life.
Christ's Sheep may lose their golden Fleece, men may rob them of their Wool; and
they may lose their lives for Christ's sake, I but Christ gives them Eternal
Life: Life is sweet, but that word Eternal makes it far sweeter: Eternal Life
it does consist in the fruition of all good things, Life, Beauty, Strength,
Joy, Perfection, Eternity; here is the excellency of our good Shepherd, he
gives his Sheep Eternal Life, he will take them out of the Wilderness, where
are fiery Serpents, and place them in Paradise, and they shall feed among the
Cherubims.

Thus I have showed you how the Lord Jesus is resembled to a Shepherd, and how
he is a better Shepherd than any other.

Give leave to make some Application.

USE the first.
Is the Lord Jesus Christ, this great Shepherd which takes such care for his
Flock; and is he a better Shepherd than any other? Then let us all labor to
know our Shepherd; here in the Text, says Christ, I know my Sheep: And I know
them by Name: I and I am known of them too, Oh! Let us know our blessed
Shepherd; knowing of Christ is nothing else but believing in him: in Scripture
Knowledge is sometimes put for Faith, By my Knowledge shall thy righteous
Servant justify many. Knowledge is there put for Faith, then we know our
Shepherd Christ, when we believe in him. The blind World is Ignorant of Christ,
John 17.25. The World has not known me; No! when they heard Christ preach?
they did see his Miracles that he wrought, but neither Oracle, nor Miracle
would work upon them: The World (says Christ) has not known me: Formalists do
not know Christ savingly; they have light, but they want sight; as if the Sun
should shine upon a blind eye. Then we know Christ aright, when we believe in
him, we fetch virtue from him, we are transformed into his likeness, this is to
know Christ; Oh! let us never rest till we know the Bishop and Shepherd of our
Souls the Lord Jesus; as our Comfort lies in Christ's knowing us, so it lies in
our knowing of Christ, our Comfort lies in Christ's knowing of us with a
Knowledge of Approbation; and also in our knowing Christ with a Knowledge of
Apprehension; that is the first, let us know our Shepherd such as know not
Christ, will hear Christ say to them, I know you not.

Secondly, Let us not only know our Shepherd, but let us hearken to the voice
of our blessed Shepherd, our Lord Jesus, as soon as ever the Shepherd comes
into the Field, the Sheep know his voice. Oh! let us hear Christ's voice, John
10.27. My Sheep (says Christ) hear my Voice. Christ's voice it is in the
preaching of the Word, therefore observe, Christ is said now, just now, to
speak from Heaven to us, Heb. 12.25. How does he speak now from Heaven, but in
the preaching of the Word? Oh! then hear Christ speak, but take heed, don't
hear the voice of a stranger, John 10.5. a stranger, says Christ, will they
not follow, Sheep will not follow a stranger, by stranger is meant one that is
Heterodox, that would bring strange wonders into the Church, and poison Christ's
Sheep; as you must hearken to Christ's voice, so take heed you don't listen to
the voice of a stranger: Christ's Sheep are rational, he has given them a
Spirit of discerning, and they are able by their Wisdom to distinguish betwixt
Truth and Error, they will not hear the Voice of a Stranger. Then must (...)
hear Christ's Voice, but when do we hear Christ's Voice aright? Then we hear
Christ's Voice aright, when we obey his Voice, and never till then. In John 10.
and several other places, you read of obeying the Voice of Christ, when Christ
speaks of self-denial, of meekness, and mercifulness, we obey him, and are
ambitious to obey him; a good Christian is like the Flower that opens with the
Sun, he opens to Christ's commands, he does cordially obey Christ; this is to
hear Christ's Voice.

Thirdly, If Christ be the great, and blessed, and good Shepherd; then let us
all labor to evidence to our selves, that we belong to this Shepherd, that we
are the Sheep of Christ's pasture. Let us search and try, whether we have the
ear-mark of Christ's Sheep or no; whether we are like Sheep; a Sheep is a pure
and cleanly Creature: Are we like the Sheep of Christ, are our Hearts (...)
from all filthiness of Flesh (...) Spirit? He that lies wallowing in Sin, is a
Swine, not a Sheep.

Secondly, A Sheep it is a very useful Creature, every thing in a Sheep is good
for something, the Milk, the Flesh, the Fleece, every thing is useful; are we
the Sheep of Christ? are we useful? we should be always doing good; this is the
very end of our Living to be good, and to do good; how useful was Saint Paul?
the care of all the Churches lay upon him.

Fourthly, Is Christ this blessed Shepherd better than any other Shepherd? Oh
then! let us labor to Love and Honor this blessed Shepherd; does the Shepherd
die for his Sheep, and shall not the Sheep love their Shepherd? They that do
not love Christ, they are not Sheep, but Goats* Give Christ, I beseech you, the
best of your love, the Cream of your Love* the (...) gave Christ the Juice of
her (...)granate, Cant. 8.2. Her spiced (...) Love Christ better than Estate
(...) Relations; Relations may lie in (...) Bosoms, but Christ must lie in
(...) Hearts; our love to the Lord (...) must be intent and ardent, (...)
should like Seraphims burn in a (...) flame of love to Christ. If a (...) had
three Souls, as a Philosop^^^^ once dreamed, they were all too (...) for
Christ; let us so love Christ and show it by an open acknowledgment of Christ;
if we are called to it, this is love to dare (...) own Christ our blessed (...)
it is said of the chief Rulers, (...) 12.42. They believed on (...) but they
did not confess him, (...) they should be put out of (...) Synagogue. Christ
will never (...) that Faith, which will never (...) Christ, he that is ashamed
(...) Christ, is a shame to Christ.

(...) and Lastly, I will but name (...) us answer all the love and cost ^^rist
our blessed Shepherd: How (...) we answer this cost? Answer, by (...)
fruitfulness, 1 Cor. 9.7. Who (...) flock, and eats not the milk of (...)
^^ock? Christ has feasted you, as (...) flock, Christ has feasted you (...)
his Body and Blood; Oh! then (...) him with the fruits of Righteous^^^^, be
fruitful in Knowledge, be (...) in good works, I will close (...) with* Cant.
4.2. Thy Teeth are like (...) of Sheep, that are even shorn, (...) came up from
the washing, (...) one bare twins, and none is (...) among them.

FINIS.

