Imprimatur,

July 29. 1676. Jonas Moore Soc. Regiae Vice-Praeses.

THE DISPLAYING OF SUPPOSED WITCHCRAFT.

Wherein is affirmed that there are many sorts of Deceivers and Impostors.

AND Diverse persons under a passive Delusion of MELANCHOLY and FANCY.

But that there is a Corporeal League made betwixt the DEVIL and the WITCH, Or
that he sucks on the Witches Body, has Carnal Copulation, or that Witches are
turned into Cats, Dogs, raise Tempests, or the like, is utterly denied and
disproved.

Wherein also is handled, The Existence of Angels and Spirits, the truth of
Apparitions, the Nature of Astral and Sydereal Spirits, the force of Charms,
and Philters; with other abstruse matters.

By John Webster, Practitioner in Physic.

Falsae etenim opiniones Hominum praeoccupantes, non solum surdos, sed and
caecos faciunt, it a ut videre nequeant, quae aliis perspicua apparent. Galen.
lib. 8. de Comp. Med. LONDON, Printed by J. M. and are to be sold by the
Booksellers in London. 1677.

To his Worshipful and honored Friends Thomas Parker of Braisholme, John
Asheton of the Lower-Hall, William Drake of Barnoldswick-coat, William Johnson
of the Grange, Henry Marsden of Gisburne Esquires, and his Majesty's Justices
of Peace and Quorum in the West Riding of Yorkshire.
Worshipful Gentlemen and honored Friends,
I Do not dedicate this piece of my Labors unto you, thereby to beg protection
for it, as fearing either its weakness, or the malevolent censures of the
ignorant; for I very well know, and have experienced, that it is the usual
property of idle and pragmatical persons to please their own malignant humors,
with the condemning and scoffing at the painful lucubrations of others. And I
have ever judged that nothing ought to be published, that like a Noun
Substantive cannot stand by it self, without being supported by any other
adjoined help. Neither is this forth of a vain confidence or an overweening of
mine own abilities, though I very well know that some are as much in love with
the brood of their own brains, as others are with the fruit of their loins:
Because I have for many years been as wary and vigilant, as any could be, to
watch over my self, that I might both know, and keep a clear distinction,
betwixt flattering Fantasy, and true and sound judgment. But I shall in brief
show you the true reasons of my presenting of this poor piece to your reading
and judgments.

1. The first reason is, because you have all been Gentlemen, not only well
known unto me for many years, as being my near Neighbors, but also with whom I
have been freely admitted to a Noble and Generous converse, and have been
trusted, and honored by you in your D^estick concerns, wherein by my Medical
Profession, I might be (...) to you, or your Families, far beyond my poor Merit
and Desert. And having been for many years a due observer of your deportments
in your places of trust as Magistrates, for being but as a stander by, and
looking on, may (perhaps) have noted as much, as those that are Gamesters, I
was moved to present this piece of my labors unto you, by reason of that
knowledge and acquaintance, rather than to others, whose abilities and
integrity I did not so well understand. And (I hope) I may without suspicion of
flattery (of which I am sure both your selves, and others that know me, will
acquit me, that if I be any way guilty, it is rather in being too plain and
open) say, that you have been, and are true Patriots to your Country, and not
only Justices of the Peace, but true conservers of i^, and Peacemakers amongst
all your Neighbors; and really this is one of the chief causes why I have
dedicated this Treatise unto you.

2. Another reason is, you have all fully known me, and the most of the
particulars of my life, both my follies and frailties, as also my other
endowments and abilities, and therefore in reference to these, I thought none
more fit than your selves, to whom I might tender this laborious piece. For it
is not unknown unto you, that (excepting my Physical Practice, which age and
infirmities will not suffer me very much to attend) I have for many years last
past lived a solitary, and sedentary life, mihi and Musis, having had more
converse with the dead than the living, that is, more with Books than with Men.
And therefore I present this unto you, as being better able than most others to
whom I am unknown, to judge what I am like or able to perform in such a subject
as this is.

3. Also it is not unknown unto you, that I have had a large portion of Trouble
and Persecution in this outward world, wherein you did not like many others
stand aloof off, as though you had not known me, but like persons of Justice,
and true Magnanimity, durst both look upon and assist wrong^d innocence, though
besmeered over with the envious dirt of malicious scandals, and even in that
very conjuncture of time, when the whole giddy Troop of barking Dogs, and
ravenous Wolves, did labor to devour me. But then, even then did put to your
helping hands, and were free to declare, what you knew of mine innocence: which
was so Generous, Noble and Christian a kind of just commiseration, that I
should for ever account my self a wretched person, if I should not have deeply
impressed in my breast and memory, which no time, nor adversity can ever
obliterate. But being in a condition that I may truly say with the Apostle S.
Peter, (...), Silver and Gold have I none (which I know you expect not) and
therefore the greatest power I have is my weak pen, thereby to testify my
thankfulness for your unparalled kindness. And therefore I offer this
Treatise as a perpetual and monumental memorial to all Posterities, of my
gratitude, and your goodness.

And further, to whom can a subject of this nature be more suitably and fitly
presented than to such Magistrates as your selves, who have often occasion to
be cumbred and troubled with the ignorant, envious, and sometimes knavish
accusaiions against people suspected of Witchcraft, Sorcery, Charming and
Enchantment? Wherein to free the guilty, and condemn the innocent, is equally
abominable to the Lord: And therefore much judgment, caution, care and diligent
inspection ought to be used in the examining and determining of these matters,
wherein I have used as much perspicuity and plainness as was possible to
distinguish betwixt those that are Impostors, Cheaters, and active Deceivers,
and those that are but under a mere passive delusion through ignorant and
superstitious education, a melancholy temper and constitution, or led by the
vain credulity of inefficacious Charms, Pictures, Ceremonies and the like,
traditionally taught them. The one sort of which deserves to be punished for
couzening of the people, and taking upon them, and pretending to bring to pass
things that they have neither skill nor power to perform; but the other sort
rather merit pity and information, or the Physicians help than any punishment
at all. And I make bold to mind you of this one thing especially that in things
of this nature great heed ought to be taken of the conditions, qualities, ends
and intentions of the Complainants and Informers, who are often more worthy of
punishment, than the persons accused. For many forth of a mere deluded fancy,
envious mind, ignorance and superstition do attribute natural diseases,
distempers, and accidents to Witches and Witchcraft, when in truth there is no
such matter at all. And sometimes they counterfeit strange fits and diseases,
as vomiting of preternatural and strange things, which if narrowly looked into
and examined are but Juglings, and deceitful confederacies, and yet for malice,
revenge or some other base ends, do accuse others to be causers of them.

And though you should find some confidently confessing that they have made a
visible and corporeal league with the Devil, and that he has carnal copulation
with them, and that he does suck upon some parts of their Bodies, and that they
are Transubstantiated into Dogs, Cats, and the like, or that they fly in the
air, and raise Tempests; yet (I hope) I have sufficiently proved by the word of
God, the true grounds of Theology and sound reason, that there never has been
any such Witch existent in rerum natura, and so you may know what credit may be
given to such Fables and impossibilities.

So wishing that you may long live in Health and Happiness, to do his Majesty
and your Country service, which is, and shall be my faithful prayer for you, I
take leave subscribing my self

Your Worships most Faithful Friend, and Devoted Servant, John Webster.

THE PREFACE or INTRODUCTION.
Readers,
KNowing certainly that all writings once published, do equally undergo one
fate, as to stand or fall by the common censures, judgments and opinions of
Men; therefore have I affixed no Epithete, as foreseeing this Treatise (like a
Man once at Sea that is forced to hold out against all weathers) must abide the
censures of all sort of persons, how various soever their minds and principles
be. And though men's fancies and opinions be commonly as different as their
faces, yet I shall enumerate some few general sorts, that may be sufficiently
comprehensive to comprise the most of other subordinate particulars, and that
in this order.

1. First, that which a Man has found true by experience in such like cases,
may very reasonably induce him to expect the like again; as after I had printed
my book of the History of Metals I met with some that were no more learned than
Parrots, who could not write true English, and whose greatest skill was in the
several ways of debauchery, and other poor Pedanticks that were hardly masters
of Grammar, and yet this cr^w, and the like were rash and bold enough, to
censure my painful endeavors, and to scoff at it as a mere collection. And
therefore in publishing of this piece, which is a dark and mysterious subject,
I may very probably meet with some troops of such rash ignorants, to whom only
I shall return this sharp, but suitable responsion. It is an ordinary thing for
many that never could shape a shoo, to reprove and find fault with the
Shoemaker: but such wise men (fit only for Gotham) may learn these two
Proverbs, There is none so bold as blind Bayard, and A Fools bolt is soon shot,
and their heads may be fitter for Feathers, than the Laurel, and when any of
them have made such a collection as my former Book, or published such a piece as
this, then I shall give them a better answer, and not before, Lactucas non esse
dandas hisce Asinis co^edendas, cum illis sufficiant card^i.

2. There are another generation that seem wise in their own eyes, whose brains
are like blown Bladders filled with the wind of overweening and
self-conceitedness, and these usually do hu^f, snuff, and puff at every thing
that agrees not with their Capricious Cockscombs, when their abilities for the
most part lie in the scraps they have gathered from the Theaters, or from the
discourses had in Taverns and Coffee-houses, and if they can but reach some
pitiful pieces of Drollery and Raillery, they think themselves fit and able to
censur^ any thing though never read nor seen, except the Title Page. To these I
have little to say, as being but such airy and frothy Vaporoso's, as the least
blast of sound reason makes them vanish into smoke and nothing; but only wish
them to take into serious confideration, the saying of the Wiseman: See thou
a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a Fool than Prove. 26. 12.
of him. And the counsel of a learned Father is proper for such vain
confidents: Expedit been tim^re, quam male fidere; and utilius est, ut infirm^m
s^ hom^ cognoscat, ut fortis existat, quam fortis videri velit, and infirmus
emergat.

3. There are another sort that are so critically envious, that they can allow
of nothing that is not their own production, and bears not the test of their
approbation, and cannot but stigmatize the labors of others how good or
beneficial soeever they be, because they shadow their fame, and tend not to the
advancement of their own reputation: even as diverse sorts of insects do feed
upon the excrements of other animals, so these feed their own humors, and
please their own fancies by the calumniating, and blacking the labors of
others. These being guilty of peevish morosity cannot look kindly at any thing
of another, without frowning, distaste, and censuring; but we have little to
say unto such as these, but shall leave them to the gall of their own breasts,
and the spleen of their own minds, having neither intended our labors for any
such, nor valuing their censures how sharp and bitter soever they be. For nulla
foelicit^s tam magna est, ut malignitatis dentes vitar^ possit. And therefore
it is discretion to bear that patiently for which humane prudence can find no
remedy.

4. Others there are who are grown obstinate in their minds and wills,
concerning Spirits, Apparitions, Wi^chcraft, Sorcery, Enchantment, and the
like, and are grown pertinacious and resolute to stick to and hold those
opinions that they have imbibed through ignorant education: not considering
that perseverance in a good cause, and well grounded opinion is laudable and
commendable, but pertinaciousness in a bad and ill grounded tenent, is as bad
and hurtful. And it is every wise man's duty to study the cultivation and
improvement of the goods of the mind, and never to be ashamed to learn that of
which they were ignorant before. For the minds of men are not only darkened in
the fall of Adam, but also much misled, by the sucking in of errors in their
younger and more unwary years, from whence they ought to endeavor with might
and main to extricate and deliver themselves. But he that is wilfully settled
upon the lees and dregs of former opinions, though never so erroneous, has
shut forth all further light from shining into his understanding, and so is
become wilfully blind. To such as these we shall only propose the example and
practice of the Apostle, who says: When I was a 1 Cor. 13. 11.
child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child: But
when I became a man, I put away childish things. And I advise them not to
refuse the counsel of S. Augustine, who says: Ad discendum quod opus est,
nulla aetas sera videri potest: quia etsi senes magis decet docere quam
discere; magis tamen decet discere, quam ignorare. And they need not be ashamed
to imitate Socrates, who did wax old every day learning something.

5. As we have not intended this Treatise, and Introduction for such
conditioned persons as we have enumerated before, so there are others to whom
we freely offer and present it, and shall show the grounds and causes that
moved us to undertake such a mysterious, and dangerous subject. And those are
such as have an humble, lowly, and equal mind, that they commonly read Books to
be informed, and to learn those truths of which they are ignorant, or to be
confirmed in those things they partly knew before. It is to such as these only
that we offer our labors, and therefore shall heartily declare unto them the
causes and reasons of our undertaking which are these.

1. Though there be a numerous company of Authors that have written of Magic,
Witchcraft, Sorcery, Enchantment, Spirits, and Apparitions, in sundry ages, of
diverse Countries, and in various languages: yet have they for the most but
borrowed one from another, or have transcribed what others had written before
them. So that thereby there has been no right progress made truly to discover
the theory or ground of these dark and abstruse matters, nor no precise care
taken to instance in matters of fact, that have been warrantably and
sufficiently attested: But only rhapsodies, and confused heaps of stories and
relations, shuffled together, when not one of an hundred of them bore the face
either of verity, or truth-likeliness, whereby the understandings of Readers
have remained uninlightned, their memories confounded, and their brains stuffed
with Whimsies and Chimera's. And though there be nothing more common than
disputes of Witches, and Witchcraft, both in words and writing, yet not one of
great multitudes that has plainly told us, in what notion, or under what
acceptance, they take the words, nor what description is agreed upon, of
either of these, that their existence, or not being, their power and operations
might be known and determined: But all the disputes as yet concerning them have
been loose, wild, and in vagum. And therefore to remedy this, as far as such a
subject would allow, and our abilities stretch, we were moved, and have
attempted to clear those difficulties. And if we do not (which is epidemical to
mankind) flatter and deceive ourselves, we have in some measure reasonably
attained, as having plainly laid down the notion and acceptance of the words,
Witches and Witchcraft, in which we grant them an existence, and in what sense
and respect we grant them none, which is more (as we conceive) than yet has
been performed by any. And though our instances of matters of fact be neither
so punctual nor full as might be wished, for things of this nature are deep and
hid; yet are they the best we could select or choose; and this is one chief
reason why I undertook to treat of this subject

2. Though the gross, absurd, impious and Popish opinions of the too much
magnified powers of Demons and Witches, in this Nation, were pretty well
quashed and silenced by the writings of Wierus, Tandler, Mr. Scot, Mr. Ady; Mr.
Wagstaff and others; and by the grave proceedings of many learned Judges, and
other judicious Magistrates: yet finding that of late two persons of great
learning and note, who are both (as I am informed) beneficed Ministers in the
Church, to wit Dr. Casaubon, and Mr. Glanvil, have afresh espoused so bad a
cause, and taken the quarrel upon them; And to that purpose have newly
furbished up the old Weapons, and raked up the old arguments, forth of the
Popish Sink and Dunghills, and put them into a new dress, that they might
appear with the greater luster, and so do with Tooth and Nail labor to
maintain the old rotten assertions, the one in his Book called, A Treatise
proving Spirits and Witches etc. the other in a Treatise called, A blow at
modern Sadducism etc. Finding these (I say) as two new Champions giving
defiance to all that are of a contrary judgment, I was stirred up to answer
their supposed strong arguments, and invincible instances, which I have done (I
confess) without fear, or any great regard to their Titles, Places, or Worldly
Dignities, but only considering the strength or weakness of their arguments,
proofs, and reason. For in this particular that I have to deal, it is not with
the men, but their opinions and the grounds they would lay their foundations
upon. And if I be censured for dealing too sharply and harshly with them, they
must excuse me, for I profess I have no evil will at all against their persons,
no more than against a Nonentity, but was justly zealous for the truth, and
bitter against such opinions as they have vented, which to me seem dangerous,
and in some respect impious, as (I suppose) I have fully proved. And this was
another reason of my writing about this subject.

3. Another reason that made me undertake this subject, was the horrid
absurdities the tenent of the common Witchmongers brings along with it, as not
only tending to advance superstition and Popery, but also to be much derogatory
to the Wisdom, Justice, and Providence of the Almighty, and to cry up the power
of the Kingdom of darkness, to question the verity of the principal Article of
the Christian Faith, concerning the Resurrection of Christ in his true
numerical Body, and generally to tend to the obstruction of the practice of
Godliness and Piety. These after I had seriously weighed and considered them,
did move me to labor as far as the light of Gods word, the grounds of true
Theology, and the clear strength of reason would guide, and direct me, to
undertake the confutation of them as far as I was able, and if I have failed I
humbly desire those that are more able to handle the matter more fully if
possible.

If any be moved that I seem to maintain some things that are Paradoxes, I hope
I may crave leave, as well to discede from the opinions of others, as others
have done from those that went before them. And I desire them not so much to
consider, either the novelty or strangeness of the opinions, as the weight and
strength of the reasons that are laid down to support and statuminate them; for
if the arguments be sound and valid, the Tenants built thereupon cannot be weak
and tottering. And however I acknowledge my self to have humane frailties and
so may err, yet I have no mind or will pertinaciously to persevere in an error,
and these things that we have treated of lying so far from the ken of our
senses, and experiments of this nature, either so rare, or uncertain, that we
may rationally expect pardon, rather than reprehension.

But I shall say no more, but let the Book speak for it self, only desiring the
Readers, first to peruse and seriously to consider, before they censure, that
so I may have cause to bid them, Farewell.

Dated February 23. 1673.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. 1. Of the false, irrational, and unchristian censures, that have been,
and yet are cast upon learned Men for writing of abstruse subjects* As also for
treating of Apparitions and Witchcraft, especially if they crossed the common
stream of vulgar opinion. Page 1. Chap. 2. Of the Notion, Conception, and
Description of Witches and Witchcraft according to diverse Authors, and in what
sense they may be granted, and in what sense and respect they are denied. p.
19. Chap. 3. The denying of such a Witch (...) is last described in the
foregoing Chapter does not infer the denying of Angels, or Spirits. Apparitions
no warrantable ground for a christian to believe the existence of Angels, or
Devils by, but the word of God. p. 37. Chap. 4. That the Scriptures, and sound
reason are the true and proper mediums to prove the actions attributed unto
Witches by, and not other improper ways that many Authors have used. And of the
requisites necessary truly to prove a matter of fact by. p. 43. Chap. 5. That
these things now in question, are but barely supposed, and were yet never
rationally nor sufficiently proved: And that the Allegations brought to prove
them by are weak, frivolous, and absolutely invalid: with a full confutation of
all the four particulars. p. 63. Chap. 6. That diverse places in Scripture have
been mis-translated thereby to uphold this horrid opinion of the Devils
omnipotency, and the power of Witches, when there is not one word that
signifies a familiar Spirit, or a Witch in that sense that is vulgarly
intended. p. 106. Chap. 7. Of diverse places in the Old Testament, that are
commonly wrested, and falsely expounded, thereby to prove Apparitions, and the
power of the Devil, and Witches. p. 136. Chap. 8. Of the Woman of Endor that
pretended to raise up Samuel, and of some other places in the Scriptures, not
handled yet, and of some other objections. p. 165. Chap. 9. Of Divine
permission, providence and prescience. p. 183. Chap. 10. Whether fallen Angels be
corporeal, or simply incorporeal, and the absurdity of the assuming of Bodies,
and the like consequents. p. 197. Chap. 11. Of the knowledge, and power of fallen
Angels. p. 215. Chap. 12. If the Devils or Witches have power to perform
strange things, whether they do not bring them to pass by ^ere natural means,
or otherwise? And of Helmonts opinion concerning the effects caused by Devils
or Witches. p. 241. Chap. 13. That the ignorance of the power of Art and
Nature, and such like things, has much advanced these foolish and impious
opinions. p. 267. Chap. 14. Of diverse Impostures framed and invented to prove
false and lying miracles by, and to accuse persons of Witchcraft, from late and
undeniable authorities. p. 270. Chap. 15. Of diverse creatures that have a real
existence in nature, and yet by reason of their wondrous properties, or seldom
being seen, have been taken for Spirits and Devils. p. 279 Chap. 16. Of
Apparitions in general, and of some unquestionable stories, that seem to prove
some such things. Of those Apparitions pretended to be made in Beryls and
Crystals, and of the Astral or Sydereal Spirit. p. 288. Chap. 17. Of the force
and efficacy of words or charms, whether they effect any thing at all, or not,
and if they do, whether it be by natural or diabolical virtue and force. p.
321.
THE DISPLAYING OF SUPPOSED WITCHCRAFT.
CHAP. I.
Of the false, irrational, and unchristian Censures, that have been, and yet
are, cast upon Learned men, for writing of abstruse Subjects: As also for
treating of Apparitions and Witchcraft, especially if they crossed the common
stream of vulgar Opinion.

BEING about to treat of the mysterious and abstruse Subject of Witches and
Witchcraft, I cannot but think it necessary (especially to make the things we
handle more plain and evidential) to imitate Architectors, who when they intend
to raise some fair Fabric or Edifice, do not only provide themselves of good
and lasting Materials, but above all take care to lay a firm and sure
foundation, which they cannot well accomplish, unless the earth and rubbish be
removed, that a firm ground for a foundation may be found out. So before I lay
the foundation of what I intend in this Discourse, I shall labor to remove
some censures and calumnies, that are usually cast upon those learned persons
that labor to unma^acle imprisoned truth, and to adventure to cross the stream
of vulgar Opinion, backed with seeming Authority, Antiquity, or universality of
Votes, especially if they have intermeddled in Subjects occult and mysterious.

And these Censures (how unjust soever) have often deterred the most able and
best learned from divulging their opinions, or publish their thoughts upon such
difficult and intricate matters, which (I conceive) ought not to be done for
these reasons.

1. Because the best part of a man, as naturally considered, is his Courage,
Resolution, and Magnanimity, which should make him Reas. 1.
resolute and courageous to declare and maintain, what he upon sound and
rational grounds apprehends to be truth, and not at all to fear the censure or
judgment of others, who may have had no better means to inform themselves, or
perhaps have been less diligent, and however are subject to the same errors
and mistakes of Mankind, who must all confess the verity of that unerring
Oracle, Humanum est errare. And therefore he must needs be a person of a poor,
base, and low spirit, that does conceal his own sentiments of the truth, for
fear of the censure or calumnies of others.

2. He that is afraid to declare his thoughts, for fear of censure Reas. 2.
or scandal, must of necessity be very weak in his Morals, as having little
affection for verity, which is the chief object of the intellect, and
consequently ought above all things to sway and lead the affections. And to be
frighted from owning or declaring of the truth, for fear of the vain, aerie,
groundless, and erroneous censures of others, must needs speak a man weak in
the grounds of Morality, and to have small affection for virtue, whose guide is
verity. The Learned Father said exceeding well to this purpose: Qui veritatem
occultat, and qui prodit mendacium, uterque reus est. Ille August. de Agon^
Christi.
quia prodesse non vult, ipse quia nocere desiderat.

3. He that conceals the truth that he knows, for fear of the Reas. 3.
censures of others, must needs have little of Christianity in him, for we are
commanded to buy the truth, and not to sell it; but Prove. 23. 23.
for a Christian to conceal the truth, and not to dare to declare and defend
it, for fear of the vain and perishing censures of men, is to make absolute
sale of the truth, and that for the worst of all prises that can be. For what a
weightless and worthless prise are the judgments and opinions of vain man,
whose breath is in his nostrils, and whose life is but a vapor, that a
Christian should, for fear of such vain censures, be afraid to declare or
defend the truth? Therefore let the (...) Politicians and Machiavillians of
this Age, who have in a manner turned the truth of the Christian Religion, and
the most certain Rules of Providence into Atheism, and becom'd vain Idolaters,
to sacrifice to the falsely adored and deified fancies of their own craft and
cunning, think or say what they please, yet the rule of p^ous Gregory will ever
hold true: Ille veritatis Gregor. H^nil.
desensor esse debet, qui quum recte sentit, loqui non metuit, nec erubescit.
And that of Chrysostom ought never to be forgotten Chrysostom. (...). Math.
by a good Christian, and one that fears God, who says: Non solum proditor est
veritatis, qui mendacium pro veritate loquitur: sed qui non libere pronuntiat
veritatem, quam pronuntiare oportet, aut non libere defendit veritatem, quam
defendere oportet. But as there have been some that have been affrighted with
the feigned Bugbears of malevolent men's censures and scandals; so there have
been others, to whom Nature has given greater Magnanimity, who were better
principled in their Morals, and better rudimented in the Christian Religion,
that have scorned and undervalued those censures as vanities and trifles, and
these were those -- Quos Jupiter aequus amavit,
Et meliore luto finxit praecordia Titan.
These were those that for the advancement of Truth and Learning, and the
benefit of Mankind durst undertake Ire per excubias, and se committere Parcis.
And feared not the tempestuous storms of venomous tongues, or malicious minds,
of which we shall here enumerate a competent Catalogue.

1. In the first place we need not travel far, either in regard of time or
place, to find Precedents of such as have undergone no small censures and
^ubsannations for vindicating Truth, and laboring the advancement of it,
though against common and deep rooted Opinion. So ill entertainment new
Inventors and Inventions have always found amongst the present Masters of
several Professions, and those that made the World believe, that they alone had
gained the Monopoly of all Learning. Our learned Countryman Doctor Hackwell in
his Preface to his Apology, has sufficiently proved this particular: whose
profound Piece of proving no decay in Nature (a truth now sufficiently known,
and assented to) found no small opposition, both from the Learned in Theology,
and other persons, and underwent many sharp censures, until men had more
considerately weighed the strength and cogency of his Arguments, which carry
sufficient evidence to confute rational persons. Our learned and most
industrious Anatomist Dr. Harvey, who (notwithstanding the late Cavils of some)
first found forth and evidenced to the World that rare and profitable discovery
of the Circulation of the Blood, did undergo the like Fate: who for eighteen or
twenty years together did groan under the heavy censur e of all the Galenists
and expert Anatomists almost in Europe, and was railed upon, and bitterly
written against, not only by such as Alexander Rosse and Dr. Primrose, but by
Riolanus and others, and not forborne by that famous Physici^n of Roterodam,
Zacharias Sylvius, who ingenuously confesses thus much: Primum mihi inventum
hoc non placuit, quod and voce and scripto public testatus sum; sed Praes. in
Harv^ Exerc. Anat.
dum postea ei resultando and explodendo vchementius incumbo, refutor and ipse
and explodor: adeo sunt rations ejus non persuadentes, sed cogentes:
diligenter omnes examinavi, and in vivis aliquot (...) eum in sinem a m^
dissectis, verissimum comperi. Which was a most candid and free retractation
and confession of his own errors, and may be proposed as an example to all
rash and unadvised Censurers. Neither could this most clear and evidential
Verity (which falls under ocular Demonstration and manifest Experiments) find
countenance in the World, until that Wallaeus, Plempius, and diverse other
judicious and accurate Anatomists, had found the truth of Harvey's opinion, by
their own trials and ocular inspection: so difficult it is to overthrow an old
radicated opinion. For I have known some years ago, that a person for owning or
maintaining the Circulation of the blood, should have been censured and
derided, as much by other Physicians, as one should be now for denying the
same: so hard it is to root out an opinion (though never so false and
groundless) if once settled in the brains of many, and has had a long current
of continued reputation and belief. And it is much more to consider the
ignorance, stupidity, and perverseness of those, that in this Age of Knowledge
dare take upon them to censure (nay to condemn) that Society of persons, and
their endeavors, who have a just, pious, merciful, and learned King for their
Founder, and the greatest number of Nobility and Gentry, renowned both for
divine and humane Knowledge, that can be chosen forth of the three Nations for
their Members, and whose undertakings and level are the most high, noble, and
excellent that ever yet the World was partaker of. And yet (which may be
wondered at) I have not only met with many, that do censure and misjudge their
vast and laudable enterprise, but even have been bold to appear in Print to
censure and scandalize their proceedings, as is manifest in that Piece styled
Plus ultra, written by Mr. Stubbs of Warwick, wherein he has effected as much
as Dogs do by barking at the Moon. But it is plain, that highness of place, or
greatness of parts exempts no man from evil tongues, or bad censures. And to
this purpose I cannot but add Dr. Casaubon, who as he had a long sickness of
body, so doubtless he wanted not some distemper of mind, when in his Treatise
of Credulity and Incredulity, he uttered this. If I may speak my mind (he
says) without offense, this prodigious propensity to innovation in all Page 3.
kinds, but in matters of Learning particularly, which so many upon no ground,
that I can see, or appearance of reason, are possessed with; I know not what we
should more probably ascribe it unto, than to some sad Constellation or
Influence. Alas! poor man, he was so blind, that he could see no ground or
appearance of reason for the usefulness of Experimental Philosophy, nor for the
Institution of the Royal Society, but must ascribe it to the Stars: it is a
wonder why he ascribes it not to natural Melancholy, as he does almost all
strange Effects, in his Book of Enthusiasm, or why not unto Demons or Witches,
as he does the most things in the Treatise quoted.

2. That learned and painful person Renatus des Carts, who brought in,
revived, and refined the old Doctrine of Atoms, ascribed to Democritus, and
other of the Ancients, found for a long time much opposition; insomuch that
when he lived at Utrecht in Holland, the Aristotelian Professors of that
University became so inflamed with envy at him, that their Scholars raised the
Rabble of the City at the sound of a Bell, to drive him out of Town. And yet
this man's Philosophy has had the luck to triumph in that University, where so
much contempt was poured upon him; for Henricus Regius, the public Professor
of Physic there, has published a Book of Natural Philosophy, agreeable to the
Principles and design of Des Carts: and is in a manner generally received and
applauded; and by the honorable Mr. Boil much made use of, and by him styled
the Corpuscularian Philosophy. So was not that must learned and diligent
Mathematician Galalaeus imprisoned for seeing more than others could by the
help of his Optic Glasses, losing (as one says) his own liberty in Prison,
for giving the Earth liberty to fetch a round about the Sun? And yet now to
what great height of improvement are Telescopes arrived unto, and what credit
is given to the Observations made with them? though in their birth their first
Author and User so much opposed and punished; for all Inventions that are new
(as well as Opinions) are in their beginnings opposed and censured, not
considering, that all acquired Knowledge, and all Arts and Sciences were once
new, and had their beginnings.

3. When Josephus Querc^tanus and Sir Theodore Mayern did labor to introduce
the practice of Chemical Physic into the City of Paris, what cruel censures
and scandals did they undergo by all the rest of the Physicians of the
College, so that they were accounted illiterate and ignorant Fellows and
dangerous Empiricks, not fit to practice in the King of France his Dominions,
and so were sentenced by the College, and prohibited to practice? So far did
ignorance, self-interest; and blind malice prevail against these two persons,
of so much Worth and Learning, insomuch that the former was made Physician to
the King of France, and lived to see despised Chemistry to flourish, where it
had been most contemned, himself to be honored, and his Chemical Works to be
published, and to be had in great and general esteem with all that were Lovers
of Learning. The latter likewise outlived the malice of all his enemies, and
saw himself advanced to be Physician to two potent and renowned Kings of
England, and to have the general practice of the most of the Nobility and
Gentry of the Kingdom, and to live to a fair old age, and to dye vastly rich.
So that even the bravest men, for their noble endeavors for the good of
Mankind, have always found harsh usage.

4. It has fared no better with diverse persons that have written of abstruse
and mysterious Subjects, such as were Arnoldus de Villa Nova and Raimundus
Lullius, who, because they handled that secret and sublime Art of the
Transmutation of Metals, were by the ignorance and malice of Francis Pegna and
the John Tredeschen of Mund. subter. lib. 11. sect. 2. page 277.
Rome, Athanasius Kircherus, with some others, branded with the name of
Magicians, taken in the worst sense. Facile est reprehendere and maledicere, so
apt are men through overweening pride and self-conceitedness, as though they
were ignorant of nothing, to take upon them to censure all things, when Artists
only are fit to judge of those proper Arts, in which they are verst and bred
in, and not others: For it is not sufficient for a man to be verst in many
parts of Learning, but also in that very Science or Art, in which the Question
is propounded: as for Example; Suppose a man to be well read in School
Theology, Metaphysics, Logic, Grammar, Rhetoric, Ethics, and Physics, yet
for all this how unable were he to resolve one of the difficultest Propositions
in Euclid? no more can any person, though never so generally learned, if he
perfectly do not understand the method, terms, ground, matter, and end of the
Writers in mystical Chemistry, be any competent Judge of their Art, nor of the
nature of Transmutation. And this might justly have bridled Kircher, and many
other rash and vain Censurers to hold back their judgment, until they perfectly
understand the matter, about which they are to give judgment, and to have
considered that Maxim of the wisest of men: See thou a man wise Prove. 26. 12.
in his own conceit? there is more hope of a fool than of him. But
notwithstanding these groundless slanders against Arnoldus, that he was guilty
of Diabolical Magic, from which the Pen of learned Nandaeus has totally
discharged him, though he otherwise (according to his petulant humor and
prejudiced opinion against the Art of Transmutation, of which he was no
competent Judge, for the Hist. Magic. c. 14. p. 177.
reason foregoing) cast some unworthy reflections both upon him, and Lully, yet
he confesses (which is but the bare truth, as every learned Physician does
sufficiently know, that have heedfully read his Writings of the Art of
Medicine) in these words, That it is certain, he was the learnedest Physician
of his time, equally acquainted with the Latin, Greek, and Arabian Tongues,
and one whose Writings sufficiently witness his abilities in the Mathematics,
Medicine, and Philosophy, the practice whereof gained him favor and employment
about Pope Clement, and Frederick King of Sicily, who certainly would never
have made use of him, if he had thought him a Conjurer or Magician, such as
many judged he was. As for Lully (notwithstanding the malevolent froth of some
rash, malicious, and ignorant Writers) he was guilty of no other Magic but
what was natural, lawful, and laudable, as his profound and learned Works (if
his blind Adversaries had ever taken pains to have perused them, who frequently
censure and condemn those things they never saw, read, or understood) do
witness beyond all exception, and is all justified by the testimonies of so
many learned and judicious persons, that more cannot be said to his praise and
vindication. The most of his learned Works being kept in the Library at Oxford,
written in an ancient hand: which would never have been done, if they had not
been highly esteemed and prised. For as Zetznerus the great Stationer of
Stasburgh says: Tantae suo fuisse aevo authoritatis atque aestimationis
legitur, ut justissimi D^ Art L^llian. Praes.
Arragonum Reges cum in privilegiis eidem concessis, magnum in Philosophia
magistrum, and mirandarum artium and scientiarum authorem nominarint. Lastly,
one Father Pacificus in his Journey from Persia 1628. came into the Isle of
Majorca, where Lully was born, and to his great admiration found the Statue of
Lully there in Wood curiously colored, and he honored as a Saint Vide Relat.
Paris. impres. Gallice, 1631.
(whom he had before judged an Heretic) as also a Society of Professors
following the Doctrine of Lully, and called Raymundines or Lullists, and that
they affirmed, that by Divine illumination he had the perfect knowledge of
Nature, by which he found out the universal Medicine, by a certain Aurum
potabile, by which he prolonged his life to the 145. year of his age, in which
year he suffered Martyrdom. This I have produced to show how inconsiderately
and ignorantly the best learned of an Age may be, and often are wrongfully and
falsely traduced and slandered, which may be a warning to all persons to take
heed how they pass their censures, until they understand perfectly all that is
necessary to be known about the Subject they are to give judgment of, before
they utter or declare their sentence.

5. Roger Bacon our Countryman, who was a Franciscan Friar, and Doctor of
Divinity, the greatest Chemist, Astrologer, and Mathematician of his time, yet
could not escape the injurious and unchristian censure of being a Conjurer, and
so hard put to it, that Lib. 1. de Script. Anglic.
as Pitts says, he was twice cited to Rome by Clement the Fourth, to purge
himself of that accusation, and was forced to send his Optical and Mathematical
Instruments to Rome, to satisfy the Pope and the Conclave, which he amply
performed, and came off with honor and applause. To vindicate whom I need say
little, because it is already performed by the Pens of those learned persons,
Pitts, Leland, Seldom, and Nandaeus, only I shall add one Sentence forth of
that most learned Treatise, De mirabili potestate artis and naturae, and de
Cap. 1.
nullitate magiae. Where he says thus: Quicquid autem est praeter operationem
naturae vel artis, aut non est humanum, aut est fictum and sraudibus occupatum.
Another of our Countrymen Dr. John Dee, the greatest and ablest Philosopher,
Mathematician, and Chemist that his Age (or it may be ever since) produced,
could not evade the censure of the Monster-headed multitude, but even in his
life time was accounted a Conjurer, of which he most sadly (and not without
cause) complains in his most learned Preface to Euclid, Englished by Mr.
Billingsley, and there strongly apologizeth for himself, with that zeal and
fervency, that may satisfy any rational Christian, that he was no such wicked
person, as to have visible and familiar converse (if any such thing can be now
adays) with the Devil, the known Enemy of Mankind, of which take this short
passage, where he says: O my unkind Countrymen, O unnatural Countrymen, O
unthankful Countrymen, O brainsick, rash, spiteful, and disdainful
Countrymen, why oppress you me thus violently with your slandering of me
contrary to verity, and contrary to your own consciences? Yet notwithstanding
this, and his known abilities in the most parts of abstruse Learning, the great
respect that he had from diverse Princes, Nobles, and the most Learned in all
Europe, could not protect him from this harsh and unjust censure. For Dr.
Casaubon near fifty years after Dr. Dees death, has in the year 1659.
published a large Book in Folio of Dees conversing for many years with Spirits
(wicked ones he means.) But how Christian-like this was done, to wound the
man's reputation so many years after his death, and with that horrid and wicked
slander of having familiarity with Devils for many years in his life time,
which tends to the loss both of body and soul, and to register him amongst the
damned, how Christian-like this is, I leave all Christians to judge? Besides,
let all the World judge in this case, that Dr. Casaubon being a sworn
Witchmonger, even to the credulity of the filthiest and most impossible of
their actions, cannot but allow of the Law that does punish them for digging up
the bones of the dead, to use them to Superstition or Sorcery; what may he then
think the World may judge him guilty of, for uncovering the Dormitories of the
deceased, not to abuse their bones, but to throw their Souls into the deepest
pit of Hell? A wickedness certainly beyond the greatest wickedness, that he can
believe is committed by Witches. It is manifest, that he has not published
this merely as a true relation of the matter of fact, and so to leave it to
others to judge of; but that designedly he has labored to represent Dee as a
most infamous and wicked person, as may be plainly seen in the whole drift of
his tedious Preface. But his design to make Dee a Converser with evil Spirits
was not all, he had another that concerned himself more nearly. He had before
run in a manner (by laboring to make all that which he called Enthusiasm, to
be nothing else but imposture or melancholy and depraved fantasy, arising
from natural causes) into the censure of being a Sadducee or Atheist. To wash
off which he thought nothing was so prevalent, as to leap into the other end of
the balance (the mean is hard to be kept) to weigh the other down, by
publishing some notorious Piece that might (as he thought) in an high degree
manifest the existence of Spirits good and bad, and this he thought would
effect it sufficiently, or at least wipe off the former imputation that he had
contracted.

But that I may not be too tedious, I shall sum up briefly some others, by
which it may be made clear, that those dauntless Spirits that have adventured
to cross the current of common opinion, and those that have handled abstruse
Subjects, have never wanted opposition and scandal, how true or profitable
soever the things were that they treated or writ of. Trithemius that Honor and
Ornament of Germany for all sorts of Literature, wanted not a Bouillus to
calumniate and condemn him of unlawful Magic, from which all the Learned in
Europe know he is absolved, by the able and elegant Pen of him that styles
himself Gustavus Silenus, and others. Cornelius Agrippa run the same Fate, by
the scribbling of that ignorant and envious Monk Paulus Jovius, from whose
malicious slander he is totally acquitted by the irrefragable evidence of
Wierus, Melchior Adams, Nandaeus, and others. Who almost have not read or heard
of the horrid and abominable false scandals laid upon that totius Germaniae
decus, Paracelsus, by the malevolent Pen of Erastus, and after swallowed up
with greediness by Libanius, Conringius, Sennertus, and many others? for not
only laboring to bring in a new Theory and Practice into the Art of Medicine,
but also for striving to purge and purify the ancient, natural, laudable, and
lawful Magic from the filth and dregs of Imposture, Deceit, Ceremonies, and
Superstitions: yet has not wanted most strong and invincible Champions to
defend him, as Dorne, Petrus Severinus, Smetius, Crollius, Bitiscius, and many
others. Our Countryman Dr. Fudd, a man acquainted with all kinds of Learning,
and one of the most Christian Philosophers that ever writ, yet wanted not those
snarling Animals, such as Marsennus, Lanovius, Foster, and Gassendus, as also
our Casaubon (as mad as any) to accuse him vainly and falsely of Diabolical
Magic, from which the strength of his own Pen and Arguments did discharge him
without possibility of replies. We shall now come to those that have treated of
Witchcraft, and strongly opposed and confuted the many wonderful and incredible
actions and power ascribed unto Witches: and these crossing the vogue of the
common opinion, have not wanted their loads of unworthy and unchristian
scandals cast upon them, of which we shall only name these two, Wierus a
learned person, a German, and in his time Physician to the Duke of Cleve; the
other our Countryman Mr. Reginald Scot, a person of competent Learning, pious,
and of a good Family: what is said against them in particular, I shall recite,
and give a brief responsion unto it.

1. There is a little Treatise in Latin titled Daemonologia, fathered upon
King James (how truly we shall not dispute, for some ascribe it to others)
where in the Preface these two persons are intimated to be Witches, and that
they writ against the common opinion, concerning the Power of Witches, the
better to shelter and conceal their Diabolical skill. But indeed this
groundless accusation needs no confutation, but rather scorn and derision, as
having no rational ground of probability at all, that they should be such
cursed Hypocrites, or dissembling Politicians, the one being a very learned and
able Physician, as both his Writings do witness, and that upright and unpartial
Author Melchior Adams in his life has most amply declared: the other known (as
not living so very many years ago) to be a godly, learned, and an upright man,
as his Book which he calls, The Discovery of Witchcraft, does most largely
make it appear, if his Adversaries had ever taken the pains to peruse it. So
that all rational persons may plainly see, that it is but a lying invention, a
malicious device, and a mere forged accusation.

2. These persons are accused to have absolutely denied the existence of
Witches, which we shall demonstrate to be notoriously false, by these following
reasons.

1. Could ever any rational man have thought or believed, that Mr. Glanvil, a
person whopretends to such high parts, would have expressed so much weakness
and impudence, as to have charged Mr. Scot with the flat denial of the
existence of Witches, as he does in these words speaking of him? and pretends
this to be a Confutation of the being of Witches and Apparitions; and this he
Considerat. about Witchcraft, p. 76.
intimates in diverse other places, but without any quotation, to show where or
in what words Scot does simply deny the Being of Witches, which he does no
where maintain: so confident are many to charge others with that which they
neither hold no^ write.

2. Mr. Scot and Wierus do not state the Question, An sint, Whether there be
Witches or not, but Quomodo sint, in what manner they act. So that their
Question is only, What kind of power supposed Witches have, or do act by, and
what the things are that they do or can perform: so that the state of the
question is not simply of the Being of Witches, or de existentia, but only de
modo existendi: wherein it is plain, that every Dispute de modo existendi, does
necessarily grant and suppose the certainty of the Existence, otherwise the
Dispute of the manner of their Being, Properties, Power, or Acts would have no
ground or foundation at all. As if I and another should dispute about the
extent, buildings, and situation of the great City Peking in China, or about
the length, breadth, and height of the great Wall dividing China from Tartary;
we both do take for granted, that there is such a City, and such a Wall,
otherwise our Dispute would be wild, vain, and groundless: like the two
Wisemen of Gotham, who strove and argued about the driving of sheep over a
bridge; the one affirming he would drive his sheep over the bridge, and the
other protesting against it, and so begun, one as it were to drive, and the
other to stay and stop them, when there were no sheep betwixt them. And this
might be a sufficient document to Mr. Glanvil, to have been more sober, than to
have charged Scot so falsely. And do not the ancient Fathers differ in their
opinions circa Angelorum modum existendi, some of them holding them to be
corporeal, and some incorporeal? yet both these parties did firmly hold their
existence: so that this is a false and improper charge, and has no basis to
stand upon at all.

3. What man of reason and judgment could have believed, that Mr. Glanvil or
Dr. Casaubon, being persons that pretend to a great share of Learning, and to
be exact in their ways of arguing, would have committed so pitiful and gross a
fault, as is fallacia consequentis? For if I deny that a Witch cannot fly in
the air, nor be transformed or transsubstantiated into a Cat, a Dog, or an
Hare, or that the Witch makes any visible Covenant with the Devil, or that he
sucketh on their bodies, or that the Devil has carnal Copulation with them; I
do not thereby deny either the Being of Witches, nor other properties that they
may have, for which they may be so called: no more than if I deny that a Dog
has rugibility (which is only proper to a Lion) does it follow that I deny the
being of a Dog, or that he has latrability? this is mere inconsequential, and
has no connection. So if I deny that a man cannot fly by his natural abilities
in the air like a Bird, nor live continually in the Sea as a fish, nor in the
earth as a Worm or Mole, this does not at all infer that I deny the existence
of man, nor his other properties of risibility, rationality, or the like. But
this is the learned Logic, and the clear ways of arguing that these men use.

3. A third scandal Mr. Glanvil throws upon him is this, where he says thus:
For the Author does little but tell odd tales and Page 76.
silly Legends, which he confutes and laughs at, and pretends this to be a
confutation of the Being of Witches and Apparitions. In all which, his
reasonings are trifling and childish; and when he ventures at Philosophy, he is
little better than absurd. Dr. Casaubon, though he confesses he had never read
Scots Book, but Of Credul. and Incredul. p. 40.
as he had found it by chance in friends houses, or Booksellers Shops, yet
does rank him amongst the number of his illiterate Wretches, and tells us how
Dr. Reynolds did censure him and some others. To these, though they be not much
material, we shall give positive and convincing answers.

1. There is no greater sign of the weakness of a man's cause, nor his inability
to defend it, than when he slips over the substance of the question in hand,
and begins to fall foul upon the adverse party, to throw dirt and filth upon
him, and to abuse and slander him: this is a thing very usual, but exceeding
base, and plainly demonstrates the badness of their cause.

2. If Mr. Scot has done little but told odd tales and silly Legends, Mr.
Glanvil might very well have born with him; for I am sure his story of the
Drummer, and his other of Witchcraft are as odd and silly, as any can be told
or read, and are as futilous, incredible, ludicrous, and ridiculous as any can
be. And if the tales that Scot tells be odd and silly, they are the most of
them taken from those pitiful lying Witchmongers, such as Delrio, Bodinus,
Springerus, R^migius, and the like, the Authors that are most esteemed with Dr.
Casaubon, and other Witchmongers, of whom we shall say more hereafter.

3. For Mr. Glanvil to give general accusations without particular proofs, as
to say Scots reasonings are trifling and childish, and when he ventures at
Philosophy, he is little better than absurd, do plainly manifest the man's
malice, and discover his weakness: For dolus versatur in universalibus, and no
man ought to be condemned without particular and punctual proof, as to the
time, place, and all other circumstances, which Mr. Glanvil could not do, and
therefore he only gives general calumniations without ground; and if Scot were
little better than absurd, then he the better agrees with Mr. Glanvil, whose
Platonical Whimseys are as absurd as any, as we shall sufficiently prove
hereafter.

4. Dr. Casaubon must needs have been highly elevated with the desire of
censuring, when he would condemn a man without reading his Book, or serious
weighing the force of his arguments, this concludes him of vast weakness, and
of great perverseness of mind, as all rational men may judge; for in effect it
is this, Scot is an illiterate Wretch, and his Book full of errors, but I never
read it, but as I have looked upon it at a friends house, or a Booksellers
Shop: is not this a wretched ground whereupon to build so wretched a
foundation, as thereby to judge him an illiterate Wretch? And to censure him by
the report of others, is as unjust, weak, and childish as the former; and
though Dr. Reynolds were a learned man, it does not appear for what particular
point or error he censured Scot, and therefore is but a general and groundless
charge, sheltred under the color of Dr. Reynolds reputation, an evidence, in
Reason and Law, of no weight or validity.

5. For Dr. Casaubon to rank him amongst illiterate Wretches, is against the
very Rule of the Law of Nature, that teaches all men, that they should not do
that to another, which they would not have another to do unto them. And sure
Dr. Casaubon would not have another to judge and condemn him for an illiterate
Wretch, and therefore he ought not to have condemned Mr. Scot to be so. And as
it is against the Law of Nature, so it is contrary to the rules of modesty and
morality to give a man such stigmatizing titles: nay it is even against the
rules of good manners and civil education, but that some men think that it is
lawful for them to say any thing, and that nothing what they say does misbeseem
them. And lastly, how far it is against the Rules of Christianity and Piety,
let all good Christians judge.

6. The falsity of this soul scandal is manifest in both the particulars
therein couched. 1. For Mr. Scot was a learned and diligent person, as the
whole Treatise will bear witness; he understood the Latin Tongue, and
something of the Greek, and for the Hebrew, if he knew nothing of it, yet he
had procured very good helps, as appears in his expounding the several words
that are used in the Scriptures for supposed Witches and Witchcraft: as also
his quoting of diverse of the Fathers, the reformed Ministers, and many other
Authors besides, which sufficiently prove that he was not illiterate. 2. And
that he was no wretched person, is apparent, being a man of a good Family, a
considerable Estate, a man of a very commendable government, and a very godly
and zealous Protestant, as I have been informed by persons of worth and credit,
and is sufficiently proved by his Writing.

I have not been thus tedious to accumulate these instances of men that have
been censured, for opposing vulgar opinions, or writing of abstruse Subjects,
as circumstantial only, or for a flourish, but merely as they are introductive,
necessary, and pertinent to the purpose I intend in this Treatise, as I shall
make manifest in these Rules or Observations following, and shall add
sufficient reasons to confirm the same.

1. That the generality of an opinion, or the numerousness of Rule 1.
the persons that hold and maintain it, are not a safe and warrantable ground
to receive it, or to adhere unto it: nor that it is safe or rational to reject
an opinion, because they are but few that do hold it, or the number but small
that maintain it. And this I shall labor to make good by these sure and firm
arguments following.

1. Because the Scriptures tell us thus much: Thou shall not follow Exodus 13. 2.
the multitude to do evil. And that there are many deceivers: For many shall
come in my Name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive Mat. 24. 5. Luke 6. 26.
many. And woe unto you, when all men shall speak well of you: for so did their
fathers to the false prophets. From whence it is plain, that first we are to
consider and be assured, that the matter be not evil; for if it be, we are not
at all to be swayed with the multitudes that follow it, or that uphold it: so
if the opinion be evil, erroneous, or false, we ought not to receive it, or
adhere unto it, though never so many do hold or maintain it. So that in truth
and substance, we are not at all to consider, whether there be few or many that
hold it, but simply, whether it be true or not. For as Plato tells us: Neque id
considerandum quid dixerit, sed utrum vere dicatur nec ne. For the multitude
have been by all good Authors and Learned men always esteemed the most
erroneous, as Seneca says: Quaerendum non quod Lib. de vit. beat. Lactant.
Duimar. Instit. l. 2. c. 3.
vulgo placet, pessimo veritatis interpreti. And Lactanti^s teaches us this:
Vulgus indoctum pompis inanibus gaudet, animisque puerilibus spectat omnia,
oblectatur frivolis, nec po^derare secum unamquamque rem potest. And our
Savior gives us a proof and instance of the error of the multitude, and that
in matter of fact. Did not almost all the Jews under diverse Kings Raigns
applaud and approve of the doctrine and opinions of the false Prophets, though
utterly erroneous? insomuch that Elijah said, that he only was left of the true
Prophets, though the false ones were many and numerous. So that the Rule is
proved to be true, both by the precept and example of the Scriptures.

2. If we consider the generality of Mankind, either in respect of their
inclinations and dispositions, or their breeding and education, we shall not
find one of an hundred, either by nature inclined, or by education fitted and
qualified to search forth and understand the truth. And then if there be an
hundred to one drowned in ignorance and errors, and so few fitted to understand
the truth of things either divine or natural, then it must need^ follow, that
it is not safe to embrace or adhere to an opinion, because of the great number
of those that hold or maintain it, but rather to stick to the smaller number;
though neither simply ought to be regarded, but truth it self.

3. Again, if we consider those numbers, that either by nature are inclined, or
by education trained up in Learning, to enable them to judge rightly betwixt
truth and truth-likeliness, how few of these that prove any thing excellent in
those parts of Learning wherein they are bred, we may easily see the verity of
this Rule sufficiently proved, that it is not safe to embrace or adhere to an
opinion, because the numbers are great that hold or maintain it.

4. If the multitude that hold the opinions, whether of spiritual or natural
things were to be followed, merely because of the great numbers that hold them:
then if we look and consider the Writings of the best Geographers, Travelers,
and Navigators, we should either be of the opinions of the Pagans, who are the
most numerous part of Mankind, or the Mahumetans, which are many in respect of
the paucity of Christians. And then what horrid, blasphemous, idolatrous,
impious, and diabolical opinions must we receive and hold, both concerning God,
Angels, the Creation, and the most of the operations that are produced by
Nature? So that the arguments of Dr. Casaubon and Mr. Glanvil, drawn from the
universality of the opinion, and the great multitudes of those that hold it,
are vain and groundless.

5. If the comparison I use be thought too large, and the rule be put only as
to the greater part of the Learned that are in Europe, yet it will hold good,
that the greatest part of the Learned are not to be adhered to, because of
their numerousness; nor that the rest are to be rejected, because of their
paucity. For it is known sufficiently, that a Bishop of Mentz was censured and
excommunicated for holding that there were Antipodes, by some hundreds of those
that were accounted learned and wise: so that it is plain, that the greater
number may be in the error, and those that are few be in the right. And did
not the greatest number of the Physicians in Europe altogether adhere to the
Doctrine of Galen, though now in Germany, France, England, and many other
Nations the most have exploded it? And was not the Aristotelian Philosophy
embraced by the greatest part of all the Learned in Europe? And have not the
Cartesians and others sufficiently now manifested the errors and imperfections
of it, and especially the endeavors of the honorable and learned Members of
the Royal Society here in England, and the like Societies beyond Seas by their
continual labor and vigilance about Experiments, made the errors and defects
of it obvious to all inquisitive persons? So that multitude, as multitude,
ought not to lead or sway us, but truth it self.

6. If to all this we add, that truth in it self is but one; for unum and verum
are convertibles, and that error or falsity is various and manifold, and that
there may be a thousand errors about one particular thing, and yet but one
truth; it will necessarily follow, the greatest number holding an opinion,
cannot be safe to be followed, because of their multitude, and the reason is
error, is manifold, truth but one.

2. It is not safe nor rational to receive or adhere to an opinion because of
its Antiquity; nor to reject one because of its Novelty. Rule 2.
And this we shall make good from and by these following reasons.

1. Because there is no opinion (especially about created things) but it has
once been new; and if an opinion should be rejected merely because of novelty,
then it will follow, that either all opinions might have been rejected for that
very reason, or that novelty is no safe ground only, why an opinion should be
opposed or rejected.

2. Antiquity and Novelty are but relations quoad nostrum intellectum, non
quoad naturam; for the truth, as it is fundamentally in things extra
intellectum, cannot be accounted either old or new. And an opinion, when first
found out and divulged, is as much a truth then, as when the current of
hundreds or thousands of years have passed since its discovery. For it was no
less a truth, when in the infancy of Philosophy it was holden, that there was
generation and corruption in Nature, in respect of Individuals, than it is now:
so little does Time, Antiquity, or Novelty alter, change, confirm, or overthrow
truth; for veritas est temporis filia, in regard of its discovery to us or by
us, who must draw it forth e puteo Democriti. And the existence of the
West Indies was as well before the discovery made by Columbus as since, and our
ignorance of it did not impeach the truth of its being, neither did the novelty
of its discovery make it less verity, nor the years since make it more: so that
we ought simply to examine, whether an opinion be possible or impossible,
probable or improbable, true or false; and if it be false, we ought to reject
it, though it seem never so venerable by the white hairs of Antiquity; nor
ought we to refuse it, though it seem never so young, or near its birth. For as
St. Cyprian said: Error vetustatis est vetustas erroris.

3. In regard of Natural Philosophy, and the knowledge of the properties of
created things, and the knowledge of them, we preposterously reckon former
Ages, and the men that lived in them, the Ancients; which in regard of
production and generation of the Individuals of their own Species are so; but
in respect of knowledge and experience, this Age is to be accounted the most
ancient. For as the learned Lord Bacon says: Indeed to speak truly, Antiquitas
Advanc. of Learn. l. 1. c. (...).
seculi, juvent us mundi, Antiquity of time is the youth of the World.
Certainly our times are the ancient times, when the World is now ancient, and
not those which we count ancient, ordine retrogrado, by a computation backward
from our own times; and yet so much credit has been given to old Authors, as
to invest them with the power of Dictators, that their words should stand,
rather than admit them as Consuls to give advice.

3. It is not safe nor rational to resolve to stick to our old imbibed Rule 3.
opinions, nor wilfully to reject those that seem new, except we be fully
satisfied, from indubitable grounds, that what we account old is certainly
true, and what we reckon to be new is undoubtedly false. And this will appear
to be a truth, partly from the weakness of their arguments, that seem utterly
to condemn all recession from ancient opinions, as vain, foolish, and
unnecessary; as also from other positive reasons.

1. Some give the reason why they will not recede from an opinion that their
Predecessors held; for that their Forefathers were as wise, if not wiser than
they. But this, if strictly considered, is very lame and defective; for their
Predecessors were but men, and so were liable both to active and passive
deception, and were not exempted from the common frailty of Mankind, who are
all subject to errors. And therefore, unless they were assured that their
Ancestors in former Ages, held the certain and undoubted grounds of truth, it
is nothing of reason in them, but mere perverseness of will, rather obstinately
errare cum patribus, than to learn to follow the truth with those that are
coetaneous with them, which is foolish and irrational. Further, there are more
helps now, and means to attain the knowledge of Verity, than were in the days
when their Ancestors lived, and it must be a kind of the greatest madness to
shut their eyes, that the light of truth may not appear unto them.

2. This kind of reasoning has no more of reason in it, than if one should
say, that because his Grandfather and great Grandfather were blind or lame,
therefore they will be so too: or that their Ancestors never learned the Greek
or Latin Tongues, nor to write or read, neither will they learn any more than
they did: or that their Predecessors were ill husbands and unthrifts, and that
therefore they will continue the same courses: or that because their
Forefathers followed drunkenness and luxury, therefore they will continue the
same cariere of vices, as many of our debauched persons do now adays, having no
better reasons to allege for their exorbitant and vicious courses, but what
the Prophet condemned, The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens
teeth are set on edge.

3. How far would they run back to state the beginning of their Ancestors? If
as far as their first Originals, then they must all be Savages, Barbarians, and
Heathens. And if they state it distant from their first Originals, then their
Predecessors had the same reason to have continued, as those did that preceded
them. But if their Ancestors varied from, and left the steps and opinions of
those that went before them, then if they will do as their Ancestors did, they
must leave their courses and opinions, as they had done of those that preceded
them.

4. Some say they cannot recede from the opinions of their Predecessors,
because it would be a shame and disgrace unto them. But that which we call
shame and disgrace consists in the opinion of others, and we ought not to
receive error, or reject truth, by reason of the censures or opinions of
others: Si de veritate scandalum sumitur, utilius permittitur nasci scandalum,
quam veritas relinquatur. August. lib. de Liber. Arbitrio.
And to leave an error to entertain truth, is so far from being a shame and a
disgrace, that there cannot be a greater honor or glory: for errare humanum
est, sed in errore perseverare belluinum ac diabolicum est.

4. Those effects that seem strange and wonderful, either in respect Rule 4.
of Art or Nature, require much diligence truly to discover and find out their
causes; and we ought not rashly to attribute those effects to the Devil, whose
causes are latent or unknown unto us: and that for these grounds.

1. It has been common almost in all Ages, not only for the vulgar, but also
for the whole rabble of Demonographers and Witchmongers to ascribe those
strange and wonderful effects, whether arising from Art or Nature, unto the
worst of Gods Creatures, if they did not themselves understand their causes,
and to censure the Authors that writ of them, as Conjurers and Magicians, as I
have made manifest in my former Instances, and might be further made good and
illustrated by the effects of healing by the Weapon-salve, the Sympathetick
Powder, the Curing of diverse Diseases by Appensions, Amulets, or by
Transplantation, and many other most admirable effects both of Art and Nature,
which by these self conceited Ignorants are all thrown upon the Devils back,
and he made the Author and effector of them, as though he had a kind of
omnipotent power: of which the learned Philosopher and Physician Van Helmont
gives us this account: Credo equidem cum pietate De Inject. matter. page 597.
pugnare, si Diabolo tribuatur potestas naturam superans. Verum naturae ignari
praesumunt se naturae secretarios per librorum lectionem: quicquid autem ipsos
latet, vel adynaion, vel falsum, vel praestigiosum, atque diabolicum esto. And
a little after he adds this: Pigritiae saltem enim immensae inventum fuit,
omnia in Ibid. page 598.
Diabolum retulisse quae non capimus, nec velim Diabolum invocatum, ut nostris
satisfaciat quaestionibus per temerariam potestatum attributionem.

2. Whosoever shall read Pancirollus de rebus memoralibus noviter repertis, may
easily be satisfied, what strange and stupendous things Art and the Inventions
of men have produced in these latter Ages. And no man can rationally doubt, but
that many more as strange or far more wonderful, may in Ages to come be found
out and discovered; for there is a kind of bottomless depth in Arts, whether
Liberal or Mechanical, that yet has not been sounded, but lie hid and unknown
unto men. And if these for their wonderfulness should (as former Ages have
ignorantly done) be ascribed unto the power of Satan, and their Authors accused
of Conjuring and Diabolical Magic, no greater wrong could be done unto Art and
Artists, and it would be a kind of blasphemy to attribute these stupendous
effects (as the Vulgar and Witchmongers use to do) unto the Devil, the worst of
Gods Creatures, and the Enemy of Mankind.

3. The third argument I shall take from Mr. Glanvil (which is the greatest
piece of truth in all his Treatise) and convert and retort it against him: and
is this (he says) We are ignorant of the Page 103.
extent and bounds of Natures Sphere and Possibilities. Now if we be ignorant
of the extent and bounds of Natures Sphere and Possibilities, then it must
needs be folly, madness, and derogative against Gods power in Nature, to
attribute those effects to wicked, fallen, and degenerated Demons, that we do
not know but are produced by the course of Nature. And to ascribe the products
of Nature to such wicked Instruments is blasphemous, in depriving Nature of the
honor due unto her, and robbing God of the honor and glory belonging unto
him, for the wonderful power wherewith he has endowed his Creatures, who were
all made to show forth his power and Godhead, and the Heavens declare the Romans
1. 20.
glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handy work: and as one said very
well, Natura creatrix est quaedam vis and potentia divinitus insita, alia ex
aliis in suo genere producens. So that the honor that is due unto the Creator,
Conserver, and Orderer of Nature ought not to be ascribed unto the Devils; for
in doing this, the Witchmongers become guilty of Idolatry, and are themselves
such Witches as are mentioned in the Old Testament, who by their lying
Divinations led the people after them to follow Idols; therefore the effects
that belong unto Nature, are to be attributed to Nature, and the effects that
Devils produce, are to be ascribed unto them, and not one confounded with
another. And much to this purpose the learned Father has a very considerable
passage: D^ Civit. D^ lib. 10.
Quicquid igitur mirabile fit in hoc mundo, profecto minus est quam totus hic
mund^s, i. e. coelum and terra, and omnia quae in (...) sunt, quae certe Deus
fecit: nam and omni miraculo quod fit per hominem, majus miraculum est homo.
Quamvis igitur miracul^ visibilium naturarum videndi assiduitate vilescunt,
tamen e^ quum sapienter intuemur, inusitatissimis rarisque majora sunt.

4. Though these men should believe the power of the Devil to be great by his
Creation, and not lessened by his Fall (which is doubtful or false) yet can he
not exert, or put this power into execution, but when, where, as often, and in
what manner, as God does send, order, direct, and command him: and could not
enter into the herd of Swine, until that Christ had ordered and commanded him;
nor to touch Job or afflict him either in his goods Job 1. 11. and 2. 5.
or body, until that God had given him license and order with express
limitation how far he should proceed, and no further. In all which there
appears nothing at all of his power, but his malice and evil will; and what
was effected, was the hand of the Lord, and he but the bare Instrument to
execute and perform the command. Therefore to ascribe to the Devil the
efficiency of those operations we do not clearly understand, is to allow him a
kind of Omnipotency, and both to rob God and Nature of that which belongs
unto them; for the Almighty does work whatsoever he pleases both in Heaven and
Earth, and it is he that works all in all. And the Devil is but as Gods
Executioner to fulfill his will in tempting men, and punishing the wicked, and
can act nothing 2 Pet. 2. 4.
but as God commands him, except the acts of his wicked and depraved will; for
he is with all his Angels delivered into chains of darkness to be reserved unto
Judgment. To this purpose there is a very true and Christian saying of St.
Augustine in these words: Diabolus plerumque vult nocere, and non potest, quia
potestas ista est August. super Psalm.
sub potestate: nam si tantum posset nocere Diabolus quantum vult, aliquis
justorum non remaneret.

5. The last Rule I shall observe is, That men, if they mean to Rule 5.
profit by reading Controversies of this nature, they must prudently and
deliberately consider the design that Authors have had in writing. For though
it be the general pretense of all, that they write to confute errors, and to
maintain truth, yet very few in Disputes of this nature have sincerely
performed this pretended end. For some have written (as we shall hereafter make
manifest in due place) upon designed purpose, thereby to establish some points
in their corrupted and superstitious Religion. Some because of their own lucre
and profit arising by the upholding of these opinions of the great power and
performances of Witches, as did all the Inquisitors and their Adherents, having
a share in the condemned Witches goods. Others have written in these Subjects
merely for ostentation and vainglory, to get a name that they were learned and
able persons: of all which the judicious Readers ought to beware of, and to
consider. There is another main scandal that Witchmongers usually (especially
of late) cast upon those that oppose their gross, impious, and blasphemous
opinions; but I cannot seasonably give answer unto it, until I have laid down
the state of the question, upon which the substance of this Treatise is
grounded, and therefore shall proceed to its Explication.

CHAP. II.
Of the Notion, Conception, and Description of Witches and Witchcraft,
according to diverse Authors, and in what sense they may be granted, and in what
sense and respect they are denied.

THose that are Masters in Ethics teach us, that every Virtue has on either
side one Vice in the extreme, and that Virtue only consists in the mean, which
how hard that mean is to be kept in any thing, the Writings and Actions of the
most Men do sufficiently inform us. This is manifest, that not many years ago
the truth of Philosophy lay inchained in the Prisons of the Schools, who
thought there was no proficiency to be made therein, but only in their Logical
and Systematical ways: so that (in a manner) all liberty was taken away both in
writing and speaking, and nothing was to be allowed of that had not the Seal of
Academick Sanction. And now when Philosophy has gotten its freedom, to
expatiate through the whole Sphere of Nature, by all sorts of inquiries and
trials, to complete a perfect History of Nature, some are on the other hand
grown so rigid and peremptory, that they will condemn all things that have not
past the test of Experiment, or conduce not directly to that very point, and so
would totally demolish that part of Academick and Formal Learning that teaches
men Method and the way of Logical procedure in writing of Controversies, and
handling of Disputes. Whereas what is more necessary and commendable for those
that treat of any controverted point in Writing or in other Disputations, than
a clear and perspicuous Method, a right and exact stating of the Question in
doubt, defining or describing the terms that are or may be equivocal, and
dividing the whole into its due and genuine parts, distinguishing of things one
from another, limiting things that are too general, and explaining of every
thing that is doubtful? Those that would totally take away this so profitable
and excellent a part of Learning, are not of my judgment, nor can be excused
for having run into that extreme that is extremely condemnable. Let
Experimental Philosophy have its place and due honor; and let also the
Logical, Methodical, and Formal ways of the Academies have its due praise and
commendation, as being both exceedingly profitable, though in different
respects; otherwise, in writing and arguing, nothing but disorder and confusion
will bear sway.

I have premised thus much, because the most of the Authors that have treated
about this knotty and thorny Subject of Witches and Witchcraft, have been as
confused and immethodical as any. For whereas the learned Orator Cicero tells
us, that omnis discursus a definitione debet proficisci; and that it is also
true, that what is not aptly and fitly defined or described, as far as the
Subject will admit of, is never perfectly understood: yet have the most of
these Authors (which are numerous) laid down no perfect description of a Witch
or Witchcraft, nor explained fully what they meant by that name, notion, or
conception. And therefore, lest I become guilty of the same fault, I shall lay
down what the most considerable Authors that have treated of this Subject, do
mean or intend by this word Witch, and Witchcraft, and shall fully explain in
what notion or sense I either allow or deny them, and their actions, and that
in this order, and in these Particulars following.

1. Though an argument taken a denotatione nominis be of little Lib. 14.
method. c. 9.
weight or validity, and that the industrious and sharp-witted person Galen
does seem to make little account of words, that is, in this respect, when we
would only understand the nature of things, yet in another respect he
concludes thus: Verum qui alterum Ibid. c. 1.
docere volet quae ipse tenet, huic prorsus nominibus propter res uti est opus.
Now the handling of Controversies is chiefly and principally to inform others,
and teach them the truth, and to discover errors; therefore in this respect
the explication and denotation of words is exceeding profitable and necessary:
and so Plato in Cratylo tells us: Nomen itaque rerum, substantiam docendi
discernendique instrumentum est. And it being a manifest truth, that words are
but the making forth of those notions that we have of things, and ought to be
subjected to things, and not things to words: if our notions do not agree with
the things themselves, then we have received false Idola or images of them; but
if we have conceived them aright, and do not express them fitly and
congruously, then we shall hardly make others understand us aright, nor can
clearly open unto them the doctrine that we would teach them.

2. But to come to the signification and acceptance of the words that those
Authors, who have magnified and defended the power of Witches, have used to
express their notions by, we shall find them to be so far fetched, so
metaphorical, and improperly applied, that no rational or understanding man can
tell us what to make of them. And if we take the notion, as they do, of a
killing and murdering Witch, with the rest of the adjuncts, which they couple
with it, we shall not be able to find a proper and significative word, either
in the Hebrew, Greek, Latin, French, Spanish, Italian, or High Dutch, but a
multitude or a Ferrago of words, whereof not one does properly signify any
such thing, as they would make us believe, by the notion that they maintain of
a Witch: of which we shall principally note these.

1. For the Hebrew words used in the Old Testament we shall not mention them
here, but afterward, where we speak of the mistranslation of them, and
therefore shall pursue them in the Latin and other Languages. And first they
sometimes use the word Lamia in the Latin, (...) in Greek, which Gesner and
others tell us does signify a terrestrial Creature, or a voracious fish, as
also a Spectrum or Phantasm. And this was supposed to be a Creature with a face
like a Woman, and feet like a Horse or an Ass, such as (indeed) neither is, nor
ever was in rerum natura, but was only a sigment devised to affright children
withal. But if we will believe Poetical Fables, the Romances of Philostratus
concerning Apollonius, or the lying Diary of his Man Damis, we must take it to
be a Spirit or Apparition, such as the Greeks called Empusae, that went upon
one leg, and had eyes that they could take forth, and set in, when they
pleased. And such a monstrous Fable and Lie was a sufficient ground for doting
Witchmongers to build their incredible stories of the power and actions of
Witches upon, having no proper word for such a Witch as they falsely believe
and suppose. Though there be a Text in the Lamentations of Jeremiah, that has
given occasion or color to this vain opinion, especially as the Lament. 4. 3.
vulgar Latin renders it, which is thus: Sed and Lamiae nudaverunt mammam,
lactaverunt catulos suos. Filia populi mei crudelis, quasi struthio in deserto.
The French render it, The Dragons have made bare their breasts: and so have
also the Italians in their Translation retained the words Dragon and Ostrich;
and also the Septuagint render the words (...) and (...). And Luther in his
Translation has kept the same words, though the Germans call Lamia Ein (...).
But our own Translation has come more near the truth: Even the Sea Monsters
draw out the breast, they give suck to their young ones: the Daughter of my
people are become cruel like the Ostriches in the wilderness. And Arias
Montanus gives it thus: Etiam draco -- (...) Tannin (which signifies a Dragon,
Serpent, Whale, or other Sea-creatures) solverunt mammam, lact averunt catulos
suos: Filia populi mei in crudelem, veluti ululae in deserto. But none has
come up close to the mark but Junius and Tremellius, who render the place thus:
Etiam Phocae praebent mammam, lactant catulos suos, quomodo filia populi, mei,
propter crudelem inimicum, est similis ululis in deserto. And the Notes upon
the place do make it plain: Vox quidem Hebraea late patet, significans
serpents and reptilia magna, sive terrestria sive aquatilia; sed cum non
omnium reptilium sint mammae, neque aquaticorum sint ii quos Propheta vocat
catulos; necesse fuit hunc locum ad Phocas, id est marinos vitulos accommodari,
qui a natura sint quasi Amphibii. Nam Draconibus accommodari non potest, cum
volucrium solus vespertilio mammas habeat: serpentium terrestrium nulla species
mammata est, ac proind^ haec ad marinum istud genus referri debent.

2. Another far fetched and improperly applied name to Witches, is Strix, and so
some Authors call them Striges; when as the word Strix does properly signify a
nocturnal bird, a stridendo sic dicta, that do use to suck the dugs of Goats,
and also of young children, which we shall show hereafter to be a Truth, and no
Fable, as Ovid says, Nocte volant, puerosque petunt nutricis egentes,
Et vitiant cunis corpora rapta suis.
Carpere dicuntur lactentia viscera rostris,
Et plenum poto sanguine guttur habent.
Est illis strigilis nomen; sed nominis hujus
Causa, quod horrenda stridere nocte solent.
This is that sort of bird that Gesner calls Caprimulgus, and the Greeks
(...), the Germans Rachtvogel or Rachtraven, the Hebrews (...) Lillith, as is
said in Isaiah: Quin and ibi subito quievit Isa. 34. 14.
strix (seu lamia) and invenit sibi requiem. It is taken to be a kind of Owl,
litter bigger than an Ousel, and less than a Cuckoo, they are blind upon the
day, and fly abroad upon the nights, making G^sn. d^ Avib. l. 3. p. 241.
an horrible noise, and were to be found about Rome, Helvetia, and Crete or
Candy, and do certainly suck the dugs of Goats, that thereby they waste away
and become blind. And that they are also sometimes found in Denmark, that
learned Physician and laborious Anatomist Bartholinus does make manifest, and
that they do suck Hist. Anat. C^nt. 1. p. 18.
the breasts or navils of young children. Now what affinity has this to a
Witch or Witchcraft? but that Witchmongers would bring in any allusion or
Metaphor, though never so impertinent or incongruous? For if it were
transferred to the actions of Witches, yet as Calepine tells us: Ab hujus avis
nocumento striges appellamus mulieres (...) fascinantes suo contactu, and
lactis mammarumque oblatione. So that if the assimulation were proper in any
proportion or particular, those Women they do account Witches, do but hurt the
little children with the virulent steams of their breath, and the effluviums
that issue from their filthy and polluted bodies, and so wrought by contact and
contrectation, by which the contagious poison is conveyed, but not by
Witchcraft.

3. There is another word that they apply to Witches, as insignificant and
improper as the other, and that is Sortilegus, (...), a Teller of Fortunes by
Lots or Cuts: and Lambertus Danaeus, who in other things was a judicious and
learned person, yet doted extremely about this opinion, calling a Witch
Sortiarius, deriving it from Sortilegus, which the French call Sorcier. Now
what affinity or congruity has casting or using of Lots with that which these
men call Witchcraft? surely none at all. For though Lots may, like the best
things, be abused and wrested to a vain or evil end, yet are they not
altogether evil, but that a civil and lawful use may be made of them, as is
manifest this day at the famous City of Venice, where their chief Officers are
chosen by them. And also there has been a godly and divine use made of them
even by the Apostles themselves, in the deciding of the Election of Barsabas
and Matthias, upon the latter of which the Lot fell, and so he was Act. 1. 26.
numbered with the eleven Apostles. And Solomon tells us, The lot is cast into
the lap, but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord. Prove. 16. 33.
And sure these men were at a loss to find a suitable word to fix upon these
Creatures, to whom they ascribe such impossible and incredible actions, when
they were fain to bring this appellation of Sortilegus, that has no kinship at
all with such Witches, as they mean and intend.

4. Sometimes they call them by the name Saga, which signifies no more than a
Wife and subtle Woman, being derived a sagiendo to perceive quickly, or to
smell a thing quickly forth, which the Germans call Enhold, which is no more
than malevolus, or evilwilled.

5. They use the word Venefic^s, venefica, and veneficium, and this in its
proper signification and derivation from the Latin, does import no more than a
Poysoner, or to make poison, venenum sacere, and so might perhaps be given unto
them, because by Tradition they had learned several ways to poison secretly and
strangely, as doubtless there may be diverse hidden and not ordinarily known
ways (as we shall show hereafter) by which either by smelling, tasting,
touching (and it may be by sight) they could kill and destroy, though the means
they used, and the effects produced, were merely natural; yet because the
manner was very occult and unperceivable, it was through ignorance and want of
due inspection into the matters accounted Diabolical; when there was no more of
a Devil in the business, than is in a Thief or Murderer, but only in the Use
and Application, which is to steal, kill, or destroy. And this, though now
improperly and abusively called Witchcraft, does but signify poisoning, and so
the French call it Empoisonnement, and the Italians Veneficio or Avenenatione,
and the Germans Bergifftung, which all amount to one purpose. And this
Veneficium or poisoning the Greeks call (...) and (...), from (...)
Medicamentum v l Venenum; for sometimes it was taken in the better sense for a
curing and healing Medicine; and sometimes in the worse for poison that did
kill or destroy. Neither can it be found in any Greek Author to signify any
more, than such men or women that used Charms and Incantations, and were
believed by the Vulgar to effect strange things by them, when in truth and
indeed they effected nothing at all but by natural means and secret poisons,
and from thence had these names. And the Poets spoke of them to adorn and
imbellish their Poems withal, according to common opinion; not that either they
themselves believed the things to be so done, as the Vulgar believed, nor to
give credit to such false Fables and impossibilities; but to make their Poems
more delectable and welcome to the common people, who are usually taken with
such fond Romantic stories and lies. But after the year 1300. when the Spanish
Inquisitors, the Popish Doctors and Writers had found the sweetness and benefit
of the confiscated Goods of those that they had caused to be accused and
condemned for Witches, in their sense then these words either in the Greek or
Latin were wrested to signify a Witch that made a visible and corporeal
League with the Devil, when in the true sense of them they did but signify a
secret Poysoner. So that all things were hurried, though never so improper and
dissonant, to be made serviceable to their filthy lucre and avaritious
self-endedness. Templum venale Deusque.

6. Lastly, For Withcraft they used the Latin Fascinum and Fascinatio, and so
they called a Witch Fascinator and Fascinatrix, and this the Greeks called
(...), Fascinum, Fascinatio, also invidia, odium, seu invidentia, (...) a
fascinando, seu oculis occidendo: the Germans call it Zaubery, and
Berzauberung, and sometimes ^erwerk; the French Ensorcellement and Sorcelerie;
the Italians Lestrigare and amaliare, amaliamento; the Belgicks Ber^venge: the
Saxons called them and it ^icce and (...), from whence we have the name Witch
and Withcraft, that signified Saga, Venefica, Lamia, and Fascinum, Magia,
Incantatio, Fascinatio, Praestigium: of which (because we shall have occasion
to speak more of it hereafter) we shall here only note these few things.

1. It is taken sometimes for Envy and Malice, because those that were supposed
to use Fascination, did direct it to one Creature more than another through
their envious minds, as may be perceived by some few Authors: And so was
accounted a kind of eyebiti^g; Vid^ Alexand. Aphrod. lib. 2. Probl. 53.
whereby (as the Vulgar believed) children did wax lean, and pined away, the
original whereof they referred to the crooked and wry looks of malicious
persons, never examining the truth of the matter of fact, whether those
children that pined away, had any natural disease or not, that caused that
macilency or pining away; nor considered, whether or no there was any
efficiency in the envy or wry looks of those malicious persons, but vainly
ascribed effects to those things that had in them no causality at all to
produce such effects.

2. Sometimes this kind of Fascination was ascribed to the sore or infected
eyes of those that were accounted causers of hurt thereby in others, and in
this sense Virgil says: Nescio quis teneros oculus ^clog. 3.
mihi fascinat agnos. And by this no more could be understood, but that those
that had infected and sore eyes might infect others, and this was nothing but
contagion, or corrupt steams issuing from one body to another, which may happen
in many diseases, as is manifest by the Writings of diverse learned Physicians,
as in bodies infected with the Plague, French Pox, Leprosy, Ophthalmies, and
such like.

3. Sometimes Fascination is taken for some kind of Incantation, that by virtue
of Words or Charms does perform some strange things; but concerning this there
is such incertainty of the opinions of the Learned, some flatly denying that
Words or Charms have in them any natural efficacy at all; others as strongly
affirming it, that of this point it is very difficult to make a clear
determination: and therefore we shall say but this of it here, that the
Angelical Doctor did conclude well in this particular, in these words: Ad Sup.
epist. D* Paul. ad Galat* c. 3.
sciendum autem quid sit fascinatio, sciendum est quod secundum glossam
fascinatio proprie dicitur ludificatio sensus, quae per arts magic^s fieri
consuevit, put^, cum hominem facit aspectibus aliorum apparere leonem, vel
cornutum, and hujusmodi.

Having been thus large in considering the names and denomination given to
those persons that are esteemed Witches, and finding them to be so improper,
impertinent, various, and uncertain, let us now proceed to the notion and
acceptance of Witchcraft and Witches, to try if in that we can find any more
certainty or consonancy, and herein we shall produce some of the chief
descriptions that are given of them by several Authors; for to quote all would
be tedious and superfluous. Those that are or may be accounted Witches we rank
in these two orders.

1. Those that were and are active deceivers, and are both by practice and
purpose notorious Impostors, though they shadow their delusive and cheating
knaveries under diverse and various pretenses; some pretending to do their Feats
by Astrology (which is a general Cheat as it is commonly used) some by a
pretended gift from God, when they are notoriously drunken, debauched, and
blasphemous persons, such as of very late years was the Cobbler that lived upon
Ellill Moor, named Richmond, and diverse others that I could name, but that in
modesty I would spare their reputations: some by pretending skill in Natural
Magic, when indeed they can hardly read English truly; some by pretending a
familiar Spirit, as one Thomas Bolton near Knaresborough in Yorkshire, when
indeed and in truth they have no other Familiar but their own Spirit of lying
and deceiving: some by pretending to reveal things in Crystalglasses or Beryls,
as was well known to be pretended by Doctor Lamb, and diverse others that I have
known. And some by pretending to conjure and call up Devils, or the Spirits of
men departed; and some by many other ways and means that are not necessary to
be named here; for error and deceit have a numerous train of Followers and
Disciples. And the existence of such kind of Witches as these (if you will
needs call them by that name, and not by their proper titles, which are, that
they truly are Deceivers, Cheaters, Couseners, and Impostors) I willingly
acknowledge, as having been, and are to be found in all ages, and these sorts
are also acknowledged by Wierus, Mr. Scot, Johannes Lazarus Gutierius, Tobias
Tandlerus, Hieronymus Nymannus, Martinius Biermannus, and all the rest, that
notwithstanding did with might and main oppose the gross Tenent of the common
Witchmongers.

And of this sort were all those several differences of Diviners, Witches, or
Deceivers named in the Scriptures, as Mr. Ady has sufficiently declared in
this passage, which we shall transcribe. A A Candle in the dark, p. 12, 13.
Witch is a man or woman that practices Devilish crafts of seducing the
people for gain, from the knowledge and worship of God, and from the truth, to
vain credulity (or believing of lies) or to the worshipping of Idols. And again
he says: Witchcraft is a Devilish craft of seducing the people for gain, from
the knowledge and worship of God, and from his truth, to vain credulity (or
believing of lies) or to the worshipping of Idols. That it is a Craft truly so
called, and likewise that it is for gain, is proved Act. 16. 16, 19. The Maid
that followed Paul crying, brought in her Master much gain; and that it is a
Craft of perverting the people, or seducing them from God and his Truth, is
proved Act. 6. 7, 8. Elimas the Sorcerer labored to pervert the Deputy from
the Faith. So likewise Act. 8. 9, 10, 11. it does more plainly prove all these
words: And there was a man before in the City called Simon, which used
Witchcraft, and bewitched the people of Samaria, saying, That he himself was
some great man, to whom they gave heed from the least to the greatest, saying,
This man is the great power of God, and gave heed unto him, because that of
long time he had bewitched them with Sorceries. How bewitched them with
Sorceries? That is, seduced them with Devilish Crafts: (as the Greek and also
Tremelius Latin Translation do more plainly illustrate.) In this sense
speaks Paul to the Galatians 3. 1. O foolish Galathians, who has bewitched
you, that you should not obey the truth? And that a Witch or Witchcraft is
taken in no other sense in all the Scripture, it appears by the whole current
of the Scriptures, as you may see in this Book. But against this Mr. Glanvil
and the rest of his opinion will object and say, that it is hard and severe
that Cheaters Object. p. 78.
and Impostors should be ranked with Inchanters, and such as converse with
Devils and with Idolaters, and that of this it is hard to give a reason. To
this we shall give this full responsion.

1. We are to consider in what precise respect actions are in Sacred Writ
called sinful and wicked, and wherefore they have such severe punishments
annexed unto them, and we shall find that this is not ratione medii vel actus,
sed finis. As for instance and illustration: Levit. 20. 10. Deuteronomy. 22. 22, 23,
24.
we shall find that the Law was peremptory in point of adultery, which says:
If a man be found lying with a woman married to an husband, then they shall
both of them dye. Now the act of copulation, as it is an act, is all one with a
lawful wife, and with the wife of another man (that is, one generically
considered) and yet the one is lawful, as agreeing with Gods Law and Ordinance,
and the other is unlawful, sinful, wicked, and therefore to be punished with
death, because it is an aberration from the Divine Ordinance, and contrary to
the Command of God, who says, Thou shall not commit adultery. So though the
things committed by these persons, were or might be performed by natural or
artificial means, that simply in themselves were not sinful, or so severely
punishable, yet were they evil in regard of the end, which was to deceive and
seduce the people to Idolatry.

2. Therefore the true and punctual reason why these persons (termed Witches or
Diviners) are by the Law of God so severely to be punished, is, because they
drew the people to Idolatry, the thing that God most hates, and against which
he has pronounced the most severe and terriblest judgments of all. Nay these
people were the very false Prophets, especially of one sort, and the 2 Chronicles.
33. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
very Priests to the Idols, as is manifest in the wicked and filthy Idolatry of
all sorts set up and practiced by Manasses, even all the sorts (or the most of
them) mentioned in the Scriptures. And God declares himself to be a jealous
God, and that he will not give his glory to another, but is the only Lord God,
and him only we ought to serve; and therefore will most severely punish those
that attribute that unto Idols, that is only proper unto himself: and for this
cause, and upon this ground are all those terrible Comminations used in the
Scriptures, and especially against this sort of people, who were the chief
Instruments of promoting Idolworship, ascribing the power of a Deity unto them,
when the Prophet tells us, Their Idols are silver and gold, the work of men's
Psalm. 115. 4, 5, 6, 7. ibid. Psalm. 135. 17.
hands; they have mouths, but they speak not; eyes have they, but they see not;
they have ears, but they hear not; noses have they, but they smell not; they
have hands, but they handle not; feet have they, but they walk not, neither
speak they through their throat, neither is there any breath in their mouths.

3. That many great and abstruse things may be lawfully done by Natural Magic,
is well known to the best Naturalists, and how great Feats may be performed by
the Mathematics and Mechanical Arts, are well known to the Learned; and that
there is and may be a lawful use of Astrology, and many things may be foretold
by it, few that are judicious are ignorant; that the Prognostics in the Art of
Medicine are necessary, and of much use and certainty, all learned Physicians
know very well; that observing of times, and many other such like things may
for diverse respects be lawfully practiced. But if all or any of these be used
to draw people to Idolatry, and their strange effects ascribed unto dumb and
dead Idols, then what horrible sin and abomination were this, and no punishment
could be too heavy for it. And so it is in the case of these sort of people
called Witches or Diviners, they persuaded the multitude, that their false Gods
(or rather Devils) in their Idols, could foretell life or death, and so led the
people a whoring 2 King. 1. 4.
after them, as Abaziah sent to inquire of the god of Ekron, whether he should
recover or not, and therefore he had that sharp judgment, That he should not
come down from that bed whither he was gone up, but should surely dye. And did
not the Priests of Baal (which were the same rabble named Deuteronomy. 18. 10, 11, 12,
13, etc.) obstinately labor to make Ahab and all the people believe, that the
2 King. 18.
Gods (or Devils) that they worshipped in their Idols, could and would answer
by fire, and pertinaciously persisted in their obstinacy, cutting themselves
with knives and lancets from morning until the time of the offering of the
evening sacrifice, and yet nothing was effected? so that they were justly
guilty of that punishment which they received, which was death, for ascribing
that to a dead Idol, that none could perform, but the only true God of Israel,
and yet in the mean time could neither by their own skill, nor the skill of
their Idols foresee that sudden death that fell upon them: which punishment
fell deservedly upon them, for laboring to deceive the people, and confirm
them in Idolatry, in ascribing that unto a dead stock, which was only in the
power of the Almighty to perform. So if all those sine Knacks and neat Tricks
that Athanasius Kircher performed at Rome by the help and means of the
Loadstone, and mentioned in his Book de Art Magnetica, had been by him
ascribed unto some Saint, thereby to have drawn the people to the adoration of
that Saint, and so to Idolatry, it had been active imposture, deceit, and
knavery in him, and he might justly have been enrolled in the Catalogue of
these Witches or Diviners, and had really been an active Impostor, as they
were, and so had deserved the same punishment: when on the contrary for
ascribing effects unto their true and proper causes, and clearly showing the
manner and means of producing those effects, he has justly deserved the title
of a learned and honest man. And though a common Hocus Pocus man, or one that
plays Tricks of Leger-de-main or slight of hand, to get a livelihood by, do
labor to make the ignorant multitude believe that he does his Feats by virtue
of his barbarous terms or non-significant words, or by the help of some
familiar Spirit; must therefore a prudent or learned person believe the same,
and not labor to understand that those pretenses are but used the better to
deceive the senses of the beholders, and so that pretense but a cheat and
imposture?

4. We affirm that all these mentioned in the Scriptures (nay, and that the
Priests attending all the so famoused Oracles) were but mere Cheaters and
Impostors, and that for these reasons. 1. They could not be, nor were ignorant
that all their numerous Idols were but the works of men's hands, and that they
could not of themselves move, see, hear, smell, or breathe, much less eat and
drink; and therefore were notorious Cheaters and Impostors in laboring to make
the people believe the contrary. 2. They could not be ignorant but what answers
were given, and what acts were done, were performed by themselves, and not by
the Idols, and yet they labored to make the people believe the contrary, as
the Bramines and Priests do to this day all over the Eastern parts of Asia, and
in many other places, and so must needs be notorious Knaves and Cheaters;
because, as Isaiah says, With part of the wood whereof Isa. 44. 15, 16.
he has made himself an Idol, he makes a fire and warmeth himself. 3. They
could not be ignorant that their Idols could not, nor did declare any thing
truly that was to come, but what Answers were given, or Divinations were
uttered, were of their own devising and invention, and no other Devil in the
case, but Diabolical inspirations in their minds. And this is manifest by their
pitiful shuffling equivocations (especially of all the Oracles) their
responsions being always ambiguous, and bearing a double sense, which caused
Cardan to say: Oracula, si non essent ambig^, non essent oracula. And commonly
(if not always) they were given in the favor of those that gave the largest
gifts, which made Demosthenes say, that the Oracle at Delphos did (...),
because it always spoke in favor of Philip and his proceedings. And it was
with the Oracles, as with the Temple of Neptune, All the Offerings of those
that escaped shipwreck were preserved, and to be seen; but of those that had
suffered shipwreck, there was no memorial nor knowledge of their number: so,
many have noted some few Hits of the Oracles, but few have noted their Misses,
which doubtless were far the greater number. For so it is here in this North
Country with our Figure-flingers and pretended Conjurers, Piss-Prophets, and
Water-Witches, that if they hit once, it is cried up and told every where; but
if they err an hundred times, it is soon buried in silence and oblivion, and
one fool will not take warning at another being cheated and deceived. And that
their Idols did not, nor could declare truly what was to come, is manifest by
the Prophet who says: Let them bring them forth (that is, their Idols) Isa.
41. ^2, 2^.
and show us what shall happen: let them show the former things what they be,
that we may consider them, and know the latter and of them; or declare us
things for to come. Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may
know that ye are gods: yea do good or do ^vil, that we may be dismayed, and
behold it together. Yet these miserable, cheating, dissembling Wretches that
would have had the multitude to have believed, that their Idols could have
foretold truly almost any thing; yet neither their Idols, nor the Gods (or
Devils) they pretended to be in them, nor themselves could foretell or foresee
their own destruction, as is manifest in the Prophets of Baal in the time of
Elijah, who went up to Mount Carmel to advance the worship and power of their
Idols, but did not foresee it should be all their destructions and deaths.
Doubtless those that in the Book of Daniel are called Wisemen, Magicians,
Astrologers, Sorcerers, Dan. 22. 11.
and Chaldeans were endowed with much rare knowledge, both in respect of Nature
and Art: for if their knowledge had been Diabolical, without question Daniel
would hardly have interceded for them, yet could they not reveal what the Kings
dream was that was gone from him, nor foresee that they run the hazard of their
lives; but did conclude that none other could show it, except the gods whose
dwelling is not with flesh. 4. In matters of fact it appears, that they were
active deceivers and deluders, as is manifest when Pharaoh had dreamed two
dreams, that he called Genesis (...). 8.
and sent for all the Magicians and Wisemen of Egypt; but they could not
interpret them unto him. Junius and Tremelius render it: Omnes Magos Aegypti,
and omnes Sapientes ejus. The vulgar Latin (or that which is improperly called
St. Hieromes Translation) gives it: Misit ad omnes Conjectores Aegypti,
cunctosque Sapientes. And these doubtless Pharaoh would not have sent for, but
that either upon his own knowledge he knew that they professed the ability of
the interpretation of dreams, and (perhaps) as the sequel showed, greater
matters; or else upon common repute, or relation of others, and that must needs
arise from their own profession of the knowledge of such abstruse matters: and
so of necessity must have pretended greater matters, than when they came to
trial they were able to perform, and so must needs be Impostors. And the Woman
at Endor (falsely called a Witch, or a Woman that 1 Samuel 28. 11.
had a familiar Spirit, when in the Hebrew she is only called the Mistress of
the Bottle, as we shall manifest hereafter) must needs be a Deceiver and
Impostor, because she pretended to bring up whomsoever Saul desired, which was
a thing absolutely not in her power, as I shall undeniably prove afterward.
And notwithstanding the stories of Eusebius, and the strong endeavors of
Doctor Hamond to make it good, that Simon Magus was a person that had peculiar
and corporeal converse with the Devil, and by that league and converse could
perform strange and wonderful things; yet was he but a notorious Impostor, as
appears by two reasons. 1. The Text says, That he gave out that himself was
some great Act. 8. 9.
one, that is, that he had great skill, and was able to perform wonderful
things. This shows his presumption and pretense, the certain badge of a
Deceiver and Cheater. 2. But could do little, except some petty juggling Tricks
of Leger-de-main, confederacy, and the like; because he wondered, or was amazed,
beholding the Miracles and signs which were done, and those were, that unclean
Spirits, crying with loud voice, came out of many that were possessed with
them: And many taken with palsies, and that were lame, were healed. Now if he
had been any great Magician, or could have performed any great things, he could
not have so much wondered at those things that Philip wrought: or if he could
have flown in the air, as Eusebius (or those that have foisted such incredible
lies into his Writings) pretends, then he need not have been so amazed at the
miracles and signs that the Apostles wrought, nor to have offered to have
bought the gift of bestowing the Holy Ghost, but only because he was a
notorious Dissembler and Impostor. And if he had been in league with the Devil,
surely he might have cast forth Devils by the power of Beelzebub the Prince of
Devils: all which do plainly conclude him to be an absolute Cheater and
Impostor. And the story of Bell and the Dragon (though but an Apocryphal pi^ce,
yet very ancient, and of sufficient credit as to matter of fact) does evidently
demonstrate, that these sort of people were abominable Cheaters and Impostors,
and were not endowed with any supernatural power, nor had assistance of any
visible Demon, but only the Devil of deceit and cousenage in their own breasts,
and so were, as Cardan says, Carnales Daemones ipsis Daemonibus callidiores.

5. And though by the Laws of our own Nation these kind of people were to be
severely punished, as appears by the Statute 1 Jac. cap. 12. yet had they
respect in that Act, not only to the punishment in respect of what these
persons could or did do, but also in regard of their being Impostors and
Deceivers of the people; for so the Lord Chief Justice Sir Edward Cook, the
best Expositor of Instit. p. 3. p. 46.
Law that has written in our Language, does expound it in these words. The
mischiefs before this part of this Act were: That diverse Impostors, men and
women, would take upon them to tell or do these fine things here specified, in
great deceit of the people, and cheating and cousening them of their money or
other goods: therefore was this part of the Act made, wherein these words [take
upon him or them] are very remarkable. For if they take upon them, etc. though
in truth they do it not, yet are they in danger of this first branch.

6. And whereas in the objection Mr. Glanvil mentions converse with Devils,
if he mean mental, internal, and spiritual converse, such as Murderers,
Adulterers, Thieves, Robbers, and all wicked persons have with Satan, we grant
it; for so had the Jews and the High Priests in conspiring and acting to put
our blessed Savior to death: it was their hour, and the power of darkness. But
if he mean a visible and corporeal converse, then we plainly affirm that there
is not, nor can be any such, whereby any such strange things (as Witchmongers
fondly and falsely believe) can be performed or effected. Therefore by way of
conclusion in this particular, we grant that there are many sorts of such kind
of Witches, as for gain and vainglory do take upon them to declare hidden and
occult things, to divine of things that are to come, and to do many wonderful
matters, but that they are but Cheaters, Deceivers, and Couseners.

2. And as there are a numerous crew of active Witches, whose existence we
freely acknowledge; so there are another sort, that are under a passive
delusion, and know not, or at least do not observe or understand, that they are
deluded or imposed upon. These are those that confidently believe that they
see, do, and suffer many strange, odd, and wonderful things, which have indeed
no existence at all in them, but only in their depraved fancies, and are merely
melancholiae figmenta. And yet the confessions of these, though absurd, idle,
foolish, false, and impossible, are without all ground and reason by the common
Witchmongers taken to be truths, and falsely ascribed unto Demons, and that
they are sufficient grounds to proceed upon to condemn the Confessors to death,
when all is but passive delusion, intrinsecally wrought in the depraved
imaginative faculty by these three ways or means.

1. One of the Causes that produces this depraved and passive delusion, is
evil education; they being bred up in ignorance, either of God, the Scriptures,
or the true grounds of Christian Religion, nay not being taught the common
Rules of Morality, or of other humane Literature; but only imbibing and sucking
in, with their mothers and nurses milk, the common gross and erroneous opinions
that the blockish vulgar people do hold, who are all generally enchanted and
bewitched with the belief of the strange things related of Devils, Apparitions,
Fayries, Hobgoblins, Ghosts, Spirits, and the like: so that thereby a most deep
impression of the verity of the most gross and impossible things is instamped
in their fancies, hardly ever after in their whole life time to be obliterated
or washed out: so prevalent a thing is Custom and Institution from young years,
though the things thus received, and pertinaciously believed, and adhered unto,
are most abominable falsities and impossibilities, having no other existence
but in the brains and fantasies of old, ignorant, and doting persons, and are
merely muliercularum and nutricum* terriculamenta and figmenta, and therefore
did Seneca say: Gravissimum est consuetudinis imperium. And that this is one
main cause of this delusion, is manifest from all the best Historians, that
where the light of the Gospel has least appeared, and where there is the
greatest brutish ignorance and heathenish Barbarism, there the greatest store
of these deluded Witches or Melancholists are to be found, as in the North of
Scotland, Norway, Lapland, and the like, as may be seen at large in Saxo
Grammaticus, Olaus Magnus, Hector Boethius, and the like.

2. But when an atrabilarious Temperament, or a melancholic Complexion and
Constitution does happen to those people bred in such ignorance, and that have
sucked in all the fond opinions that Custom and Tradition could teach them, then
what thing can be imagined that is strange, wonderful, or incredible, but these
people do pertinaciously believe it, and as confidently relate it to others?
nay even things that are absolutely impossible, as that they are really changed
into Wolves, Hares, Dogs, Cats, Squirrels, and the like; and that they fly in
the Air, are present at great Feasts and Meetings, and do strange and
incredible things, when all these are but the mere effects of the imaginative
function depraved by the fumes of the melancholic humor, as we might show from
the Writings of the most grave and learned Physicians; but we shall content our
selves with some few select ones. 1. That distemper which Schenck. observe.
medic. lib. 1. page 129.
Physicians call Lycanthropia, is according to the judgment of Aetius and
Paulus, but a certain species of Melancholy, and yet they really think and
believe themselves to be Wolves, and imitate their actions: of which Johannes
Fincelius in his second Book de Mirac. gives us a relation to this purpose.
That at Padua in the year 1541. a certain Husbandman did seem to himself a
Wolf, and did leap upon many in the fields, and did kill them. And that at last
he was taken not without much difficulty, and did confidently affirm that he
was a true Wolf, only that the difference was in the skin turned in with the
hairs. And therefore that certain, having put off all humanity, and being truly
truculent and voracious, did smite and cut off his legs and arms, thereby to
try the truth of the matter; but the innocence of the man being known, they
commit him to the Chirurgions to be cured, but that he dyed not many days
after. Which instance is sufficient to overthrow the vain opinion of those men
that believe that a man or woman may be really transformed or transubstantiated
into a Wolf, Dog, Cat, Squirrel, or the like, without the operation of an
omnipotent power, as in Lots Wife becoming a Pillar of Salt; though St.
Augustine was so weak as to seem to believe the reality of these
transformations: of which we shall have occasion to speak more largely
hereafter.

2. Another story we shall give from the Authority of that learned Physician
Nicolaus Tulpius of Amsterdam to this effect. A certain Observat. medic* lib.
1. cap. 18. page 38.
famous Painter was for a long time infected with black Choler, and did falsely
imagine that all the bones of his body were as soft and flexible, that they
might be drawn and bended like soft wax. Which opinion being deeply imprinted
in his mind, he kept himself in bed the whole Winter, fearing that if he should
rise, they would not bear his weight, but would shrink together by reason of
their softness. That Tulpius did not contradict him in that fancy, but said
that it was a distemper that Physicians were not ignorant of, but had been long
before noted by Fernelius, that the bones like wax might be softened and
indurated, and that it might be easily cured, if he would be obedient: and that
within three days he would make the bones firm and stable, and that within six
days he would restore him to the power of walking. By which promises it was
hard to declare, how much hope of recovering health it had raised up in him,
and how obedient it made him. So that with Medicines proper to purge the
atrabilarious humor within the time appointed, he was at the three days end
suffered to stand upon his feet, and upon the sixth day had leave given to walk
abroad: and so found himself perfectly sound afterward; but did not perceive
the deceit in his fantasy, that had made him lie a whole Winter in bed,
though he was no stupid, but an ingenious person in his Art, and scarce second
to any.

3. Thomas Bartholinus the famous Anatomist, and Physician to Frederick the
Third King of Denmark, tells us these things: That it is the property of
melancholy persons to fear things not to be feared, and to feign things quae
nec picta usquam sunt, nec scripta. A Plebeian (he says) with them abounding
with melancholy C^nt. 1. Hist. 79. page 117.
blood did imagine that his Nose was grown to that greatness, that he durst not
go abroad, for fear it should be hurt or justled upon by those he met. And that
a famous Poet at Amsterdam did believe that his Buttocks were of glass, and
feared their breaking, if he should sit down. Another Old man of prime Dignity
did suspect that he had swallowed a nail, which being lost, he could no where
find, and thought himself much tortured by its being fixed in him. But was
restored to his health, by having a Vomit given, and the Physician conveying a
nail into the matter that he cast up. And that a certain man in England would
not make water, for fear that all the blood in his body should have passed
forth by that passage, and therefore straightly tied the yard with a thread for
some days, which swelling he was not far from death, but that his Brother by
force untyed it. The Books of Physicians are very full with such relations, and
we in our Practice have met with diverse as strange as these, and cured them.
Also he tells us this: A certain Student of a melancholic Ut supr. Histor. 85.
page 125.
Constitution, distracted with grief for the death of a Sister, and wearied
with lucubrations, did complain to (Bartholinus) of the Devil haunting of him:
and did affirm that he felt the evil Spirit enter by his fundament with wind,
and so did creep up his body until it possessed the head, lest he might attend
his Prayers and Meditations with his accustomed devotion, and that it did
descend and go forth the same way, when he bent himself to Prayers, and reading
of Sacred Books. Before these things he used to be filled with unheard of joy
from his assiduous Prayers and watching, that also he had heard a celestial
kind of Music, and therefore despising all mortal things, he had distributed
all things to the poor; but that now piety waxing cold by too much appetite
after meat, and his brain troubled with that wind, that he had heard a voice of
one in his brain upbraiding him with Blasphemy, and that he felt hands beating,
and a stink passing before his nose. By all which Bartholinus guessed, that it
was Hypochondriacal Melancholy, and by good Counsel, proper Physic, merry
Company, and rightly ordering of him, he was perfectly cured.

4. To these we will only add this that is related by Marcellus Donatus,
Physician to the Duke of Mantua and Montferrat, to this purpose. That he knew a
Noble Countess of their City, that did most earnestly affirm, that she was made
sick by the Histor. medic. mirab. l. 2. c. 1. p. 33.
Witchery and Incantation of a certain ill-minded Woman; which was apprehended
by a learned Physician to be, notwithstanding her fancy, nothing else but
Hypochondriacal Melancholy, which he cured by giving her proper Medicaments to
purge that humor, and ordering her Waiting-maid to put into the matter she
voided Nails, Feathers, and Needles; which when with a glad countenance she had
showed to her Mistress, she presently cried out that she had not been deceived,
when she had referred the cause of her disease to Witchcraft, and afterward
did daily recover more and more.

3. And as ignorance and irreligion meeting with a melancholic Constitution,
does frame many persons to strange fancies both of fear and credulity: so when
to these is added the teachings of those that are themselves under a most
strong passive delusion, then of all others these become most strongly
confident that they can perform admirable things. As when a person has by
education sucked in all the grossest fables and lies of the power of Witches and
familiar Devils, and therein becomes extremely confident, heightened with the
fumes of black Choler, and so thinks, meditates, and dreameth of Devils,
Spirits, and all the strange stories that have been related of them, and
becomes maliciously stirred up against some Neighbor or other: And so in that
malicious and revengeful mind seeks unto, and inquireth for some famed and
notorious Witch, of whom they believe they may learn such craft and cunning,
that thereby they may be able to kill or destroy the persons or goods of those
that they suppose have done them injuries. Then meeting with some that are
strongly deluded, and confidently persuaded, that they have the company and
assistance of a familiar Spirit, by whose help they believe they can do
(almost) any thing, especially in destroying men or cattle, they are presently
instructed what vain and abominable Ceremonies, Observances, Unguents, Charms,
making of Pictures, and a thousand such fond, odd fopperies they are to use, by
which they believe they can do strange Feats. And from this do proceed their
bold and confident confessions of lies and impossibilities, that
notwithstanding have abused so many to take them for certain truths: so that
according to the Proverb, Popery and Witchcraft go by Tradition: and we shall
find none of these deluded Witches (if they must be Relat. of Lancash. Witches.
so called) but they have been taught by others, that thought themselves to be
such also. And this is a truth, if we may trust the confession of Alizon Denice
at the Bar at Lancaster, who says thus: That about two years agone her
Grandmother called Elizabeth Sotheres, alias Dembdike, did (sundry times in
going or walking together, as they went begging) persuade and advise this
Examinate to let a Devil or a Familiar appear to her, and that she this
Examinate would let him suck at some part of her, and she might have and do
what she would.

But besides these two sorts of Witches, whose Existence we deny not, there is
an acceptance of the word Witch in another sense, the Existence of which I
absolutely deny, and that is this according to Mr. Perkins. A Witch is a
Magician, who either by open or secret League wittingly and willingly
consents to use the aid and assistance of the Devil in the working of Wonders.

But the full Description and Notion that the common Witchmongers give a Witch
is this. That a Witch is such a person to whom the Devil does appear in some
visible shape, with whom the Witch makes a League or Covenant, sometimes by
Bond signed with the Witches blood, and that thereby he does after suck upon
some part of their bodies, and that they have carnal Copulation together, and
that by virtue of that League the Witch can be changed into an Hare, Dog, Cat,
Wolf, or such like Creatures; that they can fly in the air, raise storms and
tempests, kill men or cattle, and such like wonders. This notion of a Witch may
be gathered from the Writings of these persons, Delrio the Jesuit, Bodinus,
Jacobus Springerus, Johannes Niderus, Bartholomeus Spineus, Paulus Grillandus,
Lambertus Danaeus, Hemmingius, Erastus, Sennertus, and many others. As also
from the Writings of our own Countrymen, Mr. Perkins, Mr. Bernard of Balcombe,
the Author of the Book called Demonology, Mr. Ga^le, Mr. Giffard, and diverse
others, who have from one to another lickt up the Vomit of the first Broacher
of this vain and false opinion, and without due consideration have labored to
obtrude it upon others. Yet was it in a manner rejected by the most of the
Learned, who had duly weighed the matter, and read the strong and convincing
arguments of Wierus, Tandlerus, Nymannus, Biermannus, Gutierrius, Mr. Scot, and
the like, until of late years Dr. Casaubon and Mr. Glanvil have taken up
Weapons to defend these false, absurd, impossible, impious, and bloody opinions
withal, against whose arguments we now principally direct our Pen, and after
the answering of their groundless and unjust scandals, we shall labor to
overthrow their chief Bulwarks and Fortifications.

CHAP. III.
The denying of such a Witch as is last described in the foregoing Chapter,
does not infer the denying of Angels or Spirits. Apparitions no warrantable
ground for a Christian to believe the Existence of Angels or Devils by, but the
Word of God.

HAving declared in what sense and acceptance we allow of Witches, and in what
notion we deny them, lest we be misunderstood we shall add thus much: That we
do not (as the Schools speak) deny the existence of Witches absolute and
simpliciter, sed secundum quid, and that they do not exist tali modo, that is,
they do not make a visible Contract with the Devil, he does not suck upon their
bodies, they have not carnal Copulation with him, and the like recited before,
and in these respects, and not otherwise, did Wierus, Gutierrius and Mr. Scot
deny Witches, that is, that neither they nor their supposed Familiars could
perform such things as are ascribed unto them. And that Dr. Casaubon and Mr.
Glanvil should charge those that hold this opinion with Atheisth or Sadducism,
is to me very strange, having no ground, connection, or rational consequence so
to do: yet does Dr. Casaubon affirm it in Of Credulity and Incredulity, page 7.
these words: Now one prime foundation (says he) of Atheism, as by many
ancient and late is observed, being the not believing the existence of
spiritual Essences, whether good or bad, separate, or united, subordinate to
God, as to the supreme and original Cause of all; and by consequent the denying
of supernatural operations: I have, I confess, applied my self, by my examples,
which in this case do more than any reasoning, and (the Authority of the holy
Scriptures laid aside) are almost the only convincing proof. And Mr. Glanvil is
so confident (I might justly say impudent) that he styled his Book, A Blow at
modern Sadducism, which, I confess, is so weak a blow, and so blindly levelled,
Preface.
and so improperly directed, that I am sure it will kill or hurt no body: and
tells us this boldly and roundly. And those that dare not bluntly s^y, There is
no God, content themselves, (for a fair step and introduction) to deny there
are Spirits or Witches. Which sort of I^fidels, though they are not ordinary
among the mere Vulgar, yet are they numerous in a little higher rank of
understandings. And those that know any thing of the World, know that most of
the looser Gentry, and the small Pretenders to Philosophy and Wit, are
generally de^iders of the belief of Witches and Apparitions. And the whole
design of his Book is to prove those men to be guilty of Sadducism, that deny
the existence of Witches understood in his sense, and this we oppose, and the
state of the question we lie down thus.

That the denying the existence of Angels or Spirits; or the Resurrection, does
not infer the denying of the Being of God; nor the denying of the existence of
Witches (in the sense before laid down) infer the denying of Angels or Spirits;
and that they do unjustly charge the Authors of this opinion with Sadducism, we
shall prove with irrefragable Arguments.

1. There can be no right deduction made, nor no right consequence Argum. 1.
drawn, where there is no dependency in causality, nor no connection of
dependency. For as in the Relative and Correlative, the denying of the one
necessarily destroys the other, yet fundamentum Relationis non destruitur; so a
father without a child, as a father, does neither exist nor is known, and yet
the foundation of those two terms, of Paternity and Childship, which is Man,
does remain. So he that denies Creation, does destroy the Relative, which is
Creator; yet the foundation, which is God, does remain: and the denying of the
Creation, does not infer the necessary conclusion of denying the Being of a
God, because there might be a God, though there were no Creation, because God
is supposed to be, both in respect of causality and duration, before Creation.
So what relation can Mr. Glanvil feign betwixt the Being of God and the Being
of Angels or Spirits? For they both belong to the Predicament of Substance, and
not that of Relation; and there is less relation betwixt the Being of a Witch
and the Being of Spirits: so that the denying of the one does not infer the
denying of the other. And though there were relation (which Mr. Glanvil cannot
show) the foundation of that Relation (which is so necessary, that Relatives
cannot subsist without it) might remain, though the Relatives were taken away:
and therefore the denying of the existence of Angels or Spirts, does not infer
the denying of the Being of God; and therefore the Authors of this opinion are
wrongfully and falsely charged with Atheism: and the denying of the existence
of a Witch (in the sense specified) does not infer the denying of the Being of
Spirits; and therefore Scot, Osburne, and the like, are falsely and wrongfully
charged with Sadducism.

2. Though it be a true Maxim, that de posse ad esse non valet Argum. 2.
argumentum; yet on the contrary, the possibility of that can never be
rationally denied, that has once been in esse. But it is apparent, Mat. 22.
23. Act. 23. 8.
that the Sadducees denied the Resurrection, and that there were either Angels
or Spirits, that is, they denied that Angels or Spirits, whether good or bad,
did separately exist, and that they were nothing but the good or bad motions in
men's minds: yet these men were no Atheists; for though they denied the
Resurrection, and held that there were no Angels or Spirits, yet they held and
believed there was a God, and did allow of, and believed the five Books of
Moses, else would not our Savior have used an argument, whose only strength
was drawn from a sentence in the third Chapter of Exodus, the sixth verse. So
that even the denying of the Existence of Angels and Spirits, does not infer
the denying of a God; much less does the denying the Existence of a Witch,
infer the denial of the Being of Angels and Spirits; and therefore the charge
of Atheism and Sadducism is false, injurious, and scandalous.

3. Those things that in their Beings have no dependence one Argum. 3.
upon another, the denying of the one does not take away or deny the being of
the other; but where the being does merely exist in dependency upon another
superior Cause, there take away or deny the being of the first Cause, and
thereby you take away and deny the being of all the rest that depends upon it.
So he that denies the Being of a God, does necessarily deny the Being of Angels
or Spirits; but not on the contrary. For he that denies the Existence of
Angels and Spirits, does not therefore necessarily take away or deny the Being
of a God, because the Being of a God is independent of either Angel or Spirit,
and does exist solely by it self. And therefore if Wierus or Scot had denied
the Existence of Angels and Spirits (which they did not) yet it would not have
inferred that they were Atheists; and therefore are falsely accused by Dr.
Casaubon and Mr. Glanvil. And though they should have denied the Existence of
Witches (which they did not simpliciter, sed tali modo) yet it would not have
inferred, that they were guilty of Sadducism, because Spirits or Demons have
their Existence without any dependence of the being of Witches; and therefore
it is but a poor fallacia consequentiae to say, he that denies a Witch, denies
a Demon or Spirit.

4. The denying of the Existence of Spirits, does not infer the Argum. 4.
denying of the Being of a God, because in the priority of duration God was
when Spirits were not, for they are not immortal a part ante. So likewise the
denying of the Existence of Witches, does not infer the denial of the Being of
Spirits, for in the priority of duration Spirits were existent before Witches;
for Adam and Eve could not be ignorant that there were Spirits, both good and
bad, and yet then there were no Witches. So that a Spirit having, in respect of
duration, a Being before that a Witch can have any; the denying the Existence
of the latter, does not infer the denying of the Being of the former, but is
merely inconsequent, agreeable to no Rules of Logic, except that of
Logger-head College.

5. Many properties or proper adjuncts may be ascribed unto a Argum. 5.
substance, the denying of which adjuncts, does not infer the denying of the
being of the substance. So that to deny that a Horse has fins like a fish, or
wings like a bird, does not infer the denying of the being of a Horse.
Therefore it is injurious and scandalous in Dr. Casaubon and Mr. Glanvil, to
charge Dr. Wierus and Mr. Scot with Atheism and Sadducism, when indeed (as we
shall prove hereafter) their own Tenants tend to blasphemy, impiety, vanity,
and uncharitableness.

Another thing that we oppose is, that Apparitions are no warrantable ground
for a Christian to believe the Existence of Angels and Spirits by, but the Word
of God, which these cogent reasons do sufficiently prove.

1. For to say that the Apparitions of Spirits, good or bad, do Argum. 1.
prove their Existence, is but petitio principii, a begging of the question,
that first is in doubt, and ought to be proved. For how come we to be assured,
that the Apparitions that are made, and really by unquestionable Witnesses
attested for truth (not to speak of melancholy Fancies, and Fables, Knacks of
Knavery and Imposture, and other ignorant and gross mistakes, which are often
believed to be Apparitions, when they are no such matter) that they are made by
good or bad Spirits? for that is the thing in doubt, and so is but a circular
way of arguing by way of begging the question, or proving ignotum per ignotius;
for Apparitions do not prove the Being of Spirits, except it be first proved,
that those Apparitions be made or caused by Spirits.

2. There are many Apparitions that are produced by natural and Argum. 2.
artifi^ Causes, and need not be referred to supernatural ones, as are all
(...) Idola, Images, or Species that we see in Glasses, which cannot be denied
to be Apparitions, and yet arise from natural Causes. So the Apparition of
Comets, new Stars, and many other sort of strange Meteors, as sometimes three
Suns, the Rainbow, Halones, and the like, that have natural Causes to produce
them, and are no proof of the Being of Spirits. Nay as the best and most
credible Historians have left upon Record, and has been known to be a certain
verity in diverse parts of these three Kingdoms, within the space of these forty
years, strange and various Sights have been seen in the Air, both of Men, and
Horses, and Armies fighting one with another; and yet were these no proof of
the Existence of Spirits, because they may (and doubtlesly do) proceed from
other causes, and not from the operation or efficiency of Angels or Spirits,
either good or bad.

3. It is not certainly known what diversity of Creatures there Argum 3.
may be that are mediae naturae betwixt Angels and Men, that may sometimes
appear, and then vanish: so that if it be granted, that there be Apparitions
really and truly, yet it will not necessarily follow, that these are caused by
good or bad Angels, because they may be effected by Creatures of another and
middle Nature; and so Apparitions no certain ground for the believing of the
Existence of Angels or Spirits. For the most learned Drusius gives us this
account from one of the Commentators upon the Book Aboth. Debet ^o. Drus^
Prae^rit. l. 7. p. 289.
homo intelligere ac scire a terra usque ad firmamentum, quod Rakia, id est,
Expansum appellant, omnia plena esse turmis and praefectis, and insra plurimas
esse creaturas laedentes and accusantes, omnesque stare ac volare in aere,
neque a terra usque ad firmamentum locum esse vacuum: sed omnia plena esse
praepositis, quorum alii ad pacem, alii ad bellum, alii ad bonum, alii ad
malum, ad vitam and ad mortem incitant. Ob id compositum fuit canticum
occursuum, quod incipit, Sedet in occulto Supremus. And if this be a truth,
here are orders and numbers enough of several sorts to make Apparitions, and
yet be neither the good or bad Angels. And if there may any credit be given to
the relation that Cardan gives of D^ Subtle. l. 19. p. 1202, 1203.
his Father Facius Cardanus, which he had from his own mouth, and also had left
it in writing; then there are mortal Demons, that are born and do die as men
do, that can appear and disappear, and are of such most tenuious bodies, that
they can afford us neither help nor hurt, excepting terrors, and specter, and
knowledge. And if there may be credit given to Plutarch (so highly magnified by
Dr. Casaubon) the God Pan of the Heathens must have been one of these mortal
Demons, because he tells us upon the credit of Epotherses (a Tale of hearsay)
That Thamus was by a voice thrice calling upon him, commanded that when he came
to D^ Nymph. lib. page 389.
Palodes, he should tell them, that the great God Pan was dead. And that there
are such mortal Demons, is strongly asserted by Paracelsus, and by him called
Nymphae, Sylphi, Pygmaei, and Salamandrae, and that they are not of Adams
Generation, and that they have wonderful power and skill. And to this opinion
do the Schools both of the ancient and later Academicks wholly incline, and
seems to be favored both by Dr. Moor and Mr. Glanvil himself; and if there be
any such matters, doubtless from thence did arise all the strange stories and
gests that former Generations have told and believed concerning the Apparition
of these kind of Creatures, which the common people call Fayries: of which the
Reverend and Learned person Bishop Hall gives us this touch: The invisible
World, sect. 6. page 303.
The times are not past the ken of our memory, since the frequent (and in some
part true) reports of those familiar Devils, Fayries, and Goblins, wherewith
many places were commonly haunted; the rarity whereof in these latter times, is
sufficient to descry the difference betwixt the state of ignorant Superstition,
and the clear light of the Gospel. And whosoever shall seriously read and
consider that little Piece that was printed some few years since, though
written long ago, and by some (that pretend to no small share of Learning)
cried up exceedingly for a most convincing Relation, to prove the Existence of
Spirits, called, The Devil of Mascon, may easily gather, that if the thing were
truly related, as to the matter of fact, that it must needs be some Creature of
a middle Nature, and no evil Spirit, both because it was such a sportful and
mannerly Creature, that it would leave them, and not disturb them at their
devotions; as also (as far as I remember, for I have not the Book by me)
because it denied that it was a Devil, and professed that it hoped to be saved
by Christ.

4. That the Scriptures contain in them all things necessary to Argum. 4.
Salvation, is so clear a truth, that none but those that are wilfully blind
can deny it; for Christ taught his Disciples all things that he had learned of
the Father, and the Father sending him to be the Joh. 15. 1^.
Savior of the World, and to preach the Gospel of eternal Salvation, was not
defective in declaring all things that were necessary to accomplish the work
and end, for which he was sent forth of the Father. And the glorious Apostle
St. Paul tells the Disciples and Breth^en, That he had not shunned to declare
unto them all the Act. 20. 27.
counsel of God, which must of necessity be abundantly sufficient for their
Salvations. And he tells Timothy, That he had known 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17.
the Scriptures from a child, which were able to make him wise unto salvation.
All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine,
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness: That the man of
God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. Nay the Woman of
Samaria had so much knowledge and faith, that she believed that when the
Messiah was come, he would tell them all things. Now to the obtaining of
Salvation, there is nothing more necessary than to know what enemies men have
to fight against in their Christian Warfare, which the Apostle tells in these
words: For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities,
against powers, against the Ephesians. 6. 11, 12, 13.
rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high
places: Wherefore they are to take unto them the whole armor of God, (...),
that they may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil, (...): and that
made the Apostle say in another place, We are not ignorant of his devices or
crafts, (...). 2 Cor. 2. 11.
Now the Scriptures being able to make us wise to Salvation, it has
sufficiently declared the natures, powers, knowledge, and offices of both the
good and bad Angels, and is a sure word of Prophecy, unto which it is good to
take heed, and not unto old 2 Pet. 1. 19.
wives fables of Apparitions and Goblins, such as Mr. Glanvil would persuade us
that they are tidings of another World, when we are taught by unerring
testimony of Truth, That those that have Moses Luke 16. 29, 30, 31.
and the Prophets, and do not hear them, neither will they be persuaded, though
one rose from the dead. And therefore we must be bold to tell Mr. Glanvil, that
the Sacred Scriptures do with infallible certitude teach us, that both good and
bad Spirits have most certainly an Existence, and therefore we need none of his
feigned nor forged stories of Apparitions; which if they were certainly known
to be true and real, by undeceivable matters of fact, yet he that does not
believe what is written of the Being of Spirits by Moses and the Prophets, will
not believe Apparitions, no not of a man, if he came from the dead. And
therefore I will conclude with that precious and pithy Sentence of St. Austin,
who says: Major Sup. Genesis ad lit. l. 2.
est hujus Scripturae authoritas, quam omnis humani ingenii perspicacitas. And
believe not them that say, If you would know the power of Devils and Witches,
go to the Writings of Dr. Casaubon, Mr. Glanvil, and to the rest of the
Demonographers and Witchmongers, that amass and heap together all the lying,
vain, improbable, and impossible stories that can be scraped forth of any
Author, ancient, middle, or modern, when we are commanded to go to the Law and
to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this Isa. 8. 19, 20.
word, it is because there is no truth in them. And so I shall shut up this
Chapter, wherein (I suppose) I have sufficiently proved, that the denying of
such a Witch as I have described, does not infer the denial of the Being of
Angels or Spirits, and that Apparitions are no sufficient grounds for
Christians to believe the Existence of Angels and Spirits by, but the Word of
God; which was the thing undertaken to be proved.

CHAP. IV.
That the Scriptures and sound Reason are the true and proper Mediums to prove
the Actions attributed unto Witches by, and not other improper ways that many
Authors have used. And of the Requisites necessary truly to prove a matter of
Fact by.

AS we have in the former Chapter proved, that Apparitions (though true) are no
sufficient warrant to ground our belief upon, for the Existence of Angels or
Spirits, but the Word of God: so here we shall endeavor clearly to manifest,
that the Sacred Scriptures are the only Medium, joined with sound Reason, of
deciding this point of the power and operation of Demons and Witches, and not
other improper Mediums brought in by diverse Authors, and first we shall answer
the Objection of Mr. Glanvil, that runs thus.

That though the New Testament had mentioned nothing of Object. 1.
this matter, yet its silence in such cases is not argumentative. He said
nothing of those large unknown Tracts of America, nor gave Page 96, 97.
he any intimations of as much as the existence of that numerous people; much
less did he leave instructions about their Conversion. He gives no account of
the affairs and state of the other World, but only that general one of the
happiness of some, and the misery of others. He made no discovery of the
Magnalia of Art or Nature, no not of those whereby the propagation of the
Gospel might have been much advanced, viz. the Mystery of Printing and the
Magnet, and yet no one uses his silence in these instances as an argument
against the being of things, which are evident objects of sense. To which we
answer.

1. He falls into a common mistake in making the Proposition Respons.
universal, and dolus versatur in universalibus, when it ought but to be
particular: so for him to say, that no silence of Scripture is argumentative,
is too universal; for its silence in point of Geography, as in describing
America, and the people thereof, nor in discovering the Magnalia Naturae and
Artis is not argumentative; and we do not say, that all silence of Scripture is
argumentative, but yet we affirm that some silence of Scripture is
argumentative. So we cannot universally say, that nothing has a being but what
is mentioned in Scripture; but we may very well affirm, that some things have
no being, of truth of existence, because not declared in Scripture.

2. The Scriptures were not written to teach Naural Philosophy, Arts or
Sciences, humane Policy, or the like; but were given, that the man of God might
be perfect, furnished for every good work: and it is by them that we have the
doctrine of eternal Salvation revealed unto us, and we positively affirm the
sufficiency of the Scriptures unto Salvation, which thing no Orthodox Divine
(we suppose) will deny, and Bellarmine himself did confess in these words: Live.
1. c. 1.
Prophetici and Apostolici libri sunt verum verbum Dei, ac stabilis regula
fidei. And if it be a certain Rule of Faith, and the true Word of God, then
whatsoever it is silent of, we ought not to believe, and so its silence is
argumentative in that point. The Scriptures are utterly silent concerning
Purgatory, and therefore it is a good argument to affirm there is no such place
as Purgatory, because the Word of God is silent as concerning it; but if it had
been necessary to have been believed, then there would have been mention made
of it.

3. And as the Scriptures are sufficient in matters of Faith, and circa
credenda, and what they are silent in, are not to be received as Articles of
our Faith, but to be rejected, as having no truth of Existence: So likewise
what Worship God requires of his people, is fully revealed in his Word, and
therefore I am to reject the worshipping of Mahomet with the Turks, or Images,
and praying to Saints with the Papists, because I have neither precept nor
president in the Word, but it is silent in such matters; nay tells us, That he
is the Lord our God, and him only we ought to serve.

4. Though Mr. Glanvil say, that God has given no account of the state of the
other World, but only that general one of the happiness of some, and the misery
of others; yet Am I to believe as Mr. Glanvil somewhere in his Book affirms,
that Samuels Soul was raised up by the Woman at Endor, and that those that he
feigneth to Page 87, 88. ^3.
make Leagues and Contracts with Witches, are the Souls of such as had been
Witches when they lived, and asks, Who says that happy Souls were never
employed in any ministeries here below? Or am I to believe that both the Souls
of the godly and wicked, do rove up and down here upon earth, and make
Apparitions, because the Popish Teachers do hold it to be so? I hope not, and
therefore I shall in part give an answer here to some of these, and handle that
of the Woman of Endor in another place. 1. The Word of God does particularly
teach us the state and condition of the Souls after death, that they shall be
like the Angels in Heaven; and all other things necessary to move and draw us
to believe the immortal Existence of Souls, as that most able and learned
Divine Dr. Stillingfleet has asserted in these words: The Scriptures give the
most faithful representation of the state and condition of the Soul of Man. The
World (he says) was almost lost in Disputes Origin. Sacr. l. 3. c. 6. p. 608.
concerning the Nature, Condition; and Immortality of the Soul, before divine
Revelation was made known to Mankind by the Gospel of Christ; but life and
immortality was brought to light by the Gospel, and the future state of the
soul of man not discovered in an uncertain Platonical way, but with the
greatest light and evidence from that God who has the supreme disposal of
souls, and therefore best knows and understands them. A Sentence truly pious
and orthodoxal. 2. Has not God in the holy Scriptures amply and plainly taught
us the state of the other World, in describing unto us such a numerous company
of S^raphims and Cherubims, Angels and Archangels, with their several Orders,
Offices, Ministeries, and Employments? and this is more than a general account,
as may be seen at full in that learned and godly Piece of Bishop Halls, called
The invisible World. And has he not given us a particular account of the very
Kingdom of Darkness, telling us of the Devil and his Angels, and precisely in
this enumeration? For we wrestle not with flesh and blood, but against
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this
world, against spi^al wickedness in high places. And this is more than a
general account; and we must needs fay, that what he holds is very derogatory
to the wisdom and goodness of God, and the sufficiency and truth of the
Scriptures. 3. Must I believe him that the souls of the Saints do rove and
wander here below? when as Bishop Hall says, where he is speaking against the
opinion of those that hold, that Souls do sleep until the Day of Judgment:
Indeed who can but wonder that any Christian can possibly give Invisib. World,
p. 112.
entertainment to so absurd a thought, whilst he hears his Savior say* Father
I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with Joh. 17. 24.
^e where I am, and that (not in a safe sleep) they may behold my glory, which
thou have given me. Sure if the Souls departed be with Christ where he is, and
do behold his glory, then it is a Popish Fable of Mr. Glanvil, to feign their
coming upon Messages hither. The saying of St. Bernard is remarkable in this
case: Advertis^is (...) esse sanctarum status animarum, primum videlicet in
Sermon. c. 7.
co^pore (...), ^cundum sin^ corpore, tertium in corpore jam glorificato^
Primum in militi^, secundum in requie, tertium in (...). And if the second
state of holy Souls b^ without (...) body* and be at peace and rest, then it
must necessarily be a truth* that they do not wander here, nor run upon
Errands; For the souls of the righteous are in the hands of the Lord, and there
shall no torment touch the^. And our Savior told the Wisd. 3. 1.
Thief upon the Cross, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise, Luke 23. 43.
that is, as Dr. Hammond gives the Paraphrase: Immediately after thy death
thou shall go to a place of bliss, and there abide with me, a Member of that my
Kingdom which thou ask for. Now if the soul^ of the godly, after their
death, be immediately in a place of bliss, and abide with Christ as Members of
his Kingdom, then they do not wander up and down here, as Mr. Glanvil and the
Papists vainly fancy and believe; for as Chrysostom says upon that place of
Lazarus his being carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom. What is it then that
the Devils say, I am the Soul of such a Monk? Truly I therefore believe it not,
because the Devils say Concio (...) de Lazar^.
it, for they deceive their Auditors. 4. Or must I believe that the souls of
the wicked do wander, and make Apparitions here, because Mr. Glanvil and the
Popish Writers tell me so? I hope not; for the Text tells us plainly, that
the rich man presently after his death was in Hell in torments, and could not
come hither unto Luke 16. 22, 23.
earth again to warn his brethren, otherwise he would not have prayed Abraham
to have sent Lazarus. And whether it be taken for a real History of things
done, or but a Parable, yet the spiritual meaning of our Savior must be
infallibly true, that immediately after death the souls of the godly are by
Angels carried into Abraham's bosom, and the wicked go down into Hell, from
whence there is no redemption; and therefore do not wander up and down here,
nor make any Apparitions: for I imagine that the authority of holy King David,
a Prophet and a man after Gods own heart, is to be preferred before the
authority of a thousand Popish Writers, and he tells us, when the child was
dead: But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? can I bring him back again?
I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me. And Job tells us: As the
cloud 2 Samuel 12. 23. Job 7. 9, 10. Id^m 10. 20, 21.
is consumed, and vanishes away: so he that goes down to the grave, shall
come up no more, he shall return to more to his house, neither shall his place
know him any more. And therefore it was a vain argument of Bellarmine when he
said: Apparitiones animarum Bellarm. (...). va^. ^om. 2. (...). (...). p. 204.
ex Purgatorio venientium idem testantur. To which the Protestants answer: But
who shall bear witness of these Apparitions, that they were not either feigned
fables, or Satanical illusions? They were men, and might be deceived, even the
best of them, with whom does rest the faith of these Narrations. 5. And whereas
he audaciously asks, Who says that happy Souls were never employed in any
Ministeries here below? I shall tell him who they are that say, that happy
Souls departed are never employed here in any Ministeries; and they are all the
learned Divines of the Reformed Churches, and all those that were true Sons of
the Doctrine of the Church of England, such as were Bishop Jewel, Bishop Hall,
Dr. Willet, Dr. Whitaker, Mr. Perkins, and many more such, the authority and
reputation of the least of which is far above the simple question of Mr.
Glanvil. And therefore says Homil. sect. 16. page 484.
the latter Confession of Helvetia: Now that which is recorded of the Spirits
or Souls of the dead sometimes appearing to them that are alive, etc. we count
those Apparitions among the delusions and deceits of the Devil.

5. And as the Scriptures are sufficient both in respect of matters of Faith,
and concerning divine Worship, that their silence in those two particulars are
fully argumentative, to deny whatever is not contained in them, as unfit to be
received to either purpose. So in respect of a Christians warfare, all things
for the obtaining of a perfect and complete victory, and for standing and
perseverance, are in them fully declared, and what they mention not is to be
rejected, as wanting the seal of Divine Authority, whether it be in regard of
eschewing what is prohibited, or in following what is commanded. And therefore
we affirm, that what the Scriptures have not revealed of the power of the
Kingdom of Satan, is to be rejected, and not to be believed, and what weapons
we are to use against the wiles of the Devil, we are to be furnished withal,
but have need of no others but what the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures has made
known unto us, the rest are to be cast off, as fables and lies, or humane
inventions, because the Scriptures are silent of any such matter, and that for
these weighty grounds and considerations.

1. We shall take the Concession of Bellarmine himself, who says: Nullum est
vitium ad quod sanandum non invenitur in Scriptura aliquod remedium. And again:
Illa quae sunt simpliciter omnibus necessaria, Apostoli consueverunt omnibus
praedicare: and aliorum quae sunt omnibus utilia. And to the same purpose is
the saying of St. Austin: Titubat sides, si divinarum Scripturarum vacillet De
Doctrine. Christian.
authoritas: porro fide titubante, etiam ipsa charitas la^guescit. Therefore if
there be no fault for which the Scripture does not yield some remedy, then
surely to make a visible League with the Devil, or to have carnal Copulation
with him, either must have no verity at all in it, or that the Scripture has
provided no remedy for it, for of such things there is no mention. And if Faith
must stumble, where the authority of the Scriptures is wanting, then surely the
belief of all rational men must needs be staggering, to believe what these
common Witchmongers affirm of the Witches visible League and carnal Copulation
with the Devil, when there is no authority of Scripture at all to strengthen or
countenance any such matter.

2. The Scriptures do fully and abundantly inform us of the Devils spiritual
and invisible power, and against the same declares unto us the whole Armor of
God, with which we ought to be furnished, as the Apostle says: Put on the
whole armor of God, that Ephesians. (...). 11, 12, 13.
ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we wrestle not
against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high
places. Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to
withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. And the Apostle St.
Peter tells us: Be sober, ^e vigilant, because your adversary the de^il. 1
Pet. 5. 8, 9.
like a roaring lion, walks about seeking whom he may devour* whom resist
steadfast in the faith. And in another place: For the weapons of our warfare are
not carnal, but mighty through God to 2 Cor. 10. 4, (...)
the pulling down of strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every high
thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God. From which Scriptures
we may take these remarkable observations.

1. We are to consider the nature of this Warfare, that it is spiritual and
against spiritual wickedness in high places, and not against flesh and blood;
and the Holy Ghost could not be wanting nor defective, but superabundantly full
in describing the nature of this warfare, that it is spiritual, not carnal; and
therefore we are to prepare our selves against all spiritual assaults: but as
for any visible, carnal, or bodily, there is not, nor can be any such, because
the Apostle that declared by his Preaching and Writings the whole counsel of
God, has revealed no such thing as the visible appearing of Satan, much less
of his making of a visible League with the Witches, or the sucking of their
bodies, or the having carnal Copulation with them, which must of necessity be
lies and figments, because the Holy Ghost has not warned us of any such, which
we ought certainly to believe he would have done, if there had been any such
matter. And the holy Apostle, who was not ignorant of 2 Cor. 2. 11.
the devices (...), notions or intentions of Satan, would not have omitted to
have warned the godly, if there had been any such matter as a visible League,
sucking of their bodies, or carnal Copulation, the thing being of so great
weight and concern. For as one said well: Grave est de vita and bonis
periclitari, sed multo 1 Timothy 3. 7. 2 Timothy 2. 26.
gravius insidiantem habere Satanam. And he that so often has given us warning
of the wiles, devices, and snares of the Devil, if there had been any such
dangerous snare as this, would without doubt have given us notice of it.

2. We are to consider the end of this Warfare, that it is for no less than a
Crown, and that not a terrestrial, but a celestial one, not a fading one, but
an everlasting one, a Crown of eternal life, of immortal glory, even for an
house given of God, eternal in the Heavens. Therefore this being a thing of the
greatest concern that belongs to a Christian, the Apostle would not doubtlesly
omit any thing that had been necessary to the obtaining of such an inestimable
prize, and such an important Victory; and therefore cannot in reason have
concealed or omitted such a weighty matter as a visible League, and the like,
if there had been any such thing.

3. We are to consider that this Armor prescribed for the Soldiers of Jesus
Christ, is the whole armor of God, (...), the complete armor of God (as Dr.
Hammond renders it) perfect both for defense and offense. And therefore the
Apostle describes it fully by a Metaphor, taken from such Arms as the Roman or
other Nations in his time did use, saying: Stand therefore, having your Ephesians. 6.
14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
loins girt about with truth, and having on the breast plate of righteousness:
And your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace. Above all
taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery
darts of the wicked. And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the
spirit, which is the word of God. Praying always with all prayer and
supplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance and
supplication for all Saints. And as it is a complete and perfect Armor, both in
respect of defense and offense; so it is a spiritual, not a carnal, corporeal,
or bodily armor, because the warfare is not against flesh and blood, but
against spiritual wickedness in high places, against spiritual enemies, not
against corporeal and carnal ones; for as the enemies are and the warfare, so
are the armor and weapons. From whence we truly urge, that the Apostle led by
the Holy Ghost, and the Wisdom of the Father, and knowing the whole counsel of
God (especially in this point) has omitted nothing that is fitting armor for a
Christian either of defense or offense, whereby he may be enabled to get the
victory against Satan, and all his spiritual Army. And therefore that either
Satan has not power, or does not assault Christians after a visible, carnal,
and bodily manner, or else that the Holy Ghost has been defective in
prescribing armor against such assaults, and consequently that the armor of a
Soldier of Jesus Christ is not complete, or else there is no such bodily
assaults of Satan at all, as to tempt visibly, to make a corporeal League, to
suck upon the Witches bodies, nor to have carnal Copulation with them. But we
affirm, and that (as we conceive) with sound reason, that the Scriptures in
this particular of a Christians armor, and the compleatness of it, is
abundantly sufficient against all spiritual assaults whatsoever, and
consequently that there is no other kind of assaults but merely spiritual, and
therefore the Word of God, the most proper Medium with sound reason, to judge
of the power of Spirits and Devils by.

3. That the Scriptures and sound reason are the only true and proper Medium to
decide these Controversies by, is most undeniably apparent, because God is a
Spirit, and the invisible God, and therefore best knows the nature and power of
the spiritual and invisible World, and being the God of truth, can and does
inform us of their power and operations, better than the vain lies and figments
of the Heathen Poets, or the dreams of the Platonic School, either elder or
later, nay better than all the notional and groundless speculations of the
Schoolmen, of whom it may truly be said that, Rivulo divinae Scripturae
relicto, in abyssos vanarum opinionum inciderunt. Nay these can better inform
us in this point, than the Writings of all Mortals besides, and therefore
whatsoever may be said to the contrary, may receive its answer from the Father:
Quod de Scripturis sacris authoritatem non habet, eadem facilitate Gregor. sup.
Ezekiel. Homil. 6. 1 Timothy 1. 17.
contemnitur, qua probatur. Therefore he being the King eternal, immortal,
invisible, and the only wise God, of none can we so truly and certainly learn
these things, as of him who has plentifully taught us in his Word all things
necessary to Salvation, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished
to every Heb. 12. 9.
good work. Nay he is the Father of Spirits, and therefore truly knows, and
can and does teach us their Natures, Offices, and Operations.

4. The Scriptures (especially the Writings of Moses) considered only as
Historical, are of more antiquity, verity, and certainty both as to Doctrine,
Precepts, matters of Fact, and Chronology, than all other Histories whatsoever,
whether of the Phenicians, Egyptians, Vid. Orig. sacr. l. 1. c. 1. p. 15.
Chaldeans, or Grecians, as the learned person Dr. Stilling fleet has
sufficiently proved. Now if there had been such an one as a Witch, that made a
visible League with the Devil, and upon whose body he sucked, and with whom he
had carnal Copulation, something of that nature would doubtless have been
recorded in the Scriptures, of which notwithstanding there is not the least
tittle or mention. And Moses who was so perfect a Lawgiver, as in a manner to
omit no kind or sort of sin or evil that men possibly could commit, but to
forbid it, and make a Law against it, could never have left out such an horrid,
unnatural, and hellish wickedness as carnal Copulation with the fallen Angels,
if there had been any such matter. For he says, after he had forbidden all
sorts of Fornications, Adulteries, and Incests: Thou shall not lie with
mankind, Levit. 18. 22, 23, 24.
as with womankind: it is abomination. Neither shall thou lie with any beast to
defile thy self therewith: neither shall any woman stand before a beast to lie
down thereto: it is confusion. Defile not your selves in any of these things:
for in all these the nations are defiled, which I cast out before you. Now it
cannot be rationally imagined, that Moses having named and prohibited the less
sins of bestial Copulation and Sodomy, would have left out that which is the
most horrid and execrable of all others, to wit, carnal Copulation with Devils,
if there had been any such thing either in possibility or act. And therefore we
may conclude according to the rules of sound reason, that there is no such
matter, and that the Scriptures are the most fit Medium to decide these
Controversies.

5. The Scriptures and sound reason are the most fit Mediums to determine these
things by, because there is nothing that any has written upon this Subject
(though the Authors be superfluously numerous) but if it agree not with the
principles of right reason, and the rules of the Scriptures, they ought to be
rejected. For what is not consonant to right reason, ought not to be received
by any that truly are rational Creatures; and what agrees not with the Word of
God, ought not to be entertained by any that are or would be accounted good or
true Christians. And if all the gross fables, lies, impossibilities, and
nonsensical stories that Demonographers and Witchmongers have related and
accumulated together, were brought to the test of the Scriptures and sound
reason, they would soon be hissed off the Stage, and find few believers or
embracers of them. But alas! all (nay few men) have the right use and exercise
of their rational faculty, but men to see to are in themselves as beasts; and
therefore we may all pray with the Apostle to be delivered 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2.
from unreasonable men, or men without reason, or absurd men, that make no
right use of reason, (...).

6. The Scriptures and right reason have declared all things concerning Spirits
either good or bad, as also all sorts of Diviners (or Witches, if you will have
them called so) and the nature, power, operations, and actions of them, more
than any other Book that was written before the time of our Saviors Birth (the
dreams and whimsies of the Platonists only excepted) or for the space of three
hundred years after, and therefore are the most fit Medium and Authority to
determine these things by. 1. For first it is manifest, that all things are
ordered by the wisdom of the Almighty, who has done whatsoever he would both
in Heaven, and he does Dan. 4. 35.
according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the
earth: and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What do thou? And these
things God does not by a naked prescience, but by his divine will, providence,
and ordination, as a learned Divine has taught us in these words: Est hoc
inprimis necessarium and salutare Christiano nosse, quod Deus nihil praescit
contingenter, sed quod omnia incommutabili and aeterna, infallibilique
voluntate and providet, and praeponit, and facit. So it was only his will,
decree, and determination, that Christ should not be born, or assume humane
nature visibly, but at that precise time that he had appointed, according to
the evidence of the Apostle. But when the Gal. 4. 4.
fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under
the law. And when that fullness of time was come that he sent him, then did the
divine Wisdom and Providence ordain all means, objects and occasions, whereby
the fullness of the Godhead that dwelt in him bodily, might be made manifest, by
working of miracles, both by himself and his Apostles, therefore were there so
many several sorts of Demoniacks, blind, lame, dumb, deaf, and diseased, not by
chance, but by the providence of the Father, and only and chiefly that the work
of God might be manifest in them, for the Evangelist tells us: And as Jesus
passed by, he saw a man which was blind from his birth. And his Disciples asked
him, saying, Joh. 9. 1, 2, 3.
Master, who did sin, this man or his parents, that he was born blind? Jesus
answered, Neither has this man sinned, nor his parents, but that the works of
God should be made manifest in him. Upon which place Dr. Hammond does give this
clear Paraphrase: And some of his followers asked him, saying, Sir, was it any
sin of his own, when his soul was in another body, or was it some sin of his
parents at the time of his conception, which caused this blindness in him?
Neither his own, nor his parents sins were the cause of this blindness of his,
but Gods secret wisdom, who meant by this means to show forth in me his
miraculous power among you. And though the Doctor would bring in the opinion of
Pythagoras of the Transmigration of Souls (of which vain traditional fancies he
is almost every where guilty) as received and imbibed in by some of the Jews
that then followed him: yet it appears plainly, that it was not interrogated
by the Jews, but by his Disciples, (...), and therefore it is a wonder the
Doctor should be so grossly mistaken; and Theophylact tells us thus much
plainly: Neque enim Apostoli Gentiles nugas receperunt, quo anima ante corpus
in alio mundo versans peccet, ac deinde poenam quandam recipiat in corpus
descendens. Piscatores cum essent, neque audiverant tale quiddam, quia haec
Philosophorum dogmata erant. And so declares, that the Disciples having seen
Christ heal the man that had thirty eight years been impotent and lame, and had
said unto him, Behold Joh. 5. 14.
thou art made whole, sin no more lest a worse thing come unto thee, did
conceive, that this man being born blind, it had been a punishment upon him,
either for his own sins, or the sins of his parents, and so doubting asked the
question. And so also do St. Austin Vid. Thom. Aquin. cat^n. aur. in loc.
and Chrysostom expound the place, which is both sound and rational. And of
our Saviors responsion, That neither had this man sinned, nor his parents, the
learned Father gives a satisfactory answer, saying: Nunquid vel ipse sine
originali peccato natus erat, vel vivendo nihil addiderat? Habebant ergo
peccatum, and ipse and parents ejus, sed non ipso peccato factum est ut caecus
nasceretur. Ut supr.
Ipse autem causam dicit quare caecus sit natus, cum subdit: sed ut
manifestentur opera Dei in illo. And to the same purpose Gregory has this
notable passage: Alia itaque est percussio, qua peccator percutitur, ut sine
retractatione puniatur: Alia qua peccator percutitur, ut corrigatur: Alia qua
quisque percutitur, non ut praeterita corrigat, sed ne ventura committat: Alia
per quam nec praeterita culpa corrigitur, nec futura prohibetur. Sed dum
inopinata salus percussionem sequitur, salvantis virtus cognita ardentius
amatur. From whence it is manifest, that as the Father in the fullness of time,
by his Decree and Providence sent out the Son, in whom dwelt the fullness of the
Godhead bodily, with a purpose to manifest the same by his great and wonderful
Miracles: so in his divine Wisdom he had ordered fit subjects and objects upon
whom that power might be made manifest. And therefore were there such strange
diseases offered, especially in Demoniacks, that can hardly be paralleled in
any one Country of that small compass, and in so short a time, and all that the
works of God might be manifest by that ever-blessed Savior of Mankind, Jesus
Christ. And though there were so many persons, so many several ways perplexed
and afflicted both in their minds and bodies, as some made deaf and dumb, some
torn and contorted in their members, some thrown on the ground, some into the
fire, some driven to live amongst the graves and monuments, and yet all these
cured by our blessed Savior: Yet is there no mention made of any that had made
a visible League with the Devil, nor upon whose bodies he sucked, nor with whom
he had carnal Copulation, nor whom he had transubstantiated into Wolves, Dogs,
Hares, Cats, or Squirrels; to have cured which would have been as great a
miracle as any of the rest, but there were no such matters; and therefore we
may safely conclude, there never were, are, or can be any such matters,
whatsoever may be said to the contrary.

2. In the New Testament there is mention made of several sorts of deceiving
Impostors, Diviners, or Witches, who were all discovered and conquered by that
power that Christ had given unto the Apostles; as for instance: Simon, which
before time in the same city used sorcery, and bewitched (...) the people of
Samaria, giving out that himself was some great one. To whom they Act. 8. 9,
10, 11.
gave heed from the least to the greatest, saying, This man is the great power
of God. And to him they had regard, because that of long time he had bewitched
them with sorceries; (...), seducebat populum suis magicis praestigiis, says
Tremellius; and Beza, Exercuerat artem magicam, and gentem Samariae
obstupefecerat; who when he would have bought the gift of the Holy Ghost with
money, was rejected by Peter as an Impostor and Counterfeit, Act. 13. 8.
and declared, that he was in the gall of bitterness. Such another was Elymas
the Sorcerer (for so is his name by interpretation) (...), who was stricken
blind by St. Paul. Such an one was the Ibid. 16. 16, 18.
Damsel that was possessed with a Spirit of Divination, which St. Paul cast
forth. And such were the Jewish Exorcists, that took upon them to call over
them which had evil Spirits, the Name of the Lord Jesus, saying, We adjure you
by Jesus whom Paul preaches. Act. 19. 13, 16.
But the man in whom the evil spirit was, leapt on them, and overcame them, and
prevailed against them, so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded.
But amongst these several sorts of Diviners, Impostors, or Witches, there were
none that had made a visible League with the Devil, nor upon whose bodies he
sucked, nor that had carnal Copulation with him, nor were changed into Cats,
Dogs, or Wolves: but if the Devil had had any such power, or had there been any
such sort of Witches, the divine Wisdom and Providence would have ordained some
of them then to have been made apparent, that his power by Christ and the
Apostles, might have been showed as well in the greater as in the less: and
that for the more full manifestation of the Works of God, as for a more
triumphant declaration of the power of Christ in conquering him and his
Kingdom, and for a more ample warning and instruction to the Children of God to
avoid the snares and wiles of the Devil; but there being no such, then we must
rationally conclude, that 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
there now is not, nor ever was, or can be any such matter, but the vain
believing of such figments and forgeries, is only the cunning and delusion of
Satan, who works by lying and deceiving wonders (...), of which St. Chrysostom
says thus: Hoc est, omnem ostentabit potentiam, sed nihil very, verum omnia ad
seductionem. Chrysostom. in loc.
Et prodigiis, inquit, mendacii. Aut ementitis ac indificantibus, aut ad
mendacium inducentibus.

Having now sufficiently proved, that the Scriptures and sound Reason are the
proper Mediums to decide these difficulties by, we shall in the next place show
the invalidity of some ways used by the most Authors, to prove and defend these
Tenants, and ab uno disce omnes, take Mr. Glanvil For all, in his own words:
That Page 5.
this being matter of fact, is only capable of the evidence of authority and
sense: and by both these, the being of Witches and Diabolical Contracts, is
most abundantly confirmed. To which we shall give this smart Reply. Not to make
the Proposition universal, generally to deny the evidence of authory and sense;
no, far be it from me to run into that wild and senseless absurdity, which were
in a manner to destroy the credibility of all humane testimony: But we shall
here speak of the evidence of authority and sense with this restriction and
limitation, to these Particulars. 1. Those Authors that write of Apparitions
and Spirits. 2. Those that treat of Diabolical Leagues and Contracts. 3. Those
that mention the Devil sucking of the Witches body, carnal Copulation with
them, their being changed into Hares, Dogs, Cats, and Wolves, and the like.
These Authors we say are to be read with caution, and their relations not to be
credited, except better proof be given to evidence the matters of fact, than
hitherto has been brought by any, and that for these especial reasons and
necessary cautions.

1. The Authors that have recorded stories of this nature, are to be seriously
considered, whether they have related the matter of fact by their own proper
knowledge, as eye and ear-witnesses of it, or have taken it up by hearsay,
common fame, or the relation of others: and if what they relate, were not of
their own certain knowledge or (...), then is it of little or no credit at all;
for the other that relates it, might be guilty either of active or passive
deception and delusion, or might have heard it from another, or by common
report: of all which there is no certainty, but leaves sufficient grounds for
dubitation, and is sufficient to caution a prudent person altogether to suspend
his assent, until better proof can be brought. There is a story related by
Plinius Caecilius to his Epist. lib. 7. page 252.
Friend Sura, of a House in Athens that was haunted by a Spirit in so terrible
and frightful a manner, that it was left utterly forsaken, and none would
inhabit in it, until that Athenodorus the Philosopher adventured upon it, and
abode the coming of the Apparition or Phantasm, and upon its signs followed it
to a place below, and then it vanished: he marked the place, and went to the
Magistrate, and caused the place to be dug up, and found the bones of a
person inchained or fettered, and caused the bones to be buried, and so the
House remained free afterward. It is a wonder to think how many Authors have
swallowed this relation (nay even Philip Camerarius himself, who though a very
Learned man, yet in things of this nature too extremely credulous) and urged it
for proof, as a matter of great credit and authority, when we cannot discern
that it affords any credible ground to a rational man to believe it, not only
because the very matter it self, and the circumstances of it, do yield
sufficient grounds of the suspicion of its verity; but chiefly because Pliny
does but relate it by hearsay, exponam ut accepi, and of it and the rest he
desires the opinion of his Friend Sura, from whom we do not find any answer.
The story taken from Plutarch (a grave Author, if he be considered as an
Heathen De defect. oracul. p. mihi 700.
and a Moralist) yet of no authority to decide such points as these are) of the
voice that called upon Thamus, and commanded him to declare when he came at
Palodes, that the great God Pan was dead, which he performed, and that
thereupon followed a great lamentation of many: the story at large is related
by many, and urged as a matter of great weight and credibility, when indeed
there is no ground sufficient to persuade any that it was true. For if it had
been related by Plutarch as an ear-witness of it, yet was he but an Heathen,
that we know believed many fond, lying, and impossible things, especially of
their Gods; and therefore in this case to a considerate Christian could be of
no great authority. And if his authority had been great, or of weight in such
matters as these, yet was he but singularis testis, which is not sufficient in
these things to be relied upon. And lastly (to our present purpose here) he
does not record it as a thing of his own certain knowledge, but of hearsay
from Epitherses, who was but a single Relator, and a man of no certain
veracity; and therefore we can have no rational ground to believe the truth of
the story, but it may be rejected with more reason, than it can be affirmed by.
Of no greater credit can his story be of Brutus his malus Genius appearing
Plutarch. in vit. Marc. Brut. page 361.
unto him, because he received this by mere Tradition and hearsay, neither
could it have any other rise, but from the relation of Brutus himself, whose
guilty conscience, and troubled brain, fancied such vain things; for those that
were near Brutus neither saw nor heard any such matter, and therefore must have
been a deception of Fancy, and no real Apparition ad extra.

2. And as evidence of the matter of fact recorded from the relation of others,
is of no validity to a judicious person: so if the matter of fact be witnessed
but by one single testimony (though an eye or an ear-witness) it is not
sufficient, because one single person may be imperfect in some senses, or under
some distemper, and so be no proper Judge of what it sees or hears; and the
Word of Truth tells us, That in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word
shall be established; and therefore we are not (especially in such abstruse
matters as these) to trust the evidence of one single testimony. To make clear
this Particular, we shall relate a story or two from the credit of the Reverend
and Learned Bishop Hall, joined with his judgment of such weak and feigned
Tales, one of The invisible World, p. 245, 246, 247.
which runs thus: Johannes a Jesu Maria, a modern Carmelite, writing the Life
of Theresia (Sainted lately by Gregory XV.) tells us, that as she was a
vigilant Overseer of her Votaries in her life, so in and after death she would
not be drawn away from her care and attendance: For (says he) if any of her
Sisters did but talk in the set hours of their silence, she was wont by three
knocks at the door of the Cell, to put them in mind of their enjoined
taciturnity. And on a time appearing (as she did often) in a lightsome
brightness to a certain Carmelite, is said thus to bespeak him; Nos coelestes,
ac vos exules amore ac puritate foederati esse Jo. (...) Jesu Mar. lib. 5. de
Vit. There Is. cap. 3.
debemus, etc. We Citizens of Heaven, and ye exiled Pilgrims on earth, ought to
be linked in a League of love and purity, etc. Methinks the Reporter (says the
Bishop) should fear this to be too much good fellowship for a Saint; I am sure
neither Divine nor Ancient story had wont to afford such familiarity: and many
have misdoubted the agency of worse, where have appeared less causes of
suspicion. That this was (if any thing) an ill Spirit under that face, I am
justly confident; neither can any man doubt, that looking further into the
relation, finds him to come with a ly^ in his mouth. For thus he goes on; [We
Celestial ones behold the Deity, ye banished ones worship the Eucharist, which
ye ought to worship with the same affection wherewith we adore the Deity] such
perfume does this holy Devil leave behind him. The like might be instanced in a
thousand Apparitions of this kind, all worthy of the same entertainment. This
is a story from one single person, a lying Carmelite, one that for interest,
and upholding of Superstition and Idolatry, had feigned and forged it; for in
it self it appears to be a mere falsity and figment, as any rational man may
easily discern, and so are a thousand stories of this kind worthy of the like
entertainment, that is, to be condemned for most horrid lies. Another he tells
us: Amongst The invisible World, p. 305.
such fastidious choice of whole dry-fats of voluminous relations, I cannot
forbear to single out that one famous of Magdalen de la Croix, in the year of
our Lord Christ 1545, etc. The third from the mouth of another lying Friar
named Jacobus de Pozali, in his Sermon, That St. Macarius once went about to
Ibid. p. 284.
make peace betwixt God and Satan, etc. Now whatsoever credit this Learned man
(who in things of this kind appears to be as vainly credulous as any) does
seem to give unto these, or what use soever he would make of them, it is
undeniably manifest to all impartial judgments, that they were but absolute
forgeries and knacks of Imposture and Knavery, and (according to his own
opinion) may justly be ranked amongst those thousand Apparitions of this kind,
all worthy of the same entertainment, that is, to be rejected for abominable
lies or forgeries, and that for these reasons. 1. Because they are not attested
by any sincere and incorrupt ear and eyewitnesses, but by reports and
relations, and that of those that were corrupt and partial, or Accomplices to
bring to pass the fraud and imposture. 2. If they be run up to their first
Author or Venture of the Tale, he will but be found a single Witness, which is
utterly insufficient in evidencing truly a matter of fact. 3. The Relaters of
them did publish them for interest sake, and upon design to advance false
Doctrine, Worship, Superstition, and Idolatry, and therefore are not of
validity and credit. 4. In themselves (if strictly considered) they will appear
to be lying, ridiculous, contradictory in themselves, and contrary to the
authority of Divine Writ, and dissonant to sound and right reason, and
therefore ought to have no other entertainment, but as abominable lies and
forgeries.

3. But if matters of fact be witnessed and attested by many or diverse persons
that were ear and eyewitnesses, yet may their testimony bear no weight in the
balance of Justice or right Reason, because they may be corrupt in point of
interest, and so have their judgments mis-guided and biassed by the corruption
of their desires and affections, or relate things out of spleen, envy, and
malice; and so may not in these mysterious matters be fit authority to rely
upon, nor competent evidence in these particulars, as Dr. Casaubon is forced to
confess in these words: In the relation of strange Of Credul. and Incredul.
page 159.
things, whether natural or supernatural, to know the temper of the Relator, if
it can be known: and what interest he had, or might probably be supposed to
have had, in the relation, to have it believed. And again, whether he profess
to have seen it himself, or taken it upon the credit of others. And whether a
man by his profession in a capacity probable to judge of the truth of those
things, to which he does bear witness. Every one of these particulars would
require a particular consideration. For if there be interest in point of
Religion, then all authorities, all color of reason is drawn in to make good
this interest, and verity is commonly stifled in this contest for selfness and
interest, and the adverse parties stigmatized with all the filthy lies and
enormous crimes that can be invented, as is most manifest in these instances.
The Popish party finding themselves hindered and opposed in point of the highest
interest, have forged a thousand false stories and tales to make good the
interest of their Party, and have left no dirt and dung unscraped up to throw
in the faces of their Opponents; and so have each Party done against other,
where religious interest was the quarrel, as Bishop Hall has truly observed in
this passage, where he is showing the abominable corruptions of the Church of
Rome: A Religion that cares not by what wilful falsehoods A serious Disswasive
from Popery, page 38, 39.
it maintains a part; as Wickliffs blasphemy, Luthers advice from the Devil,
Tindals Community, Calvin's feigned Miracle, and blasphemous death, Bucers neck
broken, Beza's Revolt, the blasting of Huguenots, Englands want of Churches,
and Christendom, Queen Elizabeth's unwomanliness, her Episcopal Jurisdiction,
her secret fruitfulness, English Catholics cast in Bears skins to Dogs,
Plesses shameful overthrow, Garnats straw, the Lutherans obscene Night-Revels,
Scories drunken Ordination in a Tavern, the Edict of our gracious King James
(An. 87.) for the establishment of Popery, our casting the crusts of our
Sacrament to Dogs, and ten thousand of this nature, maliciously raised against
knowledge and conscience, for the disgrace of those whom they would have hated,
e're known.

The rise of this opinion that we are disputing against, that the Devil makes a
visible and corporeal League with the Witches, that he sucks upon their bodies,
has carnal Copulation with them, and that they are changed into Hares, Dogs,
Cats, or Wolves, and the like, was soon after the thirteenth hundred year of
Christ, when as Frederick the Second had made a Law temporal, for the burning
of Heretics. And not long after that, was the Inquisition set up in Rome and
Spain, and then did the Inquisitors and their Adherents, draw in from the
Heathen Poets, and all other Authors, whatsoever might carry any color of
authority or reason, the better to countenance their bloody and unjust
proceedings, where they drew thousands of people into the snare of the
Inquisition for pretended Witchcraft, which they made to be Heresy. And
whatsoever these have written concerning these things, such as Delrio, Bodinus,
Romigius, Springerus, Niderus, Spineus, Grillandus, and a whole rabble besides
not necessary to be named, are nothing but lies and forgeries, and deserve no
credit at all for these reasons. 1. Because as many of them as either were
Inquisitors themselves, or those that had any dependence upon them, or received
benefit by their proceedings, are all unjust and corrupt Authors and Witnesses,
as writing and bearing witness for their own ends, interest, and profit, having
a share in the Goods and Estates of all that were convicted and condemned: and
the Wolf and Raven will be sure to give judgment on the Serpents side, that he
may devour the man, though never so innocent, because they hope to have a share
of his flesh, or at least to pick the bones. 2. These Authors that were the
first Broachers of these monstrous stories of Apparitions and Witches, and are
so frequently quoted by others, (that ought to have been more wary, and might
have seen reason enough to have rejected all their feigned lies and delusions)
were not only sharers in the spoil of the Goods of the condemned (who were
judged per fas, and nefas) but also had another base end and interest, to wit,
to advance the opinion of Purgatory, praying for the dead, setting up the vain
Superstitions of the virtue of the sign of the Cross, holy Water, and the like.
And therefore they did forge so many stories of Apparitions, and Souls coming
forth of Purgatory, and recorded so many false, lying, and impossible things
from the forced, extorted, and pretended confessions of the Witches themselves,
which were nothing else but an Hotch-potch of horrid and abominable lies, not
to be credited, because the Authors only invented them, to promote their own
base ends and wretched interests.

Again, where Authors are engaged for interest sake, they fall into heat,
passion, malice, and envy, and what they cannot make out by strength of
arguments, they labor to make good by lies and scandals, as is most apparent
in this one Example we shall here give. Henricus Cornelius Agrippa, a person in
his time well known to most of the Learned in Europe, and admired for his
general and universal skill in all kind of Learning, having published a Piece
which he styled, A Declaration of the incertitude and vanity of Sciences and
Arts, and the excellency of the Word of God: wherein amongst other things he
had sharply taxed the Monks and Friars, and other Orders, of their ignorance,
idleness, and many other crimes and misdemeanors, whereby certain Theologasters
of Lovain (netled with their own guilt) did in bitter malice draw up certain
Articles against him, therein accusing him of Error, Impiety, and Heresy, and
had so far incensed Charles the Fifth then Emperor against him, that he had
commanded Agrippa unheard to make a Recantation. But he writing a strong,
polite, and pithy Apology, gave them such a responsion, that afterward they
did never reply; by which, and the mediation of diverse learned Friends, who
gave Caesar a right information of the end and drift of that Book, and of the
things therein contained, He was pacified, and brought to a better
understanding of the matter. Yet this could not protect Agrippa from the
virulent malice of the Popish Witchmongers, but that they forged most
abominable lies and scandals against him, especially that wretched and ignorant
Monk Paulus Jovius, that was not ashamed to record in his Book entitled, De
Elogiis doctorum Virorum, that Agrippa carried a Cacodemon about with him, Lib.
2. de praestig. Demon. cap. 5.
in the likeness of a black Dog, and that he died at Lions, when it is certain
he died at Gratianople. From all which horrid aspersions and lying scandals he
is sufficiently acquitted by the famous Physician Johannes Wierus, one that was
educated under him, and lived familiarly with him; and therefore was best able
to testify the whole truth of these particulars. But any that are so perversely
and wilfully blinded as to have a sinister opinion of this person, (who ab
ineunte aetate in literis educatus esset, qua fuit ingenii foelicitate, in omni
artium ac disciplinarum genere ita versatus est, ut Vit. Germ. medic. page 16.
excelluerit) may have most ample satisfaction from the modest and impartial
Pen of Melchior Adams, who has written his Life: as also from something that
our Countryman, who called himself Eugenius Philalethes, has clearly
delivered: so that none can be ignorant of this particular, but such as
wilfully refuse to be informed Anim. mag. praes.
of the truth.

Nay where interest has a share, truth can hardly be expected, though it be
but in more trivial things, as even but for aerie fame and vainglory, as may be
manifest in Hierome Cardan, who was a man of prodigious pride and vainglory,
which led him (as the Inquir. into vulgar Errors, page 34.
learned Dr. Brown has noted) into no small errors, being a great Amasser of
strange and incredible stories, led to relate them by his mere ambition of
hunting after fame and the reputation of an universal Scholar. And of no less
pride and vainglorious ambition was his Antagonist Julius Caesar Scaliger
guilty, of whom it may truly be said, that he was of the nature of those of the
Ottoman Family, that do not think they can ever reign safely, unless they
strangle all their Brethren; so he did not think that he could aspire to the
Throne of being the Monarch of general Learning, without stifling the fame and
reputation of Cardan and others, against whom he has been most fell, and
impetuously bitter. But when men fall out about professional interest, then the
stories that through malice they invent and forge one against another, are
incredible, as is manifest in many Examples; but we shall but give one for all,
which is this. When Paracelsus, returning from his Peregrination of ten years
and above, was called to be Physical Lecturer Vid. vit. G^m. ^edic. page 2^.
at Basil, where he continued three years, and more, having by his strange and
wonderful Cures drawn the most part of Germany, and the adjacent Countries into
admiration; so that he was, and might (notwithstanding the envy and ignorance
of all his enemies) justly be styled, Totius Germaniae decus and gloria: yet
this was not sufficient to quiet the violent and virulent mind of Thomas
Erastus, who coming to be settled at Basil, and finding that he could not outgo
nor equal Paracelsus in point of Medicinal Practice, and being strongly
grounded in the Aristotelian Philosophy, and the Galenical Physic, did with
all poison and bitterness labor to confute the Principles of Chemical Physic
that Paracelsus had introduced; and lest his arguments might be too weak, he
backed them with most horrible lies and scandals, thinking that many and strong
accusations (though never so false) would not be easily answered, nor totally
washed off: which after were greedily swallowed down by Libanius, Conringius,
Sennertus, and many others: so apt are men to invent, and suck in scandals
against others, never considering how false and groundless they are, or may be:
for that he wrongfully and falsely accused him in many things, will be manifest
to any unbiassed person, that will but take pains to read his Life, written by
that equitable Judge Melchior Adams, and that large Preface the learned
Physician Fredericus Bitiskius has prefixed to his Works printed at Geneva
1648.

4. But if the Authors that report matters of fact in reference to these four
particulars that we have named, were ear and eye witnesses, and not single, but
a greater number, and were not swayed by any corrupt or self-interest
whatsoever; yet all this is not sufficient to give evidence in these matters,
except they be rightly qualified in other things, that are necessarily
requisite to capacitate a person rightly to judge of these nice and difficult
matters, some of the chief of which we shall here enumerate. 1. The persons
that are fit to give a perfect judgment of these matters, ought to be perfect
in the organs of their senses, otherwise they may easily be deceived, and think
the things otherwise than indeed they are; so some defects or distempers in the
ears, eyes, or the rest of the sensories, may hinder the true perception of
things acted or done. 2. They ought to be of a sound judgment, and not of a
vitiated or distempered Fantasy, nor of a melancholic Temper or
Constitution; for such will be full of fears, and strange imaginations, taking
things as acted and wrought without, when they are but only represented within.
These will take a bush to be a Boggard, and a black sheep to be a Demon; the
noise of the wild Swans flying high upon the nights, to be Spirits, or (as they
call them here in the North) Gabriel-Ratchets, the calling of a Daker-hen in
the Meadow to be the Whistlers, the howling of the female Fox in a Gill, or a
Clough for the male, when they are for copulation, to be the cry of young
Children, or such Creatures, as the common people call Fayries, and many such
like fancies and mistakes. 3. They ought to be clear and free from those
imbibed notions of Spirits, Hobgoblins, and Witches, which have been instamped
upon their Fantasies from their very young years, through ignorant and
superstitious education, wherewith generally all mankind is infected, and but
very few that get themselves extricated from those delusive Labyrinths, that
parents and ignorance have instilled into them. From hence it is, that not only
the stolid and stupid Vulgar, but even persons otherwise rational enough, do
commonly attribute those sleights and tricks that our common Jugglers play,
unto the Devil, when they are only performed by Leger-de-main, or sleight of
hand, Boxes, and Instruments aptly fitted; and will not stick to believe, and
strongly to affirm to others, that they have seen the Jugglers Familiar or
Devil, when it was but a poor Squirrels skin stuffed with hair or moss, and
nimbly agitated by the hands of the Juggler: which makes me call to mind a very
lepid and pertinent Accident that once in my younger years happened in Burrow
bridge upon a great Fair holden there upon St. Barnabas day: I being in Company
with diverse History 1.
Gentlemen, whereof two were Masters of Arts, and walking in the Horse-Fayr, we
espied a great crowd and ring of people, and drawing near, there was a person
commonly known through most of the Northern parts of Yorkshire by the name of
John Gypsy, being as black as any of that Tribe, with a Feather in his Hat, a
silk slasht Doublet, upon a fair Holland Half-shirt, counterfeiting himself
half drunk, and reeling to and fro, with a fine Tape or Incle-string tied fast
together at the two ends, and throwing it, (as it were) carelessly two or three
times about a smooth Rod, that another man held by both ends, and then putting
the bout of the Tape upon the one end of the Rod, and then crying, It is now
fast for five shillings; but no sooner reeling and looking aside, the man that
held the Rod did put off the bout of the Tape again, and still John Gypsy,
would cry and bet that it was fast, then would there come two or three, and bet
with him, and win, and go away (as it were) laughing him to scorn, yet still he
would continue, and pray the Fellow that held the stick not to deceive him, and
plainly show the people, that it would be fast when the bout was put on, then
would the Fellow that held the stick, still put off the bout when John Gypsy
looked away, whereby the people believed that he was in drink, and so deceived
by him that held the Rod, and so many would come and bet with him, and lose: so
that he used to win much money, though the bout was put off every time, and
none could discern any alteration in the string. This strange Feat (which I
confess, as he handled and acted it, was one of the neatest that ever I saw in
all my life) did so surprise all my Companions, and in part himself, that some
of them were of opinion, that he had some stone in the Ring upon his finger, by
virtue of which he performed the Trick. But the most part concluded, that it
could not be done but by the power and help of the Devil, and resolved to come
no more near John Gypsy, as a man that was a Witch, and had familiarity with
the Devil. But I that then was much guilty of curiosity, and loath to be imposed
upon in a thing of that nature, then also knowing the way and manner how all
the common Jugglers about Cambridge and London (who make a Trade of it) did
perform their Tricks, I slipped away from my Company, and went to the place again
where I found him still playing; and thrusting in, I desired to hold the stick,
which he refused not; and so in a short time I perceived how it was done, and
so returned to my Company, and showed them the slight and mystery of it, which
made them very much ashamed of their folly and ignorance. They may deride this
story that list, and yet it may serve for instruction to the wisest, and there
are hundreds yet living that knew this person, and where he was born, which was
at Bolton-bridge near Skipton in Craven, and have seen him play this trick of
fast and loose, as I have related it: so that if a man meet with a crafty
cunning Fellow, he commonly by way of Proverb calls him John Gypsy. 4. They
ought to be free in their judgments as in aequilibrio, and not to be radicated
nor habituated in the belief of those things; for then they will hardly be
dissuaded from their opinions, but pertinaciously adhere unto them, though
never so absurd, and will be apt to ascribe all effects, that they understand
not, unto Devils and Witches, as is manifest in the Jesuit Roberti Foster,
Sennertus, Vid. Resp. Rob. Flud. ad Foster.
and many others, who attributed the effects of the Hoplocrism or Weapon-salve,
and the Sympathetick Powder unto the operation of the Devil and Witchcraft,
when they are but merely natural. Which makes me call to mind a pretty story
that happened when I was but a young Boy. For where I once learned at the
School, History 2.
there was one who was Rector of the Church, who was a very godly man, a good
and constant Preacher, accounted very learned, and Bachelor of Divinity: this
person being informed, that I and some other Boys could play some odd Feats of
sleight of hand, especially to put a Ring upon our Cheek, and to throw it unto
a staff holden fast by both the ends; this he by no means did believe could be
done but by Diabolical means, and did advise and threaten us to desist from
such practices, as devilish and damnable. So ready even the otherwise Learned
may be, when once settled in these fond and absurd opinions of the too great
power of Demons and Witches, to ascribe that unto them, which is performed by
Nature and lawful Art.

CHAP. V.
That these things now in question are but barely supposed, and were yet never
rationally nor sufficiently proved: And that the Allegations brought to prove
them by are weak, frivolous, and absolutely invalid. With a full Confutation of
all the four Particulars.

HAving in the preceding Chapter proved that the Scriptures and sound Reason,
are the proper Mediums to decide these difficulties by, and also laid down the
necessary qualifications requisite in an Author or Witness that would evidence
these things as matters of fact: We shall here once again repeat the four
Particulars, which we are about to confute, which are these. 1. That the Devil
does not make a visible or corporeal League and Covenant with the supposed
Witches. 2. That he does not suck upon their bodies. 3. That he has not carnal
Copulation with them. 4. That they are not really changed into Cats, Dogs,
Wolves, or the like. And these four Particulars we affirm were never matters of
fact, nor ever had a being, except only in the fancy as mere Chimera's, nor
that they ever were or can be proved to have been brought to pass or acted; and
de non apparentibus, and non existentibus eadem est ratio, says the great
Maxim of our Law. But in the first place let us hear what the Patrons of this
wretched and execrable opinion have to say to prove that they are matters of
fact, or were ever acted or performed. And first we have Mr. Glanvil arguing at
this rate: All Histories are full of the exploits Page 5, 6.
of those instruments of darkness; and the testimony of all ages, not only of
the rude and barbarous, but of the most civilized and polisht World, brings
tidings of their strange performances. We have the attestation of thousands of
eye and ear-witnesses, and those not of the easily deceivable vulgar only, but
of grave and and wise discerners; and that when no interest could oblige them
to agree together in a common lie: I say we have the light of all these
circumstances to confirm us in the belief of things done by persons of
despicable power and knowledge, beyond the reach of Art and ordinary Nature.
Standing public Records have been kept of these well-attested Relations, and
Epocha's made of those unwonted events. Laws in many Nations have been enacted
against those vile practices; those among the Jews and our own are notorious;
such Cases have been often determined near us, by wise and reverend Judges,
upon clear convictive Evidence, and thousands in our own Nation have suffered
death for their vile compacts with Apostate Spirits. And a little after he
says: And I think those that can believe all Histories are Romances; that all
the wiser World have agreed together to juggle Mankind into a common belief of
ungrounded Fables; that the sound senses of multitudes together may deceive
them, and Laws are built upon Chimera's; that the gravest and wisest Judges
have been Murderers, and the sagest persons Fools or designing Impostors.
Bishop Hall makes the like Objection, saying: Neither can I make question of
the authentic Records of the Examinations and Confessions of Witches and
Sorcerers in several (...). Damonom^. ^bique of evil Spirits, page 304.
Regions of the World, agreeing in the truth of their horrible pacts with
Satan, of their set Meetings with evil Spirits, their beastly Homages and
Conversations. I should hate to be guilty of so much incredulity, as to charge
so many grave Judges and credible Historians with lies.

These Objections at the first view seem very plausible, and to carry with them
a great splendor and weight of truth and reason; but if they be looked into,
and narrowly weighed in the balance of sound reason, and unbiassed judgment,
they will be found too light, and will soon vanish into Rhetorical fumes and
frothy vapors: which that it may be more clearly performed, we shall rank them
into the number of three, in which all their seeming strength lies, and these
are they.

1. They pretend that these things are sufficiently proved by Historians of
unquestionable credit and reputation.

2. That the Confessions of Witches themselves, in diverse Regions, at several
times and places, who have all acknowledged these particulars, are sufficient
evidence of the truth of these performances.

3. That so many wise and grave Judges and honest Juries could not have been
deceived, to put to death such great numbers of these kind of people, called or
accounted Witches, without sufficient proof of the matters of fact. To all
which we shall give a full response, in respect of the four particulars,
mentioned in the beginning of this Chapter, and shall commix and adjoyn such
positive Arguments as will be cogent to all rational persons, whose corrupt
wills have not perverted their judgments.

1. It is much to be admired, that Mr. Glanvil (but especially Bishop Hall, a
very Reverend and Learned person) should lie any great stress upon such a weak
foundation: For there is none of these three Objections that will amount to a
necessary Proposition, but only to a contingent one, which will infer no
certain and necessary Conclusion, nor bring forth any certitude or science, but
only bare opinion and probability. Propositio contingens est, qu^ sic vera est,
ut falsa esse possit: and at the best the strength of all these are but
testimonia humana, which are but weak, and no sufficient ground for a rational
man to believe them to be true, because humanum est errare. And the weight of
these matters is not a contention de lana caprina, vel de umbra asini, sed de
pelle humana, for the lives and estates of many poor Creatures, and they
professed Christians too, and therefore does require stronger Arguments than
contingent Propositions, to establish a firm ground for the belief of this
opinion.

2. It is one thing barely to affirm, and another thing to prove sufficiently
and fully: For though they boldly allege, that these things are sufficiently
proved by Authors of unquestionable credit and verity, we must return a flat
negative, and that for these reasons. 1. Let them show us any one Author of
credible veracity, that ever was ear or eyewitness of the Devils making of a
visible and corporeal League or Bargain with the Witches, or that he ever sucked
upon their bodies, or that he had carnal Copulation with them, or that by the
experience of his senses ever certainly knew a man really transubstantiated and
transformed into a Wolf, or a Wolf into a man, and we will yield the whole
Cause. But we must assert and truly affirm, that this pretense of theirs, that
these things are sufficiently proved by Historians of good credit, is a mere
falsity, and a lying flourish of vain words. There are (we confess) a multitude
of vain and lying stories, amassed up together in the Writings of
Demonographers and Witchmongers of strange and odd Apparitions, Feats,
Confessions, and such like; but never any one positive proof of any of these
four particulars by any Authors of credit and reputation: and this we dare
boldly aver to the world. 2. Let them produce any two Witnesses that were of
honesty and integrity, sound understandings and ability, that ever were
present, and ear and eyewitnesses of a visible, vocal, and corporeal League
made betwixt the Devil and the Witch; or let them tell us who was by, and
watched, and really and truly saw the Devil suck upon some part of the Witches
body; or who were the Chamberlains, Pimps or Panders, when the Devil and the
Witch committed carnal Copulation; or who were ever present when a Witch was
changed into a Cat, a Dog, an Hare, or a Wolf. If they can but bring forth any
two credible Witnesses to prove these things by, then we shall believe them;
but we must assert that never any such two could be produced yet: and therefore
cannot but wonder at the shameless impudence of such persons, that dare affirm
these things that never were, nor can be proved, and yet have not blushed to
vent and trumpet forth such execrable and abominable lies to the World. Mr.
Glanvil confidently affirms these things to be matters of fact, and affirmanti
incumbit probatio, let him produce his Witnesses, and if they be persons of
judgment, veracity, and impartiality, then we shall accept their proof; but it
is not figments, supposals, weak presumptions, or apparent falsities that will
perform it; for that which never was acted, can never truly be proved, and
things that appear not, are as though they were not; therefore he must produce
his testimonies, or lose both his cause and credit, and must be taken for an
Assertor of never-proved Fables. Lying lips are abomination unto the Lord: but
they Prove. 12. 22.
that deal truly are his delight.

Now we know they use to do in this case, as Soldiers use, who when they are
beaten forth of some Out-work or Trench, they then retreat into another that
they think more strong and safe. And being driven from their weak Hold of a
bare affirmation without proof, that these things are verified to have been
matters of fact, and really performed, both by authority and the evidence of
sense, which are both utterly false, then they fly to this assertion: That the
Confessions of so many Witches in all Ages, in several Countries, at diverse
times and places, all agreeing in these particulars, are sufficient evidence of
the truth of these matters. To which we shall rejoyn, that the Confessions of
Witches, however considered, are not of credit and validity to prove these
things; but are in themselves null and void, as false, impossible, and forged
lies, which we shall make good by these following Reasons.

1. The Witch must be taken to be either a person insanae, vel Reas. 1.
sanae mentis; and if they be insanae mentis, their Confessions are no
sufficient evidence, nor worthy of any credit; because there is neither Reason,
Law, nor Equity that allows the testimony or confession of an Idiot, Lunatic,
mad or doting person, because they are not of a right and sound understanding,
and are not to be accounted as compotes mentis, nor governed by rationability.
For as by the Civil Law mad Folks, Idiots, and Old men childish, Bondslaves,
and Villains are not capable of making a Will to dispose of Goods, Lands, or
Chattels: so much more are all these sorts of persons excepted for giving
evidence by confessions, or otherwise in matters concerning life and death,
which are of far greater weight and concernment. And that these persons are of
unsound understandings, is manifest in all the points that they confess, and
therefore are no proof, nor ought to be credited: and that for these reasons.
1. Because the things they confess are not attested by any other persons of
integrity and sound judgment, and they must of necessity be liars, because the
Bondslaves of the Devil, whose works they will do, and he was a liar from the
beginning. 2. Because they confess things that are impossible (as we shall
prove anon) and confiteri impossibilia insanienti^ est. 3. There is no good end
wherefore they make these Confessions, neither do they receive any benefit by
them, either spiritual or temporal, internal nor external. And this does
sufficiently show, that they are deluded, melancholy, and mad persons, and so
their Confessions of no credit, truth, or validity.

2. Their Confessions will be found null and false, if we consider Reas. 2.
the impulsive cause that moves them to make them, and the end wherefore they
declare such false and lying matters, and that in these particulars. 1. The
moving cause is not, nor can be the Spirit of God, which is a Spirit of truth
and righteousness, nor any motion of true remorse for their sins, or any thing
flowing from repentant hearts, because they are persons forsaken of God and his
Grace, and given over to reprobate minds and senses, and therefore the truth of
the Word of God is fulfilled in them: Because they 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12.
received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved, therefore God
shall send them strong delusion, that they might believe a lie. That they all
might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. 2. Neither is the end for the glory of God, or their own
Salvation, because they are the Vassals and Bondslaves of Satan, being kept
Captive at his will, and are Rebels and Traitors against God and Christ, his
Church and Truth, having renounced the Faith, and become Apostata's to the
truth. 2 Timothy 2. 26.
3. The impulsive cause and chief end wherefore they make these and such like
confessions, is sometimes, and in some persons merely to eschew torture and
bodily pains, and sometimes the quite contrary solely to escape the present
miseries of a poor, wretched, and troublesome life; and therefore these
confessions not at all to be credited, as being vain and feigned. 4. Sometimes
they are by force, waking, craft, and cunning, in hope of pardon and life, to
make such confessions as the base ends and corrupt intentions of the
Inquisitors themselves, or their Agents, have infused into them, for the
advancement of false Doctrine, Superstition, and Idolatry: such were the most
(if not all) recorded by Delrio Bodinus, and the rest of the Witchmongers, to
which no credit can be given at all. 5. But the chief end that Satan has (who
is the Forger, Contriver, and Deviser of these Confessions, if voluntarily and
freely made, the principal Agent in all these matters) is to set forth the
power and glory of his own Kingdom, thereby to lead men into, and continue them
in lies and errors; for when he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own, for he
is a liar, and the father of it, Joh. 8. 44.
and the Witches are his Children, and the works of their Father the Devil they
will do, and he was, and is a Murderer and Liar from the beginning. And thus
far we acknowledge a spiritual and mental League betwixt the Witch and the
Devil, by virtue of which they confess these horrible and abominable lies, of
the glory of him and his Kingdom; but other League or Covenant there is none,
neither is there any the least spark of truth in all that they say or confess,
because their sole end in making of these confessions, is to advance the credit
and power of Satan. 6. The impulsive cause that often makes them to utter such
confessions of strange and impossible things, is the strong passive delusion,
that they lie under, contracted by ignorant, unchristian, and superstitious
education, which they have sucked in with their milk, heightened with an
atrabilarious temper and constitution, and confirmed by the wicked lies, and
teaching of others, which makes them confess these execrable things, which they
in their depraved and vitiated imaginations, do think and believe they have
done and suffered, when there was never truly acted any such matter ad extra,
but only in their mad and deluded Fantasies: and so no more credit to be given
to them, than to the maddest Melancholist that ever was read or heard of.

3. That there is not any jot of truth in these Confessions, is manifest, Reas.
3.
if we consider the subjective matter of them, as is plain by these ensuing
grounds. 1. For the most of them are not credible, by reason of their obscenity
and filthiness; for chaste ears would tingle to hear such bawdy and immodest
lies; and what pure and sober minds would not nauseate and startle to
understand such unclean stories, as of the carnal Copulation of the Devil with
a Witch, or of his sucking the Teat or Wart of an old stinking and rotten
Carcass? surely even the impurity of it may be sufficient to overthrow the
credibility of it, especially amongst Christians. 2. There are many things that
have no verity in them at all, that notwithstanding have verisimilitude; but
these are not only void of truth, but also of truth-likeliness: for it is
neither truth, nor has any likelihood of it, to believe it for a truth, that
the Devil should carry an old Witch in the Air into foraign Regions, that can
hardly crawl with a staff, to dancing and banqueting, and yet to return with an
empty belly, and the next day to be forced, like old Dembdike or Elizabeth
Sothernes, and Alizon Denice, to go a begging with the sowr-milk Can: is this
either probable or likely? would it not much more have advantaged the Devils
interest and his Kingdom, to have furnished them with good and true meat and
drink, and not with such imaginary Cates, which would neither fill the stomach,
nor satisfy the appetite? Had it not been more for the Devils benefit to have
furnished them with plenty of gold and silver, than to let them go ragged and
tattered, begging their bread from door to door? 3. As these confessions have
no truth-likeliness in them, so they are things that are simply impossible to
be performed by any created power, and therefore must needs be false and
fictitious relations; for no Creature can perform any thing but that for which
by Creation it was ordered and designed to; but the Devils by Creation have no
generative power given them, nor members or organs to perform the act of
copulation withal; and therefore their having carnal copulation with the
Witches, is a most monstrous fiction, and an absolute impossibility, and can
have nothing in it more than the stirring up of the imaginative faculty, and
thereby to move titillation in the members fitted for the act of generation,
which is a thing that happens to many both men and women, that are of hot
constitutions, and abound with seed, which we call nocturna prolutiones, of
which the Divines and Casuists make that great question, An nocturna
prolutiones sint peccatum? And it is as simply impossible for either the Devil
or Witches to change or alter the course that God has set in Nature, as to
transubstantiate a man or woman into a Cat, a Dog, or a Wolf; and therefore are
these confessions mere impossibilities and monstrous lies. 4. There can in
sound and right reason no credit at all be given to these confessions, because
diverse of them have been proved to be utterly false, as is plain in the man
that did confidently affirm, that he was a true Wolf, and that he had hair
under his skin, the woeful trial of which was his death, though a pregnant and
undeniable proof, that the delusion was in the Fantasy, and that there was no
real change of the man's body into a Wolf; and therefore does flatly overthrow
the credibility of these vain and lying confessions. To the same purpose is the
story related by Camerari^s Lib. 1. of Prognost. Hist. meditat. lib. 4. cap.
13. page 280. History 1.
from Johannes Baptista Porta, a great Naturalist, and a person of competent
veracity, which is this. Once (says he) I met an old Witch, one of those that
are said to enter houses in the night time, and there to suck the blood of
little children lying in their Cradles. Having asked her a question of
something, she promised forthwith, that within a while she would give me
answer. She puts forth of her Chamber all those that went in with me to be
witnesses of that which should pass. Having shut us out, she strips her self
stark naked, and rubs over all her body with a certain Ointment, which we saw
through the chinks of the door. The operation of the soporiferous juyces,
whereof this Ointment was compounded, made her fall to the ground, and brought
her into a deep sleep. Upon this we open the door, and some of us begin to
strike and knock her well-favour'dly; but she was so soundly asleep, that to
strike her body and a stone, it was all one. Forth we go again, in the mean
time the Ointment had ended his working, and the old Trot being awaked, and
having put on her clothes, begins to tell tales of Robin Hood, saying, That she
had passed over Seas and Mountains, and then gives us false answers. We tell
her, that her body had never stirred out of the Chamber; she maintains the
contrary: we show her the blows we had given her, she persisteth the more
stiffly in her opinion. By the testimony of this Author, who was an ear and
eyewitness of this passage, and other persons with him, which manifests it to
be good and sufficient evidence, it appears, that the Witches are under a
melancholy and passive delusion, promoted by the help of soporiferous
Ointments, whereby they fancy and think they are carried into far remote
places, where they hear and see strange things, and do and suffer that which is
not at all performed, but only as in a dream, their bodies in the mean time
lying immovable, and so do but relate falsities and lies, which is an
unanswerable proof of the absolute falsity of their confessions, the thing that
here we undertook to make good. And some late Learned men (with Mr. Glanvil
himself) giving too much credit to the things related by the Witches in their
confessions, to be true stories of things really performed at a great distance,
have been forced to revive that old Platonical Whimsie, of the Souls real
egression forth of the body into far distant places, and its return again, with
the certain knowledge of things there done or said, according to the relation
that Pliny gives us in these words: Reperimus (inquit) Hist. not. l. 7. c. 52.
page 103.
interempla, Hermotimi Clazomenii animam relicto corpore errare solitam,
vagamque e longinquo multa annuntiar^, quae nisi a praesenti nosci non possent,
corpore interi^ semianimi: donec cremato eo inimici (qui Cantharidae
vocabantur) remeanti animae velut vaginam ademerint. To which notwithstanding
he does not seem to give credence. But these Relations of the Witches are mere
lies and forgeries, and are but taught them by the spiritual craft of the
Devil, thereby to pretend to imitate the true Visions that the Prophets had
from God. And though there may be some peculiar persons that have the way to
fall into ecstasies, (as Helmont witnesses of himself) and may thereby
understand many mystical matters, yet in it there is no real egression of the
Soul forth of the body, but a freeing or withdrawing of it from the Fantasy
and Senses, and then (as the Cabbalists and mystical Authors say) it is joined
to the intelligible World, and beholds things as present; and though there may
be something of truth in it, yet few Authors of credit and veracity, have
attested it upon their own experience, and there may be much fallacy and danger
in it, and therefore we leave it to further search and inquiry. Another
apparent ground of the nullity of the truth or credit of these confessions, is
that which a learned Divine in his Letter to Dr. Wierus gives us, the substance
of which we shall give in English, Doctor. Epist. page 641. History 2.
which is this: I have known (he says) the year foregoing (he writ his Epistle
Anno 1565.) many foolish things from the private confession of a certain old
Woman, an Inchanter, who when she had heard in my Sermon the place in the 19.
Chapter of the Acts explained, That many of the Ephesians, being of those who
had exercised curious Arts, had brought their Books, and burned them openly,
etc. She forthwith (he says) came unto me with a mind plainly troubled; and
with tears pouring forth into my bosom the secrets of her breast, did receive
Christian instruction; and when she had understood, by the blessing of God, the
vanity of Diabolical Impostures, and perceived them with opened eyes, she was
easily converted to the light of truth, the smoke of lies being laid aside.
She, truth being once received, has most constantly confessed, that it did
appear to her more clear than the light at noon day, that Satan did only
deceive and blind the eyes of his Vassals, and that there was nothing done in
verity, and this she declared with a detestation of her Diabolical Art. And so
concludes it in these words: Uno verbo dicam, me satis experientia didicisse,
bonam partem incantationum mera esse insomnia. And whosoever shall read, and
seriously consider the Epistle of that excellent and learned Divine, will find
the most of those vain illusions laid open and confuted: so that in all (or the
most) of the things attributed unto Witches, we shall find no more of
Diabolical operation in them, than an internal, mental, and spiritual delusion,
in making the Witches to believe, and to draw on others to the same opinion,
that the Devil has a kind of omnipotent Power and Sovereignty. Therefore did
Aristotle well conclude: Incantamenta esse muliercularum Histor. Animal. lib.
8. cap. 24.
figmenta.

4. A fourth Reason of the mere falsity and incredibility of these Reas. 4.
Confessions is this: Is it possibly credible to a rational and unbiassed
judgment, that the Witches (though never so many, at several times and places)
having made themselves the Slaves and Vassals of the Devil, both in soul and
body, and being led by his lying and deceitful Spirit (though making large and
voluntary confessions) can be conceived to have any touch of truth in them at
all? Surely no more truth in these confessions, than there is in the Devil, who
was a Liar from the beginning; and therefore we argue thus. Such kind of will,
affections and inclinations as are in the Devil himself, such kind are in his
Children. But the will and affections of the Devil are against God, his Truth,
and against all Gods people, and his inclinations tend to continual lying.
Therefore the will, affections, and inclinations of his Children (such as the
Witches are, and are granted to be) are against God, his Truth, and against all
Gods people, and their inclinations tend to continual lying. The proof of the
major and minor Proposition is the plain words of our Savior, Ye are of your
father the devil, and the lusts of your father the devil ye will do, (...), and
he was a Joh. 8. 44.
murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no
truth in him. When he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own: for he is a liar,
and the father of it. And again St. John tells us: He that commits sin, is
of the devil; for the devil sins 1 John 3. 8.
from the beginning. So that it may truly be said of them, They delight in
lies, and their confessions are nothing but lies. And if Psalm. 62. 4.
they object and say, that here we confess a League with the Devil and the
Witch, otherwise the Witches could not be his Children, Vassals, and
Bondslaves, which elsewhere we deny; we answer, it is a gross mistake, in not
observing the distinction we make betwixt a mental and spiritual League, such
as the Devil and Judas made, and such as all wicked men make with him, and
under this League we acknowledge all Witches to be; but a visible and corporeal
League we positively deny, and so the objection is of no validity. And thus we
suppose we have sufficiently proved, that there ought no credit at all to be
given to the Confessions of Witches, no more than to Devils, who are all liars.

Now let us proceed to their third main Objection: That so many wise and grave
Judges and honest Juries could not have been deceived, to put to death such
great numbers of those kind of people, without sufficient proof of the matters
of fact. Against which we oppose these following Reasons.

1. It is but an Argument at the best to drive the other Party into an
absurdity, which is not of any such dangerous consequence, Reas. 1.
as may be supposed; for it would but conclude, that many grave and wise Judges
and Juries have been imposed upon, and deceived, which is but argumentum ad
homines, and doubtless many might, and have been. And do not we Christians
hold, that the gravest and wisest Judges amongst the Turks and Persians have
been, and are deceived, and have done unjustly in persecuting and putting
Christians to death, because they would not submit to the Religion of Mahomet,
and yet we account it no absurdity or injustice to pass that censure upon them?
And do not the Idolaters in all those large Empires and Kingdoms of Tartary,
China, the Moguls Country, and the rest of those Countries in the East of Asia
persecute and put many to death, for not worshipping their Idols, or embracing
their Religion; and do we think it absurd to censure and condemn them of
injustice, though in their own Countries they be accounted grave and wise
Judges? Surely we do not, and there is the parity of reason in both the
Arguments, for all are but men, and so may err.

2. But as for the grave, learned, and wise Judges, and understanding and
honest Juries within His Majesty's Dominions, we Reas. 2.
affirm they are clear and innocent from these imputations, and that for diverse
and sundry sound reasons. 1. Our Judges and Juries have no such sinister and
corrupt ends, to wrest the Laws, or wring forth and extort feigned and false
Confessions, because they have no such ends as to uphold and maintain
idolatrous and superstitious Tenants, as praying to Saints, magnifying of
Holy Water, or setting up of Purgatory, as had the Popish Inquisitors, and the
Demonographers, and Witchmongers that writ for those ends. And therefore it is
no absurdity to say or think, that they dealt unjustly in their proceedings,
which our learned and pious Judges are not, nor can be guilty of. 2. The
Inquisitors and their Agents had benefit by the death of Witches, having a
share in their Goods, and therefore no absurdity to conclude, that their
proceedings were unjust, partial, and corrupt, of which our Judges and Juries
are clear, as having no profit at all by the death of these wretched and
deluded people. 3. Our Judges are but sworn to the due execution of the Laws
made, and the Juries sworn to bring in their Verdicts according to their best
evidence: now if the Witnesses forth of malice, envy, ignorance, or mistake
swear to matters of fact, for which death or other punishments are allotted by
the Law, both the Judges and the Jury are absolutely excusable; and if there be
any guilt in the Witnesses, or falsity in their Evidences, it lies at their own
doors, and upon their own consciences, and the Judges and Jurors are clear, and
not to be blamed, for no humane prudence can altogether prevent, that Witnesses
may not err or swear falsely.

3. Have there not been many thousands of true and faithful Martyrs, that have
suffered and been condemned in many Ages, in Reas. 3.
many and several Countries, at many different and distinct times? And some of
these have been condemned by such as were called and accounted General
Councils, Parliaments, High-Courts of Justice, and other places of great
Judicature, before Judges that were accounted wise, grave, and learned, and by
Juries of honesty and understanding: were there therefore no true Martyrs, and
were they all justly condemned and put to death? or is it absurd to be guilty
of such incredulity, as to think and hold, that so many grave and wise Judges,
and knowing Juries were deceived, and did unjustly? Let Mr. Glanvil or any
other solve this Argument, and carry the cause; or else we must necessarily
conclude, that opinio quae a se non propellit absurda, per absurda non premit
adversarium.

Now having given a full and satisfactory Answer to their main and strongest
Objections, and defeated the whole force of their first and most furious
Charge, we shall proceed to overthrow their main Battle, in proving the four
Particulars mentioned in the beginning of the Chapter, to be false and
impossible. And in doing of this, we shall handle the three first promiscuously
and all together, and the fourth about Transubstantiations or Change of Witches
into Cats, Hares, Dogs, Wolves, or the like, we shall handle by it self.

1. And first we acknowledge an internal, mental, and spiritual League or
Covenant betwixt the Devil and all wicked persons, such as are Thieves,
Robbers, Murderers, Impostors, and the like, whereby the temptations,
suggestions, and allurements of Satan, spiritually darted, and cast into the
mind, the persons so wrought upon, and prevailed withal, do assent and consent
unto the motions and counsels of the evil Spirit, and so do make a League and
Covenant with the said evil Spirit, as says the Text: According to Ephesians. 2. 2.
the Prince of the power of the air, that now works in the children of
disobedience. He does not only rule over them, but also works in them; for
men are either the Temples of God, or the Temples of Satan and Antichrist, who
sits in the Temple of God, and 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God or worshipped. Such
a spiritual League or Covenant as this did Judas make with the Devil, whereby
he agreed to betray his Master Christ. Then entered Satan into Judas: not that
essentially or Luke 22. 2.
personally he entered into Judas, but that he put it into his heart, (...), to
betray him: which wrought so effectively in him in a spiritual manner, that he
took up that Diabolical resolution to betray his innocent Master: and this was
entering into a spiritual League with the Devil. For as Theophylact says upon
the place. Hoc enim significat, spospondit, hoc est, perfectam promissionem and
pactum fecit. And another says: In Judam Satanas intravit, non Chrysostom. in Luc.
22. 3. Joh. 13. 2.
impellens, sed patulum inveniens ostium: nam oblitus omnium quae viderat, ad
solam avaritiam dirigebat intuitum. And again: Missio ista spiritualis
suggestio est, and non sit per aurem, sed per cogitationem: diabolicae enim
suggestiones immittuntur, and humanis cogitationibus immiscentur.

2. We acknowledge that this spiritual League in some respects and in some
persons may be, and is an explicit League, that is, the persons that enter into
it, are or may be conscious of it, and know it to be so; for when a person
resolves to murder, he cannot but know that he then makes a League with the
Devil, who was a Murderer from the beginning. And it is manifest, that in this
League, and in no other, were all the Priests that belonged to the Oracles, who
knew well enough that the Idols or false Gods they worshipped, did give no
answers at all, but the responsions given were only of their own devising and
framing, to uphold their credit; and more colourably to cozen and deceive the
people, they did pretend that they had answers from their Gods or Idols, and
thus far the Devil was in all their impostures and jugglings. And so all the
several sorts of the Diviners or Witches mentioned in the Old Testament, were
under a spiritual League with the Devil, and did very well know, that what they
did, was not by the finger of God, but either by the help of Art, Nature,
Leger-de-main, Confederacy, or such like impostures and cheats: and yet they
pretended, as did Simon Magus, and gave out that they were some great men,
thereby to deceive others, when explicitly they plainly knew that themselves
were but dissemblers and liars, and that for gain, credit, and vainglory they
pretended to do those things, which they could never truly perform. And under
this spiritual League, explicitly considered, are all our Figure-flingers
contained, who take upon them (far beyond the Rules of the true Art) to declare
where stolen Goods are, and to cause them to be brought back again, and many
other such vain and lying matters, which they well know they have no power to
perform, but that they willingly and knowingly take upon them to pretend to do
these things for vainglory and filthy lucre sake. And of this sort are all our
pretending Conjurers, Diviners, Wizards, and those that take upon them to
reveal things by looking in Crystals, Beryls, and the like, (of which we may
perhaps speak more largely hereafter) that indeed know well enough they do but
deceive and cheat others: of all which we could recite very lepid and apposite
stories, certainly known unto us, or discovered by us; but Mr. Glanvil would
account them but silly Legends and old Wives Fables, and therefore we shall
supersede here, and leave them to a fitter place.

3. There are others that are under this spiritual League, though implicitly,
as are all those that we have granted to be passively deluded Witches, those
that by ignorant and irreligious education, joined with a melancholy temper and
disposition, to which they have added Charms, Pictures, and other superstitious
Ceremonies, which they learned by Tradition. By all which they become so
deluded and besotted in their Fantasies, that they believe the Devil does
visibly appear unto them, suck upon them, have carnal copulation with them,
that they are carried in the Air to feastings, dancings, and such like
Night-revellings; and that they can raise tempests, kill men or beasts, and an
hundred such like fopperies and impossibilities, when they do nor suffer any
thing at all, but in their depraved and deceived imaginations. And so do
blindly and implicitly believe that the Devil does perform all these things for
them, when indeed and truth he does nothing but dart and cast in these filthy
and fond cogitations into their minds agreeable to their wicked wills and
corrupted desires, and so are fast bound in this spiritual and implicit League.
And under this spiritual implicit League are also comprehended all those that
are Witchmongers, and believe the verity and performance of these things, and
think that the Devil can both hurt and also help, and that there is a bad and a
good Witch, or with Mr. Perkins, a black and a white one, by which wicked
opinion, the seeking unto Witches, Wizards, Mutterers, Murmurers, Charmers,
South-sayers, Conjurers, Cunning-men and women (as we speak here in the North)
and such like, is still upholden by the Authors and Favorers of this opinion,
contrary to the direct counsel of the Holy Ghost, who says: And Isa. 8. 19, 20.
when they shall say unto you, Seek unto them that have familiar Spirits, and
unto Wizards that peep and that mutter; should not a people seek unto their
God? for the living to the dead. To the law and to the testimony: if they speak
not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. And
therefore says one: Admonet etiam, nos adversus impios cultus and
superstitiones tutos fore, si in lege Domini acquiescamus. The League or
Covenant Calvin in loc.
betwixt the Devil and the Witch, is that which is visible and corporeal, where
he is supposed to appear in some bodily shape unto the Witch, and to have oral
and audible conference with him or her, and so to make a League or Covenant;
and this is the thing that we deny, and the consequents thereof, that he does
not suck upon their bodies, nor has carnal copulation with them, nor carries
them in the Air, nor for them, nor by them does destroy or kill man or beast,
raise tempests, or change them into Cats, Hares, Wolves, Dogs, or the like; and
this we oppose with these following Reasons.

1. Whatsoever the Devil works, it is to bring advantage to his own Kingdom,
or otherwise he should act in vain. But whatsoever Reas. 1.
he works by a visible Covenant, is not for the advantage of his own Kingdom:
and therefore it is in vain. The major is plain from the Text: Be sober, be
vigilant, because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walks about,
seeking whom he may 2 Pet. 5. 8, 9.
devour, whom resist steadfast in the faith. The minor is manifest in these two
particulars. 1. Satan is that old Serpent, that was, and is more subtle than
any beast of the field, which the Lord God has Rev. 12. 9.
created: which notwithstanding the vain Cavils, and seeming Arguments of
Pererius, must be understood of Satan the Adversary of Mankind, and not of the
natural Serpent, which is not the most subtle beast that God has created,
there being many others more subtle than the Serpent; and the Scripture tells
us of his cunning and wiliness: for the Apostle says, We are not ignorant of
his wiles or devices (...). And the Apostle in another place calls 2 Cor. 2. 11.
them (...), his wiles, which are so great, that if it were possible, Ephesians. 6.
11. Mat. 24. 24.
they might deceive the very elect. So that he wants no cunning nor subtilty to
know how to bring a sinner into his snare, and to hold him fast, and when he is
fast, he knows he need do no more, and therefore acts not in vain. 2. Before he
need attempt a visible apparition to the Witch (if any such thing could be) he
knows that the Witch is sure and fast in his snare by a spiritual Covenant
already entered into, and therefore knows he need do no more, and he is too
cunning to act to no purpose, and therefore does St. Paul warn Timothy, That a
Bishop must have a good report, lest he fall into the snare of the devil, all
sins being the snares of the Devil, and when men are fast taken in them, they
are in Satan's fetters, and he labors no more but to keep them there. And so
the same Apostle speaks of those that oppose the Gospel, that they must be
instructed in meekness, that they may recover themselves 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26.
out of the snare of the devil, who are taken captive by him at his will. So
that sins keep men in the spiritual snare of the Devil, and so are all those
that are accounted Witches, in that spiritual snare, holden fast enough by
their own consents and corrupt wills, and need no bodily apparition to make
them surer: and so this visible League falls to the ground, as having no ground
nor end why it should be made. And for the Devil to appear like a Dog or a Cat,
and speak, would sure not only fright and startle an old Witch, but even the
boldest and most stout-hearted person.

2. The Witches by visible apparitions of the Devil (if any such Reas. 2.
thing could be) in any shape, could have no more assurance of Satan's
performances, than they have already, by mental persuasion, and the dominion of
him in their hearts, who is the Prince of the air, and works in the children
of disobedience, because by that visible appearance there is not brought any
Hostages or Witnesses, which are absolutely necessary to confirm such a League
or Covenant. And these representations being made in their imaginations and
fancies, wherein they think they see, do, and suffer these delusive Visions,
they are most firmly and pertinaciously confirmed in the belief of them, that
any Apparition externally must needs be vain and superfluous.

3. If the Witches be not superlatively mad (and if so, then so to Reas. 3.
be judged of, and all that in this point is believed of them either in doing,
suffering, or otherwise, must be judged extreme folly and madness) they will
not make a League with the Devil, knowing him to be the Devil, because they
cannot but know that he was and is a Liar and a Murderer from the beginning,
and has deceived many before them, that were of the same way and profession.
And a visible appearance can afford them no certain security, but that he may
and will deceive them still, and that he continues a liar and a deceiver. But
while the delusion is internal, and the imagination depraved, and led by the
suggestions and motions of Satan, they then are so blinded, that they see not,
nor understand the danger they run into, nor the certainty of the deceit they
lie under, which a visible Apparition would sooner shake and overthrow, than
any way confirm, and therefore is false and needless.

4. But how come the Witches certainly to know that the Devil Reas. 4.
can perform such things as they would have done? Surely by no means, but
either by traditional hear say or inward delusion; the one they know not, but
that it is a lie, and the other concludes their passive delusion, to neither
of which a visible Apparition like a Cat or a Dog, and speaking unto them, can
bring any confirmation, except the Devil should bring them good store of gold
or silver, or work some strange feat before their eyes, as to kill some men or
beasts, or the like; but none of these things are ever proved to be performed.
And therefore it is not rational to believe that Witches do make a visible and
corporeal League with the Devil, because by it they can have no certain
knowledge, that he either can or will accomplish such things for them, as they
desire.

5. The Devil cannot by his own power or will, either appear Reas. 5.
visibly in what shape he please, neither can he when he will, nor as he will,
perform these strange tricks, because he is under restraint, and can act
nothing but as the will of God orders and determines: so God sent an evil
Spirit upon Saul, otherwise he could not have troubled him; and the Devils
could not enter into the herd of 1 Samuel 16. 14. Mat. 8. 31, 32.
Swine, until leave was given them by our Savior; neither could he afflict
Job, until that Gods hand was laid upon him, and God Job 1. 10, 11.
ordered him to be an instrument in that affliction. And though the Devil be
said to walk about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour, yet must
that walking about be only understood 1 Pet. 5. 8.
(and is so taken by all sound Expositors) of the evil and wicked intention of
his will, according to which he is always ready seeking whom he may devour, if
he be so ordered or permitted of God (ordering and permission in this point,
being but all one act of the divine Will and Providence) and not in regard of
his power or liberty to act or execute what he please, and when and as he list;
for the same Apostle and also St. Jude tells us, that he is kept in chains of
darkness to be reserved unto judgment, and by those chains 2 Pet. 2. 4. Jude 6.
he is kept, that he cannot hurt or destroy, when and where he list, but as he
is sent and appointed of God, either to tempt or afflict the godly, or to
punish the wicked; and therefore the sentence of St. Austin is much to be
weighed and considered, who says: Diabolus plerumque vult nocere, and non
potest, quia potestas ista est sub Aug. super Psalm.
potestate: nam si tantum posset nocere Diabolus quantum vult, aliquis justorum
non remaneret. And therefore I cannot but transcribe here the opinion of that
pious and learned person Bishop Hall upon this very particular, which is this:
Could Samson have been Of evil Aug. sect. 3. page 279, 280.
firmly bound hand and foot by the Philistine cords, so as he could not have
stirred those mighty limbs of his, what Boy or Girl of Gath or Ascalon would
have feared to draw near and spurn that awed Champion? No other is the
condition of our dreadful enemies, they are fast bound up with the adamantine
chains of Gods most merciful and inviolable Decree, and forcibly restrained
from their desired mischief. Who can be afraid of a muzled and tied up Mastive?
what woman or child cannot make faces at a fierce Lion, or a bloody Bajazet
locked up fast in an Iron Grate? Were it not for this strong and strait curb of
divine Providence, what good man could breathe one minute upon earth? The
Demoniack in the Gospel could break his iron fetters in pieces, through the
help of his Legion; those Devils that possessed him could not break theirs;
they are fain to sue for leave to enter into Swine, neither had obtained it (in
all likelihood) but for a just punishment to those Gaderene owners: How sure
may we then be, that this just hand of Omnipotence will not suffer these evil
ones to tyrannize over his chosen Vessels for their hurt? How safe are we,
since their power is limited, our protection infinite? So that if the Devil be
thus chained and restrained by the omnipotent Decree and Providence, that he
cannot execute any evil, but as he is ordered of God, and that God does not let
him loose but for just causes and reasons; then can it not be that the Devil
does visibly appear and make Leagues with Witches, nor work such strange things
for them, because there is no just or reasonable end that can be assigned, why
God should order him to do these things; and therefore a visible League with
Witches is merely false and fraudulent.

6. This pretended League must needs be a lie and a figment, because of the
effects that are feigned to follow, as to have carnal Reas. 6.
copulation with the Devil, to raise storms and tempests, to fly in the air,
and to kill men and beasts. For if these things be done, they are either
performed by the Witches own natural power, or by the Devils. If by the Witches
natural power, or the force of her resuscitated imagination and strength of
will to work ad nutum (as Van Helmont seems to hold) then the Devil operateth
nothing, but in playing the Impostor, and deceiving the Witch, and that he may
easily do by internal and mental delusion, and needs no visible League to bring
it to pass. And if the Witch kill men or beasts, or perform any of the
forecited Feats by natural means or Agents, then where is the Devils power, or
wherein is the Witchcraft or Fascination, or where is the effect of the League?
And if the Witch kill by natural means, then the natural Agent is not simply
evil, but in the use and application. As a Sword is a natural and lawful
instrument for an honest man to use, to defend his life withal, in using of it
with his natural power and skill; but if a Thief or a Robber, with his natural
power and skill, use a Sword to kill and murder an honest man withal, it is
wickedness in the use and end, but not in the agency of the Thief, nor in the
effect of the Sword. So if the Witch by any natural means (though never so
secret) do kill a man or child, it is murder; but wherein lies the Witchcraft?
Is it any thing else but Veneficium (as both the Greek and Latin words do
import) to kill by some secret way of poisoning? Show what Witchcraft there is
in it besides. If the Devil by his own power kill a man, or perform the Witches
carrying in the air, and the like, let us know how, or by what means he
performs the same? If what the Devil performs in natural and corporeal
matter, be (as the Fathers, Schoolmen, and Divines most generally hold) by
applying natural Agents, to fit passives, then the effect is natural, and so in
killing any person, it is only wicked and diabolical, in regard of the end,
which is murder, but what Witchcraft is there in the means and operation? And
therefore Guiterrius strongly concludes thus. If there be no natural
Fascination, there can be no diabolical; but there is no natural Fascination
(as he thinks he has sufficiently proved) therefore he concludes there is
no diabolical Fascination at all. There is no way to solve this Argument, but
either in denying that the Devil works these things by natural means, and
then it crosses the opinion of all the Learned in general, ancient, middle,
and modern, or by proving that there is natural Fascination, and then
diabolical is but in vain and needless.

7. How can the Witches (if not maniacal in the highest degree) believe, that
the Devil who is a Liar, and the Father of lies, and Reas. 7.
whom they cannot but know has in the like cases deceived many, that have (in
their opinion) made contracts with him, will prove true in the performance of
his promise? Or that he who is the enemy of all truth and goodness, and
labors to deceive all Mankind, will be faithful to perform his promise, or
to do them any good, either real or apparent? Or (if the Witches be not
incredibly mad) can they believe that he will perform without Hostages,
Bonds-men, or Sureties? when we find that the weakest and maddest of Mortals,
if he make a Covenant with another of known looseness and deceit, though for a
thing of a far less value, than either soul or body, will he not require
sufficient Bonds-men and Security? Now what Bonds-men or Security can the
Witches have?

8. And if the Witches be not beyond measure deluded and mad, must they not
rationally know, that if the Devil deceive them (as Reas. 8.
he is sure to do) there is no recompense to be had, nor any that can compel
him to perform bargains? Before what Judicature, before what Judges, by what
Law must they call him to an account, or have him punished? So that in all
reason and sound judgment we must conclude the Witches to be absolutely mad,
and then all these things also madness, lies and folly, or that there is not,
nor ever was any such League or Covenant.

9. But if all this were granted, yet who are the Witnesses to this visible
League or Covenant, can the Witches name or find any? Reas. 9.
The things that cannot be proved by sufficient Witnesses, are never to be
believed, and we have proved the nullity, impossibility, and falsity of the
pretended Confessions of Witches themselves, and therefore that no credit at
all ought to be given unto them, and however no Law nor Equity ought to allow
the Evidence of a Party, as in these cases all Witches are. And though some few
of them have been so exceedingly mad to make such false and absurd Confessions,
yet if the Records of all Ages and Courts were sought, it will be found that
many hundreds of them have suffered that never confessed the least tittle of
any such matter; and the supposed Witches of Salmesbury in the County of
Lancaster, the tenth year of the Reign of King James, were so far from this
confession, that See the Arraignment of Witches in Lancast. Ann. 10. Jacobi.
they were cleared, and the accusation found to be false, and all acted by the
imposture of one Thompson, or Christopher Southworth. And I my self have known
two supposed Witches to have been put to death at Lancaster within these
eighteen years, that did utterly deny any such League, or ever to have seen any
visible Devil at all: and may not the confession of these (who both dyed
penitently) be as well credited, as the confessions of those that were brought
to such confessions by force, fraud, or cunning persuasion, and allurements?
But if there be any such League or Covenant betwixt the Witches and the Devil,
how comes the truth of this matter of fact (if ever there were or could be any
such thing) to be certainly known and revealed? Have any of the Penmen of the
holy Scriptures recorded, that there ever was, is, or can be any such League or
Contract? Or was it ever attested by any honest rational men, that were ear or
eyewitnesses of such a bargain and contract? Therefore we must once again
conclude: De non apparentibus and non existentibus eadem est ratio.

10. As for the Witches either Males or Females, having carnal Reas. 10.
Copulation with Devils, either as an Incubus or Succubus, and their stealing
of seed from a man, and conveying it into the vessels of the woman, it is in it
self so horrid, monstrous, and incredible, that I cannot well believe him to be
a rational person, or sanae mentis, that believes it as a truth, and therefore
cannot but think the rehearsal of it a sufficient confutation. Also herein I do
appeal to all learned Physicians, who do know the way that Nature breeds humane
seed, the causes that make it prolifical, and the members fit for its
generation and reception, who (I doubt not) will deride this Tenent, and
condemn it, as false and abominable. Moreover, the horrid absurdity of it has
been sufficiently demonstrated by Wierus, Dr. Tandlerus, Mr. Scot, Mr.
Wagstaff, and others: and therefore all we shall say is this: That Devils,
whether conceived to be corporeal or incorporeal, and to assume bodies (for the
one it must of necessity be) were not created of God to generate, neither have
they, nor can have any seed, or members fit for generation; and therefore to
copulate or generate is derogatory from the glory of Nature, and blasphemous
against God and his Power. As for the Devils sucking the Teats, Warts, or such
like excrescences of the Witches bodies, we should have passed it over as
easily as the former, but only that Mr. Glanvil has taken up the Cudgels to
defend it: to confute which, we shall give these satisfactory Reasons.

1. There can be no rational end assigned, why the Devil should Reas. 1.
perform this action, for we must tell Mr. Glanvil that supposals are no
proofs, and ex suppositis supposita consequuntur, and in a thing of this
nature, arguments to prove it probable are insufficient. And Page 18.
if (as he confesses) for their being sucked by the Familiar, I say, (he says)
We know so little of the Nature of Demons and Spirits, that it is no wonder we
cannot certainly divine the reason of so strange an action: Now if he knew so
little of their Nature, it must needs be vanity and arrogance to take upon him
to declare so much: and if he could not certainly divine the reason of so
strange an act, it was extreme folly and pride in him to bring in idle and vain
conjectures and probability, where verity and certainty are expected. One while
he supposes them corporeal, which if granted, will not prove that they are
recreated by the reeks and vapors of humane blood, because their bodies are of
a more pure Nature, than to be nourished with gross, and sometimes (especially
in melancholic old men and women) corrupted blood; for if every thing be
nourished by its like, then they cannot be fed with humane blood, for they have
no flesh nor bones such as ours, that have need to be nourished with blood. And
for his next, perhaps, and may be, that it is a diabolical Sacrament, we shall
believe it when he proves it, and not before. But he has a third supposal,
which to him seems most probable, viz. That the Familiar does not only suck
the Witch, but in the action infuseth some poisonous ferment into her. If this
had been most probable, why did he bring in the other two, that are less
probable? surely he might have known that, srustra fit per plura, quod fieri
potest per pauciora. And is his sucking now come to infusion and injection?
surely these will not accord: but enough of supposals.

2. But we must know of Mr. Glanvil, how he comes to know that the Devils
sucking of the Witches bodies is a truth, or ever Reas. 2.
was proved to be matter of fact, who were by and present that were ear or
eyewitnesses of it? A thing that never was proved ought never to be believed;
and if he recur to the Witches confessions, that is fully overthrown before,
and we are sure that in these late years that are past, when so many pretended
Witch-finders were set abroad in Scotland and Northumberland, they never
manifested, nor could verify any such thing, but were found and discovered to
be notorious Impostors and Knaves, pretending to discover Witches by putting
sharp Needles or Pins into the Warts History.
and hollow Excrescences of diverse persons, when the persons so dealt withal,
did not see nor know; and if the persons did not feel nor complain of pain,
then (forsooth) they must be taken for Witches, and be burnt. So of many
persons they got money and bribes, that they might not be searched or stripped
naked, and of others for finding Excrescences upon them that were hollow and
fistulous, and therefore when the Pin was thrust into the fistulous cavity,
that was skinned within, and so indolent, they were then accounted guilty, and
were either forced to compound with these notorious pretended Witch-finders, or
to be prosecuted for their lives. By which wicked means and unchristian
practices diverse innocent persons, both men and women lost their lives; and
these wicked Rogues wanted not greater persons (even of the Ministry too) that
did authorize and encourage them in these Diabolical courses, as though this
had been some way prescribed by God or his Word to discover Witches by, when it
was an Hellish device of the Devil to delude Witchmongers, and bring poor
innocent History.
people to danger and death. Yet it had prevailed further, if some more wise
Heads and Christian Hearts had not interposed, by whom the Villainy was
detected, and the Impostors severely punished; and that this is a most certain
truth, hundreds yet living can witness and testify. And the like in my time
and remembrance happened here in Lancashire, where diverse both men and women
were accused for supposed Witchcraft, and were so unchristianly, unwomenly, and
inhumanely handled, as to be stripped stark naked, and to be laid upon Tables and
Beds to be searched (nay even in their most privy parts) for these their
supposed Witch-marks: so barbarous and cruel acts does diabolical instigation,
working upon ignorance and superstition, produce.

3. But as this was never really proved de facto, that the Devil Reas. 3.
did suck upon the body of a supposed Witch, so the possibility of it likewise
can never be demonstrated. For whether a Spirit be taken to be corporeal, or to
assume a body, yet it neither has nor can have such a body as our Savior did
appear in after his Resurrection, which was the same real and numerical body
that he suffered in, and was by the sense of seeing and feeling distinguished
from any bodies that Spirits can have and appear in, especially in solidity and
tangibility; for a Spirit has not flesh and bones, as he was felt and seen to
have. And where there is no flesh and bones, there cannot be any animal
sucking, and we speak not here of artificial sucking or attraction, of which
there is a great question, whether any such thing be at all or not; but however
the Spirits have no power to suck, because they have not flesh and bones.

4. That there are diverse Nodes, Knots, Protuberances, Warts, Reas. 4.
and Excrescences that grow upon the bodies of men and women, is sufficiently
known to learned Physicians and experienced Chirurgions. Some have them from
their mothers wombs, some grow afterward, some proceed from internal causes,
some from external hurts, some are soft, some hard, some pendulous, some not,
some fistulous, and issue matter, some hollow and indolent, and many other
ways. And these are more frequent in some persons, by reason of their
Complexion and Constitution, in others by reason of their Age, Sex, and other
accidents and circumstances, especially in Women that are old, and their
accustomed purgations staid, or by reason of Childbirth, and the like. Now if
all these were Witch-marks, then few would go free, especially those that are
of the poorer sort, that have the worst diet, and are but nastily kept. And for
their being indolent, it does argue nothing but ignorance; for many sorts of
Tumors and Excrescences are without pain, as well as fistulous and hollow
Warts. And it is a woeful error, to make that a sign and mark of a diabolical
Contract, that has natural causes for its production. And it is a strange kind
of Logic to argue or conclude, that men or women are Witches, and have made a
Contract with the Devil, because they have such Warts or Excrescences that are
indolent when pricked into: where is the coherence, connection, or just
consequence? Let all wise men judge.

As for that vain opinion, that Witches are, or can be really and essentially
transformed into Dogs, Cats, Hares, and the like, or men transubstantiated into
Wolves, it is largely by numerous positive arguments, Psycholog. par. 2. page
53. etc. Dialog. Discourse. page 149, etc. Discovery of Witchcraft, l. 5. c. 1,
etc.
confuted by Casmannus, and by the Authors of that learned Treatise of Spirits
and Devils, written in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, as also by Wierus, Mr.
Scot, and others; so that we shall not bring all that others have written about
this point, but note such things as are most material, and have been less
handled or regarded by others, and that in these Particulars.

1. It is taken to be a great matter with some, because St. Augustine seems to
favor this opinion of transformation, and tells us De Civit. Dei, lib. 18.
cap. 18. page 583.
this: Si enim dixerimus ea non esse credenda, non desunt etiam nunc, qui
ejusmodi quaedam, vel certissima and isse, vel etiam expertos se esse
asseverent. And then says: And we, when we were in Italy, did hear such things
of a certain Region of those parts, where certain Women that kept Inns, being
skilled in these Arts (they did say) were wont to give in Cheese to Travelers
that they could get to take it, from whence forthwith they were turned into
Juments, and carried necessary burdens, and when they had done, did again
return unto themselves, but that while they had not a bestial, but rational and
humane understanding. And yet concludes: Haec vel falsa sunt, vel tam
inusitata, ut merito non credantur. To which we shall return these short
answers. 1. Though St. Austin were in many things a very Learned man, yet being
but a man, might and did err, not only in this point, but in many others. 2.
His Reasons to prove it by are weak and groundless. 3. He speaks nothing of
his certain and peculiar knowledge, but by common fame and hearsay; and
therefore the matters alleged to be done, are not credible. 4. He confesses
that they are either false, or so unusual, that they are not worthy to be
believed. 5. And when he has said all he can, he concludes these
Transformations (if any such were) to be but fantastical, that is, to seem so,
but not really to be so, and what he means by a fantastical appearance, is
not easy to judge, whether it were a delusion of the Fantasy within, or of
the senses without. 6. But in another place he tells us this: Non est
credendum, humanum corpus Daemonum art vel potestate in bestialia lineamenta
converti posse; De Spirit. anim. cap. 26.
so that here is St. Austin contradicting himself, or else he concludes
nothing. 7. But his learned Commentator Ludovicus Vives does not give credit to
those vain and lying Fables, but confuteth them by the Authority of Pliny (who
might have given St. Austin satisfaction, H^st. not. l. 8. c. 22. p. 114.
if he had read him) who tells us roundly: Homines in lupos verti, rursumque
restitui sibi, falsum esse confidenter existimare ^lebemus, aut credere omnia
quae fabulosa tot seculis comperimus. And further says: Mirum est, quo
procedat Graecia credulitas. Nullum tam impudens mendacium est, ut test careat.

2. For essential Transformations we have examples in the Sacred Scriptures,
but these not wrought but by a divine Hand and an omnipotent Power. And such
was that of Lots Wife, who looking back contrary to command, was turned into a
Pillar of Salt, and fuit in statuam salis, as Arias Montanus renders it, which
Genesis 19. 26.
accords with the Hebrew exactly, the vulgar Latin and others say, versa est
in statuam salis: and this by the divine finger was a real transubstantiation,
especially in respect of her body, the substance of which was really changed
into an absolute Pillar of Salt, without regression or returning back to what
it was before, but remained so still, and was standing in the days of Josephus,
if credit Antiq. J^daic. l. 1. c. 12. p. 17.
may be given to what he writes. Another example we have in Moses his Rod,
which God commanded him to cast upon the ground, and he cast it upon the
ground, and it became a Serpent, Exodus 4. 3, 4.
and Moses fled from before it. And the Lord said unto Moses, Put forth thine
hand, and take it by the tail. And he put forth his hand, and caught it, and it
became a rod in his hand. This Rod afterward Aaron threw down before Pharaoh,
and it became a Serpent, and swallowed up the rods of the Wisemen and
Sorcerers, and it afterward Exodus 7. 9, 10, 20.
became a rod again, and Aaron used it in working some of the rest of the
Miracles. So that this was so true a transformation, that Moses himself was
afraid when he saw the Rod a Serpent, that he fled from before it; and that it
was a real change, appeared in that it swallowed up the Rods of the Magicians,
and Exodus 7. 20, 21.
still afterward became a Rod again. So likewise all the Waters in Egypt were
really changed into blood: And our Savior did really change the Water into
Wine at the Marriage in Cana of Galilee. And all these were true and real
transubstantiations, which Joh. 2. 9.
neither Devils nor Witches can perform, as appears by these unanswerable
Arguments.

1. All real Transubstantiations are wrought and performed by a divine and
omnipotent Power: but Devils and Witches have no divine nor omnipotent Power.
Therefore Devils or Witches cannot work or perform any real Transubstantiations.

2. All Beings that work real Transubstantiations, must work contrary and
different from that order and course that God has established in Nature: but
Devils and Witches cannot work contrary and different from that order and
course that God has established in Nature. Therefore Devils and Witches cannot
work any real transubstantiations at all. Let all the Witchmongers in the World
answer these Arguments, if they be able.

3. We find also external Transfiguration, as of Christ in the Mountain; for
the Text says, in St. Matthews Gospel: And he Mat. 17. 2.
was transfigured before them, and his face did shine as the Sun, and his
raiment was white as the light. And Mark says: And he was Mar. 9. 2, 3.
transfigured before them, and his raiment became shining exceeding white as
snow: so as no fuller on earth can white them. And St. Luke Luke 9. 28.
says: And as he prayed, the fashion of his countenance was altered, and his
raiment was white and glittering. The word used in those places for the
transfiguring or altering of his face by St. Matthew and St. Mark is (...),
from (...) trans, and (...) forma, figura, the outward form, shape, figure, or
lineaments; and this word is also used for the change or transforming of the
mind, will, desires, and affections: For so the Apostle says: And be not
conformed Romans 12. 2.
to this world: but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind. And again
he says: We behold as in a glass the glory of the Lord 2 Cor. 3. 18.
with open face: and are transformed into the same image from glory to glory.
But St. Luke instead of this word expresses it thus: Luke 9. 29.
(...). Tremellius renders it: Transformatus est aspectus vultus ejus. And
Beza: Species vultus ejus alia, which is nearest the Greek. So Moses face, when
he had been with Exodus 34. 33, 34, 35.
the Lord upon the Mount, the skin of it did shine, so that he put a veil upon
it, when he spoke to the people, and put it off when he went in to speak unto
the Lord. So that these were external alterations of both Christ's and Moses
face, by appearing glorious, resplendent, and shining like the Sun, and this
was wrought by a divine hand and power. From whence we may note,

1. That though Christ was thus gloriously transformed (for so the word does
bear) yet we are not to imagine, that Christ was essentially changed into some
other substance or nature; no, but that he was rather made there most
resplendent in glory.

2. And where the Apostle wishes the Romans to be transformed: Is it to be
essentially transformed into any other substance or natural thing? Nay not so,
but effectively into some other more sacred qualities, by the renovation of
their inward mind. And again where he says: And are transformed into the same
image from glory to glory. His meaning is not, that we are essentially
transformed into the very image of God; for so should he very shrewdly confirm
that foolish opinion of some, who hold that men are deified in God, and that
God also is hominified in men: But his purpose is, that we (by the operation of
the holy Spirit) should proceed and grow (by degrees) from glory to glory,
until we be truly conformed unto the similitude of that same glorious Image of
God wherein we were first created; and so intends no essential transformation
at all.

3. We are here to note the difference betwixt this Transfiguration, and that
which may proceed from natural causes, as passions, affections, or diseases;
and also from artificial or counterfeited Transfigurations. For it is wonderful
to behold, how anger and rage does alter the faces and countenances of some,
and so grief, sorrow, despair, and the like, in others, causes horrible
changes all over the external parts both of the face and body. Neither is any
passion more prevalent than deep-rooted fear mixed with despair, as has been
manifested in some, that in a short time, nay even in the space of one night
have had their hair, that formerly was black, turned into gray or white, as is
testified by Authors of unquestionable veracity. And for diseases, it is almost
incredible to think, what strange alterations Madness, Frenzy, the bitings of a
mad Dog, Melancholies (especially that kind which Physicians call Lycanthropia,
which is so wonderful, that it has made many dotingly believe, they were
really transformed) will produce and Obs^rv. medi^. page 80, etc. Id. page 129.
bring forth. Examples of which at large may be seen in Schenckius; of which we
shall speak more fully anon, as also of artificial and counterfeited
Transfigurations: and that Devils nor Witches can perform no such
Transfigurations as this of Christ and Moses, is manifest by the Arguments laid
down before, because these were brought to pass by a divine Hand and an
omnipotent Power, which Devils and Witches have not, and therefore cannot
operate any such things.

4. Moreover in the Scripture there is mention of counterfeit, simulated, and
hypocritical transformation, such the Apostle mentions in these words,
speaking of the false Apostles: For such are 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15.
false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles
of Christ. And no marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of
light. Therefore it is no great thing, if his Ministers also be transformed as
the Ministers of Righteousness, whose end shall be according to their works.
The word there thrice used is from (...), which comes from (...) habeo,
possideo, teneo, and from thence (...) habitus: so that the compound Verb
properly signifies effingo, assimulo, and so of necessity must signify in
these three places. So the Apostle says in another place: The form of this
world, (...); passes away, that is, the fashion, 1 Cor. 7. 31.
condition, custom, or usage of the world passes away. This place of Scripture
concerning Satan's transforming of himself into an Angel of light (though plain
in it self) has been and still is most usually alleged by Witchmongers, to
prove the Apparitions of Devils by: For thus they commonly argue; If Satan can
transform himself into an Angel of Light, much more (arguing a majore ad minus)
into any other shape, and so may easily appear in the form of a Cat, Dog, or in
any other shape whatsoever, and this they think to be an invincible Argument.
This way of argument were of force, if the Apostle in this place had meant or
intended any real or essential transformation; but that this is not the meaning
of the Text, we shall prove by these following Reasons.

1. The very signification of the word here, does not bear nor Reas. 1.
intend any essential transformation, but only feigning, pretending, and
assimulating, as when Judas pretended charity and love to the poor, when he
said: Why was not this ointment sold for three hundred Joh. 12. 5, 6.
pence, and given to the poor? This he said, not that he cared for the poor:
but because he was a thief, and had the bag, and bare what was put therein.
Though Judas Iscariot hypocritically feigned and pretended this charity to, and
care for the poor, yet was he not really a charitable man, or a lover of the
poor, but a thief, and a most covetous wretch. So these false Apostles did
pretend much zeal and piety to preach and promote the Gospel, but therefore
were they not really transformed and changed into true Apostles, but were
Deceivers, Dissemblers, and Hypocrites. So Satan often pretends heavenly,
angelical, and divine things, and to do as the holy Angels do; but it is in
deceit, cozenage, falsity, and hypocrisy, and so he is by counterfeiting and
dissembling said to be transformed into an Angel of Light, and not otherwise by
any essential transformation at all.

2. The Text it self does plainly manifest, that they were not Reas. 2.
transformed into true Apostles, for then St. Paul had had no cause to have
written so bitterly against them; but that notwithstanding that show, form, or
pretense that they held forth, and though outwardly they seemed to personate
the true Apostles of Christ, yet that was but an external and hypocritical
simulation; for really and truly they were false Apostles, (...), and deceitful
workers, (...). And so Satan may make what shows or pretenses he will of
goodness, piety, and of heavenly things, and so may counterfeit, dissemble and
lie, yet still he remains a very accursed Devil, and is never really changed
from his damned and diabolical Nature.

3. Satan is so transformed into an Angel of Light, as his Ministers Reas. 3.
are transformed into the Apostles of Christ. But Satan's Ministers are not
essentially transformed into the Apostles of Christ. Therefore neither is Satan
essentially transformed into an Angel of Light. For though Satan's Ministers may
pretend never so much Dialog. Disc. of Spirits and Devils, p. 234.
piety and zeal, and labor to personate and imitate the true Ministers of
Christ, yet notwithstanding that pretended transformation, they still really
and essentially remain as they were, that is, Deceivers and Hypocrites. And
Satan for all his seeming and apparent personating and imitating the Angels of
Light, he still remains in his essence and nature an Angel of Darkness, and a
lying and accursed Wretch.

4. The Devil is never nor can be really and essentially transubstantiated
Reas. 4.
into an Angel of Light, for then he could (indeed and in truth) be no longer a
Devil, but his diabolical Nature would of necessity cease. But all his
transformation is, when he intends most deeply to circumvent and deceive the
sons of men, then he pretends the most religious and the holiest shows of
all. Pretending in all outward appearance the holy affections, sincerity, and
zeal of the holiest Angels of Light. For as St. Austin says: Unless August. d^
Civ. Dei, l. 2. c. 26.
the malignity of Satan be slightly and cunningly covered, his deceivable
purpose is seldom or never effected.

5. The best and most sound Expositors, both ancient, middle, Reas. 5.
and modern do expound the place as we have urged it, of which we shall name
only two or three. St. Chrysostom tells us this: Operarii (...). in (...).
dolosi: nam operantur quidem, sed revellunt ea quae sunt plantata: nam quoniam
sciunt se aliter non posse esse acceptos, persona veritatis sumpta, erroris
actum simulantes peragunt. And a little after he says thus: Et multos Diabolus
sic decipit, persona in se accepta, and non factus Angelus lucis: sic illi
personam Apostolorum circumferunt, non ipsam potentiam, neque fortes sunt. Dr.
Hammond gives the Paraphrase of this place thus: For the truth is (he says)
these men that come to infuse false Doctrines into you, behave themselves as
cunningly as they can, and do labor to imitate, and seem to do those very
things, that we true Apostles do. And it is no unusual matter for Deceivers and
Seducers to do so; for Satan himself pretends to do those things that the good
Angels do, makes as if he meant you all kindness, when he comes to destroy you.
And therefore it is not any thing strange, if seducing Heretics, employed by
him, do imitate the actions of the Apostles of Christ; but according to the
hypocrisy of their actions, so shall their ends be. See Theophylact and Calvin
upon the place. So that we positively conclude, that from this place of
Scripture no real or essential transformations of Devils can be proved at all.

6. There are natural Transformations by progression to perfection, as is
manifest in Insects, which at the first to our view do appear to be Worms,
Maggots, Creepers, or Caterpillars, and yet afterward do become several sorts
of winged Creatures, as Butterflies of many and various kinds, Flies, and the
like; as that Creature, which here in the North Fishers do call a May-Fly, is
first but a little Creeper enclosed in an Hull, as of pieces of straws, or the
like: and so that which they call a Cod-bait, is like a yellow Maggot with a
black head enclosed in a sandy crustaceous Husk, and yet toward the middle of
August, or the beginning of September, becomes a fine yellowish Fly, which the
Fishers use to bait withal, and these are but gradual progressions toward the
perfection of the Animalcle, as the learned Author Johannes Swammerdanus has
declared in these words, as we find it laid down in the Philosophical
Transactions: First it lays down the ground of all natural Philosophical
Transactions, numb. 64.
changes in Insects; declaring, that by the word Change, is nothing else to be
understood but a gradual and natural evolution and growth of the parts, not any
Metamorphosis or Transformation of them, and a great deal more of notable
observations concerning the most sorts of Insects, as may be seen in the piece
quoted in the Margent. So likewise there are very many strange transformations
wrought by petrifactions both of Vegetables and Vid. Barthol. Cent. 2. Hist.
100. page 319. Microgr. obser. 17. page 107.
Animals, or their parts, as may be seen by the Writings of many learned
Authors, especially those noted in the Margent, to whom we refer the curious
Inquirer. These being natural Transfigurations (for so they may be properly
called) we cannot rationally suppose that any man of judgment will imagine,
that any such can be produced by Devils or Witches, because they are brought
forth by natural Principles and Agents, which Devils or Witches cannot
overruled, alter, nor hinder, else the whole and certain course that the
Creator has set in the order of the production and generation of natural
things, might be suspended, which is not possible to be performed without an
omnipotent Power, which the Devils and Witches have not. Besides the most of
these require a suitable time for their production and perfection, which must
only be performed by the internal operation of Nature, or by Art accelerating
the works of Nature, which Devils and Witches cannot bring to pass.

7. There are diverse other Transformations (at least so accounted and called)
which because they are not absolutely pertinent to our purpose, we shall only
mention slightly. 1. External changes of the body in respect of diseases, and
some by an extraordinary power, as that of Moses, to whom the Lord said: Put
now thine hand into thy bosom. And he put his hand into his bosom: And Exodus 4.
6, 7.
when he took it out: behold, his hand was leprous as snow. And he said, Put
thine hand into thy bosom again: And he put his hand into his bosom again, and
plucked it out of his bosom, and behold, it was turned again as his other
flesh. Here we see that the same hand was made leprous white as snow, and was
again restored as his other flesh. And this was done by a divine Power, such as
neither Devils nor Witches can perform. So Gehazi of whom it is said: The
leprosy therefore of Naaman shall cleave unto thee, and 2 King. 5. 27.
unto thy seed for ever. And he went out from his presence a leper as white as
snow. And here the judgment was permanent, and no restoration, and was a great
Miracle, which Devils and Witches cannot perform. 2. There is feigned, and
artificial transfigurations. So of David, of whom it is said: And he changed
his behavior 1 Samuel 21. 13.
before them, and feigned himself mad in their hands, and scrambled on the
doors of the gate, and let his spittle fall down upon his beard. And all this
he prudently feigned, that he might escape from Achish the King of Gath, of
whom he was sore afraid: So many Persons of Worth have disguised themselves
strangely, that they might escape the hands of their enemies, or not fall into
their power, and yet these were not done by the Devils Art, nor by Witchcraft.
So a Stage Player transfigureth himself, sometimes to personate one person, and
sometimes another; and though his outward habit, speech, and action be changed,
yet he remains the same in Nature and Person that he was before those
changes, and so makes nothing for Witcheraft at all. 3. There are knavish
Transfigurations and Counterfeiting for deceitful and wicked ends, as in those
we call Gypsies, that discolor their faces and skins, to be more fit to cheat
and cozen. So likewise do many other vile and wicked persons De Monst. l. 24.
c. 18. p. 565.
counterfeit Sores, Ulcers, Leprosy, Dropsy, and such like diseases, as may
be seen at large in Ambrose Paraeus Book of Monsters, and we have seen and
detected diverse; and all this done only to deceive and abuse men's goodness and
charity: But no more of Devil in any of these, but the wickedness of the mind,
and the evil of the end and intention. Of a more wicked grain and temper are
those, that for wicked and devilish ends counterfeit themselves to be
possessed, and labor to make the World believe, that the Devil does move in
diverse parts of their bodies, and does speak in them, when it is nothing but
only their own devilish cunning in lying and counterfeiting, as we shall have
occasion to show more fully hereafter. 4. There are also diverse kinds of
sportive and delusive Transformations, performed by those that use the Art of
Leger-de-main or Juggling, wherein they pretend and seem to transubstantiate
one thing into another, when by the agility of their hands, and the gesture of
their face and body, they do but draw your eyes and attention another way,
while they do but nimbly convey another thing in its place. And he that takes
these for Conjurers or Witches, and their Tricks for diabolical or Witchcraft,
are surely under a devilish delusion, and are most strangely bewitched. And as
for the changes wrought by Pharaohs Magicians, we shall particularly handle it
in another place.

8. There are other Transformations mentioned in the Scripture, of which we
shall now speak. 1. That transformation that the Grace and Spirit of God does
work inwardly in the minds and hearts of the Godly, which is not by changing
their Nature or Persons, but by transforming their minds, and altering their
wills and affections from sinful and earthly things, to those that are holy and
heavenly: so the Apostle wills the Romans, that they be transformed by the
renewing of their minds, and so they come to Romans 12. 2.
be changed from glory to glory, and this were blasphemy to say, that either
Devil or Witch could perform it. 2. There is a transformation wrought in the
minds of the wicked by the just judgment of God; for the Text says, speaking
of Antichrist: Revealing even, him, whose coming is after the working of Satan,
with all 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12.
power and signs and lying wonders. And with all deceivableness of
unrighteousness in them that perish; because they received not the love of the
truth, that they might be saved. And for this cause God shall send them strong
delusions, that they should believe a lie. That they all might be damned, who
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. So in the case of
Saul the Text says: And it came to pass on the morrow, that the evil Spirit
from God 1 Samuel 18. 10.
came upon Saul. These therefore are inward judgments for wickedness, sent by
God by the ministry of Satan, of which we shall speak more hereafter. 3. We
lastly come to the main point, that is, concerning the transformation of
Nebuchadnezzar, which the Witchmongers hold to be a real and an essential
transubstantiation, therefore let us hear the words as they run in our English
Translation, which are this: And they shall drive thee from men, and thy Dan.
4. 32, 33, 34, 36.
dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field, they shall make thee eat grass
as oxen. The same hour was the thing fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar, and he was
driven from men, and did eat grass as oxen, and his body was wet with the dew
of heaven, till his hairs were grown like Eagles feathers, and his nails like
birds claws. And at the end of the days I Nebuchadnezzar lift up mine eyes unto
heaven, and mine understanding returned unto me. At the same time my reason
returned unto me. And a little before: Let his heart Ibid. verse. 16.
be changed from man's, and let a beasts heart be given unto him. From this
place they commonly frame an argument to this purpose. That Nebuchadnezzar
being really and essentially changed from a man to a beast or an ox, much more
may Satan essentially transform himself into the shape of any Creature, and
consequently that he may really change the Witches into Hares, Dogs, Cats, and
the like. But we shall unanswerably prove that the assumption is false, that
Nebuchadnezzar was not transubstantiated, or essentially transformed at all:
And if he had been really so, yet that the consequence is invalid, and of no
force, and that by these Arguments.

1. Because that being driven into the field, and eating grass as oxen, and
having his body (it was his body, not the body of an Argum. 1.
ox, and therefore no corporeal nor real change) wet with the dew of Heaven,
do not at all conclude or infer, that his body was really and essentially
changed, nor in the external figure of it altered from what it was before; for
he might go upon all four, and eat grass, and yet that does argue no real
change of his bodily shape at all; for so have diverse persons done, that being
young, have been lost in Woods and Deserts, and have been brought up with Bears
or Wolves. To which purpose take one story for all from Philip Camerarius, that
learned Counselor of Norimberg, a Hist. medic. l. 4. c. 5. p. 239.
man of great credit and reputation, in these words. In the year 1543. there
was in the parts of Hesse a Lad taken, who (as he reported afterward, and so
it was found true) when he was but three years old, was taken away, and
afterward nourished and brought up by Wolves. These Wolves, when they got any
prey, would always bring the best of it to a Tree, and give it to the Child,
which did eat it: in Winter and time of cold, they would dig a pit, and strew
it with grass and leaves of trees, and thereupon lay the Child, and lying round
about it, preserve him from the injury of the weather: after they would make
him go upon all four, and run with him, till by use and length of time, he
could skip and run like a Wolf; being taken, he was compelled by little and
little to go only upon his feet. He would often say, that if it had been in his
power, he could have taken more delight to have conversed among Wolves, than
among men: he was carried to the Court of Henry Lantgrave of Hesse to be seen.
And in the same Chapter he relates another story to the same purpose of one
that he himself had known and seen, that was of admirable agility, and more to
the same end. Now must we conclude, that because this Boy did live and lie in
the open air, was fed with raw flesh, and went upon all four, that therefore he
was really and essentially changed into a Wolf? no, that would be inconsequent
and ridiculous; and so would it be, if because Nebuchadnezzar lay in the open
field, was wet with the rain and dew, and did eat grass as an ox, to conclude,
that therefore he was really changed into a beast; the absurdities are both
alike. This is as mad a kind of inference, as if we should say, Conies and
Geese do eat grass like an Ox, therefore they are Oxen or Asses, when
notwithstanding they still retain their essential beings and shapes, without
any essential transformations at all.

2. Because the hairs of his head (as the Text says) were grown Argum. 2.
like to an Eagles feathers, and for that also the very nails of his hands and
feet were like the claws of a bird: yet it does not prove that he was really
changed into a beast, and that for these Reasons. 1. Because it would be more
consonant to conclude, that he was rather transformed into some bird, having
feathers and claws, than into a beast that has horns and hoofs, though there
was in him no corporeal transformation at all, but only a changed mind. 2. The
Text is not according to the Hebrew Phrase used when there is real
transubstantiation, as in Lots Wife; Et fuit statua salis; but as Tremellius
renders it: Usquedum pili ejus ut Aquilarum plumae crevissent, and ungues ejus
ut avium. And Arias Montanus thus: Donec capillus ejus sicut Aquilarum crevit,
and ungues ejus sicut avium: which is exactly agreeable to the Hebrew. So that
the assertion is not, that his hairs were changed into Eagles feathers, nor his
nails into birds claws, but that they were sicut as the feathers of Eagles, and
as the claws of birds; the hairs by being grown ruffled, squalid, and rugged,
and the nails by being grown long, hard, and crooked for want of cutting,
dressing, combing, and ordering; and more change than this the words or sense
do not bear. 3. There was no other change, but what was by natural growth; for
the Hebrew word (...) does properly signify multus fuit, succrevit in
multitudinem: so that the hairs were increased naturally in multitude and
length, and the nails in magnitude and length, and so there was no essential
change at all, but only an excessive augmentation of them both, he having lost
the use of reason, whereby he could not use means to cut, cleanse, and order
them. So that they did but grow squalid and ill-favored for want of using
means to order and make them comely, even as many that have been lost, or left
in Deserts, and desolate places, have after some length of time been found to
be overgrown with hairs and ugly nails, that they have scarce been taken for
men, but have appeared as savage and feral Monsters.

3. His restoration does plainly testify what kind of change it Argum. 3.
was; for that which was restored unto him, did bring him into the same
condition that he was in, before this transformation; and that was his
knowledge or understanding. Now therefore if his knowledge or understanding did
reduce him to the right use of reason, and brought those conditions and
qualities that he had before: Then it is most plain, that it was only his
knowledge or understanding that was taken away or changed; and so there was no
other transformation, but what was internal in the mind, judgment, or
imagination, by altering his will, desires, cogitations, condition, and
qualities, and so no essential transformation at all, nor no change of his
external shape, but what grew naturally in regard of his hair and nails or
skin, for want of due ordering and decent dressing. And that this is an
unanswerable truth, the words in the Text do sufficiently testify, which are
in our English: And mine Dan. 4. 34, 36.
understanding returned unto me, and at the same time my reason returned unto
me; therefore it was only his understanding and reason, that had for a time
been turned from him, and at his restoration they returned, or came again.
Tremellius renders the former Verse: Et mente mea ad me reversa Excelso
benedixi. And in the latter: Mente mea reversa in me. In both Verses Arias
Montanus renders it: Cognitio mea super me reversa est; for the Hebrew word
there used (...) scivit, restituit, cognovit, agnovit, proprie est mentis and
intellectus, as Avenarius says. And the Septuagint in Avenar. Diction. page
313.
both the Verses do agree with the Hebrew, (...). And to this purpose does the
French, Italian, and Luthers Translation render it, only the vulgar Latin
gives it by the word sensus, and figura mea reversa est, which is altogether
vicious. So that from hence we may safely conclude, that this transformation
was only internal and mental, and no essential change at all: of which a most
learned Divine tells us thus much: Sunt nonnulli, inter quos Palon. in loc.
est Johannes Bodinus, qui putant humanam figuram revera fuisse ei ademptam. Ac
sane Deus pro sua omnipotentia miraculum hoc in rege isto impio facere, and
humanam ejus naturam in bruti animalis essentiam mutare potuit: sed
verisimilius est regem alienatum mente, vel etiam maniacum factum, adempta ei
divinitus mente, ut patet ex sequente verse. 34. and in furorem versum, sive per
iram, sive per dolorem, ob acceptam ignominiam, quod regia dignitate esset
orbatu^. Sic Ericus Rex Sueciae in furorem est actus per iram and dolorem, quod
regno esset dejectus, Anno 1568.

4. That this was only a mental and internal transformation, as are many sorts
of Melancholy, especially that which Physicians call Argum. 4.
Lycanthropia, or Melancholia lupina, Rabies canina, and the like, is most
manifest by comparing it with some of these that we have named; of which
(though we have related some before) we shall give some few, from Authors of
credit and veracity. 1. And first concerning the effects of that Madness caused
by the biting of a mad Dog, we have a most sad and deplorable story recited by
Philip Salmuth, that experienced Physician of Anhalt, which we shall Obser.
medic. p. 57, 58.
here give in English: Many (he says) do verily think that the force of this
poison will break out; and appear within a few months or years. But experience
does altogether testify the contrary. As certain learned Authors do
commemorate, that it has laid hid in some the space of seven years, but in
others it has broke forth in the twelfth. Guainerius also mentions a History
1.
certain person, to whom the Hydrophobia did happen the 18. year after he was
bitten by the mad Dog. Moreover (he continues) a most Noble person of Hagen
has told me, that a certain Noble man was bitten in the face by a little
pretty Dog, which he much delighted in, and that the seeds of that poison, as
it were nourished in his bosom for a long time, at the last did suddenly break
forth. For after that for some years feeling no molestation nor trouble from
that bite, he addressing himself to a Virgi^ did marry. And the nuptial Supper
being ended, and the Bride brought to the Marriage Bed, her Kinsfolks a little
after do hear her complaining and lamenting. At which they laughed and jested,
thinking it but to be the Venereal sport. But that howling continuing late,
they by force do break the barred doors of the Chamber, and enter, and find
that the Bridegroom had bitten with his teeth, plainly after the manner of a
Dog, the face of the Bride, and also the shoulders and arms, and the fleshy
places, and still did not give over the same sort of biting. Being much
astonished with this sad spectacle and cruel wickedness, they with an ireful
and provoked mind do forthwith slay him: and the new Bride also died the same
day. Though this he had but by relation, yet it was from a person of great
quality; and if he had not been reasonably assured of the truth of it, he would
never have writ it down amongst his Medical Observations. But this is also
attested by other Authors of sufficient credit, of diverse of this sort of
History 2.
persons, that have both barked and bitten like Dogs, and this is testified by
Scribonius Largus and Rhases, as Baptista Codronchus De Hydrop. l. 1. c. 12. p.
99.
has cited them; and learned Sennertus tells us this: That some (if bitten
with Dogs) do bark like Dogs, and fly at whomsoever they meet, and that
against or besides their will. For (he says) Gentilis relates in his Comment
upon Avicen, that a certain Sennert. de Hydrop. page 417.
young man troubled with this rabiousness, did exhort his Mother, that she
should not come near him, for he could not contain himself but bite those that
came near him. 2. As concerning Wolf-melancholy, we shall only give a short
relation or two, the first from Donatus ab alto mari, who confesses that he
had De m^dend. mo^b. c. 9. p. 97.
seen two: of the one of which he says: This person (he says) having formerly
known me, did one day meet me when he was holden with this distemper; but I
truly fearing went aside, and he looking at me a little went away. There was
with him a multitude of men, and he did bear upon his shoulders a whole thigh
History 3.
and a leg of a dead man: At last being cured he was well, who afterward when
he met me again, did ask me, if I had not been afraid, when he found me in such
a place when he was mad: by which it is manifest, that in him the memory was
not vitiated. Another take from that able Physician of Delfe Petrus Forestus in
Obser. medic. l. 10. p. 440.
English thus: A certain Countryman was in the Springtime seen at Alcmaria
with an horrid look, and mad, to stay about the Churchyard, and after to enter
the Church, and did leap upon a Seat or Plank (as we have seen him) only
climbing upwards, and another while downwards with great fury, and never
History 4.
resting in one place. He carried a long staff in his hand, but did strike no
body, but did with it beat off the Dogs; for he had his thighs and legs black
and ulcered with black crusts or scurff by the biting of Dogs. His whole body
did appear squalid, very black, and melancholic, but pale in the face, and his
eyes exceeding hollow. From the foresaid signs (he says) I did judge the man
affected with the Lycanthropia or wolfish Melancholy. He never used any
Physician that I know of. And this both this Author, Schenckius and Sennertus
do sufficiently confirm from Paulus, Aetius, Avicen, and the like. From all
which it is clear and manifest, that Nebuchadnezzars distemper was but as some
kind of Melancholy, whereby the imagination was corrupted, and the use of
reason and right understanding for the time taken quite away, as says the
Text: Let his heart be changed from man's, and let a beasts heart be given unto
him. That is, let his thoughts, desires, and affections be made brutish; for by
the heart in Scriptures the cogitations, will, and affections are understood,
as, my son give me thy heart, that is, the love and affections of thy soul and
heart. So that when it is said, Let a beasts heart be given him, that is, let
his mind, thoughts, and affections be made bestial; and so there was a change
of the conditions and qualities of his mind and heart, but no real or essential
change of his natural heart at all. And in this sense Tremellius does take it,
saying: Obbrutescat, nihil humanum Vid. Polan. Rolloc. and alios in Dan. c. 4.
v. 16.
sapiat, and so does Polanus, Rollock, and others understand it; for Polanus
says: Debuisse animum ejus prorsus obbrutescere, and mentem judiciumque animi
humani amittere: non enim intelligendum hoc de metamorphosi aliqua in corpore
facta, sed de animo tantum obbrutescente. So that from these examples it
appears, that many persons, by reason of Melancholy in its several kinds,
have been mentally and internally (as they thought, being depraved in their
imaginations) changed into Wolves and other kind of Creatures, and have acted
their parts, as though they had been really so, when the change was only in the
qualities and conditions of the mind, and not otherwise. And so only was the
change of Nebuchadnezzar, which notwithstanding Bodinus, the Popish Writers,
and Witchmongers have falsely and ignorantly taken it to be a real
transubstantiation, when it was only mental: so apt are men to mistake and urge
things amiss, when it lies for their own gain or interest. But if these persons
that thought themselves really changed into Wolves, had been covered with a
Wolfes skin sitted to their bodies, and gone upon all four, and so have acted
the parts of Wolves, then it might in all likehihood have more strongly induced
them to have believed a real transmutation indeed, though that way neither had
there been any change of substance, but only a counterfeit and cunning
disguisement: of which we shall here insert (for diversion sake) a pleasant
story from the Pen of Vincent le Blanc of Marseilles, and leave it to be judged
of according to the credit of the Author, which runs thus: As concerning the
Anthropolychi, I have not heard (he says) of any thing The World surveyed,
part. 2. c. 19. p. 270. History.
so strange, as that the Governor of Bagaris, related once to me. He told me,
that going with some of his Company from Lionac to Montpelier, they overtook an
old man with a Sack on his shoulders, going a great pace toward the same Town,
a Gentleman of the Company out of charity told him, if he would, one of his
Servants, to ease him, should carry his burden for him: at first he seemed
unwilling to be troublesome; but at length accepted the offer, and a Servant of
the Commanders Chamber called Nicholas took the burden, and being late, every
one doubled his pace, that they might get in in good time, telling the good old
man, they would go before, and he should find them at the White Horse. The
Servant of the Chamber coming in with the first, had a curiosity to see what
was in the Sack, where he found a Wolfes skin, so properly accommodated for the
purpose, that he had a strong fancy to disguise himself in it: whereupon he got
it upon his back, and put his head within the Headpiece of the Skin, as 'twere
to show his Masters a Masquerade; but immediately a fury seized him, that in
the Hall where they supped, he made straight to the Company at Table, and
falling on them with teeth and nails, made a dangerous rude havoc, and hurt
two or three of them, so as the Servants and others fled to their Swords, and
so plied the Wolf with wounds, that they laid him on the ground, and hurt in
several places. But as they looked upon him, they were amazed when they saw
under the Skin a poor Youth wallowing in blood. They were fain to lay him
presently on a Bed, taking order for his wounds and hurts, whereof he was
recovered; and was long before he could be cured: But this cured him of the
like curiosity against another time. The Company by this means had but a bad
seasoned Supper, and many of them were sick either of hurt or apprehension. For
the old man Wolf, 'twas not known what became of him; but it is probable, that
hearing of this tidy accident, he was cautious to appear. Now if this relation
be true, as there is nothing in it that seems either impossible or improbable,
but that it might, then from it we may observe these two things. 1. To consider
for what end the skin of the Wolf was so fitted and prepared, which might be to
act some part of a Tragedy or Comedy in, or in sport to fright some persons
withal; but then it is not likely, but that the old man would have appeared and
sought for it again, which he might have done without fear or danger. But I
rather conjecture it was for some more pernicious purpose, as in that disguise
to fright Travelers and Passengers, that thereby they might (for without doubt
the old man had other Companions) more securely rob them, and so escape, and
not be discovered or apprehended, which might make him afraid to be seen, or to
seek it again. 2. We may note the curiosity of the young man, and the strength
of his fancy, being moved to see himself, so fitly to appearance, to be so like
a Wolf, and not to the steams flowing from the Wolfes skin to work upon his
imagination, which we leave to the inquisition of Naturalists, that live in
Countries where Wolves are, to make trial of.

So having sufficiently disproved their supposition or assumption, that
Nebuchadnezzar was essentially transformed into a beast, we shall also show the
consequence that (if it had been true) they would draw from it, to wit, that if
Nebuchadnezzar were really transformed into a beast, much more may the Devil
transform himself into the shape of any Creature, and may change Witches into
Cats, Dogs, Hares, and the like, which can by no true Rules of Argument be
good, because it stands upon diverse, or rather contrary efficients, namely God
and the Devil. The one having of himself an absolute and indeterminate power,
and therefore of himself able to work what he will, where, when, and howsoever
best pleases himself. And so by consequence he might (if it had so seemed good
in his wisdom) have essentially transformed Nebuchadnezzar into an ox. The
other (the Devil I mean) he has only a finite and limited power, and therefore
utterly unable of himself to accomplish any one work beyond the bounds of that
power: and so by consequence he cannot possibly transform himself essentially
into any Creature whatsoever, without a special power from God. Lastly we shall
conclude all with this binding Argument: what transubstantiations soever are
wrought, the thing transformed ceases to be what it was before, both in nature
and properties, as Lots Wife being transubstantiated into a Pillar of Salt, did
cease to be flesh, blood, and bones, as she was before, and lost all the
properties of humane Nature. So if Devils or Witches be transubstantiated into
other Creatures, they cease to be what they were before both in Nature and
Properties. And then by consequence the Devil should cease to be a Devil in
Nature and Properties, and the Witches should cease to have humane Nature and
Properties in them.

Having laid down these positive Arguments, we shall in the next place show the
horrid absurdities of these Tenants, to wit, of holding a visible Contract,
that the Devil sucks upon the Witches bodies, that they have carnal Copulation
together, or that they are essentially changed into Cats, Dogs, or Hares, or
that they can fly in the air, or raise storms or tempests, and kill men or
Cattle, and the like, and that in this order.

1. These Tenants do derogate from the Wisdom and Power of Absurd. 1.
God in his Government of the World by divine Providence, because by these it
is supposed that the Devils and Witches do operate what, when, and howsoever it
pleases them, and so the life and estate of all Creatures should be in their
power to afflict, torment, or to destroy when they please, which is both false
and blasphemous. For the Devils and wicked men are enemies and rebels against
God, but yet conquered, and imprisoned, and chained close up by his Almighty
Power, that they are not able to act any thing at all (except the evil of their
own wills) nor put that into execution, but as far as God does license and
order them; which we shall make plain in these two particulars. 1. The Devils
are kept in chains of darkness unto the judgment of the great day, that 2 Pet.
2. 4. Jude 6.
is, though their wills be corrupt, wicked, and evil, and that they have a
continual desire, like a roaring lion, to seek whom they may devour; yet are
they restrained from acting this evil, by the mighty Power of God, and can
execute nothing at all, but only as far as God does order and command them: so
the Devils could not by their own power enter into the herd of Swine, until
Christ gave them leave: neither could Satan hurt Job either in his goods or
body Mat. 8. 31, 32. Mar. 5. 9. 10 14.
(though he strongly and earnestly desired it) until he had leave and
commission given him from God. No more can Devils or Witches perform these
things that are pretended; for it can never Job 1. 11, 12. 2. 5, 6.
be proved that ever God did, or will give them order or leave to perform any
such filthy or wicked thing, for which there can be no reason or end assigned
why God should order such things to be done, so far different and opposite to
the rules of his Justice, Wisdom, and Providence. 2. Nor can wicked persons act
what they please, but God does bridle and restrain them as he pleases; for
though Pilate proudly thought and boasted that he had power to condemn Christ,
or to let him loose, yet our Savior tells him: Thou could have no power at
all against me, except it were given Joh. 19. 11.
thee from abo^e. Upon which place learned Dr. Hammond says thus: So that thou
have neither right nor power to inflict any punishment one me, were it not that
God, who is my Father, has in his great Wisdom and divine Counsels, for most
glorious ends, for the good of the World, determined to deliver me up into thy
power to suffer death under thee. Of which another Rolloc. in loc.
says thus: Verba haec duobus modis accipi possunt: partim quia omnis potestas
est a Deo, and divina ordinatione; partim quia qui cum potestate est, nihil
plane potest, nisi ex Dei efficaci dispensatione ac providentia. So this is
manifest in the excessive pride and boasting of Sennacherib of his own power,
and taking no notice of Gods inevitable Decree in his Providence, that it was
he, even the Isa. 38. 29.
Lord of Hosts that had done it, and of ancient times had formed it, without
which Sennacherib could have done nothing; but because he despised Gods Power
and Providence, therefore says the Lord: Therefore will I put my hook in thy
nose, and my bridle in thy lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which
thou came, which was performed by the slaughter of his Army, and the sending
him back into his own Country: so little do men's purposes and counsels prevail,
when the Lords will and purpose are against them.

2. These Tenants do divert and obstruct the power and practice Absurd. 2.
of Godliness: For while the Saints of God are taught, that they are to fight
the good sight of Faith; and if they intend to be crowned, they must fight
stoutly, and gain the victory, knowing, that they fight not against flesh and
blood, but against spiritual wickedness in high places, and that therefore they
are to take unto them the whole Armor of God: Therefore they knowing that this
warfare is spiritual, and against spiritual enemies, and that the weapons both
offensive and defensive are also spiritual; therefore they ought always
spiritually to watch and stand upon their guard, lest their subtle and cruel
enemy the Devil take them unawares, or by his Stratagems surprise them. For he
is that old crafty Serpent, that has innumerable wiles, and while he intends
one thing, he pretends another; and like a cunning Enemy, gives a false Alarm
at the one side of the Camp, while he assaulteth another, or making false fires
or shows he seems to march away, when in the dark of the night he intends
to fall on. So lest the Christian should be watchful and prevail, he labors
by false Teachers, which are the Magicians and Sorcerers in the Mystery, to
draw them from their vigilance, by possessing their minds with these lying
Tenants, that the Devil comes in the shape of a Cat or a Dog to a Witch, and
bargains with her, and the rest, that whilst they are set at gaze to look for
him in a bodily shape, they are made negligent in their spiritual watch, and so
are diverted from the spiritual combat, and thereby the power and practice of
Godliness is diverted and obstructed. Therefore we are to give heed unto the
counsel of the Holy Ghost; to resist the Devil in his spiritual assaults with
the spiritual weapons that God bestows upon us, and not to give heed to old
Wives Fables, or the false Doctrine of Witchmongers, that make us watch for the
Devil where he is not, and in the mean time not to resist him where he is, and
that is within effectively in a spiritual manner, for he works in the
children of disobedience, and therefore a Devil within us is more to be feared,
than a Devil without us.

3. These Tenants do uphold that horrid, lying, and blasphemous Absurd. 3.
opinion, that our blessed Savior did cast out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince
of Devils: For when they could not deny, nor disprove the plain and open
matters of fact, that our Savior did really cast out Devils, then they
devilishly invented and vented, that though he did so, yet it was but by the
help of the Prince of Devils, with whom he had a compact, and so wrought by the
greater power to overpower the less. Concerning which Mr. Glanvil is pleased
to Considerat. about Witchcraft, page 95, 96.
tell us this: In his return to which he denies not the supposition or
possibility of the thing in general, but clears himself by an appeal to the
actions of their own children, whom they would not tax so severely. But by Mr.
Glanvils leave we must affirm, that though it be a bold assertion, yet it is
not true; for our Savior does absolutely confute the supposition both in the
general, and also in reference to himself, by showing the absurdities of it,
and that by these Arguments.

1. They supposed that the Devils had a Prince or a Ruler that was able to cast
out Devils that were his Subjects, and inferior unto him, to which his answer
is: Every Kingdom divided against it self is brought to desolation, and every
City or house divided against it self cannot stand. And if Satan cast out
Satan, he is divided against himself, how shall then his Kingdom stand? Upon
which a most learned Author does thus paraphrase: If any King mean to Vid. Dr.
Hammond in Math. 12. 25, etc.
uphold his Kingdom, he will not quarrel and fall out with his own Subjects,
and cast them out, which are doing him service; such divisions and civil
dissentions as these will soon destroy his Kingdom, and therefore cannot
probably be affirmed of any prudent Ruler or Prince. And Satan's casting out
Devils which are about his business (possessing those he would have possessed)
would be such a civil dissension as this, and a breach. From whence he
necessarily concludes, that either Satan does not cast out Satan, or else that
his Kingdom is divided, and cannot stand, but come to desolation. But Satan's
Kingdom is not destroyed nor brought to desolation; therefore it is not divided
against it self, and consequently Satan does not cast out Satan. Of this
passage Theophylact says: Quomodo enim Daemones seipsos ejiciunt, quum magis
inter se conveniant? Satan autem dicitur adversarius. Vid. loc. citat.
And to the same purpose is that of S. Chrysostom: Si divisus est, imbecillior
factus est, and perit: si autem perit, qualiter potest alium projicere?

2. Our Savior says further: And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom
do your children cast them out? For as the forecited Author says: Why may not
I cast out Devils by the Power and in the Name of God, as well as your
Disciples and Countrymen, the Jews among you (who being evil are therefore
more obnoxious to suspicion of holding correspondence with Satan's Kingdom) do,
at least pretend to do. When they in the Name of God go about to cast them out,
you affirm it to be the Power of God, and so do I. Why should you not believe
that of me, which you affirm of your own? Si expulsio (says S. Hierom)
Daemonum in filiis vestris Deo, non Daemonibus deputatur, Vid. Hieron. in loc.
quare in me idem opus non eandem habeat and causam?

3. Christ further urges: But if I cast out Devils by the Spirit of God, then
the Kingdom of God is come upon you or unto you. But if it be indeed by the
Power of God, that I do all this, then it is clear, that although you were not
aware of it, yet this is the time of the Messiah, whose Mission God has
testified with these Miracles, and would not have done so, if it had been a
false Christ. So that he seems to conclude thus: You Scribes and Pharisees
seem to acknowledge, that there are real possessions by Devils, and that they
may be thrown out, either by the Power of God or the power of Satan. But I have
showed the absurdity, that Satan does not cast out the Devils his obedient
Subjects that are doing his service; and therefore that what I do must be by
the finger of God, and that must certainly denote unto you, that his Kingdom is
come, and that I am the Messiah.

4. He proceeds: Or else how can one enter into a strong man's house, and
spoil his goods? except he first bind the strong man, and then he will spoil
his house. My dispossessing Satan of his goods, and turning him out of those
whom he possesses, is an argument that I have mastered him, and so that I do
not use his power, but that mine is greater than his, and employed most against
his will, and to his damage. Quod enim (as says a learned Father) non
Chrysostom. in loc.
potest Satanas Satanam ejicere, manifestum ex dictis est: sed quoniam neque
alius potest eum ejicere, nisi prius eum superaverit, omnibus est manifestum:
Constituitur ergo quod and antea, cum manifestiori abundantia. Dicit enim:
Tantum absisto ab hoc quod utar Diabolo Coadjutore, quod praelior cum eo, and
ligo eum: Et hujus conjectura est, quod vasa ejus diripio. Et sic contrarium
ejus quod illi tentabant dicere, demonstrat. Illi enim volebant ostendere, quod
non propria virtute ejecit Daemones. Ipse autem ostendit, quod non solum
Daemones, sed and eorum Principem ligavit: quod manifestum est ab his quae fact
a sunt. Qualiter enim Principe non victo, hi qui subjacent Daemones direpti
sunt?

5. Lastly he concludes: He that is not with me, is against me: And he that
gathers not with me, scatters abroad. And it is proverbially known (says
Dr. Hammond) that he that is not on ones side, that brings Forces into the
field, and is not for a man's assistance, he is certainly for his Enemy, engages
against him, does him hurt; and consequently my casting out Devils, shows that
I am Satan's declared Enemy. By all which arguments he flatly overthrows the
false supposition of the Pharisees.

4. These Tenants do overthrow the chief Articles of the Christian Absurd. 4.
Faith, to wit, the rational and infallible evidence of the Resurrection of
Christ in the same individual and numerical body in which he suffered: and this
we shall elucidate in these particular Considerations.

1. The whole strength of the Christian Religion consists in the certainty of
Christ's Resurrection in his true and individual body. For as the Apostle
argues: And if Christ be not risen, then is our 1 Cor. 15. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
preaching vain, and your faith is also vain: yea and we are found false
witnesses of God, because we have testified of God, that he raised up Christ:
whom he raised not up, if so be that the dead rise not. For if the dead rise
not, then is not Christ risen. And if Christ be not risen, your faith is vain,
ye are yet in your sins. Then also they which are fallen asleep in Christ, are
perished. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most
miserable. So that all these sad consequences must needs follow, and the whole
Christian Religion be found a lie, if Christ be not truly risen from the dead.

2. And though the Apostle do enumerate sufficient Witnesses of his
Resurrection and appearance after death, and that he was seen of Cephas, then
of the Twelve, after that he was seen of above five hundred Brethren at once,
then of James, then of all the Apostles, and lastly of himself: Yet all this
Cloud of Witnesses will prove little, but dissolve into vapor, if there were
or are either Angels or Spirits, that in their own or assumed bodies, may
appear in his form, shape, and likeness, and to sight and tangibility be in all
properties as his body was, to have flesh and bones, the print of the nails in
the hands and feet, and to eat and drink.

3. That the Apostles held the opinion, that there was Apparitions and Spirits
that did show themselves in any form or likeness, is most plain and evident;
for when they saw Christ walking upon Mar. 6. 49.
the Sea, they supposed it had been a Spirit or Apparition, for the Greek is
(...), and cried out. That is, either being cruelly affrighted and amazed,
their Fantasies did represent strange thoughts in their minds: or else (which
doubtless was the truth) seeing Christ walking upon the Sea, which they thought
was not possible for a man to do without sinking or drowning, they in great
fear cried out, and forgetting his former Miracles, did vainly suppose it some
Spirit that had made an apparition in his likeness. But it is most strange,
that the Disciples that had seen and been eyewitnesses of so many Miracles
wrought by him during his life, and those that accompanied him at his death, as
the renting of the veil of the Temple from the top to the bottom, and the
Earthquake, Mat. 27. 51. Mar. 15. 38.
and the renting of the Rocks, and the Darkness that was over the Land from the
sixth hour unto the ninth; and that after his Resurrection the Graves were
opened, and many bodies of Saints that slept arose, and came out of the Graves,
and went into the holy City, and appeared unto many, of which they could not be
ignorant; It is (I say) most wondrous strange, that after all these they could
doubt of the verity of his Resurrection, and imagine that it was a Spirit in
his form and likeness. And most especially, considering that his Sepulcher was
made sure, the stone sealed, and a Watch set to attend it, of which they could
not be ignorant; and likewise the certain affirmation and evidence of the two
Mary's, from the mouth of the Angel, and their own sight who worshipped him,
Mat. 28. 6, 9. Mar. 16. 1. Joh. 20. 1.
and held him by the feet, and Peter's finding the Sepulcher empty, and his
appearing to the two Disciples that went to Emmaus, and yet for all this at his
next appearance, not to be satisfied, but to be terrified and affrighted, and
to suppose they had seen a Spirit, is beyond all wonder, but that doubtless the
heavenly Father had so ordained it in his inscrutable Wisdom, that the
infallible certainty of his Resurrection might be more evidently and punctually
proved. For at his next appearing, when they were all together, Jesus himself
stood in the midst of them, and said unto them, Peace Luke 24. 37.
be unto you. But they were terrified and affrighted, and supposed they had
seen a Spirit, there the word is (...). Now the cause of this supposing that
they had seen a Spirit, doubtless was because as St. John tells us, That Jesus
twice had stood in the midst of Joh. 20. 19, 26.
them, the doors being shut, because of the Jews, and therefore they could not
possibly imagine, that he could have a body that could make penetration of
dimensions, not considering that he had an omnipotent Power, and therefore
nothing could be impossible unto him. Though it may well be conceived to be
done without Vid. Rolloc. in Job. 20.
penetration of dimensions, because by his Almighty Power he might
inperceptibly both open and shut the doors, and so enter, and suddenly stand in
the midst of them, and no humane sense be able to discern it. But however it
was, the Disciples did not then believe that it was Christ with his individual
body in which he suffered, but either (as some of the Fathers believed) that it
was his very Spirit that he yielded up upon the Cross, that appeared in his
figure or shape, that was so pure, fine, and penetrable, that it could pass
through any Medium, though never so dense or solid: or some other Spirit that
assumed his form and shape, which is far more probable and sound. But howsoever
it was, they did believe that it was some Spirit in his likeness, and not he
himself, in that very numerical body in which he suffered, as may be apparently
gathered from the words of Thomas called Didymus, who strongly affirmed,
saying: Except I shall see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my
fingers into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will
not believe.

4. To the grounds of all these doubts our Savior gives a demonstrative and
infallible solution, which we shall explain in these particulars. 1. He does
not at all deny the existence or beings of Spirits; neither that Spirits do
not, or cannot make visible apparitions: but does grant both. 2. But he
restrains these apparitions to those inseparable properties that belong to
Bodies and Spirits, that is, a body (that is to say an humane body) has flesh
and bones, but a Spirit has neither, as Christ's or humane bodies have; and
therefore says a learned Person upon the place: Docet se non esse Rolloc. ubi
supr.
Spiritum hoc modo: Spiritus, inquit, non habet carnem and ossa. Ego vero, ut
conspicitis, habeo carnem and ossa: Ergo ego non sum Spiritus. Vide igitur ex
sensu and sensibilibus: sensu nimirum visus; sensu tactus: ex visibilibus and
tractabilibus se corpus esse non autem Spiritum edocet. Per sensum enim fides
and gignitur and confirmatur. So that whether Spirits be taken to be corporeal
(and so appear in their own bodies) or to be incorporeal (and so to appear in
assumed bodies) yet are they both to sight, and especially to feeling, not as
humane bodies are that have flesh and bones. So that however they do, may or
can appear (for it must be considered in that latitude, else our Saviors
argument would not be irrefragable and convincing) they to the resistibility of
touching cannot be as flesh and bones are, for they to the sense of touching do
resist, and are solid, but so the bodies of Spirits in what appearance soever
have not, nor can have, otherwise our Saviors argument falls to the ground,
and proves nothing. 3. He confirms this by the Disciples own proof of feeling
and touching the prints or scars of the nails in his hands, and the print of
the wound in his side, and thereby manifests that it was he himself, and the
very same individual body in which he suffered, by which Thomas his great
unbelief and doubting was unanswerably satisfied, by putting his fingers into
or upon the very prints of the nails, and by putting his hand into or upon the
wound or scar upon his side. And therefore though the same power that raised
him from the dead, and rouled the sealed stone from the Sepulcher, could have
perfected his body to be without prints or scars of the wounds; yet did the
divine Wisdom reserve them, thereby to cure the infidelity of his Disciples,
and undeniably to confirm the truth of his Resurrection; to which purpose one
said well: Ibi ad dubitantium corda sananda, vulnerum I'id. Cat^n. A^. Tho.
Aquin. in locum.
sunt servata vestigia. And the further to establish and settle their Faith, he
took a piece of a broiled fish, and of an honeycomb, and eat before them; all
which concluded him to have a true body, and that he was not a Spirit: from
whence we draw these conclusions.

1. That howsoever Spirits do or may appear, they have not, or can have such a
body, that in respect of tangibility, is as flesh and bones. For flesh and
bones are dense, solid, and make sensible resistance to the touch; but the
bodies of Spirits in their apparitions are not, nor can be so. For as we deny
not but there are and may be apparitions in any figure or shape, yet they can
but be as the figures and shapes in the Clouds, which are often seen, and cause
much wonder, though (we suppose) many of them may be rather attributed to the
assimilation made in men's fancies, than to their real existence in those forms
or shapes. So they may be as shadows, or the species of bodies that we see near
or afar off, or as the images that we behold of our selves and other things in
Mirrours or Looking-glasses: which though without doubt they be not
non-entities, for nullius entis nulla est operatio, but these affect the
senses, which is an operation or action; yet do they all easily yield to the
touch, and have no firmness nor solidity, as flesh and bones have; and this is
all that can be justly deduced from our Saviors argumentation.

2. Either we must believe that our Saviors argument is of no force and
validity, which is blasphemous and horrid to affirm or imagine, he being the
way, the truth, and the life, and in whose mouth there was found no guile, and
thereby overthrow the whole foundation of the Christian Religion: or else we
must for certain believe that Spirits whenever they appear have no such
solidity or resistibility as to touch, as flesh and bones have. And
consequently that what strange things soever we may by sight and touch take to
be the apparitions of Spirits, that to touch have the solidity of flesh and
bones, we must conclude that they are not Spirits, but must be some other kind
of Creatures, of whose nature and properties we are to inquire; for doubtless
(as we shall manifest hereafter) there are many strange Creatures, that for
their rarity or strange qualities, have been and are mistaken for the
apparition of Spirits. For the Disciples doubts must still have remained
unsatisfied, if Spirits could appear to have bodies to touch, of that solidity
that flesh and bones are of, and then the truth of our Saviors Resurrection
falls to the ground, and the Christian Faith is vain.

3. Therefore that Demons do appear in the shape of Dogs, Cats, and the like,
and do carry the heavy bodies of Witches in the air, do suck upon their bodies,
and have carnal copulation with them, must suppose them to have bodies as solid
and tangible as flesh and bones: and so overthrow the main proof of our
Saviors Resurrection, and consequently the very foundation of the Christian
Religion; For if Christ be not risen our faith is vain, we are yet in our sins,
and are of all men most miserable, as having only hope in this life, and no
further. And this is sufficient to show the horrid and execrable absurdity of
these opinions; which objection Mr. Glanvil calls spiteful and mischievous, but
durst not undertake the solution, but with a plain shuffle leaves and over-runs
it, as indeed being too hard a morsel for his tender teeth.

And if any do object (as we have heard some do) that three Angels did appear
unto Abraham in the Plains of Mamre, as he sat Genesis 18. 1, 4. 8.
in the Tent-door, and did eat and drink, and washed their feet, and therefore
that they had flesh and bones; to that we return this responsion.

1. It is a very froward and perverse way of arguing, to make one place of
Scripture to clash with another, when they ought all to be expounded according
to the Analogy of Faith, and it is a perfect Harmony which we ought to labor
to find out and rejoice in.

2. It is no perfect way of arguing from the Dispensations in the time of the
Patriarchs and Prophets, to those that God uses now in the time of the Gospel;
for so they might argue that God should answer by Urim and Thummim, because he
did so in the time of the Levitical Priesthood, but that is now ceased, and the
Apostle tells us: God at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in times
past Heb. 1. 1, 2.
unto the Fathers by the Prophets: But in these last days he has spoken by his
Son unto us. So though God did then vouchsafe to make himself manifest unto the
Patriarchs by the visible appearance of Angels: yet it is no rational
consequence that he does so how in these days.

3. It is manifest, that though they were in number three, yet it is true that
it was Jehovah that appeared unto Abraham, and Jehovah Ibid. v. 17.
said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do. Now we do not find that
the word Jehovah is communicable to any Creature, but only to God himself; and
therefore the best Expositors do understand (notwithstanding what Pererius does
say to the contrary) that one of them was Christ the second Person in the
Trinity, who after was to take humane nature upon him, and therefore did so
appear.

4. However these Angels had with them the assistance of a divine and
omnipotent Power, which cannot rationally be affirmed of the common and
ordinary apparitions of Demons to Witches, and therefore does conclude nothing
against what we have laid down before.

CHAP. VI.
That diverse places in Scripture have been mis-translated thereby to uphold
this horrid Opinion of the Devils Omnipotency, and the Power of Witches, when
there is not one word that signifies a familiar Spirit or a Witch in that
sense that is vulgarly intended.

COncerning the words in the Hebrew and Greek, that are commonly alleged to
prove these things, they have been wrested and drawn to uphold these Tenants by
those Translators that had imbibed these Opinions, and so instead of following
the true and genuine signification of the words, they haled them to make good a
pre-conceived Opinion, and did not simply and plainly render them as they ought
to have been. Which has been observed by diverse, especially by Wierus, who got
the learned Masius (a great Hebrician) to interpret them, of which he has
given a full account, Wier. l. 2. p. 89.
which was followed by Mr. Scot. As also Mr. Ady, who A Candle in the dark, p.
10.
has perfectly rendered them according to the Translation of Junius and
Tremellius, and likewise Mr. Wagstaff has prettily opened the The Question of
Witchcraft debated, p. 1. etc.
most of them. So that our attempt here might seem to be superfluous and
unnecessary, and may be condemned of arrogance and vain confidence. To which we
reply, That it is far from us to compare our selves with those Learned men that
were Masters of the Hebrew and Greek Tongues, being in comparison but a
Smatterer in those Languagues, yet have in our younger years both studied and
taught them to others, and as far as we undertake, we hope we need not fear the
censure of the most rigid Critic; intending to note some things that others
have omitted, and to handle them to the full, which others have but done
briefly. And this we shall prosecute in this order.

1. We shall take the words in the same order as they are recited in
Deuteronomy, and the first mentioned is in these words: There shall not be
found among you that makes his son or his daughter to Deuteronomy. 18. 10.
pass through the fire. Now here we shall not enter upon that great Dispute,
whether they really burned and sacrificed by burning their children unto
Moloch, or that they only dedicated them to that Idol, by making them pass
through the fire; but examine the reasons, why those that practiced this kind
of Idolatry are ranked amongst the Diviners or Witches, and were to have the
same punishment, seeing it is no where mentioned, that these used any kind of
Divination at all, and these we conceive to be the chief.

1. The Lord had promised his People to raise them up a Prophet Reas. 1.
from amongst their Brethren like unto Moses, and that therefore they should
hear him, and not go after other Gods or Idols. And therefore he sent them many
and diverse Prophets, of whom they were to inquire: so likewise they gave the
Priest order to inquire Verse. 14, 15.
by Urim and Thummim, by which he gave answers, and therefore they were to
hearken to his Ordinances, and not to follow after other strange Gods: For the
Nations that he cast out had hearkened unto Observers of times and Diviners,
but they were not to do so. And though these that caused their children to pass
through the fire unto Moloch, used not Divinations, yet it was a wicked and
abominable Ceremony, and the use and end of it to lead the people to Idolatry,
and therefore is reckoned amongst the rest.

2. They are solely condemned, because the end of all their Divinations and
their other Feats, were only to draw and lead the Reas. 2.
people to Idolatry, and to serve other Gods. For it is manifest, that all ways
and sorts of Divination were not in themselves evil and unlawful, for else
Astronomy it self, that foretells the Entrance of the Sun and Moon into such
Signs, and when Eclipses will happen, and the like, should be forbidden too,
but they were not: so that the chief reason why they were condemned, was sub
ratione finis, non medii, in regard of the end, and not of the means used,
because all their Divinations, and other Arts, Crafts, or Feats, whether
performed by natural or artificial means, or otherwise, had still for their
chief and principal end the leading of the people unto Idolatry, and the
serving of other Gods, which was above all things abominable and hateful unto
God, who is a jealous God, and will not give his glory to graven Images. And
therefore all Idol-Priests, or those that lead the people to Idolatry, are in
the Scripture-sense Witches, Diviners, and the like. And that all Divinations
were not forbidden, is most clear from that of Solomon, Prove. 16. 10.
as Arias Montanus translates it: Divinatio super labiis regis: and that of
Isaiah, where the Lord threatens to take away the staff Isa. 3. 2.
and stay of Jerusalem, that is, the mighty man, and the man of war, the Judge,
the Prophet, and the prudent, Divinum, sive Sagacem. For it is the same word,
and from the same root (...) Divinavit: For as Avenarius, Schindler, and others
say, Est verbum medium, nam modo in bonam, modo in malam partem accipitur, of
which Tremellius says this: Sagacitas, id est, consultissima prudentia in
rebus dijudicandis, praecavendis, and veluti addivinandis: nam vox Hebraea
media est sive anceps, quae non tantum in malam partem accipitur, sed etiam in
bonam. Therefore was the Law so strict, that Exodus 22. 20.
if any sacrificed unto any other God, save unto the Lord only, he was utterly
to be destroyed, much more those that lead and incited the people to serve and
sacrifice unto other strange Gods, were to be rooted out.

2. Is the word we have named before, to wit, (...), Kosem Kesamim, Divinans
divinationes: which, as we have showed before, was taken in bonam and malam
partem, and is by the Septuagint fitly rendered (...), vaticinans vaticinium,
and is almost with all Translators rendered in that sense and propriety: so that
we need not complain, that it is one of them that is mistranslated; but
concerning it, we may note these things.

1. That there were and are almost innumerable ways, whereby men have
undertaken to Divine and foretell things to come, some of which were by lawful
means and ways, as all prudent, sagacious, and experienced men have done, and
may do. Some by vain, trivial, foolish, and groundless ways, as by the flying
of birds, their noise and motion, and so of beasts, by casting lots, dice, and
the like, which have no causality or efficiency in them at all to declare
things to come, but were merely vain and superstitious, with which the Heathen
World does still abound, and they are not yet totally eradicated from amongst
Christians. The most foolish of which was this, That when the Philistines had
kept the Ark of the Lord seven months, they called the Priests and the
Diviners, to know what to do with it, and they advised them not to send it away
empty, but to send five golden Emerods and five golden Mice, and 1 Samuel 6. 1,
2. 3, 7, 8, 9.
to take a new Cart and two Milch-kine, upon which there had com'd no yoke, and
to tie them to the Cart, and to bring their Calves home from them, and to lay
the Ark in the Cart, and the Jewels of Gold to be put in a Coffer by, thinking
that if they went up toward Beth-shemesh that was the Israelites Coast, that
if they did so, then it was he that smote them, otherwise that it was but a
chance that happened unto them. And this in respect of the Priests and Diviners
was only a casual conjecture at Random, though God in his Providence did order
it according to his Divine Wisdom for the best. Like unto this was that
mentioned by the Prophet, a Consulter with his staff, as also that of Ezekiel:
Hos. 4. 12. Ezekiel. 21. 21.
For the King of Babylon stood at the parting of the way, at the head of the
two ways, to use divination: he made his arrows bright, he consulted with
images, (Teraphim) he looked in the liver. And besides these there were others
that pretended Visions and Revelations from their Gods or Idols; but how far
either Idols, or Devils, or their Priests could truly foretell things to come,
is very doubtful and hard to determine, of which we shall have occasion to
speak hereafter.

2. We are to note, that though there were never so many ways of Divination
used, and whether the means used to predict by, were natural or supernatural,
lawful or unlawful, frivolous and superstitious, or taken upon sound and
rational grounds, yet were they all wicked and abominable, because they were
used to withdraw the people from those Ordinances that God had appointed to
give answers by, and to lead the people to inquire of vain and lying Idols, and
their Priests, and thereby to commit Idolatry; and so whatsoever the means
were, the end was wicked and damnable.

3. Moreover, what answers soever the Priests forged and gave (for it is
manifest, that the Idols gave none at all; for they had Psalm. 115. 4, etc.
mouths and spoke not, ears and heard not, eyes and saw not, feet and walked
not, neither was there breath in their nostrils) were nothing but lies and
conjectures of their own devising, and there an Idol in the Hebrew is sometimes
styled (...) nihilum, and therefore says the Prophet: The Prophets prophecy
lies in my Name, I sent Jer. 14. 14.
them not, neither have I commanded them. They prophecy unto you a false
vision and divination, and a thing of naught, and the deceit of their heart.
Unto which the Apostle alludeth, when he says: We know that an Idol is nothing
in the world, and that there is 1 Cor. 8. 4.
none other God but one. That is, that an Idol taken abstractively, without
regard to the matter of which it was made, as gold, silver, stone, wood, or the
like, which were natural substances, or respect to the figure or shape which
was artificial, and the work of the Vid. Dr. Hammond. in loc.
Workman, it was plainly nothing, and had no real existence as a God or Idol,
but only in the Fantasies and minds of the blinded Worshippers; for it neither
could truly foretell, nor act any thing of it self, but all that was done, was
the lies and inventions of the Priests that served them, and got their living
by that villainous and lying trade. For God by the mouth of his Prophet does set
down the true difference of the true God, that could infallibly foretell and
declare things that were to come, from the false Gods and Idols, and does
challenge them in this manner: Show the things that are Isa. 41. 23.
to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are Gods: yea do good or do evil,
that we may be dismayed, and behold it together. From whence it is plain, that
the only (...) to distinguish betwixt the Divinations that are given forth by
the Spirit of God in his Prophets or Apostles is, that they are plain, certain,
and infallible, and the event never fails to answer the Prediction, but those
that are given forth by Satan and his juggling and lying Ministers, are always
ambiguous, doubtful, and perplex, and evermore deceive such as trust in them,
as was manifest in Ahab, when all the false Prophets bade him go up to Ramoth
Gilead, and prosper, yet there was he slain. And as they never truly foretell
things to come, so neither can the Idols do good or evil: all that is, or ever
was done, was performed only by the cunning, confederacy, and juggling of the
knavish and deceitful Priests; and therefore the Prophet admonishes Gods
people not to be afraid of them; For they cannot do evil, neither also is it in
them to do good. Jer. 10. 5.


4. We are to note, that if a Sign or Wonder foretold do come to pass, we have
no Warrant to ascribe the bringing of it to pass either to Devil or Witch, for
the Lord tells us this: If there arise among you a Prophet or a Dreamer of
dreams, and gives thee Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3.
a sign or a wonder. And the sign or the wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke
unto thee, saying; Let us go after other Gods (which thou have not known) and
let us serve them: Thou shall not hearken to the words of that Prophet or that
Dreamer of dreams: For the Lord your God proves you, to know whether you love
the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul. So that what
Divinations or Predictions soever be foretold by any, or what signs or wonders
soever be brought to pass, if the persons that work or foretell them, persuade
us to serve other Gods, or go to seduce us to Idolatry, we are not to follow
them, but are to know that by them the Lord does prove us, to try if we love
him with all our heart, or not. And if there were no other means to distinguish
a true Miracle from a false, yet were this infallibly sufficient to instruct
and direct us.

5. We may note, that of all the several sorts of Divinations pretended, and of
all the acceptations of this Hebrew word in all the Bible, there is nothing
that does imply any such kind of killing Witch, as is commonly imagined, nor
none such as make a visible League with the Devil, nor upon whose bodies he
sucketh, or has carnal copulation with them, nor no such as are really changed
into Cats, Hares, Wolves, or Dogs; which was the thing we undertook to prove.

3. The next word we are to consider, is (...), which Avenarius, Schindlerus,
Buxtorsius, and Mr. Goodwin do derive from (...) obnubilavit, nubem obduxit,
item praestigiis usus est. From whence we may note these things.

1. That the most of all the Translators do some render it by one word, and
some by another, that no certainty can be gathered from them at all, as though
it did signify diverse and many sorts of these kinds of Augury, Divinations, or
juggling Feats, when in reason we cannot but suppose that it only comprehended
some one sort, and not so many as the Translators do ascribe to it. The
Septuagint render it for the most part (...), sometimes (...), and sometimes
(...), which are all of different derivations and significations; some others
render it other ways, as, neque auspicabimini, neque observabitis horas,
nevaticinemini, neominemini, nec Vid. Polyglot. in loc.
observet somnia and auguria, nec qui exercet Astrologiam, etc. Now from such a
diversity no man is able to draw a positive certainty.

2. They do not keep to one word appropriate to the Hebrew, which if they had
not forgotten themselves, they would have done, and not left it uncertain. For
Arias Montanus in the 19. of Leviticus, verse. 26. renders it, neque
praestigiabamini, and in the 2. of Isaiah, verse. 6. translates it, augures
sicut Philistim. In Isa. 57. 3. he calls them Filii Auguratricis. And in the
27. of Jeremiah, v. 9. Et ad Augures vestros. Also Micah 5. 11. he renders it
Praestigiatores. Now what great difference there is betwixt any sort of Augury,
and Juggling, or Leger-de-main, is known to any of indifferent reading. And the
rest of the Translators are far more wild, and more wide. And Junius and
Tremellius, who of all others, one might have thought would have been more
circumspect, yet fall into the same incertitude; for in Deuteronomy. 18. 10. he
renders it Planetarius, but in the place before-cited in Leviticus, they render
it, neque utemini praestigiis, though in the Margent they mend it, with this
note, neque ex nubibus conjicite, vel ne temporis observationi plus aequo
tribuite. And Isa. 2. 6. Et praestigiatores sunt ut Polischtaei.

3. But if there be any certainty in adhering to the primitive signification of
the Hebrew root, that plainly intends obnubilavit, that it is without
question most safe and genuine to translate it Planetarius, to which the most
learned Andreas Masius (as he is quoted by Wierus) does incline in these words:
Veteres Hebraeorum dicunt id verbum ad eos proprie pertinere, qui temporum
momenta Vid. Jo. Wier. de mag. Jus. c. 1. p. 91. Of Divin. lib. 4. cap. 10. p.
183.
superstitiose observant, atque alia fausta rebus gerendis, alia infausta
praescribunt. To which agrees Mr. Thomas Goodwin, saying: But of all I approve
those who derive it from (...), a Cloud, as if the Original signified properly
a Planetary, or Stargazer.

4. But however thus far there is no word found, that signifies a Witch in the
sense we have laid down, nor any such person that has a real familiar Spirit,
either in them, or attending upon them, ready visibly to appear at their beck,
this is not yet to be found out.

4. The next is (...) from the root (...) nichesch, auguratus est, observavit,
augurium fecit, which our English Translators have erroneously rendered an
Inchanter, which it no way signifies, nor has any relation unto, having in
the next verse named a Charmer, as though Inchanter and Charmer were not all
one, when the word plainly (as Mr. Goodwin and the learned Masius do confess)
imports an Augur or Sooth-sayer: That is, such an one, who out of his own
experience draws observations of good or evil to come: of which we may note
these things.

1. The most of all the Translations given us in the Plolyglot, do render the
Hebrew word by auguratus est, and so understand it to be an Augur or
Sooth-sayer, a Conjecturer, or an Observer, from whatsoever it be that he
takes his observations, as from the flying noise or motion of birds or beasts,
looking into their entrails, and the like, and from thence taking upon them to
foretell good or evil to come, or what was hidden and secret.

2. The Hebrew word (...), is by the Septuagint rendered (...), Augurium,
Auspicium, that is, an Augur, an Observer, or a Conjecturer, which Luther
translateth: ^yn de up Uoegell geschrey achte. And in the Low Dutch Bible it is
rendered agreeable thereto; and the French render it aux Oiseaux, from the word
Oiseau, Avis, Volucris; and the Italians render it Auguropista, which are all
to one purpose, and no difference at all, and so the gross mistake of our
English Translators is most apparent, that make it to be an Inchanter or
Charmer, to which it has no relation at all.

3. This Hebrew word is taken in bonam partem, heedfully to consider, mark, or
observe, as Laban said, when he labored to stay Jacob from going from him: I
have learned by experience that the Lord has blessed me for thy sake. So that
though Labans heart Genesis 30. 27.
was not upright toward Jacob, nor he a sincere Worshipper of the God of the
Jews; yet so far had the Lord convinced him, by the faithful and industrious
service of Jacob that he had experienced, and by trial found that the Lord had
blessed him for Jacob's sake. And the same word is used, when Joseph said: Is
not this the cup wherein my Lord drinks, and whereby indeed he divineth, or
makes Genesis 44. 5, 15.
trial? And again: Know ye not, that such a man as I can certainly divine, or
make trial? And though Pererius has made a large Dispute about this matter,
and recites the Opinions of many Authors concerning it; yet it is manifest,
that Joseph knew his Brethren before, and had caused the Cup to be put into
Benjamins Sack, and that all this was but done in a just and prudent way, the
better to prepare his Brethren for his revealing of himself unto them, and so
had reference to no unlawful conjecturing at all, though it was plain, that he
had the special gift from God of interpreting of Dreams, and foretelling of
things that were to come.

4. It is too hard a task to enumerate all the several ways that the Heathens
used, by observation to foretell things to come, and more difficult to declare
all the subjects from whence they gathered the signs of their Predictions. The
chiefest that the old Romans used, were Augurium quasi Avigerium dictum, vel
Avigarium, ab avium scilicet garritu quem auspicantes observabant: And so
Auspicium, quasi Avispecium, ab avibus spectandis. And these observations were
taken, either from the feeding, flying, or noise of the birds. So they had
their Haruspices, Harioli, and Haruspicina, which was derived ab haruga,
hostia, ab hara in qua concluditur and servatur.

5. But all these sorts of Observations, Guessings, and Conjectures may be
considered these three ways. 1. Some of them are natural, rational, and legal;
as is the Prognostic part of the Art of Medicine, Political Predictions of the
change, fall, and ruin of Kingdoms, States, and Empires. Some Civil taken from
the course and carriage of men, as when one sees a rich young Heir that
follows nothing but vice, luxury, and all sorts of debauchery, it is easy to
foretell that his end will be beggary and misery. Some from the due observation
of beasts and fowls, which live sub dio, may easily conjecture the alteration
of the weather. And so by observing the change, or color of the Stars and
Planets, the Clouds and Elements, may easily foretell the change of weather. And
we find that these predictions from the Signs gathered from natural causes, are
not condemned by our Blessed Savior, who says: When it is Matthew. 16. 2, 3.
evening, ye say it will be sair weather, for the sky is red. And in the
morning, it will be foul weather to day, for the sky is red, and lowering. And
again: When ye see a cloud rise out of the West, straightway Luke 12. 54.
ye say, there comes a shower, and so it is. And when ye see the South wind
blow, ye say, there will be heat, and it comes to pass. 2. There are some
conjectures that are false, groundless, and superstitious, as were, and are all
the predictions taken from the feeding, flying or noise of Fowls, or the signs
appearing in the intrails of Beasts; for in all such like, there is no
connection betwixt the cause and effect, and they therefore are false and vain,
and this was one of the reasons why they were forbidden amongst the Jews. 3.
There were some that in regard of their use and end were wicked and Idolatrous,
and in this respect all divinations and predictions are wicked and unlawful, if
they be used (as was and is yet among the Heathen) to lead the people unto, or
confirm them in, the worship of Idols, and false Gods. And from all this it
appears, that yet we can find no proper or fit word for such a kind of Witch
whose existence we have denied and are disproving.

5. The next word in this place of Deuteronomy is (...) Umechascheth, which our
Translators render a Witch, but in what sense or propriety, I think few can
conjecture, for it comes from the Hebrew root, (...) Coscheth, which Avenarius
renders, Fascinavit, effascinavit, but Schindlerus translates it, Praestigias,
maleficia aut magiam exercuit, mutavit aliquid natural ad aspectum oculi, ut
aliud appareat quam est. And by Buxtorfius it is rendered, Praestigiae, and the
derivations from it through the whole Old Testament, which is the most certain
propriety of the word, as these following considerations will make manifest.

1. That the most of the Translators in rendering this word whether in this
place, or in others, have been very inconstant, and one place not agreeing with
another, as Arias Montanus in this place gives it maleficus, but in Exodus he
makes it, Praestigiatores, Chap. 7. 11, 22.
and in the 22 and 16 of the same Book he makes it Praestigiatricem; and in
another place where the very same word is used in the Hebrew, Chron. 2. 33. 6.
he says of Manasseh, and Praestigiis vacabat. And yet in another place, he
rendereth the very same word veneficia. So uncertain was this learned Man, and
so inconsiderate in his versions, 2 Kings 9. 22.
wherein he ought to have had a more special care. Now Tremellius in all the
places named before, does use the words Praestigiatorem, and the words from the
same derivation in the Latin, which shows certainty and constancy.

2. The most of all the translations in the Polyglott, do render this word
doubtful and various: As maleficus, magus, praestigias faciens, Incantator, and
the like, which are all dubious, and various, and no certainty can be produced
from them. Only those we call the Septuagint do keep close to words of the same
signification, deducted all from (...), which properly does signify no more
than venenum, poison, though the circumstances do manifest that they were but
Juggling and Imposture. And the High Dutch, Low Dutch, French and Italian
translations do all render it with the same uncertainty, so that nothing sure
can be drawn from them.

3. But to leave these uncertainties, it is manifest that this word does
signify as Burtorfius and Schindlerus do render it, for they are best to be
trusted, because they are not guilty of contradiction as the most of the others
are; That is, a Jugler, or one that by himself, or the help of his
Confederates, does by sleight of hand, and such like conveyances perform
strange things to the astonishment of the beholders. And therefore does Mr.
Goodwyn tell us this: A Witch, Moses and Aaron l. 4. c. 10. p. 191.
properly a Jugler. The original (he says) signifies such a kind of Sorcerer,
who bewitcheth the senses and minds of men, by changing the forms of things,
making them appear otherwise than indeed they are. And these Dr. Willet says
(speaking of Pharaohs Magicians) were Praestigiatores, whom we call Juglers,
which deceived Com. upon Exodus c. 7. p. 72.
men's senses. And though learned Masius (speaking of those that Nebuchadnezzar
called to interpret his dream) does make this objection, that if this word be
translated Praestigiatores, he does not see, quid illi ad explicandum somnium
adferre sua art potuissent, quae tota fallax and delusoria est: Yet is this of
little or no force at all, for the rest that were called, were as well
Impostors as these if not more, and the King and those with him knew not
certainly (as the event showed) that they could perform any such matter, but
was ignorant of the manner of their delusions and cheats, and was only led by
common rumor and belief, grounded upon the vain and lying boasts that such
sort of people are apt to give out of themselves, and the wonders they pretend
to perform. So that from his and his Courtiers opinions of either the matter,
or manner, of what they pretended to do, will no consequence be drawn, from
what they truly could do, because belief and action are two different things,
as might be manifested by the vain credulity of the vulgar, that those kind of
deceivers can do strange things, but in trial and experiment they are found to
be Cheaters and Impostors.

4. But that this word does bear this signification is manifest from the things
they performed, for in Exodus they are called (...), and they in like manner
cast down every man his rod and Chap. 7. 11.
they became serpents: not that their rods were really transubstantiated into
true serpents as Aarons was, for that could not be done but by an Omnipotent
and Divine power, which they had not; It was only done as Juglers do,
seemingly, by sleight and cunning, and so had an appearance of true serpents,
but were not so indeed; or else in making a show to throw down their rods, they
secretly conveyed them away and threw down serpents in their stead, as might
easily be done by sleight of hand, as we shall show more fully hereafter.

5. That this is the genuine meaning of this word is manifest from the
circumstances of some other places duly weighed, and compared together: for one
text says as our English Translators have rendered it, And it came to pass
when Joram saw Jehu that he said, Is it peace Jehu? And he answered, What
peace, so long as the 2 Kings 9. 22.
whoredoms of thy mother Jezebel, and her witchcrafts are so many? Now why they
should translate it witchcrafts, cannot well be imagined, except it were to
draw the Scriptures to speak according to their preconceived opinions, for the
word used there is the same we speak of, to wit, (...), which though Arias
Montanus rendereth, and veneficia ejus, that according to the Latin
signification is but poysonings, or poison making, which does not intimate
Witchcraft in that sense that is vulgarly understood, which Tremellius properly
renders, and praestigae ejus: and Luther renders it by the words Coeverye, and
so does the Low Dutch: Though the proper High Dutch word for praestigiator, a
Jugler, be Baut^er, which is as Calepin tells us, that Praestigiae sunt
incantationes, delusiones, cujusmodi sunt, quae manuum quadam dexteritate alia
apparent quam rever a sunt. Now what whoredoms or fornications had Jezebel
committed? Spiritual whoredoms, and not Carnal ones; for she had her self gone
a whoring after Idols, and strange gods, and as much as in her lay drew the
people of Israel into the same whoredoms, and for this it was that so fearful a
judgment fell upon her. And what Witchcrafts (if they must be so called) had
she practiced or followed? Was it any other than in setting up, maintaining,
and defending the Priests of Baal and of the groves, who practiced several
sorts of divination, juggling, impostures, and delusions, whereby they were
seduced and blinded to follow and worship the false god and Idols? And from
this it is plain that all her Witchcrafts were only impostures and delusions
whereby the people were led unto idolatry: and so the true signification of
this word is a deceiver and an impostor, and intends no other kind of
Witchcraft at all. And in the same sense must the word given by those we call
the Septuagint which is (...), Pharmaca vel venena sua, her poisons, that is
her deceits and delusions that she set up by the lying Divinations, Juglings,
and Impostures of the Priests, by which the people were seduced, and blinded
and poisoned with the filthy Doctrine and practice of Idol worship. And in the
same sense must the words be taken in the Revelation where the words (...) are
used. For the Text says: And a mighty Angel took up a stone like a great
millstone, and* Chap. 21. 8. 22. 51. 9. 21. 18. 23.
cast it into the sea, saying; Thus with violence shall that great City Babylon
be th^wn down, and shall be found no more at all. And after: For thy merchants
were the great men of the earth: For by thy sorceries were all nations
deceived. These words are spoken mystically of spiritual Babylon, in which
Antichrist rules, who (as the Apostle says) sits in the temple of God, and
exalts himself against all that is called god; and this is he whose coming is
after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders. So
that it is plain that his working being by lying wonders, his Merchants must
needs be liars and deceivers, and it is these Sorceries, impostures and
delusions by which all Nations are deceived, and caused to err: and so is no
other Witchcraft but mere lying, delusion and imposture. And to this purpose
does Dr. Hammond Paraphrase it in these words; speaking of the destruction of
Babylon: And three eminent causes (he says) there are of this; First, Luxury
which enriched so many Merchants, and made them so great. Secondly, seducing
other people to their Idolatries and abominable courses by all arts of
insinuation. And thirdly, the persecuting and slaying of the Apostles and other
Christians. And in the same sense must this word also be taken in the
Galathians, which though Chap. 5. 20.
translated Witchcraft, must needs mean imposture, deceit and delusion by which
people are led from the true Doctrine and Worship of Christ, to vain and lying
Superstition and Idolatry, and not bodily poisoning.

6. Thus far we can find no such Hebrew word as signifies any such kind of a
Witch as Dr. Casaubon, or Mr. Glanvill intend, or labor to prove, and
therefore we may proceed to the next. Only we cannot but take notice of one
other text, that our English Translators have erroneously rendered, and that is
this: where Samuel is rebuking Saul for sparing Agag and the best of the spoil,
he says, For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as
iniquity and idolatry: Which Tremellius renders thus: Quin sicut 1 Samuel 15. 23.
peccatum divinationis est rebellio: and sicut superstitio and Idola est
repugnantia. And Arias Montanus gives it thus: Quia peccatum divinationis est
rebellio, and mendacium vel Idolum, and Teraphim transgredi, which both are
agreeable to the Hebrew word (...) which signifies properly Divination. So
that this place notes, not rebellion against an earthly or temporal King, but
against the King of Heaven; and to disobey his command, and to follow our own
wills and judgments, and to persevere therein, is as odious and detestable, as
to set up lying Divinations thereby to follow Idols and false gods: for the
following the fancies of our own brains, is to follow the divinations of our
own counsel, and to make an Idol, and a Teraphim of our own frail, weak and
blind judgments, and to forsake the pure and perfect Law of the Lord, which
ought to be a lantern to our feet, and a light unto our paths, and is spiritual
rebellion, even as the divinations of Idol-priests and Idol-worship were.

6. The next word in this place of Deuteronomy is (...) utens incantatione, vel
incantans incantatione, aut ju^gens junctiones, from the root (...) Sociatus
est, junctus fuit alteri, copulatus est, for so Avenarius renders it. And
Schindlerus says, Incantator, vel qui consortium habet cum Daemonibus,
conjurator, qui incantationibus multa animalia in unum locum consociat vel
congregat, vel ne laedant associat. From whence we may note thus much:

1. That it primarily signifies to join together, as in that of Genesis
speaking of the Kings that went to War, All these were joined together in the
vale of Siddim, which is the salt sea. And in another Chap. 14. 3. Exodus 36. 10.
place, And he coupled the five curtains together; and in the same sense in
diverse other places: by all which it appears, that when it is used for
incantation or charming, it is because of some conjunction or coupling together.

2. It is very remarkable that in all the translations in the Polyglot, there
is no variance, neither do Arias Montanus, Burtorfius, or Tremellius differ at
all, and the Greek Translators do agree with them, who render it, (...), and
the Germane, Low Dutch, French, and Italian Translators do accord herewithal,
and it is likewise so rendered in Isa. 47. 9, 12. and in other places. So that
it is plain it signifies such as took upon them by strange words and charms to
prevent venomous beasts to hurt, bite or sting, and many other wonderful
things; but what they brought to pass, or effected, besides deluding and
deceiving of the people and leading of them to Idolatry, is hard to determine,
of which we shall speak in another place.

3. There are diverse opinions concerning this incantation or charming, why it
should be accounted conjunction, or association; and some, as Schindlerus and
Bithner, do judge it is because they associate or bring together many Serpents
or noysom Creatures into one place, and then destroy them. But this is but a
conjecture, for it is by the best learned strongly disputed on both sides,
whether charms and enchantments can really and truly perform any such effects,
and diverse instances and examples brought both ways, some for the affirmative,
some for the negative, so that the matter of fact is not certainly known or
granted. Others by association do understand, the league or compact made
betwixt the Charmer and the Devil, by virtue of which such strange things are
brought to pass by them, and of this opinion was Mr. Perkins (if that Book of
Witchcraft, that goes under his name, be truly his) who strengthening his
conceit with that verse in the 58 Psalm thought that he had found out an
invincible argument to prove the Compact betwixt Witches and Devils, and
therefore it is necessary and expedient to examine that text to the bottom to
sift out the true translation, and sense of that place, which we shall do at
large as follows in these particulars.

1. Our English Translators render it thus, speaking of the deaf Adder or Asp;
Which will not hearken to the voice of the charmers, charming never so wisely;
and in the margent, or be the Charmer never so cunning, where they take no
notice of the conjoyning of conjunctions, and consequently none of such a
league or compact.

2. Tremellius gives it thus: Quae non auscultat voci mussitantium, utentis
incantationibus peritissimi, which piece of Latin were very difficult to put
into perfect Grammatical construction, because mussitantium is the plural
number, but utentis and peritissimi are of the singular, which we shall leave
to the censure of Critics, and give the marginal note that is there added.
Surdae] id est, calide agentis adversus incantamenta, ut sequentia exponunt,
nam aurem utramque ab ea obturari, etc. Of the deaf Adder] That is to say, that
acts craftily against the incantations, as the following words do expound:
For she stops both her ears, by fixing one to the earth, and covering, and
stopping the other with her tail; and that Hierome, Augustine, Cassiodorus, and
others do so expound the place. Whether this be true of the Asp or not is much
to be doubted, for I find no Author of credit that does averr it of his own
knowledge, and the thing is very difficult to bring to experiment, and the
Psalmist might speak according to vulgar opinion, of which there was no
necessity that it should be literally and certainly true. Further he goes on
and says, mussitantium] That is to say, pronouncing their incantations to
charm her, whispering and very low; which study of charming, lest any should
think that David does approve of them in this place, he learnedly uses the
very words of the prohibition, which God laid down Deuteronomy. 18. 11. For (he says)
these fascinators in the Hebrew appellation are said to consociate society,
because they apply the society of the Devil to their arts.

3. Those we call the Septuagint do render it thus: (...). And that which is
ascribed to Hierome in the eight Tome of his works printed at Basil 1525, gives
two Latin versions to this, the one answering to the Septuagint which is this:
Quae non exaudiet vocem incantantium and venefici incantantis sapienter. The
other according to the Hebrew thus, Ut non audiat vocem murmurantium, nec
incantatoris incantationes callidas. So that this makes the meaning to be,
that the deaf Asp is so cunning in stopping of her ear, that she does not hear
the voice of those that murmur, and mutter charms, though it be a Charmer that
utters the most cunning and powerful charms: So that here is no regard had to
conjoyning or associating either of Serpents together, or of the society of the
Charmer and the Devil.

4 Luthers Translation of this place is remarkable, which is this, Dass sie
nicht boere die stimme dess Gauberers, dess Beschwerers der wol besch weren
fan. Which in English runs thus, That does not hear the voice of the Magicians
or Charmers, the Conjurors or Exorcists, that well conjure can. And agreeable
to this is the translation of the Low Dutch. So that the sense is, that the
deaf Asp stops her ear against the voice of the Charmers, those that have
sworn together (it may be that common error and opinion had prevailed so far
with learned Luther, as does appear by his exposition upon the third Chapter to
the Galathians, that he believed that the Witch, and the Devil were in compact,
and sworn together) and that were most cunning in that art. But this does but
in a manner beg the question, not prove it, for all will but amount to this,
that the Asp cannot be charmed, no not by those that have the greatest skill in
the matter of incantation.

5. The French Translators render it thus: Lequel n'ecoute point la voix des
enchanteurs, ni du charmeur sort expert en charms, Which will in no point hear
the voice of the inchanter, nor of the Charmer that is expert in charms. And
this proves nothing at all of joining societies, nor of compacts. The Italian
version gives it thus, Accioche non oda lavoce de glivoce incantatori, del
venefico incantante incantationi di dotto. In English thus, Which does not hear
the voice of the inchanter, of the Witch (if that be the signification of the
word venefico, a poysoner) enchanting with the incantation of the learned: And
this is most near the Hebrew of all the rest, and bears thus much, That the
Asp does not hearken to the voice of the inchanter, of the Charmer which uses
the charms that were framed and conjoined by a learned Clerk: so that if
associating be comprised, it must be understood of the framing and joining of
the charms, which doubtless was the composure of those that were very learned,
especially if they work by a natural operation, of which we shall discourse
hereafter.

6. But now we come to the Hebrew it self, which Arias Montanus renders thus,
Quae non audiet ad vocem mussitantium: jungentis conjunctiones docti. And in
the margent thus, Quae non obtemperabit voce incantantium, incantantis
incantationes sapienter. Which we may thus English, Which hearkeneth not to the
voice of the mutterers, of the learned joyner of conjunctions. And the other
thus; Which obeys not the voice of the Charmers, of the person charming
charms wisely. So that it may mean, that the Asp hearkeneth not to the voice of
those that mutter or mussitate the charms of the Charmer that does wisely use
them, or of him that is a wise Charmer. But it is needless and improper to make
an half period at mussitantium, for then there will be no coherence in
Grammatical construction betwixt the former and latter part of the verse: and
therefore according to the order of Grammar, it should be rendered thus: Quae
non audiet advocem mussitantium incantationes, docti incantantis. And so the
meaning is plainly this, that the Asp does not hearken to the voice of those
that mutter the charms of a learned Charmer. And so there is no intimation of
association or compact either one way or another, but it does merely imply that
the Asp does resist and frustrate the charms of the mutterers that use them,
though they be wise in the using of them, which doubtless is the most genuine
rendering, and the true meaning of the place: or else it may be thus aptly
translated: Quae non audiet advocem mussitantium conjunctiones jungentis docti;
That is thus, Which hearkeneth not to the voice of those that mutter the
Conjunctions of a learned Joyner. So this way the sense will be, that she
resists the Charms, or Conjunctions of the learned Joyner or Framer of them,
and consequently that it has not respect, either to the associating or
gathering of the Asps into one place, or an association or compact betwixt the
Charmer and the Devil, which are both begged, and too far fetched, and cannot be
intended properly in this Metaphor. But it (if thus Translated according to
Arias Montanus) refers punctually and properly to the cunning and wise
composure of the letters and words used in the Charm, that if they had been
never so cunningly contrived, or joined together by those that had the greatest
skill of all others in framing and composing of charms; yet were they utterly
inefficacious against this kind of Serpent. And so we conclude this, having as
yet found no such Hebrew word as signifies a Witch in the vulgar sense and
common acceptance.

7. Another word that follows in this place of Deuternomy is (...) requirens
Pythonem, which what it means is more obscured, and erroneously translated,
than any of the rest. And this our English Translators have ignorantly or
wilfully, but however erroneously rendered in all the places where it is used,
to be one that has a familiar spirit. From whence note these things.

1. This word, as Buxtorfius, Schindlerus, and Avenarius observe, has two
significations, the one is, uter vel lagena, the other Python, and so says
learned Masius, significat vero vox Ob utrem vel lagenam; From whence the
Jewish Nation did call those Devils which did give answers forth of the parts
of Men and Women's Bodies, Ob, and in the plural number Oboth; As it is only
once for bottles used in that of Job, Behold, my belly is as wine that has no
vent, it is ready to burst like new bottles. And to the same purpose Job. 32.
19.
speaks Schindlerus in these words: From thence it seems to be called (...)
Pytho, because those that had it, or were possessed with it, being puffed up with
wind, did swell like blown bladders, and the unclean spirit being interrogated
did forth of their bellies give answers of things past, present, and to come,
from whence also they were called (...) ventriloqui, speakers in the belly, or
out of the belly. So that in the sense of these men, it was a Devil or Spirit
that spoke in them, as though they had been essentially and substantially
possessed with a Demon; so prone were they to ascribe all things (almost) unto
the Devils power, not considering that they had no other Devil, but that of
Imposture and Delusion, as we shall show anon with unanswerable arguments.

2. The most or all the translations in the Polyglott do render it Pythonem,
vel spiritum Pythonis in this place of Deuteronomy, and other places: But what
is to be understood by Python, or the Spirit of Python is as difficult to find
out, as the meaning of the Hebrew word Ob, because it must be dug forth of
the rubbish of Grecian lies: For some will have it to be derived from the word
(...), a consulendi and interrogandi usu. But that they were called so rather
from the Epithete given to Apollo, who (as the Poets fabled) did soon after
Deucalions flood slay the Dragon Python, (...), so called a (...) quod est
putrescere, because he was said to be bred of the putrefaction of the Earth;
and so he was called Apollo Pythius, and those that kept the Oracle at Delphos,
and gave answers, were called Pythii vates, and the Oracles Oracula Pythia: as
may be seen in Plutarch, Thucydides, and Lucian: and Suidas and Hesychius say,
(...) dicebatur etiam Daemonium cujus afflatu futura praedicebant, and (...), e
ventre hariolantes: From whence Pythius Apollo came because of slaying the
Dragon, nam (...) putrescere significat, ut est in his carminibus. -- (...),
(...).
-- Sic inde precatus Apollo est:
Putrescas tellure jacens campoq feraci.
And from hence were the Pythian Games instituted: Ovid. Metam. lib. 1.
Neve operis famam posset delere vetustas,
Instituit sacros celebri certamine ludos
Pythia perdomitae serpentis nomine dictos.
Though, if we will believe Natalis Comes and some others, it was not a Serpent
or Dragon that Apollo slew, but a man whose name Mytholog. l. 4. c. 10. p. 36.
362.
was Python, and his surname Draco, and from that Victory Apollo was called
Pythius, and those that kept his Oracle at Delphos were called Pythios vates,
Pythian Priests, or Diviners of Python. So that all that can be gathered from
hence is, that to have the Spirit of Python, was to undertake such Divinations,
as the Priests used at the Pythian Oracle at Delphos, and that was no more in
truth and effect, but Cheaters and Impostors.

3. Those that we call the Septuagint expressing the manner of the performance
of this kind of Imposture do (as Masius confesses, and is true) constantly
call them by the name of (...), because they did speak forth of their Breasts
or Bellies, that was by turning their voices backwards down their Throats,
which some of the Latins imitating the Greek word have not unfitly called them
ventriloquos, that is, speaking in their Bellies. And that there were such in
ancient times is witnessed by Plutarch, who says, speaking of the ceasing of
Oracles, thus: That it is alike foolish and De defect. Oracul. mihi p. 691.
childish to judge that God himself, as the Engastrimuthoi, (that is to say,
the Genii hariolating forth of the Belly) which in times past they did call
Eurycleas, now Pythonas, hiding himself in the Bodies of the Prophets, and
using their mouth and voice as instruments, should speak. From whence we may
note these things. 1. That in Plutarch time who lived in the Reign of Trajan,
there were of these persons that could speak (as it were) forth of their
Bellies. 2. That though Plutarch was a very learned, sagacious person, yet he
either knew not, or else concealed the manner how these ventriloquists
performed this speaking in their Breasts or Bellies, it being nothing but a
cheat and artificial imposture, as we shall show anon, of whom his learned
Translator Adrianus In Praesat. de defect. Oracul.
Turnebus, and of these vanities speaks thus. Therefore (he says) we condemn
all sorts of Divinations which are not received from the sacred writings, and
do judge them to have been found out, either by the craftiness of men or the
wickedness of Devils; but we rejoice to our selves that being Divinely taught,
we here see far more than the most learned Plutarch did, who beheld but little
light in this his disputation of the defect of Oracles. 3. We may note that
these words (that is to say, the Genii hariolating forth of the Belly) which we
have enclosed in a Parenthesis, are not found in the Greek written by Plutarch,
but are only added as the conjecture of Turnebus. 4. Plutarch does hold it
childish to believe that God does hide himself and speak in the belly of these
couzening Diviners, and therein though an Heathen was wiser than many that
profess Christianity now, who believe it to be some Spirit, when it is nothing
but the cunning Imposture of those persons, that by use have learned that
artifice of turning their voices back into their Throats and Breasts. 5. As to
matter of fact it is manifest that in the time of Plutarch there were those
that practiced this cunning trick thereby to get credit or money by the
pretense of Predictions and Divinations, and such an one doubtless was the
Woman at Endor, and the Maid mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles, of which we
shall speak presently.

Also Tertullian a grave Author, affirms that he had seen such Women that
were Ventriloquists, from whose secret parts a small voice was heard as they
sat, and did give answers to things asked. Antiq. lect. 8. 10.
And so Caelius Rhodiginus does write that he often saw a Woman Ventriloquist
at Rhodes, and in a City of Italy his own Country, from whose secrets he had
often heard a very slender voice of an unclean Spirit, but very intelligible,
tell strangely of things past or present, but of things to come for the most
part uncertain, and also often vain and lying; which does plainly demonstrate
that it was but an humane artifice, and a designed Imposture.

But most notable is that story related by Wierus from the mouth of his Sons
who had it from the mouth of Adrianus Turnebus, Hist. 1. De Mag. Infam. c. 14.
p. 141.
who did openly profess that before-time he had seen at Paris a crafty fellow
very like Euricles mentioned by Aristophanes, who was called Petrus Brabantius,
who as often as he would, could speak from the lower part of his Body, his Mouth
being open, but his Lips not moved, and that he did deceive many all over by
this cunning, which whether it be to be called an art, or exercitation, or the
imposture of the Devil is to be doubted. And further relates that at Paris he
deceived a Widow Woman, and got her to give him her Daughter in Marriage, who
had a great Portion; by counterfeiting that his so speaking in his Breast, or
Belly, was the voice of her deceased Husband, who was in Purgatory, and could
not be loosed thence, except she gave her Daughter in Marriage unto him: By
which deceitful knavery he got her, and about six Months after, when he had
spent all her Portion, the Wife and Mother-in-law being left, he fled to Lions:
And there hearing that a very rich Merchant was dead, who was accounted living
a very wicked man, who had gotten his riches by right and wrong; this
Brabantius goes to his Son called Cornutus, who was walking in a Grove or
Orchard behind the Churchyard, and intimates that he was sent to teach him
what was fit for him to do. But while that he tells him that he ought rather
to think of the Soul of his Father, than of his Fame, or Death; upon the
sudden while they speak together a voice is heard imitating his Father's:
Which voice although Brabantius did give out of his Belly, yet he did in a
wonderful manner counterfeit to tremble: But Cornutus was admonished by this
voice, into what state his Father was fallen by his injustice, and with what
great torments he was tortured in Purgatory, both for his own, and his Sons
cause, for that he had left him the Heir of so much ill gotten goods, and that
he could be freed by no means, unless by a just expiation made by the Son, and
some considerable part of his goods distributed to charitable uses unto those
that stood most need, such as were Christians made Captives with the Turks.
Whereupon he gave credit to Brabantius, with whom he discoursed, as a Man that
was to be sent by Godly persons to Constantinople to redeem the prisoners, and
that he was sent unto him by Divine Power for the same purpose. But Cornutus,
though a Man no way evil; and although having heard these things, he understood
not the deceit: yet notwithstanding because of the word, that he should part
with so much money, made answer that he would consider of it, and wills
Brabantius to repair the day following to the same place. In the mean time
being staggered in his thoughts he did much doubt, in respect of the place,
where he had heard the voice, because it was shadowy, and dark, and subject to
the crafty treacheries of Men, and to the Echo. Therefore the next day he
leads Brabantius into another open plain place, neither troubled with shadows
nor bushes. Where notwithstanding the same tale was repeated, during their
discourse, that he had heard before: This also being added, that forthwith six
thousand Franks should be given to Brabantius, that three Masses might be said
every day, to redeem his Father forth of Purgatory; otherwise that there could
be no redemption for him. And thereupon the Son obliged both by conscience and
religion, although unwillingly, delivers so many to the trust of Brabantius;
all lawful evidence of the agreement and performance being utterly neglected.
The Father freed from the fire and torments afterward has rested quiet, and
by speaking did not trouble the Son any more. But the wretched Cornutus, after
Brabantius was gone, being one time more pleasant than wonted, which made his
Table-companions much to wonder; and forthwith opening the cause to them
inquiring it, he was forthwith so derided of all, because that in his judgment
he had been so beguiled, and cheated of his money besides, that within few days
after he died for plain grief, and so followed his Father to know the truth of
that thing of him.

But to make this more plain and certain, we shall add a Story of a notable
Impostor, or Ventriloquist, from the testimony of Mr. Ady; which we have had
confirmed from the mouth of some Courtiers that both saw and knew him, and is
this: It has been (says he) Hist. 2.
credibly reported, that there was a Man in the Court, in King James his days,
that could act this imposture so lively, that he could call the King by name,
and cause the King to look round about him wondering who it was that called
him, whereas he that called him stood before him in his presence, with his face
toward him: but after this Imposture was known, the King in his merriment
would sometimes take occasion by this Impostor to make sport upon some of his
Courtiers, as for instance; There was a Knight belonging to the Court, whom the
King caused to come before him in his private room (where no Man was but the
King, and this Knight, and the Impostor) and feigned some occasion of serious
discourse with the Knight; but when the King began to speak, and the Knight
bending his attention to the King, suddenly there came a voice as out of
another room, calling the Knight by name, Sir John, Sir John, come away Sir
John; at which the King began to frown that any Man should be so unmannerly as
to molest the King and him: And still listening to the Kings discourse, the
voice came again, Sir John, Sir John, come away, and drink off your Sack; at
that Sir John began to swell with anger, and looked into the next rooms to see
who it was that dared to call him so importunately, and could not find out who
it was, and having chid with whomsoever he found he returned again to the King.
The King had no sooner begun to speak as formerly, but the voice came again,
Sir John, come away, your Sack stays for you. At that Sir John began to stamp
with madness, and looked out, and returned several times to the King, but could
not be quiet in his discourse with the King, because of the voice that so often
troubled him, till the King had sported enough.

I my self also have seen a young man about 16 or 17 years of age, who having
learned at School, and having no great mind to his Hist. 3.
Book, fell into an Ague; in the declination of which he seemed to be taken
with convulsion-fits, and afterward to fall into Trances, and at the last to
speak (as with another small voice) in his Breast or Throat, and pretended to
declare unto those that were by, what sinful and knavish tricks they had
formerly acted, or what others were doing in remote places and rooms. So that
presently his Father and the Family with the neighborhood were persuaded that
he was possessed, and that it was a spirit that spoke in him, which was soon
heightened by Popish reports all over the Country. But there being a Gentleman
of great note and understanding his Kinsman caused him to be sent over unto me,
to have mine opinion whether it were a natural distemper or not. The Father and
the Boy with an old cunning Woman (the made creature to cry up the certainty of
his possession, and the verity of a spirit speaking in him) came unto me, who
all appeared to my judgment and best reason fit persons to act any designed
Imposture. The Father having been one that had lived profusely, and spent the
most of his means, being sufficiently profane and irreligious: The Boy by his
face appearing to be of a melancholy complexion, and of a subtle and crafty
disposition; the Woman cunning, who would have forced me to believe whatsoever
she related, thinking to impose upon me as she had done upon others. I
presently judged it to be neither natural disease, nor supernatural distemper,
but only knavery and Imposture, and so made the Woman silent, and told her she
was a cheater, and deserved due punishment, and that what she told, were the
most of them lies of her own inventing; and told the Father and the Son that I
could soon cast forth all the Devils that he was possessed with; but then I
must have him in mine own custody, and none of them to come near him nor to
speak with him. A long time I expected to have seen him in one of his fits, but
his Devil was too timorous of my ster^ countenance and rough carriage. Well
after they three had consulted together, the Lad by no means could be gotten to
stay with me, no not for that night, nor be prevailed with again to be brought
into my presence; but away they went the Lad riding behind his Father, and when
about a quarter of a mile from the Town the Father turned the Horse to come
back again unto me, the Lad leapt from off the Horse, and run away crying from
the Townwards as fast as he could. They went that night to a Popish House where
were concourse of people sufficient, and many tales told of the Divinations of
the spirit in the Boy, but not one word either of me or against me. Soon after
the Gentleman that was of kin to the Boy came over, and I gave him satisfaction
that it was a contrived cheat, and after he returned, he would have prevailed
with them to have sent the Boy to me, but by no means could effect it; and so
he never after gave any regard unto them, and soonafter it vanished to nothing.

I my self also knew a person, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, Hist. 4.
who about some forty years or above, to have made sport, would have put a
Coverlet upon him, and then would have made any believe (that knew not the
truth) that he had a child with him, he would so lively have discoursed with
two voices, and have imitated crying and the like. And also the said person
under a Coverlet, and coming upon all four would so exceeding aptly, even to
the life, have acted a skirmish betwixt two Mastiffs, both by grinning,
snarling and all other motions and noise, that diverse understanding persons
have been deceived and verily believed that there were two Mastiffs under the
Coverlet, until their eyes have convinced them of their error: So delusive may
art or cunning be, being seconded by use and agility.

I also have sometimes seen a person that lived in Southwark near London, who
holding his lips together, and making no sound or noise Hist. 5.
at all, would notwithstanding have, by the motion of the muscles of his face,
and the agitation of his head and hands and other gesticulations of his Body,
made any of the beholders understand, what tune he had modulated in his fancy,
which was very strange and pleasant to behold, and that which I could not have
believed if I had not seen it.

We might hereunto add the Story of the pretended sleeping preacher, who had
drawn many into admiration and belief that Stow p. 864. Hist. 6.
he did it either by Divine inspiration or vision, and yet was but a voluntary
cheat and a delusive Imposture, as may be seen at large in Stowes Chronicle. We
have been thus tedious in giving these examples, that it may appear how
improperly Men fly to supernatural causes to solve effects by, that are and may
be performed by natural means; and that Men need neither fetch a Devil from
Hell nor a Soul from Heaven to solve these effects that men's cunning, art and
craft are able to perform.

4. Next the more fully to explain this we may consider the place in the Acts
which is rendered thus, (...) of which the learned and judicious Isaac Casaubon
says thus: An Acts 16. 16.
ancient interpreter reads (...), and the Syrian version rendereth spiritum
divinationis. It may be quere'd, seeing Apollo is understood, why S. Luke does
use the Epithete of him rather than Not. in Act. Apost. in loc.
the proper name: And the reason is because the ancients did call the
Ventriloquists (...) Pythonists. And it is plain that it was Divination, that
was telling of secret things, whether past, present or to come, that the Maid
pretended and undertook: for the text says, Which brought her masters much
gain by soothsaying, (...), that is, by Vaticination. Beza in his Latin
translation says in his Marginal Notes, That that Spirit of Oracling, Vid.
Beza not. in loc. and A Candle in the dark, p. 67, 68.
was only an expression alluding to the Idol Apollo, which was called Python,
and gave answers unto them that asked, namely, by the Priests that belonged
unto it, of which Idol the Poets feigned many things; so that they that had the
Imposture of Divination were said by the Heathen to be inspired by the spirit
of Apollo. And in this place of the Acts, S. Luke speaks after the common
Phrase of the Heathen, because he delivers the error of the common people,
but not by what instinct the Maid gave Divinations; for it is certain that
under the Mask of that Idol, the Devil played his deluding pranks, and this
spirit of Apollo was nothing, but as much as to say, an Imposture, or deluding
trick of the Devil practiced by the Priests of Apollo. So much says Beza, who
plainly expounds, That that Spirit of Divination or Oracling, was only a
Devilish deluding Imposture, and not a familiar Devil as many do fondly
imagine: And whereas it is said in the verse following, that S. Paul did cast
that Spirit out of the Maid, it was, that he by the power of the Gospel of
Jesus rebuked her wickedness: so that her Conscience being terrified, she was
either converted, or else at the least dared not to follow that Luke 7. 47. 8.
2.
deluding craft of Divination any longer: as when Christ did cast out seven
Devils out of Mary Magdalen, it is to be understood that he did convert her
from many devilish sinful courses in which she had walked. Thus far learned
Beza and Mr. Ady, who both seem to understand no other Demon in the case than
only a crafty and devilish Imposture and Cheat, and most certainly it could be
nothing else.

5. But to come to the stress of the business, these things are to be
considered. 1. Some thought that they were really, and essentially possessed
with an evil spirit that did speak in them and gave forth answers, and this is
the most common, though most false opinion: which if it were true, it makes
nothing for those familiars that are ascribed to our Witches, for by that they
mean a visible Devil without them in the shape of a Dog, a Cat or the like, and
both these are equally absurd and false, as we shall show anon. 2. Some thought
that an evil spirit ab extra did but work upon their minds, and so inspired
them with these Divinations, and this seems to have been the opinion of
Plutarch and some others of the Heathen. 3. But others (which is that which we
affirm) did hold that they were but counterfeiting deluding Impostors, and what
they did was only by Ventriloquy, Juggling and confederacy, and that all their
pretended Divinations and predictions, were nothing but lying conjectures and
ambiguous equivocations. But to open it fully we must conceive that they did
pretend and take upon them to foretell and declare things to come, which
notwithstanding were but false forgeries and lies: for if they had really had
any certain foreknowledge of things to come, then when Jehu was made King, and
in subtilty pretended to sacrifice to Baal, and so got together all the Priests
to sacrifice, if these base, lying, cheating 2 Kings 10. 18, to 26.
Impostors had really had any skill in Divination, then they might have known,
that their calling together was not truly to advance their Idolatry, but to
take away their lives; and it may safely be concluded that those that could not
foresee the danger threatening their own lives, could not truly foretell
contingent effects to others; and though the Scripture give us many such
examples as these, yet to eschew prolixity this may suffice to evince that all
their pretended predictions were nothing but conjectures, or lying forgeries.

And as they did take upon them to foretell things to come, so this Woman of
Endor, and in likelihood the rest, did pretend to do it by raising up, or
causing to ascend those that were dead to give answers of the things demanded.

Now therefore the state of the question will be, whether this Woman had really
a familiar or supernatural spirit that gave her answers, or that she raised
such an one, or that only she was a deceiver and Impostor that could cast her
self into a Trance, and so speak in her Breast, or that she had a place
contrived for the purpose (as they had at the Oracle at Delphos) by which means
she could speak, as in a Bottle or hollow cavity, and had other Confederates
sutably fitted to accomplish her design. Here we shall only speak as to the
significancy of the words relating to this matter, and shall handle the History
of the matter of fact elsewhere: And in the first place we allow and grant that
she had the cooperating power of the Devil, in her mind and will, leading her
to take upon her to foretell things to come, of which she was utterly ignorant:
so that we grant her under a spiritual league with the Devil, as all wicked
persons are, but we deny that she had any other familiar spirit, but only the
spirit of delusion and Imposture, as we shall make good by these arguments.

1. Because the word sometimes signifies the persons pretending to be skilful
in this sort of Divinations; for so the Woman says unto Saul: Behold thou
know what Saul has done, how he has 1 Samuel 28. 9.
cut off (...) Pythones, that is, the persons that pretended, and practiced
that kind of Divination. And so again in that of Isaiah: And thy voice shall be
(...) sicut Pythonis as the voice of one that Isai. 29. 4.
uses this kind of Divination. So that it is clear that the act is ascribed
unto, and was performed by the persons practicing this couzening craft, and not
unto a familiar or Devil.

2. Sometimes it is taken for the means that they pretended they performed it
by, as in Saul's deluded and despairing sense; for he says, Divina quaeso mihi
(...) in Pythone, vel per Pythonem, and cause to ascend whom I shall name unto
thee. So that he vainly thought that she could call up, and make to ascend
whomsoever he should name, so blind and deluded was he when the spirit of the
Lord was departed from him, and was justly delivered up to believe lies,
because he had not received the love of the truth.

3. It does not appear that she had any familiar spirit, or called up any; for
the name that is there given her is (...) Dominam Pythonis vel utris; the
Mistress of the Bottle, or of the Oracle, for Saul says, seek me a Woman that
is Mistress of the Bottle, or of the Oracle, for so it must signify, if it be
genuinely and fitly translated; and his servants tell him, that at Endor there
is a Woman that was Mistress of Ob, the Bottle or Oracle. For though some
translate it mulier habens Pythonem, or as Tremellius, mulier praedita Pythone,
it will but reach thus much, that she was possessed of or had in her power,
this Ob, Bottle, or Oracle, that could be nothing but the fit contrived place
to give answers, as they did at the Oracle. For if they meant that she had a
familiar spirit in her Belly, then it was possessed of her, more than she could
be said to be possessed of it. But there is another Text that does fully agree
with this, and will help to explicate it, and is this, speaking of the
destruction of Nineveh or the Jewish Nation, and the causes of it: Because of
the multitude of the whoredoms of the welfavoured harlot, the Mistress Nahum 3.
4.
of Witchcrafts, (...), Domina vel patrona, the Mistress, or Patroness of
Juglings and delusions. So that in propriety of language she of Endor is called
the Mistress of Python or Oracle, because she could play the couzening feats
that belonged unto it.

4. Amongst all the several ways of Idolatry that Manasseh set up, 2 Chronicles. 33.
6.
or caused to be set up, this is one (...), and fecit Pythonem, or fecissetque
Pythonem, he made Ob, or Pytho; and though Translators have been much
perplexed, and hard put to it, to give a signification agreeable to their
preconceived opinion, yet have they, were it right or wrong, brought it to
their minds, though it be utterly false and erroneous; for Tremellius renders
it, instituitque Pythonem, which though pretty near, yet is altogether short of
the propriety, and the most of the rest have run quite Counter; but our English
Translators the worst of all others, who give it, and dealt with a familiar
spirit. When it is plain that this word must be taken in this place, as it is
in the third verse of this Chapter, he made groves, fecitque lucos, because the
words are both from the same root which is (...) fecit, confecit, per^ecit, and
so it is, and must be taken in other places; and is especially manifest in
these. God said to Noah, make thee an Ark of Gopher wood, and after, a Genesis 6.
14. 16.
window shall thou make to the Ark. The Psalmist says: But our Psalm. 115. 3.
God is in heaven, he has done whatsoever he pleased, and again, To him who
alone does great wonders. We might add forty places Id. 136. 4.
more, where the word is used that comes from this root and has the same
punctual signification; so that from hence we may conclude, 1. That Manasseh
could not make a Devil nor a Spirit, and therefore that the word Ob does not
intend nor bear forth any such matter in true and genuine signification. 2.
That he could not make a Man or Woman, and therefore the word properly does
signify neither. 3. That he only could make, and cause to be contrived the
Groves, in such as order, ar the Idol-Priests might direct, as most fit for
them to play their couzening and Juggling feats and delusions in. So he might
make or cause to be contrived the (...) or place for the Oracle, and prepare
those knacks and implements, wherewith and in which place the Diviner might
either by him, or her self, or with the help of confederates bring to pass
strange things, which they made the blind and ignorant people believe were
performed by the God worshipped in and by those Idols, or by Demons and
Spirits, or the calling up of the dead. When in truth there was nothing at all
performed, but either in raptures, feigned and forced Furies, Trances; and
thereby lying predictions and ambiguous equivocations were uttered, whereby the
people were deluded and drawn unto Idolatry: or by giving dark and obscure
responsions by Ventriloquy, speaking in Bottles, or through hollow Pipes and
cavities, whereby they did peep and mutter; or lastly by having knavish
confederates hidden in secret, and cunningly contrived places, and suitably
habited to personate those that were desired to be raised up, as is most
probable in this Woman of Endor and the forged and pretended Samuel: So that
there was no Devil nor familiar but a couzening Knave or a Queen, more crafty
than the Demons themselves.

5. That they had no familiar Spirit is manifest, if we consider the manner how
they carried themselves in these cheating actions and performances, for the
Prophet tells us thus: And when they shall Isai. 8. 19.
say unto you, seek unto (...) ad Pythones, unto Oraclers, and unto Wizards
that peep, and mutter; If they had a familiar Spirit or Demon, what need they
chirp, peep, or mutter? could it not speak loud and plain enough? Yea doubtless
it could if they had any such, but it is to conceal their own deceit and
knavery, lest it should be found forth and discovered: And without such
chirping and muttering they could neither perform their Juggling delusions, nor
keep them from being known, and derided. Tremellius his note upon this place is
very remarkable: The Prophet (says he) aggravateth the heinous crime of those
Witches from the vanity of those Divinations, which the very manner of them
betrayeth: those seducers have not so much wit, that they dare speak to the
people the thing they pretend to speak in plain and open terms, with an audible
clear voice, as they that are Gods Prophets, who speak the word of God as loud
as may be, and as plain as they can to the people; but they chirp in their
Bellies, and very low in their Throats, like Chickens half out of the shells in
their hatching. And this does plainly declare their knavery and cheating
Juglings. The same Prophet in another place speaking of the destruction, and
bringing low of Jerusalem he says: And thou shall be brought down, and shall
speak out of the ground, Id. 29. 4.
and thy speech shall be low out of the dust. And thy voice shall be as of a
Pythonist, Ob, or as of an Oracler, out of the ground, and thy speech shall
whisper, peep or chirp out of the dust. The word there, and in the former place
used is from the root, (...) garrivit more avium, he has peeped or chirped
like a Bird. Now this does plainly allude to these kind of Pythonists, or
Oraclers, who in giving their Oracles, or Divinations, did speak out of the
ground, that was from hollow Vaults and Caves contrived on purpose for them to
perform their tricks in, and such a place as this, called in the Hebrew Ob, did
Manasseh make and prepare, And thy speech shall be low out of the dust, like
these deceivers who fall into Trances, and lie upon their faces the better to
conceal and hide their Impostures, and so do change their voice, and mutter as
it were out of the dust, thereby to make the people believe that it is the
Demon's or Spirits voice that speaks in them, when it is nothing but their
own counterfeiting. And thy voice shall be like one of these Oraclers, out of a
low and hollow place, to whisper and chirp like a Chicken coming forth of the
shell, the more to make them believe that it is the voice of a Spirit, and not
their own, by craft and cunning altered and changed. Upon which place learned
and judicious Calvin says thus much: For the voice of them, who before were so
lofty and cruel, he compares to the speech of Pythonists, Calvin in loc.
who when they did utter the Oracles, did give forth I know not what kind of
murmur, from some low and dark place under the earth.

8. The next word that follows in this place of Deuteronomy is (...) from the
root (...) novit, sivit, proprie est (ut Avenarius inquit) mentis and
intellectus. Which word our Translators (contrary to their usual custom) have
kept a constancy in, and always have rendered a Wizard, a name (as we
conjecture) not improper, for we, in the North of England, call such as take
upon them to foretell where things are that have been stolen, or to take upon
them to help Men or Goods, that the vain credulity of the common people have
thought to be bewitched, we (I say) call them Wise Men, or Wise Women, without
regard had to the way or means by which they undertook to perform these things.
Diverse others do render it sciolus, which is proper and consonant to the
former. The other Translations that we have either seen, or were able to
understand, are so uncertain, various, wide and wild, that it were lost labor
to examine or recite them; and the word Wizard (though a general one) is the
most proper that we can find. But we must conclude, that hitherto we find no
such word as signifies a Witch in that sense we have allowed, and endeavored
to confute.

9. The last word mentioned in this Text of Deuteronomy, is a Necromancer, or
one that consulteth with the dead. Now whether this were some special kind of
Divination, or but a comprehension of all the kinds, being but in all their
several sorts, a leading of the people to inquire of dumb and dead Idols, may
be a great and material question. And though no Interpreter or Commentator that
we have seen, read, or do remember, do hint at any such matter, but still
strike upon the common string, that it should be some kind of Magic, whereby
they could make the dead appear, and consult with them: yet notwithstanding all
this we cannot but propose our doubts in these reasons following.

1. Moses in this Text doubtlesly did not set down all the particular sorts of
Divinations and Impostures used amongst the Heathen, for that had hardly been
possible, but the chiefest kinds of them. And this is not rationally probable
that he would do it by a Tautology, or repetition of the same thing twice. For
inquiring of the dead, or consulting with them, was intended in the word Ob,
and the Woman of Endor said; Whom shall I raise up, or cause to ascend unto
thee? Whereby it appears that she pretended (and also Saul vainly believed,
who said; Divine unto me in or by Ob) that she could cause the dead to ascend,
and to have answers from them of things to come, as is manifest in the Story of
the pretended apparition and prediction of Samuel. And so this thing should be
twice repeated in this place, which is not probable that Moses would have done.

2. He does not forbid these several sorts of Divination only because they were
evil and unlawful in themselves (for some of them might be lawful, and
performed by natural or artificial means) but because of the thing they all
centred in, and the end they all tended to, which was to lead and draw the
people to inquire of and to serve deaf, dumb and dead Idols. For though the
Idols were Silver and Gold, the work of Men's hands, and had eyes and saw not,
ears and heard not, feet and walked not, mouths and spoke not, neither was
there breath in their Nostrils: And though the common people could not but know
this, for as Isaiah says they were so blinded that, None considers in his
heart, neither is there Isai. 44. 19.
knowledge or understanding to say, I have burnt part of it in the fire; yea
also I have baked bread with the coals thereof, I have roasted flesh and eaten
it, and shall I make the residue thereof an abomination? shall I fall down to
the stock of a tree? Yet notwithstanding were they so deluded by the crafty
Impostures, and subtle Divinations of all the several sorts of these Juggling
Priests, that they ran to ask counsel at these dead Idols, who (as they falsely
persuaded the people) did inspire them, and gave them answers, when the Idols
were all dead things, and gave no answers at all. And this is that consulting
with the dead, that all these couzening Priests did draw the people unto, and
therefore in general is here forbidden.

3. The words of the Prophet, where he says [And when they Isai. 8. 19.
shall say unto you, seek unto them that are Ob or Oraclers, and unto wizards
that peep, and that mutter: should not a people seek unto their God? for the
living to the dead?] do fully prove as much; for the sense must be this: That
the people of God ought to seek unto their own God, who was and is a true and a
living God, and to his Law and Testimonies, and not to those peepers and
mutterers that seek counsel of the dead Idols only; and doubtless this is the
true meaning of consulting the dead.

4. This exposition includes no absurdity, nor brings any inconvenience, and
is genuine, and not wrested; whereas the other does hurry in a whole heap of
most absurd doubts, questions and opinions. But if in this exposition we be
Heterodoxal, we crave pardon, and referr it to the judgment of those that are
learned, of what persuasion soever they be.

10. Another word that is used in diverse places of Scripture is (...), which
though Avenarius does derive from (...) stilus (...) cla^sit, yet the learned
person Masius says, Est autem aliarum nationum vocabulum, ab Hebraea lingua
alienum and peregrinum, In Dan. c. 1. v. 20. p. 87.
usurpatum tamen ab Hebraeis. And also the judicious Polanus is of the same
opinion, that it is a word strange and foreign from the Hebrew language. The
Translators are all so various about the proper derivation and signification of
it, that it were but lost time and labor to recite them: But it is manifest
that it was a general word for one that was skilful in all, or diverse sorts of
these Divinations, and might best be constantly rendered magos, and that for
these reasons.

1. It is the opinion of Masius and Mr. Ady that it is a general A Candle in
the dark, p. 11.
word, and signifies one that has skill in many of these kind of arts, (if
they may be so called) the latter of which says thus: It is taken in the
general sense for magus a Magician; that has one, or all these crafts or
Impostures. And the former quoting the sentence of Rabbi Isaac Natar, says:
Hoc nomine vocatos esse ab Hebraeis quosvis, qui inter gentes singularem
prositebantur sapientiam; praesertim cum ea ad superstitionem pertineret.

2. Because that in Exodus 7. 13. those that there are called Hachamim and
Mechassephim, that is sapientes and praestigiatores, as Tremellius renders it,
which is most proper and genuine, are there called Hartummim Mezeraim, that is
Magos Aegypti, the Magicians of Egypt; by which it appears plainly that it
is a general name, and may most properly be rendered a Magician.

3. It may most properly be taken for a Magician, because those that acted
before Pharaoh are called by that name, and excepting their opposing of Moses,
and their superstition, it does not appear that they dealt with unlawful
Magic, as we shall prove undeniably hereafter.

11. There is also another word which is used in diverse places, which is (...)
mussitavit, he has muttered, or murmured, and is taken generally for any kind
of murmuring for any cause whatsoever, as in this place, But when David saw
that his servants whispered. And again, All that hate me, whisper together
against me. 2 Samuel 12. 19 Psalm. 41. 7.
And in another place: Fuderunt submissam orationem, a low whispering prayer.
In which places it is taken for any kind of low speaking, Isai. 26. 16.
whispering or muttering. Of this we may observe these things.

1. Sometimes by a Metonymie it is taken for a low and modest speech, the art
of Oratory, or Eloquence, as Isaiah 3. 3. and intelligentem vel peritum
eloquentiae, and sometime for an ear-ring ina^ris, as in the 20. verse of the
same Chapter.

2. It is also ascribed unto Charmers or Inchanters as in the Psalm, That does
not hearken unto the voice of the charmers: Where it is plain that all Charmers
were whisperers and mutterers, but not on Psalm. 58. 6.
the contrary, that all whisperers or mutterers are Charmers.

3. And whereas our English translation reads it, Surely the Eccles. 10. 11.
serpent will bite without enchantment, and a babbler is no better; It may as
well be read, as Arias Montanus translates it, Si mordeat serpens in non
susurro, vel absque susurro, If the Serpent bite without hissing, or
sibilation. And Schindlerus to the same purpose: Si mordebit serpens absque
incantatione, vel murmr, id est sibilo. And so Avenarius: Si mordeat serpens
absque susurratione, id est absque sibilo. And though Tremellius, and the whole
troop of Translators do render it, as our English Translators do, yet that will
not make sense: for it would infer that as a Serpent will bite except it be
charmed, so will a babbler do also. But who ever heard of a bablers being
charmed? So that truly considered that cannot be the sense of the place.

But if it be taken exactly according to the Hebrew, then the sense runs thus,
If the Serpent bite without, or in not hissing, and excellency is not to him
that has a tongue; that is, The Serpent does hurt with his biting, without
making a noise with his tongue; but a babbler does make a noise, but effects
nothing, or speaks to no purpose.

4. There is another Text in Jeremy which is commonly rendered thus: For behold
I will send serpents, cockatrices among you, Jerem. 8. 17.
which will not be charmed, and they shall bite you, says the Lord. But it may
be as fitly read, To whom there is no hissing, and they shall bite you. And
whether way soever it be read, the sense is good; that is, their enemies shall
be so fierce and cruel, that no words can stay or appease their fury; or that
they shall be so sly and cunning, that they shall destroy you, before they
speak, or give you warning: And whether way soever it be, there is a pronoun in
the Hebrew which is superfluous, a thing that is usual in that language.

5. But if in both places it be taken for charming, yet will it not prove the
being and existence of such a kind of Witch, as we have denied and confuted;
nor does it show any fit appellation for such a one.

12. Moreover there is another word as much mistaken, and as falsely translated
as any of the rest, and that is (...), Inflammatus est, flammescebat, and is
understood a shining brightness, as in the Psalm: Who makes his Angels
spirits: his ministers flaming fire. Psalm. 104. 4.
And in another place, and inflammabit ^os dies veniens; The day comes that
shall burn as an oven. From whence we may note these Malach. 4. 1.
things.

1. From this root does come (...) Flamma, Metaphorically (as Schindlerus
says) a polished and shining piece of Metal, as a Sword or the like. But
Avenarius tells us, it is, Flamma rutilans, lamina fulgens and vibrans; as, And
he placed at the East of the garden Genesis 3. 24.
of Eden, Cherubims, and a flaming or bright shining sword which turned every
way, to keep the way of the tree of life. And in another place, The horseman
lifts up the bright sword, and the Nahum 3. 3.
glittering spear. Both places plainly showing that it signifies Metal so
polished, that when it is shaken in the light, or shining of the Sun, and moved
quickly, it does then glitter like a red and shining flame.

2. There is also the word (...) Involvit, velavit, arcanum, and the like which
the vulgar Latin do attribute to Pharaohs Magicians, when our translation
says, And they did in like manner with their enchantments: It is and fecerunt
similiter per sua arcana, thinking the word there had been derived from (...)
arcanum, when it is from (...), Flamma, lamina; a polisht and bright piece of
Metal.

3. In all the places of Exodus where mention is made of the Magicians, that
they did in like manner with their enchantments, the word is (...) which if
truly rendered, is this: And they did in like manner with their bright,
glittering lamens, or plates of Metal. And how the Translators could hale it by
head and shoulder to signify Enchantment, cannot be conjectured; but because
the Magicians are there called, sapientes and praestigiatores, Wise Men and
Juglers, they vainly thought that they wrought by a secret compact with the
Devil, and so all must be done by their imaginary Witchcraft and enchantment,
when it is plain that what they did was by natural Magic, and sleight of hand,
and not by Diabolical Magic at all. But let them show us any one place in all
the Old Testament, where any of the derivatives from this root, are translated
Enchantments, but only in these places of Exodus, and we will yield the whole
cause.

13. There is also another Text which we have omitted of purpose until now,
which our English Translators do, according to their usual manner, thus render:
And they shall seek to the Idols, Isai. 19. 3.
and to the Charmers, and to them that have familiar spirits, and to the
Wizards: In which there is a word not used in that sense in all the Old
Testament besides; of which place we may note these things.

1. The word there in doubt is (...), Lenis, lenitas, and it often becomes an
Adverb, leniter, pedetentim. The root (...), leniter incessit, Avenarius says
it is not used in the plural number, and signifies Inchanters or Diviners, and
is (...) which he rendereth Incantatores; because as some think they do easily
and gentilely pronounce their charms.

2. But Tremellius does translate it thus: Consulent sua Idola, and
praestigiatores Pythonesque and ariolos: And gives this note, Their Idols,
that is to say Devils, that give them answers, especially the Idol of Latona in
the Town called Butun over against the Sebenitick mouth of Nilus, of which
Herodotus speaks: where he expounds also diverse consultations of these
Idols. But how or in what sense he holds that the Devils gave answers, except
by the lying Impostures of the Priests, he does not show, nor Herodotus his
Author neither.

3. But this place according to Arias Montanus is rendered thus: And they shall
seek unto their vain things or Idols, and to their Diviners (that is this word
Haattim) and to the Pythonists, or Oraclers, and to Wizards. But those we call
the Septuagint do render this place very odly, as they seldom do elsewhere,
which is this: (...), that is, And they shall ask their gods, and their images,
or painted statues, and those that give their voice forth of the earth, and
those that speak in their breasts or bellies.

14. There is also another word which is (...), and signifies (as Avenarius
says) Sephus, sapiens in Astrologia and in auspiciis, augur, aruspex. Rabbi
Abraham thinks it signifies a Physician, who knows the alteration of the
body, by the pulse of the arm, or by the urine. And Schindlerus translateth it,
a Philosopher, an Astronomer and a Physician, and says that such were
Astronomers and Physicians amongst the Chaldeans, of whom Strabo Strab.
Geograph. l. 16.
says: There was a certain habitation appointed in Babylon for their homebred
Philosophers, who were much conversant about Philosophy, and were called
Chaldeans. And further, that they were Physicians that could judge of the
passions of the Body, which dreams did imitate, by the Pulse and urine. And
Polanus tells us that it is a Chaldee word because it is found no where else
but in Daniel.

15. Lastly there is one word we shall touch more, and that is (...),
sapientia, the wisdom of Divine and Humane things, Magic or skill in natural
things; and comes from the root (...), sapuit mente, sapiens fuit, sapientia
praeditus est. And this is that wisdom that is ascribed to Solomon, of whom it
is said: And Solomon's 1 Kings 4. 30.
wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the children of the East country, and all
the wisdom of Egypt.

So have we run over all the words in the Old Testament, that can any way
concern this subject, and yet amongst them all there is not one that properly
and genuinely, without stretching, wresting or mistranslating, does, or can
signify any such Witch or Diviner, that can kill or destroy Men or Beasts, or
that makes a visible compact with a Devil, or on whose Body he sucketh, or
that they have Carnal Copulation together; or such a Witch as is or can be
really changed into a Cat, Dog, or such like, which was the task we undertook
in this Chapter. And for the words that are in the New Testament, we shall
handle them when we answer the objections made from thence. And therefore we
would admonish Mr. Glanvil, and all other candid, and sober persons to beware
of false or mistranslations, and not to labor to establish dangerous and
erroneous tenants upon such slippery and sandy foundations: For one falsity
once supposed or taken for good, does bring a numerous train of absurdities at
the heels of it.

CHAP. VII.
Of diverse places in the Old Testament that are commonly wrested, and falsely
expounded, thereby to prove apparitions, and the power of the Devil and Witches.

THus far we conceive that we have sufficiently proved, that there is no word
in the Old Testament, that in the original Hebrew, can genuinely and truly be
translated, that does signify such a kind of Witch, whose existence we have
denied. And now we shall proceed to answer those places in the Old Testament,
that commonly are produced, to prove the Devils or the Witches power in those
particulars that we have oppugned. And because the whole stress lies upon the
true interpretation of those places pretended to prove such matters by, we
think it convenient and much conducible to the business in hand, to lay down
those rules of interpretation, that the most learned Divines have declared and
assigned; and that in these particulars.

1. That truly to understand the Scriptures according to the mind of the Holy
Ghost that gave them forth, and by whose inspiration they were indicted, it is
most necessary that we implore the help of that blessed Spirit, that did reveal
them to those that penned them; because, as S. James says: If any of you lack
wisdom, let him James 1. 5, 17.
ask of God, that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall
be given him. For every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and
comes down from the father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning. And it is said of the Disciples of Christ: Then opened he
their understandings, that they Luke 24. 45.
might understand the Scriptures. So that all Men whether wise or unwise,
learned or unlearned, have need of the teaching and spirit of Christ to open
their understandings to understand the Scriptures; and therefore have all men
need of faithful and servent Prayers, that God may enlighten their minds in the
understanding of them; otherwise, they are but as blind Men, that go without a
guide, and so must needs fall into the Ditch of ignorance and error.

2. That a most due and diligent collation and comparison be made of the
several versions, with the Fountains and Originals themselves, that so the
truth of the translations may be ascertained. For if an error in this point be
committed, all the expositions and deductions drawn from thence, must needs be
erroneous and vicious.

3. That there be a due comparing of the Antecedents and Consequents in the
context, that the purpose, scope, theme, arguments, disposition and method, may
be perfectly and maturely considered: otherwise the sleighting or omitting any
one of these particular points, the whole place may be mistaken, and an error
easily fallen into.

4. There must a due and serious consideration be had of the Phrases and manner
of speaking; especially in regard of that language it was first written in: For
every several language has its peculiar Phrases and forms of speaking, which
may not be proper in another tongue, the not regarding of which may sooner lead
into a great deviation from the genuine sense of the place.

5. That there be a most diligent comparing of the place of the Scripture to be
explicated, with others of the same similitude or dissimilitude, For oftentimes
one Scripture does unfold and open another, and one Text does enucleate and
make plain another: Which for want of a due comparison one with another, may
occasion the mistaking of the true sense of the place that is to be expounded.

6. And chiefly in explicating any place, regard must be had to the Analogy of
Faith: Because the Scriptures do not contradict one another, especially in the
Articles of Faith, and the chief points necessary to be believed.

7. There ought a due comparison be made with the judgments and sentiments of
other Interpreters, according as the Apostle says: That no Prophecy of
Scripture is of any private interpretation: Which ought to be rendered as
learned Beza and Dr. Hammond give it: 2 Pet. 1. 20.
No Prophecy of Scripture is propriae incitationis, of a Man's own or proper
incitation, motion, or loosing forth; for so the Greek is, (...). Of which Beza
gives this learned note. The Prophets truly are to be read, but so that the
gift of interpretation be begged of God, that the same God may be the Author
and Interpreter of the Prophetical writings. For though a Man have by nature
never so great endowments, of understanding, judgment and reason, or have never
so large and ample acquirements, or presume never so highly to be assisted with
the Spirit; yet his own single judgment ought not to be relied upon in the
exposition of the Scriptures; but he ought to call in to his aid, and to
consider the sentiment and opinion of others. For it is obvious into what
dangerous errors the Arrians, Pelagians and Antitrinitarians of old, and the
Socinians and Arminians of later years have fallen, by making their innate
notions and the strength of natural reason to be the chief and principal rules
for interpreting of the Scriptures by. And there is hardly any one thing that
the Scriptures are more against, or do more condemn, than the too much
extolling and idolizing of Humane and Carnal reason. Because the carnal mind
(...), is enmity against God, and Romans 8. 7.
is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be; of which Beza says:
Probatio cur intelligentia carnis sit mors, quia, inquit, Dei est hostis And
again, the Text says: For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the
wise, (...), and will bring to nothing Isai. 29. 14.
the understanding of the prudent; (...). And again, Has not God made foolish
the wisdom of this world? (...) 1 Cor. 1. 19, 20.
(...). And the words of the Hebrew in that place of Isaiah do signify all
that height of wisdom or understanding, that Men either have by Nature, or
acquire by Art and Industry. Neither is it safe for a Man to rely upon his own
single acquired parts, be they never so vast or great; because in the most
ages, the most pestilent Errors and damnable Heresies have been vented and
maintained by Men that were of the greatest acquired endowments. And that it is
often as vain to presume upon having the guidance of the Spirit, as are the
other two, is manifest in the late times of Rebellion and Confusion; where
every Man pretending the Spirit, made such wild and extravagant expositions of
the Scriptures, as few ages have known before; and is still kept up by the
giddy troop of Fanatical Quakers, and the like.

There is another rule which the learned do use, in expounding of the
Scriptures, which is often either too far extended, or not rightly limited and
applied, which is this; That Men in interpreting of the Scriptures should keep
close to the literal sense, if it include not an absolute absurdity. Whereby
Allegorical, Metaphorical, Mystical and Parabolical Expositions are not only
cried down, but by some even abhorred and detested, which thing ought not
absolutely and simply to be approved of; and therefore we shall make it plain
in some few particulars.

1. In Historical relations of matters of fact, we ought to keep close to the
literal meaning, and not to deviate a jot from it, otherwise we should
overthrow the best part of the Christian Faith, and destroy the chief
foundation of Scripture truths. But notwithstanding this, though we ought to
hold to the literal sense in respect of the matter of fact, yet we are not
always to be bound to the bare letter in the mood, means or manner of the
performance. As may be plain in these examples. 1. It is apparent that our
Savior Christ cured the Man that was born blind, and the means and manner is
described: He spat on the ground and made clay of John 9. 6, 7.
the spittle, and he anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay. And said
unto him, Go wash in the pool of Siloam (which is by interpretation, Sent.) He
went his way therefore and washed, and came seeing. Now as to the matter of
fact, that the Man born blind was cured and had his sight restored, is a truth
according to the sense of the letter; and that the manner, which was by spittle
and earth made into Clay, and his eyes covered or anointed with it, and washing
in the pool of Siloam, was also literally true, is manifest. But it were absurd
so far to stick to the letter, as to believe that clay, and spittle, and
washing in the poole Siloam, were true and real natural means to produce that
effect; no, that were absurd, and therein the literal sense is not to be
followed.

2. Again concerning Ahab, thus much is literally true in matter of fact that
he was persuaded to go up to Ramoth-Gilead by his false Prophets in whose
mouths there was a lying Spirit. 1 Kings 22. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
But the manner there declared of sending the lying Spirit into their Mouths,
cannot rationally be presumed to be true in a literal sense, but in a
Metaphorical; for that the Lord was set on his Throne, and all the Host of
Heaven standing by him, on the right hand and on the left, must needs be a
Metaphor taken from an Emperor or a King that sits on his Throne, and all his
Counselors, Princes, Estates and Officers about him, to deliberate and consult
what is to be done. And this is the highest and most apt Metaphor that the
supreme Majesty of Heaven and Earth can be represented by; not that in the
literal sense it must be believed to be acted just in that mood and manner, but
as the most apposite Metaphor that can be found to express the proceedings of
the Heavenly Majesty by, and that for these reasons. 1. God is Infinite and is
every where by his Power, Essence and Presence, and therefore cannot literally
be said to be comprehended in any locality, but after a Metaphorical sense and
expression. For the Prophet says: Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, says the
Lord? Jerem. 23. 24.
And as Solomon confesses: But will God indeed dwell upon the earth? Behold,
the heaven, and heaven of heavens cannot contain 1 Kings 8. 27.
thee: how much less this house that I have builded? 2. God who is only wise,
and before whose eyes all things lie open, and naked, cannot literally Romans
15. 27.
be said to consult or deliberate, or to ask his creatures how a thing shall be
done or brought to pass, because his wisdom is, like himself, Infinite, and
need ask counsel of none, and therefore must the manner of the performance of
the deceiving of Ahabs Prophets needs be Metaphorically understood, and not
literally, which is the thing that we would demonstrate.

3. Further concerning Satan's afflicting of Job in his Goods, Cattels,
Children, Servants, and in his own Body, is a real truth literally so taken as
to the matter of fact; but the manner of Satan's appearing before God, with the
Sons of God, cannot without manifest absurdity be understood in a literal sense
but in a Metaphorical, that God who is Omnipotent, did command, order, send and
limit him, what and how far he was to act. For otherwise God is light in whom
there is no darkness at all, dwelling in the light 1 John 1. 5.
which no Man can approach unto; but Satan is bound in chains of everlasting
darkness, and therefore cannot be said literally to appear 1 Timothy 6. 16.
in person before God, but by way of a Metaphor. So when the Angel tells the
Virgin Mary, that she should conceive in her womb, and she not understanding
how that should come to pass, because she had not known Man, the Angel
answered, the Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest
shall overshadow thee. Though the matter of fact be an undoubted truth, and an
Article of Faith, literally so taken; yet the manner of the Holy Ghosts coming
upon her, and the power of the highest overshadowing her, cannot be understood
in a literal sense, as though it were by that natural and humane way that Men
and Women do beget and conceive Children by, for that were horrid and absurd,
(as some late profane, wretched and debauched Atheists have spattered forth)
but after a Metaporical sense, and a most mystical meaning. So that it is plain
that where a matter of fact may be literally and Historically true, yet the
manner how that matter of fact is brought to pass may be, nay must be
Metaphorical, or else an absurdity will follow, which was the thing undertaken
to be proved.

4. There is nothing more common and usual in Scripture than Metaphors, as when
Christ says, I am a vine, I am the door of the sheep, I am the living bread
that came down from heaven: Though they be Metaphors, yet the things signified
and intended by them are as really and certainly true, as are the Metaphors
themselves, and sometimes more true; because sometime the Metaphor is not used
for the verity of its existence, but according to the common use and opinion,
as O foolish Galatians who has bewitched you? does intend no more but an
allusion to vulgar opinion, that held that men might be bewitched and
enchanted. And so Christ in the true mystical and spiritual meaning is as
really a spiritual vine, door and bread, as there are any of such things in
nature, or being. But as that which is Literally and Historically true in
matter of fact, or meaning, is not to be deceeded from; so that which is a
Metaphor ought not to be turned into a literal thing, nor on the contrary, the
literal sense ought not to be made Metaphorical.

5. Parables are Similitudes taken from things that may have been done, or that
are supposed to have been done, and so the thing to which the comparison is
made, or from whence the Similitude is taken, need not always be a thing that
has been performed in all the circumstances and manner thereof; it is
sufficient that the thing was possible, or rationally probable to have been
acted, or at least supposed so to have been. As for instance in that Parable,
where our Savior says: That those that hear his words and do them are Matthew.
7. 24, 25, 26, 27.
like a wise man that built his house upon a rock; and he that hears them,
and does them not, is like a foolish man, that built his house upon the sand:
now it is not necessary that there should be two such men, that in matter of
fact did after that manner (though there might have been many men before the
time of our Savior that might have done so) but it was sufficient that the
thing from which the comparison was made, was possible, rational and probable.
But the thing intended by the Parable or Similitude, is always a spiritual
truth and certainty. Concerning which learned Beza upon the Parable of the Rich
Man and Lazarus does give us this remarkable Marginal note: Although Christ
does relate an History, notwithstanding he writes spiritual things under
Figures, which he knew were suitable to our sense. For neither are Souls
endowed with Fingers and Eyes, neither do they suffer thirst, neither have they
mutual conference one with another. Therefore the sum is, that faithful Souls
after they be departed from their Bodies, do lead a pleasant and blessed life
without the World: And that most horrible torments are prepared for the
reprobates, which can no more be conceived by our minds, than the immense Glory
of Heaven.

6. As for an Allegory, which is a continuation of a Metaphor, and properly
signifies a figure expressing one thing by another, from (...), and (...),
enuntio, and this is very frequently used in the Scriptures, as when the
Apostle speaking of the two Sons of Abraham, the one from Hagar a bond woman,
the other from Sarah a free woman, says: These things are an Allegory, (...),
which things do express one thing by another; From whence we may note, 1. That
Allegories that tend to edification, keeping the Analogy of Faith, and not
perverting or overthrowing the literal sense, ought not to be so much cried
down nor condemned, as some have done both against Origin and others. For the
Apostle here, as Beza has noted, made it manifest, that he had followed the
footsteps of the Prophet Isaiah, who did foretell that the Church was to be
constituted of the Children of Sarah that was barren, that is to say of those
who merely and spiritually were by Faith to be made the Sons of Abraham, rather
than of Hagar that was fruitful, even then foretelling the rejection of the
Jews, and the vocation of the Gentiles. 2. Allegories may be used, and the
literal sense nevertheless preserved also for the History is literally true
that Sarah and Hagar were two living Women, the one Abraham's Wife a free Woman,
the other his Servant, and a bondwoman, and yet this did not hinder but that
thereby an Allegory might be used, and they might, and did signify and express
another thing than what was merely contained in the letter. 3. We cannot here
but add the grave and learned opinion of S. Augustine upon this very point, Di
Civitat. D^i lib. 13. c. 21. p. 40^.
who rejecting the tenent of some that made Paradise and the things therein
contained, merely corporal, and of some that made it only spiritual and
intelligible, does run a middle course betwixt these two extremes, saying thus:
As though Paradise could not be corporal, because also it might be understood
to be spiritual: As though therefore there were not two Women Agar and Sarah,
and of them two Sons of Abraham, one of the bondwoman, the other of the
freewoman, because the Apostle says that the two Testaments were prefigured
in them; or therefore that water had flowed from no rock Moses smiting, because
there by a figurative signification Christ also may be understood, the Apostle
saying, and the rock was Christ. And after concludes thus: These Ut supra l.
15. c. 27. p. 475.
and some others may be spoken of understanding Paradise spiritually, and may
be spoken without contradiction, while notwithstanding the most faithful verity
of that History may be believed in the commendable narration of the things done
or performed. This same opinion this learned Father does maintain in another
place, where he is speaking of the Ark of Noah.

Having premised these rules for the right expounding of the Scriptures, we
shall now come to the main things that we purpose to handle in this Chapter.
And those that would uphold a kind of omnipotency in Devils, and maintain their
great power in Elementary and Sublunary things, the better to defend the great
power of Witches, do allege diverse places of Scripture, and expound them in
favor of their gross tenants, which now we shall examine and confute in order
as they lie.

1. The first colorable argument that they produce, is from the Devils or the
Serpents tempting and seducing of Eve, where laboring to prove the Devils
power, and his visible apparition to Witches, and making a compact with them,
they pretend that in the seducing of Eve he did visibly appear unto her and
vocally discourse with her, and to that purpose that he essentially entered into
the Body of the Serpent, and spoke through its Organs, or that he assumed the
visible and corporeal shape of a Serpent, and so discoursed, and had
collocution with her. To answer which (that we may proceed methodically,) we
shall lay down and labor to prove these two positions. 1. That if it were
granted that he did it either way, it would be no advantage, thereby to prove
the ordinary power of Devils or Witches.

2. That that place of Scripture, if rightly weighed and considered, will no
way make it rationally appear, that the Devil performed that temptation any
other way but only mentally; and that the History there in the manner and
circumstances of it, is only to be Allegorically and Metaphorically expounded.
And as to the first, if it were granted it proves nothing to the purpose, for
the power of Devils or Witches, as these two Arguments will sufficiently evince.

1. From no single instance or particular proposition, can ever a general
conclusion be rightly drawn by any known and certain Argum. 1.
rules of Reason or Logic; for Syllogizari non est ex particulari, is known to
any Tyronist in that Art. But if Satan for that once should have entered into
the natural Serpent, or assumed his shape, it is a deceivable and vicious way
of arguing, that therefore he has such a power over all Bodies at all times
when he pleases, or that he can assume what shape he please, and therefore it
certainly and rationally concludes nothing of validity.

2. In the temptation of Eve, there was something more extraordinary than can
be assigned in any other temptation whatsoever, except Argum. 2.
that of Christ. And therefore was there a more peculiar and extraordinary
dispensation from God in that case than can be showed in any others but that of
Christ. For now it pleases God in his merciful providence, so to order and
overrule the malice of his hellish will, and to restrain and bridle his envious
nature, that though his will be never so wicked, yet is he kept in his chains
of darkness, and God will not suffer his people to be tempted, above 1 Cor. 10.
13.
what they are able, but will with the temptation also make way to escape that
they may be able to bear it. Now Adam and Eve were in an extraordinary
condition in respect of the Saints of God in this life, or of any other
persons, and there was a more high and greater end in the providence of God in
ordering and permitting of that temptation than there is or can be in any
others, but that of Christ: And therefore from what the Lord permitted, and
ordered to do in that temptation, or the liberty that he might grant him to
exert his own power then, will no argument rationally follow that he can
commonly and at his pleasure perform as much, and so makes no firm conclusion.

And as concerning that place of Scripture in the third of Genesis the great
and learned Jesuit Pererius does undertake with tooth and nail to prove that it
is to be literally interpreted, and that Satan did really enter into the Body
of the natural Serpent, and spoke in him, or through his Organs; and labors
(though in vain) to enervate and overthrow the strong arguments of his Brother
in Religion, the most learned Cardinal Cajetan, Where he rejects the Vid.
Pereril Comment. in locum.
opinion of those that hold that the Devil did assume a Body in the shape of a
Serpent; because (he says) that Satan presently after the temptation ended
must have deposited and put off the assumed body, but that the Serpent was
after in Paradise, and therefore that he did not act it in an assumed Body.
Therefore we shall also pass by that opinion of assuming of Bodies, as being a
mere groundless figment invented by the dreaming Schoolmen, as we shall
demonstrate hereafter. But to proceed in order, We shall first show that the
place must of necessity admit of an Allegory or Metaphor. And secondly, we
shall lay down positive Arguments to show the absurdity and impossibility of
the Devils speaking in the Serpent, or by his Organs. And thirdly, we shall
answer all objections that are material, and that in these particulars.

1. The thing that in that History is to be taken literally, is that Eve was
tempted and seduced; but the instrument by which it was done, the manner and
circumstances, must of necessity have an Allegorical or Metaphorical
interpretation, otherwise no sense rationally can be made of the place at all.

2. There can no blame of the action be imputed to Satan himself, Vid. Dialog.
Discourses of Spirits and Devils. Dialog. 4. p. 110.
if neither absolutely, nor properly, nor Historically, nor Allegorically, nor
Metaphorically, nor no ways else he be named in that very History of Evahs
tentation, wherein the action it self with the several circumstances is fully
and plainly expressed. For the action especially being so weighty a matter, was
necessary to be known in every point: And therefore it is not to be doubted,
but that the History concerning the same is so exactly set forth, with every
circumstance, as that any Man may be able to judge of the principal Actors
therein at the least. So then, although the Devil in that History, be neither
absolutely, nor Historically, nor properly expressed by name; yet must we
acknowledge him to be therein Allegorically and Metaphorically set forth at the
least, or otherways impose no blame upon him at all concerning the action. And
therefore must Pererius needs confess a Metaphor in the place, or else the
Devil cannot be made an actor in the business.

3. It was no natural Serpent but the Devil himself Metaphorically set forth by
the name of a Serpent, who gave the onset upon Evah in that tentation. Forby
Allegories and Metaphors there is evermore some other thing meant than that
which is literally expressed. And that this is so, is thus proved. If in that
action the Devil himself be not Historically and properly, but Allegorically
and Metaphorically, called a Serpent, because he is most crafty and subtle;
then undoubtedly the objection of a natural Serpent to be used in that action
is very inconvenient: But the antecedent is true, and therefore also the
consequent.

4. The antecedent to that Hypothetical Argument foregoing is easily thus
proved: It is an accustomed thing in the Sacred Scriptures to use the names of
other creatures in setting forth to our sense the Intellectual Creatures
themselves. Hereupon it is that in the Apocalypse the Devil (by a perpetual
Allegory) is called a Dragon Apoc. 12. 3, 4, 5.
or Serpent: And therefore in this History of Evahs tentation, by the like
perpetual Allegory he is also called a Serpent. For no Id. 20. 2.
Man can be so absurd and foolish to think that the Devil literally and
properly (in that of the Revelation) can be called a Dragon or Serpent; but
only in a Metaphorical and Mystical sense, and therefore must in right reason
be taken so in that place of Genesis; for one part of Scripture is always best
interpreted by another.

5. Again how can Judah literally be a lions whelp, or Christ Genesis 49. 9.
called the lion of the tribe of Judah? must it needs be understood Revel. 5. 5.
that Christ either assumed the shape of a natural Lion, or that he entered into
the Body of a natural Lion? Surely not, that were most absurd to think or
believe. Even so must it be accounted most absurd and abominable for Pererius
or any other to fancy that the Devil may not properly enough in an Allegory, or
Mystical sense be called a Serpent in that action of tempting of Evah, without
either assuming the shape of a Serpent, or entering into the Body of a natural
one. I appeal to all rational Men to judge if the absurdities of both be not
alike, if barely and literally taken. But this being one of Cajetans Arguments,
was too hard a morsel for the teeth of Pererius; and therefore he past it over
without an answer. Further when our Savior called the Pharisees, and Sadducees
a generation of vipers, must any Man be so extremely mad Matthew. 3. 7.
as to believe that naturally and literally they were generated by vipers? Must
it not be understood that they were called so from their poisonous and wicked
minds, by way of Metaphor? Yes surely: and so is the Devil called a Serpent by
a Metaphor, or else literally so taken, both appellations are equally absurd.
And let Pererius or any other unloose this knot.

6. How can the Devil be a very murderer from the beginning, John (...). 44.
(which he is Mystically so considered) if he had no hand in the destroying of
Evah and Adam both in Souls and Bodies? But if by the Serpent the Devil was not
understood, then he stands acquitted, and was not guilty of the murdering Adam
and Evah both in Souls and Bodies. But we must affirm that all learned and
rational Divines, whether ancient, middle or modern, that have expounded or
commented upon that place, do by the words of our Savior calling Satan a
murderer from the beginning, understand the murdering of Adam and Evah both in
Souls and Bodies; And we dare referr all those that have taken, or will take
pains to examine them upon that piece of Scripture, that they shall be found as
we have averred.

7. Moses (in that action) does purposely entitle the Devil by the name of a
Serpent, because (by his effectual creeping into the interior senses, as also
by infecting Men's minds with venomous persuasions) he does very lively
represent the nature, disposition and qualities of the venomous Serpent. And in
this same sense was the Apostle jealous over the Corinthians, lest as that
Serpent (...), 2 Cor. 11. 3^
(which must necessarily be understood of Satan by a Metaphor of that Serpent)
beguiled Evah through his subtilty, so they might by the cunning of Satan in
his false Apostles have their minds corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ.

8. The Serpent that tempted Evah in Paradise, is there said to be more subtle
than every beast of the field, the which (if the writing of such as have
observed and described the nature of all sorts of animals be true) cannot be
avouched truly of the natural Serpent. For there are many other creatures more
subtle than the Serpent. And therefore it must needs be understood of the
spiritual Serpent, that is, Satan who is (indeed) the old Serpent.

9. Moses does therefore purposely attribute speech to the Serpent which
tempted Evah, to the end we (knowing by experience that speech cannot properly
accord with a natural Serpent) might the rather be induced to believe that the
same must metaphorically be understood of the spiritual Serpent. For we may
with like absurdity imagine that the olive, the fig, the Vine-trees and the
Bramble Judge. 9. 7, 8, 9, 10, etc.
did vocally and articulately speak one to another; as to suppose that either
the Serpent, or the Devil in the Serpent did use an articulate voice and
discourse unto Evah; they are both alike credible, and both alike absurd.

10. The punishment inflicted by God, has no convenience at all with the
natural, but with the spiritual and mystical Serpent, which is the Devil. For
neither can the going upon her belly, nor the eating of dust be any punishment
at all to the natural Serpent, because (before the tentation) both those
properties were peculiarly allotted unto her, she taking her name from her
creeping condition, for Serpens is derived a serpendo, and in the Hebrew she is
called (...) reptile a (...), reptavit, serpsit. Neither yet may we imagine
that the said Serpent being of some better form before the tentation, was then
(by the just judgment of God) transformed into a viler proportion, property or
shape, she being in the History of the Creation accounted amongst the creeping
Creatures.

11. Moses makes no mention at all of the Serpents coming to Evah about that
business, nor of her departure after the action, nor of any one special
property whereby she might be essentially discerned to be (indeed) a true
natural Serpent, nor of any manner of amaze, or sudden fear in Evah at her
sudden approach and extraordinary speech: whereas yet Moses himself was
afterward horribly afraid at the only sight of a Serpent. And where it is
said, Thou art cursed above all the beasts in the field; there the very Exodus
4. 3.
bruit beasts (to the horrible confusion of Satan) are preferred before him;
not in absolute power, but in an especial regard of that happy continuance and
timely conservation of their original nature. For, the beasts of the field,
they do not forgo any heavenly happiness, which they never yet had: But they
continue forth their course in that self same primary estate they took at the
first. But Satan is accursed because he kept not his first estate, but fell
from it, and therefore is worse than the beasts of the field. Neither is this
way of expounding the Scriptures metaphorically; where the literal sense
includes an apparent absurdity, either singular or novel, for both Ancients
and Moderns have allowed the same course, for S. Augustine says: When any
thing is found in Aug. ad Genesis lib. 11. cap. 1.
the Scriptures which cannot (without an absurdity) be possibly interpreted
literally, That thing without doubt is spoken figuratively, and must receive
some other signification, than the bare letter does seem to import. And Gregory
says: When the Greg. in Moral.
order of the History becomes defective of it self in the literal sense, then
some mystical sense as it were with wide open doors does offer it self: yea and
that mystical sense must be received instead of the literal sense it self. And
therefore (says Peter Martyr) Pet. Martyr i^ Genesis 3. 1.
that malediction or curse which the Lord did cast on the Serpent, must be
Allegorically understood of the Devil, and those things which seem properly to
accord to the Serpent indeed, must metaphorically be transferred to Satan
understood in the Serpent. So then, by all the premises it is very apparent,
that it was the Devil himself, and no natural Serpent, who set upon Evah in
that tentation, he being only metaphorically set forth by the name of a
Serpent: And therefore had no need in that action essentially to assume to
himself the Body of a natural Serpent, for the better accomplishment of the
intended business.

The next is to lay down positive Arguments to prove that the Devil did not
essentially enter into the body of the Serpent and if he did, that yet neither
he by himself, nor the Serpent, and he joined, could therebymake any articulate
sound or discourse. Which if the Devil in the Serpent be supposed (as it is) to
perform any such matter, it must be either by considering him as an incorporeal
or as a corporeal creature, but we affirm he could perform neither way, and
that for these reasons.

1. If the Devil be considered as an incorporeal creature simply Reas. 1.
and absolutely, then it will follow, that he cannot act upon any corporeal
matter, because an incorporeal substance can make no contact upon a body,
unless it were it self corporeal; for, quicquid agit, agit per contactum, vel
mediatum, vel immediatum. But both those are caused by the touch of one body
upon another, as when ones hand by touching a straw does immediately move it
forth of its place, or else by blowing does remove it, which is by the
mediation of the air; but that which is merely incorporeal can perform neither:
Because that which is merely incorporeal has no supersicies, whereby to touch
the body to be removed; and therefore can make no motion of it at all; and
where there is no motion, there can be no alteration, and consequently no
speech nor articulation at all. And therefore the Devil (if incorporeal) could
not move the Organs of the Serpent at all, and so could not speak in the
Serpent nor move his organs, if they had been fit for articulate prolation,
which they were not. Which was the thing required to be proved.

2. The Serpent by the ordinance of God in the Creation was specificated Reas.
2.
to an inarticulate sound, not to an articulate: but the Devil neither has,
nor ever had any power to change and overturn the course of Gods ordination in
nature, and therefore has not power, nor never had to make the Serpent speak
articulately; for that were to overthrow the inviolable order of God set in the
Creation, which no man of sound judgment did ever aver that the Devil could do.

3. I take it to be one of the most firm maxims that ever the Reas. 3.
Schools had, that, immateriale non agit in materiale, nisi eminenter ut Deus:
Therefore that the Devil being incorporeal and immaterial cannot act upon that
which is material, as was the body of the Serpent, unless he had had a
super-eminent and omnipotent power, which were blasphemous to attribute unto
him, therefore could he not articulately speak in the Serpent unto Evah,
because immaterial, and had no omnipotent power.

4. And if he be conceived to be corporeal, then he could either Reas. 4.
of himself speak articulately and audibly, or else not. And if he could do so
of himself, then to enter into the Serpent was needless and superfluous. And if
he could not, then the entering into the Serpent would not have contributed that
faculty unto him, and so neither way he could have performed it; For a Frog
creeping into the body of a Man, will not cause the Frog to speak, though it
may make some noise or croaking.

5. Though the Devil being corporeal should have entered into Reas. 5.
the body of the Serpent, yet by no motion that could be made with or upon her
organs, could they have been framed to have uttered an articulate sound,
because they were not fitted for that purpose, but only to have made a
sibilation or hissing. For in Instruments that are artificial, the several
sounds and tunes made by them, are but agreeable to the diversity of their
parts and their several compactions; so an Harp cannot (when made) be ordered
to give forth a sound like a Trumpet, nor the noise of a pair of Organs; nor on
the contrary: and if any of their parts be wanting, defective or broken, then
the orderly sound and Music is spoiled. And though a Parret or Paraquet may by
vocal and external teaching be brought to learn and speak some words; yet it is
not by the teachers entering into her belly, but by his outward, vocal teaching,
whereby her senses and fantasy are audibly wrought upon, and not otherwise.
But in this action ascribed unto Satan, he is not supposed to be able to speak
articulately, nor to have taught the Serpent vocally and audibly, which if he
could have done, yet were not her organs capable of any such matter; and
therefore it had been more subtilty in the Devil rather to have chosen a Parret
than a serpent.

The only objection worth taking notice of that Pererius brings against the
sound and reasonable opinion of learned Cajetan, is this: That Adam and Evah
being in the state of innocence could not be wrought upon by an interior
tentation, because that neither the sensitive appetite nor the fantasy were
corrupted; and therefore Satan could not internally work upon them, and
therefore that the whole tentation must be extrinsecal. To which we return this
sufficient reply.

1. It is but a bare assertion without any proof at all, and he does Reas. 1.
but only shelter it under the authority of S. Austin and Gregory, whose
authority in many other matters he does often reject when they agree not with
his humor, end and interest. But however they are but testimonia humana; and
we are not to regard what the Men are that do speak, so much as to consider the
weight and reason of what they do speak.

2. He proceeds upon false supposition, that the sensitive appetite Reas. 2.
and consequently the Fantasy could not be wrought upon nor drawn, but by a
sensible and exterior object, when it is manifest that the sight of the
Serpent alone could not have stirred the sensitive appetite; for it is
rationally to be supposed as a certainty that Evah had seen the Serpent before
that time. Neither could it be the discourse with the Serpent, barely
considered as discourse, that could have moved it; for it is certain she had
heard, and had had audible, vocal and articulate discourse with her Husband
before this time of the temptation. Neither could it be the beholding of the
tree of knowledge of good and evil, for by the discourse it appears that she
had before seen it, and it is probable that the tentation was in the view of
it, and its species that appeared to her eye of the said tree was the same that
it was before. So that it will be most manifest that the tentation took effect
from the strong lie that Satan told her, that their eyes should be opened and
they should be as Gods knowing good and evil, and so her deception was first
made in her mind and understanding, and thereby the will was drawn, and the
sensitive appetite moved, whereupon she took of the fruit of the tree, and did
eat. And this may far more reasonably be thought to be brought to pass by a
mental discourse and internal motions, than by external collocution, which must
first work upon the mind, before that the Fantasy or sensitive appetite could
at all be moved or drawn.

3. If the tentation had been this way that Pererius supposes it, Reas. 3.
our first parents could not have been seduced; for Satan's argument lay not to
persuade Evah, that it was pleasant for the taste or good for the Stomach
thereby to have drawn the sensitive appetite and the Fantasy, but that it was
good and profitable to make them wise, and to be like Gods, whereby he ensnared
her understanding with a fallacious and lying argument, thus framed, as learned
Pisoator lays it down: That thing which will bring you Divine Vid. Is. Piscat.
in locum.
Wisdom and Felicity, that thing ye ought to make use of. But the eating of
this fruit can bring you Divine Wisdom and Felicity: Therefore the eating of
the fruit of this tree, ye ought to make use of. And so the seduction was not
at all by the sensitive appetite (that could receive no more benefit by it than
by the other fruits in the Garden) but by her understanding being blinded with
a specious show of an apparent (not a real) benefit, and thereby her will drawn
and led to put forth her hand, and to eat. And therefore consequently there was
no need at all of an extrinsecal tentation, which might and was brought to pass
by an intrinsic discourse, working upon her understanding.

4. Surely if Pererius had been aware of the many inconveniences that this
opinion of his does hurry along with it, he would never Reas. 4.
have plunged himself into a Labyrinth of such perplexities; some of which we
shall here enumerate and so conclude. 1. If this opinion were true, that Evah
by reason of her perfection in the state of innocence could not be tempted nor
seduced, but only by an external way and means: Then how could it come to pass
that the Angels in their Primitive Estate, which was as perfect (if not more)
than that of Evahs, were without a tempter or any external means drawn unto
that defection, who left their estate and station, and abode not in the truth?
2. How could the defection have been so general (for multitudes of them fell)
if they had not had some way or means to have communicated their cogitations
and intentions one to another? For though we are not able to apprehend the
manner how they discourse or commune one with another, yet it must be taken for
a truth that they have a way and means to manifest their cogitations one to
another, which is some way Analogous to that which we call speech or discourse.
Therefore concerning this point does learned and judicious Zanchy thus
conclude. Tom. 3. l. 3. c. 19. p. 156.
Therefore (he says) that which we do by a sensible voice, the same thing the
Angels and blessed Souls in Heaven, yea the Devils in the infernal pit, and in
the air, do perform, but without voice, in a spiritual manner. 3. If this
opinion were true, then the blessed Souls, being divested from their Bodies,
should not have a communion one with another, nor should jointly praise and
glorify God together, which were false and absurd; and therefore the learned
Father said well: It is to be holden steadfastly that Hieronym. in Job. c. 24.
the offices of the Heavenly Host are by no means performed in silence;
seeing, we may read that the Angelical powers before the Throne of the Lord, do
sound forth his praise with unwearied Tom. 7. p. 187.
voices. 4. The sleights and subtle machinations (for he has his (...) or
devices) of Satan's Kingdom could not be carried on, if 2 Cor. 2. 11.
he had not a way and means to communicate them to the rest of the Crew of his
inferior Fiends, and therefore does plainly prove that there is a way of
hidden, Mystical and Spiritual discourse, which the Devil might, and did
represent to the mind and understanding of Evah, whereby she was seduced, and
that there was no need of a vocal and audible interlocution; and so much in
answer to his objection.

The next place of Scripture that is commonly brought and urged thereby to
prove the great power of Devils and Witches, is that of Pharaohs Magicians,
from whence they argue thus: If the Magicians of Pharaoh were able by the power
and assistance of the Devil to change their Rods into Serpents, the Water into
Blood, and to produce Frogs; Why may not Witches, by the power and assistance
of the Devil, change themselves and other things into strange and several
shapes, and do the rest of the feats that are ascribed unto them?

But though this be but petitio* principii, a begging of the question, that by
the assistance of the Devil they did these things, which is neither supposed
nor granted, but ought first to have been proved; And though in the case of
hardening Pharaohs heart, there might be (and was) a peculiar dispensation from
God at that time: yet it will not follow that God does always dispense with,
and give the Devil leave to operate the like things; and so nothing firmly can
be concluded from hence. Yet (I say) though these be so, we shall pretermit
them, and come to the full opening and discussion of the matter; and that in
these two particulars. 1. How far the Devils power and assistance did concur
with the actions and performances. 2. And wherein he did not concur nor act at
all.

1. We shall grant that Pharaoh and the Magicians being Idolaters, and
worshippers of false gods, their ends were principally to magnify the power of
their Idols, and to manifest that their supposed gods could work, and bring to
pass as strange miracles or wonders as Moses and Aaron could perform by the
assistance of the God of the Hebrews; and in respect of this end they had all
the assistance that Satan and his dark kingdom of Angels could afford them in a
spiritual and hellish way; for he is the Prince of the power of the air that
Ephesians. 2. 2.
works in the children of disobedience, for such were both Pharaoh and his
Magicians. And to this purpose does the Apostle tell us, speaking of false and
seducing teachers: That they were like Jannes, and Ja^bres that withstood
Moses, in their resisting of the truth: 2 Timothy 3. 8.
so that the Magicians of Pharaoh were condemned for resisting the truth of
that message that Moses and Aaron brought, and of those real miracles that they
performed; and so in respect of the wicked end they aimed at, they were
assisted with the power and concurrence of the Devil, and in that respect only
were his servants and instruments.

But as for the second particular, namely, the efficient causes and ^eans of
the producing of those thing that the Magicians did, we affirm they were
performed by the power of nature and art, and that the Devil was no efficient
cause of their production, and that by these irrefragable arguments.

1. Those that affirm that the Devil did or can produce such strange effects,
do also acknowledge, that what he performs in natural Argum. 1.
and elementary Bodies, is done by applying natural agents to natural and fit
patients, which dotruly bring to pass such strange effects, and that he does no
more, but only make the local application of them. From whence it must
necessarily follow that the effects flow from natural agents, and so no
causality at all can be ascribed unto him, except that fictitious one of being
causa sine qua non, which is as much as no cause. And besides that, there is no
proof that he makes this local application; for if he be incorporeal, then it
is simply impossible that he should perform any such matter; and however, a man
by natural power and means, if he know the fit and apt actives and passives,
may perform them himself, and so his assistance is needless; and we have never
yet met with any argument that bore any convincing force that might induce us
to believe that he is so great a Naturalist.

2. There are many persons that think themselves no mean sharers Argum. 2.
in the most sorts of learning, and others that are very strait laced in their
pretended zeal for godliness, and in detesting the works of Satan, that even
startle and show an abhorrency at the word Magic, if it be but once named, as
though there were no Magic but what is diabolical, or that which they call
diabolical were any other way evil but only in the end and use: for there are
many plants and minerals, that though poisonous, are yet notwithstanding good
in respect of their Creation, and the good uses that may be made of them, as to
kill noxious animals that are hurtful unto man. But if any forth of malice and
wickedness should use them to poison and destroy Men and Women, it were wicked
and diabolical in the end and use, yet were the means lawful and natural. So
whatsoever the Devil may do by wicked Men, his instruments, in leading and
drawing them to make use of the great magnalia naturae, to work strange wonders
by, thereby to confirm Idolatry and Superstition, or to resist the truth and
such devilish ends, though the end and use may be wicked and diabolical, yet
the efficient cause is natural and lawful. And therefore we can find no other
ground or reason of dividing Magic into natural and Diabolical, but only that
they differ in the end and use: for otherwise they both work by a natural
agency and means, seeing the Devil can do nothing above or contrary to that
course that God has set in nature. Therefore may men do without the aid of
Devils whatsoever they can do, seeing they have no advantage over us, but
operate only by applying active things to passive, like as Men do: And
therefore said that most learned Philosopher, Chemist and Mathematician, our
Countreyman Roger Bacon, excellent well in these words: non igitur oportet nos
uti De s^cret. oper. Art. and nature. c. 5.
magicis illusionibus cum potestas Philosophiae doceat operari quod sufficit.
Therefore are those men that came from the East to worship Christ called
Magicians, not because that great knowledge they had in the secrets of Nature
was Diabolical or unlawful; for the name of a Magician was honorable and
laudable, until Knaves and Impostors made use of it to cheat and cousen withal,
and for wicked and ungodly ends; but because they had made use of it for the
glory of God, and the good of mankind, therefore were they Magicians in the
genuine, and best sense, as working by lawful and natural means, and to a good
end: when the Magicians of Pharaoh may be called Cacomagicians, because they
used the good and excellent causes and agents of nature to a wicked and
Diabolical end, namely to resist the truth: and so the only difference of
Magic is from the end and uses, and not from the causes or agents, that are
both natural. So what these Magicians of Pharaoh did, though it were strange
and wonderful, yet was it merely by natural means and causes; and yet being for
a wicked end was therefore Diabolical. So Jacob when he set the pilled rods
with white streakes in Genesis 30. 37, 38, 39. etc.
them, before the flocks in the gutters in the watering troughs, that when the
Rams and the Sheep came up to drink, and coupled together, they might conceive
and bring forth ring streaked, speckled and spotted young ones; It came so to
pass, and is confessed by Pererius himself, and the most of learned Expositors
upon that place, to be from natural causes, and was a strange feat of natural
Magic; but not evil because not directed to a wicked end: but that of Pharaohs
though wrought likewise by a natural causes (for so it was whether ascribed to
the Devil, that can but work by natural means, or not) was wicked and
Diabolical; because they did it to resist Moses and Aaron the messengers of the
Lord Jehovah.

3. The most or all the learned Expositors that have Commented Argum. 3.
upon this place of Exodus (as may be seen in Dr. Willets Hexapla and diverse
other learned Authors) though they attribute these things done by the Magicians
to the power and assistance of Satan, yet in the manner they do acknowledge
them not to be done really and in truth, but only in show and appearance. But
what they mean by show and appearance is not so easy to find out and
determine; for if by it they mean, that they did it as Juglers and those that
use the Art of Legierdemane do, that is, by showing one thing, and then by
nimble slight and agility convey it away, and suddenly and unperceiveably
substitute another thing in its place, which they perform by leading the Eyes
and attentions of the spectators another way with staring and using of strange
and insignificant words, then we should be soon accorded, for so they might
probably and easily have been performed as we shall prove anon, but this is not
the thing they mean or intend. But some do mean that the Devil did only deceive
the Fantasy and imagination of the beholders, in causing them to imagine and
believe that the rods were changed into Serpents, when they were not changed at
all, but only their imaginations deceived in thinking them to be Serpents when
they were but only rods, as melancholy persons, Men in Fevers, Phrensies and
Maniacal distempers do often think and affirm that they see strange things when
they see no such things externally, but the Fantasy is only deceived with the
species and images of those things within. This might be granted if Pharaoh and
all the Spectators could be proved to be Men under those forenamed distempers
and the like, though yet that might (and does often) come to pass from mere
natural causes, where the Devil has nothing to do at all. But the beholders of
these actions of the Magicians are neither proved, nor can rationally be
supposed to be Men under any such distempers; but must be understood to be Men
of several constitutions, tempers, and of sound health, and therefore not any
way capable of any such illusions, neither could the Devil in a moment have so
vitiated their imaginations, which we affirm he can no ways do, except the
humors, fumes and spirits in the Body be first altered by natural causes,
which cannot be done instantaneously, and if it could, then it would follow
that no Man could certainly tell, when he were deceived in his imagination,
when not: neither could it be, (as some imagine,) by casting a mist before
their Eyes; for though Christ did hold the two Disciples Eyes going from Emaus,
that they did not know him, it were blasphemous to think that Satan could do so
also. And a mist casting before their Eyes might make them to see more dimly
and confusedly, and cause things to appear greater than they were, but not to
make one thing seem a quite contrary. But it never was yet proved that Satan
could do such a thing, and what was never proved, may safely and rationally be
denied. Some do suppose that the Devil did cloth or cover the Magicians rods
with some such vestment of an airy substance, as might make the rods appear to
the eye like Serpents; but this is as groundless a whimsey as any of the rest,
and as it has no proof, so it needs no confutation.

4. But to come more close to the matter, it is most plain and Argum. 4.
perspicuous that what they did was merely by Art, or by Art and Nature joined
with it; for if we may trust any thing to propriety of the words (as we have
proved sufficiently before) they are called mechassephim, praestigiatores, that
is Juglers, such as by sleight of hand, and nimble conveyance, could perform
strange and wonderful things, and after they are called Hartummin, that is,
Magicians, such as had skill in natural things, and by knowing their causes,
and making due and timely application of them to passives that were suitable,
could produce wonderful effects. And if we seriously consider the few things
that they performed, they might easily be brought to pass by Legerdemain alone.
For, as for holding a rod in their hands, and seeming to throw it down upon the
ground, how soon might they throw down an artificial Serpent in its stead, and
immediately and unperceivedly make conveyance of the rod? And if it be thought
difficult or impossible, I shall unriddle the mystery, as I have sometimes seen
it performed, and is but thus. The Jugler that is to perform this feat is
usually provided Hist. 1.
beforehand with a wiar so twined and wrested, that it may be pressed together
with the little finger in the ball of the hand, and when let loose it will
extend it self, like a spring, and make a pretty motion upon a Table, this is
fitted with a suitable head, and a piece of neatly painted linen, perfectly
resembling a Serpent, with Eyes and all. This thus fitted he holds in his
right hand betwixt his little finger, and the ball of his hand, then with his
left hand he takes up a little white rod that he has upon the Table, with
which he makes people believe he performs all his feats: And then telling
them a Story to amuse them, that he will like Moses and Aaron, transform that
rod into a Serpent, then he presently begins to stare about him, and to
utter some strange and nonsensical words, as though he were invoking some
Spirit or Goblin, and so immediately conveyeth the rod either into his lap (if
sitting) or into his sleeve (if standing) and then lets loose the Serpent forth
of his right hand with pushing it forward, that what with the wiar, and the
nimble motion of his hand, he makes it to move a pretty space upon the Table,
which he continues, while offering with the one hand to catch it by the neck,
he nimbly with the other puts it forward, and turns it by touching the tail,
and the mean while hisseth so cunningly, that the bystanders think it is the
Serpent it self, and presently whips it up and conveys it into his pocket. And
such a trick as this well acted might make Pharaoh and the beholders believe
there was as much done, as Moses and Aaron did, but only that Aarons rod
swallowed up their Serpents, or his Serpent theirs, which they might easily
excuse. As for the changing water into blood, and the producing of Frogs, they
were so easy to be done after the same manner, that they need not any
particular explication, for by this the manner of their performance may most
easily be understood. Though I once saw a Gentleman that was much delighted
with these kind of tricks, and did himself play them admirable well, who
performed it with a living Snake, that he had got for one of his Children to
keep in a box; for in this North-Countrey they are plentiful, and are also
innoxious; and it might have deceived a very wary person. So that it is very
foolish and absurd to bring in a Demon from Hell, or an Angel from Heaven, or a
Soul from above, to solve a thing that seems strange and uncouth by, when the
craft and cunning of Men (if duly considered and examined) are sufficient to
perfom the same, and much more.

5. And in this place of Exodus where our Translators say: and the Magicians
did so or in like manner with their enchantments, Argum. 5.
the word being Belahatehem ought to have been rendered, suis laminis (as we
have proved before) that is, with their bright plates of metal, for the word
does not signify Enchantments in any one place in all the Old Testament. And
if truth and reason may bear any sway at all, it must be understood that they
were deeply skilled in natural and lawful Magic (as generally the Egyptians
and the Eastern Nations were) though they did use and apply it to an evil end,
namely the resisting the power of Gods miracles wrought by Moses and Aaron: and
so by this word suis laminis, with their plates of Metal must be understood,
Metalline bright plates framed under certain fit constellations, and insculped
with certain figures, by which naturally (without any Diabolical assistance)
they did perform strange things, and made the shapes of some things appear to
the eye. And though we may be derided and laughed to scorn by the ignorant, or
hardly taxed and censured by the greatest part of Cynical Critics, yet we
cannot so far stifle the knowledge of our own brains, nor be so cowardly in
maintaining the truth, but we must assert, That anciently there has been a
certain lawful art, whereby some sorts of metals might be mixed together under
a due constellation, and after engraven in like fit Planetary times with sundry
figures, that would naturally work strange things; And this piece of learning
though it may justly be numbered amongst the Desiderata, and might very well
have been placed in the Catalogue of the Deperdita of Pancirollus; yet was it
well known unto the ancient Magicians, and by them often with happy success put
into practice; And amongst those many noble attempts of that most learned and
experienced (though much condemned) person Paracelsus, this part of learning
was not the least, that he labored to restore. The truth of which we thus
prove.

1. That there have been formerly in the World many such like planetary Argum.
1.
Sigills or Talismans, (as the Persians called them) is manifest from the
authority of diverse Authors of good credit and account. For the learned and
most acute Julius Scaliger relates this saying: The novelty of this History
also may sharpen the wits of the studious. Ex^rc. 196. 6. p. 637.
In the Books of the Arabic Egyptians (he says) it is thus written. That
Hameth Ben Thaulon the Governor of Egypt for the Arabians did command that a
certain leaden Image or Picture Hist. 1.
of a Crocodile, which was found in the groundwork of a certain Temple, should
be melted in the fire. From which time the inhabitants did complain, that those
Countries were more infested with Crocodiles than before, against whose
mischief that Image had been framed, and buried there by the more ancient
Wisemen or Magicians. Junctin, upon the Sphere of Sacrobosco, affirms Cap. 2.
that his Master who was a Carmelite, named Julianus Ristorius a Prato, one
that was not any whit superstitious, was entreated by Hist. 2.
a Friend of his to make one of these Images for the cure of the Cramp, which
he was very much subject to. This learned Man resenting his Friends sufferings,
taught him the manner how to make one: so that he, not content to make only
one, made diverse Vid. Gaffarel Unheard of curiosities, p. 165. etc.
of them when the Moon was in the Sign Cancer; and that with so good success,
and with such certainty, as that he immediately found the benefit of it.
Confecit (says he) plures imagines, pro se, and amicis suis: quibus effectis,
unam pro se accepit, and liberatus est. The same he reports of a certain
Florentine, a very Pious Man, who made one of these Talismans, for to drive
away the Gnats, which he did with good success. Nicolaus Florentinus, (says
he) Vir religiosus fecit in una constellatione annulum ad expellendum culices,
quas vulgo Zanzaras dicimus, sub certis and determinatis imaginibus; and usus
fuit constellatione Saturni infortunati, and e^pulit culices. Another Story
take from an Arabic Cosmographer, cited by Joseph Scaliger thus: Epist. advaz^.
This Talisman (he says) is to be seen in the Country of Hamptz, Hist. 3.
in a City bearing the same name; and it is only the Figure of a Scorpion
graved upon one of the Stones in a certain Tower; which is of so great virtue,
as that it suffers not any, either Serpent or Scorpion to come within the City.
And if any one, for experiment sake, bring one of these out of the field into
the City, it is no sooner at the Gate, but that it dies suddenly. This Figure
has this virtue besides; that when any one is stung with a Scorpion, or bitten
by any other Serpent, they need but take the Image of the Stone with a little
clay, and apply it to the wound, and it is instantly healed. Unto which Mr.
Gaffarel adds this: If any one doubt (says he) of the credit of this
Cosmographer, he may yet adventure to believe Mr. de Breves, as Hist. 4.
having been an eyewitness of the like experiment: who says in his Travels,
that at Tripoli a City of Syria, within a Wall that reaches from the Seaside
to the Gate of the City, there is a certain enchanted stone; on which is
figured, in Relief, or by way of Imbossment, the Figure of a Scorpion, which
was there placed Ut supra p. 164.
by a Magician, for to drive away Venomous Beasts, which infested this
Province, as the Serpent of Brass in the Hippodromus at Constantinople did. And
a little above the City, there is a certain Cave, which is full of the
Carcasses and Bones of Serpents, which died at that time. And further Gaffarel
says: Now whereas he calls this an enchanted Stone, and says that it was
placed there by a Magician, you must note, that he there speaks according to
the sense of the inhabitants, who knew not how to give any other account of the
thing, as not understanding any thing at all of the natural reason of it.

2. And that the election of fit times according to the Configuration of the
Stars and Planets, is of great efficacy and virtue, is sufficiently Argum. 2.
known to Husbandmen and Sailers, and of no small power both in respect of
natural and artificial things, as we shall show in this instance. Lazarus
Riverius who was Counselor and Physician to the French King, a person of
extraordinary learning and experience in the Medical profession, both in the
Galenical and Chemical way, does give us this relation saying: I have not
seldom experienced, and I have many witnesses of this thing, that Peony
Observat. Communicate. 7. p. 329.
gathered under its proper Constellation, to wit, the Moon inclining
(inclinante) being in Aries, does loose the Epilepsie, by application alone:
for the middle and chief root divided by the Hist. 5.
greater Longitude, I have (he says) compassed about the neck and the arms of
a certain Virgin in the Hospital, of eighteen years of age, who had been
afflicted with this Disease from her childhood, and had the Paroxysmes every
day; but from that day seemed altogether to be cured. From whence it is
manifest how greatly the observation of the Stars is to be esteemed of in the
Art of Medicine. Agreeable unto which is the judgment of that Industrious
person Galen, who affirms that Peony by appension does cure the Epilepsie,
though he declare not the fit time for its Dt simpl. medic. facul. p. 1076.
collection. From whence it is most clear that the careful and precise
observation of the Heavenly influences is most necessary to a Physician, and to
all others that would produce strange and desired effects. Therefore does
learned Schroderus tell us this concerning the power and efficacy of those
influences, saying: The influences Pharm. med. Chym. c. 9. p. 24.
of the Stars are effluvia, or Steams endowed with peculiar faculties, by which
they make strong (if they be in their strength and vigor) things that are
familiar to them, and do prosper and promote their virtues; but on the contrary
they debilitate, hinder and make worse things that are not agreeable to them.
And this is that which Moses fully mentions in these words, as they are fitly
rendered by Arias Montanus. Et ad Joseph dixit, Benedicta Domini terra ejus, de
delicia Coelorum, de rore, and de voragine cubante de orsum: and de delicia
proventuum Solis, and de delicia ejectionis lunarum. Which our Translation
gives thus: And of Joseph Deuteronomy. 33. 13, 14.
he said, Blessed of the Lord be his land, for the precious things of heaven,
for the dew, and for the deep that coucheth beneath; And for the precious
fruits brought forth by the Sun, and for the precious things put forth by the
Moon. The full evidence of the truth of these influences of the Stars, and
necessity and utility for due and proper seasons for the collection of Flowers,
Fruits, Roots and Plants, may be seen in that learned piece that Bartholomaeus
Carichterus Chief Physician to Maximilian the Second, writ and dedicated to his
Master in the German Tongue. As also, what is written in the same Language by
those learned Germans, Johannes Pharamundus Rhumelius, and Israel Hebueras that
learned Mathematician, in a Treatise which he calls, Mysterium Sigillorum
herbarum and lapidum, which do completely verify the certain efficacy and
virtue of Planetary Seals, Images or Figures.

3. These things are confirmed by the effects of appensions of many Argum. 3.
natural things which produce strange and wonderful effects, some of which we
shall give in the words of that honorable person Mr. Boil, who says: That
great cures may be done by bare outward applications, Usefulness of Exper.
Phil. c. 10. p. 207.
you will scarce deny if you disbelieve not the relations which are made us by
learned men concerning the efficacy of the Lapis Nephriticus, only bound upon
the Pulses of the wrists (chiefly that of the left hand) against that stubborn
and Anomalous disease the Stone. And that which gives the more credit to Dt
Lapid. and Gemm. l. 2. c. 11.
these relations is; That not only the judicious Anselmus Boethius de Boot seems
to prize it, but the famous Monardes professes himself, not to write by
hearsay of the great virtues of this Indian Stone, but to have made trial of it
himself upon persons of Hist. 6.
very high quality: And that which is related by Monardes is much less strange
than those almost incredible things which are with many circumstances delivered
of that Stone, by the learned Chemist Vutzerus. And although it must be
acknowledged that some Stones that go under that name have been ineffectually
applied in Nephritick Distempers. Yet the accurate Johannes de Laet himself
furnishes us with an answer to that objection, informing us that many of those
Nephritick Stones (which differ much in color, though the best are wont to be
greenish) although not at all counterfeited or sophisticated are of little or
no virtue. But that yet there are some others of them which can soarce be
distinguished from the former, but by trial upon Nephriticks, Dt Gemm. and
Lapid. l. 1. c. 23.
which are of wonderful efficacy, as he himself has more than once tried in
his own Wife. Garcias ab orta mentions a Stone found in Balagat, called
Alaqueca; of which he tells us, that though it be cheap: Hujus tamen virtus (to
use his own words) reliquarum Gemmarum facultates exuperat, quippe qui
sanguinem undequaque fluentem illico sistat. Monardes (cap. 35.) relates the
great virtues of a Stone against Hysterical suffocations, and concludes;
Cumuteri suffocationem imminentem praesentiunt, adhibito lapide subito
levantur, and si eum perpetuo gestant (Hysterici) nunquam simili morbo
corripiuntur: exempl^ hujusmodi faciunt ut his rebus fidem adhibeam. The same
Author in the next Chapter, treating of the Lapis Sanguinaris or Boodstone,
found in New*Spain (having told us, that the Indians do most confidently
believe, that if the flesh of any bleeding part be touched with this Stone, the
bleeding will thereby be stanched) adds this memorable observation of his own:
Vidimus nonnullos haemorrhoidum fluxu afflictos remedium sensisse, annulos ex
hoc lapide confectos in digito continue gestando; nec non and menstruum sluxum
sisti. And to these for brevity sake, we shall only mention the virtues of the
Jasper, which is blood-red throughout the whole body of the Stone, which
Boethius de Boot of his own experience Dt Lapid. and Gemm. l. 2. p. 102.
does avouch in several trials to have stopped Fluxes of Blood, only by bare
appension: As also the child of a famous Chemical writer, who had his child
(supposed to be bewitched) cured by hanging a piece of that Noble Mineral by
Paracelsus called electrum minerale immaturum, of which Helmont tells us this:
Imprimis electrum minerale immaturum Paracelsi, collo appensum, ^iberat, quos
spiritus immundus persequitur, quod ipse vidi. Il^ius Mod. Intra^d. p. 604.
potum vero, plures a veneficiis solvisse, me^ini. N^o autem, qui appenso illo
simplici, non praecaverit, ne injecta intromittantur: vel ab importunis
ligationibus confestim non solvatur. All which do manifest the great and
wonderful virtues, that God has endowed Stones, Minerals, Plants and Roots
withal, that the Devil need not be brought in to be an adjutant or operator in
their effects.

4. And it is also manifest that Metals may be so artificially in fit
Constellations commixed together, that their effects will be rare Argum. 4.
and stupendous, as the aforesaid honorable person does transcribe Ut supra.
209.
and relate to us in these words: What Monardes, (he says) mentions of the
virtue of the Lapis Sanguinaris to cure Hemorrhoidal Fluxes, puts me in mind of
a yet much stranger thing, which Helmont affirms, namely, That he could make a
metal, Helm. de Febr. c. 2.
of which if a Ring were worn, the pain of the Haemorrhoids would be taken
away, in the little time requisite to recite the Lords Prayer; and within
twenty our hours the Haemorrhoids themselves, as well internal as external, how
protuberant soever, would vanish, and the restagnant blood would (as he speaks)
be received again into favor, and be restored to a good condition. The same
Ring he also commends in the suffocation and irregular motion of the Womb, and
diverse other Diseases: But if Paracelsus be in any case to be credited in an
unlikely matter, we may think by his very solemn protestations that he speaks
upon his own experience, that he had a Ring made of a metalline substance, by
him called electrum, (which by his description seems to be a mixture of all the
metals joined together under certain constellations) which was of far greater
virtue than this of Helmont, For, hoc loco (says he) non possum non indicare
admirandas quasdam Paracels. in Archidox. mag. l. 6. p. 714.
vires virtutesque electri nostri, quas fieri his nostris oculis vidimus,
adeoque cum bona veritatis conscientia praeferre attestarique possumus. Vidimus
enim hujus generis annulos, quos qui induit, hunc nec spasmus convulsit, nec
Paralysis corripuit, nec dolor ullus torsit, similiter nec Apoplexia, nec
Epilepsia invasit. Et si annulus hujusmodi Epileptici digito annulari, etiam in
Paroxysmo saevissimo, insertus fuit, remittente illico Paroxysmo, aeger a lapsu
illico resurrexit, etc. And though Mr. Boil a person of a perspicuous
judgment, and of a great understanding, does seem to question his authority
with a kind of dubitation, being in probability staggered by the groundless
censures of his greatest adversaries; yet we must affirm that it is very hard
that his veracity and experience (which was as great as any Man's) should be
undervalued, by reason of the ignorance and idleness of those that judge him:
who were never able in regard of their ignorance to understand the meaning of
his mystical and dark way of writing, nor because of their supine negligence
had ever made trial of those things he treats of, with that curious diligence
and care that is requisite to accomplish such occult effects withal; not
considering that, Dii sua bona laboribus vendunt. But notwithstanding this, and
the monstrous lies and horrid calumnies of that pitiful Rapsodist Athanasius
Kircherus, we shall add one testimony more from the same Author, which in
English runs thus: Also (he says) I cannot here pass over one great wonder,
which I saw performed in Spain of a great Negromancer, who had a Bell not
exceeding the weight of two pounds which as often as he did Ring, he could allure
and stir up many and various Apparitions and Visions of Spirits. For when he
list he did describe certain words and characters in the inward superficies of
the Bell: After if he did beat and ring it, forthwith the Spirits (or shapes)
did come forth or appear of what form or shape soever he desired. He could also
by the sound of the same Bell, either draw unto him or drive from him many
other Visions and Spirits, as also Men and Beasts, as I have seen many of these
performed by him with mine own eyes. But whenever he did begin any new thing,
so often he did renew the words and Characters also. But notwithstanding he would
not reveal (he says) unto me, those secrets of the words and characters, until
I my self more deeply weighing and considering the matter, at last by chance
found them forth. Which notwithstanding, and the examples of which I here
studiously do conceal. But it is not obscurely to be noted here, that there was
more of moment in the Bell, than in the words: For this Bell was certainly and
altogether compounded or made of this our Electrum.

5. And that there are great and hidden virtues both in Plants and Argum. 5.
Minerals, especially in Metals and Precious Stones as they are by Nature
produced by Mystical Chemistry prepared and exalted, or commixed and insculped
in their due and fit constellations, may not only be proved by the instances
foregoing, but also by the reasons and authorities of persons of great judgment
and experience in the secrets of nature, of which we shall here recite some
few. And first that learned and observant person Baptista van Helmont tells us
thus much: But this one thing (he says) I willingly admit: To wit, that metals
do by In Verb. Herb. and lapid. mag. vis est. p. 579.
many degrees surpass Plants and Minerals in the art of healing. And therefore
that metals are certain shining glasses, not by reason of the brightness; but
rather that as often as they are opened, and their virtues set at liberty, they
act by a dotal light, and a vital contact. Therefore metals do operate, by a
manner attributed to the Stars, to wit by aspect, and the attaction of an
alterative blass or motion. For the metals themselves are glasses, I say the
best offspring of the inferior Globe, upon which the whole central force, by
some former ages, has prodigally poured out its treasure, that it might
espouse most richly, this liquor, this sweat, and this offspring of Divine
Providence, unto those ends which the weakness of nature did require. But (he
says) I call them shining glasses, which have the power of penetrating and
illuminating the Archeus, from its errors, furies and defects. Neither are
those arguments of that learned person Galeottus Martius, Vid. lib. de Doctr.
promise* c. 24. p. 187.
for defending the natural and lawful effects of Planetary Sigills, when
prepared forth of agreeable matter, and made in their due constellations, of
such small weight as some insipid ignorants have pretended, but are convincing
to any considerate and rational person, as this one may manifest, where he is
speaking of the Figure of a Lion engraven in a Golden Plate in these words: The
Figure of a Lion (he says) insculped in the fit hours, in a right
constellation, does not act, but does bring the beginning of the action, as S.
Thomas and Albertus magnus do testify: not as a Figure and Image impressed
Mathematically, but that it may effect this or that preparation in the thing
figured: which may in diverse moods receive the Celestial action without
difficulty: Because if the Image of a Dog, or an Horse, or some other Animal
were insculped in a Golden Plate, there would not be that disposition of the
matter, which does accompany the Image of a Lion etc. From whence (he says) we
conclude, that this aptitude to draw in the Celestial virtue in the Figure, is
not as Figure, but as the Gold is formed more dense or thin, by the condition
of the Image. For even in looking-glasses, the variety of the Figure, does
bring a most vast difference. For how much a Concave does differ from a gibbous
Looking-glass, is even known unto old Wives. Of these things also our learned
Countryman Roger Bacon, who was second to Dt secret. oper. artis and nature.
c. 2.
none in the secrets of Art and Nature, does teach us thus much: But they who
know in fit constellations, to do their works according to the configurations
of the Heavens; they may not only dispose Characters, but all their operations,
both of Art and Nature, agreeable to the Celestial virtues. But because it is
difficult in these things to know the certitude of Celestials; therefore in
these there is much error with many; and there are few that know to order any
thing profitably and truly. But we shall shut up this Paracels. Archidox.
magic. lib. 1.
particular with that memorable and irrefragable responsion of Paracelsus to
the common objection, which in English runs thus: But (he says) they will thus
urge; how comes it to pass, I pray thee, that Metals, with their assigned
Characters, Letters and Names, should perform such things, unless they be
prepared and made by Magical and Diabolical power intervening? But (he says)
to these I return this answer. Therefore thou believe (as I hear) that if
such things be made by the help of the Devil, then they may have their force
and operations. But should not thou rather believe this? that also the Creator
of Nature, God who dwells in the Heavens, is so powerful, that he in like
manner can give and confer these virtues and operations to Metals, Roots,
Herbs, Stones and such like things? As though forsooth the Devil were more
strong, more wise, more omnipotent, and more powerful than the only Eternal,
Omnipotent and Merciful God, who has created and exalted their degrees, even
of all these aforesaid Metals, Stones, Herbs, Roots and all other such like
things that are above, or within the Earth, and do live and vegetate in the
Water or Air, for the health and commodity of Man?

This argument we desire that any of the Witchmongers or Demonographers should
answer, ^re they conclude so strongly for the power of Devils and Witches.

So we conceive we have sufficiently proved that what Pharaohs Magicians did
perform, might rationally, and probably be brought to pass by Natural Magic or
confederacy, and sleight of hand, without any other Diabolical assistance than
what was mental and spiritual in regard of the end, which was the resisting of
Moses. And by all they did, as in changing their Rods, bringing in of Frogs and
changing Water into Blood, it does not rationally appear, that they had any
supernatural assistance, for then they could not have been so amazed at the
miracle of turning the Dust into Lice; for what skill did the Devil want that
he could not perform this? If by his power the former things were brought to
pass, could there be more difficulty in doing of this, than in the bringing of
Frogs? Neither could their Legierdemain have failed them but that they were
surprised, and taken unawares, being not provided to play all kind of tricks,
but only some few for which they had made provision. And so to excuse their own
inability, they cried out, this is the finger Exodus 8. 19.
of God; a pitiful shift to excuse their own knavery, and couzenage, for there
could be no more of the finger of God in this than the former, but only a shift
to put off their own shame.

Another place from whence they would draw arguments to maintain the power of
the Devil and Witches, is the Story of Balaam in the Book of Numbers, from
whence in the first place they would conclude that he used wicked and
Diabolical Divinations, and that by words he could either bless or curse. In
answer to which we shall give these pressive reasons.

1. Though it might be granted that he used Divinations that Reas. 1.
were not lawful, yet what is that to a killing and murdering Witch? Surely
nothing at all. And though Balak believed that whosoever Numb. 22. 6.
he blessed were blessed, and whosoever he cursed, were cursed, and therefore
fetched him so far, yet there is nothing apparent to prove that Balaam could do
any such matter, and from Balaks belief to Balaams performances proceeds no
argument, for his belief that he could either bless or curse, did not confer
any power to Balaam to produce such effects withal. And Balaams blessings, or
cursings might be intentional, and declarative, but could not be effective, for
he confesses a great piece of truth: How should he curse, whom Numb 23. (...),
23.
God had not cursed, or how should he defy, whom the Lord had not defied? He
might have done it verbally, but it would have been frustrate, and to no
effect, and therefore he concluded: Surely there was no enchantment against
Jacob, nor no Divination against Israel.

2. And though it be said, that he went not as at other times, to Reas. 2.
meet Auguries (for as we have before showed, the word does properly signify
that) It must be understood, and is manifest that at Chap. 24. 1.
the former times he went to attend solitarily what the Lord would say unto
him, and those two times that he went before was only to meet the Lord, to hear
and receive what he would say unto him. But here he did not, nor had need to
go, for the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he took up his Parable, and
prophesied. Where though his going to meet the Lord, be called to meet
Divinations, yet it cannot be taken in the worse sense, for unlawful
Divinations, but for such as were sent him and taught him by God, by Visions,
Angels, Trances, or other such like ways as God in those times used to reveal
his Will to his Prophets by: For from first to last, it appears that he
neither professed, nor did (in this case) utter any thing but what the Lord
commanded him, and so was no false Prophet.

3. He was no false Prophet, that is, he had, nor used any Divinations, Reas. 3.
but what he had from God, is most clear from these particulars. 1. When Balak
first sent messengers unto him, his responsion Numb. 22. 18.
was: If Balak would give me his house full of Silver and Gold I cannot go
beyond the word of the Lord my God, to do less or more. Whereby it is apparent
that he feared the Lord Jehovah, and calls him his God, thereby showing the
confidence that he had in him, and that he acknowledged him for his only God.
2. In the whole transaction of the business betwixt him and Balak, he never
took upon him to declare any thing, but what the Lord would say unto him,
neither did he at all vary from the same in the least tittle. 3. He confesses
all along, that he had his eyes opened, and Ibid c. 24. 4, 16.
that he heard the words of God, and had seen the vision of the Almighty,
falling into a trance, but having his eyes open. And these were things that
were not peculiar to any, but such as were the true Prophets of the Lord
Jehovah. 4. The truth of his Prophecy, which was of the Kingdom of Christ, and
the Glory and Dominion of it, with the prosperity of his people, does plainly
evince that he was a true Prophet of the Lord, and that his Divinations came
from the Almighty. And this caused S. Hierome, and some other Vid. Caten. Aur.
Tho. Aquin. p. 10.
of the Fathers believe, that by this Prophecy of Balaam, the Magi or Wise men
were directed, to come to Jerusalem to seek and worship Christ the Savior of
the World.

4. Though this Prophet fell into heinous crimes, and enormous Reas. 4.
sins, as tempting of God, who when the first Messengers came from Balak unto
him, was positively commanded not to go with them, and yet as though God would
change his mind entertained them again, whereby Gods anger was kindled against
him. And though he was drawn to love the wages of unrighteousness, and so 2
Pet. 2. 15, 16. Jude 11.
was rebuked by the dumb Ass, and though he taught Balak to lay a
stumbling block before the children of Israel, and therefore had that judgment
to be slain among the Midianites: Yet none of these do Revel. 2. 14.
conclude at all, that therefore he used Diabolical Divinations, or had not
what he declared from Divine Revelation, no more than the flying of Jonah to
Tarshish, when he was commanded to go to Jonah 1. 3. and 4. 1.
preach against Nineveh, or his repining at Gods mercy showed to that great
City, manifested him to be a lying Prophet, or to use devilish 1 Kings 13.
Divination. Neither the Prophets being seduced, that cried against the altar
at Bethel, before Jeroboam, by the old Prophet, and his being slain in the way
by a lion, and his carkase left there, did at all argue that his Prophecy was
false, or that he had not his message from God, but they only show, that even
those that have been truly inspired by God and been truly taught by him, have
notwithstanding often disobeyed him, and have had therefore fearful temporal
judgments fallen upon them, and yet no argument that they used unlawful
Divinations.

From hence also the Witchmongers use to urge a frivolous, and groundless
argument which is this; that the Angel did speak in Balaams Ass, and therefore
the Devil may speak in a Dog, or a Cat to a Witch, but this is confuted by
these reasons.

1. What the Angel did there was by command and commission Reas. 1.
from God, but we never read, nor can it be proved that the Devil is sent upon
such idle, and ordinary errands, to work a miracle, to speak in a Dog, or a
Cat, to a Witch; for God does not work wonders for any such wicked and
abominable ends. And if he be not sent of God, he cannot of himself perform any
such matter, who could not enter into the Swine, without Christ's leave and
order; but is kept in chains of everlasting darkness, from whence he is not
loosed, but when God sends him as an instrument to accomplish his will, which
is always for good and just ends, and not for such execrable and wicked
purposes.

2. They take up a false supposition, for the Angel was not in the Ass either
essentially, or effectively, for at the very instant that the Ass spoke, the
Angel was standing in a narrow place, where was Numb. 22. 26, 27.
no way to turn either to the right hand or to the left, and then seeing the
Angel of the Lord she fell down under Balaam, and spoke, and the Angel could
not both stand in the narrow way and likewise be in the Ass, in the same moment
of time, except we should grant that absurdity that a creature may be in two
distinct places at one and the self-same time, which was never yet allowed to
any created being. But they openly belie, and falsify the words of the Text,
Verse 28.
for it does not say that the Angel spoke in the Ass, but that the Lord, (the
word is Jehovah) opened the mouth of the Ass. So that (we suppose) here is
enough demonstrated that from none of the places of Scriptures hitherto
enumerated, any colorable grounds can be drawn to uphold those particulars
that we have labored to confute, and therefore we shall pass to another
Chapter.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Woman of Endor that pretended to raise up Samuel, and of some other
places in the Scriptures, not handled yet, and of some other objections.

COncerning the Woman of Endor, that our English and many other Translators
have falsely rendered a Witch, or a Woman that had a familiar Spirit, we have
spoken sufficiently, where we treated of the signification of the word Ob. And
there have showed plainly, that she is only called the Mistress of the bottle,
or of the Oracle, and that what she there did, or pretended to do, was only by
Ventriloquy, or casting her self into a feigned Trance lay grovelling upon the
earth with her face downwards, and so changing her voice did mutter and murmur,
and peep and chirp like a bird coming forth of the shell, or that she spoke in
some hollow Cave or Vault, through some Pipe, or in a Bottle, and so amused and
deceived poor timorous and despairing Saul, or had a confederate apparelled
like Samuel to play his part, and that it was neither Samuels Body, Soul, nor
no Ghost or Devil, but only the cunning and Imposture of the Woman alone, or
assisted with a confederate. And though this might be amply satisfactory to all
sound and serious judgments, especially if hereunto be added what Mr. Scot, Mr.
Ady, Mr. Wagstaff, and the learned Authors of the Dialogue of Spirits and
Devils have written upon this subject: yet because we have promised before to
speak something of the History and matter of fact, and that Mr. Glanvil a
Minister of our English Church has of late espoused the quarrel, we shall
confute his arguments and clear the case as fully as in reason can be required,
and that in these particulars following.

1. The certain and infallible prophecies of Samuel so punctually coming to
pass according as he foretold them, for it is said: And 1 Samuel 3. 19. Id. c. 7.
v. 13.
Samuel grew, and the Lord was with him, and did let none of his words sall to
the ground; were manifestly known to all Israel, as in the case of the
destruction of Eli, and his house, and by the overthrow of the Philistines at
Eben-ezer, and in the anointing of Saul to be King, and in the case of sending
Thunder and Lightning in Harvest time, and such like. And as these were
publicly known unto all Israel, and they had seen, and tried what infallible
certainty followed upon them, so it was as generally known, that Samuel had
told Saul that God had rejected him from being King over Israel, and that he
had anointed David to be King in his stead; and therefore any rational Man,
that knew these things, and also saw that David prospered in all things that he
did, and that it was quite otherwise with Saul, might certainly know that the
Kingdom would be transferred from him unto David, and so there needed neither
spirit nor Devil be fetched up to predict this, being sufficiently known unto
all, of which also the Woman at Endor could not be ignorant as a thing of
concern to her, especially in the point of her practice which was mere
couzenage and Imposture. And therefore Mr. Glanvils argument concludes nothing,
where he Consid. about Witchcraft, p. 8.
says: And this Samuel truly foretold his approaching fate, viz. That Israel
should be delivered with him into the hands of the Philistines, and that on the
morrow he, and his Sons should be in the state of the dead, which doubtless is
meant by the expression that [they should be with him:] which contingent
particulars, how could the couzener, and her confederate foretell, if there were
nothing in it extraordinary and preternatural? To answer which we say, that
there was no contingent particular that was foretold, but Mr. Glanvil might
have foretold it, if he had been there, and known but that which was publicly
divulged in Israel, without incurring the danger of being reputed a Witch or a
Diviner.

1. Because Samuels prophecies were certainly known to come to pass, and he had
openly declared, that the Kingdom should be rent from Saul, and given to David.
2. She or her confederate might have guessed as much, because of the extreme
fear and consternation that Saul was in, for heartless and fearful Generals
seldom or never win Battles. 3. Because that he confessed that God had forsaken
him, and when he saw the host of the Philistines, he was afraid and his heart
greatly trembled, and those that God does forsake cannot prosper. 4. The word
to morrow in the Hebrew does not precisely denote the day following, but the
time to come, so that how true soever Mr. Glanvil may think it, there was but a
piece of ambiguous Equivocation in it, for it cannot be made out that it was
fought the very next day, neither were all Saul's Sons slain with him, at that
very time. 5. And if nothing must be supplied but merely what is totidem verbis
in the Text (as he urges against Mr. Scot) then how will it be proved, that
the Phrase (to morrow thou and thy Sons shall be with me) is to be understood
of the state of the dead, seeing the words (if literally to be taken) do imply
a locality, not a state or condition? 6. But if it be supposed to be the Devil,
how comes he to know contingencies so certainly? It is a thing that is easily
affirmed, but was never yet sufficiently proved. For if it be said he gathered
it from the Prophecy of Samuel, so might the Witch have done without any
assistance of a Devil. 7. And if he take it to be Samuels Soul (as he seems to
hold) how come departed Souls to know, and foresee what contingent effects are
to fall out here below? Where reads he or finds any such Divinity except in
Popish Authors? But he may consult the Text: Doubtless thou art our Father,
though Abraham be ignorant Isa. 63. 16.
of us, and Israel acknowledge us not.

2. That this Woman was a mere dissembling and lying cheater, and used nothing
but Imposture, is manifest from these reasons. 1. Because that she was but of
the same Crew and Stamp that Manasseh, and Ahab set up, is most plain, but they
were mere Impostors and deceivers pretending to divine for other persons, and
in other matters, but could not foresee their own destruction, and therefore in
probability she was of the same practice. 2. Because she falsely feigned that
she knew not Saul, of whom she could not be ignorant, he being so publicly
known, and seen, and was taller by 1 Samuel 9. (...). and 10. 23.
the head and shoulders than any man in Israel. 3. If she had not known that it
had been Saul, when he came to her at the first, she would never have relied
upon his oath when he swore by Jehovah, for there was none but the King that
could protect her from destruction. 4. She must needs be a most notorious
dissembling cheater, because she pretended to call up any, for she said: whom
shall I bring up unto thee? which is most certainly false, she had no such
universal power, no nor all the Devils in Hell, if they had all assisted her.
5. She did plainly dissemble, for the Text says, and when the woman saw Samuel
she cried out with a loud voice; now if she saw Samuel (whom she could not but
know) why did she answer to Saul, when he asked, what saw thou? She
answered, I saw gods ascending out of the earth. Let Mr. Glanvil, and all men
judge if this be not gross and palpable lying, Gods is plural, but Samuel was
but one.

3. As it is manifest that this Woman was an active deceiver, and one that
intended to cheat and cousen, so it is as plain that Saul was in a condition
fit to be deluded, and imposed upon, even by those that had been less cunning
and skilful than she was in the craft of cheating, which is apparent from these
reasons. 1. The Spirit of the Lord was departed from him, and consequently,
Wisdom, Prudence and Discretion, and so that which should have guided his Will,
Affections and Actions in the right way, had totally left him. And when these
are gone, what is man, but a fit instrument to undergo and suffer even the
worst and lowest of delusions and abuses? 2. The Spirit of the Lord had not
only left him, but an evil Spirit from the Lord was come upon him that vexed
and 1 Samuel 16. 14.
terrified him. And to what madness, folly and wickedness is not he subject to,
who is led by the Spirit of lies and darkness? 3. The Lord had openly declared,
that because he had rejected the word of the Lord, therefore the Lord had
rejected him from being King over Israel, and that the Kingdom should be rent
from him, and given to one more worthy than him. Now what despondency of 1 Samuel
15. 23, 27.
mind, what torture and vexation of Spirit must needs be in him, that having
been a King, is thus threatened to have his Kingdom rent from him and given to
another, is easy to be imagined. 4. He must needs be under a most fearful
consternation of mind not only because of these things named, but especially
having before in his dangers and straights received counsel and advice from the
Lord, though he now inquired of the Lord, yet the Lord answered him 1 Samuel 28.
6.
neither by dreams, nor by Urim, nor by Prophets. The Lord answered him not by
dreams; for the union and converse that had been betwixt him and the Lord
before, was now broken by reason of his Sins and Rebellion. Neither did the
Lord answer him by Urim, for the Urim was not in the possession then of Saul,
but of David, Chap. 23. 6, 9. Neither did the Lord answer him by Prophets, for
Samuel had left him, after his last denouncing judgment against him, and came
no more at him until his death. 5. He must needs be in a most fearful case, and
a fit subject for the most weak and simple Imposture of the World, because the
Philistines were upon him with a potent and numerous Army, and he able to
gather but few and weak forces, the best and most of the people being revolted
from him, and were in their affections, or persons with and for David. And from
hence may easily be collected, how facile a thing it was to delude, and deceive
Saul, even by those that had far less craft than this Woman, who doubtless was
devilish cunning in her couzening tricks.

4. There is much question who was the Penman of this first Book of Samuel, but
whosoever it was (for we cannot determine it) it cannot be rationally supposed
that he had the Story of this transaction betwixt Saul and the Woman from
Divine Revelation, for then doubtless it would not have been left so ambiguous
and doubtful, but the whole truth, both of the matter, manner and
circumstances, would in all probability have been fully set down: and have been
declared whether it were a miracle wrought by God, a delusive apparition of
Satan, the Soul of Samuel, or the Imposture of the Woman, the certainty of
which had been mainly profitable and expedient for the people of God and his
Church to have known. And if the Penman had it from the relation of Saul or
either or both of his Servants, then it must needs have been according to their
deluded imaginations and their deceived apprehensions, as is most rational to
believe that it was; or if he had it from the Woman, or those of her family,
(which is not rationally probable) then it is sure to have been represented for
the most advantage, and credit of the Woman's skill and cunning. But the most
learned persons do judge it to be related, merely according to the deceived
opinion and apprehension of Saul.

5. But to come more near the stress of the business, though Mr. Glanvil
confidently say, that Mr. Scots Tenent, that the Woman Consid. about
Witchcrast, p. 86.
was in one room and Saul in another, when the feat was acted, is but a pretty
knack and contrivance, and but an invention without ground, and not as much as
intimated in the History: Yet we must soberly averr, that nothing is more plain
in the Text, than either that they were in diverse rooms, or that Saul saw
nothing at all, but what he had was from her relation, or the acting of a
confederate, and this we shall prove by these undeniable reasons. 1. After Saul
had pacified the pretended fears of the Woman, who falsely counterfeited that
she knew not Saul, who was taller by the head and shoulders than any man in
Israel, the next thing we hear of in the Text is, and when the Woman saw
Samuel: Now if they were both in the same room, and Samuel a visible object,
how comes it to pass that Saul saw him not? for if they were both in one room,
and Samuel visible, how is it that he did not or could not see him? were his
corporal eyes as blind, as the eyes of his understanding? surely not. What
fiction or invention must salve this? surely Mr. Glanvil must pump to find it
out. 2. The next thing is, that when the Woman saw (for blind Saul saw nothing)
Samuel, she cried with a loud voice, magna voce, or (as the Hebrew has it) in
magn^ voce. And (I pray you) if they had been both in one room, or near
together, what need she to have cried with a great voice, might not an ordinary
tone have made him to have heard her? What was he deaf as well as blind? Or it
might be it was the more to amuse and amaze the wretched and deluded King, or
to show the wonderfulness of the apparition she feigned that astonishment, the
more to magnify her skill and cunning. Well, admit these were so, yet however
it is manifest, notwithstanding her great voice, that as yet Saul saw nothing,
but stood waiting like a drowned Puppet to hear what would be the issue, for
all he understood was from her cunning and lying relation. And so either thus
far it is manifest that they were in distinct rooms, or there was nothing that
he could see. 3. The next thing is, he says, be not afraid, what saw thou?
that is, though I be Saul, yet be not afraid, I have sworn, and thou shall
receive no harm, but what saw thou? As who should say, I see nothing as yet
at all, but I suppose thou have seen something; for otherwise his question does
not agree with the words the Woman spoke before. But however it is manifest
that as yet he saw nothing, and therefore rationally it must be supposed that
they were in distinct rooms, or that there was nothing visible, that he could
see. Further, his question is not in the present tense but of the time past,
what saw thou? or what have thou seen? which could not be congruously
spoken, if they had been both in one room, but however do undeniably conclude
that as yet he saw nothing at all. 4. The next is the Woman's lying and forged
answer, thereby to magnify her own craft, and the more to amuse and astonish
poor deluded Saul, saying; Behold I saw gods ascending out of the earth. Well,
it is still apparent that as Saul could not before see Samuel, now he neither
sees these Gods she tells him of, nor any such thing: So that all that he
apprehended was from her forged Stories, for he saw nothing as yet, either
because he was not in the same room with her, or that there was no visible
apparition. 5. Then he makes another absurd question, like a distracted Man in
the house of Bethlem, saying, what form is he of? when his question should have
been, what forms are they of? for she spoke of Gods which are plural, and more
than one, but he asks in the singular, what form is he of. By all which it is
manifest, that he yet saw nothing at all. For when we plainly see a thing, we
do not usually ask others what form it is of, because our eyes can inform us of
that. So that he saw nothing, either because he was not in the same room, or
that there appeared nothing that was visible. 6. Now after all these ambigous
lies, and delatory cheats, the crafty queen does begin to come more near, to
give satisfaction to the blinded expectation of Saul, who all this while stood
gaping to see the appearance of Samuel, and so she tells him (who was fit to
believe any thing, though never so absurd, or impossible) behold an old man
comes up, and he is covered with a mantle. In the beginning of the action, the
Text says, and when the woman saw Samuel, she cried out, then she said, she
saw gods ascending out of the earth, and now after all this discourse and
expense of time Samuel is but coming up, all was lies and delays the more to
blind and delude the poor credulous King. But yet thus far it is plain that
Saul saw nothing at all, and so must needs all this while, either be in another
room, or else for certain there was no apparition visible, and all the
satisfaction that he had, was from the lying stories the Woman told him. Now
let Mr. Glanvil consider and answer, whether it be not only intimated, but
clearly holden forth in the Text that either they were in two distinct rooms,
or that nothing visible did appear before Saul. 7. Now after all this the Text
says, and Saul perceived that it was Samuel, the Hebrew word does signify to
know or to perceive, and relates to the understanding: but how did he know, or
perceive that it was Samuel? not by the sight of his eyes, for we have made it
plain that he was either in another room, or that no visible apparition
presented it self before his eyes, but he only perceived it by the description
of the crafty Woman, who knew well enough what habit or garments Samuel wore in
his life time, as one that was the most publicly known Man in Israel: and
therefore the subtle and crafty queen, knowing that Saul only required Samuel
to be brought up and no other, does at the last frame her tale agreeable to
Saul's desire, and so describes him an old Man, covered with a mantle, and such
an one Saul had known him to be, while he was living. But if Saul had seen any
such thing as the shape or form of Samuel, then the Hebrew Verb thrice used in
that action, that properly signifies to see with the eyes, would have been
used in this place (as well as when it relates what she saw) and not the verb
for knowing or perceiving that relates to the mind, and Samuel he saw not, but
only believed the lies she told him. For otherwise it would have been, And Saul
saw Samuel, and not, Saul perceived that it was Samuel, which he could not do
but only by her relation, and forged tales. 8. The last thing in this action,
is, that Saul stooped with his face to the ground, and bowed himself: now to
what did he stoop and bow, seeing he had seen nothing with his own eyes,
neither knew any thing that appeared, but as the Woman told him? Could it be to
any thing but to an imaginary Samuel and such an one as she had described, whom
he conceited in his Fantasy to be Samuel himself? Surely in rational
consequence it could be nothing else. For all that she had done and said
before, being undeniably lies and cheats, this also in just and right reason,
must be judged to be so also. So that it was either the Woman, that being in
another room, did change and alter her voice, and so played the part of Samuel,
or else that she had a confederate knave, whom she turned out to act the part
of dead Samuel.

6. The last thing that we shall handle concerning this controverted subject,
is the examination of the grounds and reasons of those that are of a different
judgment, which may be comprised in these three several heads. 1. Some do
conceive that it was the Body of Samuel that was raised up, and acted by his
soul or by Satan. 2. Some hold that it was Samuels Soul that appeared in the
shape and habit, that he had living. 3. Others do positively affirm that it was
the Devil that assumed the shape of Samuel, and so acted the whole business, by
a compact betwixt him and the Woman. These we shall confute in order.

1. That it was not the Body of Samuel that was raised up, nor the Soul joined
with it, that acted Samuels part, is manifest from these reasons. 1. Because
Samuels Body had lain too long in the grave, for some account it near two
years, and therefore must needs in a great part be corrupted, wasted and
disfigured, that none could have certainly known that it was Samuel. 2. It must
have been so putrified and stinking, that none could have endured near it, for
the noisome and horrible smell. 3. Who should have covered it with the mantle,
which had it been buried with him, must in so long a time, have been rotten and
consumed? Surely there were no Tailors in the Grave, to make him a new one, but
(in reason and likelihood) if it had been his Body, it should have appeared in
Linen, or a winding sheet, if that had not been rotten likewise. 4. To raise a
Body, so long dead, must needs have required an omnipotent power, for it is the
Almighty power of Christ alone, that Philipp. 3. 21.
raises up the vile Bodies of his Saints, and makes them like his glorious
Body. And therefore neither the woman with all her Divinations, nor all the
Devils in Hell, nor any created power, but the Lord Almighty, could have
wrought this miracle, who would never have done it, to gratify the humor, or
to magnify the cheating craft of an idolatrous, wicked and couzening Witch.
And if the Devil or any created power could raise up the Body of Matthew. 27. 52,
53.
a departed Saint, then the rising out of the Graves of many Bodies of Saints,
that had slept, and their coming into the holy City, and appearing unto many,
after Christ was risen from the dead, had been no certain, or convincing
argument, of the undoubted truth of the Divinity and Resurrection of our most
Blessed Savior. But they were most infallible evidences of them both, as says
the Father S. Hierome in these words, Sic multa corpora sanctorum
resurrexerunt, Caten. Aur. Tho. Aquin. in Matthew. 27.
ut dominum ostenderent resurgentem, and tamen cum monumenta aperta sunt, non
ante resurrexerumt quam resurgeret dominus, ut esset primogenitus
resurrectionis a mortuis. 5. That it was not Samuels Soul joined with the Body,
that acted this, we thus argue: That Tenent that is flatly contrary to the
plain Doctrine of the Scripture, must needs be false. But this tenent of
Samuels Soul acting in the Body after death, is flatly contrary to the plain
Doctrine of the Scripture, ergo it is false. The major (we suppose) no Oxthodox
Christian can justly deny; and the minor is proved thus. The Scripture does
assure us, that those that die in the Lord (as without all Revel. 14. 13.
doubt Samuel did) are blessed, and rest from their labors. Therefore must
this Tenent be abominably false: for if the Soul of Samuel, after his death had
been brought again to act in the Body, then he had not rested from his labors,
but had been disquieted, and brought to new trouble, to have been vexed to have
seen Saul committing more wickedness than before, in taking counsel from a
cursed Idolatrous Woman, such as the Lord had commanded to be destroyed. And
there is no one point in all this transaction of Saul with the Witch, that
speaks her Imposture more apparently than where this counterfeit Samuel
says, Why have thou disquieted me? As though the Saints of God after death
could be disquieted by a Devil, or a Witch, who (according to Gods infallible
truth) are blessed, and rest from their labors, and are in the hands of the
Lord, where no Torments can touch them. And therefore none would have spoken
those lying words, but a devilish cheating queen, or a damnable suborned
confederate.

6. If Samuels Soul was again joined to his body so long after separation, and
so performed vital actions, who was the author of this conjunction or union?
could the Witch or the Devil or any created power effect that union? Surely
not, none but the almighty power of Jehovah, who breathed into Adam the breath
of life. And therefore we are bold to assert (with all the company of learned
Christians) that this opinion is erroneous, impious and blasphemous.

2. The second opinion, that it was Samuels Soul that appeared in his wonted
shape and habit, that he wore while he lived, has been strenuously maintained
by the Popish party, and as strongly confuted by the reformed Divines. But we
shall not trouble our selves and our readers with them all, but only urge two
or three that are most cogent, thereby to answer Mr. Glanvils fopperies, and
they are these. 1. If it were Samuels Soul that appeared, it cannot be supposed
to come contrary, or whether God would or not, for hardly any rational Man (we
believe) will affirm that, because God does whatsoever he will, both in Heaven
and Earth, and who has resisted his will? 2. And it cannot be rationally
thought that Samuel, who whilst he lived, was so punctually careful to do
nothing (especially in his prophetic office) but what he was commanded of God,
would after his death run an errand without his consent or license. 3. And that
his Soul did not come by the command of God is most certain: Though Mr. Glanvil
ask the question, who says that happy departed Souls were never employed in
any ministeries here below? To which (though we have answered it before) we now
again reply, that all learned Divines of the reformed Churches have said, and
maintained it, and so do we both say and affirm, that they never were nor are
employed in ministeries here below, because never created, nor ordained of God,
for any such end or purpose, but there are legions of Angels, that are ordained
to be ministering Spirits, and not the Souls of the Saints departed this life.
But Mr. Glanvil goes further, and says, that Samuel was not raised by the
power of the Witches enchantments, but came on that occasion on a Divine
errand. And though we have before unanswerably proved in the general, that no
Souls of those that are dead do after death appear, or wander here below, nor
come such sleveless errands, as he supposes: yet we shall add one or two here
in particular, to prove that Samuels Soul came not on a Divine errand as sent
by God, without which mission it could not have come at all. 4. For fourthly,
if Mr. Glanvil had proved by any argument, or color of reason, that his Soul
had come upon such a Divine errand it had been something, but he has only laid
down an affirmation, without either proof, reason or authority, and we may with
as good reason deny it, as he affirm it, for bare affirmations prove nothing at
all. 5. It is manifest that God in all his ordinances of providence, especially
in the order of his miracles, does work chiefly to confirm and witness truth,
for that (as the worthy and learned Stillingsleet has observed) is the most
proper criterium of a miracle; and to send a Soul from the dead must needs be
miraculous. Now if the chief end in Gods working of miracles (for none else but
he can work them) be to establish truth, and settle his own Divine and pure
worship, then it cannot be to uphold lies and Idolatrous courses. But if God
should have sent Samuels Soul on a Divine errand, when the Witch was practicing
her Diabolical Divinations and cheating tricks, it had been to have
countenanced and confirmed both Saul, and the Witch, in their wicked ways, and
to have contradicted his own law and command, which did positively order, that
all that used Divinations should be put to death, and all those that sought for
counsel from them to be severely punished. Now let Mr. Glanvil, or any other
prove, that God orders that to be done by the dead, which he forbad to be done
by the living. 6. If it had been the true Samuel that appeared, it is not
rational, nor credible to imagine, that he would neither rebuke Saul for
consulting with a Woman that practiced those things, that were forbidden by the
law upon pain of death; nor that he would either reprove, or punish so wicked a
Woman, finding her in the very act. We say it is not credible, unless we
suppose Samuel less zealous for the law and commands of God, being dead, than
he was for them being living. Surely he that living hewed Agag in pieces, only
because God had commanded 1 Samuel 15. 33.
he should be slain, would (if it had been the true Samuel, which without all
question it was not) have done as much or worse, to the cursed and Idolatrous
cheating Witch, though after his death, if he had come upon a Divine errand. 7.
God should have showed himself very mutable, if he had answered Saul in a
miraculous way by a dead Prophet, that had refused to answer him by one living.
And Samuel while living knew certainly that the Lord had rejected Saul from
being King over Israel, and had testified unto him, that the strength of Israel
would not lie, and that he was not like a man Verse 29.
that he should repent. But if it had been the true Samuel that had been sent
to speak to Saul, he knowing both by his own knowledge and relation of Saul
himself, that God had refused to answer him by Prophets, must in that
conference both have made God a liar, and mutable, and also himself, who living
had testified the contrary, and therefore it could not be either the true
Samuel nor his Soul. 8. It is manifest that the Lord had before withdrawn his
good Spirit from Saul, and an evil one from the Lord was come upon him, and
therefore it was no way probable, that the Lord would in a miraculous manner
answer such a wicked person, whom he had utterly rejected as a reprobate.
Neither is it like that God would show him an extraordinary favor by a dead
Prophet, that would not vouchsafe him his Spirit in an ordinary way. And Samuel
that came not at him for a long time (though but a little distance asunder)
while he lived, was not like to make so long a journey in a Divine errand to
visit him after his death. 9. And if Abraham at the request of the rich Man
would not send Lazarus to warn his brethren, lest they should come into that
place of torment, which bore with it a fair show both of Charity and Piety;
much less would God give way (or Samuel be desirous to come) to send a blessed
Soul from its rest for such a frivolous matter, and in no wise to connive at
the wickedness of both Saul and the Witch, and never move either of them to the
amendment of their lives. 10. Where does Mr. Glanvil find it mentioned in any
part of Scripture? or where is it recorded in the writings of any reformed or
Orthodoxal Divines? or where in any of their works is it declared, that ever
any blessed Soul after death, was either sent, or did come upon a Divine errand
to any here below? Is it not monstrous confidence (not to say impudence) to
utter such groundless assertions, without any proof, reason, or authority at
all? Let all learned and judicious persons consider and judge.

3. That the Devil assumed the shape of Samuel, and acted the whole business,
is the opinion of all, or the most of the learned Divines of the reformed
Churches, of whom we shall crave pardon, if we dissent from them, it being no
fundamental of Religion, nor any Article of the Faith. And this we profess is
not done out of the spirit of contradiction, nor for singularity, but only
because (as we conceive) the Tenent has no sufficient grounds neither from
Scripture nor sound reason, to support it, and therefore we shall labor its
confutation, by these ensuing arguments.

1. Because this opinion, that the Devil should perform this apparition, does
beg two suppositions, never yet sufficiently proved, and that have in them no
certain truth. For first they take for an Hypothesis, that Devils are merely
and simply incorporeal Spirits, which we shall prove hereafter to be false.
Secondly they take for another Hypothesis, that Spirits and Devils can assume
what bodies they please, and appear in any figure or shape, which is a mere
figment invented by the doting Schoolmen, as we shall sufficiently make good
hereafter.

2. We are not of their opinion, that think, that the Devils do move, and rove
up and down in this elementary world at their pleasure, to act what they list,
and appear when, how and in what shapes they please, for then the World would
be full of nothing almost but apparitions, and every corner replenished with
their ludicrous tricks, as formerly in the times of blind Popery and ignorance,
there was no discourse almost, but of Fairies, Hobgoblins, apparitions,
Spirits, Devils and Souls, ranting in every house, and playing feats in every
Town and Village, when it was nothing but the superstitious credulity, and
ignorant fancies of the people, joined with the Impostures of the Priests and
Monks. And if this were true, then how should Men know a true natural substance
or body, from these fictitious apparitions? Nay how could a Man have known his
Father or Mother, his Brethren or Sisters, his Kinsmen or Neighbors? might
they not as well have believed them to be Phantasms, and assumed bodies, as
real and true creatures?

3. But though fallen Angels in respect of their malice, wicked wills, and
envious desires whereby they seek (as much as in them lies) the ruin of all
mankind both in Soul and Body, may in that particular end and regard, be said
to be like roaring Lions going about and seeking whom they may devour, and
compassing the earth and walking to and fro in it: yet we must affirm that in
respect of executing their wicked, envious and malicious wills and desires,
they are restrained, nay kept in the chains of everlasting darkness, from which
fetters and chains they go not out, but when and so far as they are sent,
ordered, licensed (or as some would have it worded) permitted, by the purpose
and decree of the Divine and Almighties providence. So that it is most certain,
that the fallen Spirits cannot go forth of their chains, when they list, to act
what mischief they would, contrary to the will of the Almighty, who has
fettered, and still keeps them in those chains: but when they are at any time
let loose, it is only by the will, decree, license and order of Jehovah, who
sends them forth to accomplish his will, either for punishment to the wicked to
inflict upon them his just judgments, for which they are the appointed
ministers and executioners, and in the performance of these offices of his
wrath, they are limited and bounded how far they shall proceed, and no further;
or else they are sent forth to tempt, or afflict the godly for the trial of
their faith, and herein they are so restrained and bounded by the power of the
Almighty as they cannot act one jot beyond the limit of his commands or
Commissions, as is manifest in the case of David, who was tempted by Satan to
number the people, and in the affliction of Job, wherein he was bounded how far
he should act, and no further. And when the evil Angels are thus sent forth,
and limited by God, what, and how far they shall act, it is always for just and
righteous ends, as in the case of Ahab, when a lying Spirit was sent by God
into the mouths of his Prophets, that he might be persuaded to go up to Ramath
Gilead that he might be slain there, or as it was for a judgment and 1 Kings 22.
destruction upon Sennacheribs Army, that Jerusalem might be saved and freed,
and he sent back with shame and confusion into his own Isa. 37.
country, or it is to manifest his glory, goodness and mercy to his Saints, so
David was moved to number the people, that falling under that temptation, and
he and the people therefore plagued, might be brought to a greater degree of
repentance, and to know that their defense stood not in the multitude of men,
but in the benignity of Jehovah, who was their strength and their defender, and
so Job was so sore afflicted, that his Faith and Patience might be made
manifest, and remain for an example to all succeeding posterities. But it is
utterly irrational and incredible that God would send the Devil (without whose
mission he could not have done it) to appear in the shape of Samuel, either to
magnify the skill, or practice of a lewd, wicked, and Idolatrous Woman, which
thing he had forbidden by his plain and open law, nor to gratify the curiosity
of a wretched Reprobate, such as was Saul, whom he had denied to answer by
living Prophets, and therefore would not answer him by the apparition of a
Devil, to have committed a counterfeit Imposture, in the shape of holy Samuel.
And therefore we conclude, that it was no apparition of the Devil, but merely
the Imposture of the Woman, either alone, or with a Confederate.

There is also a fourth opinion concerning the transaction of this Woman of
Endor, that holds, that it was neither the Body, or Soul of Samuel that was
raised up, neither the Devil that appeared in his shape, nor that it was the
Imposture of the Witch alone, or with a Confederate, but that it was the
Sydereal, or Astral Spirit (as they are pleased to term it) of Samuel that was
made to appear, and speak by the art and skill of the Woman. But because this
Tenent is not of much Antiquity, nor has many assertors of it, as also because
it takes that for an Hypothesis, to wit, that there are three parts in Man,
the Body, Soul, and Spirit; and that the Soul goes immediately after death
either to Heaven or Hell, the Body to the grave, and that the Spirit does for a
certain time after death wander in the air, and may be (by a certain kind of
art) brought to appear visibly, and to give answers of all things that it knew
living, which as yet has never been sufficiently proved, therefore we shall
pass it over here, having (perhaps) occasion to speak of it more largely
hereafter.

We shall now come to mention some places in the New Testament that are
produced by some, thereby to prove the great power of Devils and Witches in
transferring and carrying bodies in the air, as is that of our Saviors
temptation, where it is said that the Devil took him into an exceeding high
Mountain, and that he set him upon the pinnacle of the Temple in Jerusalem,
from whence they thus argue: That if the Devil had power to carry our most
blessed Savior in the air into an high mountain, and to set him upon the
pinnacle of the Temple, that much more has he power to carry the bodies of
Witches who are his sworn vassals in the air, whither he pleases, or they
desire. To annul the force of which objection we give these reasons.

1. If it were granted that the Devil did transport our Savior in the air, yet
it will not follow that he can at any time when he Reas. (...)
pleases carry the Bodies of Men or Women so likewise, for no particular
proposition will, according to the rules of art, infer a general or universal
conclusion, nor one example or instance inductively prove a general practice;
one Swallow does not make a Summer. For though once when our blessed Savior
was baptized, the Holy Ghost did descend like a Dove, and light upon him, it
will not follow, that in all other of his actions of preaching, or working of
miracles, the holy Spirit should appear also in the form Matthew. 3. 16. Luke 3.
22. Judge. 15. 15.
of a Dove, nor when other Saints are Baptized will it follow that it does, or
should always appear in the same form. And though Samson did once slay a
thousand of the Philistines with the jawbone of an A^s, it does not follow,
that either he did so in like manner in every battle, or that every Man may do
the like.

2. If it were granted that the Devil did carry Christ's Body in the Reas. 2.
air, it will not follow that he can do so at any other times, when he
pleases, because in the temptation of Christ there was an extraordinary
dispensation of God for the same, which cannot be presupposed in the ordinary
transportation of Witches, and therefore the argument falls quite to the ground.

3. In the actions of Satan (especially in elementary things, for Reas. 3.
we speak not of the acts of his will) the will, order and license of God is
chiefly to be considered, because his power (in respect of execution) is under
the power of the Almighty, so that he can do nothing in this respect but what
he is ordered and commanded to do. And therefore the end of the action is
principally to be regarded; for if God should have given way that Christ should
be carried by Satan in the air, it was for a glorious and good end, that the
obedience of his will to the Father might be shown, and that his victory over
the Devil might be made manifest: but in carrying the Bodies of Witches in the
air, there can be no good, just or pious end wherefore the Devil should be
licensed, or permitted to carry them in the air, except it were to promote
filthiness and abominable wickedness, which were absurd and blasphemous to
imagine. And therefore we may rationally and plainly conclude, that the
carrying of the Bodies of Witches in the air, by the power of the Devil, is a
false, wicked and impious opinion.

4. Some are of opinion that this whole transaction was visible, sensible and
corporeal, as Theophylact, and many others. Some are Reas. 4.
of opinion that it was wholly in a Vision. And some take a middle way that it
was partly sensible and visible, and partly mental, and by way of vision. Of
which opinion the great Cameron seems to be, who compares it with that of
Ezekiel who says: And the spirit lifted me up between the earth and the
heaven, and brought me Ezekiel. 8. 3.
in the visions of God to Jerusalem: And shows that the word (...), does
agree with the Hebrew word (...), which is as applicable to lifting up or
carrying in a vision, as to bodily transportation. And that it was either
altogether, or partly in a vision, the learned Beza gives us this note: Hoc
videtur satis ostendere haec omnia Beza in Luc. 4. 5.
per visionem quandam, non corporali transvectione and ostensione esse gesta,
quomodo nempe humanitus videre potuisset omnia regna orbis, and gloriam eorum
in momento? But though it be the more sound and rational opinion that the whole
transaction was mental, and in a vision, yet we shall not altogether stand upon
that, but if it be granted that it was corporeal and visible, yet it does not
appear that our Savior was in his Body carried by the power of the Devil in
the air, either to the top of an high mountain, nor set upon the pinnacle of
the Temple in Jerusalem, and that for these reasons. 1. Our Savior did not go
to undertake this combat with Satan unwillingly, that he need be constrained,
or carried to try the utmost power and malice of the Devil, but readily and
willingly by the conduct and leading of the holy Spirit, for the Text says in
Matthew; Matthew. 4. 1.
Then was Jesus led up of the spirit into the wilderness, to be tempted of the
Devil: And S. Mark says; And immediately the spirit drives Mark 1. 12.
him into the wilderness. And S. Luke says: He was led by the spirit into the
wilderness. Beza says, subductus fuit in desertum, Luke 4. 1.
and Tremellius says, ductus fuit, upon the place in S. Matthews Gospel. And
in S. Luke Tremellius says; Et duxit eum spiritus in desertum, and Beza, actus
est ab eodem spiritu in desertum. And in S. Mark Tremellius says, deduxit eum
spiritus in desertum, and Beza renders it, expellit eum spiritus in desertum.
And because of the Greek word which is there (...), he adds this note, Non
significatur expulsio violenta, sed vis divina, quae Christum, (qui ad illud
usque tempus ut privatus vixerat) nova persona induit, ac luctae proximae and
ministerio praeparatur. Therefore says Origin: Caten. Aur. Tho. Aquin. in Luke
4.
Sequebatur plane quasi athleta ad tontationem sponte proficiscens, and
quodammodo loquebatur: Duc quo vis, and invenies me in omnibus fortiorem. So
that it is most plain that he was no otherwise led or carried by Satan, but as
he was led by the Holy Ghost, so that he went whithersoever Satan would desire
him of his own mind and accord, and needed not to be carried by the Devil, for
S. Luke uses the same Greek word both for the Holy Spirit leading of him, and
Satan's leading of him, so that Satan did not carry his body in the air, as Men
vainly conceive. 2. Though S. Matthew use the word (...), which may signify
assumpsit, he took him, and set him upon a pinnacle of the Temple, and took him
into an high mountain; yet it cannot be understood thereby that he took him,
and carried his Body, but that he went before, and led Christ to those places,
that he thought most fit for him to prevail in his temptations, to which places
Christ went not by an unwilling constraint or hurried and carried in the air,
but by a ready willingness, as one that certainly knew, and was assured, that
he should win the Victory where ever, or how great soever the combat and
temptations were. And therefore S. Luke uses the same word from (...), duco,
both for the Spirits, and Satan's leading, as signifying no more, but to go
before, and lead the way, or to draw one to such or such a place by persuasion
and desire, and not to be carried in the air, which appears to be a vain and
forged interpretation, and not the true meaning of the places.

Concerning Simon Magus we have before in this Treatise sufficiently proved
that he was only a deceiver and Impostor, and what strange feats he had done to
astonish, and stupifie the Samaritanes, were only juggling knacks, or deceits by
confederacy, and no supernatural things, so that here we will say no more, but
only add: That though our English translation say that he bewitched the people
of Samaria with sorceries, and that he himself, when he beheld the miracles and
signs that were done, wondered; yet the word that they translate in the one
place bewitching, and in the other wondered, are both from one Thema which is
(...), de statu mentis dejicio, facio ut aliquis mente non constet,
perterrefacio, obstupefacio. Acts 8. 9.
And therefore either it ought to be that the Samaritanes were astonished at the
feats that Simon wrought, and that he himself was astonished at the miracles of
Philip, or that they were both bewitched, for they were both under the same
amazement, and there is no reason at all to give it one sense in one place, and
a different one in the other.

We need not here say any thing of Elymas who is styled a Magician, because it
is manifest that he was a false Prophet, full of all subtilty, and all
mischief, a Child of the Devil, and an enemy of all righteousness: Acts 13. 10.
which character truly given to him by the un-erring sentence of S. Paul, may
be really ascribed to the whole tribe and profession of such kind of seducers
and deceivers. Like unto whom were those seven Sons of Sceva a Jew, who are
called exorcists, that Acts 19. 13, 16.
took upon them to call over them that had evil spirits, the name of the Lord
Jesus, saying, We adjure you by Jesus, whom Paul preaches, but were soundly
beaten for their pains, a fit reward for such vagabonds; And if all that
profess or practice such wicked, vain and lying things were duly punished, the
poor ignorant people would not be so much abused as they are.

The other places in the New Testament we have handled, and answered, and also
have touched upon that Text in the Galathians where we spoke of Fascination,
but lest it be not sufficient, we shall handle it fully here. The words are, O
foolish Galathians, who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth?
From whence they use thus to argue: If Witchcraft in the Apostles time had not
been known, and practiced, he would not have made use of that Phrase then;
concerning which we return these responsions.

1. If we consider natural Fascination was by the Philosophers and Poets only
taken to be contagious steams flowing from the eyes, or breaths of malevolent
and envious persons, that had some infectious diseases, as we see in the
Plague, Smallpox, Lues Venerea, soreness of Eyes, Tinea's, and the like, which
are contagious to others that lie with them, or converse near them, the
infected atoms or steams issuing in a certain Sphere of activity, are received
by the pores, or mouths of the sound persons, by which they come to be infected
also. And this the Poet witnessed: Nescio quis teneros oculus mihi fascinat
agnos. Now this being the common opinion, the Apostle takes the metaphor from
thence, as who should say, who with their virulent and poisonous opinions have
infected you, that you should not obey the truth. And this is the genuine
meaning of that metaphorical phrase, and no other sense can rationally and
congruously be put upon the place, and this conduces nothing to that opinion
of Witchcraft that we oppose. For Philosophica Delrio. l. 3. q. 4. sect. 1.
Concl. 2.
seu Physica fascinatio non nisi improprie dici potest ^scinatio, proprie vero
est contagio, seu infectio. And therefore did the learned Vallesius to the same
purpose speak this. Sed neque si quis pestilenti affectus febri, aut etiam sine
febre deferens secum seminaria pestis alium intuens intuentem inficiat, dicetur
fascinasse, sed peste affecisse.

2. Some of the fathers (which may be offered for an objection) do seem to hold
that S. Paul here meant of diabolical fascination, and so Tertullian in English
thus: For there is also something amongst Vid. Jo. La: ^ar. Guttier. de fascino.
the Gentiles to be feared, which they call fascination, being a more
unfortunate event of praise, and great glory: this we sometimes interpret of
the Devil. And S. Hierome says upon this place: Fascination is when some
things by Magical illusions are showed to the eyes of Men, otherwise than they
are. Also Fascination is vulgarly called that, which does hurt Children, for
the eyes of certain persons are said to burn with looking, and this act of
theirs is called Fascination, and it may be that the Devils are subservient to
this Sin. And Thomas Aquinas says: And this also may be done by Devils, who
have power of moving false imaginations, and bringing them to the principles of
the Senses, by changing the Senses themselves. From whence we may note these
things. 1. That Tertullian says that they sometimes interpret this of the
Devil, but how truly or upon what grounds he shows not, and it seems that
sometimes they did interpret it of something else, for so his words must needs
imply. 2. Secondly, S. Hierome sometime calls fascination Magical illusions,
and sometime that which does hurt Children, by the burning of some eyes; and
then comes in with a may be that the Devils are subservient to this sin. So
that he is not certain in his opinion, nor truly knows what fascination is, but
according to vulgar opinion, or blind conjectures. 3. And all that the
Angelical Doctor says, does but amount to the delusion of the Senses, by false
imaginations, so that here is no proof either of the Devil, or his instruments,
to cause any real fascination.

3. Those that hold that Paul did allude unto natural, or diabolick
fascination, do but mean magical illusions, whereby the senses Vid. Guttier.
passim.
are abused and deceived, to take things to be that which really they are not,
and so are but cheating Incantations and delusory Juglings, for as Galen (if
that piece be truly his) says: Incantationes Galen. de Incantat.
verba sunt decipientia rationales animas secundum spei inceptionem, aut
secundum timoris incisionem. So that though S. Paul had taken the metaphor from
that which was commonly accounted fascination, there is no necessity, that
therefore the metaphor must in all points be true: it is sufficient that the
common opinion was so, from whose usage of such terms the Apostle uses the
word, to fascinate, or inchant. And of this opinion was S. Hierome himself who
says thus much: Digne Paulum, qui etsi imperitus est sermon non tamen and
scientia, debemus exponere non quod scierit esse fascinum, qui vulgo putatur
nocere, sed usus sermon sit trivii, and ut in caetero, ita and in hoc quoque
loco verbum quotidianae sermocinationis assumpserit. So that from hence it is
most evident, that the using of the word fascination by the Apostle, does not
infer the being of the thing, but only the opinion of the vulgar, that
believed things that were not. And of the same judgment is Thomas Aquinas in
these words: Proprie dicit Apostolus, quis vos fascinavit? quasi dicat, vos
estis sicut homo ludificatus qui res manifestas aliter accipit quam sint in rei
veritate. Therefore we shall conclude this point with the sentiment of S.
Hierome: Nunc illud in causa est, quod ex opinione vulgi sumptum putamus
exemplum, ut quomodo tenera aetas noceri dicitur fascino, sic etiam Galatae in
Christi fide nupernati, and nutriti lacte, and solido cibo velut quodam
fascinante sunt nociti.

4. But howsoever fascination might be understood, yet it is plain, that except
the Effluvia or steams of Bodies that had contagious diseases, entering into
other sound Bodies, and thereby infecting them with their noisome vapors, or
Atoms, there is nothing, but what was vain belief and credulous superstition,
as the learned Vallesius tells us in these words, thus rendered in English: But
if this be the way or reason of fascination, any one may easily Vid. Valles. de
sacr. Philosoph.
understand, that fascination is a certain superstitious fear, arising from
foolish credulity, of which sort are many other things in the life of Man, as
for argument, that this opinion is more approved of by Women than by Men, and
far more of the unlearned than of the learned. Although (he says) I also see
that there are those amongst the learned that are rather lovers of subtilty
than verity, who take care to defend those things that the vulgar do admire. By
which they would be accounted judicious magical Juglers, and Men skilful of
secrets. And therefore he thus concludes: Therefore the name of fascination is
ancient, and according to the ancient signification, it does not signify any
natural disease, but a vain superstition, arising from vulgar opinion, and
therefore neither Hippocrates, nor Galen, nor any of the ancient Physicians,
Galen l. 8. de compos. medic.
that I know of do mention fascination, neither amongst the differences nor
causes of Diseases. From whence again is taken no small argument of its vanity.
Therefore we shall conclude this point with that remarkable saying of Galen.
Falsae etenim opiniones animas hominum praeoccupantes, non solum surdos, sed
and caecos faciunt, ita ut videre nequeant, quae aliis conspicua apparent.

5. The Angelical Doctor with the consent of the most part of all the learned
do affirm that the Devil by his own power cannot change corporeal matter,
unless he apply proportionate actives to fit passives, to produce those effects
he intends; As for instance, he can cause burning, because there is a
combustive agent in nature; but if that were awanting, or if there were no
combustible matter, how should he cause any ignition? But if he be supposed to
work diabolical fascination, for which there is no agent in nature, it being
but an imaginary thing in the heads of the deluded vulgar* then it will
necessarily follow, that he can work no fascination at all, and so the whole
opinion of the Witchmongers falls to the ground. For it is manifest that there
is contagion, by the infected Effluvia or steams issuing from a diseased Body
to another by which it may be contaminated, but otherwise there is no natural
fascination, nor any agent in nature to produce that effect, and therefore
there can be no Diabolical fascination at all.

CHAP. IX.
Of Divine permission, providence and prescience.

THere is no one thing that has more promoted this false and wicked Tenent of
a kind of omnipotency in Devils, and the exorbitant power ascribed to Witches,
than the misunderstanding of the true and right Doctrine of Divine Providence,
and the admitting of a bare permission in God as different and distinct from
his providence. From whence it comes to pass that not only the vulgar, but
such as tread in the steps of Arminius, do hold a mere bare permission, and
that God sits as a quiet beholder by his Prescience from the event of things to
see what will be effected by Devils and wicked Men, who in the mean time run
and rove about, acting what, when and how they please, and that God has
neither hook in their nostrils, nor bridle in their mouths, neither keeps them
in any restraint, order or government, and so we must needs have a mad rule in
this World, during this permission and naked inspection.

But that we may proceed in such order, as may be clear and intelligible to the
Readers, we shall here propose the state of the matter that we undertake to
confute, which is this: That there is not in God a nude, passive permission,
separate from the positive and active decree, order and will of his Divine
Providence and Government, but that he does rule all things according to the
power and determination of his own positive and actual will. And this we shall
prosecute in this following order and particulars.

Those that deny that there is in God a passive permission separate from his
decretive and actual will in his providence are accused by others, thereby to
infer the absurdity, that God is the author or efficient cause of sin; which
pretended absurdity, in truth and reason cannot be any, because it is a simple
and absolute impossibility, that God should be the author of sin as these
arguments do sufficiently testify.

1. That of necessity must be false, which the Scriptures do declare Argum. 1.
to be so, in open and plain terms. But that God should be the author of sin or
evil, the Scriptures do deny in open and plain terms, as where the Text says:
God cannot be tempted with evil: James 1. 13.
where both the act, and the possibility of it is absolutely denied. Again: For
thou art not a God that have pleasure in wickedness, neither Psalm. 5. 4.
shall evil dwell with thee. Therefore it is false that God is, or can be the
author of sin; and so by consequence the supposed absurdity Deuteronomy. 32. 3.
is a mere impossibility; and an absurdity urged that is impossible, is most of
all absurd.

2. He is ens sum perfectum. and quicquid est in Deo, est Deus; Argum. 2.
but sin howsoever understood, or accepted, is an imperfection, defect and an
aberration from a just and perfect rule, and therefore it is simply impossible
that God can be the cause of any thing that is imperfect, sinful or evil, if
sin be considered as malum culpae.

3. God is not under any binding law given to him by some other, Argum. 3.
for then he should cease to be supreme, independent and omnipotent: Now to
whom there is no law given to observe, there can be no transgression, for the
Apostle says, where there is no law, there is no Romans 4. 15.
transgression; and therefore it is simply impossible that God should be the
author, or causer of sin, or evil, because there is no law that he can
transgress against.

4. God prohibiteth and hates sin, as the Scriptures do every Argum. 4.
where testify, but God is the cause of nothing but that which he loves, and
therefore cannot be the cause of the evil of sin. And to speak properly sin
has no efficient cause, but a deficient, such as is the will of fallen Angels,
and wicked Men, whose irregularity of will, from the command of God, is all the
cause that sin and evil has or can have. An efficient cause is only of those
things that are good, because every efficient cause does by working put
something in being: But privations (of which sort are sins) do put nothing in
being, but do truly note the absence of beings. Therefore did S. Augustine say
well: Mali causa efficiens nulla est, sed tantum deficiens. De Civitat. D^i, l.
2. c. 7.


5. That which properly has an efficient cause, has also an end Argum. 5.
properly so called: But sin has not an end properly so called, because the
end is being, and therefore good, and the perfection of the thing. But the
Scripture does declare that all things that God Genesis 1. 3.
created were exceeding good; and that the cause of sin was Man, and the Devil;
for the text says, that the Devil was a murderer from John 8. 44.
the beginning, and abode not in the truth: And again, He that commits sin,
is of the Devil, for the Devil sins from the beginning. 1 John 3. 8.
Therefore from hence it is clear, that God neither is nor can be the author or
causer of sin.

6. That which God is the author of, does not make Man worse, Argum. 4.
but sin does make Man worse, therefore God is not the author of it. And all
sin is perpetrated, because thereby it receeded from the Vid. Schar. d^ miser.
hom. stat* sub peccat^, c. 3*
order that respects God, as the ultimate end of all things; but God does
incline all things unto himself, as to the ultimate end, neither does he turn
them from himself, because he is summum bonum. And further as Fulgentius says:
Deus non est ejus rei author, Fulgent. lib. 1* ad Monim.
cujus est ultor. At Deus est peccati ultor, ergo non author. And therefore we
conclude, that this is a vain pretense of an absurdity, because it is
impossible that God should be the author or causer of sin.

This plausible pretense to seem to be zealous, not to make God the author of
sin, we commend as allowable; but it is but like the zeal of the Scribes and
Pharisees, which was without knowledge, because they pretend that for an
absurdity, that is a simple impossibility. And they ought to remember the
argument of Job, which is this: will ye speak wickedly for God? and talk
deceitfully for Job 13. 7.
him? For as we ought not to suppose, or imply him to be the author of sin; so
we ought not to rob him of his Glory, by detracting from his power and
providence, nor in ascribing that unto Creatures, that is only due unto the
Creator; as those do that hold a nude passive permission in him separate from
his will and decree in his providence. Neither does the denying of this any way
imply that he is the author of sin, for a providential permission we allow as
the act of his will and decree, as we shall show hereafter.

Now concerning permission in God, being a suspension of his efficiency in
regard of some acts permitted to the creatures, and that for just and good
ends, the definition of it and its affections or properties are so darkly
handled even by those that make most ado about it, that it would serve rather
to divert Men from the right way than to guide them in it, or unto it.
Therefore here we shall only note these three things, and pursue it more fully
hereafter. 1. There must be the person or power permitting that has ability,
right and authority so to do. 2. There must be the person or power permitted
that has ability to perform the thing permitted, otherwise it would be in
vain, and to no purpose. 3. There must be the thing or action that is permitted
to be done, or brought to pass, by the person permitted to act, and that must
not be impossible.

1. Before the Creation it is merely improper to attribute permission unto God,
because there was no person, nor power besides himself that could act any
thing, and therefore could not be permitted, and so the correlative being
awanting, both the relative and the relation betwixt them must necessarily fall
to the ground, as having no existence; and so it is impossible that permission
should be in God when there was no Creature to be permitted, and so could not
be attributed unto him before the Creation.

2. It is as improper to attribute permission unto God in respect of the
Physical agency of second causes, because he not only works all in all, and
by his Divine concourse and conservative power sustaineth all things by the
word of his power, and Job tells us: If Heb. 1. 3. Job 34. 14, 15.
he gather unto himself his spirit and breath, all flesh shall perish together,
and man shall turn again into dust. Upon which place of the Hebrews S.
Chrysostom says thus: Feratque inquit omnia, hoc est, gubernet omnia.
Siquidem cadentia, and ad nihilum tendentia continet. Vid. Chrysostom. in L^c.
Non enim minus est continere mundum quam fecisse: Sed si oportet aliquid quod
admireris dicere, adhuc amplius est. Nam in faciendo quidem, ex nullis
extantibus rerum essentiae productae sunt: in continendo vero, ea quae facta
sunt, ne ad nihilum redeant continentur. Haec ergo dum reguntur, and ad invicem
sibi repugnantia coaptantur, magnum and valde mirabile, plurimaeque virtutis
judicium declaratur: But also because he has set all natural things their
bounds, and ordered, decreed and determined their ends in acting. Now what he
has appointed, ordered and decreed to be the agency of every creature, and
determinated its end in acting, cannot properly be called permission, but his
will, ordination and providence. As if one should say he suffers and
permits the Sun and Moon to run their course, it is an improper expression
and injurious to his wisdom and power in his providential government of the
creatures, seeing that it is a certain truth, Deus operatur in omni operante:
And he has appointed the Moon for seasons, and the Sun knows his going down.
And it is absurd to say he suffers Psalm. 104. 19.
the Sea to Ebb and Flow, when he has set it a bound that it cannot passover.
For he commands, and raises the stormy wind, which lifts up the waves
thereof. And said, hitherto shall thou Verse 9. Psalm. 107. 25. Job 38. 11.
Jerem. 5. 22.
come and no further: And here shall thy proud waves be staid. And again, Will
ye not tremble at my presence says the Lord, which have placed the sand for
the bound of the sea, by a perpetual decree that it cannot pass it, and though
the waves thereof toss themselves, yet can they not prevail; though they roar,
yet can they not pass over it. And therefore we may conclude that the whole
Creation in respect of Physical agency is ruled according to those orders, and
not by a fortuitous chance, or a bare passive permission. 1. For first all
creatures have their Physical agency, and the affections and properties thereof
ordained by God in the Creation, and according to this they constantly act,
except they be turned, altered, or suspended by the Creator himself, and he
does immediately act in them all, and they cannot properly be said to be
permitted. 2. They are upholden, sustained and conserved in their several
conditions, by the word of his mighty power, his continual concourse and divine
emanation, which if it should but cease one minute, the whole Creation would
fall into that nothing, from whence his Eternal and Omnipotent Fiat did raise
and call them forth, so that we dare affirm with profound Bradwardine, Quod
necesse est Deum servare quamlibet Creaturam immediatius quacunque causa
creata. 3. When he pleases Dt Cause. D^i, l. 1. c. 2. p. 165.
he does suspend the effects and agency of natural causes, as in making the Sun
stand still in the victory of Joshua, and of the three Children in the fiery
Furnace. Sometimes he causes them to act contrary to their innate powers and
qualities, as in making the shadow go ten Isai. 38. 8.
degrees back in Ahaz sun-dial: and in causing the waters of the red sea,
contrary to their natures, which are to tend downwards, to Exodus 14. 21, 22, 23.
be divided, and to go backward, and to be as a wall on the right hand, and on
the left, until Moses, and the children of Israel were passed through. And by
many other ways and means does he alter Id. v. 17.
and change the course of natural agents, to serve his will and good pleasure
in his mercy, or in his justice, and yet here is no bare or passive permission.
4. Besides these he orders all the particular acts of natural agents, to be
subservient unto his will: So when Jonah fled to Tarshish, the Lord sent forth
a great wind into the sea, Jonah 1. 4.
and raised a mighty tempest to overtake Jonah; and when he was cast into the
Sea, the Lord prepared a great fish to swallow him up, Id. 2. 10.
and also the Lord spoke unto the fish, and it vomited up Jonah upon the dry
land. Now the wind was not carried nor the storm raised, by a permissive power,
but by the will and order of the Lord Jehovah, who sent them, and directed them
either by his immediate power, or by the ministry of his Angels; and though
they wrought according to their natural agency, yet the special ordering as to
the particular act was not by permission, but by the will and appointment of
his providence. Neither did the great fish come by chance or permission, but
God in his merciful providence had prepared him for the preservation of Jonah,
and caused him to be vomited Psalm. 119. 91.
on the dry land; so that all creatures do not only continue according to his
ordinances, but also all elementary, and irrational creatures do praise the
Lord by fulfilling his word, will and providence. And lest we be either
censured to wrest the Scriptures, or to be single in this opinion, take the
judgment of some few others. S. Gregory (as he is quoted by learned
Bradwardine) tells Greg. 16. ^or. 4.
us thus much: Quis de Deo ista vel desipiens suspicetur, qui nimirum dum sit
semper omnipotens, sic intendit omnibus, ut assit singulis; sic adest singulis,
ut simul omnibus nunquam desit; sic itaque exteriora circundat, ut interiora
impleat; sic interiora implet, ut exteriora circundet; sic summa regit, ut ima
non deserat; sic im^ praesens est, ut a superioribus non recedat. And Thomas
Aquinas their great Schoolman (as the same author cites him) says: Quod Thom.
de Christ: Religion. 133.
Deus immediate ordinat omnes effectus per seipsum, licet per causas medias
exequatur, sed in ipsa executione quodammodo immediate se habet ad omnes
effectus, in quantum omnes causae mediae agunt in virtute causae primae, ut
quodammodo ipse in omnibus agere videatur, and omnia opera secundarum ca^sarum
ei possunt attribui, sicut artifici attribuitur opus instrumenti. Therefore we
will conclude this with that of S. Augustine: Proculdubio nullus est locus ab
ejus praesentia absens; super omnem creaturam quippe praesidet regendo, subtus
est omnia sustinendo, non pondere laboris, sed infatigabili virtute, quoniam
nulla creatura ab eo condita per se subsistere valet, nist ab illo sustentetur,
qui eam creavit. Extra omnia est, sed non exclusus, intra omnia, sed non
conclusus. And these places need no fiction of an Hebraism to expound them, nor
no device of a verb of an active termination, and a permissive signification to
evade the pressure of this truth. And therefore in respect of Physical agency
we are bold with Bradwardine to assert these three Corollaries. Dt Cause. D^l,
p. 171.


1. Quod nulla res potest aliquid facere, sine Deo. 2. Quod nulla res potest
aliquid facere, nisi Deus per se and immediate facit illud idem. 3. Quod nulla
res potest facere aliquid, nisi Deus faciat illud idem immediatius quolibet
alio faciente.
4. So that however permission may be understood, it must properly relate to
intellectual and rational creatures, and that only and especially in respect of
those actions which we call moral, that is, in regard of sin, evil or malum
culpae; for whatsoever is malum poenae, God is the author, causer and inflicter
of, according to the Text: Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not
done it? To understand Amos 3. 6.
aright the nature of permission, we are to consider the affections, properties
and adjuncts of it, both in regard of the person permitting, the creature
permitted to act, and the thing permitted to be done, with all the
circumstances about them, and these we shall take from their Ringleader and
great Champion Arminius himself in these points.

5. And first in respect of the person permitting (he says) it is necessary
that he know, what, to whom, and the ability of performance, that is to be
granted, or used, by the person permitted, and that the person permitting have
power to permit and to impede, and also that he have the right and authority of
permitting. 2. In the person permitted, it is necessarily requisite, that he
have sufficient power to effect and perform the thing permitted, if not
hindered; for otherwise it would be nonsense to say, that a person is permitted
to do an act that he has no power to perform. 3. If the Vid. Twisse Vindic.
great. d^ permiss. p. 341.
person permitted have sufficiency of power to perform the act permitted, yet
there is also required a propension and disposition in the person permitted, to
perform the thing permitted, otherwise the permission as to that act would be
without a certain end, and so would be in vagum, inconstant and not to be
performed, and therefore he concludes thus: Imo nec recte dici potest quod
alicui actus permittatur, qui actus illos praestandi affectu nullo tenetur.

6. We shall omit the exceptions that the learned and subtle Dr. Twisse has
made against diverse particulars in these passages, and shall only fix upon one
that is manifestly false (if he mean of permission in general which he
confesses.) For in the Angels and Adam before their falling and committing of
sin, there was not any propension or disposition to sin, and therefore to this
we shall give the most acute answer of Dr. Twisse in these words: Nam licet
insit homini propensio ad peccandum (scilicet post lapsum) per modum Dt
permiss. p. 342.
dispositionis, quae praecedan^a sit permissioni actus peccaminos^; At in Adamo
(ante lapsum) nulla inerat hujusmodi dispositio, aut ad peccandum propensio,
ante peccatum ejus primum. Sed neque in Angelis, qui a statu suo ceciderunt.
Secundo, ut ut dispositio, sive habitus insit qui inclinet ad agendum, non est
ex natura dispositionis sive habitus cujuscunque ut faciat hominem propendere
ad actum aliquem particularem, cujus vel solius ratione dicitur permissio. And
though it be granted that God did create the Angels, and Adam in statu labili,
wherein they had a sufficiency of power or grace not to have sinned, or fallen,
and though that power or grace was not withdrawn from them, and that there was
no coaction upon their wills to enforce them to sin; for if it had been so,
their falls would have been no sin: so neither did God supply them with more
assisting grace to have upholden them, for then their estate had not been
labile, nor they in a possibility to sin. But it is manifest that they in their
Creation were set in aequilibrio, and had equal power of freedom of will either
to sin or not to sin, and so had no propension or disposition at all to commit
that sin, to which they were left by a free permission: and so propension and
disposition to the act permitted (if permission be understood generally) had no
place in the Angels nor Adam before their first sinning, according to the Text,
God made man upright, that is like a straight or right line that falling
Eccles. 7. 29.
perpendicularly upon another right line, does incline to neither end of the
line upon which it falls, so Adam was made upright without any propension or
inclination to sin at all. And if this propension and disposition be
understood, and applied to Angels in their condition after their fall, then it
is true they have not only an inclination but a most strong will and desire to
commit more evil and mischief than God in his goodness permits them to perform,
for the Devil goes about like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour, and
it was Satan that not only had a disposition, but desired to sift Peter as
wheat. And it is manifest that wicked Men have a strong will and desire to
commit mischief; but that God has an hook in their Nostrils, and a Bridle in
their Jaws wherewith he curbs and restrains them, that they cannot act out all
the mischief that they intend, as is manifest in the example of Sennacherib and
many others.

7. Permission must be referred and reduced to the will of God, for nolition is
an act of his will as well as volition: and to speak properly and truly,
permission is but an act of the Divine Will not to impede such or such
particular actions of the creatures; and therefore the same things will follow
from his volition or his will non impediendi, as from his volition to the acts
of a free agent, seeing neither do put coaction upon the will of the Creature
that is to act. And that permission is an act of the Divine will, and to be
reduced unto it Arminius confesses in these words: Permissionem ad genus
Twisse de Permiss. ut supra.
actionis pertinere ex ipsa vocis flexione est notum, sive per se sive
reductive, ut in Scholis loq^untur. Cessatio enim ab actu, ad actum quoque est
reducenda: cansamautem proximam and immediatam habet voluntatem, non scientiam,
non potentiam, non potestatem, licet and ista in permittente requirantur. And
when he defines permission, he says: Permissio Dei, est act us voluntatis
Divinae; than which nothing can be more clear. And not much different from this
is the definition of permission, that is given by learned Junius thus: Est
Fran. Jun. de peccat prim. Adam. p. 111, 114.
autem permissio act us voluntatis, quo is penes quem est alienas actiones
inhibere, eas non inhibet, sed agentis voluntati permittit earum modum. And
again he says: Apud Deum vero Opt. Max. nulla est omnino permissio, nisi
voluntaria: quandoquidem omnis divina permissio a principio interno est, id
est, a voluntate ipsius, and movetur ad finem quem voluntas praefinivit ejus.
But we will conclude this with that of S. Augustine thus Englished: Not any
thing August. Enchir. 75, 76.
comes to pass, unless the Omnipotent will have it to be done, either that it
may be done by his suffering, or by his Volition. Neither is it to be doubted
that God does well, even by suffering those things to be done, that are done
evilly; For he does not permit but by a just judgment, and verily every thing
is good that is just. Although therefore those things that are evil, in as much
as they are evil, they are not good; notwithstanding, as they are not only
good, but also as they are evil, it is good. For unless this were good that
there should be evils, they would by no means be permitted of the omnipotent
good, to whom without all doubt it is always as easy to do that which he would,
as it is easy not to suffer that which he would not have to be. By all which it
is plain that his permission is the act of his Divine Will, and if he would not
have it done he would not permit it, and so the same consequences will follow
from Nolition, that follow from Volition, in respect as they are both acts of
the Divine Will.

8. It is a certain truth that all moral actions are performed by a physical
power in respect of the sustentation of the will in its natural being while it
acts, and that the creature is conserved even in the act as it is natural,
though there be obliquity in the will of the creature acting in reference to
the law given, or made known unto it. And this Arminius acknowledges in these
words: Necesse Twisse ut supra. 346.
itaque est, ut cum Deus potentiae creaturae actum aliquem permittit, creatura
illa conservetur, ut sit, and vivat, potentia ejusdem permaneat, idonea ad
actum producendum, nulla major vel aequalis potentia opponatur, objectum
denique offeratur, and potentia permittatur. From whence therefore to instance
in the first sin of the Angels and Adam, besides the equal power and liberty of
will that they had to sin or not to sin, it is manifest that God willed and
determined not to withdraw his conservative power from them, but that they
might be and live in the very act of their sinning. Neither did he withdraw
that power they had, nor opposed a greater, or equal power to impede them, much
less did he create or infuse any evil into their natures, nor put upon them any
coaction of will, to enforce them to sin, but solely left them to the power and
liberty of their own free wills. And though by his prescience he certainly knew
that they would sin and fall, yet he determined in his purpose not to hinder
them, but by his providential decree did set down how to guide and order that
fall and defection the most advantagiously for his glory both in his Mercy and
Justice. So that even in this there was no bare passive permission, separate
and distinct from his will and decree in his providence, but only permission to
the moral act of their wills, which by his wisdom, decree and providence, he
ordered for his own glory, according to the Text: The Lord has made (or
wrought) all things for himself* Prove. 16. 4.
yea, even the wicked for the day of evil. The Hebrew word has wrought, does
properly signify, to work by polishing, trimming, or framing and fitting, so
that the wicked (who have made themselves so by the acts of their own wills)
God by his decree and providence does polish, fit and order for the setting
forth of his own glory in framing the wicked for the day of evil, the evil of
punishment and judgment.

9. Further it is necessary that the creature acting a moral act (especially in
this case of the Angels and Adam before their fall) have the liberty and
freedom of will, and that the will at the instant of the act, be not restrained
nor under a coactive power, for otherwise malum culpae or sin would cease to be
evil, and so there could be no sin at all. And thus far, and in this peculiar
respect only, the Angels and Adam before their acting of sin, and in the very
instant of the act it self, were permitted, that is, God willed and determined
not to impede them, but for the ordering of that sin and fall, the permission
was conjoined with his will and providence, and not separate from it, or a nude
permission.

10. That malum culpae, or sin does arise by the occasion of a law; for where
no law is, there can be no sin, and therefore the Apostle says: But sin taking
occasion by the Commandment, wrought in Romans 7. 8. 11.
me all manner of concupiscence. So that sin considered as it is sin, is an
Aberration or Deviation of the Will of the creature from the revealed law of
the Creator, and has simply and absolutely no other causality, but only the
deficiency and (...) of the Creature to produce it, especially in these cases
of the Angels and Adam in their first acts of sin.

11. Now we will come to the application of this unto wicked Men as they are
under original and actual sins, and that in these few examples. 1. It is not by
a bare permissive power, but by his will and order in his providence, for he
sets up the wicked in slippery Psalm. 73. 1^.
places, and yet a little while and the wicked shall not be: yea, thou shall
diligently consider his place, and it shall not be. So Cain was Psalm 37. 10.
suffered to slay his Brother Abel, but by and by he was sent from the presence
of the Lord into the land of Nod: So he set up Saul to be King over Israel, and
soon after rejected him, and also destroyed him: these were by providence, not
only bare permission. 2. For promotion comes neither from the East nor the
West, nor from the Psalm 75. 6, 7.
South: But God is the judge, he pulls down one, and sets up another. So
wicked Haman was set up to be the highest in the Kingdom next Ahasuerus, and
got a decree to have all the Jews put to death, and had set up a pair of
Gallows to hang Mordecai upon, and yet see the providence of God, who quickly
brought him to be hanged upon them himself: and this will be further made out
where we speak of providence.

12. Though those that ascribe so large a power unto Devils and Witches, do
take it for granted that they are only under a bare passive permission, and
that the fallen Angels do act, what, when, where and how they list, yet is it a
mere falsity, for they are under the rule of Gods Divine Will, decree and
providence, and do act nothing, but as and so far as they are licensed, ordered
and limited by his will and providence, and are under a punctual restraint, nay
kept in the chains of everlasting darkness unto the judgment of the great day,
as we shall prove at full in that Chapter where we handle the knowledge and
power of fallen Angels. And therefore here we shall only say this, that if Devils
could do as much mischief as they would, and were under no restraint or chains,
then none of the godly would be left alive. But it is manifest that Devils do
act nothing (excepting the obliquity and evil of their own wills) but merely as
instruments of the Divine Will and Providence, for as the Christian Philosopher
says: Illa est impiet as; nimirum Resp. Fludan. ad Lanov. p. 18.
ea falso attribuere creaturis, quae radicaliter Deo soli sunt propria, and
inter caetera, actum aliquem peculiarem in diabolo esse existimare, qui non est
originaliter a Deo, and consequenter immediate, cum essentialis Dei actus sit
per se sine divisione in omni re.

Concerning Divine prescience, which is as S. Gregory says, Praescientia Greg.
in Dialog.
est unamquamque rem antequam veniat, videre, and id quod futurum est priusquam
praesens sit praevidere, we may only note his, That it is certain and
infallible, as says the Lord by the Prophet: Behold the former things are come
to pass, and new things do I declare, Isai. 42. 9.
before they spring forth I tell you of them: Also, known unto God are all his
works from the foundation of the World. So Acts 15. 18.
that his prescience is that infallible vision, by which he comprehends
August. de Trinit. l. 15. c. 7.
all what he knows by one eternal, immutable and ineffable vision. But this
prescience in God does not flow from the things that are to come to pass, but
from his decree, by which all future things are determined, who does all things
according to the counsel Ephesians. 1. 11. Psalm. 115. 3.
of his own will, for God is in heaven, he has done whatsoever he pleased. But
this prescience is not to be considered only by it self, as a bare vision, or
inspection, but as it is coupled and joined with his providence, For the Lord
looks from heaven, he beholds all Psalm. 33. 13, 14, 15.
the sons of men. From the place of his habitation he looks upon all the
inhabitants of the earth. Forming (or framing) likewise their hearts, and
considering all their works. And this prescience considered solely by it self,
is not the cause of the things that come to pass, for as the Father says well:
Sicut tu memoria tua non cogis Vid. Rivet. de Provid. Disput. 1.
facta esse quae praeterierunt, sic Deus praescientia sua non cogit facienda
quae sunt futura. So that we conclude that God by a naked prescience does not
only behold infallibly the things that are to come, and so August. de lib.
arbitr. l. 3.
is only a spectator of what Devils and wicked Men will do, but also that he
does order, rule and predesign all their works and actions.

1. As touching Gods Government and Administration of the World by his Divine
providence, we shall in the first place lay down some of the definitions of it
from the most sound and learned Divines of the Reformed Churches, and that in
English, after this order. The acute and learned Rivet describes it thus:
Providence Andr. Rivet* disputat. These. 1. p. 4.
is an ineffable force and virtue of the Divine Sapience and Potency, by which
God does conserve and govern to his own Glory all his Works according to his
eternal, most wise, and most free decree, and directing every thing in time
unto its end. Johannes de Spina defines it thus: Providence is the prescience
and De provid. Trac^ p. 9.
counsel of God eternal, most free, immutable, most just, most wise, most good,
whereby God works and determines all good things in all, but does only
permit evil things, and does dispose and direct all things to his own Glory and
the Salvation of his elect. And much to the same purpose does Lambertus Danaeus
speak in these words: Providence is a most free and most powerful action
Isagog. Christ. c. 32. p. ^2.
of God, by which he not only stirs up and governs universals, but also
singulars, in every one of their single actions. And (he says) it is called a
most free and most powerful act, because it can neither be hindered nor
overcome by any law. And to these for substance do agree Calvin, Musculus,
Beza, Zanchius, and the rest of all Orthodox Divines.

2. But we shall chiefly insist on that definition that is given by learned
Piscator in these words: The providence of God is his eternal, most wise, most
just and immutable counsel or decree, whereby he does most freely govern all
things by him created to the glory of himself, and the Salvation of his elect.
To which he gives this explication: That it does consist of a Genus and
Exeg^s. L^c. (...). p. 143, 144. etc.
three differences. The Genus is the word Decretum which is illustrated by four
adjuncts; Eternity, Sapience, Justice and Immutability. The first difference is
taken from the objects; which are all created things. The second from the ends,
which are two, the Glory of God, and the Salvation of the elect. The third from
the effect, which is the government of things created, which Gubernation is
illustrated by the adjunct which is liberty.

3. The parts of this definition are thus proved. 1. That the providence of God
is his counsel and decree, appears most plainly from these Scriptures: Peter
in his Sermon to the Jews upon the day of Pentecost says: Him (that was Jesus)
being delivered by the Acts 2. 23.
determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God ((...)) ye have taken, and by
wicked hand have crucified and slain. And again the Church at Jerusalem in
their prayers say thus: Of a truth against thy holy Child Jesus whom thou have
anointed, both Acts 4. 27, 28.
Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and people of Israel were
gathered together, For to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined
((...)) before to be done. 2. That all things created (nay also those things
which do seem to happen fortuitously, or to be by permission, as sinful
actions) are governed and ordered by the providence of God, as these Scriptures
will sufficiently demonstrate. Christ Jesus the son of God, does uphold Heb. 1.
3.
(or sustain) all things by the word of his power. And does not our Savior
tell us: Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing, and Matthew. 10. 29, 30, 31,
one of them shall not fall on the ground without your father? But the very
hairs of your heads are all numbered. Fear ye not therefore, ye are ofmore value
than many sparrows. That place concerning the Cities of refuge, and the fleeing
of the ignorant manslayer thither is most remarkable, and is this. And this is
the case of the slayer, Deuteronomy. 19. 4, 5.
which shall flee thither, that he may live: whosoever kills his neighbor
ignorantly, whom he hated not in times past, as when a man goes into the wood
with his neighbor to hew wood, and his hand fetches a stroke with the ax to
cut down the tree, and the head slipeth from the helve, and lights upon his
neighbor that he die, he shall flee unto one of those Cities, and live. And
was not the action of Joseph's brethren, sin and sinful in selling of him to the
Ismaelites, and yet he acknowledges, that God sent him before them to preserve
life. So that God brought good forth of evil, and does order Genesis 45. 5.
even the sins of the wicked to just and good ends by his Divine Providence.
Again: The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole Prove. 16. 33.
disposing thereof is of the Lord. So when the Men in the Ship with Jonah did
cast lots, by the Lords disposing the lot fell upon Jonah who was justly
guilty, and so by providence pointed out. 3. That God does govern all things to
his own glory is manifest by these Texts: The Lord has made all things for
himself; yea even the Prove. 16. 4.
wicked for the day of evil. And, what if God, willing to show his wrath, and
to make his power known, endured with much long-suffering Romans 9. 22, 23.
the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction: And that he might make known the
riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had before prepared unto
glory? And that he governs all things for the Salvation of his elect, is
plain: And we know that all things Romans 8. 28, ^0.
work together for good, to them that love God, to them who are the called
according to his purpose. So that if God be for the Elect, who can be against
them? 4. That God does govern all things most freely is clear, because he is
omnipotent and supreme, and there is no power that can either impede, or
constrain him, For he has done whatsoever he would, both in Heaven and Earth.
And Psalm. 115. 3.
the Apostle says; I will have mercy upon whom I will have mercy. Romans 9. 15,
18.
Therefore has he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
hardens. For who has given him a charge over the Job 34. 13.
earth? or who has disposed the whole world?

4. The several ways that God uses in governing the creatures in the world
whether good or bad, may be comprised in these four ways. 1. He rules and
orders them, by bending, inclining and turning of their wills and intentions,
to serve and fulfill his decree and pleasure. So when the Brethren of Joseph
were fully resolved to murder him, God by the means of Reuben and Judah, so
wrought Genesis 37. 18, 19, 20, 26, 27. Id. 45. 5. and ^0. 20.
upon their minds and wills, that they were contented to sell him to the
Ismaelites, that so the determinate counsel of God might be fulfilled; for
though they intended it for evil, that he might never return to his Father, nor
to have his dream fulfilled that they might bow down before him, yet God
intended it for good, and so brought it to pass. And this he did not by
changing or taking away their natures, nor by putting a coactive power upon
their wills; but by inclining and bending them to his own purpose, so that the
act was the act of their own wills, but the moving of their wills to spare his
life was from the Lord: for as he that made the eye must needs see, so he that
made the will must needs have a power to move, incline and turn it. And
therefore the Father said well, Certum est, nos velle cum velimus, sed Deus
facit, ut velimus bonum. And it is apparent that the hearts of all men are in
the hands of the Lord, and he turns and inclines them according to his will
and purpose, as says Solomon, The Kings heart is in the hand Prove. 21. 1.
of the Lord, as the rivers of water: he turns it whither soever he will.
Upon which the note of Tremellius and Junius is this: Est quidem animus omnium
hominum gubernaculum, quo velut naves in mediis aquis reguntur corpora and
actiones nostrae: tamen ne ipsorum quidem regum animus ex seipso permovetur,
impellitur, inhibeturque, sed Deus in singulorum animis, veluti clavum tenet.
And concerning the wicked God says: I will harden the heart of Pharaoh, and
Exodus 7. 3.
multiply my signs and wonders in the land of Egypt. And again: And indeed
for this cause, have I raised (made thee stand, feci ut existeres, Id. 9. 16,
17. Romans 9. 17.
as Beza notes) thee up, for to show in thee my power, and that my name may be
declared throughout all the earth. And as yet exaltest thou thy self against my
people, that thou will not let them go? And further the Text says: He turned
their hearts, to hate his people, to deal subtly with his servants. 2. God
also rules and Psalm. 105. 25.
orders his creatures by leading, drawing, inciting and moving their wills to
his own ends and purposes, as sometimes to good, as in his own people: For as
many as are led by the spirit of God, Romans 8. 14.
they are the sons of God. And so was our Savior led, or driven ((...)) into
the wilderness, to be tempted of the devil. Matthew. 4. 1. Mark 1. 12. Luke 4. 1.
Genesis 9. 27.
To this agrees the blessing and prophecy of Noah: God shall persuade, or
allure Japhet, to dwell in the tents of Shem. Sometimes God inciteth the
creatures to evil by the ministry of Satan, as is manifest in these examples.
For the Text says, And again the anger 2 Samuel 24. 1.
of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he moved David against them, to
say, Go number Israel and Judah. And another place says: And Satan stood up
against Israel, and provoked David to number 1 Chronicles. 21. 1.
the people. Whereby it is plain that Satan was the instrument, as sent and
ordered of God to move David to number the people, that thereby the King and
people might be punished, and the King thereby brought to a deeper sight of his
sins, repentance, and a closer trusting and adhering to his God. So when the
Lord intended to have Ahab to go up to Ramoth Gilead that he might be slain, he
sent forth an evil Angel, to be a lying spirit in all Ahabs Prophets, and said
unto him, Thou shall persuade him, and prevail also: Go 1 Kings 22. 22.
forth and do so. So that what God orders, Satan does but execute. So when God
intended to punish and destroy Abimelech, and the Men of Shechem, he sent an
evil spirit between them to divide them, and so accomplished his will upon both
parties, as says the Text: Thus God rendered the wickedness of Abimelech which
he did unto Judges 9. 23, 56, 57.
his father, in slaying his seventy brethren. And all the evil of the men of
Shechem, did God render upon their heads: and upon them came the curse of
Jotham the sun of Jerubbaal. 3. God rules his creatures by permission, or his
will of not impeding them to act according to their wills and power, as in
these cases. For God speaking of his people of Israel says: But my people
would not hearken unto my voice; and Israel would none of me. So I gave them up
Psalm. 81. 11, 12.
unto their own hearts lusts, and they walked in their own counsels. Agreeable
to which is that in the Acts: Who in times past suffered Acts 14. 16.
all nations to walk in their own ways: which is as Beza notes: Ex arbitrio suo
vivere, nulla ipsis praescripta ratione religionis. And in this sense, and to
this purpose it is that God gave ((...)) them Romans 1. 24.
up to uncleanness, through the lusts of their own hearts; because of that
horrible Idolatry that formerly they were guilty of. 4. God rules his
creatures by his providence, sometimes by repressing, prohibiting and impeding
the execution of their wicked wills, as is clear in the case of Abimelech King
of Gerar, who took Sarah Abraham's Wife intending to have had carnal knowledge
of her, but God plagued him and his Family, and said; For I also withheld thee
from sinning against me; therefore I suffered thee not to Genesis 20 6.
touch her.

Now we shall come to consider how the fallen Angels are under the rule and
restraint of this Divine and all-governing providence, wherein we shall make it
appear, that they act nothing in this elementary and sublunary World, after any
corporeal manner, but as they are ordered, licensed and limited by the will and
decree of the Almighty, and so do not wander and rove at their own pleasures to
act in corporeal things, what, when and how they list, as the Witchmongers
vainly suppose, and this we shall clear in these particulars.

1. It cannot rationally be supposed that God is less wise, in ruling and
ordering the Prince of darkness, the Prince of Devils, and the head of all
Rebellion and Rebels, than he is in ruling his Subjects and Servants, which are
all wicked men; but all these he rules with a rod of Iron, and breaks them
in sunder like a Potter^ vessel: And therefore much more has he a restraint
upon, and a rule over the fallen Angels who kept not their first estates, and
therefore are reserved in chains in darkness until the judgment of the great
day.

2. As he is the Prince and Ringleader of all Sin and Rebellion against God,
though he yet have not his final punishment, unto Matthew. 25. 41. Luke 8. 31.
which he is reserved for the judgment of the great day, and though he be not
yet thrust into the abyss or great depth, nor into that everlasting fire that
is prepared for him and his Angels; yet* is he kept in chains and darkness, and
can act nothing but as he is licensed, ordered and limited by the Almighty.

3. And though he compass the earth to and fro, and walk about like a roaring
lion seeking whom he may devour, yet is that but according to the malice and
purpose of his wicked will, for in punishing or afflicting of the godly he must
have license from God first, or else he can do nothing in this Elementary
World, as is most manifest in the affliction of Job, neither could he enter
into the herd of Swine, but by Christ's leave and order, nor deceive Ahabs
Prophets but by order from the Lord. And therefore an ancient Father said well:
Quod si super porcos potestatem non habent, multo Thom. Aquin. Caten. aur. in
Luc. 8. p. 200.
magis nullam habent Daemones contra homines factos ad imaginem Dei; oportet
ergo Deum solum timere, contemnere autem illos.

Therefore we shall conclude this briefly here, having occasion to handle it
more fully hereafter, to wit, that the Witchmong^rs can have no shelter for
their opinion from the Doctrine of Gods permission (if rightly understood)
because God does neither order, nor permit fallen Angels to act any thing
(especially in corporeal things) but what is for just, good, and wise ends,
which cannot be showed in these actions attributed to Witches.

CHAP. X.
Whether fallen Angels be Corporeal or simply Incorporeal, and the absurdity of
the assuming of Bodies, and the like consequents.

IAm not insensible what great censure I may incurr for entering upon such a
ticklish and nice point as the corporeity or incorporeity of Angels, seeing it
has exercised and crucified the wits of the most learned in all ages,
especially being but an obscure person, and not heightened with those lofty
titles that usually elevate Men's fames, more by those attributes than by the
weight and strength of their arguments. Yet it being no necessary Article of
the Christian Faith, but that a Man may lawfully defend either, it cannot
rationally be judged by understanding Readers either to be pride or just
offense for me to handle this subject. For seeing that most of the Christian
and Learned Fathers for the space of four hundred years after Christ, were of
the opinion that they were corporeal, it can be no novelty in me to revive or
assert that opinion, and therefore I shall labor to make it manifest in this
ensuing order.

1. There is a late way of arguing taken up by Dr. Moore and others, that they
will undertake to prove a thing to be so or so, or else to make Man to deny his
own faculties. And so the said Doctor does undertake to prove the existence of
immateral and incorporeal The immort. of the Soul, p. 7, 8.
beings, or else he thinks he brings Men to deny their own faculties: And
these faculties he makes to be, common notions, external sense, and evident
and undeniable deductions of reason. And concludes that, what is not consonant
to all or some of these is mere fancy, and is of no moment for the evincing of
truth or falsehood, by either its vigor or perplexiveness. But this will not
accomplish the business he intends, for these reasons. 1. Because there is not
the common notion of a spiritual and immaterial being in all or any Man,
neither is it (to use his own words) true at first sight to all men in their
wits upon a clear perception of the terms, without any further discourse or
reasoning, but is only a bare supposition without any proof or evidence at all.
2. The being of an immaterial and spiritual substance can no way incurr into
the senses nor affect them, because it is manifest (as Des Carts has
sufficiently proved) that all sensation is procured by corporeal contact, and
not otherwise. And though we deny not that there have been, are and may be
apparitions, that cannot be rationally supposed to be the ordinary Phenomenon
of corporeal matter, yet affecting the senses, there must be something in them
that performs that effect, that is corporeal, or else the senses could not be
wrought upon, for immateriale non agit in materiale, nisi eminenter ut Deus. 3.
No right deductions can possibly be drawn from the highest power of
ratiocination, where the understanding has no cognoscibility of the things
that reason would draw its conclusions from, for as the same Doctor frames his
Axiom which is this: Whatsoever things are in themselves, they are nothing to
us, but so far forth as they become known to our faculties or cognitive powers.
But we assert (which we shall make good anon) that our faculties or cognitive
powers (how far soever some would vainly magnify and extol them) have not the
power of understanding beings that are simply and absolutely immaterial and
incorporeal. 4. There is nothing that is more undoubtedly true than what the
Lord Verulam has told us in these words: Causa vero and radix fere Nov. Organ.
lib. 1. p. 49.
omnium malorum in scientiis ea una est: quod dum meant is humanae vires falso
miramur and extollimus, vera ejus auxilia non quaeramus. And again: Subtilit as
naturae subtilitatem sensus and intellectus multis partibus superat, the which
may be proved from many undeniable instances, which need not here be mentioned,
only we shall add what the aforesaid learned Lord speaks to the same purpose
which is this: The fault of sense is twofold: For it either forsakes Ioid. p.
21.
or deceives us. For first there are many things that escape the sense, though
rightly disposed, and no way impeded either by the subtilty of the whole body
or by the minuteness of the parts, or by the distance of place, or tardity and
velocity of motion, or by the familiarity of the object, or by reason of other
causes. Neither again, where the sense does apprehend the thing, are those
apprehensions sufficiently firm. For the testimony and information of sense is
always from the Analogy of Man, not from the Analogy of the Universe. And it
is altogether asserted with great error, that sense is the measure of things.
Neither can these notions the Doctor would make so clear, be had or gathered,
without some intimation from some of the senses.

2. Further the Doctor tells us that the Idea of a Spirit is as easy a notion,
as of any other substance whatsoever. And he also says: An Antidot. etc. p. 12.
Nevertheless I shall not at all stick to affirm, that his Idea or notion
(speaking of God) is as easy as any notion else whatsoever, and Immortal. p. 21.
that we may know as much of him as of any thing else in the World. This later
he speaks concerning God. But that these assertions are unsound, these
following reasons will sufficiently evince.

1. He does define a Spirit thus: A Spirit is a substance penetrable Reas. 1.
and indiscerpible. Now if it be true that he affirms before, that, the
subject, or naked essence, or substance of a thing is utterly unconceiveable to
any of our faculties, and that if we take away aptitudes, operations,
properties and modifications from a subject, that then the conception vanishes
into nothing, but into the Idea of a mere undiversificated substance, so that
one substance is not then distinguishable from another, but only from accidents
or modes, to which properly belongs no subsistence. So then if we take away
penetrability and indiscerpibility, which are but the modes and properties of a
Spirit, whose genus he makes substance to be, then it vanishes into an
indistinguishable notion, and so his definition comes to nothing.

2. For if substances be known by their properties and modifications, Reas. 2.
as we grant they are, the modifications and properties must of necessity be
some ways known unto us: but there are no ways either by common notions,
evidence of the senses, or sound deductions of reason that can certainly inform
us of these properties or modifications of penetrability and indiscerpibility,
and the Doctor yet never proved either, but is only a bare supposition, and a
melancholy figment.

3. He tells us that all substance has dimensions, that is, length, Reas. 3.
The Immort. p. 6^.
breadth and depth, but all has not impenetrability, and boldly says: It is
not the Characteristical of a body to have dimensions, but to be impenetrable;
to which we answer. It is strongly asserted by learned Helmont, that by the
ultimate strength of nature, bodies do sometimes penetrate themselves and one
another, and to that purpose he gives convincing examples, and concludes thus
from them. Invenio equidem, naturae contiguam dimensionum penetrationem, Dt
In^ect. p. 598.
licet non ordinariam. And after says thus: Quibus constat corpora solida,
satis magna, penetrasse stomachum, intestina, uterum, omentum, abdomen,
pleuram, vesicam, membranas inquam, tanti vulneris impatientes. Id est, absque
vulnere cultros per istas membranas transmissos. Quod aequivalet penetrationi
dimensionum, factae in natura, absque open Diaboli. And to the same purpose that
most Dt Nature. Subst. En^rg. p. 406.
acute person, Dr. Glisson, handling this very point says: Verum enimvero, si
sola quantitas actualis sit causa impenetrabilitatis corporum (ut ex supra
dictis liquet,) eaque sit naturaliter mutabilis; quid impedit ne substantia
materialis aliam substantiam, mutata quantitate, novaque simul assumpta
utrisque communi, penetret? And therefore we may as confidently deny his
assumption, that Impenetrability is the Characteristical of body, as he affirm
it without proof, and must with all the whole company of the learned, assign
Extension to be the true and Genuine Character of Body. And further he granting
that substance has length, breadth, and depth, we must of necessity conclude,
that whatsoever has those properties must needs be material and corporeal, and
so that which he would make to be Spirit is merely Body.

4. Whereas he says that the notion of Spirit is as easy a notion, Reas. 4.
as any other whatsoever, it is granted, but is not at all to the purpose: for
our inquiry need not be of the facility of a notion, but of the verity of it,
that is, of the congruity and adequation of the notion and the thing from
whence it is taken; otherwise though the notion be easy, yet without an
adequate congruity to the thing it is merely false. As for instance, when a
melancholy person does verily imagine himself to be changed into a Wolf or Dog,
it is not only an easy notion, but also it is truly a notion, and yet a false
notion, because there is no true congruity betwixt it and the thing from whence
it is taken, the Body of the person so conceiving, being not at all changed
into Wolf or Dog, but still retaining its humane shape and figure. And
therefore the Lord Verulam does to this point speak truly and clearly in these
words: Itaque si notiones Nov. organ. p. 18.
ipsae mentis (quae verborum quasi anima sunt, and totius hujusmodi structurae
ac fabricae basis) male ac temere a rebus abstractae, and vagae, nec satis
definitae and circumscriptae, denique multis modis vitiosae fuerint,
omniaruunt. And therefore the Doctor might very well have considered, whether
these his new notions had been fitly and rightly drawn from the things, to
which he does so confidently affix them, before he had so boldly asserted them,
which though they be truly his notions, that is, that he did think, conceive,
and frame them, yet they are not truly abstracted from the things: And so he
may be rather judged to be led by speculative and Philosophic Euthusiasm, than
by the clear light of a sound understanding.

5. And concerning his Tenent that the Idea or Notion of God is Reas. 5.
a^ easy as the notion of any thing else whatsoever, that the notion may be
easy we grant; but whether it be true and adequate, there lies the question.
For those old Heretics that held that God had Eyes, Ears, Head, Hands and Feet
and the like, had an easy notion of it, conceiving him to have humane members,
but I hope the Doctor will not say that this notion of theirs was a notion
truly drawn from the nature and being of God, because there is no corporeity in
him at all. And it is and has been the Tenent of all Orthodox Divines,
Ancient, Middle and Modern, that God in his own nature and being is infinite
and incomprehensible, and therefore there can no true and adequate notion of
him, as being so, be duly and rightly gathered in the understanding of
creatures; and so the Doctors position or notion must needs be Phantastry and
imaginary Enthusiasm. For as there are many things in nature that in themselves
are finite and comprehensible, that as he grants of naked essence or substance
are utterly unconceivable to any of our faculties; much more must the being of
God that is infinite and incomprehensible, which are attributes that are
incommunicable, be utterly unconceivable to any of our faculties. And it is but
the vain pride of Man's Head and Heart, thereby to magnify his own abilities,
whereas the Text does pronounce this of him, For vain man would be wise; though
he be born like a wild ass colt; that lifts him up to Job 11. 12.
conceit that he can fathom and comprehend the Infinite and Almighty, whom the
Heaven of Heavens cannot contain, and therefore cannot frame a true notion of
him, whom perfectly he does not 1 Kings 8. 27.
understand nor comprehend, and the attributes of God are matters of Faith and
not the weak deductions of humane reason.

3. Those that seem to idolize humane abilities and carnal reason, have not
only applied those so much magnified Engines to the discovery of created
things, wherein they have effected so little, that sufficiently proclaims the
invalidity of the instruments or the inauspicious application of them, or both,
all the several sorts of Natural Philosophy hitherto found out, or used, being
examined, coming far short of solving the Phenomenon of nature, when even the
least animal or vegetable affords matter enough to puzle and nonplus the
greatest Philosopher, so that we may justly complain with Seneca, that the
greatest part of those things we know are the least part of those things we
know not; These engines (I say) though proving ineffectual to find out the true
notions and knowledge of natural things, have also (like the fiction of the
Giants) notwithstanding invaded Heaven, and taken upon them to discover and
determine of Celestials, wherein it is in a manner totally blind, or sees but
with an Owl-like vision. For indeed the deciding of this point must be taken
from the Divine authority of the Scriptures, and the clear deductions that may
be drawn from thence; for this is that clear light, that we ought to follow,
and not the Dark-lanthorn of Man's blind, frail and weak reason, for it is a
sure word of Prophecy whereunto it is good to take heed, and not to vain
Philosophy, old Wives Fables, or opposition of Sciences falsely so called. And
therefore we shall conclude this point here concerning the corporeity or
incorporeity of Angels with that Christian and learned position of Dr.
Stillingfleet in these words: But although Christianity be a Religion which
comes in the highest way of credibility Origin. sacr. l. 2. c. 8. p. 233, 234.
to the minds of Men, although we are not bound to believe any thing but what
we have sufficient reason to make it appear that it is revealed by God, yet
that any thing should be questioned whether it be of Divine revelation, merely
because our reason is to seek, as to the full and adequate conception of it, is
a most absurd and unreasonable pretense.

4. In handling this point of the corporeity or incorporeity of Angels, we do
here once for all exclude and except forth of our discourse and arguments the
humane and rational Soul as not at all to be comprised in these limits, and
that especially for these reasons. 1. Because the humane Soul had a peculiar
kind of Creation differing from the Creation of other things, as appears in
the words of the Text. And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground,
and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man Genesis 2. 7.
became a living soul. Upon which the note of Tremellius and Junius is, anima
vero hominis spiritale quiddam est, and divinum. 2. Because I find Solomon the
wisest of Men making this question: who Eccles. 3. 21.
knows the spirit of man, that goes upward: and the spirit of the beast,
that goes downward to the earth? 3. Because it is safer to believe the nature
of the Soul to be according to the Analogy of Faith, and the concurrent opinion
of the learned, than to sift such a deep question by our weak understanding and
reason. So having premised these things, and left this as a general exception
and caution, we shall proceed to the matter intended in this order.

1. We lay it down for a most certain and granted truth, that God simply and
absolutely is only a most simple spirit, in whom there is no corporeity or
composition at all, and what other things soever that are called or accounted
spirits are but so in a relative and respective consideration, and not in a
simple and absolute acceptance. And this is the unanimous Tenent of the
Fathers, Schoolmen and all other Orthodox Divines, agreeing with the plain and
clear words of the Scripture, as, God is a spirit, and they John 4. 24.
that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth. And again: Now the
Lord is that spirit, and where the spirit of the Lord 2 Cor. 3. 17.
is there is liberty. Therefore we shall lay down this following proposition.

2. That Angels being created substances, are not simply and absolutely
incorporeal, but if they be by any called or accounted spirits, it can but be
in a relative and respective sense, but that really and truly they are
corporeal. And this we shall labor to make good not only by showing the
absurdities of that opinion of their being simply spiritual, but in laying open
the unintelligibility of that opinion, and by answering the most material
objections.

1. And first to begin at the lowest step, Body is a thing that affects
Argum. 1.
the senses most plainly and feelingly; for though many bodies are so pure, as
the air, ether, steams of the Lodestone, and many other steams of bodies,
that they escape the sight of our eyes, yet are they either manifest to our
feeling, or otherwise made manifest by some sensible effect, operation, or the
like; yet for all this, the intrinsic nature of body as such is utterly
unknown unto us, for when we speak of the extension of body, as its
Characteristical property, we do but conceive of its superficial dimensions,
its internal nature quatenus Corpus, being utterly unknown unto us; it being a
certain truth, that Quidditates rerum, non sunt cognoscibiles; and as Dr Moore
grants, the naked essence or substance of a thing is utterly unconceiveable
to any of our faculties. From whence we argue, a minori ad majus, that if the
substance of a body, whose affections and modifications do fully incur into,
and work upon our senses, be utterly unconceiveable to any of our senses, much
more of necessity must the substance of a Created spirit, conceived as
immaterial and incorporeal, be utterly unconceiveable to any of our faculties,
because it has no effects, operations, or modifications that can or do operate
upon our senses.

2. And as we know not the intrinsic nature of body, so also Argum. 2.
we are ignorant of the highest degree of the purity and spiritualness of
bodies, nor do we know where they end, and therefore cannot tell where to fix
the beginning of a mere spiritual and immaterial being. For there are of
Created bodies in the Universe, so great a diversity, and of so many sorts and
degrees of purity and fineness, one exceeding another, that we cannot assign
which of them comes nearest to incorporeity, or the nature of spirit. And many
of these being compared with other more gross and palpable bodies, may be and
are called and accounted spirits, though notwithstanding they be all Corporeal,
and but under a gradual difference. So the vital part in the bodies of men are
by Physicians called Spirits in relation to the bones, ligaments, musculous
flesh and the like; nay even in respect of the blood, lymphatick humor, lacteal
juice, or the succus nutritious nervosus, and yet still are contained within the
limits of body, and are as really Corporeal as any of the rest, and so are the
air and ether. And those visible species of other bodies that are carried in
the air and represented unto our Eyes, by which we distinguish the shape,
color, site and similitude of one body from another, though by the Schools
passed over with that slight title of qualities, as though they were either
simply nothing, or incorporeal things, are notwithstanding really Corporeal,
else they could not incur into, nor affect the visive sensories: And these do
in the air intersect and pass through one another (as may be optically
demonstrated) without Confusion, Commixion, or discerpsion, and may
comparatively be accounted spirital and incorporeal, though really they be not
so. But what shall we say to that wonderful body, Image or Idolum of our
selves, and other things that we behold in a mirror or looking-glass? must
this be a mere nothing, or an absolute incorporeal thing? surely not. For it is
as really a body as any in the Universe, though of the greatest purity and
fineness of any that we know; and how near it approaches to the nature of
spirit, is very difficult (if not impossible) to determine; for if it did exist
when the body or subject from whence it flows were removed, it might
rationally be taken for a Spirit, and with far more probable ground than many
things else that have been vainly supposed to be Spirits. And that these
visible shapes of things, and this Image in the glass, are not merely imaginary
nothings, but Corporeal Figures and steams, is most manifest, because they
vanish when the body or subject is removed, because that nullius entis nulla
est operatio, and Incorporeum non incurrit in sensus, and because they would
pass through the glass, but only for the foil or Bractea laid on the otherside,
by which the Image is reflected. So that if we have bodies of so great purity,
and near approach unto the nature of spirit, we cannot tell where spirit must
begin, because we know not where the purest bodies end.

3. Dr Moore makes substance to be the genus, and spirit and body Argum. 3.
to be the two species, so that body and spirit are of one generical Identity,
and so there must of necessity some certain specific difference betwixt them be
assigned and proved, or else the division is vicious, and the property of
spirit not proved, and so their opinion of spirit falls totally to the ground.
For we affirm (and shall prove) that though a difference be imagined and
supposed, yet it was never yet sufficiently proved, for omnia supposita, non
sunt vera, otherwise all the impossible figments and vain Chimaera's of
melancholy and doting persons might pass for true Oracles: but it is one thing
truly to understand, and another thing to imagine and fancy what indeed is not,
nor ever was. And though the supposition seem never so probable and like, yet
it will but at the best infer the possibility of such an imagined difference,
but not prove it really to be so, and therefore here we shall retort the
Doctors Axiom against him, which is this: Whatsoever is unknown to us, or is
The Immortal. of the Soul. Axiom. 2. p. 6.
known but as merely possible, is not to move us or determine us any way, or
make us undetermined; but we are to rest in the present light and plain
determination of our own faculties. Now that a spirit is penetrable and
indiscerpible, may be imagined as possible to the fancies of some, but cannot
be clearly intelligible to any sober mind; for to imagine, and to understand,
are faculties that are very different, and however if such a difference be
conceived as possible (which cannot enter the narrow gate of my Intellect) yet
the difference of being penetrable and indiscerpible, is not to move us to
determine that a spirit has those distinct properties from bodies, because
they are but known to us as merely possible. And therefore that these two
differences of penetrability and indiscerpibility assigned by Dr Moore, are not
sufficiently proved to be so, we shall give these reasons. 1. If bodies in the
ultimate act of nature can penetrate themselves and one another, as Helmont and
Dr Glisson do strongly labor to prove, then penetrability is not the proper
difference of spirit from body, because then common to them both. 2. But if it
be taken for a truth (and the one of necessity must be true) that bodies do
not, or can possibly penetrate themselves or one another, as the common tenent
holds, and seems most agreeable to verity, for it is simply unintelligible
and impossible to conceive, that two Cubes (suppose of Marble or Metal) should
penetrate one another, and yet but to have the dimensions of one, and to
possess no greater space than the one did formerly fill: And if this be
impossible and unintelligible in respect of bodies, whose properties,
aptitudes, affections and modifications are apparent to our senses, then must
it be more impossible and unintelligible in substances supposed to be merely
incorporeal, because they must needs be more pure and perfect, and therefore
less subject to such unconceiveable affections; and however, it can be no ways
known to our faculties or cognitive powers, that they have any such specifical
property or affection. 3. As it is not any way manifest to any of our senses,
nor can be proved by any sound deductions of reason, so it cannot be manifested
to be any innate notion shining from the Intellect it self, and we ought not to
take adventitious ones instead of those that are innate, nor fictitious ones
for either, but to make a due distinction of each of them one from another. 4.
Neither is indiscerpibility a proper difference of a spiritual substance from a
corporeal one, because the visible species of things do in the air intersect
one another, and suffer not discerpibility: and that these are bodies is
manifest, because they affect the senses; and therefore that which is a
property of some bodies cannot be the proper difference to distinguish a spirit
from a body. 5. This is only an arbitrary and feigned supposition, and cannot
be proved either by the testimony of any of the senses, by sound reason, or
innate notions; and what is or cannot be proved by some of these (according to
his own position) ought to be rejected. And therefore as indiscerpibility is no
proper difference of a spirit from a body, no more is penetrability, which can
no more be in a spiritual substance, than either in discreet quantity one can
be two, or two one, or in continuate quantity one inch can be two, or two can
become one. Dr Glisson from his much admired Suarius the great Weaver of
fruitless Cobwebs, has devised another difference of spirit from body which he
thus lays down, as we give it in this English. I assign (he says) a twofold
difference betwixt the substance De natura substant. Energetic. c. 27. p. 379.
of matter and that of spirits. The first is taken from the substantial (a
substantiali materiae mole) heap or weight of the matter. For I (he says)
besides the actual and accidental extension, do attribute to the matter this
substantial heap or weight which is denied to spirits. But the sign of this
heap or weight is, that if the matter in the same space be duplicated,
triplicated, or centuplicated, that it will be made more dense twofold,
threefold, or an hundred fold. And concludes thus: I answer (he says) that
matter and spirit in this do agree betwixt themselves, that they both are
finite, and from thence that they have this common, that neither of them can
reduce themselves into a littleness that is infinite, or into an infinite
magnitude. Therefore the difference betwixt them does not consist in this; but
in this, that a spirit whether it be contracted or dilated, is not made more
dense or rare; but on the contrary, matter, whether it be contracted or
expanded, is made more dense, or more rare. To which we return this responsion.
1. It is usual with men, when by their wills and fancies they would maintain an
opinion that is weak and groundless, finding they cannot clearly perform it, to
bring in some strange, obscure or equivocal word, thereby to make a flourish,
though they prove nothing: So here this learned person to make a show to prove
the difference of spirit does assign moles substantialis as peculiar to body,
but not to spirit; but what is to be understood by moles, he might know his own
meaning, but I am sure there are few others that do or can understand it, and
therefore is but a devised subterfuge to stumble and blind men's intellects, and
not to prove the thing intended. 2. If by the word moles he intend weight or
gravity (and what else it can signify is not intelligible) then it will not be
a difference betwixt body and spirit, because gravity and levity are
differences of bodies in respect of one another, and therefore can be none as
he assigns it. 3. To assert that a spirit when contracted or dilated is not
made more dense or more rare, but that matter whether it be contracted or
expanded, is made more dense or more rare, is easily spoken, but not so easily
proved: and rude assertions without sound proof, are of no validity, and may
with as good reason be denied and rejected, as affirmed or received. 4. We have
no density in bodies but in respect of the paucity and parvity of the pores, so
that less of another body is contained in them, and that is accounted rare that
has many or greater, and so contains more of another body in them, and are
qualities or modifications that only belong unto bodies, and not at all unto
spirits, and is but precariously taken up by the Doctor without any proof or
demonstration at all. 5. If spirits cannot expand themselves into an infinite
space, nor contract themselves into an infinite littleness, then where are
bounds and limits of this contraction and expansion, or how is it proved that
they can do either? seeing they are properties and affections of bodies and
matter, and never were proved to be peculiar to spirits.

4. Those that are much affected to and zealous for experimental Argum. 4.
Philosophy, do often run into that extreme, as utterly to condemn and throw
away all the ancient Scholastic Learning, as though there were nothing in it
of verity or worth: But this is too severe and dissonant from truth, as might
be made manifest in many of their Maxims; but we shall only instance in one as
pertinent to our present purpose, which is this: Imaginatio non transcendit
Continuum. And this if we perpend it seriously, is a most certain and
transcendant truth; for when we come to cogitate and conceive of a thing, we
cannot apprehend it otherwise than as continuate and corporeal; for what other
notions soever we make of things, they are but adventitious, arbitrary, and
fictitious, for even non entia ad modum entium concipiuntur. And therefore
those that pretend that Angels are merely incorporeal, must needs err, and put
force upon their own faculties, which cannot conceive a thing that is not
continuate and corporeal: But if they will trust their own Cogitations and
faculties rightly disposed, and not vitiated, then they must believe that
Angels are Corporeal, and not merely and simply spirits, for absolutely nothing
is so but God only.

5. If the Angelical nature were simply and absolutely spiritual Argum. 5.
and incorporeal, then they would be of the same essential Identity with God,
which is simply impossible. For the Angels were not Created forth of any part
of Gods Essence, for then he should be divisible, which he is not, nor can be,
his Essence being simplicity, unity, and Identity it self, and therefore the
Angels must of necessity be of an essence of Alterity, and different from the
essence of God. Now God being a simple, pure, and absolute spirit in the
Identity of his essence, if the Angels were simply and absolutely spiritual and
incorporeal, then they must be of the same essence with him, which is absurd
and impossible; and therefore they have Alterity in them, and so of necessity
must be Corporeal, and not simply and merely spiritual. And that as much as we
contend for here is granted by Dr Moore in these words: For (he says) I look
upon Angels to be as truly a compound Being consisting of soul and body, as
that of men and brutes. Whereby he plainly asserteth their Composition, and so
their Alterity, and therefore that they must needs have an Internum and
externum, as the learned and Christian Philosopher Dr Fludd does affirm in
these words: Certum est igitur inesse Vid. Rob. Fludd. utri. Cosm. Hist. Tract.
1. l. 4. c. 2. p. 110.
ipsis (scilicet Angelis) aliud, quod agit, aliud autem, quod patitur; nec vero
illud secundum quod agunt, aliud quam actus esse poterit, qui forma dicitur;
neque etiam illud secundum quod patiuntur, est quicquam praeter potentiam, haec
autem materia appellatur.

6. Therefore to conclude, these arguments do sufficiently and Argum. 6.
evidently prove that Angels are either Corporeal, or have bodies united unto
them, which is all one to our purpose whether way soever it be taken. To which
only we shall add these authorities; and first S. Bernard tells us thus much
rendered into English. Therefore Sermon. 6. sup. Cantic. p. 505.
(he says) as we render unto God alone true immortality, so also incorporeity,
because he alone does so far transcend the universal Corporeal nature of
spirits, that he does not stand need of any body whatsoever, in any operation
whatsoever, being content with only a spiritual nodd (or motion) when he will,
to perform whatsoever he pleases. Therefore only that majesty of his, is that,
which neither for himself, nor for another, has need of the help of a
Corporeal instrument, by which omnipotent will he is immediately present at
every work. And that of Damascen Lib. 5.
is full to the purpose, which is this: That Angels quantum ad nos, are said to
be incorporeal and immaterial: but compared to God, are found to be Corporeal
and material. And of this opinion besides were Tertullian, S. Augustine,
Nazianzen, Beda, and many others, as may be seen in the learned Writings of
Zanchy upon this subject: with whose words we shall shut up this particular:
Certum enim est, ex iis quae scripturae tradunt de Angelis, probabiliorem esse
Patrum sententiam, quam Scholasticorum: utram tamen sequaris, non multum
peccaveris, nec propterea inter Haereticos haberi poteris.

And on the otherside, if they be holden to be simply and absolutely
incorporeal, then these absurdities must of necessity follow.

1. If Angels be simply incorporeal, then they can cause no Physical or local
motion at all, because nothing can be moved but by contact, and that must
either be by immediate or virtual contact, for the Maxim is certain, Quicquid
agit, agit vel mediatione suppositi, as when ones hand does immediately touch a
thing and so move it; vel mediatione virtutis, as when a man with a rod or a
line, does draw a thing forth of the water, both of these do require a
Corporeal contact, that is, that the superficies of the body moveing or
drawing, must either mediately or immediately touch the superficies of the body
to be moved or drawn. But that which is absolutely incorporeal has no
superficies at all, and therefore can make no contact either mediate or
immediate; and therefore Angels if simply incorporeal, can cause no Physical or
local motion at all.

2. If Angels be absolutely incorporeal, then they cannot be contained or
circumscribed in place, and consequently can perform no operation in Physical
things. To which if they answer with Thomas Aquinas: Quod circumscribi terminis
localibus est proprium Corporum, sed circumscribi terminis essentialibus, est
commune cuilibet Creaturae, tam corporali, quam spirituali; This aerie
distinction might have taken place, if Aquinas had showed us what essential
terms and limitations are, but of this we have no proof at all, and what was
never proved may justly be denied. For what a definitive place is, was never
yet defined, neither can we possibly conceive an Idea or notion of any such
thing, but only as we may make a Chimaera or figment of that which never was
nor is. For though we may apprehend that they are not circumscribed in place,
as gross bodies are, yet it is not to be doubted, but that they move from place
to place, and do so consist in some place, that they occupy a certain space of
place, and this is most certain, if we believe (as we ought) those things which
the Scriptures do declare concerning the mission and motion of Angels. And
therefore notwithstanding this frivolous and feigned distinction, we may
conclude with Theodoret, Angelorum naturam esse finitam, and circumscriptam,
eoque opus habere loco. Neither does that avail to solve the business, and make
this a good distinction, which is brought by Dr Moore, to wit, that there are
two acceptions of place, the one being imaginary space, the other that place is
the concave superficies of one body immediately The Immortal. l. 1. c. 10. p.
72.
environing another body, and that therefore there being these two acceptions
of place (he concludes) that the distinction of being there Circumscriptive
and definitive, is an allowable distinction. But by the Doctors leave we must
affirm, that what he says is not allowable, and that for these reasons. 1.
Because imaginary space has no existence in nature, but only in the fancy of
the Imaginant, and entia rationalia, non sunt entia naturalia ex part rerum
existentia. 2. Because it is a certain truth which Des Carts Princip. Phil.
Part. 2. p. 40.
has taught us, to wit: That the names of place or space, do not signify any
thing different from a body that is said to be in a place, but only do design
the magnitude, figure and site of it amongst other bodies. And that this fite
may be determined, we ought to have respect unto some other bodies, which we
may consider as immovable. And as we respect diverse bodies, we may say that
the same thing at the same time does change place and not change place. As when
a Ship is carried in the Sea, he who sits in the Ship does always remain in
one place, if respect be had to the parts of the Ship, betwixt which parts he
keeps the same site: And the same person does continually change place, if
respect be had to the shores, because he continually receedeth from some
shores, and comes more near unto other. 3. Neither is this distinction good,
because as the same Author tells us: Non etiam in re differunt spatium, sive
locus internus, and substantia corporea in eo contenta, sed tantum in modo, quo
a nobis concipi soleat. 4. Dr Moore grants that spirits are substances and
have extension, and we affirm that nothing can be so but what is Corporeal, and
consequently must be in place circumscriptively, and therefore the fancy of a
definitive place, is merely a fictitious foppery, without ground or reason.

And now let us examine the objections that are usually brought Object. 1.
against this opinion, the strongest of which is to this purpose; that if
Angels be Corporeal, then of necessity they must be mortal, alterable and
destructible; to which I answer. 1. Because no Creaturely nature is or can be
immortal, per se and ab intrinseca and propria natura, for God only is so as
says the Text, (...), 1 Timoth. 6. 16.
Who only has immortality; Therefore the Angels whether corporeal or
incorporeal, are not immortal, neither by themselves or their intrinsic
nature, either (as the Schools speak) a part ante, vel a part post, because
God only is so, exclusively considered in regard of any Creature, and so the
objection is of no force. 2. The Corporeity of Angels does not at all hinder
their immortality a part post, for as God is only immortal in respect of
Essence, Eternity, Infinity and Independency, so Angels nor any Creatures, are
immortal in that point or respect, but only in regard of their dependency upon
God, who by his conservative power does keep them by Christ, that for the time
or duration to come, they shall not die; perish, or be annihilated; and this he
can and does as well perform if they be corporeal as spiritual, even as he does
preserve and conserve the bodies of the Saints in their Graves until the
general Resurrection, and in the World to come does keep them in immortality;
though they be changed and made spiritual bodies, yet they remain bodies still.
For it is he that sustaineth all things by the power of Hebr. 1. 3. 1 Timothy 6.
13. Job 34. 14, 15.
his word; And it is he that does vivifie or quicken all things: and if he
gather unto himself his spirit and his breath, all flesh shall perish together,
and man shall turn again unto dust. So that the objection is of no validity,
because no Creature is kept in perpetual duration, a part post, ab intrinseca
natura, sed ex causis conservantibus, which is the good will, benignity, and
blessed influence of Jehovah, and not from any internal creaturely power. 3.
Every spiritual and incorporeal substance that is created, is as annihilable by
the prime power that created it, as is a Corporeal created substance. And on
the contrary, a Corporeal or material substance is no more capable of
annihilation by any power or efficiency of second Causes, than an incorporeal
and spiritual substance is; and therefore whether Angels be simply incorporeal,
or that they be Corporeal, it neither makes for nor against their immortality,
which consists only in the benign emanation of the Divine conservative power of
the Almighty: And therefore does profound Bradwardine draw that invincible, and
undeniable Corollary of verity, Quod necesse est Deum servare quamlibet
Creaturam immediatius quacunque causa creata. 4. Though the most of the bodies
that are known unto us be divisible, alterable and discerpible, or dissipable
in respect of our conceptions of them, yet actually we may find many bodies in
nature that are not, nor ever were dissipated or dissevered secundum totum,
though there may be alteration in their superficial parts, as the Earth, the
Sun, Moon, the rest of the Planets, and those great and glorious bodies that we
call Stars; so that for the duration of bodies a part post we can conclude
little of certainty. And as there are bodies that secundum suum totum, are not
severed or dissipated, so there are some bodies that though they may suffer
division and dissipation into smaller parts, yet do those parts though most
minute, suffer no real transmutation, but remain of the same Homogeneous nature
they were before, as is most manifest in Silver dissolved in Aqua fortis,
wherein though it be so severed and dispersed, that it appear not at all unto
the eye, yet may it be from thence recovered and redintegrated into its own
nature as it was before. And also the Masters of the more abstruse Philosophy
affirm to us upon their own certain experience, that though metallic Mercury
may be divided into insensible and invisible Atoms, yet still it retains the
nature of metallic Mercury, and that thus Helmont tells us: Si non vidissem
argentum vivum eludere Dt Lithias. l. c. (...). p. 70.
quamcunque artificum operam, adeo, quod aut totum avolet adhuc integrum, aut
totum in igne permaneat, atque utrolibet modo, servet impermutabilem sui ac
primitivam identitatem, identitatisque homogeneitatem anaticam: dicerem artem
non esse veram, quae vera est, sine mendacio, atque long verissima. So also
there are bodies which although they suffer division and separation by some
other bodies dissevering of them, yet by motion of coition they soon close and
redintegrate themselves, having thereby suffered no detriment at all, as is
most apparent in the pure body of the Ether, the visible species of things,
the images in a Looking-glass and in shadows, which are all bodies. So that
seeing bodies, no more than Spirits to be annihilable by second causes, and
that there are some bodies that are not dissipated secundum totum, and that
there are others that though they are separable into more minute particles, yet
do they remain in Anatical and Homogeneous Identity, and that there are others
that though they be actually for a small moment divided, yet they do
instantaneously coalesce, and by coition unite themselves; yet we may therefore
rationally conclude, that corporeity, quatenus such, does not at all take away
immortality a part post, because bodies as well as spirits may be kept in
immortality by the conservative concourse of Divine Power, and so the objection
utterly falls to the ground.

2. There is only another argument that the persons of the other Object. (...)
opinion have urged, such as Aquinas, and the rest of the Scholastic rabble,
to wit, the Text in the Psalm, which is this: Who makes Psalm. 104. 4. Heb. 1.
7.
his Angels spirits: his ministers a flaming fire. From whence they would
positively conclude that they are spirits, and absolutely incorporeal; but fail
of their purpose for these clear reasons. 1. The Text there cannot be
rationally understood of their creation, or of their creaturely nature, but of
their offices and administrations, because the word used there is not from
(...) to create, or form forth of nothing, but from (...) fecit, that is by
ordering them in their offices and ministrations. And again the word (...) does
not always or of necessity signify an incorporeal thing but that which is a
body, as the winds, and so does Luther and diverse others render it, and it is
commonly attributed to beasts as well as Men, as in that of Solomon, Who
knows the spirit of man that goes upward, and the spirit of the beast that
goes downward to the earth? Where the word spirit, which is all one in the
Hebrew, is attributed to beasts as well as to men, but no man (I suppose) will
believe that the spirit of a beast is simply incorporeal, and therefore by the
word spirit in the Psalm cannot necessarily be understood a simple incorporeal
substance, and therefore the consequence is not necessary.

But the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews must needs be taken for the best
Expositor of these words of the Psalmist, who does quote them only for this
purpose, to prove that Christ in dignity and office is far above-the Angels who
are all ordered to serve and obey him, and are by their offices all but
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of
Salvation. By which it is manifest that this place is to be understood of their
ministration and offices, and not of their nature or substances. 2. They can no
more be merely and literally said to be spirits, understanding spirit to intend
an absolute incorporeal substance, than his ministers can be literally
understood to be flaming-fire, they must either be both literally true, which
is absolutely absurd, or else those words must have a metaphorical
interpretation, as they may and must have, and there is no inconvenience in
that exposition. For as the winds, which is but a strong motion of the air, and
the shining or flaming fire, are two of the most quick, agile and operative
agents that are known unto us in nature, so the Angels and Christ's Ministers
are strong, quick and most nimble and powerful in performing their offices and
administrations. Therefore we shall conclude this as Scheibler does from S.
Augustine: Nihil enim invisibile and Metaphys. l. 2. c. 4. p. 222. Vid. August.
Tom. 2. l. de spir. and an. c. 8.
incorporeum natura credendum est, praeter solum Deum, qui ex eo incorporeus
and invisibilis dicitur, quia infinitus, and incircumscriptus est, and simplex,
and sibi omnibus modis sufficiens se ipso, and per seipsum: omnis vero
rationalis creatura corporea est, Angeli and omnes Virtutes corporeae sunt,
licet non subsistunt in carne.

Now though we have sufficiently proved that they are corporeal, that is, that
they have bodies naturally united unto them, and so have an internum, or moving
power, and an externum, or a part moved, that is, as Dr. Moore confesses, a
spiritual and incorporeal part, and a corporeal part or vehicle, yet to assign
what kind of bodies they have, or what proper difference there is betwixt their
substance and other corporeal substances is no easy matter to determine. Only
we shall give two differences whereby they are distinguished from other
substances that are corporeal, and that as the Scripture holds them forth
unto us. 1. The first differential distinction is, that their bodies do not
suffer, or are altered or dissipated, by the most strong, and operative
sublunary agent that is known unto us: Amongst which we have none of greater
force and activity than our culinary fire, yet it is manifest that that Element
did not work upon nor burn the Angel that appeared to Manoah and his Wife, who
ascended in the flame of the altar, and was not touched, Judges 13 20.
or altered at all, which plainly shows that his body was not to be wrought
upon by the fierce flame of sublunary fire, and he is there called the Angel of
Jehovah. This also is confirmed by that which Nebuchadnezzar saw, and
confessed, that though there were three men only cast into the fiery furnace,
yet he saw a fourth Dan. 3. 24, 25.
(which by all the learned is judged to be an Angel) and they had no hurt upon
them, that is, the fire did not work upon their bodies to burn, alter, or
consume them. So that in this the bodies of Angels differ from the most of
other bodies, because they do not suffer by sublunary fire, the most violent
agent that we know. And this must needs rationally be taken to be proper unto
Angels in regard of their created natures, and not as superadded by a Divine
and Almighty Power, as in some other cases it may be granted. 2. A second
difference is, that what bodies soever spirits or Angels have, or appear in,
they have not flesh and bones such as Christ Luke 24. 39.
had in his true and numerical body in which he did appear after his
resurrection, which was the same individual body which he had before he was
crucified. But though they have bodies, yet to feeling and tangibility they
have not flesh and bones as humane bodies have, which have a renitency and
resistibility to our touch, which their bodies have not, being as it were
ethereal, airy and shadowy, and yielding and giving way to the touch, and
though to be divided and separated, yet, may be, do as soon close by counition,
and so suffer nothing at all by that division.

Concerning the properties of their bodies it seems to have been the opinion of
Tertullian (as I find him quoted by Mr. Baxter) Saints Everlast. rest, c. 7.
part 2. p. 255.
that they had thin pure and aereal bodies which they could dilate and expand,
condense and contract at their pleasures, and so frame them into diverse and
sundry shapes; his words are these: Daemones sua haec corpora contrahunt, and
dilatant, ut volunt: sicut etiam lumbrici, and alia quaedam insecta. So we see
that some worms and insects will extend themselves into a vast length and
smallness, that they can pass through a very small hole, or passage, and again
contract themselves into a great bulk, drawing in the length, and increasing
the breadth and thickness, which though it still be the same corporeal
substance, and in general does, in what figure soever it be brought into, but
retain the same dimensions in respect of place, yet in regard of accidental
shape or figure it may change the dimensions in respect of one another, as one
while to be more in longitude, and less inbreadth and depth, and sometimes more
in breadth and depth, and less in length. So may the bodies of Angels by
contraction and dilatation, sundry ways alter their dimensions, and
consequently their shapes and figures, and all this according to the motion and
act of their own wills, so that still there must be limits to these acts of
distention and contraction, that they can do neither in an infinite degree as
either to become an insensible and indivisible prick, nor to be infinitely
expanded or dilated, and this opinion has sufficiency of rationality and
intelligibility in it. Of this very point S. Bernard speaks thus modestly:
Videntur Patres de hujusmodi Sup. Cantic. p. 504.
diversa sensisse, nec mihi perspicuum est unde alterutrum doceam: and nescire
me fa^or. And though we cannot punctually enumerate, nor assign the certain
properties of their bodies, yet we may rationally conclude thus much. 1. That
they being creatures ordained for high and noble ends must needs have their
bodies and organs fitted and suitably proportioned to fulfill and accomplish
those ends, as does most manifestly appear by the bodies and organs of all
other creatures, which are most wisely and fitly framed by the Almighty,
according to the several ends and uses they were created and ordained for. 2.
It is most probable that considering there are creatures that as their wills
are moved by their passions and affections can alter the colors and figures of
their own bodies, as is manifest in worms, and in the colors of the Chameleon,
as it is asserted by the experience of the learned Physician Dominic^
Panarolus, so from the less to the more, that Angels have bodies of far more
excellency to perform their ministrations in, than those gross and terrestrial
bodies have that are here below. And it is no small wonder to observe our
ordinary Gallus Turcicus vel Gallopavus, how quiet and demisly sometimes he
goes, and then again upon the sudden by some emotion of spirit, how will his
train be advanced and extended, his barbles swelled and puffed up, and the
appendicle that comes over the bill or rostrum, be extended or contracted at
the pleasure of the animal: And much more to consider the quick and sudden
change of the colors of both those parts, as sometimes to a whitishness, or an
ash color, sometimes purple, sometimes bluish, and sometimes pure red, so
quick a motion that creature can give to the spirits and blood, that they can
so quickly alter and change, not only the colors, but also the magnitude. And
much more may we rationally believe that Angels can alter and change the figure
and color of their bodies according to the ministrations they are employed
about.

3. The Scripture informs us that in or at the resurrection, the Mark 12. 25.
bodies of men shall be as the Angels that are in heaven, sicut Angeli: Now
this Analogy, comparison, or assimilation, would be altogether false if Angels
had no bodies at all, but were merely incorporeal; then it would follow, that
the bodies after the resurrection were made mere Spirits, and so ceased to be
bodies, which is false according to the doctrine of S. Paul, who shows us
plainly that after the resurrection they are changed in qualities into (...)
spiritual bodies, for there is a natural Soul or Animal 1 Cor. 15. 44.
body, and so likewise, there is a spiritual body. From whence we necessarily
conclude that Angels have Bodies, and that they are pure spiritual ones.

Now we shall come to the other point intended in this Chapter, that is to show
that the opinion of Angels assuming bodies of the Elements here below, is a
mere figment, as must of necessity follow if this be a truth that we have
proved, to wit, that they have bodies; for then assuming of other bodies must
needs be in vain and to no purpose: but we shall also show the weakness and
folly of that Tenent by these positive reasons following.

1. Those that maintain the assumption of bodies dare not affirm that they are
so invested with those bodies, as are humane souls with their bodies: for then
there must be vital union, which cannot be but by Divine Ordination: But it
does not any where either by Scripture, or sound rational consequence, appear
that either God appointed, or gave power to Angels to assume to themselves
bodies of what shape they pleased, or that he ordained a vital union, betwixt
the Angels and those bodies they are supposed to assume either by Creation, or
Generation, and therefore if they did assume any such bodies it must but be as
we put on and off our Garments, or as Players put on and off their Perukes,
Vizards and Garments according to the several things or persons they intend to
represent ad personate.

2. But the great question will be, who are the Tailors that shape and frame
them these vestments? what! must it be themselves that shape and figurate these
bodies, as snails are supposed to frame and make their shells and houses?
Surely not, because if they be simply incorporeal, then they can make no
contact with corporeal matter, and without a corporeal contact there can be no
alteration nor organization of matter, and consequently they cannot frame or
shape themselves such vestments; neither can any other actor or agent be
assigned that can frame them, and therefore the Tenent is a most ridiculous
figment. And again if they should have such solid bodies framed of the inferior
Elements, as the body of a Serpent, as the Witchmongers do suppose the Devil
assumed when he deceived Evah, and such bodies as Demons are vainly supposed to
assume to carry the heavy bodies of Men and Women in the air, then those bodies
must needs be of that solidity and compactness that they cannot suddenly be
wasted and dissipated, and then doubtlesly we should find them sometimes, as we
do the sloughs, Exuvias, or skins of Snakes, for they could not be consumed in
a moment. And it were horrid to suppose that God should instantaneously create
them, and as suddenly dissipate and waste them. So that in verity there is
nothing of certitude, but it may be looked at as a Chimera and a Poetical Fable.

3. And if the Angels had not such bodily organs wherein they could move, walk,
speak, and perform other such actions withal, before they assumed or crept into
such vestments, their being enclosed and invested with them and in them would
no more fit and enable them to walk or speak in them, than would an hollow
Image enable a lame Man to walk, or a dumb Man to speak that were enclosed in
them. Therefore (suppose) as the Witchmongers hold, that the Devil should
appear to a Witch in the assumed shape of a Cat, Dog, Foal or such like, and
walk and talk with him or her, if before that assumption of such a shape, the
Devil could not walk and speak, the having crept into such a vestment would no
more enable him to speak, than a dead Cat in an empty hogshead, or wind pent in
an empty bladder.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Knowledge, and Power of fallen Angels.

THese evil Angels of which we treat, did doubtless, before they left their
habitation and did not keep their first estate, participate of the same
knowledge and power, that those Angels still retain that did not fall into that
defection and rebellion; so that our disquisition must be, what knowledge and
power they have lost, and what they still do retain, and this we may consider
in these particulars. 1. That there are many things of which they are totally
ignorant and nescient. 2. The knowledge that they have is dark and confused.

1. Concerning the first, this must of necessity be a certain rule that what
the holy and elect Angels do not know, the evil and fallen Angels must much more
ignore, except the knowledge of evil and guilt, from which the good Angels are
free; and these may be reduced to these few points. 1. We here may consider
that the knowledge of Angels, is to be restrained into these three ranks; first
either their innate and congenerate knowledge, or secondly their infused or
revealed knowledge by God in his Son Jesus Christ, or thirdly their
experimental knowledge that they gain by observation and experience, and it is
of the first only that we speak in this Paragraph, and the rest we shall handle
anon. 2. That our cogitations, desires and affections are not known to the
Angels, unless they manifest themselves either by external signs, or effects,
or be revealed from God; Andtheseways they may be known, but not otherwise; for
it is manifest that Satan had darted it, or put it into the mind of Judas to
betray Christ, yet had he so cunningly carried himself, that neither by any
effect nor sign did the Disciples know it until our Savior did reveal it unto
them. So that the Scriptures do plainly inform us of the truth in this
particular, as, For what (...) Cor. 2. 11.
man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? For
this is only proper to God to search the heart, and to understand the
cogitations, as says the Text: For thou only know 2 Chronicles. 6. 30.
the hearts of the children of men, he only knows them, and neither Angels
nor men: and though the heart be deceitful and desperately wicked, yet God does
search the heart, and try the reins. Jer. 17. 9, 10.
So that if the good Angels do not know the cogitations, desires and affections
of Men's hearts, except God either reveal them unto them, or they be made
manifest by signs and effects, much less must the bad Angels know or understand
them. 3. Those things that are merely contingent, and those which depend upon
free will, cannot be known of the Angels, unless they be revealed by God, as is
manifest by the Text. Produce your cause, says the Lord, bring forth your
strong Idols, or Diviners, says the King of Jacob. Let (...) 41. 21, 22, 23.
them bring them forth, and show us what shall happen: let them show the former
things what they be, that we may consider them, and know the later end of them,
or declare us things for to come. Show the things that are to come hereafter,
that we may know that ye are Gods: yea, do good, or evil, that we may be
dismayed, and behold it together. And as the good Angels know not contingent
things, or those that depend upon free will, much less do the fallen Angels
understand them, as is manifest in these examples. The Angel that was sent of
God to warn Joseph to take the child Jesus, and fly into Egypt, Math. 2. 13.
did not of his own innate knowledge, either in it self, or in its cause (as
the Schoolmen speak) know that Herod would seek the child to destroy him,
because it was truly a contingent thing, and did only depend upon the free act
of Herod's will, and therefore by Divine Goodness and Providence it was revealed
to the Angel, thereby to preserve the life of the child, and to fulfill the
Scriptures. Neither do the fallen Angels know future events that are contingent,
or depend upon the free will of men, as is manifest in Satan's tempting and
afflicting of Job, which he intended to have been his destruction, and
therefore did falsely divine and foretell that Job would curse God to his face,
but the event was not according to his lying conjecture, but to the
manifestation of Jobs Faith and Patience, and produced his glorious
restoration. So the lying spirit in the mouth of Ahabs Prophets, did not know
that Ahab would go up to Ramoth Gilead, or that he should be slain there, but
that God did reveal it unto him, and sent him forth with a powerful commission
to prevail. So that all the predictions and Divinations of the Devil or his
Angels are nothing but lying guesses and uncertain conjectures; for what can be
expected from him who was a liar from the beginning, and the father of lies?
Neither were his Idol-priests, Wizzards, Diviners or Prophets any better but
mere conjecturers and liars, as was most manifest in all those Oracles that
were amongst the Grecians, which uttered nothing but cheats, lies,
equivocations and ambiguous responsions. And those amongst the Jews were no
better, who took upon them to foretell and divine for others, but could not or
did not foresee their own destruction, as is manifest in Ahabs Prophets slain
by Elijah, and the Priests of Baal slain by Jehu, and therefore must all those
needs be deceived that run to Divining Witches and Wizzards, of which sort of
couzeners we have too many.

And if against this it be objected that the Devils did know and Object.
confess that Jesus was the Son of God, and therefore if they could tell this
that was so great a mystery, much more easily may they know other inferior
things, and so may foretell future contingencies, to which we give this
responsion.

1. We only affirm that Devils did not know Christ by their innate or inbred
knowledge, but they might know him by the revelation of the Father, and by the
things that were written of him by the Prophets, and by the observation of
those things that were manifested at his birth, and showed and done in his life
time.

2. And it is manifest that God did not altogether intend to have him hidden
from the knowledge of Devils, because he ordered that the spirit should lead
him into the wilderness, that he might be tempted, that his power and victory
might be shown over the Prince of darkness. And the end that the wisdom of God
had in this, was that the Devils to their greater terror and horror might know
their Conqueror, and by whose power they should be tormented and thrown into
the Abyss or bottomless pit, and this made Matthew. 8. 29. Luke 8. 31.
them cry out saying, Art thou come to torment us before the time, and also
force us not into the Abyss or deep.

3. The Devils might know this because the Angels had proclaimed his birth to
the Shepherds, and told them, that unto them was Luke 2. 11.
born that day, in the City of David, a Savior which was Christ the Lord: And
they might know it from the appearing of the Holy Ghost in the form of a Dove,
and resting upon him, and by the voice which said from Heaven, this is my
beloved son, in whom I Math. 3. 17.
am well pleased. And they might know it by the conquest that Christ had over
the Devil, and by their daily being cast out by the power of his word, and
command, as by the finger of God.

4. The mysteries of Salvation cannot be known unto the good Angels, but by
Divine Revelation, much less unto the bad ones, as witnesses the Text: For
what man knows the things of a man, 1 Cor. 2. 11.
save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knows no
man, but the spirit of God. The mysteries therefore of Salvation, as they have
been decreed by himself in his eternal counsel, are not known unto the Angels,
but by the revelation of the spirit of God and the complement and fulfilling of
his promises. So concerning the restoration or precise day and hour of the
coming of Christ, do not the Angels in Heaven know, though their knowledge be
vast and great, and therefore much less those fallen and rebellious Angels that
are chained in everlasting darkness, until the judgment of the great day.

5. And as that which is not understood of the blessed and elect Angels must
needs be unknown unto the fallen Angels, so likewise there are many things known
to the good Angels, that are hidden or but conjectured at by the bad ones, as
may be manifest in these instances. 1. The blessed Angels know and see the face
of the Father in beatifical vision, as says the Text: Take heed that ye offend
Math. 18. 10.
not one of these little ones; for I say unto you, that in heaven their Angels
do always behold the face of my father, which is in heaven. Upon which Beza
has this note: Loquitur more seculi hujus, ubi consistere in conspectu regis
faciemque ejus perpetuo videre posse, signum est domesticae intimaeque
familiaritatis. But the fallen Angels are totally deprived of this blessed
Vision, being cast forth of Heaven, as says the Text. And the great Dragon was
cast out, that old Serpent, Revel. 12. 9.
called the Devil and Satan, which deceives the world: he was cast out into
the earth, and his Angels were cast out with him. And S. Peter tells us, that
God spared not the Angels that sinned, but 2 Pet. 2. 4.
cast them down to hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness. 2. And as
they have lost the vision and fruition of the mercies of God, so they have
utterly lost the knowledge of his will, concerning his Covenant of Grace and
mercy to the elect, for they are only ministering spirits sent forth to tempt to
sin, to afflict and punish, and have still enough for the advancing of the
Kingdom of darkness, but have no knowledge of saving grace nor the mysteries of
the Gospel, but are all enemies and adversaries to God and the Kingdom of
Christ, and goes about seeking continually whom he may devour. But it is the
blessed elect Angels that are ministering spirits, sent forth for to minister to
them, who shall be heirs of Salvation. Heb. 1. 14.
3. The good Angels have the blessed messages revealed unto them for the
assisting and delivering of the godly. So an Angel did comfort Joshua, and
another warned Joseph to take the child Josh. 5. 13.
Jesus, and to fly into Egypt, thereby to preserve the child's life; and an
Angel delivered the Apostles forth of prison, and many such Acts 12. 7.
happy errands are made manifest unto them, and they employed about them, of
all which the fallen Angels are utterly ignorant, and they are concealed from
them.

6. There are some things that the evil Angels know of, which the blessed ones
have no sensibility of, that is the knowledge of their own guilt, and the
experimental sense of the loss of Gods Favor, Love, Grace and Mercy.

2. The second thing that we proposed to handle, is, that the knowledge that
the fallen Angels have is dark and confused, which is plain because they are
reserved in chains under darkness, unto the Jude (...).
judgment of the great day. Now those that are kept or reserved in darkness,
must of necessity have their knowledge dark, and consequently confused; and he
also that is the Prince of darkness, and the Father and Author of the works of
darkness, must needs like his children have his understanding darkened also. And
therefore we will conclude this point with the opinion of S. Augustine who
speaking both of the Angels that stood, and those that fell, says thus: Ante
peccatum autem tam isti quam illi perfect omnia intelligebant. De Civitat.
Dei, l. 9.
Accessit igitur istis propter peccatum aliquid tenebrarum. Proinde etiam
tenebrae appellantur, and in tenebris esse dicuntur, coelesti illa luce
destituti, and in locum caliginosum praecipitati. Ut inde intelligamus nonnihil
tenebrarum naturali etiam illorum menti accessisse, in poenam admissipeccati in
Deum, Deique filium. But we shall only here speak of their knowledge in
reference to things acted in this elementary and sublunary world, and that in
these particulars.

1. Though they retain the same faculty of understanding that they had before
their fall, of the generation, motion and mutation of natural things here
below, yet is it much darkened, and far inferior to the knowledge of the good
Angels in natural things, the one sort living and abiding in light, and the
other being shut up in darkness.

2. What knowledge soever they have by their natural faculties, or that they
may be supposed to gain by acquisition, is by them gotten or learned for no
other end, but for the hurt and destruction of mankind, and not as the good
Angels who make use of theirs for the benefit of those that shall be heirs of
Salvation. For as a good Physician labors and studies to know the nature and
virtues of Animals, Vegetables and Minerals, and their parts and products, for
the good and benefit of mankind, but a Witch or poysoner labors to know
their virtues thereby to destroy and kill; even so do the evil Angels, and not
otherwise.

3. The knowledge of Devils whether natural or acquisitive is spurious,
erroneous, fallacious, deceitful and delusive, both in respect of themselves
and others, for as says the Scripture: He was John. 8. 44.
a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no
truth in him. When he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own: for he is a liar,
and the father of it. Therefore says learned Rollock upon this very place: Hoc
est loqui ex ingenio suo, quod natural est sibi facere; suum enim and quod ex
sese deprompsit, non autem quod aliunde accepit, profert. For as all the
endeavors of the fallen Angels tend to the seduction and delusion of others, so
are they, and were they the deceivers and deluders of themselves: For it is
most manifest that their minds are so obcaecated and covered over with
darkness, that although they be not altogether in general destitute of the
knowledge of that which is just and unjust, good and evil, pious and impious,
yet they do not acknowledge their own sin, as they ought, for they are so
pertinacious in their sin and wickedness, that they do not attentively perpend
and consider their own evil, and therefore are not truly sensible, or do
understand that it is evil, and therefore are by the just judgment of God so
absolutely obcaecated that they cannot acknowledge their own evil and sin. And
as that knowledge they have is so darkened that they have deluded and deceived
themselves, so all their knowledge in respect of others is erroneous,
fallacious and lying, as the Text witnesses of Antichrist: Even he whose
coming is after the 2 These. 2. 9, 10, 11.
working of Satan, with all power and signs, and lying wonders: And with all
deceiveableness of unrighteousness, in them that perish. And for this cause God
shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe a lie.

4. In regard of the words, intentions and actions of wicked Men they both know
and may foretell much, because they are the Authors and devisers of those evils
and wicked thoughts; as it was the Devil that pushed on the Scribes and
Pharisees to accuse and put Christ to death, for it was their hour and the
power of darkness, and it was Satan that had darted it into the mind of Judas
Iscariot to betray his Master: And therefore the Devils might probably (if not
certainly) know that his death would be brought to pass; so that they may
easily foretell what themselves have projected and prepared instruments to
accomplish.

5. The acquired knowledge of the fallen Angels must needs be great in regard of
their vast multitudes and their being dispersed in this caliginous air or
Atmosphere, for the Devil is called the Prince of the air (if that be literally
to be understood) and he compasses the earth and walks to and fro in it, and
goes about seeking whom he may devour, and therefore by their agility of body
and celerity of motion may easily know what is done and spoken, and may so very
quickly convey it one to another, and so may most readily communicate things
that are acted or spoken at an incredible distance one from another; but yet
all this no further than Divine Providence will permit and allow of.

6. The Witchmongers and others do attribute a kind of omnisciency to Devils in
respect of their acquired knowledge, which we by no means can allow them, and
that for these reasons. 1. Though it be granted that they do grow and increase
in the knowledge of sin, evil, and wickedness, therewith to hurt, devour and
destroy; or gain more skill and craft to lie, cheat, delude and deceive; yet
that they either gain or gather any knowledge that is good, or for any good
end, is absolutely false, for they abode not in the truth, neither are they
lovers of truth, but are utter Enemies to all good knowledge and verity. 2.
That they may be Masters of all the arts or ways of deceit, lying, cheating
and delusion, is no way to be denied; but that they should (as many suppose) by
reason of their longevity and duration, learn and be perfect in any or all of
the good Arts or Sciences, is to me utterly incredible, because they are the
Corruptors of all, but the perfectors of none, else should they be the greatest
Philosophers in the World, which is false. And therefore most Christian and
pious was that Sentence of that unjustly censured Person Paracelsus in these
words: Et licet Diabolus quidem De ver. influr^r. l. p. 425*
plurima machinetur: hoc tamen cum omnibus suis legionibus praestare minime
potest, ut vel abjectam ollam frangat, nedum eandem faciat: multo is minus
quenquam occidere, aut jugulare potest, nisi id mandato, permissu jussuque ac
vi divina faciat.

The other main point that we undertake to handle in this Chapter, is, touching
the power of the fallen Angels, and that is to be considered in these three
particulars: 1. In general in respect of their power, either in spiritual and
moral things, or in things natural. 2. Or in respect of spiritual and moral
things in particular. 3. Or in respect of Physical and sublunary things.

1. And for the first it must of necessity be granted, that their power since
their fall is much diminished, or at least restrained and chained and fettered
up. For they becoming Rebels against the Almighty, and not keeping their first
Estate, but having left their own habitation, it was most agreeable to the
wisdom and justice of God to take away from them the greatest part of that
power and authority that he formerly had given them, and so to imprison and
chain them up, that they might never be able to attempt or perform the like
Rebellion again; otherwise the Almighty should not have used that wisdom that
is ordinary with earthly Princes, who having overcome those that rebelled
against them, do not only disarm them, but also confine or imprison them. And
to this very thing do the Scriptures allude, when they say, that they are
delivered into chains of darkness, and that they are reserved in everlasting
chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day. So that though the
Devils still retain their cruel, wicked and devouring will and mind; yet they
are but like the Lion within the Bars of Iron, or Bajazet in the Cage of Iron
led about by Tamberlan, and so though they be never so cruelly bent to do
mischief, yet they are under the Chains and cooped up in the Grates of
Darkness, and kept in Everlasting Chains that they are never able to break or
unloose. And though he be called the God of this World and the Prince of it,
yet that is not to be understood, that he is the Prince and Ruler of the
Creatures of the World, or that he gives riches, health, honor or the like,
for those are the gift of God only and not of the Devil; but he is the God and
Prince of the evil and wickedness that is in the World, for in that, and by
that, he reigns and rules; and John 12. 31.
to this purpose says Rollock: Damnatio est Satanae, qui peccati author est.
Nam vit a hujus mundi est secundum principem cui potestas Ephesians. 2. 2.
est aeris, etc. Dicitur autem Princeps hujus mundi, quia per peccatum, and
mortem regnat in mundo: ut enim test Paulo, Regnum Romans 14. 17.
Dei positum est in justitia, and pace, and gaudio per spiritum sanctum, sic
regnum Satanae positum est in injustitia, and morte. Unde ipse propter peccatum
per quod regnat, dicitur rector tenebrarum. Propter mortem per quam regnat,
dicitur imperium mortis habere. And upon this place St. Augustine says thus:
Nunc Princeps hujus mundi Ephesians. 6. 12. Heb. 2. 14.
ejicietur for as, absit ut Diabolum principem mundi it a dictum existimemus, ut
eum Coeli and terrae dominari posse credamus: sed mundus appellatur in malis
hominibus, qui toto orb terrarum diffusisunt. Sic ergo dictum est: Princeps
hujus mundi, id est princeps malor um hominum qui habitant in mundo. Appellatur
etiam mundus Vid. Caten. Aur. Tho. Aquin.
in bonis, qui similiter per totum orbem terrarum diffusi sunt: Ideo dicit
Apostolus, Deus erat in Christo mundum reconcilians sibi: Hi sunt ex quorum
cordibus principes mundi ejicientur for as. And whereas also Satan is called the
Prince of the power of the air, that, works in the Children of disobedience,
it is not literally so to be understood, as though he had the natural power of
ruling the air, and causing of winds, hail, snow, frost, rain, thunder and
lightning, for these are all ordered according to the will of divine providence
and the causes that he has established in the Elements: So David speaking of
the Heavens, the Earth, and the Elements, does conclude thus; They continue
this day according to thine ordinances, Psalm. 119 89.
for all thy servants: And it is he that orders all these, as says the Text:
Who covers the Heavens with Clouds, who prepares rain for the earth, who
makes grass to grow upon the mountains. He Psalm. 147. 8. 16, 17, 18.
gives snow like wool, he scatters the hoary frost like ashes. He casts
forth his ice like morsels: Who can stand before his Cold? Psalm. 148. 8.
He sends forth his word, and melts them: he causes his wind to blow, and
the waters flow. And all these fulfill the will and command of God, and not the
will of the fallen Angels; for the Text says: Fire and hail, snow and vapor,
stormy wind fulfilling his word; so that if they have any thing to do in the
sublunary changes or motions of Meteors, it is but only as instrumental and
organical Causes, working merely as they are ordered and acted by the first
cause that works all in all, as the Christian Philosopher Doctor Fludd has
most learnedly proved in his Treatise of Cosmical Meteors, which I seriously
commend to those that desire full satisfaction in this particular. But the
Devil is chiefly called the Prince of the power of the air, because he is the
proud, high, airy and spiritual Prince and Ruler of wickedness in high or
super-coelestial places, by which proud, airy, and spiritual wickedness, he
works Ephesians. 6. 12.
in the Children of disobedience. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood,
but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness
of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places, (...). Upon which
learned Beza says thus: Homine^ quorum fragilis and caduca est natura, cui
opponuntur versutiae spirituales, infinitis partibus potentiores. And again,
Is It a nomina tribuit Angelis malis, propter effectus, non quod eos sua vi
possint praestare, sed quia illis Deus laxat habenas. And therefore S.
Chrysostom Homil. 22. p. 257. Jo. 8.
upon this place says thus: Mundi vero dominos eos vocat, non quod mundum
gubernent, sed solet scriptura malos actus hunc mundum vocare, ut quando
Christus dicit, vos non estis ex hoc mundo quemadmodum ego non sum ex mundo.

2. To consider their power in spiritual and moral things particularly, we
shall find they have no power in some things, but by their fall have utterly
lost it, as is apparent in these few points. 1. They have lost that freedom of
will that they had by Creation, and were partakers of before they fell, and
agreeable to this is the Thesis of learned Zanchy, which is this: That all
Devils have so De operib. Dei l. 4. c. 6. p. 175.
far their wills made obstinate in sins, the hatred of God, Christ, and of
Mankind, that from this evil they cannot will to repent, and thereby be saved;
and this he thus proves. 1. Because in the Scriptures they are called, (...),
for they are now become such, that they cannot be changed from their malice and
wickedness; because it is become natural unto them. 2. From whence it is
manifest, that the whole time since their fall, never yet any of them has
given any sign of resipiscence. 3. If they could repent and believe in Christ,
then for them and their sins Christ also should have died; for he says, that
he prayed for those that were to believe in him; but they neither believe in
him, neither Jo. 17.
did he die for them. 4. But the chief cause of their impenitency is the just
judgment of God, that has given them up to hardness of heart, because they
sinned knowingly and wilfully against the truth. And this point is sufficiently
proved by Thomas Aquinas, the rest of the Schoolmen and many others. 2. So that
as they have lost freedom of will, so they cannot at all will or act to be
saved, or to repent. 3. And as they cannot will or act to repent or be saved,
so the whole acts of their wills are evil, malicious and wicked, being liars
and murderers from the beginning.

3. The third is to consider their power in sublunary and elementary things
which is the most pertinent to our present purpose, it being the thing that
some have magnified even to a kind of omnipotency, and therefore we must the
more narrowly ventilate and examine it, which we shall do in this order.

1. How great soever the power of the fallen Angels may be supposed to be, yet
neither in knowledge can they be deemed to be omniscient, or in power to be
omnipotent, because they are created Beings, circumscribed, limited and finite,
and consequently can perform no act that necessarily must require an omnipotent
power, and so can neither create things de novo, annihilate or transubstantiate
any Creature or substance, or pervert or put forth of order, the things that
God by Creation, Decree and Providence has set into their certain orders of
Generation, alteration and corruption.

2. How great soever their power may be supposed to be, yet rationally it must
be taken for a truth, that they have not the same power that they had before
their fall. For as Zanchy says: Certum Ut supra.
est enim in universum, and in genere, hac etiam in part illos punitos fuisse,
ut non possint quicquid poterant, cum boni essent, nec etiam quicquid nunc
velint. Because the Holy Ghost bears witness, that they are bound in Chains,
and that Satan begged leave of God to invade Job, that they fought with the
good Angels, but were overcome, and that they may be so resisted of believing
men that they may be overthrown. Ac vae nobis, nisi potentia Daemonum infirmata
esset, and a Domino comprimeretur, and compesceretur.

3. And what power soever be granted to the fallen Angels, yet it Zanch. de op.
Dei ut supra.
is by the opinion of all the learned, restrained only to these sublunary and
inferior bodies, and that they have neither power by Creation or Ordination, to
work upon, move, or alter things that are Angelical, Celestial, Ethereal and
Superior, but only are chained in this Caliginous Atmosphere, and impure air.
For it is manifest, that superior bodies work upon those that are inferior, but
not on the contrary, neither have we any examples that can prove that they do
operate upon Celestial bodies, and so their power (how great soever some may
suppose it to be) is only restrained to these inferior sublunary things.

4. The operations and actions performed by the fallen Angels, may be considered,
either in the simple respect of their natural and created power, and this how
great soever it was before their fall, is not only lessened, but that which
remains, is limited and restrained with the Adamantine Chains of the decree of
divine providence: or in respect of what power they may have superadded by God,
when they are Commissionated and sent by God to effect some particular actions,
as for example, Moses and Aaron had but the ordinary strength and power that
was common to other men, before they were sent upon the message to Pharaoh, and
made Instruments to deliver the Israelites, for then were they armed and
endowed with the power of working great and stupendous Miracles. So it cannot
rationally be imagined that the two Angels that were sent as Instruments to
destroy Sodom and Gomorrha, did or could of their own proper, individual and
created power, bring down Fire and Brimstone from Heaven to burn those two
Cities, but that it was brought to pass by the Power of the Almighty, as
granted and given to them for that judgment only, and not by that ordinary
power that they could always exercise, for the Text says: Then the Lord rained
upon Sodom, and upon Gomorrha brimstome Genesis 19. 24.
and fire from the Lord forth of heaven. Neither can it rationally be supposed
that one Angel has by his created power, that ability, that he can slay in one
night an hundred fourscore, and five thousand, Isai. 37. 36.
as it is written the Angel did in the camp of the Assyrians, but that it was
brought to pass by the power of Jehovah superadded unto him, to work the great
deliverance of Hezekiah and his people. Upon which place the learned Expositor
John Calvin says thus: Solus quidem dominus satis per se potest, ac certe
solus nos servat: Angeli enim, manus quodammodo sunt ipsius: Unde etiam
Virtutes and Potestates vocantur. Interim haec vis soli Deo tribuenda, cujus
organa tantummodo sunt Angeli, ne in superstitionem incidamus. From whence we
may note these two things. 1. That even Devils are but the organs and
instruments by which God accomplisheth his will, and executes his wrath and
justice, and so are but as tormenters and executioners to act no more than what
they are appointed and commanded to do. 2. We may observe that in times past
they had large Commissions given and great power superadded to perform great
wonders for the destruction of the wicked, which was done for great and
extraordinary ends, such as in these days the Lord does seldom or never use,
and therefore there can be no reason now showed why Devils should have any
extraordinary power added unto them in working strange feats for Witches and
Sorcerers.

5. It will much conduce to the clearing of this point of the power of Devils
to examine into what place they are fallen, or since their rebellion into what
Prison they are shut, and this we shall give in the Thesis De op. Dei l. 4. c.
4. p. 174.
of learned Zanchy who says thus: All the evil Angels were thrust down from
Heaven, into places that are below the Celestial Orbs, to wit into this air,
and below, as it were into a caliginous Prison, where they are reserved unto
the Universal Judgment as bound with chains. And this is plain from the words
of S. Peter, who says: For if God spared not the Angels that sinned, but 2
Pet. 2. 4.
cast them down to hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness to be
reserved unto judgment. To which accords that of Jude: And the Angels that
kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, Jude 6.
he has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of
the great day. For as learned Musculus tells us: Decet Christianum hominem ea
modestia, and cautio, ut nihil affirmet, nec Loc. Com. p. 12.
si quis alius affirmaverit, inconsiderate recipiat, quod non certo veritatis
testimonio e sacris literis desumpto, confirmari queat. To this we shall only
add what the acute and learned Theologue Amesius notes upon this place of
Peter, which in English is this: In general (he says) we are taught, that they
did not keep their first estate, that is, they did forsake righteousness and
that station in which they were placed of God, and afterward they have
exercised from the beginning, envy, lies and murder against Men. Also (he
says) we are taught, that they were a great number that were partakers of this
defection, and therefore the Apostle speaks in the plural number. 1. They are
said to be thrust down in Tartarum into Hell by reason of the commutation of
estate and condition, because that from a most high condition, which they
received by creation, they were cast down to an estate most low. 2. By reason
of commutation of place, because they were thrust down from a place of
beatitude, where they were conversant about the Throne of God with the rest of
the Angels, into an inferior place subject to sin and misery. But that this
place is in the lowest parts of the earth, as the Papists do hold, cannot be
made forth from the Scriptures, but rather the contrary, for they are said to
be conversant, and to rule in the air, and to walk to and fro in the earth
seeking the subversion of Men. This at the least is manifest from the
Scriptures, and ought to satisfy those that are not too curious. 1. That they
suffer a great change of estate and condition. 2. That they are excluded and
shut out from their first habitation. 3. That they are in such a place where
they suffer both the pain of loss and of sense. They are said to be delivered
over to darkness, partly in respect of sin, and partly in respect of misery;
for darkness in Scripture does denote both: and they are said to be delivered
in chains, by a metaphor taken from facinorous persons, that are condemned and
kept bound in prison with chains, and the chains are these. 1. Obfirmation or
obduration in sins. 2. An utter despair of any freedom or deliverance. 3. A
terrible expectation of extreme misery, and an horrid fear of being cast into
the abyss or deep. 4. The Providence of God which continually watches over
their custody, imprisonment, and punishment. They are said to be reserved to
damnation, because they are so bound up in these evils and miseries, that they
never can escape; and yet these are but the beginnings only of their miseries,
for they are hereafter to go into that everlasting fire, that is prepared for
the Devil, and his Angels. Matthew. 25. 41.


6. Though the Devils be said to be reserved in everlasting chains of darkness,
yet are they said sometimes to be loosed, and to go to Job 1. 7.
and fro in the earth, and to walk up and down in it, and that Satan does like
a roaring lion walk about seeking whom he may devour. 1 Pet. 5. 8.
Which must be understood (as we have showed before) that in respect of his
evil will, malice and envy, he seeks and desires the overthrow of all
mankind, but yet is so restrained that he does but act, what, where, when and
so far only as God does limit and order him. For though it be usually said that
God does permit him, yet it cannot be understood as a bare and nude permission,
as though God should suffer him to go so loose and at liberty, that he may
exert and exercise his power to the uttermost, for then all the godly should be
destroyed both in Souls and Bodies, and God should only sit by as a bare
spectator, not as an Orderer, Ruler and Governor, even as though an hungry
fierce Lion that had been chained up in a grate, should be let loose to rage
and run where he would, and to kill and devour what he could, and thus the
Witchmongers do suppose of him, which is false and contrary to the testimony of
Gods word. But when the Almighty makes use of Satan or his Angels, they are
only so let loose that he has a hook in their Nostrils, and their Necks in a
chain, that they can act no more nor no further than he orders, and gives
them leave to accomplish, and thus are they limited not only by his
irresistible will and decree, but they are also watched over and ruled by the
good Angels that are as it were their keepers and overseers. So when the Devil
is used as an instrument to afflict Holy Job, he is first let loose to afflict
him in his Children and Goods, but not to touch his Body; and the second time
he has leave and power given him to lay his hand upon Jobs Body, but not to
take away his life: which do plainly show, that he is not only and barely
suffered to do what he will, but has his limits set how far he shall act, and
no farther. And when God makes use of him for the punishment of the wicked, he
gives him power, and orders him how far to act or prevail. As in the case of
the lying spirit in the mouth of Ahabs Prophets, the evil spirit is sent forth
with this commission, And God said thou shall 1 Kings 22. 22.
persuade him and prevail also: go forth and do so. By which it is manifest
that he prevails more by the virtue of Gods command and commission, than by
his own proper created power.

7. It is manifest that as the good Angels are the Ministers of God for the
Salvation of mankind, so the evil Angels are ministering spirits only seeking
the destruction and damnation of Men; and though Vid. Lambert. Dan. Isagog. c.
24. p. 68.
God does use the Ministry of these that are evil and have an evil will, yet he
uses them well, and to good ends, that is, as the executioners of his justice
to chasten the godly, and to restrain, or destroy the wicked. Therefore God and
the Devil do not afflict, tempt or do any other thing for the same ends; for
God acts to prove, preserve, and stir up to goodness, but the Devil acts to
bring into sin and evil, to destroy and to bring to despair, as is manifest in
the History of Job. And therefore here we may consider the several ways wherein
God uses the evil Angels as his instruments, and that is in these particulars.
1. God uses him generally for temptation both of the good and the bad; so he
tempted David, Christ and the Disciples, for Satan had desired to sift them as
wheat, and therefore he is called (...), the tempter: and these temptations are
internal and spiritual, for we fight not against flesh and blood, but against
spiritual wickedness in high places. And in these as far as concerns the
faithful, he acts but only as God permits or orders him, as is plain in
the case of David, where one Text says, Jehovah moved David to number the
people, and in another place, and Satan stood up, and moved David to number the
people: where it is to be noted that God did it as the director and orderer,
and Satan performed it as his instrument and servant. And the Apostle tells
us; that God is faithful, and would not 1 Cor. 10. 13.
suffer the believing Corinthians to be tempted above what they were able, but
would with the temptation also make a way to escape, that they might be able to
bear it. 2. God makes use of him for the chastisement and affliction of the
godly, as is most manifest in that of Job; but this only so far as he is
limited, ordered and commanded from God and no further. 3. When Satan as a
tormenting or punishing instrument is used of God, he has his commission given
him how far only he shall act and proceed, beyond which he cannot go one hairs
breadth, as is manifest in the case of Ahab and the Gadarens Swine, so that we
may conclude this with the learned Aphorism of Piscator in these words: Etsi
autem Satan seu Diabolus Exages. Aphor. 14. p. 133.
cu^ suis Angelis Deo and filiis Dei adversatur quantum in ipso est, nimirum
voluntate and conatu: non tamen effectu; ita nimirum ut vel fidelibus perniciem
afferre, vel quicquam efficere possit quod Deus nolit. Deus enim illum
potentiae suae fraeno vinctum constrictumq tenet: ut ea modo exequatur quae ei
divinitus mandata, aut concessa fuerint.

8. Lastly, we shall now examine the particulars wherein learned Zanchy does
acknowledge the fallen Angels to have power over our and other sublunary bodies,
and they are principally these.

1. Upon the supposition granted that the fallen Angels have permission, De oper.
Dei. l. 4. c. 10. p. 186.
he holds that by their own proper created natural power, they can as they
please move in place: as to lift a Body up from the earth on high, and then to
let it fall or throw it down to the earth; that they can transfer or carry a
body from one City to another in a very short space of time: Lastly, that they
can move and agitate bodies with every kind of local motion that none can
resist them. And that therefore all those strange transportations of Witches in
the air into foreign and far distant places (he holds) need not be thought
strange or impossible, and that they may be done with great celerity, and in a
short time. And this he thinks he proves by the example of Philip, who when
he had instructed the Eunuch in the faith and baptized him, was caught away by
the spirit Acts 8. 39, 40.
of the Lord, that the Eunuch saw him no more, and that he was found at Azotus.
Upon which we must make these animadversions. 1. That upon the supposition or
ground that fallen Angels are simply and merely incorporeal, this must be false,
for then they cannot move in place, nor agitate any bodies, as we have
sufficiently proved before. 2. And though upon the supposition that they are
corporeal, they may move in place, and may move and agitate other bodies, yet
that must be understood in a proportionable measure, according to their power
and strength, and not in an infinite, or indefinite respect; for though one
Devil may be supposed to move or lift up that which would load an Horse, yet it
will not follow that he can move or lift up as much as would load a Ship of a
thousand Tun; and though one Devil might remove a Millstone by his own created
power, yet it will not follow that he can remove the greatest mountain that is
to be found. 3. And whatsoever motion Devils may have here in the air, or power
to remove and agitate bodies, yet the least of these cannot be performed but by
license and permission from God, which license and permission is always for
ends agreeable to his Wisdom and Justice; but for God to license or permit
Devils to appear to Witches in the shape of Cats, Dogs, Squirrels or the like,
to the end to suck upon their bodies or to have carnal copulation with them, or
to transport them in the air to places far distant, to dance, revel, feast and
to do homage to the Devil (as the Witchmongers allege) is for so impure,
filthy, horrid and abominable ends, as can no way agree with the Wisdom or
Justice of the Almighty, and therefore must needs be false and frivolous. 4.
And that which the fallen Angels are in the Scriptures recorded to have
performed, may be considered, whether they accomplished those things by their
own created power, or by the power of God granted to them when they are sent
forth to perform such or such an act: For as it may not be rationally granted
that the two Angels that were instruments for the destroying of Sodom and
Gomorrha did bring down fire and brimstone from Heaven by their own created
power, nor that the destroying Angel in Egypt did in one night kill all the
firstborn by his own power, but by the power of the Almighty granted unto him
in that mission; so it is not rational to suppose, that although Satan might by
internal motions and spiritual temptations prevail with the Sabaeans and
Chaldaeans who were his Vassals, wherein he could work what he would, to take
away the Oxen, Asses and Camels of Job, and to slay his Servants: though (I
say) he might do this by his created power; yet that he should bring fire from
Heaven to destroy the sheep, or that he by his created power could raise such a
wind, as could blow down the house in which the Sons and Daughters of Job were,
and slay them, is not probable, but that it was performed by that assisting
power that was granted him of God, to effect that affliction upon Job, that God
had determined for the trial and manifestation of his Faith and Patience, which
cannot in any reason be said to be done by Devils in their transactions with
Witches, and therefore must needs be Fables and Chimeras. 5. And whereas he
adds that the Devils can perform all kind of motions with natural bodies, and
that none can resist them, it is too large by far; for by that rule they might
shake and remove the earth, which they cannot do, for it abides firm according
to Gods appointment in the creation: And it is absurd to think that the
superior and good Angels cannot resist them, who have far greater force and
might than the fallen Angels have. 6. And whereas he would prove the power of
Devils by that of the spirit of the Lord conveying of Philip from the Ethiopian
Eunuch, which supposing it to be a good Angel, it must likewise be granted to
be furnished from God to have that power to carry him away, and does not
necessarily conclude that the Angel did it by its proper created power: neither
is the consequence good, to argue that what a good Angel may do, that therefore
a bad one may do the same or the like, for their powers and strength are not
equal, the one retaining what he had by creation, the other losing much by
reason of his rebellion and fall; as an outlawed person has not in a civil
respect the same power that another person has that is under a legal capacity,
and as a prisoner that is laden with chains, gives and fetters, can neither
walk, leap, or run so fast, as he that has none, no more can the fettered
Devils move with that agility and celerity that the good Angels can do that
have no fetters nor chains at all.

2. A second kind of actions that he assigns unto Devils is, that they cannot
only move bodies locally, but also can alter them diverse and sundry ways, as
to make hot things of cold, and so on the contrary, white things of black, and
black of white, and can make of fair things deformed ones, and so on the
contrary, and can make sound bodies sick, and sick bodies sound, affecting them
with various qualities. But these particulars he leaves altogether without
proof, except one Text in these words: And he cried Apoc. 7. 2.
with a loud voice unto the four Angels to whom it was given to hurt the earth
and the seas. From whence we shall observe these things. 1. It is granted that
God does make use of evil Angels to punish the wicked, and to chastise and
afflict the godly, and in the effecting of these things that they have a power
given them to hurt the earth and the Sea and things therein, as to bring
tempests, thunder, lightning, plague, dearth, drought and the like; but that in
the effecting these things, they have a dative power above what they had in
Creation, and that they are commissioned and sent by God upon purpose to fulfill
and effect these things, and so are as the organs and instruments to perform
the will of God in his justice, and are always for such ends as tend to the
Glory of the Creator: But for Devils to be sent to play such ludicrous, filthy
and wicked tricks with Witches, as is commonly affirmed, suits not at all with
the Wisdom and Justice or Glory of God, neither have we any such examples in
holy Writ, no further, but that Devils only are Gods Executioners or Hangmen.
2. It does no where appear that the Devils can alter, or change the shape or
qualities of things at his own will and pleasure, but the contrary is manifest
in the Priests of Baal in the time of Elijah upon the Mount Carmel, where their
Idols or Gods were to show their power by firing the Sacrifice, a thing which
if Satan could have done for them with all his power, it had been most
advantageous for his Kingdom; but it is evident that he neither did nor could
procure as much fire as would burn the Sacrifice, though earnestly called upon
by his best Servants the Idolatrous Priests. But thou will say, his power was
then restrained and withholden at that time from effecting any such thing.
Well, grant it were so, what was the end that God used that restriction upon
him at that time for? was it not because God would not contribute to magnify
the Devils Kingdom? nor to suffer him any longer to deceive his people? But to
discover the weakness of his power, who is not able of his own created power,
to bring forth fire where there is none, not able to break a paper window,
unless he have leave and power given him from God. And therefore much less can,
for the magnifying of his own power, and to dishonor the Creator, appear as a
Cat, Dog, Squirrel or the like to Witches, suck upon their bodies, have carnal
copulation with them, or transport them in the air, for this were to advance
his credit too much, and utterly derogatory to the Glory of God. 3. Concerning
Satan's being an instrument and means to bring and cause diseases, it may be
considered these two ways. 1. In an ordinary way he seduceth and draws men to
gluttony and drunkenness, by which way of i^gurgitation and excess they draw
and contract to themselves diverse Diseases, as Coughs, Catarrhs, Dropsies,
Scorbutic Distempers and the like. Others he draws to insatiable lust and
concupiscence, that thereby they fall into the Lues Venereae, and the whole
troop of those dire and horrid Symptoms that accompany it, whereby Men and
Women undergo great misery, pains, sickness, and sometimes death. Sometimes he
pusheth Men on so far in malice, wrath, choler and passion, and many other such
like ways, that they wound, lame and sometimes kill one another; and in this
sense he may be said to cause diseases diverse ways. 2. But there is another
way more extraordinary wherein as an instrument he may be said to cause
diseases and sometimes death, as in that case of David's numbering of the people,
where there died of the Pestilence seventy thousand, and though this Pestilence
was sent by Jehovah, yet was a destroying Angel the instrument and minister in
the execution of it, for the Text says: And 2 Samuel 24. 16.
when the Angel of the Lord stretched forth his hand upon Jerusalem to destroy
it, the Lord repented him of the evil, and said to the Angel that destroyed the
people, It is enough: now stay thy hand. And Herod for assuming to himself that
honor that was only proper to God, was immediately smitten by the Angel of the
Lord, and was Acts 12. 2
eaten up of worms, and gave up the Ghost. And the Psalmist says: He cast upon
them the fierceness of his anger, wrath, indignation and trouble by sending
evil Angels among them, the Hebrew gives it, the emission or sending out of
evil Angels. From whence it is manifest that evil Angels are the organs and
instruments of Gods wrath, and as Ministers cause Plague, Pestilence and other
diseases. 3. Thirdly, there is another great question whether or not the Devil
by his vassals, to wit, Sorcerers and Witches does not cause diseases and
death, as is believed by those vomiting up of strange things exceeding the
bigness of the Gullet to get either up or down, of which we shall speak largely
where we handle the opinion of Van Helmont concerning the actions of Witches:
Here only we shall say thus much, that the Devil is author and causer of that
hatred, malice, revenge and envy, that is often abounding in those that are
accounted Witches, which desire of revenge does stimulate them to seek for all
means by which they may accomplish their intended wickedness, and so they learn
all the wicked and secret ways of hurting, poisoning and killing, but yet we
affirm, that what evil soever they perform, it is by causes and means that work
naturally, and so the evil is only in the use and application, and not in the
efficients or means.

And whereas he holds that Devils as they can cause Diseases, so they can
cure them and take them away, we must crave to be excused if we cannot
subscribe to his opinion, and that for these reasons. 1. Because of their
causing of Diseases we have sufficient evidence in the Scriptures, but of their
curing of any, we have not any mention at all; and though some will think this
but weak because it is negative, yet it is not probable, but as it expresses
the one fully, so it would have given some hint of the other, if there had been
any such matter. 2. But the Scriptures do inform us, that the gift of healing
or curing Diseases, is not in the power of Devils by their Creation, much less
since as a gift bestowed upon them, but flows solely from God by the Ministry
of good Angels, of whom Raphael (that is, the Medicine or health of God) is the
chief. And that it is reckoned amongst the gifts of the Holy Ghost is most
plain: For to one is given by the spirit the word of 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9.
wisdom, to another the word of knowledge by the same spirit. To another says
by the same spirit: to another the gifts of healing by the same spirit; but
these gifts of healing are not given to Devils, but to the chosen ones of God.
And the Psalmist where he is speaking how God afflicted and brought low the
people of Israel by reason of their sins, says: Their soul abhorred all manner
of meat, and they drew near Psalm. 107. 18, 20.
unto the gates of death, but he sent his word and healed them. And God
declares, that if his people Israel would keep his Statutes, he would bring
none of those Diseases upon them that he had threatened, for (he says) I am the
Lord that heals thee, and this he does by the ministry of good Angels, or by
natural means, and not by Devils. 3. That Devils are no causers or instruments
in curing Diseases is manifest, because that were to make him act contrary to
his original destination after his fall, wherein in his own propriety, he is a
murderer from the beginning, and that both of souls and bodies, and never did,
nor does any good to mankind, either spiritual or natural, either real or
apparent; for that were to act contrary to his will, nature and disposition,
and contrary to the Ordinance and appointment of God who has Created the
destroyer to destroy. Therefore-Satan after his fall was not ordained of God to
be an healer, preserver, or sanator of diseases, but to be a destroyer, a
wounder and murderer; for his nature is be Isai. 54. 16.
come so wicked and malignant, that his whole endeavor is the destruction of
mankind, both in souls and bodies, and so no healer, no not of the least
infirmity. 4. But he is that grand Impostor, that by lying, cheating and
delusion, labors to make his Vassals and others believe that he can cure and
heal Diseases, when he can do no such thing, and therefore has and still does
amongst the Pagans, by the wicked Priests his Slaves, make the people believe,
that if the sick persons be brought before their Idols, and there worship and
pray, that they shall be Cured, when there is not any jot performed in the way
of sanation, but what is by natural means, fancy, and imagination, or what is
pretended to be done so, by cheating, counterfeiting and imposture. And the
very same thing is practiced by the Papists unto this day, in the pretense of
their false and lying Miracles, fathered upon their Saints and Images, which
are nothing else but lying cheats and Impostures, as we shall fully make
manifest hereafter. 5. The Devil internally deludeth the minds of men, in
making them believe, that Pictures, Charms, Amulets, and such other
inefficacious and ridiculous means, have power to Cure these and these
Diseases, when indeed they are merely inoperative, and effect nothing at all;
but yet the Witchmongers will needs have them to be media operativa, when they
are utterly inefficacious, and are only means of seduction and delusion, to
alter, change, or fortify the imagination, by which alone the Cures (if any
such be effected) are brought to pass, and not by any power of the Devil at
all; and he operateth nothing at all in them, except a mental and internal
delusion, in making the Witchmongers and others believe, that those things are
wrought by a Diabolical Power, which are only performed by the force of
imagination, and a natural agency and virtue. 6. Again, where there are many
occult and wonderful effects wrought by natural causes and agents, as by
appensions of vegetables, animals, or their parts, and minerals, by magnetism,
as the Hoplochrism, Sympathetic Powder, by Transplantation and many other very
abstruse and secret ways and means, the Devil labors to take away the glory
of these sanative effects, both from God and his Instrument which is Nature,
and to have it ascribed* unto himself; and in this the Witchmongers do him no
small service, in giving that power and honor unto the most wicked and wr^hed
of all Gods Creatures, that is only due to the Creator, and to his instrument
Nature. And to conclude this, I cannot but repeat that excellent and Christian
Sentence of Helmont: Pigritiae saltem enim immensae inventum fuit, omnia in
Diabolum Dt inject. material. p. 598.
retulisse quae non capimus.

3. A third kind of power that he ascribes unto Devils, is their changing and
transmuting of bodies; which is either in regard of substantial
transformations, or of those that are but in the external figure or shape, or
in the qualities, accidents and adjuncts only. Of real transubstantiations,
after a long dispute, he grants, that they cannot be brought to pass but by a
Divine and Omnipotent Power, which we have sufficiently proved before, and
therefore shall forbear to say any further of it here. And for what other
portents, prodigies, or lying wonders he can perform, we shall here examine and
discuss them to the full in this order.

1. We shall pass by what may be thought of the strange feats the Magicians of
Pharaoh, or Simon Magus did perform, as fully examined and concluded before,
and shall give those Texts of Scripture that mention the signs and wonders that
Antichrist and false Prophets, that are Satan's Instruments, can or do work, and
they are these. If there arise among you a Prophet; or a dreamer of dreams,
Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3, 5.
and gives thee a sign, or a wonder: And the sign or the wonder come to pass,
whereof he spoke unto thee, saying, Let us go after other gods (which thou have
not known) and let us serve them: Thou shall not hearken unto the words of that
Prophet, or that dreamer of dreams: for the Lord your God proves you, to know
whether you love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul.
And that Prophet, or dreamer of dreams, shall be put to death, because he has
spoken to turn you away from the Lord your God. -- Another place is this: But
the Prophet which shall presume to speak Deuteronomy. 18. 20, 21, 22.
a word in my name, which I have not commanded him to speak, or that shall
speak in the name of other gods, even that Prophet shall die. And if thou say
in thine heart, How shall we know the word which the Lord has not spoken? When
a Prophet speaks in the name of the Lord, if the thing follow not, nor come
to pass, that is the thing which the Lord has not spoken, but the Prophet has
spoken it presumptuously: thou shall not be afraid of him. From whence we may
take these Observations.

1. That we may know he is a false Prophet, that speaks a thing in the name
of the Lord, if the thing do not come to pass: Observe. 1.
But yet this must be understood with limitation, where God sends a Message
by a true Prophet, where the thing is spoken positively, but the condition is
concealed, and not expressed, as in the Message of Jonah to Nineveh: yet forty
days, and Nineveh shall be Jonah 3. 4.
overthrown: which was intended if they repented not, but implicitly was
understood (as the event showed) if they did repent, the Lord would spare them:
of which Learned Dr Stillingfleet has Orig. Sacr. l. 2. c. 6. p. 193.
this Proposition: Comminations of judgments to come do not in themselves speak
the absolute futurity of the event, but do only declare what the persons to
whom they are made are to expect, and what shall certainly come to pass, unless
God by his mercy interpose between the threatening and the event. So that
Comminations do speak only the debitum poenae, and the necessary obligation to
punishment; but therein God does not bind up himself as he does in absolute
promises; the reason is, because Comminations confer no right to any, which
absolute promises do, and therefore God is not bound to necessary performance
of what he threatens.

2. That there are those that do foretell, or show signs and wonders, Observe. 2.
that do come to pass, and yet those that foretell them are false Prophets,
because sometimes God sends false Prophets with power to work signs and
wonders, thereby to try his people, whether or no they will cleave unto him
with all their hearts and souls, or turn to other strange gods, or Idols; and
this is ordered by the Providence of God for the trial of the faithful, as was
in the Case of Job. But though these may be great signs and wonders to amaze
and amuse men, and likewise come to pass, yet are they no true miracles, but
are distinguished in this, that true miracles are always for the establishing
and confirmation of the true Doctrine and Worship of Christ, but the other are
lying wonders, wrought only to try the godly, or for the deluding and punishing
of those that received not the knowledge of the truth. And though there are,
and may be signs and wonders that are wrought by Antichrist and false Prophets,
by and in the power of Satan, yet these are all ordered by the Wisdom and
Providence of the Almighty, and Satan is no more but an organ and instrument in
the performance of them.

There are two other remarkable places of Scripture concerning the Devils power
in working signs and wonders, the first of which is this: For there shall arise
false Christ's and false Prophets, and Matthew. 24. 24.
shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch that (if it were possible) they
shall deceive the very elect. The other is this: Even him 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 10,
11, 12.
whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and
lying wonders: And with all deceiveableness of unrighteousness, in them that
perish; because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be
saved. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should
believe a lie. That they all might be damned, who believed not the truth, but
had pleasure in unrighteousness. From whence we may take these remarkable
observations.

1. Though there arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and even the
Antichrist himself, working after the power of Satan, with Observe. 1.
signs and lying wonders; yet though Satan be the organ and instrument in
performing these lying wonders, God is the Author and efficient cause that does
inflict them, because they are mala poenae, and come not by a bare permissive
power, but are inflicted by him as punishments upon the wicked, even those that
received not the love of the truth, and therefore these lying wonders cannot
possibly deceive the elect, but prove all deceiveableness of unrighteousness in
them that perish; and the reason why they are thus punished with the deceits
and delusions of Satan, is because they received not the love of the truth, and
therefore God does send such strong delusion, that they might believe a lie,
and this he does rightly and justly, that as Beza notes, Ita tamen ut soli
increduli sint illius fraud perituri. Upon which place learned Rollock tells
us this: We are (he says) to observe that Antichrist is nothing else, but Gods
Executioner by whom he punishes those, by his just judgment, who have not
received the love of the truth, but have contemned the Gospel: which is so far
forth true, that if there had not been, and now were a contempt of the truth,
then altogether Antichrist had not been, that is, the Executioner had not been,
whom God sends to execute his just judgment upon those that despise the truth
of his Gospel. So that it is manifest that God does make a just, and good use
of the very malice, and lying nature of Devils, in punishing those that did not
receive the love of the truth, but deceiving them by strong delusions that they
might believe a lie; and this he does as sent and commanded of God, and so
cannot go one jot further than his Commission, or as far as he is limited by
God.

2. We may observe that how great soever these signs and wonders be, yet they
are but lying ones, both in regard of the end Observe. 2.
for which they are done, and in respect of their substance. And therefore how
great soever the signs and wonders be that evil Angels do perform, yet they are
totally different from true miracles, those being always wrought for the
confirming of the true Doctrine and Worship of God, but these have their end
only to establish false doctrine, lies and erroneous opinions, or Idolatrous
Worships. So they differ in their substance, for those miracles that God
shows for the confirmation of his truth, are always true and real, being
against and above the whole power and course of nature, but those wonders
wrought by Satan are but delusions, cheats, juglings and impostures, which
though they may seem strange to those that are ignorant of their causes, yet do
but all arise from natural causes, or from artificial cunning, confederacy and
the like. And therefore we may conclude that what miracles soever are wrought
by a Divine Power, tend to the overthrow of Satan's power in the world, but all
false miracles are wrought to uphold the power of Satan's Kingdom in the world,
and following delusions, lies and false doctrines.

3. Therefore what signs and wonders soever Satan does work, they are no real
and true miracles, for as Dr. Stillingfleet says: Observe. 3. Orig. Sacr. l. 2.
c. 8. p. 253.
God alone can really alter the course of nature. I speak not (he says) of
such things which are apt to raise admiration in us, because of our
unacquaintedness with the causes of them, or manner of their production, which
are thence called Wonders; much less of mere juggles and impostures, whereby
the eyes of Men are deceived; but I speak of such things as are in themselves
either contrary to, or above the course of nature, i. e. that order which is
established in the universe. And this cannot be altered by any diabolical
power, but only by that which is Divine and Omnipotent, which never does it but
for considerable ends and important causes, as may be manifest from these
unshaken grounds. 1. That Devils can work no true miracles is manifest from the
definition of a miracle which is this: Verum miraculum est opus, quod fit
praeter, and contra naturam and secundas causas, cujus nulla Physica ratio
potest reddi. But Satan cannot alter or change the order and course of nature.
Therefore Satan cannot work or effect a true miracle. The proposition may be
illustrated by an induction made of many great miracles, of which there is
mention made in the Old and New Testament, all which are of that sort, that are
repugnant to the order and course of nature, and of which no natural or
physical reason can be rendered and given. Such were the taking of Enoch and
Elias into Heaven, the conserving of Noah and his Family in the Ark, the
confusion of tongues at the building of Babel, the fecundity of Sarah being old
and barren, the passage of the children of Israel over the red Sea and over
Jordan, the standing still of the Sun in the battle of Joshuah, its going back
in the dial of Ahaz, its eclipse at our Saviors suffering, the preservation of
Daniel in the Den of the Lions, and of the three companions of Daniel in the
fiery furnace, the preserving Jonas in the belly of the Whale, the raising up
of the dead, and the curing of the Man born blind, and all the rest of those
most true and wonderful miracles wrought by our blessed Savior and his
Apostles. 2. The assumption of the Syllogism is thus proved. It is the part of
the same power to change the order of nature, and to create things that were
not existent, and so the mutation of the order of nature is a certain kind of
new creation. But Satan has not power, by which he can create things that as
yet had no existence, as all persons of reason must needs confess. From whence
it must follow that Satan has not power to change the order of nature, and
consequently that he cannot work true and real miracles. 3. The working of true
miracles is only a proper attribute of God, and incommunicable to any
creaturely power, for the Text says: Blessed be the Lord Psalm. 72. 18. Id. 77.
14.
God, the God of Israel, who only does wondrous things. And again, thou art the
God that do wonders. And these two things the changing of the order of
nature, and creation S. Paul attributes to God as only proper to him: God who
quickens the dead, and Romans 4. 17.
calls those things that be not, as though they were. Upon which Beza gives
this note. Eo qui vitae restituit. Apud quem jam sint, quae alioqui reipsa non
sunt, ut qui vel uno verbo quidvis possit ex nihilo efficere.

But if it be objected that though Satan and his Angels of themselves, and by
their own proper power, do not work true miracles, Vid. Rolloc. in These. 2.
yet may not God work real miracles by them, as he did by the Prophets,
Apostles and his Ministers? It is answered: That the wonders which are wrought
by Satan, do tend to that end, that they might confirm lies against God and his
glory. But God does not accommodate his power, to confirm lies, contrary to his
glory, and against himself. Therefore Satan by the power of God, as his
Minister, does not work true miracles, for God does use the fallen Angels as
executioners of his wrath and judgments, for the afflicting and punishing of
men, but when God works any thing for the good of mankind, either in Soul or
Body, he does not use Devils as his Ministers, but the good and blessed Angels,
who are ministering spirits sent forth for the good of those that shall be heirs
of Salvation.

And if it be queried, what things and of what sort and kind, are those wonders
that are wrought by Satan and Antichrist? I answer, that either they are indeed
nothing but prestigious juglings and illusions: or if they be any thing, they
are not brought to pass contrary to the order of nature and second causes,
although they may seem so to us, who do not know the causes that are in nature,
so well as that old serpent: neither do we apprehend the manner by which he
works and acts his tricks. From which ignorance it proceeds, that those
wonders, that in themselves are no true miracles, nor done contrary to the
order of nature, are by us taken to be true miracles.

But we will draw toward a conclusion of this point, with that definition and
corollaries that learned Zanchy gives us in these particulars. Miraculum (ait)
igitur est externum and visibile, verum and De Oper. Dei, l. 4. c. 12. p. 191.
simpliciter mirabile factum, ad optimos fines atque imprimis ad salutem
hominum, and ad Dei gloriam promovendam editum. From whence these points are to
be observed.

1. That a Miracle is external and made visible. For so (he says) are all
those things that we read of in Scripture that are taken to be true miracles:
And therefore that the pretended invisible miracle of Transubstantiation (as
they call it) in the ordinance of the Lords Supper, is a mere figment, because
no such thing was ever made visible, or truly witnessed. But let us press this
his argument a little further. If it be (as indeed it must be) a certain
property of a true miracle that it be external and visible, that there may be
witnesses of it, otherwise that which none ever saw or knew may be the property
of a miracle: Then those great wonders that Witchmongers do affirm that the
Devil works with and for Witches, as having carnal copulation with them,
sucking upon their bodies, making a corporeal and oral league with them,
carrying them in the air, changing them into Cats or Dogs, must of necessity be
a mere figment and an impossibility: Because never yet seen, witnessed, or
proved by any that were of sound judgment, right understanding or of clear
reason, but are merely the works of darkness, having existence no where, but in
the minds and brains of the Witchmongers, who are ruled by the Prince of
darkness.

2. A miracle ought to be really and truly done, that is, that indeed it be
such a thing as it appears, as the water that Christ changed into Wine, was
really such, that is, it was truly Wine to the sight and taste of all those
that drank of it. Therefore those things that are brought to pass by the
prestigious juglings of Devils and Magicians, are indeed no true miracles. And
to apply this to our present purpose, it is manifest that those things that
Witchmongers do believe that the Witches do or suffer, as to fly in the air, to
be present at dancings and banqueting, and yet to remain empty and hungry, and
the like, are but mere delusory dreams and cheating fancies in their brains,
and if any thing be done ad extra, it is but merely as Juglers do by drawing
the eyes from observing the manner of their conveyances, by substituting one
thing in the stead of another, and the like. So that at the best Satan in
respect of what he performs in these aforesaid actions, is but as a chief
Hocus Pocus fellow, or Jugler, and one that acts to a worse end, than our
common Juglers do, who act but to move sport and delight, and thereby to get
something to be a livelihood, but Satan works his tricks to blind and delude
the Soul, and to lead it to error and destruction.

3. A true miracle ought to be simply miraculous and wonderful, that is with
and unto all. And such are those miracles, whose causes are hid from all, and
therefore are those things that are done contrary to the order of nature, by
the only virtue and power of the Almighty God. Therefore those things that are
done by natural causes, though occult to many, as are oftentimes done by
Devils, are no true miracles. From whence therefore we may conclude, that
whatsoever is performed in Physical actions, by natural causes, (and it is the
general Tenent of all, that Devils in these cases can work nothing but by
natural causes,) are no miracles, and that as they are agents; are not evil,
but only become so in the use and application.

4. Every true miracle is wrought above all for most good ends, and especially
for the Salvation of Men, and the true Glory of God. By this particular
therefore all those signs and wonders that are wrought by Devils, are excluded
from the name of true miracles, because they are all wrought for evil ends, and
contrary to the Glory of God, and for the deceiving and perdition of Men. And
therefore all prodigies wrought by Devils, are called lies.

4. The fourth and last particular that he sets down, that the Devils have
power in, and operate here below, is, that they can insinuate themselves into
and penetrate our bodies, and so move Men diverse ways, driving them into the
solitary places and Monuments, and by throwing them into the fire or water, by
strange tearing and tormenting of them, and by manyother ways, of which we
shall only note these few things.

1. It is manifest that in the times of our Saviors being here upon earth, and
his Disciples, that there were many Demoniacks or Men possessed with Devils, or
Men that were devillished, or over whom the Devil exercised an effective and
ruling power, and the reason was plain and manifest, for our blessed Savior
being to establish the Doctrine of the Gospel, by great and true miracles, it
was necessary that there might be fitting subjects for the effecting of such
stupendous miracles in and by, and therefore the Father in his providence had
prepared and provided Lunaticks, Demoniacks, those that were born blind, and
other strange Diseases that the power of Christ and his Apostles might be
manifest in their miraculous cures. But whether or no that Devils have at all
times the same power over men's bodies is much to be doubted, there being not
the same causes or ends for permitting the same now that was at that season, as
we perhaps shall show hereafter.

2. The manner of the Devils possessing of the minds and bodies of Men, he
labors to prove, to be essential and personal, and not virtual and
effective, which he thinks he sufficiently proves by the words to enter, and
to dwell, of which we shall only say this.

1. That upon the supposition that Devils are corporeal and have thin, pure and
etherial bodies, it may be granted that they may really and substantially enter
into bodies, for he says: Daemones autem habent corpora aerea, and aere etiam
subtiliora and tenuiora. Deinde, ut Tertullianus ait, Daemones sua haec corpora
contrahunt, and dilatant, ut volunt, sicut etiam lumbrici, and alia quaedam
insecta. Ita difficile illis non est penetrare in nostra corpora.

2. But secondly, there is none of those places that he cites, nor any other
that signifies a local, or personal possession, or any such local inherency in
the bodies of Men, but only a spiritual rule, Vid. Dialog. disc. of Spir. and
Devils, Dialog. 2. p. 34. etc.
he (that is Satan) works in the children of disobedience, or an effective
dominion over them, by which he does actually afflict, vex and torment Men
sundry and diverse ways. Neither is the word D^monizomenos translated or
understood by learned Men of an essential, or personal possession of Devils to
be inherently in men, but only of an effective dominion in afflicting and
tormenting of them.

3. And this is most manifest, that as the Text says, that Christ may dwell in
your hearts by Faith, where it were absurd to understand Ephesians. 3. 17.
by Christ's dwelling in the hearts of the faithful, a personal, essential or
substantial dwelling, but only an effective one, because he works effectually
in them by his spirit: Even so were it absurd to take the other places of
entering into, and dwelling there, in so gross, and literal a sense, as
personally to inhabit, but only effective by his power and dominion. For
though the Text says; that after the sop, Satan entered into Judas, yet in the
same John 13. 2. 27.
Chapter the Evangelist expounds what manner of entrance it was; not a
personal one, but an effective one by putting, or darting it, (...), into Judas
heart to betray his Master. And whereas it is said that Satan had filled the
heart of Ananias to lie to the Holy Ghost, no man can rationally understand it
of a personal and Acts 5. 3.
essential repletion, but only of an effective one, having by his power seduced
the heart of Ananias, and filled it with deceit by his effectual operation, and
not otherwise. And whereas it is said by S. Luke and S. Mark, of the legion of
Devils that our Savior did cast out, that they entered into the swine, (...)
Luke 8. 33. Mark 5. 13. Matthew. 8. 32.
S. Matthew makes it clear, saying, they went into the herd of swine, (...), in
gregem, or as Tremellius renders it ad gregem porcorum, by which it is manifest
that they did go amongst, or into the herd of Swine, and put them into such a
fright or fury, by an effective power working upon them, that they ran down a
steep place into the Sea, and perished in the waters; but not that they did
personally and essentially enter into the bodies of the Swine, for that were
absurd and needless, for the Swineherd can with his Horn and Whip drive them
without creeping into their bellies, and much more might the Devils drive them
into the Sea (according to the Proverb, They must needs run whom the Devil
drives) without a personal and local being in their bellies as though a Piper
cannot effectively play several tunes upon his Pipes, except he creep into them.

CHAP. XII.
If the Devil, or Witches have power to perform strange things, whether they do
not bring them to pass by mere natural means, or otherwise. And of Helmonts
opinion concerning the effects caused by Devils or Witches.

HAving handled the knowledge and power of the fallen Angels as far forth as
there is any thing manifested in the Scriptures, or that may be deducted from
thence by sound reason, and finding their knowledge and power to be much less
in these inferior bodies and elements than is commonly supposed; we are now to
proceed to examine what they do simply of their own power, and what they
perform by natural means. And first it cannot be denied but that they can of
themselves dart in evil thoughts, suggestions and temptations into the minds of
Men immediately of their own power, as also to allure Men to sin by the
irritation of external objects presented to the senses, as also by means of the
fantasy, and especially by the melancholy humor which is Balneum Diaboli.
But secondly the great question is, what they work in elemental and corporeal
things, and whether it be not only by natural means, as the applying of fit
actives to agreeable passives, whereby the acts ascribed unto them are
performed, or not? Which we affirm from these grounds.

1. Because it is the common and unanimous opinion of Philosophers, Theologues
and Physicians, that what the Devils operate Vid. Gutter. de Fascino dub. 5. p.
125.
in sublunary bodies, or in causing diseases in humane bodies, is by the
applying fit actives to convenient passives, by which the effects are brought
to pass. And this is an argument sufficiently pressive, and convincing, if
there be any force in arguments brought from humane authority, especially
considering that no other causes besides what are natural, could ever yet be
assigned, much less proved.

2. And this is more plain if we consider what the Author quoted last in the
Margent says to the same purpose, Demon propria virtute nequit transmutare
materiam corpoream, nisi adhibeat illi activa proportionata effectibus quos
intendit. As for example, the Devil may cause burning, by reason that there is
a combustible subject, as also a fiery and burning agent in nature, and this
agent being fire, being applied to combustible matter would produce that effect
which we call cremation, or burning: But if there were no combustible matter in
nature, or that there were no igneous agent, then it is plain, the Devils could
produce no burning at all; and so where there is no agent and patient in
nature, to produce the effect intended, (as in pretended fascination there is
neither) there such an effect could not possibly be produced: so that from
hence it must necessarily follow, that Devils can operate nothing in corporeal
matter, but by applying fit agents to convenient patients, and therefore
Helmont said well: Quasi Satanas supra naturam De inject. material. p. 597.
esset, operareturque naturae impossibilia. Dono quidem, modum operando
exoticum: at sane ad intra naturam coerceri oportet.

3. And that many strange things that are vomited up by such as are supposed to
be bewitched do proceed from natural causes, and that the Devil works no more
in them but by instigation, to move wicked persons (such as are commonly those
that are accounted Witches) to give and administer strange things, Philters, or
secret poisons, to such as they would kill, torment, make mad, or draw to
unlawful love, or rather lust, as may be made manifest from the testimonies of
persons of unquestionable veracity and judgment, some few of which we shall
here relate. Philip Salmuth chief Physician to the Prince of Anhalt records
this which we shall give in English: The Daughter of a certain Inkeeper was
Obs. Medic. Cent. 1. c. 70. p. 45. Hist. 1.
desperately in love with a principal Nobleman. To whom going away she offers a
most beautiful apple. This he suspecteth and throws into a Basket. After
three days he remembers it, and looks at it; and then it altogether appeared
blackned. He expects for the space of other three days, and then finds
abundance of little Frogs there. Therefore he returns into that Inn, where
the Maid lived, and does counterfeit sickness and huge torments. The Maid
wills him to use warm milk. That he pours upon the Frogs, who take it
greedily, and by little and little do increase. But he every day feigneth
greater pains, whereupon the Maid pitying him does will him to take the urine
of a Mare newly made and warm. This he also pours upon the Frogs, whereupon
they die. After some time the servant of another Nobleman is afflicted with
miserable torments, and there is suspicion of a Philter given by a person of
quality. They exhibit Mares urine, and she vomiteth up two Lizards, and two
Frogs. By which it is manifest that such strange vomitings up of Frogs,
Lizards, Askers and the like, though attributed to Witchcraft, and the
operation of Satan, do but proceed from natural causes. And doubtless the
sperme, or ova ranarum, were but conveyed into the Apple, that so by the heat
of the Stomach, and the Chylus, (that is like warm milk) they might grow and
increase. And this kind of witching, or secret poisoning, we grant to be too
frequent and common, because those persons commonly accounted Witches are
extremely malicious and envious, and do secretly and by tradition learn strange
poisons, philters and receipts whereby they do much hurt and mischief. Which
most strange ways of poisoning, tormenting, and breeding of unwonted things in
the stomach and bellies of people, have not been unknown unto many learned men
and Philosophers, but they respecting the good of mankind, and the multitude of
evil minded persons, have altogether forborne openly to mention such dangerous
receipts in their writings, or at the best so to publish them, that not one of
a thousand could understand what they intended, and so these secrets of
mischief are for the most part kept in obscurity, amongst old women,
superstitious, ignorant, and melancholy persons, and by them delivered over
from hand to hand, and commonly one learns it of another according to the
Proverb, Popery and Witchcraft go by Tradition. And to this very purpose I
cannot but insert that remarkable passage of Paracelsus in these words. Possent
equident (ait) De Pestil. Tract. 2. p. 388.
peculiarem de ipsis tractatum edere, ut arts ac machinae illarum
manifestarentur. Sed propter malitiosos ista talia penna seu calamo minime
evulganda sunt, multa enim ^agitiosa simul induci possent: quae satius est
reticeri. And that strange productions may be brought to pass, and stupendous
effects brought into action, from secret and hidden natural causes, that are
better known to those malicious persons that are accounted Witches, than
others, may be made manifest by another observation set down by the
forementioned Salmuth, and is this: Galen and others have recorded, that the
saliva, Observe. Medic: 83. p. 99. Histor. 1*
or spittle of a mad dog, if it touch an human body, and be not forthwith
washed off, may cause madness. But in the Hydrophobia, there is so great force
of the poison, that the persons that are bitten do also piss or void by urine,
little whelps, or pieces of flesh like them, as Avicenna lib. 3. Fen. 6. tr. 4.
c. 7. has delivered, though doubted of by others. But (he says) I certainly
know notwithstanding that of such saliva or spittle only left in the Garment,
after biting, have Worms been breed, plainly resembling little Whelps with
their heads. For a mad Dog did meet a Servant Maid of an honest Matrons going
to the Market* and flies furiously and violently at her feet. She that she
might avoid the danger, inclines her self* and a little bends her knees,
whereupon the Dog does with his teeth catch hold of her Garment, and especially
the seam or low selvidge, and did bark a little while, and forthwith ran away.
Which being done the Maid remained terrified, and at the first doubted whether
the Dog was mad or not, but having recollected her self, she suspecteth his
rabiousness, because he had been very familiar, even almost domestic with her.
Therefore she returns home, and hangs the torn Garment upon a piece of wood
in the House. But afterward upon the fourth day she goes to it, with an
intent to mend it. But oh a wonderful thing, she finds Worms altogether like
little Whelps in the head, to be bred in those places of the hem in which the
Dog had fastened his teeth, and those as a new Miracle (as they did call it)
were showed unto certain of the Neighbors being called together.

4. Another instance to prove the strange effects that may be produced by
natural Causes, and yet are so occult, stupendous, and unusual, that they are
commonly fathered upon Devils, when they have no more at all to do in or about
them, but only the mental persuading of the persons to use them to wicked and
destructive ends, as those wonderful compositions that produce the Plague and
such like grievous Diseases and Symptoms; For this kind of veneficium (call it
Witchcraft if you please) is and has been often practiced by most horrible,
malevolent, and wicked persons, who by an art more than Diabolical (especially
in respect of the end and use) have so framed, and prepared, and commixed
things naturally, that in the form of unguents have produced the Plague and
diverse other most pernicious and venefical Diseases, which may be confirmed by
undeniable examples, of which we shall give some few. Josephus Quercetanus,
that famous Chemist and Physician to Quercet. Rediv. Tom. 3. p. 38. Histor. 1.
Henry the Fourth of France, tells us thus much: The Contagion of the Plague is
not only contracted by the mediation of the air and water, things in a manner
universal, or from other things more particular, as vestments, linen, and
other moveable things inquinated by the attraction of pestiferous Atoms: But
also by the detestable Crafts, and Diabolical Arts of certain most wicked
persons, which we call poysoners, or witches, by means of which they
contemperate and mix certain poisons into the form of an unguent, and use to
rub some of it upon the handle of doors, so that those that do but lightly
touch them, are forthwith infected with the Plague, this subtle poison
forthwith creeping by the pores of the skin into the extremities of the veins,
is quickly communicated to the heart, to which human industry can hardly
administer any remedy. Unto which the Lord Verulam gives this cautious
attestation: Pestem quoque excitavit januarum, rimarum, aliorumque Syl. Syl.
Cent. 10. 564.
inunctio, non tam ex contactu, quam quod homini in more positum, si quid
humidi adhaerescat digitis, naso illud admovere. Moneri sepatientur, apud quos
ea inolevit consuetudo, ut praecaveant. Johannes Wierus a learned Physician,
and a person of credit and De Praestig. Daem. lib. 3. c. 36. p. 265. Histor. 2.
veracity, recites this History from Antonius Sabellicus, Ennead. 4. lib. 4.
This strange venefice or witchcraft, was practiced at Casal in the City of
Salassia, a Region of Italy, in the year of our Lord God 1536. About forty
persons men and women, amongst whom there was one Hangman, had combined and
sworn together, That seeing the Plague had ceased that before did rage, they
would compound an unguent, with which the handles of the doors being besmeared,
they should be infected that touched those handles. They did also prepare a
Powder which being secretly sprinkled in the Garments, should produce the
Plague. The Villainy lay hid for some certain time, and many were taken away of
such as were joined in blood or affinity: Also money was given (as was said) to
the Poysoners, instead of inheritance. But when they had murdered the Brother
and only Son of one Necus, and that scarcely others than the Masters of
Families themselves, or their Sons, did perish: And that also they had marked,
that into what Houses those Conspirators had insinuated themselves, that those
for the most part did perish into whose Houses they entered: but the Conspiracy
being found out, they were all put to death with most exquisite torments. They
also confessed, that they had determined to kill all the Citizens upon a
Festival day, by anointing the Seats, and to that purpose they had prepared
twenty Pots full of that pernicious and hellish Ointment. And Paracelsus tells
us, that at De Pestil. lib. (...). Tract. 2. p. 388. Histor. 3.
St. Vitum and Villacum, certain of the Poyson-makers in the time of a Plague,
did take the Earth and Dust from the Graves of those that had been buried, and
did so prepare it with their Magical Art, that they raised up a most cruel and
raging Plague, whereby many thousands of men were infected and slain. But that
the manner of that preparation is by no means to be revealed. Those that desire
more satisfaction in this particular may have recourse to that learned
Treatise, de Peste, written by the learned and industrious Matthias Untzerus.

5. But there is no where a more strange accident written, than Stow. Annal. p.
681. Histor. 4.
what is recorded in our own Annals in the year 1579. the nineteenth year of
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, in these words: The 4, 5, and 6. days of July,
were the Assizes holden at Oxford, where was arraigned and condemned one
Rouland Jenkes for his Seditious Tongue, at which time there arose such a damp,
that almost all were smothered, very few escaped that were not taken at that
instant: The Jurors died presently: Shortly after died Sir Robert Bell, Lord
Chief Baron, Sir Robert de Olie, Sir William Babington, Mr Weneman, Mr De Olie,
High Sheriff, Mr Davers, Mr Farcurt, Mr Kirle, Mr Pheteplace, Mr Greenwood, Mr
Foster, Sergeant Baram, Mr Stevens, etc. There died in Oxford 300. persons, and
sickned there but died in other places 200. and odd, from the sixth of July to
the twelfth of August, after which day died not one of that sickness, for one
of them infected not another, nor any one Woman or Child died thereof. This is
the punctual relation according to our English Annals, which relate nothing of
what should be the cause of the arising of such a damp, just at the Conjuncture
of time when Jenkes was Condemned, there being none before, and so it could not
be a Prison Infection, for that would have manifested it self by smell or by
operating sooner. But to take away all scruple, and to assign the true Cause,
it was thus: It fortuned that a Manuscript fell into my hands, collected by an
ancient Gentleman of York, who was a great observer and gatherer of strange
things and facts, who lived about the time of this accident happening at
Oxford, wherein it is related thus: That Rouland Jenkes being imprisoned for
treasonable words spoken against the Queen, and being a Popish Recusant, had
notwithstanding during the time of his restraint, liberty sometimes to walk
abroad with a Keeper, and that one day he came to an Apothecary, and showed him
a receipt which he desired him to make up; but the Apothecary upon the view of
it told him, that it was a strong and dangerous receipt, and required some time
to prepare it, but also asked him to what use he would apply it? he answered to
kill the Rats that since his Imprisonment spoiled his Books; so being satisfied
he promised to make it ready. After a certain time he comes to know if it were
ready, but the Apothecary said the ingredients were so hard to procure that he
had not done it, and so gave him the receipt again, of which he had taken a
Copy, which mine Author had there precisely written down, but did seem so
horribly poisonous, that I cut it forth lest it might fall into the hands of
wicked persons. But after it seems he had got it prepared, and against the day
of his trial had made a week or wick of it (for so is the word, that is, so
fitted, that like a Candle it might be fired) which as soon as ever he was
Condemned he lighted, having provided himself a Tinder-box and Steel to strike
fire. And whosoever should know the ingredients of that Wick or Candle, and the
manner of the Composition, will easily be persuaded of the virulency and
venenous effects of it, and this in him in regard of the use and end was merely
Diabolical, though the agency and effects were mere natural.

6. It is very strange to consider what learned and grave Authors have left
recorded of the Ligation or binding of Husbands that they might not be
viripotent, or be able to have to do with their Wives for a longer or a shorter
time; nay some even have proceeded so faras to write it, and seem also to
believe it; that by venifice or Witchcraft, the virile members may be quite
taken away; as is related by Codronchius, of a certain young man that had his
members quite De morb. venefic. l. 3. c. 5. (...). 5.
taken away by a Woman Witch, which notwithstanding she restored again, by
beating and putting her in the fear of death. And of this incredible story,
Sennertus a professed maintainer of the impossible power of Witches, does
notwithstanding give this censure. The De fascino lib. 6. Part 9. c. 5. p. 680.
Devil does often delude men by prestigious and juggling deceits, and persuades
them that he has brought such Diseases as indeed are none at all, as this
taking away the virile member, related by Baptista Codronchius. For although
some be of that opinion, that the genital members may really be taken away and
restored by the Devil: notwithstanding (he says) I had rather hold with those
that believe such things are mere juglings and delusions; seeing it is not in
the power of the Devil to restore unto man a member lost or taken away. The
most learned Lord Bacon does affirm, Syl. Syl. Cent. 9. Exper. 888. Ibid. Cent.
10. 959.
that this kind of Ligation or binding, to make men impotent for Coition, is
frequent in Santonne and Gascoigne, and is used to be done upon the Marriage
day, and that it is often performed by the Mothers to prevent that incantation
by others, and that they may loose it when they please. And does think it no
light matter because punishable by their laws. And says after, If it exceed
not nature it has its force from the Imagination of the binder of the virile
member, and adds: Putem ego illud ab incantatione alienum esse, quia non a
certis personis tantum (quales incantatores) sed a quolibet fieri potest. But
that which puts it forth of all doubt that it is nothing but melancholy, and
the abuse of the fancy, is manifest from the observation of perspicacious
Salmuth, which is this: I have known two (he says) who did imagine themselves
impotent Obs. Medic. Cent. 2. p. 96. Hist. 6.
to the act of Venery, and thought themselves maleficiated or bewitched, when
as before they had afforded themselves sufficiently strenuous in that warfar
also with their Wives. But both being (he says) handled and cured by me, as
persons melancholic and Hypochondriacal, have afterward sufficiently laughed
at themselves. But I did conjecture them to be melancholic by this, because
they did complain, that about that act they were overwhelmed with an heap of
Cogitations. From whence it is manifest from what cause that effect did
proceed. And therefore it is deservedly doubted of Wierus, whether or no there
be any true impotency at all, but what is from natural Causes.

7. That the most of those vomitings of strange things is only caused from
natural Causes, as poisonous Potions, Philters and the like, is manifest by
another example given us by that famous Chemist and learned Physician of
Frisuiga in Bavaria, Martinus Rulandus, which is this: David Held Student in
the Arts about Curat. Emp. Cent. 91. p. 222. Hist. 7.
the twentieth year of his Age did receive from a wicked Woman Cakes, which he
did eat, and departing from her forthwith in the way he began to dote, and
being brought home he began to rage more, and fell into madness. And to help
this madness the Students came unto me and declare the insanity, the Philter
that he had taken, and his being infected or brought into that madness by it,
and desire some help against it. To oppose which (he says) I gave six Ounces
of my Aqua Benedicta, which I commanded straightway to be given him in the name
of Jesus. And this being taken soon after by vomiting he cast up the Philter,
or invenomed Cakes that he had swallowed, which being cast upon the Earth, they
did with the admiration of the bystanders begin to wax hot and to boil, as
meat with the fire does grow hot and boil. So that this poison being cast up as
a thing unhoped for, soon after the insanity is driven away, and within two
days his understanding was perfectly restored, and by the power of the Almighty
did totally recover. So that it is manifest that these kind of people that are
commonly called Witches, are indeed (as both the Greek and Latin names do
signify) Poysoners, and in respect of their Hellish intentions are Diabolical,
but the effects they procure flow from natural Causes. If any require more
ample satisfaction in this point, they may find diverse Histories recorded in
Schenkins his Observations, lib. 7. de venenis, to verify this particular.

8. There is no one Argument that does more confirm, that what effects soever
Devils, or those called Witches do bring to pass in humane bodies, are wrought
by natural means, and proceed from natural causes: Because what diseases soever
are cured by natural causes and agents, must of necessity be brought into
humane bodies by natural means. But many diseases attributed to the Devil, or
Witches as instruments, have been cured by natural means and applications, as
we shall prove both by authorities and matters of fact. And therefore those
diseases must of necessity grow and arise from natural causes. And for
authority we find Helmont affirming thus much: And also partly the curing of
these diseases is to be Injaculat. mod. intrand. p. 603, 604.
had by certain Simples, to which the omnipotent goodness has given a gift
from the beginning of the Creation, of resisting, preventing and correcting of
Veneficia, Witchcrafts, or poysonings, and of bringing forth things injected.
For (he says) certain Simples do drive away evil spirits (a miserable company
of Men, who give worship to Gods, that are not able to resist the natural
efficacy of Simples) and reckons some that take away the penetration of the
formal light tied to the excrements. Some do hinder the touch, entrance or
application. And that there are many such like, that do correct the poisons,
and kill them. And chiefly he commends the Electrum minerale immaturum of
Paracelsus, the Phu of Dioscorides, being a kind of Valerian with purple
flowers, and likewise there commemorateth diverse others.

To confirm this assertion of Helmonts, we shall transcribe what the Honorable
person Mr. Boil has set down to this purpose. Useful. of Exper. Philos. p.
214. Hist. 8.
Since the beginning of this Essay (he says) I saw a lusty, and very
sprightful Boy, child to a famous Chemical Writer, (I judge it to be Joachimus
Poleman) who as his Father assured me and others, being by some enemies of this
Physicians, when he was yet an infant, so bewitched that he constantly lay in
miserable torment, and still refusing the breast, was reduced by pain and want
of food, to a desperate condition, the experienced relator of the story
remembering that Helmont attributes to the Electrum minerale immaturum
Paracelsi, the virtue of relieving those, whose distempers come from
Witchcraft, did according to Helmonts prescription hang a piece of this noble
mineral about the infants neck, so that it might touch the pit of the Stomach;
whereupon presently the child, that could not rest in I know not how many days
and nights before, fell for a while asleep, and waking well cried for the Teat,
which he greedily sucked, from thenceforth hastily recovering, to the great
wonder both of the Parents, and several others that were astonished at so great
and quick a change. And though I am not forward (he says) to impute all those
diseases to Witchcraft, which even learned Men father upon it; yet it is
considerable in our present case, that whatsoever were the cause of the
disease, the distemper was very great, and almost hopeless, and the cure
suddenly performed by an outward application, and that of a Mineral, in which
compacted sort of bodies the finer parts are thought to be locked up. Another
example he gives us in these words: The same Henricus ab Ut supra p. 217.
Hist. 9.
Here among his freshly commended observations, has another of a little Lady,
whom he concludes to have been cast into the strange and terrible distemper,
which he there particularly records, by Witchcraft. Upon so severe an
examination of the Symptoms made by himself in his own house, that if,
notwithstanding his solemn professions of veracity, he mis-relate them not, I
cannot wonder he should confidently impute so prodigious a disease to some
supernatural cause. But though the observation, with its various circumstances,
be very well worth your perusing; yet that, for which I here take notice of it
is, what he adds about the end of it, concerning his having cured her, after he
had in despair of her recovery sent her back to her Parents, by an outward
medicine, namely, an Ointment which he found extolled against pains produced by
Witchcraft, in a Dutch book of Carrichter's (where also I remember I met with
it set down a little differently from what he delivers.)

But to conclude this tedious particular, I shall only add one observation more
from learned Salmuth, which is this: The servant Observe. Medic. 34. p. 127.
Hist. 10.
Maid (he says) of Caesar's a Breitenbach was taken with a most intense pain of
her left arm, which when it did not at all remit or abate, but that the dolor
was augmented more and more, and that no tumor, nor any other preternatural
thing did outwardly appear, the beholders did fear some sort of venefice or
Witchcraft. Therefore they apply a well tried medicine, which in such a case is
said to be much approved, to wit red Corals well beaten with the leaves of Oak,
and with Rose Water brought into the form of a Cataplasm, and leave it on for
the space of 24 hours. In which space of time the place is brought to
suppuration, and within as many more hours, the same remedy being applied
again, the abscess is broken, and in it needles, hairs and burnt coals are
found. All these together with the Amulet they put into an hole made with an
Augur or Gimlet in the root of an Oak, toward the East, in the morning before
the Sun rise, and they stopped up the same hole with a wedge or pin, made of
the wood of the same Tree. The pain thereupon plainly cease, and the place is
with other medicaments brought to Cicatrization. But some deriding such things,
and thinking them to be prestigious delusions, do pull them forth of the hole
again. Hereupon forthwith that miserable servant was again afflicted with cruel
pains, more raging than the former. Therefore they repeat the former
medicaments, and more copious matter does issue forth, which being taken
together with the Amulet, and put in the former place in the Oak, all the pains
did forthwith vanish, and she afterward lived altogether sound. And so I
conceive that by these reasons, authorities and instances of matters of fact,
it is sufficiently proved; that what Devils or Witches work in humane bodies or
in corporeal matter, is by applying fit actives to suitable passives, and so
the effects are only produced by natural causes and means, which was the thing
I undertook to make good.

The next thing that in this Chapter we have to consider and examine is the
opinion of Johannes Baptista van Helmont, that great Physician, Philosopher and
Chemist, which we shall open in these particulars.

1. He recites a large Catalogue of things, that are in a most strange manner
brought or injected into the bodies of Men and Women, as darts, thorn-pricks,
or pins, chaff, hairs, dust of wood that has been sawed, little stones,
egg-shels and pieces of pots, hulls and husks or swads, insects, things of
linen, needles and the instruments of artificers, which have been injected
insensibly, and entered altogether in an invisible manner, but were detained and
ejected with direful pains and tortures. And that sometimes they are greater
than the holes or passages by which they are intromitted.

2. And to confirm this assertion he brings instances of matters of fact, as
these following. For (he says) of late there was a part of an Oxe-hide
injected by the pores of the skin, it being entire, which the Surgeon did
draw forth with a pair of Forceps, Hist. 1.
it being of the magnitude of the ball of a Man's hand, the Apostume first being
ripened. And a Witch burned at Bruges, did confess, that she had injected that
hide into the good man. So (he says) we have in times past seen at Lira the
children of Orphans to have cast up by vomit an artificial Horse and Cart,
drawn forth by the hands of the bystanders; to wit a four footed board
accompanied with its ropes, and wheel. And Hist. 2.
what way soever it were placed, it was easily greater than the double throat.
Further he says, I have seen at Antwerp in the year 1622. a young Maid, who
had vomited, perhaps two thousand pins conglomerated together, and with them
hairs and filth. Another Maid (he says) at Mechlin in the year 1631, who we
being present, did vomit up shavings of wood or chips, cut off in plaining with
the Hatchet, with much slimy stuff, to the magnitude of two fists. It is (he
says) a frequent thing every where admitted by learned Men. Upon which we will
only give these Animadversions.

1. That things as strange as these, that Helmont seems to avouch Anim. 1.
of his own sight and knowledge, are also attested by other persons of great
learning and credit, as, besides what we have immediately before showed from
Salmuth, of the needles, hairs and burnt coals that came forth of the Maids
arm, these examples may ratify. We will pass by Sprenger, Bodin, Remigius and
Del Rio as Pontificial Authors, and therefore partial and interested, only in
the first place we shall give this from Alexander Benedictus, who tells this:
Pract. l. 7. c. 25. Hist. 3.
That he saw two Women his neighbors upon one day, being infected by potions
of evil medicaments, who afterward were wonderfully tormented with strange
vomitings: That the one cast up with great strainings an head bodkin very great
bended like an hook, with a great lump of Women's hair, wrapped with the pairing
of nails, who died the day following. The other vomited up a Woman's Quoif,
pieces of glass, with three dried pieces of a Dogs tail that was hairy, so that
she had voided by vomiting as much, (if set together,) as would have equalized
the quantity of the whole tail. But the most strange story that possibly can be
read is recorded by Thomas Bartholinus who was Physician to Frederick the third
King of Denmark, of Anna Erici, who vomited up at several times a piece of
sharp wood, Hist. Rar. Anat: Cen. 1. Hist. 52. p. 73. Hist. 4.
great store of black blood, an hem or fring of silk or linen cloth of a blew
color, sowed with a green thread, in which were hid three pieces of lead, two
pieces of glass, three Almonds, three pieces of a Tobacco-pipe, and white
stones or flints: And afterward many other horrid, strange and incredible
things that may be read in the place quoted in the Margent.

2. It would seem a point of strange Skepticism or infidelity to Anim. 2.
distrust and reject these relations as lies and fictions, seeing the Authors
that recite them do for the most part attest them upon their own view or
knowledge, or at least from unquestionable eyewitnesses, and that they were
Men of great Reputation and Credit, that lived in several Countries, and in
different times, and therefore could not conspire in a lie.

3. But notwithstanding all this, we find persons of great learning and sober
judgments, to use much hesitation about these things, and Anim. 3.
either to suspend their belief of them, as having never seen any such things
themselves, and therefore may well conclude as many Wise Men do, that he that
has seen a thing may better believe it than he that has not seen it, or else
are utterly diffident and believe no such matters of fact at all. And indeed
there is no greater folly than to be very inquisitive and laborious to find out
the causes of such a Phenomenon, as never had any existence, and therefore Men
ought to be cautious and be fully assured of the truth of the effect, before
they adventure to explicate the cause. And I find both my Lord Bacon, and that
honorable and learned person Mr. Boil, when they have occasion to mention
these things, do it with extreme caution, and always with an If or some other
note of signal dubitation, and also the Lord Mountaigue in his Essays, and our
Countreyman Mr. Osburne (no contemptible persons) in his writings seem utterly
diffident of any such matter.

4. Again if we consider how easy a thing it is, for the most vigilant,
attentive and wisest person either to impose upon himself, Anim. 4.
being drawn by those overruling notions that he sucked in from his childhood,
whereby the will and affections being never* so little biased the judgment
will be presently swayed that way: or how subject the most wary and
perspicacious person is to be imposed upon by the cunning craftiness or
confederacy of others, or drawn to believe a mere impossibility, by the
perseverant asseverations of what others have seen and known, may certainly
induce us, though not utterly to reject all relations of this nature, yet to
stand like Janus in this field of doubtful perplexity.

5. If to this we add the consideration, how rare and seldom Anim. 5.
these things happen, and how long (though it argue but negatively) many
Physicians have practiced, and yet have never met with any such strange
accidents: and withal that many of these vomitings of strange stuff, and the
like have been mere counterfeit juglings and Impostures, as was manifest in the
Boy of Bilson Summers of Nottingham and diverse others: besides, I that have
practiced Physic above forty years could never find any such thing in truth
and reality, but have known many that have counterfeited these strange
vomitings, and the like, which we and others have plainly laid open and
detected. So that though we shall not simply deny the verity of these
relations, so we cannot but believe, that some of them have been cheats and
delusions, and others mere mistakes of ignorance and vain credulity, and in the
belief of any of them, that we ought to proceed with much cautiousness and
careful foresight.

3. The next thing that Helmont lies down (after he thinks that he has
proved the matters of fact sufficiently) is the assigning of the true cause (as
he thinks) of the bringing to pass these wondrous effects; And these he
makes twofold, first the Devil, by reason of the league with the Witch, does
bring and convey the things to be injected to the place, or near the object,
and makes them invisible by his spiritual power: Secondly that the Witch by the
strength of her imagination and the motion of her free will, (which he holds to
be the only peculiar prerogative of mankind, and to remain both with Men and
Women after the fall, namely a power by their free wills and force of
imagination, to create or frame seminal and efficacious Ideas to work as it
were ad nutum) does convey or inject these strange things into the bodies of
those they would hurt or torment, and that in this case as the ultimate attempt
of nature, there is and may be a penetration of dimensions, and these things he
attempteth to prove after this manner, which we shall first amply lay down and
relate, and afterward we shall give some notes and observations upon them, as
things of great weight and consideration.

1. He grants that the evil spirit has a power motive, yet therewith cannot
hurt the innocent as he pleases. And further Reas. 1.
he tells us that these injected things do enter invisibly. And that this one
thing is merely Diabolical. For the most miserable scoffer (he says) seeing he
has nothing that is real left to his liberty, yet he has vain appearances:
Because he is the Father of lies, he feigneth those things and makes them to
appear falsely, or otherwise than they are, from the beginning of the World. And
in these juglings the Man that is the Devils bondslave works nothing at all.
But by what manner the Devil makes things visible in themselves to be
invisible, or how he involves them in his invisible spirit, he confesses that
he is not a sedulous searcher of the works of Satan, that belong unto him in
propriety. And therefore that the Devil does transfer the things to be
injected, being made invisible, unto the object, the Idea of humane desire
directing. And because it is not permitted to the Devil, to enter into Man,
much less that he may hurt him, and least of all with an invisible burden;
therefore he uses the free motive power of the Man bound unto him. The Man
does therefore impress his free motive Blas into the body made invisible, but
the Devil does carry it unto the Man, into whom it is to be injected. And as a
knife by the desire and consent of the person wounding is fixed into the flesh
of him that is wounded: So this body made invisible by the Devil, is injected
into the body of the person to be enchanted, by the Idea of the motive power of
the Witch: Satan conspiring to this because of the purposed direction of
hurting the person.

2. Truly I believe (he says) that it does fight with Piety, if a power
exceeding nature be attributed to the Devil. As though Reas. 2.
Satan should be above nature, and should operate things impossible to nature.
I grant that the manner is exotic and strange, but yet notwithstanding it
ought to be contained within the limits of nature. And if it be said: the
manner is unknown by which nature should do it. The manner is also equally
unknown by what means Satan should do it. Therefore they gain nothing who refer
the work of nature unto the Devil. But whether they offend or not, let others
look to it. For at least it is an invention of immense sloathfulness, to refer
all things to the Devil that we do not understand. Neither would I (says he)
have the Devil called upon to satisfy our questions by a temerarious
attribution of power.

3. Therefore (he says) I will show, that the aid of Satan is not at all
needful, that some solid body may be drawn without Reas. 3.
the comminution of it self, by a passage far less than it self. For the evil
spirit, though he have a motive Blas; yet notwithstanding it is against piety,
that he can hurt the innocent at his pleasure. Which certainly should come to
pass, if every where he could inject these things, according to his nefarious
will, for (he says) I have seen these things happen to innocent children, to
Virgins that were pious and devoted to God after a singular manner. And to
prove this point he gives these instances. Cornelius Hist. 1.
Gemma de Cosmocriticis does recite that he had seen a piece of three pounds or
48. ounces weight, of a brass Cannon, which a Maid the Daughter of a Cooper had
voided by stool, with its characters or letters, together with an Eele wrapped in
its secundines. But it is impossible to nature to melt powdered metal in us,
and to be detained so many months in its pristine figure in the Intestines, or
that the Eele should so often be made into small powder and to arise again from
death. And that pieces of wood and leather should so often be turned into small
powder, and again restored into their former condition. For (he says) I have
seen at Bruxells in the year 1599. that an Ox having taken three Hist. 2.
Herbs did vomit a Dragon with a tail like an Eele, a body as of leather, a
Serpentine Head, and not less than a Partridge. There is (he says) an History
of a Polonish Countryman, seen lately of the Son of the Lord Ericius Puteanus.
A certain rustic did Hist. 3.
attempt himself to cut the Squinsie that he had in his throat with a short
Knife, which at unawares he swallowed, and that at the length he did void the
same at the right side of the Abdomen, or lower belly, with much rotten matter
after great tortures, and survived in health. Also at Vilvordia in the year
1636. a Countryman known unto me (he says) intending to feed a Cow, did daily
give her a bowl, in which he had boiled Pot Herbs with bran. At last she waxes
leaner more and more every day, and begun to halt upon the right thigh: The Cow
being killed, the short Knife of his Wives bended back into the haft of Box, is
found hid betwixt the ribs and the shoulder blade: For the Country Woman in
cutting the rape root, had left her Knife amongst the Pot Herbs, and the Cow by
drinking had swallowed it. Also (he says) Ambrosius Paraeus relates a story
of a certain man whom Hist. 4.
Thieves had compelled to swallow a Knife, which he afterward being sound did
void by an Apostume of the side. Alexander Benedictus (he says) does mention
another, to whom an Arrow had penetrated into his back, the hook of which of
the breadth of three fingers he did void by stool without hurt. The same Author
relates of a certain Girl of Venice who had swallowed a Needle, and that after
two years she voided it by urine, crusted over with a stony substance. Also (he
says) Antonius Benevenius Hist. 5.
does relate, that an Hetruscan Woman had swallowed a Copper Needle or Pin,
which three years after she voided at the Navil, and was sound. Valesius de
Taranta (he says) mentions a Girl of Venice (perhaps the same) who voided by
urine a Pin Hist. 6.
of three fingers long. A certain Capucine at Eburum called Bullonius, by
Surname Hamptean, did with much aversion of mind drink up an huge living
Spider, which he had seen fall into the Chalice in the time of the Sacrifice of
the Mass. Within a few days he had a Phlegmon or bile that did arise in his
right thigh, and with much rotten matter from thence he voided the whole
Spider, but being dead. A young Merchant of Antwerp being playing at Venice in
his mouth with an unripe Ear of Barley, did Hist. 7.
swallow the same with an huge fear of suffocation: From thence after three
Weeks in the left side above the Girdle, an Apostume appeared, and at the
length with the rotten matter the same Ear of a yellow color is extracted
whole. And he escaped sound. With Fernelius a Student is related to be cured by
him who had voided an Ear of Corn by the ribs. Also Writers do commemorate,
that the young one sometimes dead and wasted in the Womb has voided the bones
through the Womb, the belly, by the na vil, and sometimes by the fundament.
More things of this nature do every where occur amongst Authors worthy of
credit.

4. From which matters of fact he thus concludes: By which Reas.
(he says) it is manifest, that solid bodies sufficiently great, have
penetrated the Stomach, the Bowels, the Womb, the Caul, the lower Belly, the
skin upon the inside of the Ribs, the Bladder. Membranes (he says) impatient
of so great a wound. That is to say, that Knives have been transmitted through
these Membranes without wound, which is equivalent to the penetration of
dimensions made in nature without the help of the Devil. And that an human body
may be drawn through a small hole, through which a Cat might only pass, but not
through a Wall. Verily that the Devil cannot break a paper Window without the
consent of his Master, is (he says) manifest by the process and arrest of
Ludovicus Godfredus the Witch, pronounced at Aix in Narbona, the last of April
1611. I pray you where have the three pounds of brass, of the Cannon of War,
marked with its letters, laid hid? how for so many months has the dross
shined, in what part was the piece of brass greater than the intestine
contained? While I was (he says) showing a necessary vacuity in the air, I
promised that I would declare, that although the penetration of bodies by the
primary law of nature, and by the common way of Artificers be forbidden:
notwithstanding that while a body does totally pass over into the dominion of
the spirit, and is carried over, and is by that as it were weakened; then
bodies do naturally and mutually penetrate one another, at least in that part
that is porous: Because that the spirit then does enclose the body under it
self, and therefore as it were takes away the dimensions.

5. And to confirm and open this point more fully, he says: Reas. 5.
I will premise some things. The desire of eating Muscles did invade a Woman
with Child. And she eats some of them so very hastily, that she did devour
the raw shells, twice or thrice broken Hist. 1
with her teeth. Thereupon by and by within an hour, she brings forth a sound
and adult Child, with the same half-chewed shells, and wounded in the belly.
Therefore the shells without the aperture of the membranes, had forthwith
penetrated the Stomach, Womb and Secundines: or else there were new shells
generated upon the young Child. Neither could this later be true. For they were
the true fragments of the Muscles, and not figuratively framed to the imitation
of them. Furthermore, the appetite is not carried to a thing unknown: Therefore
the appetite of eating the Muscles was not of the Child, but of the Woman.
Therefore it was not necessary that new Muscles should be generated about the
Child; for they were desired by the Mother that they might become nutriment to
her, not the Child. Otherwise by the same argument of Identity, what things
soever should by the appetite be desired, should be generated about the young
Child; of whom when they could not be digested, they should be always either
left remaining about the Child, or should there putrefie. Which is false both
ways: for if it should putrefie, that which is desired would cause abortion; or
if it were conserved there, it would be found regularly. For the Child is only
nourished by the Navil: Therefore those external Muscles could neither be
wished by the Child, nor could be profitable unto it, and by consequence, were
neither for an end made anew, but sent to the young one by reason that it was
an uterine appetite. The appetite is always directed from the end; but the
Woman with Child desired the Muscles not the shells, neither that the Muscle
being a living animal might remain in its former state, in which it was
unprofitable to the Mother, nor could satisfy her appetite; and therefore much
less has had occasion of generating new and unprofitable shells about the
young one. But however it be taken, the appetite was not to the shells twice or
thrice broken. For if the Fishes had been taken forth of the shells, she had
eaten the fish the shells being left. Therefore the concomitance and concision
of the shells were accidental to the appetite. I suppose truly (he says) that
as the desire, terror, etc. do generate seminal Idea's, which the hand of the
Woman with Child does send down to the young one, and does depinge or figurate
it in a set time: So the joy of finding that which the appetite did desire,
does bring that very thing to the Child. So verily the heaviness of heart of
him that swallowed the Knife, the horror of having drunk the Spider, and of the
Ear of Barley devoured, did repel or drive back those things beyond the
membranes not able to suffer a wound without death. And these things (he says)
of things injected, entering by the ordinary power of nature, without the
suspicion of Diabolical cooperation.

6. Now he proceeds to prove penetration of dimensions by Reas. 6.
natural power in another way. Something like to these (he says) appears in
things that from within are to without taken away, which I will dispatch (he
says) in one or two examples. The Wife of a Tailor of Mechlinia, sees a
Soldier before the doors Hist. 1.
to lose his hand in a conflict: Forthwith being stricken with horror, she
brought forth a Daughter with one hand, the other awanting, with the stump all
bloody, which hand of hers could not be found, and the flux of blood killed the
Child. The Wife of Mark de Vogeler, a Merchant of Antwerpe in the year 1602.
Hist. 2.
seeing a Soldier begging whose right Arm an Iron Bullet in the Siege of
Ostend had taken away, and which he carried about as ^et bloody; by and by
after that she brought forth a Daughter ^anting an Arm, and that the right one
too, the shoulder of whom ^eing yet bloody the Surgeon ought to consolidate.
She has Married to a Merchant of Amsterdam, by name Hoochcamer, and is yet
living this year 1638. But the right Arm was no where to be found, neither the
bones or any corruption did appear, into which the Arm might be wasted in a
little hour. But the Soldier not being seen, the Child had two Arms, neither
could the Arm that was torn off be annihilated. Therefore the Womb being shut
the Arm was taken away. But who tore it away naturally, and whither was it
taken? certainly trivial reasons do not square or agree in so great a portent
or Paradox. I am not he that will say these things. I will say this at the
least: That the Arm was not taken away or torn off by Satan. Furthermore it was
of less weight to carry away elsewhere the Arm torn off, than to have torn the
Arm from the whole body without death. The Wife of a Merchant Hist. 3.
(he says) known unto us, as soon as she heard that thirteen were to be
beheaded (it happened at Antwerpe in the time of the Duke of Alva) and Women
with Child are led with inordinate appetites, she determined to see the
decollations. Thereupon she ascends the Chamber of a Widow that was a familiar
friend to her that lived in the Marketplace. And the spectacle being seen,
forthwith the pain of Childbirth took her, and she brought forth a full grown
infant with a bloody neck, whose head did no where appear.

7. From these most stupendous and almost incredible stories, he Reas. 7.
draws these conclusions. I do not find (he says) that human nature does
abominate the penetration of dimensions, seeing it is most frequent to the
seeds of things. For in the seeds of things, that primevous Energie of
penetrating bodies, does yet consist, but not subject to force, art or human
arbitrament. For there are many bodies many times more ponderous than the
matter of which they are framed. It is necessary (he says) that more than
fifteen parts of water do fall in together into one, that one part of gold may
from thence be made. For weight is not made of nothing: but argues the
ponderating matter in the balance. Therefore water does naturally penetrate
its body so often as the gold does overweigh the water. Therefore the domestic
and daily progress of seeds in Generations, does require that the body does
penetrate it self by condensation, which is altogether impossible to an
Artificer. We grant (he says) that there are pores in the water, these
notwithstanding cannot contain so much as fourteen times the quantity of its
whole. Therefore it is ordinary, that some parts of the water do penetrate
themselves into one place.

8. And to illustrate this going before he says: By an example, Aqua fortis
does by its spirit make Brass, Iron or Silver remaining Reas. 8.
opacous in their natures so transparent that they cannot be seen, and does
pass the metal thorough filtring paper, which otherwise will not transmit, no
not the most small powder, which metal does essentially remain still a metal in
specie or kind. But not that the similitude of penetration of dimensions does
uniformly square with the propounded example of the metal. Because reasons do
not agree to so great a Paradox, wherein (he says) I willingly acknowledge the
manner to be indemonstrable a priori. Even as no man can know by what means the
Idea impressed in the seeds does figurate, direct, and dispose the things that
it has framed. And therefore we are forced to hunt forth the same a posteriori.

9. From all which he draws this Conclusion. There is therefore Reas. 9.
another far different power of incantation, besides the Devils. And therefore
natural and free. He has no Dominion over the just. But if the power of
enchanting were free to the Devil, also it would be equally free to him to kill
by a Knife or a Maul. And so none should be free. Therefore the Witch (he
says) does, per ens natural, form imaginatively a free Idea, which is natural
and noxious. Which Idea Satan cannot form. Because that the formation of Idea's
do require the Image of God and a free power: And therefore the Witches do
operate by a natural force, no less against the just and innocent, than against
wicked men. Seeing that enchantments do more easily infect Children than those
of ripe age, sooner Women than stout Men: A certain natural power is signified
to be limited to the enchantment, to which it is easily resisted by a stout and
courageous mind. The Devil therefore offers filth and poisons to his Clients,
that he may knit fermentally Idea's formed in the Imagination of the Witches
unto them. And he preserves that Ideal poison, that it may not be blown away
with the wind, or being covered in the earth, it be not destroyed by
putrefaction. But he carries that poison locally near to the object, to be
enchanted: But to apply it, or carry it into the man, he by no means is able.
And therefore the Witch does also send forth another executive medium, or mean
emanative and commanding, which mean is the Idea of a strong desire. For it is
inseparable to the desire to be carried about things wished for. To all which
the Devil as a Spectator does assist in the conduction.

10. For (he says) in truth, I have demonstrated already, that Reas. 10.
operative means are solely in the power of man. For only God is the most
chiefly glorious Creator, to be infinitely praised, who has Created the
Universe forth of nothing. But man as far forth as he is the Image of God does
forth of nothing create certain Entia rationis, or non-Entities in their
beginning, and that in the proper gift of the Fantastical virtue. Which are
notwithstanding something more than merely a privative or negative being. For
first of all while these conceived Idea's do at length cloth themselves in the
species or shape fabricated by the Imagination, they become Entities now
subsisting in the midst of that Vestment, to which by the whole they are
equally in them. And thus far they are made seminal and operative Entities: of
which, to wit their assumed subjects are forthwith totally directed. But this
power is given to man alone. Otherwise a seminal power to propagate, is given
to the Earth, to Bruits, Plants, etc. Also the Dog by his madness can transfer
or change his spittle or saliva into poison, because it is peculiar to his kind
or species. Which also is obvious in diverse poisons of animals. But to form
Idea's abstracted from their species and adjacent proprieties, that is given to
none but man.

Having thus far at large traced his footsteps in these abstruse and mysterious
matters, we shall come now to examine them and make some observations upon
them. And although we may be sharply censured for taking upon us to question
the things that he has asserted, having been suo grad^ an Adeptist, a person
of profound judgment, great experience, general learning, high reputation, and
now generally followed as the Chief Standard Bearer for Philosophy, Physic and
Chemistry, that many esteem it no small glory to be called and accounted an
Helmontian. Yet notwithstanding this we shall note some observations in this
order.

1. He holds that the Devil does only make the things invisible, or hides
them by his spirit, and brings them near to the object Observe. 1.
into which they are to be injected, and that the Witch by the seminal Idea of
her imagination, and the strength of her desire as the agent, or efficient
cause, does inject or thrust them into the body of the person, intended to be
hurt or tormented; whereby he necessarily supposes a league or contract betwixt
the Devil and the Witch, and therefore he calls them the Devils clients and
those that are bound unto him. But what kind of contract this should be,
explicit or implicit, internal and mental, or corporeal and visible, he tells
us not; the latter of which we utterly deny, that it is in the power of the
Devil to practice when he pleases, as we have before with sufficient arguments
demonstrated at large. And for an implicit or mental league, we grant that all
thieves, murderers, these kind of malicious and poisoning Witches and all other
wicked persons are bound in a spiritual contract unto him: For he is the spirit
that works in the children of disobedience. And what wickedness soever he
has tempted and drawn them unto, to be willing to commit, he prompteth and
pusheth them on with all his skill and power to perpetrate and execute the
same. But still this is to be understood only of his spiritual and invisible
assistance, and not of any visible or corporeal aid, for else (as this Author
confesses) he might as well kill with a knife or a maul. And therefore we
cannot here pass by the bold and groundless (if not impious) assertion of
Sennertus, who though a very learned De Incant. p. 677.
person in diverse parts of humane literature, yet drawn with the sway of
popular opinion, did most miserably lapse in affirming that although Witches do
purpose to hurt men, yet that they neither do nor can effect those things, but
that the Witches being cast into a profound sleep, the Devil in the mean time
acts those things by himself; and thinks he proves this sufficiently by a
fabulous and lying story feigned to be told of a Witch, that being in a deep
sleep, when she waked, told that she had been transformed into a Wolf, and had
torn in pieces a Cow and a Sheep, which were found to be so, and therefore the
Devil must needs have done it. But in this he neither names the place, time,
nor Author to avouch it, and therefore all reasonable Men may judge how
palpable a falsity it is, for then if true it would follow that none could be
safe, and that the Devil might kill immediately with swords or knives, which he
cannot do.

2. Whereas he holds that the Devil does bring or convey the Observe. 2.
things to be injected near unto the place, and that he offers filth and
poisons to his clients, that thereby he may fermentally conjoin the Ideas of
these formed in the imaginative faculty with these. If the Devil be taken to be
merely and simply incorporeal, then he cannot remove matter (as we have before
proved) and so cannot convey the things near to the object; and if he be taken
to be corporeal (as we have asserted) his help is needless, because the Witches
may do it themselves, as we find sufficient stories of their hideing of strange
and poisonous things under the thresholds of houses De Lithias. c. 8. p. 75.
Hist.
and Churches; and to this purpose this same Author tells us this story: A
certain person (he says) did by custom use to make water in a corner of the
Court, whereupon he was afflicted with a bloody and cruel Strangury. And all
the remedy of the Physicians proved in vain, except that as often as he did
drink of Birch-Ale he did find a signal ease: But as often as he rose and walked,
and made water in the same place, so often his pains did return. At the last a
pin of old black Oak-wood is espied to be fixed in the place where he used to
make water. Which being pulled forth and burned he remained free from the
bloody Strangury, by drinking Ale of Birchen-twiggs. Also (he says) that he
remembered, that Karichterus had written that he had loosed such kind of
enchantments by only pissing through Beesomes of Birch. Now from hence it is
plain that this making water constantly upon this pin of old black Oak-wood did
cause his bloody Strangury, and that the pulling of it up and burning of it,
was with the help of the Birchen Ale the cure; but it can no ways be judged
necessary that the Devil should fix the Oak pin there, but that the Witch might
do it himself. Neither can it be thought to be any power given by the Devil to
the Oaken pin, that it had not by nature, for in probability it will constantly
by a natural power produce the same effect; only thus far the Devil had a hand
in the action, to draw some wicked person to fix the pin there where the Man
was accustomed to make water, thereby to hurt and torture him, and so was only
evil in respect of the end.

3. We observe and affirm that whatsoever effects are brought Observe. 3.
to pass by that which is commonly called and accounted Witchcraft, if they be
not brought to pass by juggling, confederacy, delusion and imposture (as the
most of them are, if not all) then they are performed either by mere natural
causes, or the strength of the Witches fancy, and most vehement desire of doing
of mischief to those she hates, or by both joined together, and that Satan is
no further an author or actor, but as he leads and draws the minds of the
Witches to do such mischievous actions, and pusheth on to seek about to learn
of others such secret poisons, charms, images and other hidden things, that
being used so or so, may produce such destructive ends as their wicked and
diabolical purposes are led to, and in this sense they are his clients, and
bounden vassals, and not otherwise.

4. The stories that he relates are either all to be taken to be true, or none
of them; and if they be all alike equally to be credited, Observe. 4.
then it will undeniably follow, that they were all alike produced by natural
causes, and so no need at all of the Devils assistance in performing of them,
no more than by working upon the minds of such as used those natural means to a
wicked and mischievous end. For first he gives these instances of things that
were very strange that were voided either by vomit or stool, by the ordinary
power of nature, without suspicion of diabolical cooperation, as the voiding of
the piece of the brass Cannon with its letters, with the Eele wrapped in its
secundines: The Dragon that the Ox voided by taking three herbs, with a tail
like an Eele, a body like or of leather, with a Serpentine head, and not less
than a Partridge: The knife that the Thieves forced a man to swallow, which he
voided by an Apostume in the side, and was after sound: also the arrow head of
three fingers broad stricken into the back, and after voided by stool, with
diverse such which we recited before. And that these being solid bodies should
have penetrated and passed through parts that are impatient of wounds, and in
which a wound is mortal, must of necessity be very wonderful, and might as soon
and upon as rational grounds be taken to be diabolical, as those that he
enumerateth to be so: For from these it is manifest that either nature put to
her last pinch does make penetration of dimensions, or else so enlarge the
pores, that those solid bodies may pass without wound, which (if seriously
considered) is a stupendous operation and effect. And as there needs no
cooperation of a diabolical power; for the performing of these, no more needs
there any concurrence of Devils to the others, that to that purpose he
relates. Only here is all the difference: these are wrought by the ultimate
endeavor of the Archaeus to save life, without the concurrence of external
causes; the others (that are therefore called diabolical) are commonly wrought
for a bad end, namely to hurt or to take away life, and have an external cause,
to wit, the force of the Witches imagination and strong desire of doing of
mischief, which is stirred up to that end by Satan, and therefore in regard of
the end are devilish, though they be both wrought by the agency of nature, the
one in the body of the imaginant, the other in the body that the Witch
intends to hurt by the force of her imagination and vehement desire, whereby
a seminal Idea is created or formed, which is sufficiently operative to
accomplish the end intended.

5. The arguments that he brings to prove penetration of dimensions Observe. 5.
to be in nature, or something equivalent thereunto, seem to be strong and
convincing. For in the generation of things, whosoever shall seriously and
strictly mark, shall find (as he alleges) that the spirit of the Archeus
(though not altogether incorporeal) does in the seeds of things penetrate it
self, and their parts one another, which he further makes good by the instance
of Gold generated of water; for it must of necessity be, that more than fifteen
parts of water must fall in or penetrate one another, that from thence one part
of Gold may be made, for weight is not of nothing, but argues the matter
ponderous in the Balance. Therefore naturally the water must so often penetrate
its body as the Gold does preponderate the water. And though it be granted that
the water has pores, yet notwithstanding it cannot contain so much as fourteen
times, it whole. And therefore he irrefragably concludes: Est ergo ordinarium
in natura, quod aliquae parts aquae se penetrent in unicum locum. And this he
backs with an unanswerable story of a Woman that longing for Muscles, did in
greediness eat some of them with the shells twice or thrice broken with her
teeth, and that she brought forth a child* with the same half eaten shells, and
a wound in the belly; therefore those shells had penetrated the stomach, womb
and secundines, or otherwise the force of the Archeus had opened the pores and
letten them pass in an unconceiveable manner So that if these things be granted
to be true (and we confess we know not how they can be answered) then there
need no diabolical power be brought to solve the injecting of strange things
into men's bodies, seeing nature is sufficient of it self, and therefore we can
allow no power at all unto Devils in effecting these things (if they be truly
done, and be not delusions) but only in drawing the minds of the Witches to
these wicked and mischievous courses; and therefore the Lord Bacon said
profoundly and wisely these words: Ut in operationibus illis earumque causis
Syl. Syl. Cent. 10. p. 556.
error cavendus est, ita quoque danda vel imprimis opera est, ne effecta nobis
imponant, temere judicantibus talia esse, quae eousque nondum processerunt. Sic
prudentes judices, praescripta velut norma, fidem haberi temere nolunt
confessionibus sagarum, nec etiam factorum contra illas probationi. Sagas enim
turbat imaginationis vertigo, ut putent se illud facere, quod non faciunt,
populumque hic ludit credulitas, ut naturae opera imputent fascino.

6. And to confirm this point he adds far more stupendous Observe. 6.
matters of fact than the former, of things that were within, being taken to
without or invisibly conveyed away, as the woman at Mechlin that saw the
Soldier in a conflict lose his hand, and forthwith brought forth a Daughter
wanting an hand, which was never found, and the wench died of the Haemorrhage.
Another at Antwerpe seeing a Soldier begging with his right arm shot off and
bloody, forthwith brought forth a Daughter wanting the right arm whose bloody
shoulder the Surgeon cured, and she was married after; and that the arm was
never found, neither did there appear any bones or putrefied matter into which
the arm might waste. Also another Woman going to see the Decollation of
thirteen men, did soon after bring forth a mature Child with a bloody neck, the
head no where appearing. I confess it would rack the judgment even of the most
credulous to the highest pitch to believe these unparalled Stories; but the
Author relating them as of his own knowledge, and being a person of
unquestionable veracity, I cannot conceive how they can rationally be denied,
especially finding Mr Boil to affirm, that in those experiments (much more
relations of matters of fact) that Helmont avouched upon his own knowledge, he
durst be his Compurgator. Who would not believe but that these things could
never have been done, but by a supernatural and Diabolical power, but that this
Author (to which all judicious persons in reason may adhere) does utterly deny,
that the arm was either pulled away or conveyed none can tell whither, by
Satan, and therefore that in such a strange Paradox, trivial reasons are not to
be allowed; and it were too much sloathfulness to ascribe all effects unto
Satan, of which we are ignorant. And therefore if an hand, an arm, nay an whole
head, could be separated from the rest of the body, and conveyed forth of the
Womb by the Archeus or natural spirit, thereunto excited by the impression of
horror and terror in the Women: In like manner by the same power of the natural
spirit of man or woman, excited by a vehement and fierce imagination to revenge
and to do mischief, may strange things be injected (if there can be any sound
proof of such a matter of fact) into the bodies of such men or women as the
Witches intend to do hurt unto, and yet Satan has no more hand in it, but only
as a spiritual agent to move the wills of those wicked and malicious people to
do mischief unto those that they hate, though without cause. And the great
secret of that which may be called Witching, is the learning of others, who
likewise have had it by tradition, the great force of imagination, and the
natural spirit with the ways and means how to excite it and exalt it; herein
stands the mystery of all Magic, and it becomes only evil in the use and
application, and they are to be condemned that use it to such devilish ends,
even as those that use those good Creatures that nature does produce to
poisonous, wicked, and destructive purposes. And lastly, here we may note, that
if things or bodies that are without may be injected into the bodies of others,
by the force of exalted imagination and a vehement desire, then the same power
that does inject them through skin, flesh and bones, must also be able to bring
them near to the place, and need not at all the assistance of Satan, because it
is far easier to carry them near the place, than to thrust them into the body;
and so this Author has here introduced the Devils aid to bring them to the
place to no purpose, and never yet proved either by reason or matter of fact,
that ever Satan did any such thing, and so is a mere supposition without proof.

7. The other matters of fact that he relates are prodigious, Observe. 7.
and are brought to prove that Satan is an actor to convey these strange things
into the bodies of men, and are these. A piece of an Ox Hide taken forth of a
man's Arm, so also that Equuleum, a Wood-Horse, or a four-footed board with a
wheel and ropes twice as broad as the gullet. Another that vomited up perhaps
two thousand pins conglomerated together, with filth and hairs; another that
vomited up, he being present, wooden Chips that had been cut off with the
Hatchet in smoothing of wood, with much slime to the bigness of two fists, of
which we shall note these Conclusions. 1. It does no way appear (if these
things be granted to be true, both for matter and manner) neither does he offer
to prove it, that these are any more than the former Diabolical, but only in
the end, because they are for the hurt and destruction of mankind and not
otherwise; and there being no proof of the Devils Cooperation any further but
in working upon the minds of those that are agents and instruments to bring
these things to pass, we may very well reject those things that are supposed,
but not proved. 2. The ejecting or voiding of such strange things as here he
has related, does not necessarily suppose their injection or thrusting in,
because they may be bred there by natural Causes, so Worms of many sorts and
strange Figures, also Frogs, Dracunculos and Askers have been voided, and
doubtlesly bred there by natural causes, and were not injected or thrust in,
and for proof of this I refer the Reader to the relations of learned Schenchius
lib. 3. p. 363. of those strange sorts of Worms and other Creatures that he
from diverse Authors shows have been vomited up, which without all scruple,
were not injected, but bred there. To confirm this and to prove what strange
things are sometimes bred in Apostumes and Tumors, we shall translate a passage
or two, and first take this from Levinus Lemnius that learned and famous
Physician of Zeland, who writes thus: Also forth of sordid Ulcers and
Impostures (he says) we have known that the fragments of nails, hairs, De
occult. not. mirac. l. 2. c. 40. p. 325.
shells, little bones and stones have been taken forth; which were concreted
and grown together forth of putrid humors: As also little creatures, worms
with tails, and little beasts of an unaccustomed form, cast up by vomiting,
especially in those who were oppressed with contagious diseases, in whose
urines I have often discerned to swim little Animalcles like to Pismires, or to
those creatures we observe in the estival months to move in the celestial dew
here in England we call it Woodsoar, or Cuckow-spittle. Take another from that
learned and expert Surgeon Ambrosius Paraeus where he is speaking of strange
tumors, in these De Tumor. l. 6. c. 19. p. 158.
words; Also in these tumors being opened thou may see bodies of all kinds,
and far differing from the common matter of Tumors, as stones, chalk, sand,
coals, cockles, ears of corn, hay, horn, hairs, flesh as well hard as
spongious, grisles, bones and whole Animalcles, as well living as dead. The
generation of which things (by the corruption and alteration of the humors)
will not much astonish us, if we consider, that even as nature has framed Man
as a Microcosm forth of all the seeds and elements of the whole great world,
that he might be as it were the lively image of that great world: So in that
Microcosm, nature has willed, that all the species of all motions and actions
might be manifest, nature being never idle in us, as long as matter is not a
wanting to work upon. So that it is most plain that these strange things may be
bred within, and so the opinion of injecting them, is but a mere figment. 3.
Neither can the vomiting up of such strange things as he relates, conclude
necessarily that they were injected either by the power of Satan or the Witch,
because they may be performed by juggling, sleight of hand, confederacy and the
like, as was manifest in the Boy of Bilson, and diverse that we have known,
that had made some numbers of others to believe that they had voided strange
things, as pins, needles, crooked-knitting-pricks, moss, nails, and the like,
but upon a strickt search, have but proved delusions and slight, such as our
common Hocus Pocus Men use, when they make the people believe they swallow a
long pudding of white tinn, and again pull it forth of their mouths, or in
pulling ribbins, or laces of diverse colors forth of their throats. 4. And
again the most of these relations are but commonly taken upon trust from the
affirmations of the bystanders who might be confederate parties, or ignorant
persons, and so easily deceived; and it appears not that Helmont was by at
the very instant when the children vomited up the wooden horse, or fourfooted
board, but that it was the bystanders that drew it forth, who might be parties
to the cheat, or be themselves deluded, and so aver it pertinaciously to
others. For I have in my practice known a young Wench about 9 or 10 years old,
who that she Hist.
might be pitied and have an idle life, had made her Father and Mother believe
that quick worms came forth at her ear, and also I taking her into mine own
house she had persuaded all the family that it was true, and did often open her
head-cloaths, and holding down her ear a quick worm would drop forth of the
hair, who notwithstanding by diligent watching, was found out to get them
privately from under stones or wood, and so did cunningly convey them into her
hair, but being discovered, was by due correction reclaimed, and so the wonder
ceased. And it is as common to mistake things, either by absolute judging them
to be such a thing indeed, when it has but some slender resemblance of it, or
by judging a thing to be really so, because of such a name but metaphorically
given unto it; so it is usual to call a Carcinoma in the highest degree Lupus
or a Wolf, because as a Wolf is a most voracious creature, so this ulcer is the
most devouring of all others; and therefore have we known after that such have
been by incision eradicated by our selves and others, and exposed to the view
of the vulgar people, they would presently most earnestly affirm to others that
they had seen it, and that it was a living creature, and had mouth, eyes and
ears; so far will ignorant mistake induce credulity.

8. That the force of imagination accompanied with the passions Observe. 8.
of horror, fear, envy, malice, earnest desire of revenge, and the like, is
great upon the body imaginant, as also upon the foetus in the womb, is
acknowledged by all. But that it can at distance work upon another body, though
denied by Fienus and the whole rabble of the Schoolmen, yet is strongly proved
by this learned Author, and allowed of by all others that truly understood the
operations of nature, which we also take to be a certain truth, and do assert
that if those people that are esteemed Witches, do really and truly (of which
we utterly doubt) inject any of these strange things into the bodies of men,
that they are brought to pass merely by the imagination of the Witch, and the
Devil acts nothing in it at all, but the setting of his will upon that
mischief. As for the handling the dispute concerning the manner of the
injecting of these strange things, so strongly pursued by this Author,
Sennertus and others, we shall totally supersede and suspend our judgment,
until the (...) be sufficiently proved (which yet lies under water, and unseen)
and then it will be time enough to dispute the manner, when the matter is
certainly made evident. Therefore we will shut up this with that modest and
grave advice of the Lord Bacon in these words: Ideo cogemur in hac inquisitione
ad nova Syl. Syl. Cent. 10. p. 583.
experimenta confugere; ubi directiones tantum eorum praescribi possunt, non
ulla positiva in medium adferri. Si quis putet subsistendum nobis fuisse, donec
tentamentis res penitus innotuisset, (ut fecisse nos ubique probant alii
tituli) sciat dubia nos fide amplecti quaecunque imaginationis effecta
circumferuntur, animum tamen esse illa per otium exigere ad Lydium veritatis
lapidem, id est, experimentorum lucem.

CHAP. XIII.
That the ignorance of the power of Art and Nature and such like things, has
much advanced these foolish and impious opinions.

THE opinions that we reject as foolish and impious are those we have often
named before, to wit, that those that are vulgarly accounted Witches, make a
visible and corporeal contract with the Devil, that he sucks upon their bodies,
that he has carnal copulation with them, that they are transubstantiated into
Cats, Dogs, Squirrels, and the like, or that they raise tempests, and fly in
the air. Other powers we grant unto them, to operate and effect whatsoever the
force of natural imagination joined with envy, malice and vehement desire of
revenge, can perform or perpetrate, or whatsoever hurt may be done by secret
poisons and such like ways that work by mere natural means.

And here we are to show the chief causes that do and have advanced these
opinions, and this principally we ascribe to men's ignorance of the power of
Nature and Art, as we shall manifest in these following particulars.

1. There is nothing more certain than, that how great soever the knowledge of
Men be taken to be, yet the ultimate Sphere of natures activity or ability is
not perfectly known, which is made most manifest in this, that every day there
are made new discoveries of her secrets, which prove plainly that her store is
not yet totally exhausted, nor her utmost efficiency known. And therefore those
Men must needs be precipicious, and build upon a sandy foundation, that will
ascribe corporeal effects unto Devils, and yet know not the extent of nature,
for no Man can rationally assign a beginning for supernatural agents and
actions, that does not certainly know where the power and operation of nature
ends.

2. And as it is thus in general, so in many particulars, as especially in
being ignorant of many natural agents that do work at a great distance, and
very occultly, both to help, and to hurt, as in the weapon salve, the
Sympathetick powder, the curing of diseases by mumial applications, by Amulets,
Appensions and Transplantions, which all have been, and commonly are ascribed
unto Satan, when they are truly wrought by natural operations. And so (as we
have sufficiently manifested before) by many strange, and secret poisons both
natural and artificial, that have no bewitching power in them at all, but work
naturally, and only may be hurtful in their use through the devilishness of
some persons that use them to diverse evil ends.

3. There is nothing that does more clearly manifest our scanted knowledge in
the secret operations of nature, and the effects that she produces, than the
late discoveries of the workings of nature, both in the vegetable, animal and
mineral Kingdoms, brought daily to light by the pains and labors of
industrious persons: As is most evident in those many elucubrations, and
continued discoveries of those learned and indefatigable persons that are of
the Royal Society, which do plainly evince that hitherto we have been ignorant
of almost all the true causes of things, and therefore through blindness have
usually attributed those things to the operation of Cacodemons that were truly
wrought by nature, and thereby not smally augmented and advanced this gross and
absurd opinion of the power of Witches.

4. Another great means in advancing these Tenants has been Men's supine
negligence in not searching into and experimenting the power of natural agents,
but resting satisfied in the sleepy notions of general rules, and speculative
Philosophy. By which means a prejudice has been raised against the most occult
operations of nature, and natural magic (which is (as Agrippa truly said) Dt
occult. Philos. l. 1. c. 2.
The comprizer of great power, full of most high mysteries, and contains the
most profound contemplation, nature, power, quality, substance and virtue of
most secret things, and the knowledge of all nature) to be condemned, as the
work of the Devil and hellish fiends, which is the handmaid and instrument of
the Almighty. And from this diabolical pit of the ignorance of the power of
nature (especially when assisted by art) have sprung up those black and horrid
lies in the mouths of Erastus, Conringius and above all of Kircherus, denying
the possibility of the transmutation of metals, by the power of Art and Nature,
and ascribing the performance thereof by Paracelsus, Lullius, Sendinogius and
others to the Devil; so malevolent do men grow when they are led by nescience
and ignorance.

5. The ignorance of the strange and wonderful things that Art can bring to
pass has been no less a cause, why the most admirable things that Art brings
to pass by it are through blind ignorance ascribed unto Devils, for so have
many brave learned Artists, and Mechanicians been accused for Conjurers, as
happened to Roger Bacon, Dr. Dee, Trithemius, Cornelius Agrippa, and many
others, when what they performed was by lawful and laudable art. The strange
things that the Mathematics and Mechanics can perform are hardly to be
enumerated, of which were those most wonderful catoptrical glasses mentioned by
Nicero, Aquilonius, Baptista Porta and many others, those wonderful engines in
the shape of Birds, Men, Beasts, and Fishes that do move, sing, hiss and many
such like things mentioned by Heron of Alexandria, and our Countryman Dr.
Fludd; and those that would have more ample s^tisfaction concerning the
stupendous things that are produced by art, may receive most large
satisfaction in reading that most learned and elaborate Epistle written as a
preface before the Book of Johannes Ernestus Burgravius called Biolychnium vel
de lampade Vid. Theatr. Chym. Vol. 5. p. 943.
vitae and mortis, by Marcellus Uranckheim Doctor of both laws, as also in
reading that profound and mysterious piece written by Roger Bacon, de
admirabili potestate artis and naturae, and de nullitate magiae, with the
learned notes of Dr. Dee upon it, of which he says this: Ut videatur quod
omnis potestas magica sit inferior his operibus and indigna. And therefore
there can be nothing more unworthy, than for any man, that pretends to any
portion of reason, so far to dote, or suffer himself to be led with ignorance
and rashness, as to ascribe those strange things that Nature and Art, or both
joined together do produce, unto Devils: And yet there is nothing that is more
common not only by the blind vulgar, but even by those that otherwise would be
accounted learned, and wise enough; pride and folly attends the most of the
Sons of Men.

6. Another gross mistake there is, in supposing those strange things that are
performed by vaulters, tumblers, dancers upon ropes, and such like, not
possible to be done but by the assistance of the Devil, when they are
altogether brought to pass and effected by use, custom, exercise, nimbleness
and agility of body. And yet we have known some not only of the popular rank,
but many that thought themselves both wise, learned and religious that have
been so blind as to father these things upon Devils and seriously Hist.
to seem to believe, that the actors of these things had made a league and
compact with the Devil, by whose help they performed them. And I do remember
that a pretty active young man, within these few years went about in this North
Country with a neat Bay Mare for money to show tricks, which were very odd and
strange, for if she had been blindfolded, and several pieces of money taken
from several persons, and wrapped in a cloth, the Mare would have given every
one their own piece of money; and this and many other feats she played, were not
only by the common people, but by others that should have been more wise,
judged to be performed by no other means but by the Devil, and some were so
stark mad as to believe and affirm that the Mare was not a natural one, but
that it was the Devil that played those strange tricks in the shape of a Mare:
when more sober judgments knew that they were performed by the masters eye, and
rod directing the Mare. Error and credulitas multum in hominibus possunt.

7. In like manner are often both those that are learned, as well as the vulgar
most woefully imposed upon by the odd and strange feats performed by
Legierdemain, sleight of hand, and by wonderful things brought to pass by
subtle and cunning Impostors that act by confederacy, and the like, of which
we have given some instances before in this treatise. And it was no evil piece
of service, that Master Scot did in his book of the discovery of Witchcraft,
when he laid open all the several tricks of Legierdemain and sleight of hand,
thereby to undeceive the ignorant multitude; and that is no less praiseworthy
that is performed by the Author of that little treatise called Hocus Pocus
junior, where all the feats are set forth in their proper colors, so that the
most ignorant may see how they are done, and that they are miracles unknown,
and but bables being discovered, which treatise I could commend to be read of
all Witchmongers and vain credulous persons, that thereby their ignorance may
be laid open, and they convinced of their errors.

8. The ignorance or mistaking of these things, joined with the notions Men
have imbibed from their infancy, together with irreligious education, are the
true and proper causes, that make so many ascribe that power to Devils and
Witches, that they neither have, or ever had, or can ever bring into act. And
therefore it behooves all that would judge aright of these abstruse matters, to
labor to understand the secret operations of nature, and the strange works of
art, to divest themselves of their false imbibed notions, and truly and
rightly to understand the Articles of the Christian Faith, to be daily
conversant in reading the Scriptures, they will then be more fit to judge of
these things, and not to call light darkness, nor darkness light.

CHAP. XIV.
Of diverse Impostures framed and invented to prove false and lying miracles
by, and to accuse persons of Witchcraft, from late and undeniable authorities.

IN the treatise preceding we have often made mention of delusions and
Impostures, which we shall largely handle in this place: and though Mr.
Glanvil, and others do object, that though many pretended possessions or
Witchcrafts have been proved to be mere couzenings and impostures, yet
therefore it will not follow that all are so. To which we shall render these
answers.

1. If it do not necessarily conclude, that they are all impostures, yet it
gives a most shrewd cause of dubitation that they may be so. And the objection
depends not upon a necessary connection betwixt the subject and predicate, for
some being direct and palpable Impostures, it is not of necessity, but by
contingency or accident that the others are not so, and ought first to have
been proved, which never yet was performed.

2. But we affirm that a general conclusion drawn from an inductive argument is
good and sound, where no instance can be clearly made out to the contrary. But
as yet no true instance, really and faithfully attested, has ever been brought
to prove that any of these things that we deny, were ever effected by
diabolical power. For who were ever by and present, that were persons of
sincerity and sound judgment, that could truly testify and averr that the
Devil in a visible and corporeal shape made a contract with the Witch, or that
he sucked upon his, or her body, or that he had carnal copulation with them, or
that saw when the Witch was really changed into a Dog or a Cat, or that they
flew or were carried in the air? Seeing no instance can be given to prove any
of these to be undoubted truths, it must needs follow that they are mere
figments, or at the best all but absolute Impostures. And again it is but
precarious, and petitio principii, to imagine that any persons have vomited up
or voided strange things that saw or knew that they were injected by Devils,
for they were either naturally bred there; or else were mere Impostures and
delusive Juglings.

And therefore we shall propose some Histories of strange and prodigious cheats
and Impostures from late and unquestionable authorities, whereby all the rest
may be judged and discerned; of which take this for one.

1. Elizabeth Barton of Kent (by those that labored to cry Hist. 1.
up her horrible cheats for miracles, otherwise called the holy Maid of Kent)
and others were in the twenty fifth year of King Henry the Eighth attainted of
High Treason, for that under color of hypocrisy, Revelations and false
Miracles practiced by Vid. Stat. Pulton, 25. year Henr. 8. c. 12.
the said Elizabeth, they conspired to impugn and slander the divorce between
the King and Queen Katherine his first Wife, and the last Marriage between him
and Queen Anne his second Wife, to destroy the King, and to deprive him of his
Crown. Her false and feigned miracles, and the subtle and cunning contrivances
that were brought to pass by the help of her confederate accomplices, and her
and the others open confession of them may be found at large in Hollingshead,
Stow, and the writings of Vid Chron. Hollingshead. Stow An. Hen. 8. 25. p. 1013.
Mr. Lambert, whither for brevities sake I remit my reader, and shall only give
it here in the words of Speed, which are these: The Romanists (he says) much
fearing that Babel would down, if Queen Anne might be heard against wicked
Haman, sought to The Pope.
underprop the foundations thereof with certain devices of their own: and that
the same might pass without note of suspicion, they laid their forgery even
upon Heaven it self; whose pretended oracle Elizabeth Barton (commonly called
the holy Maid of Kent) was made to be; and the pillars of this godless Fabric
were Edward Bocking a Monk by profession, and Doctor of Divinity, Richard
Masters Parson of Aldington, the Town wherein she dwelt; Richard Deering a
Monk, Hugh Rich a Friar, John Adestone and Thomas Abell Priests, put to their
helping hands; and Henry Gould Bachelor of Divinity, with John Fisher the
reverend Father of Rochester employed their pains to dawb these downfalling
walls with their untempered mortar. The Scribes that set their pens for her
miracles, were Edward Thwaites Gentleman, and Thomas Lawrence Register, besides
Haukherst a Monk, who writ a letter that was forged to be sent her from Heaven;
And Richard Risby and Thomas Gould were the men that dispersed her miracles
abroad to the world. This holy Maid Elizabeth made a Votaress in Canterbury,
was taught by Bocking her Ghostly Father, and suspected Paramour, to
counterfeit many feigned trances, and in the same to utter many virtuous words
for the rebuke of sin, under which more freely she was heard against Luthers
doctrine, and the Scriptures translation, then desired of many: neither so
only, but that she gave forth from God and his Saints by sundry suggestive
Revelations, that if the King proceeded in his Divorce, and second Marriage, he
should not reign in his Realm one month after, nor rest in Gods favor the
space of an hour. But the truth discovered by Gods true Ministers, this oracle
gave place as all other such did, when Christ by his death stopped their lying
mouths: For her self and seven of her disciples were executed for Treason at
Tiburn, and the other six put to their fines and imprisonment. To which he
subjoineth this story of the like nature. With the like counterfeit Revelations
and feigned predictions this generation of hypocrites had brought Edward Lord
Stafford Duke of Buckingham, unto his unhappy end, by the working of John de la
Court his own Confessor, together with Nicholas Hopkins a Monk of the
Carthusian Order in the Priory of Henton in Somer set shire, who by his visions
from Heaven forsooth, heartned him for the Crown; But before his own Coronet
could aspire to that top, he worthily lost both head and all upon Tower Hill
for his Treason, Anno Domini 1521. Unto such sins the world was then subject,
and into such conceits their reputed holiness had brought them, not only among
the simple and unlettered, but even with them that seemed to be learned indeed:
For by certain predictions foreshewing a great deluge, Prior Bolton of S.
Bartholomews in London, was so fearful that he built himself a house upon the
height of Harrowhill, storing it with provisions necessary to keep himself from
drowning in Anno Dom. 1524.

2. And that we may be certified how frequent and common these counterfeited
Impostures have been, and yet are practiced, take Hist. 2.
this other from undoubted authority. The 15 of August being Sunday in the 16
of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, Agnes Bridges Stow's Chron. p. 678.
a Maid about the age of 20 years, and Rachel Pinder a Wench about the age of
11 or 12 years, who both of them had counterfeited to be possessed by the Devil
(whereby they had not only marvellously deluded many people both Men and Women,
but also diverse such persons, as otherwise seemed of good wit and
understanding) stood before the Preacher at Pauls-cross; where they
acknowledged their hypocritical counterfeiting with penitent behaviors,
requiring forgiveness of God and the world, and the people to pray for them.
Also their several examinations and Confessions were there openly read by the
Preacher, and afterward published in print, for posterity hereafter to beware
of the like deceivers. From whence we may take these two Observations.

1. We may from hence note, how subject the nature of man is Observe. 1.
both to deceive and to be deceived, and that not only the common people, but
also the wiser and more learned heads may most easily be imposed upon. And,
that therefore in things of this nature and the like, we cannot use too much
circumspection, nor use too much diligence to discover them.

2. We may note, that when such strange Impostures or false Miracles Observe. 2.
are pretended, there is commonly some sinister and corrupt end aimed at, under
the color of Religion, and that those that are most ready to publish such
things as true Miracles and Divine Revelations, are generally those that did
complot and devise them. And therefore the greater number they be that cry them
up, and the more esteem the persons are of that blow abroad such things, the
greater suspicion we ought to have of the falsity and forgery of them. Always
remembering that the greater the fame and number of the persons are that
conspire and confederate together, the greater things they may bring to pass,
and be more able to deceive, as was manifest by the Priests attending the
Oracles; who, though they labored to father their predictions upon some Deity,
yet it was manifest that it was nothing else, but their own Confederacy,
Impostures and Juglings.

3. But these Diabolical Counterfeitings of possessions, and the Hist. 3.
maintaining of the power of dispossession and casting forth of Devils, was not
only upheld and maintained by the Papists to advance their superstitious
courses; but also in the said time of Queen Elizabeth, there were diverse
Non-Conformists, to gain credit and repute to their way, that did by public
writing labor to prove the continuation of real possessions by Devils, and
that they had power by fasting and Prayer to cast them out. Of which number
were one Mr Darrell and his Accomplices, who not only writ diverse Pamphlets in
the positive defense of that opinion, but also published certain Narrations of
several persons, that they pretended were really possessed with Devils, which
were cast forth by their means in using Fasting and Prayer. Which writings were
answered Vid. A Book called, A discovery of fraudulent practices concerning
pretended possessions.
by Mr Harsnet and others, and their Theory not only overthrown, but their
practice discovered to be counterfeiting and Imposture. Whereupon there were
diverse persons suborned to feign and counterfeit possessions, as William
Summers of Nottingham, who by the Exorcists was reported to have strange fits,
passions and actions; which are at large described and set forth in that
learned Treatise, Dialogical Discourses of Spirits and Devils, written about
the same time by John Deacon and John Waller, Ministers, and of diverse other
persons who likewise pretended the same counterfeit possessions. And though the
said forged and feigned possessions were strongly maintained by their Abettors,
and the matters of fact audaciously asserted to be true; yet after the said
Darrell and his Accomplices Vid. ibid. Dialog. 11. p. 352.
were examined by the Queens Commissioners, all was made apparent to be
notorious counterfeiting, cheating and imposture, both by the confession of
Summers himself, and by the Oaths of several Deponents. Neither was that
discourse containing the certain possession of seven persons in one Family in
Lancashire, at Cheworth in the Parish of Leigh, in the Year 1594. (though
believed by many for a truth, because of the straight tale told by the said
Darrell in that Narrative) of any better grain, but full of untruths,
impossibilities, absurdities and contradictions.

4. Our next instance shall be a most strange Imposture acted in Hist. 4.
the time of King James, and in a manner known unto the whole Nation; that is
of the Boy of Bilson in Staffordshire, in the year Vid. The cunning of the Boy
of Bilson, p. 55.
1620. by name William Perry, whose condition as he had been taught, and so
left by the Popish Priests, take as follows. This Boy being about thirteen
years old (but for wit and subtilty far exceeding his age) was thought by
diverse to be possessed of the Devil, and bewitched, by reason of many strange
fits and much distemper, wherewith he seemed to have been extremely affected.
In those fits he appeared both deaf and blind, writhing his mouth aside,
continually groaning and panting, and (although often pinched with men's
fingers, pricked with Needles, tickled on his sides, and once whipped with a
Rod, besides other the like extremities) yet could he not be discerned by
either shrieking or shrinking to bewray the least passion or feeling. Out of
his fits he took (as might be thought) no sustenance which he could digest, but
together with it, did void and cast out of his mouth, rags, thread, straw,
crooked pins, etc. Both in and out of his fits his belly (by wilful and
continual abstinence defrauding his own ^uts) was almost as flat as his back,
besides, his throat was swollen and hard, his tongue stiff and rolled up toward
the roof of his mouth, insomuch that he seemed always dumb, save that he would
speak once in a Fortnight or three Weeks, and that but in very few words.

Two things there were which gave most just cause of presumption that he was
possessed and bewitched; one was that he could still discern when that Woman
(which was supposed to have bewitched him) to wit Jone Cock was brought in to
any room where he was, although she were secretly conveyed thither, as was one
time tried before the Grand Jury at Stafford: The second, that though he would
abide other passages of Scripture, yet he could not endure the repeating of
that Text, viz. In the beginning was the word, etc. Jo. 1. ver. 1. but
instantly rolling his eyes and shaking his head, as one distracted, he would
fall nto his usual fits of groaning, panting, distraction, etc. In which plight
he continued many months, to the great wonder and astonishment of thousands,
who from diverse parts came to see him. Thus much of his cunning.

Yet notwithstanding, this most devilish and cunningly contrived
counterfeiting and dissimulation was discovered and fully detected by the
sagacity of that pious and learned person, Dr Thomas Marton then Bishop of
Coventry and Lichfield: To whose memory I cannot but owe and make manifest all
due respect, because he was well known unto me, and by the imposition of whose
hands I was ordained Presbyter when he was Bishop of Durham, and also knew his
then Secretary, Mr Richard Baddeley, who was the Notary, and writ the
examination of this crafty Boy. The manner how such a doubtful and intricate
piece of Imposture was found out and discovered, you may read at large in the
Treatise called a Discourse concerning Popish Exorcising. And his public
Confession we shall give in the Authors own words: He was finally brought again
to the Summer Assizes held at Stafford, the 26. of July, Anno 1621. where
before Sir Peter Warburton and Sir Humfrey Winch Knights, his Majesty's
Justices of Assize, and the face of the County and Country there assembled, the
Boy craved pardon first of Almighty God, then desired the Woman there also
present to forgive him; and lastly, requested the whole Country whom he had so
notoriously and wickedly scandalized, to admit of that his so hearty Confession
for their satisfaction.

And thus it pleased God (he says) to open the eyes of this Boy (that I may so
say) luto with the Clay of the Romish Priests lewd Impostures, and sputo with
the spittle of his own infamy, to see his errors and to glorify the God of
truth. And though many such Impostures as this have in several ages been hudled
up in darkness and recorded for true stories, by those that were Partisans to
them and Confederates with them, yet doubtless were but of the same stamp with
this, and might all as well have been discovered, if the like care, skill and
industry had been used.

5. No less villainous, bloody and Diabolical, was the design of Thompson alias
Southworth, Priest or Jesuit, against Jennet Bierley, Hist. 5.
Jane Southworth, and Ellen Bierly of Samesbury in the County of Lancaster, in
the year 1612. the sum of which is this. The said Jennet Bierley, Ellen
Bierley, and Jane Southworth, were Indicted Vid. The arraignment and trial of
Witches at Lancaster, 1612.
at the Assizes holden at Lancaster upon Wednesday the nineteenth of August, in
the year abovesaid, for that they and every of them had practiced, exercised,
and used diverse devilish and wicked Arts, called Witchcrafts, Enchantments,
Charms and Sorceries, in and upon one Grace Sowerbutts. And the chief witness
to prove this was Grace Sowerbutts her self, who said that they did draw her by
the hair of the head, and take her sense and memory from her, did throw her
upon the Hen-roost and Hay-mow; did appear to her sometimes in their own
likeness, sometimes like a black Dog with two feet, that they carried her where
they met black things like men that danced with them, and did abuse their
bodies; and that they brought her to one Thomas Walsham's House in the night,
and there they killed his Child by putting a nail into the Navil, and after
took it forth of the Grave, and did boil it, and eat some of it, and made Oil
of the bones, and such like horrid lies. But there appearing sufficient grounds
of suspicion that it was practiced knavery, the said Graece Sowerbutts was by
the wisdom, and care of Sir Edward Bromley Knight, one of his Majesty's
Justices of Assize at Lancaster, appointed to be examined by William Leigh and
Edward Chisnal Esquires, two of his Majesty's Justices of peace in the same
County, and so thereupon made this free confession. Being demanded whether the
accusation she laid upon her Grandmother, Jennet Bierley, Ellen Bierley and
Jane Southworth, of Witchcraft, viz. of the killing of the child of Thomas
Walshman, with a nail in the Navil, the boiling, eating and oyling, thereby to
transform themselves into diverse shapes, was true? she does utterly deny the
same, or that ever she saw any such practices done by them. She further says,
that one Mr. Thompson, which she takes to be Mr. Christopher Southworth, to
whom she was sent to say her prayers, did persuade, counsel and advise her, to
deal as formerly has been said against her said Grandmother, Aunt and
Southworths Wife.

And further she confesses, and says, that she never did know, or saw any
Devils, nor any other visions, as formerly has been alleged and informed.

Also she confesses, and says, that she was not thrown, or cast upon the
Hen-roust, and Hay-mow in the Barn, but that she went up upon the Mow by the
wall side. Being further demanded whether she ever was at the Church, she
says, she was not, but promised hereafter to go to Church, and that very
willingly; of which the author of the relation gives this judgment.

How well (he says) this project, to take away the lives of three innocent
poor creatures by practice and villainy, to induce a young Scholar to commit
perjury, to accuse her own Grandmother, Aunt, etc. agrees either with the title
of a Jesuit, or the duty of a religious Priest who should rather profess
sincerity and innocence, than practice treachery! But this was lawful, for they
are Heretics accursed, to leave the company of Priests, to frequent Churches,
hear the word of God preached, and profess religion sincerely.

6. But we shall shut up the relating of these prodigious and Hist. 6.
hellish stories, of these kind of couzening and cheating delusions and
impostures, with one instance more that is no less notorious than these that we
have rehearsed. About the year 1634 (for having lost our notes of the same, we
cannot be so exact as we should) there was a great pretended meeting of many
supposed Witches at a new house or barn, in Pendle Forest in Lancashire, then
not inhabited, where (as the accusation pretended) some of them by pulling by a
rope of Straw or Hay, did bring Milk, Butter, Cheese, and the like, and were
carried away upon Dogs, Cats or Squirrels. The informer was one Edmund Robinson
(yet living at the writing hereof, and commonly known by the name of Ned of
Roughs) whose Father was by trade a Waller, and but a poor Man, and they
finding that they were believed and had encouragement by the adjoining
Magistrates, and the persons being committed to prison or bound over to the
next Assizes, the boy, his Father and some others besides did make a practice
to go from Church to Church that the Boy might reveal and discover Witches,
pretending that there was a great number at the pretended meeting whose faces
he could know, and by that means they got a good living, that in a short space
the Father bought a Cow or two, when he had none before. And it came to pass
that this said Boy was brought into the Church of Kildwick a large parish
Church, where I (being then Curate there) was preaching in the afternoon, and
was set upon a stall (he being but about ten or eleven years old) to look about
him, which moved some little disturbance in the Congregation for a while. And
after prayers I inquiring what the matter was, the people told me that it was
the Boy that discovered Witches, upon which I went to the house where he was to
stay all night, where I found him, and two very unlikely persons that did
conduct him, and manage the business; I desired to have some discourse with the
Boy in private, but that they utterly refused; then in the presence of a great
many people, I took the Boy near me, and said: Good Boy tell me truly, and in
earnest, did thou see and hear such strange things of the meeting of Witches,
as is reported by many that thou do relate, or did not some person teach thee
to say such things of thy self? But the two men not giving the Boy leave to
answer, did pluck him from me, and said he had been examined by two able
Justices of the Peace, and they did never ask him such a question, to whom I
replied, the persons accused had therefore the more wrong. But the Assizes
following at Lancaster there were seventeen found guilty by the Jury, yet by
the prudent discretion of the Judge, who was not satisfied with the evidence,
they were reprieved, and his Majesty and his Council being informed by the
Judge of the matter, the Bishop of Chester was appointed to examine them, and
to certify what he thought of them, which he did, and thereupon four of them,
to wit Margaret Johnson, Francis Dicconson, Mary Spenser, and Hargraves Wife,
were sent for up to London, and were viewed and examined by his Majesty's
Physicians and Surgeons, and after by his Majesty and the Council, and no
cause of guilt appearing but great presumptions of the boys being suborned to
accuse them falsely. Therefore it was resolved to separate the Boy from his
Father, they having both followed the women up to London, they were both taken
and put into several prisons asunder. Whereupon shortly after the Boy confessed
that he was taught and suborned to devise, and feign those things against them,
and had persevered in that wickedness by the counsel of his Father, and some
others, whom envy, revenge and hope of gain had prompted on to that devilish
design and villainy; and he also confessed, that upon that day when he said that
they met at the aforesaid house or barn, he was that very day a mile off,
getting Plums in his Neighbors Orchard. And that this is a most certain truth,
there are many persons yet living, of sufficient reputation and integrity, that
can avouch and testify the same; and besides, what I write is the most of it
true, upon my own knowledge, and the whole I have had from his own mouth more
than once.

Thus having brought these unquestionable Histories to manifest the horrid
cheats and impostures that are practiced for base, wicked and devilish ends,
we must conclude in opposing that objection proposed in the beginning of this
Chapter, which is this: That though some be discovered to be counterfeitings
and impostures, yet all are not so, to which we surther answer.

1. That all those things that are now adays supposed to be Reas. 1.
done by Demoniacks or those that pretend possessions, as also all those
strange feats pretended to be brought to pass by Witches or Witchcraft, are all
either performed by mere natural causes (for it is granted upon all sides that
Devils in corporeal matter can perform nothing but by applying fit actives to
agreeable passives.) And miracles being long since ceased, it must needs
follow, that Devils do nothing but only draw the minds of Men and Women unto
sin and wickedness, and thereby they become deceivers, cheats and notorious
impostours: so that we may rationally conclude that all other strange feats and
delusions, must of necessity be no better, or of any other kind, than these we
have recited, except they can show that they are brought to pass by natural
means. Must not all persons that are of sound understanding judge and believe
that all those strange tricks related by Mr. Glanvil of his Drummer at Mr.
Mompessons house, whom he calls the Demon of Tedworth, were abominable cheats
and impostures (as I am informed from persons of good quality they were
discovered to be) for I am sure Mr. Glanvil can show no agents in nature, that
the Demon applying them to fit patients, could produce any such effects by, and
therefore we must conclude all such to be impostures.

2. It is no sound way of reasoning, from the principles of Reas. 2.
knowing, either thereby to prove the existence of things, or the modes of such
existence, because the principle of being is the cause of the principle of
knowing, and not on the contrary, and therefore our not discovering of all
Impostures that are or have been acted, does not at all conclude the rest that
pass undiscovered, are diabolical or wrought by a supernatural power; for it
ought first to be demonstrated that there are now in these days some things
wrought by the power of Devils, that are supernatural, in elementary and
corporeal matter, which never was nor can be, as from the testimonies of all
the learned we have showed before. And therefore a man might as well argue that
there are no more thieves in a Nation, but those that are known, and brought to
condign punishment, when there may be, and doubtless are many more; so likewise
there are many hundreds of Impostures, that pass and are never discovered, but
that will not at all rationally conclude that those must be diabolical that are
not made known.

CHAP. XV.
Of diverse Creatures that have a real existence in Nature, and yet by reason of
their wondrous properties, or seldom being seen, have been taken for Spirits,
and Devils.

BEfore we come to speak of Apparitions in general, we shall premise some few
things by way of caution, because there is not one subject (that we know of) in
the World that is liable to so many mistakes, by reason of the prepossessed
fancies of men, in adhering to those fictions of Spirits, Fairies, Hobgoblins,
and many such like, which are continually heightened by ignorant education, and
vain melancholy fears. We shall not mention those many apparitions that are
frequently practiced by forgery and confederacy, for base ends and interests,
as have been commonly used in the time of Popery, and attempted in our days,
though with little success. As also by other persons for base lucre or worse
intents, of which we have known some notorious ones that have been discovered.
Neither shall we speak of those feigned ones that have been practiced to hide
thievery and roguery, as we once knew that certain persons who stole men's sheep
in the night, did carry them away upon a thing made like a Bier covered with a
white sheet, by Hist. 1.
which means those that saw them took it to be an apparition, and so durst not
come near them, and so the most part of the people of 3 or 4 Villages were
terrified, and the report was far spread that it was a walking spirit, and yet
at last discovered to be a cunning piece of knavery to hide their theft withal.
Neither shall we say any thing of those ludicrous apparitions that are often
practiced to terrify, abuse, and affright others. But we shall here give the
relation of some strange creatures, that seldom being seen or found, have
induced more ignorant persons to take them for Demons, and these we shall
enumerate in this order.

1. It has been, and still is a strong opinion amongst the vulgars and
Witchmongers also, that Witches transforming themselves Hist. 2.
into diverse shapes, did in the night time enter into peoples houses, and then
and there suck the breasts or navils of infants in their Beds or Cradles, that
thereby they were weakened or consumed away; which inveterate opinion was the
more firmly believed, because children that at night were very well, in the
morning were found to be very ill, and to have been sucked in the places
aforesaid. To clear which point take this Observation from the learned pen of
Thomas Bartholinus that was Physician to Frederick King of Denmark, in English
thus. Three infants (he says) of the Centur. 1. Hist. 9. p. 18.
Pastor Fionens at Lyckisholm, which is a noble Manor belonging to the very
illustrious Lord Christian Thomaeus Sehsted, the Kings Chancellor, Eques
Auratus, and a most renowned Senator of Denmark, my Mecaenas, that were
sleeping in their accustomed Chamber, were not long after troubled with an
unwonted bewailing and inquietude, that they felt themselves to be sucked or
milked of something. The nipples of their breasts being diligently handled by
the Parents did confirm the Childrens suspicion, because they did hang out like
a Woman's that did give suck. And to prevent this fascination, the nipples of
the breasts were anointed with preservatives against poison and other bitter
things. Hereupon their Navils were so worn with vehement suction, that not only
they were prominent or did hang out, but also did as it were show the greatness
of the mouth that had sucked by the impression remaining. But the Infants being
carried forth of the Chamber, did from thenceforth rest free from any suction,
especially being carried in peoples arms. And this Caprimulgus or Goat-milker,
is by Bellonius said to be in Crete of the bigness of a Cuckoo, being very
hurtful to the Goats, insomuch that it sucketh milk from their dugs on the
nights. By which we may plainly understand, how Creatures that are but seldom
seen, or whose properties are unknown, may easily effect those things that
ignorant heads may impute unto Witchcraft.

2. It is no less believed by many, that those kind of Creatures which are
called Satyrs are but a kind of Demons; for learned Gesner reckoning them to
be a kind of Apes, does tell us this: D^ quadr. l. 1. p. 862.
Even as (he says) the Apes Cynocephali, or with Dogs-heads, have given the
occasion of the Fable, that some have thought such to be men: So Satyrs being
also a rare kind of Apes, and of greater admiration, some have believed them to
be Devils: also of some men deluded by the Poets and Painters, as also
Statuaries, who have feigned that they had Goats feet and horns, the more to
augment the admiration and superstition, they have been thought Devils: when in
Ape-Satyres there is no such thing to be seen. And this opinion has been the
more strengthened because the most of the Translators have in the Old Testament
rendered the word (...) (which properly signifies an happy man or beast) a
Goat, a Satyr, (as Genesis 27. ver. 11. Esau my Brother is a hairy man; where the
very same word is used) Demon, or Devil. But it is plain that it did and does
signify no more but only Satyrs, as will appear by these reasons. 1. First, as
our English Translators have truly rendered it in that of Isaiah, And the Satyr
shall cry unto his fellow: Isai. 34. 14.
for it is certainly related, both by ancient and modern Navigators, that in
those desolate Islands where there are store of them, they will upon the nights
make great shouting and crying, and calling one unto another. And in another
place of the same Prophet it is said by the same Translators, and Satyrs shall
dance there; dancing Isai. 13. 21.
being one of the properties of that hairy Creature, as a thing it is much
delighted with, and so are but Satyrs that are natural Creatures and not
Devils. 2. And though the same Translators have rendered the plural of the same
word, by the name Devils, yet it there Levit. 17. 7.
properly signifies also Satyrs; for though in another place it be said; they
sacrificed to devils, not to God, and so again by the Deuteronomy. 32. 17.
Psalmist, for they sacrificed their sons and daughters unto devils; Psalm. 106.
37.
where in both places the word is (...) vastatoribus, to the destroyers or to
Devils; because in those Idols the Devils were worshipped; and thereby
destroyed the souls of men: 3. Yet it is manifest that their Idols were formed
in the shape of Satyrs, in a most terrible manner; for the late and most
credible travelers that have been in those parts of Asia, where those
Idolatries are still upholden, do unanimously relate that they make their
Images or Idols that they worship, as terrible and frightful as they can
devise, as may be seen in the relations of the Travels of Vincent le Blanc,
Mandels^o, and Ferdinand Mendez Pinto, and Mr Herbert our Countryman gives us
the Idol of the Bannyans in the ugly shape of a monstrous Satyr. 4. So that
though this worshipping and sacrificing, in respect of its abominableness,
filthiness and Idolatrousness, was yielded to Devils, which spiritually and
invisibly ruled in these Children of disobedience, and was the Author of all
those delusions and impostures; yet it does no where appear, that it was Demons
in the corporeal shape of Satyrs (as many have erroneously supposed) no more
than the golden Calves that Jeroboam made, were real Devils: but these Idols
were made in the figure or shape of Satyrs or hairy Creatures, as says the
Text: And he ordained him Priests for the 2 Chronicles. 11. 1^.
high places, and for the hairy Idols or Satyrs, and for the Calves that he
had made. It is the same Hebrew word here that our English Translators render
Devils, that in the two former places of Isaiah they translate Satyrs; and as
the Calves are not rendered Devils, why should the Images that were like Satyrs
be translated so? Surely the Devil was as much in the Calves, and as much
worshipped in those dumb Idols as he was in the dumb and dead Idols or Images
of the Satyrs, and so no more reason to call the one Devils than the other.
But that which totally overthrows the conceit that they should be real Devils
in corporeal shapes and figures, is this, that both the Calves and the Images
of these Satyrs were made by Jeroboam: now it is manifest that he could not
make a real Devil, but only Images of Calves and Satyrs, wherein and whereby
the Devils might be worshipped in those Idolatrous ways.

So that it is most apparent, that these Satyrs being seldom seen and of
strange qualities, have made many to believe that they were Demons; nay it
seems their Images and Pictures have been taken for Devils, and yet are but
mere natural Creatures, and by learned men accounted a kind of Apes, which we
shall now prove by an undeniable instance or two; and first this from the pen
of that learned Physician Nicholaus Tulpius, who says thus: In our remembrance
Hist. 3.
(he says) there was an Indian Satyr brought from Angola; and Observe. Medic.
lib. 3. c. 56. p. 283.
presented as a gift to Frederick Henry Prince of Aurange. This Satyr was
four-footed and from the humane shape which it seems to bear, it is called of
the Indians Orang antang, homo silvestris, a wild man, and of the Africans
Quoias morron, expressing in longitude a Child of three years old, and in
crassitude, one of six years. It was of body neither fat nor lean, but square,
most able and very swift. And of its joints so firm, and the Muscles so large,
that it durst undertake and could do any thing; on the foreparts altogether
smooth, and rough behind, and covered with black hairs. Its face did resemble a
man, but the nose broad and crooked downwards, rugged and a toothless female.
But the ears were not different from humane shape. As neither the breast,
adorned on both sides with a swelling dug (for it was of the feminine Sex) the
belly had a very deep navil; and the joints, both those above and those below,
had such an exact similitude with man, that one egg does not seem more like
another. Neither was there a-wanting a requisite commissure to the arm, nor the
order of fingers to the hands, nor an humane shape to the thumb, or a prop of
the legs to the thighs, or of the heel to the foot. Which fit and decent form
of the members, was the cause that for most part it did go upright: neither did
it lift up any kind of weight less heavily than remove it easily.

When it was about to drink it would hold the handle of the Kan with the one
hand, and put the other under the bottom of the Cup, then would it wipe off the
moisture left upon its lips, not less neatly than thou should see the most
delicate Courtier. Which same dexterity it did observe when it went to bed. For
lying her head upon the Pillow, and fitly covering her body with the Clothes,
it did hide it self no otherwise, than if the most delicate person had laid
there.

Moreover the King of Samback (he says) did one time tell Hist. 4.
our Kinsman Samuel Blomart, that these kind of Satyrs, especially the Males
in the Island of Borneo, have so great boldness of mind and such a strong
compaction of Muscles, that they have often forceably set upon armed men; and
not only upon the weak sex of Women and Girls; with the flagrant desire of
which they are so inflamed, that catching them often they abuse them. For they
are highly prone to lust (which is common to these, with the lustful Satyrs of
the ancients) yea sometimes so keen and salacious, that therefore the Indian
Women do eschew the Woods and Groves as worse than a Dog or a Snake; in which
these impudent animals do lie hid. And that this lascivious animal is found in
the Eastern Mountains of India; as also in Africa, between Sierra, Liona, and
the Promontory of the Mountain, where (perhaps) were those places where Plinius
lib. 5. cap. 5. affirms that upon the nights there was seen to shine frequent
Fires of the Aegipanes, and to abound with the lasciviousness of the Satyrs,
who do love craggy Dens and Caves, and shun the society of mankind, being a
salacious, hairy, four-footed Creature, with human shape and a crooked nose.
But that the foot of this Creature neither has hoofs nor the body every where
hairs, but only the head, shoulders and back. The rest of the parts are smooth,
and the Ears are not sharp.

So that from hence it is undeniably true, that there are such Creatures
existent in nature, and have been either taken for Devils or the Apparitions of
Demons in this shape of Satyrs, as Doctor Brown has well observed in these
words: A conceit there is (he Enq. into vulg. err. l. 5. p. 271.
says) that the Devil commonly appears with a cloven foot or hoof, wherein
although it seem excessively ridiculous, there may be somewhat of truth; and
the ground thereof at first might be his frequent appearing in the shape of a
Goat, which answers that description. This was the opinion of ancient
Christians concerning the Apparitions of Pans, Fauns and Satyrs, and in this
form we read of one that appeared unto Antony in the Wilderness. The same is
also confirmed from expositions of holy Scripture; for whereas it is said; Thou
shall not offer unto Devils, the original word is Sehhirim, that is rough and
hairy Goats, because in that shape the Devil most often appeared, as is
expounded by the Rabbis, as Tremellius has also explained.

But saving the reputation of learned Saint Hierome and Dr Brown, it is but a
supposition unproved that ever the Devil appeared in the shape of a Goat, the
rise of the opinion was only because the Devil was worshipped in an Idol made
in the shape of a Goat.

3. In a few ages past when Popish ignorance did abound, there was no discourse
more common (which yet is continued amongst the vulgar people) than of the
apparition of certain Creatures which they called Fayries, that were of very
little stature, and being seen would soon vanish and disappear. And these were
generally believed to be some kind of Spirits or Demons, and Paracelsus held
them to be a kind of middle Creatures, and called them non-Adamicks, as not
being of the race of Adam; but there are Authors of great credit and veracity,
that affirm, there have been Nations of such people called Pygmies. And though
Doctor Brown has learnedly and elegantly handled the question, Whether there
have Enquir. into vulg. errors. l. 4. c. 11. p. 207.
been or are any such dwarfish race of mankind, as but of three spans, not
considering them singly but nationally, or not, and has brought the most
probable arguments that well can b^* to prove that there are not nor have been
any such race of people called Pygmies, yet does he moderately conclude in
these words. There being thus (he says) no sufficient confirmation of their
verity, some doubt may arise concerning their possibility; wherein, since it is
not defined in what dimensions the soul may exercise her faculties, we shall
not conclude impossibility, or that there might not be a race of Pygmies, as
there is sometimes of Giants, and so may take in the opinion of Austine, and
his Commentator Ludovicus Vives. And though Kircherus with his wonted impudence
do conclude in these words: Fabulosa itaque sunt omnia, Mund. Subter. l. 8.
Sect. 4. c. 4. p. 101.
quae de hujusmodi Pygmaeis veteres Geographi a simplici populo sola relatione
descripta tradiderunt: Yet (I say) notwithstanding these negative arguments, I
give the relation of others (that are of as great or greater credit) in the
affirmative. And thus much is affirmed Idea Idear. operatr. c. 6.
by that most sagacious and learned person Marcus Marci, a late Physician of no
mean judgment, who says thus: Quicquid tamen sit de his, Pygmaeos and olim
fuisse, and nunc esse affirmamus. And besides the testimony of Aristotle,
Solinus, Pomponius Mela, and Aelian, he relates these. But those (he says)
that have in our age viewed the World, the same do testify also, that there
are yet Pygmies in Hist. 5.
the Island of Aruchet, one of the Moluccas, and in the Isle Cophi, and such
Pigasetta affirms that he saw. And though Doctor Brown seem to slight it,
yet (according to the Proverb) one eyewitness is more to be credited than ten
that have it but by the ear. Odericus in his History of India does report also,
that there are such people of about three spans high, which also is confirmed
by the later Odericus. And to these affirmative proofs we shall add that of the
learned Philosopher and Physician Baptista Van Helmont, in English thus. A Wine
Merchant (he says) of our Demonstr. These. p. 679.
Country, a very honest man, sailing sometimes to the Canaries or Fortunate
Islands, being asked of me his serious opinion and judgment upon certain
Creatures, which there the Children as often as they would did bring home, and
did name them Tudesquillos, or Germanulos, that is little men; (the Germans
call them Eard-Manlins) for they were dead Carkases dried almost three foot
long, which any one of the Boys did easily carry in one hand, and were of an
human shape: But the whole dead Carkase was transparent like Parchment, and the
bones were flexible as grisles. Also the bowels and intestines were to be seen,
holden against the sun which, when after I knew to be a certain truth, from the
Spaniards born there, I considered, that in these days the offspring of the
Pygmies were there destroyed.

From whence all understanding and unpartial judgments may clearly perceive,
that these kind of Creatures have been really existent in the World, and are
and may be so still in Islands and Mountains that are uninhabited, and that
they are no real Demons, or non-Adamick Creatures, that can appear and become
invisible when they please, as Paracelsus thinks. But that either they were
truly of human race endowed with the use of reason and speech (which is most
probable) or at least that they were some little kind of Apes or Satyrs, that
having their secret recesses and holes in the Mountains, could by their agility
and nimbleness soon be in or out like Conies, Weazels, Squirrels, and the like.

4. It has been no less a mistake about those Fishes that are called Tritones,
Syrenes, Meir-maids, or Marine, and Seamen, and Women, which have been by many
supposed and taken to be Spirits, or Demons, and commonly Nymphs, when indeed
and truth they are real creatures, as these examples do make manifest. The
first of which we shall recite from the faithful pen of that learned Anatonist
Thomas Bartholinus, who was Physician to Frederick the Centur. 2. Histor. 11.
169.
third King of Denmark, in these Englished words: Various things (he says) of
Meir-maids are extant delivered in the monuments of the Ancients, that are
partly false, partly true. It is not far Hist. 6.
from a Fable that they held, that they did imitate the voices of Men and
Women. But that there are beasts found in the Sea, with humane faces (he says)
I shall not deny. But I will not (he says) sum up the accounts of the
ancients. For they are full of the stories of Meir-maids. Amongst the later
Authors, these have here and there handled this argument, Scaliger (in lib. 2.
Histor. Anim. t. 108.) Rondoleti^s, Licetus (de Spont. vin. ort.) Marcus Marci
(de Ideis) P. Boistuan (Histor. Gall. prod. T. 1. c. 18.) At Enchuysen in
Holland (he says) the shape of a certain Meirmaid is to be seen painted, that
formerly had been cast upon the shore, by the force of the waters. It is (he
says) in the mouth of our common people, that a Meir-maid was taken in
Denmark, that did speak, foretell things to come, and spin. A Father of the
Society of Jesus returning forth of India to Rome, had seen a Seaman there
adorned with an Episcopal Mitre, who did seem to have in the next corner,
hardly born his captivity; but being let loose, and turned into the Sea, did
seem to render thanks for his liberty, by bowing of his body before he went
under water, which (he says) the Jesuit was wont to tell to Corvinus the
elder, as his Son (he says) told me at Rome. But this being but a story told
to Bartholinus at the second hand, and but primarily from the mouth of a Jesuit
(who doubtless had some design in it) I leave it to the judgment of the Wise
and Prudent. But he proceeds thus. It is (he says) most certain that fishes
are to be found in the Ocean, that represent Terrestrial Animals in shape: As
the Sea-Fox, the Wolf, the Sea-Calf, the Dog, the Horse, etc. Therefore why
should we deny humane shape to Sea Monsters? Certainly also in the earth there
are Apes, which wanting reason, do express the external shape and gestures of
Man. All Sea Monsters of this sort we referr (he says) to the kind of Phocae
or Sea-Calves. There was (he says) in the age we live in a Seaman taken by
the Merchants of the West India Company, and dissected at Leiden by Peter
Pavius, John de Laet being present my friend (he says) and while he lived, a
great and most knowing person of the things of America and of Nature. The head
and the breast even as far as the navil was of an humane shape, but from the
navil even unto the extremities, it was deformed flesh, without the sign of a
tail. But that I may not (he says) seem to impose upon the Reader, the hands
and ribs are to be found in my Study or Closet, which I owe to the kindness of
the praised Latius. We have (he says) annexed the Picture of both, as well of
the Meirmaid erect, as of the image of it swimming, that we might satisfy the
dubitation of all men. The hand does consist of five fingers, as ours do, with
as many articulations as ours, but that only is singular, that all the bones of
the fingers are broader and compressed, and a membrane does join them together
in course, as in volatiles, as Geese, Ducks, etc. which do help to stretch
forth the foot in the water. The extremity of the two middle fingers are
broader, the extremities of the other two sharp. The radius and cubit are very
short, for the commodiousness of swimming, scarce the length of four fingers
breadth. Neither is the draught of the shoulder more ample. The ribs are long
and thick, almost exceeding common humane ribs a third part.

Of the ribs (he says) are beads turned or thrown, a present remedy for the
pain of the Hemorrhoides, which the praised Latius has observed by experience.
Also (he says) that Bracelets being made of the bones of this kind of Phocas
carried to Rome, applied to the wrist do appease the Hemicrany, and swimming of
the head, which comes again, if they be laid away, as (he says) the most
illustrious Nobleman Cassianus a Puteo, (most worthy of Roman Purple) has told
me. The same Noble Puteus (he says) has showed me the picture of a Meirmaid
in his Closet, which not many years before, was driven to the shore of Malta. A
certain Spaniard (he says) told me, that Meirmaids were seen in India having
the Genital members of Women, like those of humane kind, so that the Fishers do
bind themselves with an Oath to the Magistrate, that they have no copulation
with them. Bernardinus Ginnarus (lib. 1. c. 9. de Indico itinere, edit. Neap.
1641.) does relate that Meirmaids are seen, in the vast River Cuama, near the
head of Good hope, which in the middle superior part are like to the form of
men, that is, with round head, but immediately joined to the breast, without a
neck, with ears altogether like ours, and so their eyes, lips and teeth. And
that their dugs being pressed do send forth most white milk.

Therefore he concludes: There is (he says) so great difference of the form
of Meirmaids, with the Ancients and Moderns, that it is no wonder, that some do
account them figments. We have (he says) the hands to be seen with eyes, and
we show the Meirmaids to be such, as in truth they are seen to be. Neither do
the hands and ribs deceive, whose Pictures we have given framed according to
the truth of nature.

5. But besides these there are other Fishes or Sea Monsters, that Hist. 7.
in all parts resembled Men and Women, as these examples make Genial. dier. l.
3. c. 8. p. 134.
manifest. Alexander ab Alexandro, a person of great learning and experience,
relates: That in Epirus a Triton or Seaman was found, who forth of the Sea
did ravish Women being alone upon the shore: But being taken by cunning, he did
resemble a Man with all his members, but did refuse meat being offered, so that
he died with hunger and wasting, as being in a strange element.

6. Also Ludovicus Vives does tell us this story: In our age (he Hist. 8.
says) with the Hollanders, a Seaman was seen of many, who also Lib. de
verit. fid. Christ. l. 2.
was kept there above two years, he was mute, and then begun to speak: But
being twice smitten with the Plague, he is let loose to the Sea rejoicing and
leaping.

7. In the year of our Lord 1403. there was taken a Sea-woman Hist. 9.
in a lake of Holland, thrown thither forth of the Sea, and was carried Vid.
Ideam Idear. operat. c. 6.
into the City of Haerlem; she suffered her self to have garments put upon her,
and admitted the use of bread, milk and such like things: Also she learned to
spin, and to do many other things after the manner of Women, also she did
devoutly bend her knees to the image of Christ crucified, being docible to all
things, which she was commanded by her Master, but living there many years, she
always remained mute.

8. To these we shall conclusively add one story of sufficient credit Hist. 10.
from our own English Annals, which is this: In the year 1187. being the 33th
year of the Reign of Henry the second, Stows Annal. p. 157.
near unto Oreford in Suffolk, certain Fishers of the Sea took in their nets a
fish having the shape of a man in all points, which fish was kept by
Bartholomew de Glanvile, Custos of the Castle of Oreford, in the same Castle,
by the space of six months and more for a wonder; he spoke not a word. All
manner of meats h^ did gladly eat, but most greedily raw fish after he had
crushed out all the moisture. Oftentimes he was brought to the Church where he
showed no tokens of adoration. At length when he was not well looked to, he
stole away to the Sea, and never after appeared. The learned Antiquary Mr.
Camden tells this same Britan. p. 412.
story from Radulphus Coggeshall, an ancient writer, and that Capillos habebat,
barbam prolixam and pineatam, circa pectus nimium pilosus erat, and hispidus:
and concludes: Quicquid nascatur in part naturae ulla, and in mari esse, and
non omnino commentitium est.

By all which examples we may be rationally satisfied, that though these
creatures have a real existence in nature, yet because of their strange
natures, shapes and properties, or by reason of their being rarely seen, they
have been and often are not only by the common people but even by the learned
taken to be Devils, Spirits or the effects of Enchantment and Witchcraft. And
therefore men that would judge aright must take heed that they be not deceived
and imposed upon by relations of this nature, and also of all such things as
may be acted by Imposture and confederacy, and those other Physical things that
are brought to pass by natural causes, diverse sorts of which are recited by
Ludovicus Lavaterus very Lib. de Spectr. prim. part. c. 11. p. 61.
largely, to which I recommend those that desire further satisfaction in those
particulars.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Apparitions in general, and of some unquestionable stories that seem to
prove some such things. Of those apparitions pretended to be made in Beryls and
Crystals, and of the Astral or Sydereal Spirit.

IN this Treatise we have before sufficiently proved that the denying of the
existence of such a Witch as does make a visible contract with the Devil, or
upon whose body he sucketh, or that has carnal copulation with a Demon, and
that is transubstantiated into a Cat or a Dog, or that flies in the air; does
not infer the denial of Spirits either good or bad, nor utterly overthrow the
truth of apparitions, or of such things as seem to manifest some supernatural
operations. And therefore here we shall fully handle the question of
Apparitions, and things that seem to be of that nature, and that in this order.

1. We shall not meddle with Apparitions in the large extent of the word, for
so it may comprehend the appearing of new Stars, Comets, Meteors and other
Portents, and Prodigies, which (though unusual and wondrous) have yet their
production from natural causes. But only here we shall treat of such
apparitions as are taken to be performed by supernatural creatures, or in such
a way and by such creatures as we commonly account to be different from (if not
above) the power of ordinary and visible nature, as of Angels good or bad, the
Souls of men departed, or their Astral Spirits, or of some other creatures that
are, or may be of a middle nature.

2. As for the apparitions of good Angels sent by God in times past, both in
sleep and otherwise, the Scriptures do give us most full and ample assurance,
as these few instances may undeniably demonstrate. 1. That an Angel of the Lord
(that is a good Angel) Judge. 13.
did appear visibly unto Manoah and his wife, and did vocally and audibly talk
and discourse with them both, and did after in both their sights openly and
visibly ascend in the flame that did arise from the altar. Now a more plain and
indubitable apparition visibly seen and audibly heard than this cannot be found
nor read of, having the unquestionable authority of sacred writ to avouch it.
2. Another parallel unto it, and of equal authority, verity and Luke 2. 26. to
39.
perspicuity, is the sending of the Angel Gabriel unto the Virgin Mary, her
seeing of him, hearing of his salutation, having discourse with him, and seeing
his departure, both which are undoubted testimonies of the true, and real
appearance of good Angels even to sight and hearing. 3. That sometimes the good
Angels have been sent to the servants of God, and have appeared and spoken unto
them in dreams; as that the Angel of the Lord appeared unto Joseph in a dream,
and bade him to take unto him Mary his wife, which Math. 1. 20.
was a blessed; and clear apparition, though in a dream in his sleep. And
likewise by the appearing of an Angel unto him in a dream, he was warned to
take the child, and his mother, and to flee into Math. 2. 12, 13, 19.
Egypt, and also again was commanded by an Angel, after the death of Herod,
that appeared in a dream, and bade him to take the young child and his mother,
and to go into the land of Israel.

3. Of the visible apparition of evil Angels we scarce have any evidence at all
in the Scriptures, except we should take supposals for proofs, or disputable
places to be certain demonstrations, or wrest and hale the word of God to make
it serve our preconceived opinions. For I do not find any one place in all the
Scriptures, where plainly and positively any apparition of evil spirits is
recorded, or that by any rational and necessary consequence such a visible
appearance can be deduced or proved: For we have clearly proved that the
tempting of Evah by the Serpent does not necessarily infer, that it was by a
visible apparition, but by a mental delusion; and that that of Saul and the
Woman of Endor, or the Mistress of the bottle, was neither Samuel in Soul and
Body, nor his Soul alone, neither the Devil in his shape we suppose we have
evinced past answer; and that the tempting of our blessed Savior by Satan was
internal, or at least the greatest part of it; so that there does remain but
little of certain proof of the apparition of Devils in that gross manner, and
so common and frequent as many do too peremptorily affirm: yet for all this we
think it rational to grant, that as God has in times past often sent messages
by good Angels, for the teaching, counselling and comforting of his servants,
both audibly and visibly to be perceived; so also that sometimes God might not
only send evil Spirits internally and mentally to deceive and seduce the
wicked, as in the case of the lying spirit in the mouth of Ahabs Prophets, but
also visibly to appear to terrify, punish and destroy the wicked, or to make
way for the manifestation of his glory. And the Scriptures that mention
Demoniacks, and such as are commonly said to be possessed, (though that were
not by an essential inhesion, but by an effective operation both upon the Souls
and Bodies of the persons that were so affected and afflicted) do plainly show
that the operative effects of the Devils power was both heard and seen by their
words and actions. So the Devils using the organs of the man in whom was the
legion of them, they Luke 8. 26. to 37.
besought Christ not to command them to go out into the deep, but besought him
to suffer them to go into the herd of swine: Which plainly shows that their
words were audible, and were heard of the multitude that were by, and the acts
that they performed were visible enough, for by the power of the Devil he brake
the chains and fetters, wherewithal he was bound, and was driven of the Devil
into the wilderness, and that these Devils went forth of the man, and entered
in amongst the herd of swine, by whose effective power the swine ran violently
down a steep rock into the sea, and were drowned. And this does plainly
manifest the present operation of the Devils, that was apparent both by the
words and actions, that were both to be seen and heard; so that this in that
large sense, that it is usually taken in, was a real apparition of Devils, or
at least equivalent thereunto. For we do but here inquire after such
appearances of Devils, that do necessarily infer their presence in operating so
in and upon creatures or corporeal matter, that by sight, hearing, or other of
the senses, it may certainly be manifest to work above the ordinary power of
nature, and may induce us rationally by the testimony of our senses, to believe
that those things are brought to pass by those creatures that we call Demons,
as many of these persons, who were said to have been or to be afflicted with
Devils, were in the days of our bl^ssed Saviors remaining in the flesh.

4. But though it be never so freely and fully granted, that in the ages and
times mentioned in the Old and New Testament (nay it may be for a century or
more after) there were persons that were possessed and afflicted with Devils,
and also that for that time there were many miracles wrought: Yet now it will
be said that miracles are totally ceased as not being any way necessary to
confirm the Gospel, which is now established and settled. This we confess is so
strongly and convincingly proved by the Divines of the reformed Churches, that
we account him wilfully blind that will oppose it. Yet notwithstanding all this
that miracles are totally ceased, I grant that there are some strange things
that have happened in late ages, and some in our own time, that cannot be any
way solved by mere ordinary natural causes, and apparitions made by some kind
of creatures that must be derived from some such causes as those of good or bad
Spirits, or from creatures of the like nature. And that though miracles be
ceased, it will not therefore follow that every thing that has a cause above
or differing from the usual and ordinary course of nature, must be also ceased,
for quanquam nunc non sint miracula, possint tamen esse miranda: and though
that miracles be ceased, yet it will not follow that apparitions are so also,
because apparitions are not miracles; for a good Angel to be sent and to
appear, cannot be said to be a miracle, because it is the end for which he was
created, they (that is the Angels) are all ministering spirits sent forth for
the Heb. 1. 14.
good of those that shall be heirs of Salvation. And it cannot be said
otherwise of evil Angels or of any other creatures that may make these
apparitions, for as they are and must be creatures, so there is and must be
some certain ends, for which they were created and are employed unto.

5. But to prove the truth of apparitions, or other strange Phenomena's
equivalent unto them, as to have been truly performed as matters of fact is
extreme difficult and almost impossible, because the Histories and relations of
things of this nature are most strangely fabulous, and therefore are by no
means to be relied upon, as will most manifestly appear by undeniable reasons,
if we examine them in divided members in this order.

1. The Histories and relations that are given either by the Poets, or most of
the ancient Philosophers, of these things, are so seemingly impossible, and so
extremely fictitious, as he must of necessity have in a manner totally forsaken
his own reason, that can give any credit at all unto them. And especially they
are so fraught with the horrible fables of the numerousness of their feigned
gods, demigods, spirits, hobgoblins, Lares, Lemures, Men's shadows and the like,
that they would make a man believe that the world was full of nothing else, and
this was chiefly done to uphold their Idolatrous and superstitious Religion.
And all these kind of authors that have written from the time of Homer until
the end of the ages in which the two Plinies and Plutarch lived, have but run
the same course, all their relations tasting of the leaven of impossibilities,
superstition and fabulousness.

2. And if we look into the Pontificial Writers, especially those that have
recorded stories of this nature since the sixth century, we shall find such a
Rhapsodie, and heap of Bombast lies and invented fables both of apparitions and
Witches, that no rational man can well give assent to one of a thousand of
them, they seem so incredible, that they would rather make a wise man diffident
of all such matters of fact, than to yield credit to any. And a man might as
reasonably believe the forged and lying miracles of Mahomet, as those monkish
fables. For the extreme desire that those Authors had to advance their false
and feigned Doctrine of Purgatory, and thereby to uphold the gain and benefit
that was gotten by injoining such and such penances and eleemosynary deeds to
redeem Souls from thence, did drive them on to invent thousands of false
stories of the apparitions of Souls after death, which had not one jot of truth
in them at all.

3. Those that are called the Reformed Divines (because they returned to that
pure and true Doctrine and Worship, that had been settled and practiced in
those foregoing ages that were truly Catholic and Apostolic) being altogether
intent about the main and principal points of the Faith, and those that
concerned the true worship of God, did take little heed to the matters of this
nature, as being more circumstantial, and therefore not by them accounted so
essential and necessary. From whence it came to pass that Lambertus Danaeus,
Hemmingius, Erastus and others, did without due examination and circumspection
receive the opinions and stories of the Papists hand over head. From whence (I
conceive) it came to pass that Ludovicus Lavaterus a learned Divine of the
reformed Religion at Zurich did write a book of apparitions and such matters,
but brought no other proofs of the truth of these things de facto, but the
often repeated stories of Heathenish Authors, and some few from Ecclesiastic
Authors, that are of dubious credit, but not any one of his own knowledge.

6. But if we come to consider the Histories of late that are reported of
apparitions, and such like things that must of necessity have something in
them, that resembles a supernatural cause, we may in part receive more ample
satisfaction, which will be manifest in these few following particulars.

1. Meric Casaubon Doctor of Divinity, in his treatise of Credulity and
Incredulity (sometimes by us quoted before) has strongly endeavored to make
good all those impossible and absurd things that are ascribed unto Witches:
which though he has pitifully failed to perform, yet has he said enough that
may serve to prove that there are many strange things that seem to prove the
being of Demons or Spirits, though he have not brought any one story of his own
knowledge or that was done in his time. And we have showed before that
apparitions are no certain ground for Christians to believe the existence of
Demons by, but the word of God. But in his Preface to that piece of the
relation concerning Dr. Dee, he relates two stories told by that venerable and
learned Prelate Bishop Andrews to his Father Isaac Casaubon. The one (he says)
concerning a noted or at least by many suspected Witch or Sorceress, which the
Devil in a strange shape did wait upon (or for rather) at her death. The other
concerning a Man, who after his death was restored to life to make confession
of a horrible murder committed upon his own Wife, for which he had never been
suspected. And both these (he says) that learned Bishop did believe to be
true, but for one of them it seems, he did undertake upon his own knowledge, to
wit that of the apparition, and the other he had from an eyewitness. And
considering the condition of Bishop Andrews both for learning and piety, the
relations are of much weight, and they may be seen at large in the forecited
Preface.

2. I cannot but much wonder that Dr. Henry Moore, a grave person, and one that
for many years has resided in a most learned and flourishing Academy, whose
name is much taken notice of both at home and abroad, having published so many
books, should make such bad choice of the Authors from whom he takes his
stories, or that he should pitch upon those that seem so fabulous, impossible
and incredible. And that I may not seem to tax him without cause, Antidot.
against Atheis. c. 8, 9. p. 209.
I desire the Reader to peruse his two relations, the one of the Shoemaker of
Breslaw in Silesia, Anno 1591. the other of Johannes Cunti^ a Citizen of Pentsh
in Silesia, and to tell whether he can rationally believe those things either
to have been true or possible. And as for the Author Martinus Weinrichius a
Silesian Physician, I cannot find any thing either of his fame or writings, and
it is most strange that he should be omitted by that diligent and unpartial
Author Melchior Adams; And there had been far better Authors and of more credit
to have pitched upon for such like stories, than either Bodinus or Remigius;
neither can there be much credit given to any of the stories that he relates,
except it be that of the Pied-Piper, which some do interpret far otherwise.

3. There was a Treatise called, the Devil of Mascon, or a true relation of the
chief things which an unclean spirit did and said at Mascon in Burgundy, in the
House of Mr Francis Perreaud Minister of the reformed Church in the same Town,
written by the said Perreaud soon after the Apparition which was in the year
1612. but was not published until the year 1653. which was 41. years after the
thing was said to be acted. It seems it was translated by Dr Peter Du Moulin,
the Son of the learned and reverend Peter Du Moulin, at the request of the
honorable and learned person Mr Boil. The most of the things had been known
unto Mr Du Moulin the Father, when he was President of a National Synod in
those parts, to whom also the said Perreaud was well known, who was a
religious, well poised, venerable Divine. And Mr Boil says, that he had had
converse with this pious Author at Geneva, and had inquired after the Writer,
and some passages of the Book, which overcame all his settled indisposedness to
believe strange things. The Character given of this Author, and the assent of
such learned persons to the things related, have gained an ample suffrage to
give credit to them also. But notwithstanding all this, there are many passages
in the relation that a quicksighted Critic would find to be either
contradictory or inconsistent, and it cannot rationally be thought that he was
a Cacodemon, his actions were so harmless, civil, and ludicrous; and if he were
to be believed (and in some things he did speak truth, and the Minister himself
Mr Perreaud did in some things give credit to him) he was no Devil, but hoped
to be saved by Jesus Christ. But whether a Devil or not, yet the story for
substance does sufficiently prove the existence of such kind of Demons, that
can work strange and odd feats.

4. Mr Baxter a person of great learning and piety, whose judgment The Saints
Everlasting rest. c. 7. p. 255.
bears great sway with me, speaking of Apparitions says thus: I know many are
very incredulous herein, and will hardly believe that there have been such
Apparitions. For my own part (he says) though I am as suspicious as most in
such reports, and do believe that most of them are conceits or delusions, yet
having been very diligently inquisitive in such Cases, I have received
undoubted testimony of the truth of such Apparitions, some from the mouths of
men of undoubted honesty and godliness, and some from the report of multitudes
of persons, who heard or saw. Were it fit here to name the persons, I could
send you to them yet living, by whom you would be as fully satisfied as I:
Houses that have been so frequently haunted with such terrors, that the
inhabitants successively have been witnesses of it.

7. Though some of these last recited testimonies might sufficiently convince
the most obstinate and incredulous, that there are Apparitions and some other
such strange accidents that cannot be solved by the supposed principles of
matter and motion, but that do necessarily require some other causes, that are
above or different from the visible and ordinary course of nature; yet because
it is a point dark and mystical, and of great concern and weight, we shall add
some unquestionable testimonies, either from our own Annals, or matters of fact
that we know to be true of our own certain knowledge, that thereby it may
undoubtedly appear, that there are effects that exceed the ordinary power of
natural causes, and may for ever convince all Atheistical minds, of which in
this order.

1. In the first year of Edward the Sixth, Anno Domini 1551. on St. Valentines
day, at Feversham in Kent, one Arden a Gentleman S^ow. p. 605. Hist. 1.
was murdered by procurement of his own Wife; for the which fact she was the
fourteenth of March burnt at Canterbury: Michael Mr Arden's Man was hanged in
Chains at Feversham, and a Maiden burnt: Mosbie and his Sister were hanged in
Smithfield at London: Green which had fled, came again certain years after,
and was hanged in Chains in the Highway against Feversham, and black Will the
Ruffian, that was hired to do that act, after his first escape was apprehended,
and burnt on a Scaffold at Flushing in Zealand.

The same horrid murder is more at large related by Hollingshead, who lived at
that time, and had information of all the particulars, P. 1708.
who says thus much more. This one thing (he faith) seems very strange and
notable touching Mr Arden, that in the place he was laid, being dead, all the
proportion of his body might be seen two years after and more, so plain as
could be, for the grass did not grow where his body had touched, but between
his legs, between his arms and about the hollowness of his neck, and round
about his body: And where his legs, arms, head, or any part of his body had
touched, no grass growed at all of all that time. So that many strangers came
in that mean time, beside the Townsmen, to see the print of his body there on
the ground in that Field, which Field he had (as some have reported) cruelly
taken from a Woman, that had been a Widow to one Cook, and after Married to
one Richard Read a Mariner, to the great hinderance of her and her Husband the
said Read, for they had long enjoyed it by a Lease which they had of it for
many years not then expired. Nevertheless he got it from them, for the which,
the said Reads Wife not only exclaimed against him in shedding many (...) salt
tear, but also cursed him most bitterly even to his face, wishing many a
vengeance to light upon him, and that all the World might wonder on him, which
was thought then to come to pass, when he was thus murdered and lay in that
Field, from midnight till the morning, and so all that day, being the Fair-day,
till night, all the which day there were many hundreds of people came wondering
about him. From whence we may take this Observation.

As it is most certain that this is a true and punctual relation given us by
Hollingshead, as being a public thing done in the face of a Observe.
Nation, the print of his body remaining so long after, and viewed and wondered
at by so many; so that it has not left the least starting hole for the most
incredulous Atheist to get out at. So likewise it may dare the most
deep-sighted Naturalist, or unbelieving Atheist, that would exalt and so far
deifie Nature, as to deny and take away the existence of the God of Nature, to
show a reason of the long remaining of the print of his body, or the not
growing of the grass in those places where his body had touched for two years
and more after? Could it be the steams or Atoms that flowed from his body? then
are why not such prints left by other murdered bodies? which we are sure by
sight and experience not to be so. And therefore we can attribute it justly to
no other cause but only to the power of God and divine vengeance, who is a
righter of the oppressed, fatherless and Widows, and hears their cries and
regards their tears.

2. In the second year of the Reign of King James of famous memory, a strange
accident happened, to the terror of all bloody Hist. 2.
murderers, which was this; One Anne Waters enticed by a lover Sir Rich.
Bakers Chron. sol. 448.
of hers, consented to have her Husband strangled, and then buried him secretly
under the Dunghill in a Cow-house. Whereupon the man being missing by his
Neighbors, and the Wife making show of a wondering what was become of him, it
pleased God that one of the inhabitants of the Town dreamed one night that his
Neighbor Waters was strangled, and buried under the Dunghill in a Cow-house,
and upon declaring his dream, search being made by the Constable, the dead body
was found as he had dreamed, and thereupon the Wife was apprehended, and upon
examination confessing the fact was burned. But we shall give it more at large
as it was taken from the mouths of Thomas Haworths Wife, her Husband being the
dreamer and discoverer, and from his Son, who together with many more, who both
remember and can affirm every particular thereof, the Narrative was taken April
the 17th 1663. and is this.

In the year abovesaid, John Waters of Lower Darwen in the County of Lancaster
Gardener, by reason of his calling was much absent from his Family: In which
his absence, his Wife (not without cause) was suspected of incontinency with
one Gyles Haworth of the same Town; this Gyles Haworth and Waters Wife
conspired and contrived the death of Waters in this manner. They contracted
with one Ribchester a poor man to kill this Waters. As soon as Waters came home
and went to bed, Gyles Haworth and Waters Wife conducted the hired Executioner
to the said Waters. Who seeing him so innocently laid betwixt his two small
Children in Bed, repented of his enterprise, and totally refused to kill him.
Gyles Haworth displeased with the faint-heartedness of Ribchester, takes the
Axe into his own hand, and dashed out his brains: The Murderers buried him in a
Cow house, Waters being long missing the Neighborhood asked his Wife for him;
she denied that she knew where he was. Thereupon public search was made for
him in all pits round about, lest he should have casually fallen into any of
them. One Thomas Haworth of the said Town Yeoman, was for many nights together,
much troubled with broken sleeps and dreams of the murder; he revealed his
dreams to his Wife, but she labored the concealment of them a long time: This
Thomas Haworth had occasion to pass by the House every day where the murder was
done, and did call and inquire for Waters, as often as he went near the House.
One day he went into the House to ask for him, and there was a Neighbor who
said to Thomas Haworth, It Is said that Waters lies under this stone, (pointing
to the Hearth-stone) to which Thomas Haworth replied, And I have dreamed that
he is under a stone not far distant. The Constable of the said Town being
accidentally in the said House (his name Miles Aspinall) urged Thomas Haworth
to make known more at large what he had dreamed, which he relates thus. I have
(quoth he) many a time within this eight weeks (for so long it was since the
murder) dreamed very restlesly, that Waters was murdered and buried under a
broad stone in the Cow-house; I have told my troubled dreams to my Wife alone,
but she refuses to let me make it known: But I am not able to conceal my dreams
any longer, my sleep departs from me, I am pressed and troubled with fearful
dreams which I cannot bear any longer, and they increase upon me. The Constable
hearing this made search immediately upon it, and found as he had dreamed the
murdered body eight weeks buried under a flat stone in the Cow-house;
Ribchester and Gyles Haworth fled and never came again. Anne Waters (for so was
Waters Wifes name) being apprehended, confessed the murder, and was burned.
From whence we may observe this.

1. That this is the full and punctual relation of this bloody and execrable
murder from Haworths Wife (who then was a very old Observe.
Woman) and the Son, and differs not a jot from what Sir Richard Baker writes,
but only they say his brains were dashed out with an Axe, and he says he was
strangled, which is only a circumstance of the manner, but in the matter they
both agree, that it was a certain truth that Waters was murdered, and Sir
Richard Bakers information might fail in that particular of the manner of it.
And if it be thought strange that the two little Children did know nothing of
it, it is certain that they were much too young, and said that they were twins,
not above half a year old. But the only matter that we have brought it for, is
the extraordinary way of its discovery by Thomas Haworths dreaming, in which
point both the relations closely agree, and was the chief and only reason why
Sir Richard Baker put it in his Chronicle. And the same also more at large Stow
has recorded in his Chronicle. Now what should the cause be that Thomas
Haworth should be hindered of his sleep, and have restless dreams, and that his
dream should hit so punctually of the place where he was buried, more than any
other person in the same Town? certainly it cannot be referred to fortune and
chance, for they have no causality at all, and are but only names that we
impose upon certain effects and accidents: Te facimus fortuna Deum, coeloque
locamus, as said the Poet. Neither can it rationally be thought to be
melancholy, because that though it be a subtle humor, and render those that
are affected therewith very imaginative and thoughtful, yet supposing Thomas
Haworth to be of that temperament and disposition, it might make him more
deeply to think and meditate upon the rumor of Waters being awanting or upon
suspicion of his murder, but could not in dreams inform him to know precisely
the place where he was buried. And if some should imagine it to be the Soul of
the murdered person Waters, as doubtless a Papist would be ready to affirm,
yet is that opinion directly contrary to the Scriptures, and sufficiently
confuted by the reformed Divines. And if it should be referred to the operation
of the Astral or Sydereal spirit, that is an opinion but embraced by few, and
is hard to prove to be a certain verity, of which we shall speak largely anon.
Neither can it by any sound reason be thought to be the Devil, because it is
manifest that God does not use the ministry of evil Angels for any good end, as
for the discovery of murder, and the bringing of the guilty persons to condign
punishment; but on the contrary he uses their service for to tempt, seduce,
deceive, punish and torment. Therefore we conceive that it was brought to pass
by the finger of God, who either immediately by himself, or by the ministry of
a good Angel, did represent those dreams to Thomas Haworth, and revealed the
precise place of Waters burial.

3. About the year of our Lord 1623 or 24 one Fletcher of Hist. 3.
Rascal, a Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire near unto the Forest of
Gantress, a Yeoman of good Estate, did marry a young lusty Woman from Thornton
Brigs, who had been formerly kind with one Ralph Raynard, who kept an Inn
within half a mile from Rascal in the high road way betwixt York and Thuske,
his Sister living with him. This Raynard continued in unlawful lust with the
said Fletchers Wife, who not content therewith conspired the death of Fletcher,
one Mark Dunn being made privy and hired to assist in the murder. Which
Raynard and Dunn accomplished upon the May Day by drowning Fletcher, as they
came all three together from a Town called Huby, and acquainting the wife with
the deed she gave them a Sack therein to convey his body, which they did and
buried it in Raynards backside or Crossed where an old Oak-root had been stubbed
up, and sowed Mustard Seed upon the place thereby to hide it. So they continued
their wicked course of lust and drunkenness, and the neighbors did much wonder
at Fletchers absence, but his wife did excuse it, and said that he was but gone
aside for fear of some Writs being served upon him. And so it continued until
about the seventh day of July, when Raynard going to Topcliffe Fair, and
setting up his Horse in the Stable, the spirit of Fletcher in his usual shape
and habit did appear unto him, and said, Oh Raph, repent, repent, for my
revenge is at hand; and ever after until he was put in the Goal, it seemed to
stand before him, whereby he became sad and restless: And his own Sister over
hearing his confession and relation of it to another person, did through fear
of losing her own life, immediately reveal it to Sir William Sheffield, who
lived in Rascal, and was a Justice of Peace. Whereupon they were all three
apprehended and sent to the Gaol at York, where they were all three condemned,
and so executed accordingly near to the place where Raynard lived, and where
Fletcher was buried, the two men being hung up in irons, and the woman buried
under the Gallows. I have recited this story punctually as a thing that has
been very much fixed in my memory, being then but young, and as a certain
truth, I being (with many more) an ear-witness of their confessions and an
eyewitness of their Executions, and likewise saw Fletcher when he was taken
up, where they had buried him in his clothes, which were a green fustian
doublet pinkt upon white, gray breeches, and his walking boots and brass spurrs
without rowels.

Some will say there was no extrinsick apparition to Raynard at Observe.
all, but that all this did only arise from the guilt of his own conscience,
which represented the shape of Fletcher in his fancy. But then why was it
precisely done at that time, and not at any others? it being far from the place
of the murder, or the place where they had buried Fletcher, and nothing there
that might bring it to his remembrance more than at another time, and if it had
only arisen from within, and appeared so in his fancy, it had been more likely
to have been moved, when he was in, or near his backside where the murdered
body of Fletcher lay. But certain it is that he affirmed that it was the shape
and voice of Fletcher, as assuredly to his eyes and ears, as ever he had seen
or heard him in his life. And if it were granted that it was only intrinsic,
yet that will not exclude the Divine Power, which doubtless at that time did
labor to make him sensible of the cruel murder, and to mind him of the
revenge approaching. And it could not be brought to pass either by the Devil,
or Fletchers Soul, as we have proved before; and therefore in reason we
conclude that either it was wrought by the Divine Power, to show his
detestation of murder, or that it was the Astral or Sydereal Spirit of
Fletcher, seeking revenge for the murder, of which more anon.

4. About the year of our Lord 1632. (as near as I can remember Hist. 4.
having lost my notes, and the copy of the Letter to Sergeant Hutton, but am
sure that I do most perfectly remember the substance of the story) near unto
Chester in the street, there lived one Walker a Yeoman-man of good Estate, and
a Widower, who had a young Woman to his Kinswoman that kept his House, who was
by the Neighbors suspected to be with child, and was toward the dark of the
evening one night sent away with one Mark Sharp who was a Collier, or one that
dug coals under ground, and one that had been born in Blakeburn Hundred in
Lancashire, and so she was not heard of a long time, and no noise, or little
was made about it. In the winter time after one James Graham or Grime (for so
in that Country they call them) being a Miller, and living about two miles from
the place where Walker lived, was one night alone very late in the Mill
grinding Corn, and as about twelve or one a clock at night he came down the
stairs from having been putting Corn in the Hopper, the Mill doors being shut,
there stood a Woman upon the midst of the floor with her hair about her head,
hanging down, and all bloody; with five large wounds in her head: He being much
affrighted and amazed, begun to bless him, and at last asked her who she was,
and what she wanted; to which she said, I am the Spirit of such a Woman, who
lived with Walker, and being got with child by him; he promised me to send me
to a private place, where I should be well looked to until I was brought in bed,
and well again, and then I should come again, and keep his house. And
accordingly (said the apparition) I was one night late sent away with one Mark
Sharp, who upon a Moor (naming a place that the Miller knew) slew me with a
pick (such as men dig coals withal) and gave me these five wounds, and after
threw my body into a coal-pit hard by, and hid the pick under a bank, and his
shoos and stockings being bloody he endeavored to wash, but seeing the blood
would not wash forth he hid them there. And the apparition further told the
Miller that he must be the Man to reveal it, or else that she must still
appear, and haunt him. The Miller returned home very sad and heavy, but spoke
not one word of what he had seen, but eschewed as much as he could to stay in
the Mill within night without company, thinking thereby to escape the seeing
again of that frightful apparition. But notwithstanding one night when it begun
to be dark, the apparition met him again, and seemed very fierce and cruel, and
threatened him that if he did not reveal the murder she would continually pursue
and haunt him. Yet for all this he still concealed it, until S. Thomas Eve
before Christmas, when being soon after Sunset walking in his Garden she
appeared again, and then so threatened and affrighted him that he faithfully
promised to reveal it next morning. In the morning he went to a Magistrate and
made the whole matter known with all the circumstances, and diligent search
being made, the body was found in a coal pit, with five wounds in the head, and
the pick and shoes and stockings yet bloody, in every circumstance as the
apparition had related unto the Miller. Whereupon Walker and Mark Sharp were
both apprehended, but would confess nothing. At the Assizes following (I think
it was at Durham) they were arraigned, found guilty, condemned and executed,
but I could never hear that they confessed the fact. There were some that
reported that the apparition did appear to the Judge or the Foreman of the
Jury, (who was alive in Chester in the street about ten years a^go, as I have
been credibly informed) but of that I know no certainty. There are many persons
yet alive that can remember this strange murder, and the discovery of it, for
it was, and sometimes yet is as much discoursed of in the North Country as any
thing that almost has ever been heard of, and the relation printed, though now
not to be gotten. I relate this with the greater confidence (though I may fail
in some of the circumstances) because I saw and read the Letter that was sent
to Sergeant Hutton, who then lived at Goldsbrugh in Yorkshire, from the Judge
before whom Walker and Mark Sharp were tried, and by whom they were condemned,
and had a Copy of it until about the year 1658. when I had it and many other
books and papers taken from me.

And this I confess to be one of the most convincing stories (being of
undoubted verity) that ever I read, heard or knew of, and Observe.
carries with it the most evident force to make the most incredulous spirit,
to be satisfied that there are really sometimes such things as apparitions. And
though it be not easy to assign the true and proper cause of such a strange
effect, yet must we not measure all things to be, or not to be, to be true or
false, according to the extent of our understandings, for if there be many of
the magnalia naturae that yet lie hidden from the wisest of men, then much more
may the magnalia Dei be unknown unto us, whose judgments are Romans 11. 33.
unsearchable, and his ways past finding out. And as in the rest we cannot
ascribe this strange apparition, to any diabolical operation, nor to the Soul
of the Woman murdered, so we must conclude that either it was merely wrought
by the Divine Power, or by the Astral spirit of the murdered Woman, which last
does seem most rational, as we shall show hereafter.

5. To these (though it be not altogether of the same nature) we shall add one
both for the oddness and strangeness of it, as also Hist. 5.
because it happened in my time, and I was both an eye and ear-witness of the
trial of the person accused. And first take a hint of it from the pen of Durant
Hotham, in his learned Epistle to the Mysterium magnum of Jacob Behemen upon
Genesis in these words: There was (he says) as I have heard the story credibly
reported in this Country a Man apprehended for suspicion of Witchcraft, he was
of that sort we call white Witches, which are such as do cures beyond the
ordinary reasons and deductions of our usual practitioners, and are supposed
(and most part of them truly) to do the same by the ministration of spirits
(from whence under their noble favors, most Sciences at first grew) and
therefore are by good reason provided against by our Civil Laws, as being ways
full of danger and deceit, and scarce ever otherwise obtained than by a
devilish compact of the exchange of ones Soul to that assistant spirit, for
the honor of its Mountebankery. What this man did was with a white powder
which, he said, he received from the Fairies, and that going to a Hill he
knocked three times, and the Hill opened, and he had access to, and converse
with a visible people; and offered, that if any Gentleman present would either
go himself in person, or send his servant, he would conduct them thither, and
show them the place and persons from whom he had his skill.

To this I shall only add thus much, that the man was accused for invoking and
calling upon evil spirits; and was a very simple and Vid. 1 Jacob. c. 12.
illiterate person to any man's judgment, and had been formerly very poor, but
had gotten some pretty little means to maintain himself, his Wife and diverse
small children, by his cures done with this white powder, of which there were
sufficient proofs, and the Judge asking him how he came by the powder, he told
a story to this effect. That one night before day was gone, as he was going
home from his labor, being very sad and full of heavy thoughts, not knowing
how to get meat and drink for his Wife and Children, he met a fair Woman in
fine clothes, who asked him why he was so sad, and he told her that it was by
reason of his poverty, to which she said, that if he would follow her counsel
she would help him to that which would serve to get him a good living; to which
he said he would consent with all his heart, so it were not by unlawful ways:
she told him that it should not be by any such ways, but by doing of good and
curing of sick people; and so warning him strictly to meet her there the next
night at the same time, she departed from him, and he went home. And the next
night at the time appointed he duly waited, and she (according to promise) came
and told him that it was well that he came so duly, otherwise he had missed of
that benefit, that she intended to do unto him, and so bade him follow her and
not be afraid. Thereupon she led him to a little Hill and she knocked three
times, and the Hill opened, and they went in, and came to a fair hall, wherein
was a Queen sitting in great state, and many people about her, and the
Gentlewoman that brought him, presented him to the Queen, and she said he was
welcome, and bid the Gentlewoman give him some of the white powder, and teach
him how to use it; which she did, and gave him a little wood box full of the
white powder, and bad him give 2 or 3 grains of it to any that were sick, and
it would heal them, and so she brought him forth of the Hill, and so they
parted. And being asked by the Judge whether the place within the Hill, which
he called a Hall, were light or dark, he said indifferent, as it is with us in
the twilight; and being asked how he got more powder, he said when he wanted he
went to that Hill, and knocked three times, and said every time I am coming, I
am coming, whereupon it opened, and he going in was conducted by the aforesaid
Woman to the Queen, and so had more powder given him. This was the plain and
simple story (however it may be judged of) that he told before the Judge, the
whole Court; and the Jury, and there being no proof, but what cures he had done
to very many, the Jury did acquit him: and I remember the Judge said, when all
the evidence was heard, that if he were to assign his punishment, he should be
whipped from thence to Fairyhall, and did seem to judge it to be a delusion or
an Imposture. From whence we may take these observations.

1. Though Mr. Hotham seem to judge that this person accused Observe. 1.
had the white powder from some Spirit, and that one also of the evil sort, and
upon a contract, by the engaging of his Soul, we have before sufficiently
proved the nullity of a visible and corporeal contract with the Devil; neither
was it yet ever proved that the Devil did any good either real or apparent, but
is the sworn enemy of all mankind, both in their Souls and in their Bodies, but
this powder wrought that which was really good, namely the curing of diseases,
and therefore rationally cannot be thought to be given from an evil spirit.

2. Some there were that thought that the simple man told a plain Observe. 2.
and true story, and that he had the powder from those people we call Fairies,
and there are many that do believe and affirm that there are such people, of
whom Paracelsus has a Treatise of purpose, holding that they are not of the
seed of Adam, and therefore he calls them non-Adamicks, and that they have
flesh and bones, and so differ from spirits, and yet that they can glide
through walls and rocks (which he calls their Chaos) as easily as we through
the air, and that they get children, and are mortal like those that Hieronynus
Cardanus relates that appeared to his Father Facius Cardanus, and these he
calls Pygmaei, Silvestres, Gnomi and Umbratiles; but his proof of their
existence to me does not seem satisfactory, what others may think of it I leave
to their demonstrations, if they have any.

3. Some there were (and those not of the mere ignorant sort) that did judge,
that though the Man was simple, yet that the story Observe. 3.
that he told was but framed and taught him, the better to conceal the person
from whom he received the white powder. For they thought that some notable
Chemist, or rather an Adeptist, had in charity bestowed that powder upon him,
for the relief of himself and family, as we know it has often happened to
other persons, at other times and places. And this last opinion seems most
consonant to reason, and I the rather believe it because not many years after,
it was certainly known, that there was an Adeptist in that Country, and we
ought not to fetch in supernatural causes to solve effects, when natural causes
may serve the turn.

6. The last thing of this strange nature, that we shall instance in, is
concerning the bleeding or cruentation of the bodies of those that have been
murdered, I mean of such as have been murdered by prepense malice, and upon
premeditated purpose; for the bodies of others that are killed by
chance-medley, and by manslaughter, we do not read nor find any examples, that
ever their bodies did bleed. And though we have not been ocular witness of any
such bleeding, yet are there records of such accidents given us by many learned
and credible authors, that a man might almost be accounted an Infidel not to
give credit to them, and that both of those that have bled, when the murderer
has not been present, and also of those that have bled the murderer being
present. And first of those bodies that have issued blood, when the murderer
was not by.

Gregorius Horstius a Physician of great experience and learning, and of no
less integrity, records this story, thus Englished. In Hist. 6.
the year of our Lord 1604. the twenty sixth day of December, a Append. de
Cruent. Cadaver. p. 143.
young Nobleman of twenty five years old, was shot at with a Gun in the night
time about nine a clock, from an high window of an house, in the Town of
Blindmarck in lower Austria, and the bullet entering his left breast, went forth
at his right side, and so forthwith died in the place. The dead body being
viewed again, and the wound considered, the same quantity or bigness both of
the entrance and out-going are found with great plenty of blood issuing. The
following day being the twenty seventh of December* in the morning, the body of
the murdered young man has other clothes put upon it* and so is kept quiet
for the space of two days. Furthermore upon the thirtieth of December he is
laid upon the Bier, and kept in the Church, and that without any further
motion, where nevertheless from the upper wound the fresh blood did daily flow,
until the eighth of January 1605. from which time the Hemorrhage ceased. But
again the thirteenth of February, about noon, the flux of blood by the lower
wound for an hour or two was observed to issue, as though the slaughter had
been newly done. In the mean time the habit of the whole body was such, as did
most easily agree to what it was living, the color of his face remained even
unto his burial ruddy and florid, the vein appearing in his forehead filled
with good blood: no sign of an incipient putrefaction appearing for so many
weeks, no stink, or ungrateful odor, which otherwise does accompany dead
bodies within a few days, was here found at all: The fingers of the hands
remained soft, moveable, or flexible, without any wast, the natural color
being not very much changed, except that in process of time, about the last
week before burial, they begun in a certain manner to wax livid in the
extremities.

7. This following he gives to prove, that as cold constringeth Hist. 7.
and shuteth up the veins, so heat does open them, and cause the blood to flow,
and says: This is proved a few years since by experience in an infant slain by
a most wicked Mother forthwith after it was born, and thrown from the Tower of
a Noble Baron of upper Austria into a ditch that was full with water; which
after Ibid. p. 154.
five weeks by good fortune was found and taken out. And forthwith (he says)
the Mother not present, it being then not known who was the Mother, when it
felt the force of the external air, it begun to distill forth very fresh blood,
because the pores, which by reason of the cold, were shut that the blood could
not flow, were then unlockt and opened by the heat of the ambient air. And thus
much of those that have bled, the murderers not being present.

8. Next we shall give some examples of those that have bled Hist. 8.
when the murderers have been brought into the presence of the body murdered
or caused to touch it, and this Franciscus Valeriola does attest with an ample
faith that he himself saw: When (he says) Observe. l. 2. sol. 202.
James of Aqueria, a Senator of Arles, was found dead of a wound, and that he
that gave that wound was apprehended by the Magistrate, and brought into the
view of the dead body, that he might acknowledge the person murdered and
confess the fact, by and by the bubling blood, all the by standers looking on,
begun to come forth, with much fervor and bubbles, from the wound and the
nostrils.

9. Take this other as it is cited by Gothofredus Voigtius, in this manner: In
the year 1607 the 25. of April a certain Shepherd in Hist. 9. Delic. Phys.
Sect. 1. Artic. 1. p. 5.
Spain being feeding his flock was slain by two Noblemen, and his body thrown
into a company of bushes. The Judges of the same place, having much and daily
sought the Shepherd, after four days at length find his body in the bushes. But
because that murder was committed, no witnesses being by, the suspicion fell
upon the two Noblemen, inhabiting in the nearest place, who being taken were
haled to the body of the person murdered. But what comes to pass? The first
scarce with his eyes had looked upon the dead body, but behold, the blood in
plenty begun to flow from thence. But the other coming near, the very right
hand of the person murdered did first of all show to those that were by the
wound, and afterward the murderer himself. Which being done, forthwith the two
Gentlemen (or Nobles) did of their own accord confess that they were the
Authors of the murder, and did receive the punishment that was worthy of their
deeds.

10. Another very remarkable one we have from the same Author cited from
Cantipratanus lib. 2. mirac. c. 29. in this manner. It Hist. 10. Vt supra p. 9.
happened (the Author says) in the year of Christ 1271. in the Town
Psorizheim, that a certain most wicked old Woman familiar with the Jews, did
sell them a girl of seven years old, and without parents, to be slain. Her
therefore in secret her mouth being stopped, setting her upon linen clothes,
they wound almost in all the junctures of the members with incisions, and with
great endeavor press forth the blood, and receive it most diligently in the
linen clothes. But she being dead after great pains, the Jews throw her body
into a running water near the Town, and laid an heap of Stones upon it. But
after the third or fourth day her body is found by Fishers, by means of her
hand stretched forth toward Heaven, and carried into the Town, the people with
abomination crying forth that so great a wickedness was perpetrated by the
Jews. And the Marquess of Baden being near, went unto the Corpse, and
straightway the body standing upright did stretch forth its hands unto the
Prince, as though it would implore the revengment of blood, or perhaps mercy.
But after half an hour it disposed it selfupon its back, after the manner of
those that are dead. Therefore the wicked Jews being brought to the spectacle,
forthwith all the wounds of the body burst forth, and in testimony of the
horrid murder, poured forth great plenty of blood, whereupon the Jews were put
to death.

11. Another the same Author relates from Jacobus Martinius Hist. 11. Ut supra
p. 54;
in Disp. de Cognitione sui, propl. 8. who says: In the year of our Savior
1503. a certain Innkeeper, by name Buggerlinus, with whom a certain poor
Merchant or Pedlar had laid up his money or stock, occasion being taken by the
Innkeeper he kills him in a Wood, and buries him privately; but afterward
when he was found, the suspicion of the murder fell upon the Innkeeper. For
that Pedlar had a bended knife or dagger at his girdle, which they took, and
showed to the Innkeeper, asking him, if he knew it? But behold as soon as he
took it in his hand, it sweat drops of blood, whereby the murderer being
affrighted, confessed the murder, and so was Executed.

12. We have also a punctual History to this purpose, related by Hist. 12. Vid.
Histor. Thuan. l. 32:
Holling shead, Stow, and Sir Richard Baker, from Roger of Winchester, of King
Henry the second, which is this: This King, when he was carried forth to be
buried was first apparelled in his Princely Robes, having his Crown on his
Head, Gloves on his Hands, and Shoes on his Feet wrought with Gold, Spurs on
his Heels, a Ring of Gold on his Finger, a Scepter in his Hand, a Sword by his
Side, and so was laid uncovered having a pleasant countenance: which when it
was told to his Son Richard, he came with all speed to see him, and as soon as
he came near him, the blood gushed out of the nose of the dead Corpse in great
plenty, even as if the spirit of the dead King had disdained and abhorred the
presence of him, who was thought to be the chief cause of his death. Which
thing caused the said Richard to weep bitterly, and he caused his Fathers body
to be honorably buried at Fonteverard.

14. The last story that we shall relate of this nature, is from a Hist. 13.
Minister that is learned, sincere and of great veracity, who had it from those
that were eyewitnesses, and is this: In the year of our Lord God, 1661.
January 30th on Saturday at night about nine of the Clock, did John How of
Bruzlington-Bank, at the foot of an Hill (which is about two miles distant from
Bishop-Awkland) murder Ralph Gawkley, who was a Glover in Bishop-Awkland: This
How was the next day apprehended and brought to touch Gawkleys Corpse, the lips
and nostrils of the dead body wrought and opened as he touched (which made him
afraid to touch the second time) then presently the Corpse bled abundantly at
the nostrils in the sight of Mr. Robert Harrison the Coroner (now Tenant at
Bishop-Awkland to Mr. Franckland, from whom I had the relation) of Anthony
Cummin and his Brother, etc. of the Jury, and of a great many towns people, who
were then present. So How was Executed the next Assizes after at Durham:
Witnesses against him were Anne Wall, whom he also wounded, yet she escaped
with her life, and How Is own Wife, at the motion of her own Father (a very
honest Man) who bid her tell the truth, and she should never want help.

Some may think that I have been too large and tedious in heaping so many
stories concerning the bleeding of the bodies of those that have been
murdered; but I did it for this reason, because there are many that think it
but to be a Fable of the credulous vulgar, and others think that it is but an
ordinary matter that happens to any bodies that are dead, and no extraordinary
or supernatural thing in it at all. But whosoever shall but use so much
patience, as seriously to read and consider these select Histories that we have
recited, may easily be satisfied, both that such bleeding is absolutely true de
facto, and also that there is something more than ordinary in it, and therefore
we shall enlarge in these observations.

1. It will not be found to hold touch upon diligent observation Observe. 1.
and strict inquiry, that all dead bodies do bleed fresh and rosy blood,
especially after the third or fourth day, or after some weeks, as diverse of the
instances above given do manifestly prove; and therefore is an accident
incident to some dead bodies and no: to all. And it will as far fail, that
wounded bodies, that have been slain in the wars, after the natural heat be
gone, will upon motion bleed any fresh or crimson blood at all; for we our
selves in the late times of Rebellion have seen some thousands of dead bodies,
that have had diverse wounds, and lyingnaked and being turned over and over, and
by ten or twelve thrown into one pit, and yet not one of them have issued any
fresh and pure blood: Only from some of their wounds, some sanious matter would
have flowed, putrefaction beginning by reason of the moisture and acidity in
the air, but no pure blood, and therefore is not a common accident to all
humane bodies that die naturally or violently, but only is peculiar to some,
and especially to those that are murdered by prepensed malice, as appears in
the Histories recited above.

2. We shall acknowledge with Gregorius Horstius, Sperlingius Observe. 2.
and Gothofredus Voigtius, that sometimes the bodies of those that have been
murdered do bleed, when the murderer is not present, as is manifest from the
sixth History recited from Horstius of the young Man of twenty five years old,
that bled so long and so often, though the murderer was not present; from
whence they conclude that the presence of the murderer, is not a necessary
cause of the bleeding of the murdered body; and therefore that the bleeding of
the body is not always a certain and infallible sign of discovering the
murderer? To which we reply, that the issuing of fresh and crimson blood from
the wound or the nostrils of the persons body that has been murdered, is
always a certain sign that the Corpse that does so bleed was murdered, because
those that die naturally or violently by chance, manslaughter or in the war,
do not bleed, as has been proved before. Again, if the murderer be certainly
known, or have confessed the crime, in regard of the final cause which is
discovery, there is no reason why the Corpse should bleed: And though the
presence of the murderer may not be the efficient cause why the Corpse does
bleed, yet is it the occasional, as is manifest undeniably by sundry of the
Histories that we have related, where the murderers had not been certainly
known but by the bleeding of the body murdered.

3. Whereas the three Authors above named, thinking they have Observe. 3.
sufficiently confuted those that ascribed this effect of the bleeding of the
dead body to Sympathy or Antipathy, or to the moving of the bodies, or heat in
the air; have assigned the cause to be the beginning of putrefaction in the
bodies murdered, by which a new motion is caused in the humors, and so in the
blood, by which means it flows afresh: against this these two reasons oppose
themselves. 1. Must putrefaction needs begin at that very moment, when the
murderer touches the body? For in diverse of them there was no bleeding until
the murderers were present or did touch the bodies, and their touching could
not cause the beginning of putrefaction, and soon after their removing the
bleeding has ceased, so that putrescence in fieri cannot be the cause of the
fresh bleeding. 2. Putrefaction beginning could not be the cause why the
murdered Shepherds body in the ninth History should with its hands point to
the wound, and to the murderers, nor that the hands of the Wench murdered by
the Jews, in the tenth History, should be stretched forth to the Prince of
Baden, or that the Lips and Nostrils of the Body of Gawkley should work and
open at the touch of the murderer How; this must of necessity proceed from
some higher cause than putrefaction, or any other they have laid down.

4. But though it should be acknowledged, that in some of these bleedings there
were something that were extraordinary or supernatural, Observe. 4.
yet as learned Horstius tells us: It is (he says) an inconvenient Append. de
Cru. Cadav. p. 154.
Tenent of those that hold, that the Souls of those that are murdered,
wandering about the Bodies, by reason of the hatred they bear toward those
that were their murderers, do cause these bleedings: but this in Philosophy
cannot stand, because the separate form can by no means operate upon the
subject any longer. And (he says) the same thing in Theology seems to be very
impious; because the Souls of the dead are without mundane conversation, as is
sufficiently manifest from the History of the Rich Man and Lazarus, Luke 16.

5. And if some should refer these effects immediately unto God, as many
learned Authors have done; as though God by this Observe. 5.
means would sometimes make known those that are guilty: or to refer this unto
the Devil, as though he would sometimes elude the Judges, and to do this that
so the innocent might be punished with the wicked; We answer (he says) to this
briefly, by adding this only, that a supernatural cause is not rashly to be
feigned where a natural one is ready at hand. And if there be such examples,
which cannot be reduced to these aforesaid natural causes, of which sort many
are related by Libanius part 2. sol. 172. then we can by no reason be
repugnant, but that they are preternaturally brought to pass. And of this
opinion are most of the Pontificial Writers, that thereby they might the better
maintain their Tenent, that miracles are not ceased; though we do not
understand that if we should grant, that in these things there should be some
concurrence of Divine Power more than ordinary, that therefore it must be a
miracle, for it is yet not infallibly concluded what a miracle is, and every
wonderful thing is not therefore concluded to be a miracle, and a miracle being
not absolutely defined, what is not one cannot be certainly resolved.

6. Some there are that ascribe these strange bleedings of murdered Observe. 6.
bodies, and of their strange motions, with the sweating of blood, as upon the
Pedlars bended dagger or knife, mentioned in the eleventh History, unto the
Astral or Sydereal spirit (and that not improbably;) that being a middle
substance, betwixt the Soul and the Body does, when separated from the Body,
wander or hover near about it, bearing with it the irascible and concupiscible
faculties, wherewith being stirred up to hatred and revenge, it causes that
ebullition and motion in the blood, that exudation of blood upon the weapon,
and those other wonderful motions of the Body, Hands, Nostrils and Lips,
thereby to discover the murderer, and bring him to condign punishment. Neither
is any Tenent yet brought by any, that is more rationally probable to solve
these and many other wonderful Phenomena's than this of the Astral Spirit, if
it can be but fully proved that there is such a part of Man that does
separately exist, which we shall endeavor to prove ere we end this Chapter.

7. But it is granted upon all sides, that if the murderer be brought to the
presence, or touch of the person murdered, and not quite Observe. 7.
dead, that then the wounds though closed and staid from bleeding, or the
nostrils, will freshly break forth and bleed plentifully. The reason is
obvious, because the Soul being yet in the Body, retaining its power of
sensation, fancy and understanding, will easily have a presension of the
murderer, and then no marvail that through the vehement desire of revenge, the
irascible and concupiscible faculties do strongly move the blood, that before
was beginning to be stagnant, to motion and ebullition, and may exert so much
force upon the organs as for some small time to move the whole body, the hands,
or the lips and nostrils. So that all that is to be done, is but to prove, that
the person murdered is not absolutely dead, and that the Soul is not totally
separated or departed forth of the Body, and this we shall do by undeniable
proofs, as are these that follow in this order.

1. Though we generally take death to be a perfect separation of the Soul from
the Body, which is most certainly a great truth, yet when this is certainly
brought to pass, is a most difficult point to ascertain, because that when the
Soul ceases to operate in the Body so as to be perceived by our Senses, it will
not follow, that therefore the Soul is absolutely departed and separated.

2. It is manifest that many persons through this mistake have in the times of
the Plague been buried quick, and so have some Women been dealt withal that lay
but in fits of the suffocation of the Womb, and yet were taken to be dead. So
that from the judgment of our Senses, no certain conclusion can be made that
the Soul is totally departed, because it goes away invisibly; for many that
not only to the judgment of the vulgar, but even in the opinion of learned
Physicians, have been accounted dead, yet have revived, Observe. Medic^ p. 617,
618.
as learned Schenckius has furnished us with this story from Georgius
Pictorius, that a certain Woman lay in a fit of the Strangulation of the Womb,
for six continual days without sense or motion, the arteries being grown hard,
ready to be buried, and yet revived again, and from Paraeus of some that have
lain three days in Hysterical suffocations, and yet have recovered, and of
diverse others that may be seen in the place quoted in the Margent.

3. So that though the organs of the Body may by diverse means, either natural
or violent, be rendered so unfit, that the Soul cannot perform its accustomed
functions in them, or by them, so as they may be perceptible to our senses, or
judgments; yet will not that at all conclude, that the Soul is separated, and
departed quite from the Body, much less can we be able to define or set down
the precise time of the Souls abode in the Body, nor the ultimate period when
it must depart, for the union may be (and doubtless is) more strong in some
than in others, and the Lamp of life far sooner and more easily to be quenched
in some than in others. And the Soul may have a far greater amorosity to stay
in some Body that is lively, sweet, and young, than in others that are already
decaying and beginning to putrify, and it may in all probability both have
power and desire to stay longer in that lovesome habitation, from whence it is
driven away by force, especially that it may satisfy it self in discovering of
the murderer, the most cruel and inhumane disjoyner of that loving pair that
God had divinely coupled together, and to see it self, before its final
departure, in a hopeful way to be revenged.

4. If we physically consider the union of the Soul with the Body by the
mediation of the Spirit, then we cannot rationally conceive that the Soul does
utterly forsake that union, until by putrefaction, tending to an absolute
mutation, it be forced to bid farewell to its beloved Tabernacle; for its not
operating ad extra to our senses, does not necessarily infer its total
absence. And it may be that there is more in that of Abels blood crying unto
the Lord from the ground, in a Physical sense, than is commonly conceived, and
God may in his just judgment suffer the Soul to stay longer in the murdered
Body, that the cry of blood may make known the murderer, or may not so soon,
for the same reason, call it totally away.

There is another kind of supposed Apparitions, that are believed to be done in
Beryls, and clear Crystals, and therefore called by Paracelsus Ars
Beryllistica, and which he also calls Nigromancy, because it is practiced in
the dark by the inspection of a Boy or a Maid that are Virgins, and this he
strongly affirms to be natural and lawful, and only brought to pass by the
Sydereal influence, and not at all Diabolical, nor stands in need of any
Conjuration, Invocations or Ceremonies, but is performed by a strong faith or
imagination. And of this he says thus: Sed ante omnia (ait) notate Explic.
Astro. p. 654.
proprietatem Beryllorum. Hisunt, in quibus spectantur praeterita, praesentiae,
and futura. Quod nemini admirationi esse debet, ideo, quia sydus influentiae
imaginem, and similitudinem in Crystallum imprimit, similem ei, de quo
quaeritur. And a little after he says: Praeterea syderibus nota sunt omnia,
quae in natura existunt. Cumque Astra homini subjecta sint: potest is utique
illa in subjectum ita cogere, ut voluntati ejus ipsa obsecundent. What truth
there may be in this his assertion, I have yet met with no reasons or
experiments that can give me satisfaction, and therefore I leave it to every
Man to censure as he pleases.

The only story that seems to carry any credit with it, touching the truth of
Apparitions in Crystals, is that which is related of that great and learned
Physician Joachimus Camerarius in his Preface before Plutarchs Book De Defectu
Oraculorum, from the mouth of Lassarus Spenglerus, a person excellent both for
Piety and Prudence, Hist.
and is in effect this: Spengler said, that there was one person of a chief
family in Norimberge, an honest and grave Man, whom he thought not fit to name.
That one time he came unto him, and brought, wrapped in a piece of Silk, a
Crystalline Gemm of a round figure, and said that it was given unto him of a
certain stranger, whom many years before, having desired of him entertainment,
meeting him in the Market, he took home, and kept him three days with him. And
that this gift when he departed, was left him as a sign of a grateful mind,
having taught such an use of the Crystal as this. If he desired to be made more
certain of any thing, that he should draw forth the glass, and will a male
chaste Boy to look in it, and should ask of him what he did see? For it should
come to pass, that all things that he required, should be showed to the Boy,
and seen in the Apparition. And this Man did affirm, that he was never deceived
in any one thing, and that he had understood wonderful things by the boys
indication, when none of all the rest did by looking into it, see it to be any
thing else but a neat and pure Gemm. He tells a great deal more of it, and that
doubtful questions being asked, an answer would appear to be read in the
Crystal: but the Man being weary of the use of it, did give it to Spengler, who
being a great hater of superstition, did cause it to be broken into small
pieces, and so with the Silk in which it was wrapped, threw it into the sink of
the House.

I confess I have heard strange stories of things that have been revealed by
these supposed apparitions, from persons both of great worth and learning* but
seeking more narrowly into the matter I found them all to be superstitious
delusions, fancies, mistakes, cheats and impostures. For the most part the
child tells any thing that comes into his fancy, or does frame and invent
things upon purpose, that he never sees at all, and the inquirers do presently
assimilate them to their own thoughts and suspicions. Some that pretended to
show and foretell strange things thereby to get money, have been discovered to
have had confederates, that conveied away men's goods into secret places, and
gave the cunning Man notice where they were hid, and then was the child taught
a straight framed tale, to describe what a like Man took them away, and where
they were, which being found brought credit enough to the couzeners, and this I
knew was practiced by one Brook and Bolton. Some have had artificial glasses,
whereinto they would convey little pictures, as Dr. Lamb had.

It being manifest by what we have laid down that there are apparitions and
some such other strange effects, whereby murders are often made known and
discovered, and also having mentioned that it may be most rationally probable
that they are caused by the Astral or Sydereal Spirit, it will be necessary to
open and explain that point, and to show what grounds it has, upon which it
may be settled, which we shall do in this order.

1. There are many (especially Popish Authors thereby to uphold their Doctrine
of Purgatory) that maintain that they are the Souls of the persons murdered
and deceased, and this opinion, though unanswerably confuted by the whole
company of reformed Divines, is notwithstanding revived by Dr. Henry Moore, but
by no arguments either brought from Scripture, or grounded upon Immort. of the
Soul. c. 16. sect. 8. p. 296.
any solid reasons, but only some weak conjectures, seeming absurdities, and
Platonic whimsies, which (indeed) merit no responsion. And we have by positive
and unwrested Scriptures, in this Treatise before proved, that the Souls of the
righteous are in Abraham's bosom with Christ at peace and rest, and that the
Souls of the wicked are in Hell in torments, so that neither of them do wander
here, or make any apparitions; for as S. Augustine taught us: Duo sunt
habitacula, unum in igne aeterno, alterum in regno De Verb. Apost. lib. Sermon.
18. Idem contr. Pelag. c. 28. Tom. 7.
aeterno. And in another place: Nec est ulli ullus medius locus, ut possit esse
nisi cum Diabolo, qui non est cum Christo. And Tertullian and Justin Martyr,
two most ancient writers do tell us: That Souls being separated from their
Bodies, do not stay or linger upon the earth: And after they be descended into
the infernal pit, they do neither wander here upon their own accord, nor by the
power and command of others; But that wicked spirits may counterfeit by craft
that they are the Souls of the dead, Vid. Lavaterum de Spectris secunda part
c. 5.

2. We have also showed that these apparitions that discover murder and
murderers and brings them to condign punishment, cannot be the evil Angels,
because they are only Ministers of torture, sin, horror and punishment, but are
not Authors of any good either Corporeal or Spiritual, apparent or real. So
that it must of necessity be left either to be acted by a Divine Power, and
that either by the immediate power of the Almighty, for which we have no proof,
but only may acknowledge the possibility of it; or mediate by the ministry of
good Angels, which is hard to prove, there being no one instance, or the least
intimation of any such matter in all the Scriptures, and therefore in most
rational probability, either relations of matters of fact of this nature are
utterly false, or they are effected by the Astral spirit.

3. Concerning the description of this Astral Spirit or Sydereal Body, (for
though it be as a spirit, or the image in the looking-glass, yet it is truly
corporeal) we shall give the sum of it, as Paracelsus Vid. lib. Sagac. Philos.
passim.
in his magisterial way, without proof does lay down. He positively holds
that there are three essential parts in Man, which he calls the three great
substances, and that at death every one of these being separated, does return
into, or unto the Womb from whence it came; as The Soul that was breathed in by
God, does at death return unto God that gave it: And that the Body, that is to
say, that gross part that seems to be composed of the two inferior Elements of
Earth and Water, does return unto the Earth, and there in time consume away,
some bodies in a longer time, some in a shorter: But the third part which he
calls the Astral Spirit, or Sydereal Body, as being firmamental, and
consisting of the two superior Elements of Air and Fire, it (he says)
returns into its Sepulcher of the Air, where in time it is also consumed, but
requires a longer time than the body, in regard it consists of more pure
Elements than the other, and that one of these Astral Spirits or Bodies does
consume sooner than another, as they are more impure, or pure. And that it is
this spirit that carries along with it the thoughts, cogitations, desires and
imaginations that were impressed upon the mind at the time of death, with the
sensitive faculties of concupiscibility and irascibility. And that it is this
spirit or body (and not the Soul that rests in the hands of the Lord) that
appears, and is most usually conversant in those places, and those
negotiations that the mind of the person living (whose spirit it was) did most
earnestly follow, and especially those things that at the very point of death,
were most strongly impressed upon this spirit, as in the case of the person
murdered, whose mind in the very minute of the murder, receives a most deep
impression of detestation and revenge against the murderer, which this spirit
bearing with it, does by all means possible seek the accomplishment of that
revenge, and therefore does cause dreams of discovery, bleedings and strange
motions of the body murdered, and sometimes plain apparitions of the persons
murdered, in their usual shape and habit, and does vocally and audibly reveal
the murder with all the circumstances; as is apparent in the two forementioned
Histories of the apparition of Fletcher to Raynard, and of the Woman murdered
by Mark Sharp, to the Miller Grimes.

4. And this Astral Spirit is no more than that part in Man that is commonly
called the sensitive Soul, and by the Schools is commonly defined thus: Anima
sentiens est vis, quae apprehendit and percipit ea quae extra ipsam sunt. And
this is corporeal, and (as Dr. Willis holds) De Anim. Brut: c. 1, 2.
mortal and coextended with the Body, and that it has the power of
imagination, appetite, desire, and aversion and the like, and in a manner, a
sensitive way of ratiocination, and yet is distinct from the ratinal Soul or
Men's that is incorporeal, immortal, and far more excellent. And perspicacious
Helmont holding this sensitive Soul to be distinct from the men's or immortal
and rational Soul, says thus: Est ergo anima sensitiva, caduca, mortalis, mera
lux vitalis data a patre luminum, nec alio modo verboque explicabilis. But of
the rational Soul he says: Ipsa autem men's immortalis, est substantia lucida,
incorporea, immediate Dei sui imaginem referens, quia eandem in creando, sive
in ipso Empsychosis instanti, sibi insculptam suscepit. So that both these late
and learned Authors hold, that in every Man there are two distinct Souls, the
sensitive that is mortal, corporeal, and coextended with the Body, and the
rational, that is immortal and absolutely incorporeal: so that though in words
and terms they seem to differ, yet in substance they agree. For the Hermetick
School, the Platonists, Paracelsus, Jacob Behemen, and others do hold three
parts in Man which they call, Soul, Spirit and Body, and these two last Authors
do hold the body to be one part in Man, and two Souls besides, the sensitive
and rational that are two distinct parts, the one corporeal and mortal, and the
other incorporeal and immortal, and so they do but nominally differ. And now
our task must be to prove, that first there are such three parts in Man, and
that after death they do separately exist, which we shall attempt in this order.

1. Though arguments taken a notatione nominis, do not necessarily prove, yet
they illustrate, and render the case plain and intelligible; and we shall find
that the Hebrews have three distinct appellations for these three parts. As for
the Soul, either rational or sensitive, or vital spirit, they use Nephesh which
is common to brutes and reptiles as well as to Man, as says the Text: And to
every beast Genesis 1. 30:
of the earth, and to every sowl of the air, and to every thing that creeps
upon the earth in which there is a living soul, Nephesh Haiah. And therefore to
distinguish the rational and immortal Soul, from this which is sensitive,
mortal and common with brutes, the Text says: And the Lord God formed man of
the dust of the earth, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and
man became a living soul. Upon which Tremellius gives us this note: Ut clarins
appareret discrimen quod est inter animam hominis, and reliquorum animantium:
Horum enim animae ex eadem materia provenerunt, unde corpora habebant, illius
vero anima spiritale quiddam est and Divinum. And upon the words; Sic fuit
homo. Id est (ait) hac ratione factum est, ut terrea illa statua animata
viveret. Another word they use, which is Ruah, and this is also generally
attributed to Men and Beasts, as the words of Solomon do witness. Who Eccles.
3. 21.
knows the spirit of man that goes upwards, and the spirit of the beast that
goes downward to the earth? And in both these, touching both Man and Beast,
the word Ruah is used as common to them both; and sometimes it is taken
specially for the rational immortal Soul, as, And the spirit shall return unto
God who gave it. Also Ibid. 12. 7.
they have the word Niblah, and Basar, that is, corpus, caro, or cadaver, and
by these three they set forth, or distinguish these three parts. And the
Grecians have likewise their three several names for these parts, as (...),
anima, vita, which is taken promiscuously sometimes for the rational and
immortal Soul, as in this place; And fear not them which kill the body, but are
not able to Matthew. 10. 28.
kill the soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body
in hell. And it is taken for the life in that of the Acts: Acts 20. 10.
And Paul said, Trouble not your selves, his life is in him. Also they have the
word (...), Spiritus, ventus, spiritus vitae, being variously taken, yet
sometimes for the rational and immortal Soul, as Father into thy hands I
commend my spirit. So they have the Luke 23. 46.
word (...), Corpus, the body or gross and fleshly part. And to these accord
the three Latin terms for these three distinct parts; Anima, Spiritus and
Corpus.

2. This opinion of these three parts in Man, to wit Body, Soul and Spirit, is
neither new, nor wants Authors of sufficient credit and learning to be its
Patrons. For Hermes Trismegistus an Author almost of the greatest Antiquity
says thus: (...) Men's ad Herm. p. 21.
(...). That is, God is in the mind, the mind in the soul, and the soul in
matter. But Marsilius Ficinns gives it thus: Beatus Deus, Demon bonus, animam
esse in corpore, mentem Pimand. c. 12. p. mihi 451.
in anima, in mente verbum pronunciavit. And further adds: Deus vero circa
omnia, simul atque per omnia, men's circa animam, anima circa aerem, aer circa
materiam. And some give it more fully thus. God is in the mind, the mind in the
Soul, the Soul in the Spirit, the Spirit in the blood, and the blood in the
Body. But besides this ancient testimony, it is apparent that the whole School
of the Platonists, both the elder and later were of this opinion, and also the
most of the Cabalists: For Ficinus from the Doctrine of of Plato tells us this:
Humanae cogitationis domicilium anima ipsa est. Animae domicilium spiritus.
Domicilium spiritus hujus est Comment. in Conviv. Platon. p. 400.
corpus. But omitting multitudes of others that are strong Champions for this
Tenent, we think for authorities to acquiesce in that of our most learned
Physician and Anatomist Dr. Willis, and in Vid. De Anim. Brutor. c. 7. p. 73.
those that he has quoted, which we shall give in the English: First he says:
Lest I be tedious in rehearsing many, it pleases me here only to cite two
Authors (but either of which is a Troop) for the confutation of the contrary
opinion. The one (he says) is the most famous Philosopher Petrus Gassendus,
who Physic. Sect. 3. lib. 9. c. 11. does divide, toto Coelo, (as is said) the
mind of man, from the other sensitive power, as much as is possible to be done,
by many and most signal notes of discrimination, yea disjoining of them (as it
is said in the Schools) by specific differences: Because when he had showed
this to be corporeal extended, nascible and corruptible, he says the other is
an incorporeal substance, and therefore immortal, which is immediately created,
and infused into the body by God; to which opinion he shows Pythagoras,
Plato, Aristotle, and for the most part all the ancient Philosophers, except
Epicurus, did much agree; excepting notwithstanding that they did hold, as not
knowing the origin of the Soul, which they judged to be immortal, that it being
cropped off from the soul of the world, did slide into the body, and that it was
poured again into the Soul of the world either immediately, or at the last
mediately, after its transmigration into other bodies.

The other suffrage (he says) upon this matter, is of the most learned Divine
Dr. Hamond, our Countryman, who opening the Text Epist. Thessalo. 1. c. 5. v.
23. to wit, your whole spirit and soul and body etc. He says that Man is
divided into three parts. 1. To wit, into the body, by which is denoted the
flesh and the members. 2. Into the vital soul, which in like manner being
animal Ibid. p. 74.
and sensitive is common to man with the bruits. 3. Into the spirit, by which
the rational soul, that was first created of God, is signified, which also
being immortal does return unto God. Annot. in Nov. Testam. lib. p. 711. This
his exposition he confirms by Testimonies brought from Ethnic Authors, and
also from the ancient Fathers. From all which the learned Dr. does make this
conclusion: And from the things above (he says) it is most evidently manifest,
that man being as it were an Amphibious animal, or of a middle nature and order
betwixt the Angels and bruits, with these he does communicate by a corporeal
soul, framed of the vital blood and the stock of animal spirit, joined likewise
in one; and with the other he communicates by an intelligent soul immaterial
and immortal. And thus much for arguments brought from humane authority, which
are prevalent, if they be brought affirmatively (as these are) from learned men
or Artificers, and so we shall proceed to further kind of proofs.

3. But an argument arising from Divine Authority is of the most force of all,
and therefore let us a little survey the Text it self, which in our English
Translation is thus: And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly: And I pray
God your whole Spirit, and 1 These. 5. 23.
Soul, and Body be preserved blameless, unto the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ. The Apostle having given the believing Thessalonians all the spiritual
counsel that could be necessary, to bring them to the perfection of
sanctification, does pray for them, that the God of peace would sanctify them
wholly, or as the word (...) signifies (as Arias Montanus has rendered it)
omnino persectos, altogether perfect; And that the whole, (...), that is the
whole part, portion or lot (for so the word properly signifies) which he
names by Spirit, Soul and Body, to be preserved blameless, unto the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore to this does learned Beza add this note:
Tum demum igitur (ait) homo integer sanctificatus fuerit, quum nihil cogitabit
spiritus, nihil appetet anima, nihil exequetur corpus, quod cum Dei voluntate
non consentiat. And before he had said: Therefore Paul by the appellation of
spirit does signify the mind, in which the principal stain lies: and by the
Soul the rest of the inferior faculties, and by the body the domicile of the
Soul. And in another place he says: The mind is become vain, the cogitation
obscured, Ephesians. 4. 17.
the appetite hardened. And to the same purpose does learned Rollock upon the
place say thus much: Sanctification, or transformation is not of any one part,
but of all the parts, and of the whole man. For there is no part or particle in
man, which was not deformed in that first fall, and made as it were monstrous.
Therefore (...), or transformation ought to be of the whole man, and of every
singular part of him. And further he says: For the whole man the Apostle has
here the enumeration of his principal parts. And they are three in number,
Spirit, Soul and Body. By the spirit (he says) I understand the mind, which
the Apostle Ephesians. 4. 24. calls the spirit of the mind, and this is no other
thing than the faculty of the rational mind, which is discerned in invention,
and in judging of things found out. By the name of soul (he says) I understand
all those inferior faculties of the mind, as are the animal which are also
called natural. The body does follow these parts, to wit that gross part which
is the instrument by which the spirit and soul do exert their functions and
operations. By all which it is most clear, that though they call them
faculties, yet they are distinct essential parts of the whole man, which is
most manifest, in that the body, though one of these three, cannot be a
faculty, but a mere instrument, and yet is one of the essential parts, that
does integrate the whole man. But whosoever shall seriously consider, how
little satisfaction the definition of a faculty given by either Philosophers or
Physicians, will bring to a clear understanding, may easily perceive, that
distinct parts are commonly taken to be faculties.

4. The first argument that this learned Physician urges, to prove that there
are two Souls in man, the one sensitive and corporeal, the other rational,
immortal and incorporeal, is in this order. But (he says) whereas it is said
that the rational soul does by it self Ut supra c. 7. p. 74.
exercise every of the animal faculties. it is most of all improbable, because
the actions and passions of all the animal senses and motions are corporeal,
divided and extended to various parts, to perform which immediately the
incorporeal and indivisible soul (if so be it be finite) seems unfit or
unable. Further (he says) what belongs unto that vulgar opinion, that the
sensitive soul is subordinate to the rational, and as it were swallowed up of
it, that that which is the soul in brutes, in man becomes a mere power; these
are the trifles of the Schools. For how should the sensitive soul of man, which
before has been in act a subsistent, material and extended substance, losing
its essence, at the advent of the rational soul, degenerate into a mere
quality? But if it be asserted that the rational soul, by its advent also does
introduce life and sensation, then man does not generate an animated man, but
only a formless body, or a rude heap of flesh.

5. Another argument he uses to prove these two souls in man is this:
Therefore (he says) it being supposed that the rational soul does come to the
body before animated of the other corporeal soul, we may inquire, by what band
or tie, seeing it is a pure spirit, can it be united to this, seeing it has
not parts, by which it might be tied, or adhere to the whole or any of the
parts? And therefore he thinks that concerning this point it is to be said
with most learned Gassendus: That the corporeal soul is the immediate subject
of the rational soul, of which seeing it is the act, perfection, complement and
form, also by it the rational soul is made or becomes the form and act of the
humane body. But seeing that it does scarce seem like or necessary, that the
whole corporeal soul should be possessed of the whole rational soul; Therefore
it is lawful to determine that this rational soul, being purely spiritual,
should reside as in its Throne, in the principal part or faculty of it, to wit
in the imagination, framed of a small portion of the animal spirits, being most
subtle, and seated in the very middle or center of the brain.

6. Another chief argument that he uses to prove these two souls in man, is
the strife and disagreements that are within man: Because (he says) the
intellect and imagination are not wont to agree in so many things, but that
also the sensitive appetite does dissent in more things: From whose litigations
moreover it shall be lawful to argue, that the moodes of the aforesaid souls,
both in respect of subsisting and operating, are distinct. For as there is in
man a double cognitive power, to wit the intellect and imagination, so there is
a double appetite, the Will proceeding from the Intellect, which is the Page or
servant of the rational soul, and the sensitive Appetite, which cohering to the
imagination, is said to be the hands, or procuratrix of the corporeal soul.

7. To these we shall add, that when the understanding is truly enlightened
with the spirit of God, and led by the true light of the Gospel, in the ways of
Christ, then is man said to be spiritual, because the carnal mind and the
sensitive appetite are subdued and brought under to the obedience of Christ by
his grace. So also when the understanding is darkened, as says the Apostle;
Having the understanding Ephesians. 4. 18.
darkened, being alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in
them, because of the blindness of their hearts. Then man becomes wholly led
with the carnal and sensual appetite, and is therefore called (...), the
natural, animal or soully man: And in both these conditions the organical body
is led and acted according to the ruling power, either of the Spirit of God,
and so it is yielded up a living sacrifice to God; or of the spirit of
darkness, corruption, and the sensitive appetite, and so is an instrument of
all unrighteousness. By all which it is most manifest that there are in man
these three parts, of Body, Soul, and Spirit, which was the thing undertaken to
be proved.

8. Lastly as to this point, it is a certain truth that two extremes cannot be
joined or coupled together, but by some middle thing that participateth or
comes near to the nature of both. So the Soul which (by the unanimous consent
of all men) is a spiritual and pure, immaterial and incorporeal substance
cannot be united to the body, which is a most gross; thick and corporeal
substance, without the intervention of some middle nature, fit to conjoin and
unite those extremes together, which is this sensitive and corporeal Soul or
Astral Spirit, which is respect of the one extreme is corporeal, yet of the
most pure sort of bodies that are in nature, and that which approaches most
near to a spiritual and immaterial substance, and therefore most fit to be the
immediate receptacle of the incorporeal Soul: And also it being truly body does
easily join with the gross body, as indeed being congenerate with it, and so
becomes vinculum and nexus of the immaterial Soul and the more gross body, that
without it could not be united.

Now having (as we conceive) sufficiently proved that there are in man these
three distinct parts of Body, Soul, and Spirit, in the next place we are to
show that these three may, and do separately exist, and that we shall endeavor
by these reasons.

1. It is manifest by Divine Authority that the spirit, that is the Reas. 1.
rational, immortal and incorporeal soul, does return to God that Eccl. 12. 7.
gave it. That is not to be annihilated or to vanish into nothing, but to abide
and remain for ever or eviternally. For the Apostle says: For we know, that if
our earthly tabernacle or house were 2 Cor. 5. 1.
dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in
the heavens. By which it is manifest that the immaterial Soul does exist
eternally ex part post, as the Schools say, and also the gross body being
separated from the immortal Soul, does by it self exist until it be consumed in
the grave, or by corruption be changed into earth, or some other things, or
that the Atoms be dispersed, and joined unto, or figurated into some other
bodies. So it is most highly rational that this sensitive Soul, or Astral
Spirit, which is corporeal, should also exist by it self for some time, until
it be dissipated and wasted, in which time it may (and doubtlesly does) make
these apparitions, motions and bleedings of the murdered bodies.

2. Upon the supposition that the rational Soul be not ex traduce, Reas. 2.
but be infused after the bodily organs be fitted and prepared, which is the
firm Tenent of all Divines Ancient, middle and Modern, and must upon the
granting of it to be simply, and absolutely immaterial and incorporeal (which
is indisputable) of necessity be infused, because no immaterial substance can
be produced or generated by the motion of any agent, that is merely material,
or forth of any material substance whatsoever. And therefore I say that the
Soul being infused, it must of necessity follow the organized body, that could
not exist (except as a lump of flesh) without the corporeal sensitive soul;
which must of necessity demonstrate, that as they did separately exist before
the union of the Soul and Body, so they also do exist distinctly after their
separation by death, and so the Astral Spirit may effect the things we have
asserted.

3. And if the experiment be certainly true that is averred by Borellus,
Kircher, Gaffarel, and others (who might be ashamed to affirm Reas. 3.
it as their own trial, or as ocular witnesses, if not true) that the figures
and colors of a plant may be perfectly represented, and seen in glasses, being
by a little heat raised forth of the ashes. Then (if this be true) it is not
only possible, but rational, that animals as well as plants, have their Ideas
or Figures existing after the gross body or parts be destroyed, and so these
apparitions are but only those Astral shapes and figures. But also there are
shapes and apparitions of Men, that must of necessity prove that these
corporeal Histor. rarior. Obs. 62. p. 325, 326.
Souls or Astral Spirits do exist apart, and attend upon or are near the blood,
or bodies; of which Borellus Physician to the King of France, gives us these
two relations.

1. N. de Richier a Soap-maker (he says) and Beruardus Germanus Hist. 1.
from the relation of the Lord of Gerzan, and others, distilling man's blood at
Paris, which they thought to be the true matter of the Philosophers-stone; they
saw in the cucurbit or glass body, the Phantasm, or shape of a Man, from whom
bloody rays did seem to proceed, and the glass being broken they found the
figure as though of a skull, in the remaining faeces.

2. There were three curious persons also at Paris, that taking the Church
earth-mould from S. Innocents Church, supposing it Hist. 2.
to be the matter of the stone, did distill it and work upon it, and in the
glasses they did perceive certain Phantasms or Shapes of Men, of which they
were no little afraid.

3. Our Countryman Dr. Flud a person of much learning and Hist. 3.
great sincerity, does tell us this well attested story: That a certain De
Mist. Sang; Anatom. c. 6. p. 233.
Chemical Operator, by name La Pierre, near that place in Paris called Le
Temple, received blood from the hands of a certain Bishop to operate upon.
Which he setting to work upon the Saturday, did continue it for a week with
diverse degrees of fire, and that about midnight the Friday following, this
Artificer lying in a Chamber next to his Laboratory, betwixt sleeping and
waking, heard an horrible noise, like unto the lowing of Kine, or the roaring
of a Lion; and continuing quiet, after the ceasing of the sound in the
Laboratory, the Moon being at the full by shining enlightening the Chamber,
suddenly betwixt himself and the Window he saw a thick little cloud, condensed
into an oval form, which after by little and little did seem completely to put
on the shape of a Man, and making another and a sharp clamor, did suddenly
vanish. And that not only some Noble Persons in the next Chambers, but also the
Host with his Wife, lying in a lower room of the house, and also the neighbors
dwelling in the opposite side of the street, did distinctly hear as well the
bellowing as the voice, and some of them were awaked with the vehemence
thereof. But the Artificer said that in this he found solace, because the
Bishop of whom he had it, did admonish him, that if any of them from whom the
blood was extracted, should die in the time of its putrefaction, his Spirit was
wont often to appear to the sight of the Artificer, with perturbation. Also
forthwith upon Saturday following he took the retort from the Furnace and broke
it with the light stroke of a little key, and there in the remaining blood
found the perfect representation of an humane head, agreeable in face, eyes,
nostrils, mouth and hairs, that were somewhat thin and of a golden color. And
of this last there were many ocular witnesses, as the Noble Person Lord of
Bourdalone, the Chief Secretary to the Duke of Guise, and that hehad this
relation from the Lord of Menanton living in that house at the same time, from
a certain Doctor of Physic, from the owner of the house, and many others.

So that it is most evident that there are not only three essential, and
distinct parts in Man, as the gross body, consisting of Earth and Water, which
at death returns to the earth again, the sensitive and corporeal Soul, or
Astral Spirit, consisting of Fire and Air, that at death wandereth in the air,
or near the body, and the immortal and incorporeal Soul that immediately
returns to God that gave it: But also that after death they all three exist
separately; the Soul in immortality, and the body in the earth, though soon
consuming; and the Astral spirit that wanders in the air, and without doubt
does make these strange apparitions, motions, and bleedings; and so we conclude
this tedious discourse with the Chapter.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the sorce and efficacy of Words or Charms, whether they effect any thing at
all or not, and if they do, whether it be by Natural or Diabolical virtue and
force.

THere is nothing almost so common not only in the Poets (who have been the
chief disseminators of many such things) but in most of other Authors, as the
mention of the force of Charms and Incantations: And yet if we narrowly search
into the bottom of the matter, there is nothing more difficult than to find out
any truth of the effects of them, in matters of fact; and therefore that we may
more clearly manifest what we have proposed in this Chapter, we shall first
premise these few things.

1. Those that take the effects of them to be great, as many Divines,
Philosophers, and Physicians do, suppose no efficacy in them solely, holding
that quantitates rerum nullius sunt efficaciae, but that they are only signs
from the Devil to delude the minds of those that use them, and in the mean time
that the Devil does produce the effects. But it had been well, if those that
are of this opinion, had showed us the ways and means how the Devil does
operate such things, seeing he can do nothing in corporeal matter but by
natural means: So that either we must confess that there is no force at all in
Charms, or that the effects produced are by natural means.

2. Neither can we assent fully to those that hold, that the force of
imagination can work strange things upon other bodies, distinct and separate
from the body imaginant, upon which it is not denied to have power to operate
very wonderful things; and that for the reason given by the most learned Lord
Verulam, which is this: Experimenta Syl. Syl. Cent. 10. p. 583.
quae vim imaginationis in corpora aliena solid probent, pauca aut nulla
prorsus sunt; cum fascini exempla huc non faciant, quod Daemonum interventu
fortasse non careant.

3. I said not assent fully, because there are some reasons that incline me to
believe the possibility of it, though there be hardly found any experiments
that solidly prove it. For as the said Lord Verulam says again: Movendi sunt
homines, ne fidem detrahant operationibus ex transmissione spirituum, and vi
imaginationis, quia Ibid. p. 554.
eventus quandoque fallit. And there are so many learned Authors (though Dr.
Casaubon according to his scurrilous manner styles them Enthusiastical Arabs)
of all sorts, that do stiffly maintain the power of the imagination upon
extraneous bodies, with such strength of argument, that I much stagger
concerning the point; and therefore dare not say my assent is fully to either.
For learned Dr. Willis having (as we conceive) unanswerably proved that there
is a twofold Soul in Man, and that the one which is the sensitive, is
corporeal, though much approaching to the nature of spirit, how far the force
of imagination, which is its instrument, may reach, or what it may work at
distance, is not easy to determine. And if the Soul, as Helmont labors to
prove, by the Prerogative of its creation can when suscitated by strong desire
and exalted fantasy operate per nutum, then it must needs follow, that it may
work upon other bodies than its own, and so using Words, Charms, Characters and
Images may bring to pass strange things. But if these three conclusions be
certain and true, written by the pen of a most learned, though less vulgarly
known Author, to wit: 1. The Medicina Magnetica p. 14, 17, 19.
Soul is not only in its proper visible body, but also without it; neither is
it circumscribed in an organical body. 2. The Soul works without, or beyond
its proper body commonly so called. 3. From every body flow corporeal beams, by
which the Soul works by its presence, and gives them energie and power of
working: And these beams are not only corporeal, but of diverse parts also: If
these (I say) be certain, then does the imagination work at distance by means
of those beams, and consequently Words and Charms, and such like may be the
means and instruments, by which the imagination (being the principal power of
the sensitive Soul) may operate strange things at distance, and so that not be
vain which learned Agrippa tells us. Nos habitat, non Tartara, sed nec sydera
Coeli:
Spiritus in nobis qui viget, illa facit.
And we have before sufficiently proved, that the species of bodies are
corporeal, and it is plain, that these operate upon our eyes at a vast
distance, and do intersect one another in the air without confusion. And we
must in all reason acknowledge that the sensitive Soul, must needs be of as
much purity, and energie as those that we call the sensible, or visible species
of things, and then it must necessarily follow, that it by the means of the
imagination may operate at a great distance, and so words and charms may from
thence have power and operation. For learned Agrippa that great Philosopher,
and master of lawful and natural Magic, and not of that which is accounted
diabolical (as the wretched pen of Paulus Jovius has painted him) holds this:
Quod unicuique homini impressus est Character Divinus, cujus vigore potest
pertingere ad operandum mirabilia. Which if so, then many words, charms and the
like, have a natural efficacy to work wonderful things, and that at a great
distance also.

4. I cannot likewise but take notice of another caution, very pertinent to our
present purpose, given us also by the said Lord Verulam, and in English is
this: Again men are to be holden back from the peril of credulity, lest here
they too much rashly incline Ut supra p. 555, 556.
with an easy faith, because they often see the event to answer to the
operations. For the cause of the success is to be referred often to the forces
of the affections and imaginations in the body that is the agent, which by a
certain secondary reason may act in a diverse body. As for example: If any one
carry about the figure of a Planet or a Ring or a part of some beast, being
certainly persuaded, that it will prove helpful unto him in promoting his love;
or that he may be preserved from danger or wound in battle, or in strife that
he may overcome etc. it may render his wit more stirring, or may add spurs to
his industry, or may cherish confidence and hold up constancy, from which
perchancie he might have slided. Now who is ignorant what industry and a mind
tenacious of its purpose, may design and bring to pass in civil affairs?
Therefore (he concludes) he should err and deceive and be deceived, who should
ascribe these things to the force of imagination upon the body of another,
which his own imagination works in his own body. And therefore this may
caution all that would judge aright of the force and effects of words and
charms, that they may perhaps neither flow from the nature or efficacy of the
words, nor from the force of the imagination of him or her that pronounces,
writes, gives or applies the charm, but from the imagination and belief of
the person to whom they are applied, and for whom they are intended. For it is
manifest by common experience (and we our selves have known it to be certain)
that these charms either pronounced, or written and hung about the patients
neck, have produced the greatest effects, upon such as are of the weakest
judgment and reason, as Women, Children, and ignorant and superstitious
persons, who have great confidence in such vain and inefficacious trifles; and
that they seldom or never produce any effects at all, upon such as are
obstinate Infidels in the belief of their operations, and I fear we shall not
(or very hardly) find any instance to make this good, that they effectively
work upon such as are utterly diffident of their force or power.

5. It has sometimes been a question, Whether a rational Physician Cent.
Problem. Decad. 2. p. 38.
in the curing of melancholy persons, or others in some odd diseases, ought to
grant the use of Characters or Charms, and such ridiculous administrations?
Which is decided in the affirmative, that it is lawful and necessary to use
them, by that able and learned Physician Gregorius Horstius, by eight strong
and convincing arguments. And we our selves having practiced the art of
medicine in all its parts in the North of England, where Ignorance, Popery, and
superstition does much abound, and where for the most part the common people,
if they chance to have any sort of the Epilepsie, Palsy, Convulsions or the
like, do presently persuade themselves that they are bewitched, fore-spoken,
blasted, fairy-taken, or haunted with some evil spirit, and the like; and if
you should by plain reasons show them, that they are deceived, and that there
is no such matter, but that it is a natural disease, say what you can they
shall not believe you, but account you a Physician of small or no value, and
whatsoever you do to them, it shall hardly do them any good at all, because of
the fixedness of their depraved and prepossessed imagination. But if you
indulge their fancy, and seem to concur in opinion with them, and hang any
insignificant thing about their necks, assuring them that it is a most
efficacious and powerful charm, you may then easily settle their imaginations,
and then give them that which is proper to eradicate the cause of their
disease, and so you may cure them, as we have done great numbers. Here it is
most manifest that the charm or appension has no efficacy at all, and yet
accidentally, it conduces to settle their fancies and confidences, which
conduces much to their cures. And from hence it comes to pass that by reason
of the fixed belief of the party to whom the charm is applied, there are many
helped, when the causality and efficiency is solely in the person imaginant and
confident of receiving help by the means of the charm, and no efficacy at all
in the charm it self, nor no diabolical concurrence, besides what obliquity may
be in the minds of the actors, nor no agency in the imagination of the charmer,
to produce the effect: yet because often people are cured thereby, the common
people (and sometimes the learned also) do attribute the whole effect unto the
charm, when indeed it effects nothing at all. And to this purpose Varius does
quote a passage from Galen, which is this: Sunt De Fascino lib. 1. c. 5. p. 22.
quidam natura laeti, qui quando agrotant, si eos sanos futuros medicus
confirmet, convaleseunt; quorum spes sanitatis est causa: and medicus si animi
desiderium incantatione, aut alicujus rei ad collum appensione adjuverit,
citius ad valetudinem perducet.

But we now come to examine if we can find any convincing examples, from
Authors of credit, that in words, characters and charms there is any force or
efficacy; and this we shall endeavor from the best and most punctual Authors,
that have come within the compass of our knowledge, or reading, and that in
this order, to which we shall add some observations.

1. I think there are few that have been, or are Students or Practitioners in
the Art of Medicine, that have not either heard, or read the writing of that
most able and learned person Johannes Fernelius who was Physician to the most
Christian King of France De abdit. rer. cause. l. 1. c. 11. p. 65.
Henry the second, who in that most profound piece that he writ, De abditis
rerum causis, gives us as an ocular witness this relation. I have (he says)
seen a certain Man, who by the virtue or force Hist. 1.
of words did brings various Specters, or Apparitions into a looking-glass,
which did there so clearly express forthwith either in writing or in true
images, whatsoever he commanded, that all things were readily and easily known
to those that were by.

1. From hence we may observe, that Fernelius seeing this (as he says) with
his eyes, cannot (being so great a Scholar, and a circumspect Observe. 1.
person) be imagined to have been deceived, or imposed upon; though as much as
he relates might have been brought to pass by the artificial placing of the
glass, and having several images and things written moved by a confederate
placed in some secret corner, where the images might fitly be reflected from
the glass to the sight of the bystanders, or by some other means performed by
the optical science and confederacy. And it is no sure ground to introduce a
Demon to act the business, when artificial means may rationally solve the
matter, neither was it impossible but he might mistake in the conjecture of the
cause of those Phenomena.

2. And though he seems by his preceding discourse, to believe it to have been
caused but by a league and compact betwixt the person Observe. 2.
that showed it, and some Cacodaemon: yet he brings no better proof for it,
than the rotten authority of Porphyrius and Proclus, and no convincing argument
that Demons can perform any such strange matters. And however if they were the
mere apparitions of evil spirits, it is much to be wondered that Fernelius
would be present at any such sinful and dangerous sights, or have such familiar
conversation with any of that damned crew, seeing he there says: Quae omnes
prorsus vanae and captiosae sunt arts.

3. If these Apparitions were caused by Cacodaemons, then there was no efficacy
in the words at all, they were nothing but the sign Observe. 3.
of the league betwixt the evil spirit, and the person that represented them;
and then he need not have said, that they were derived into the glass vi
verborum, and so this will not prove that it was effected by force of the
words. But if all this that he relates, did proceed but from lawful and natural
causes, as Paracelsus strongly holds (the glass being but made as that which he
saw in Spain, of the Electrum that he mentions) then the words might be
efficacious; and so it is a punctual instance to prove that words are
operative; which is the thing de facto, that we here seek after.

2. The next History to this purpose we shall take from Antonius Hist. 2.
Benevenius, as we find him quoted by that learned person Marcellus Donatus,
and likewise Dr. Casaubon (for I have not the book De Medic. Histor. mirab.
lib. 2. c. 1. p. 36. Of Credul. and Incred. p. (...).
by me) who renders it thus. A Soldier had an arrow shot through the left part
of his breast, so that the iron of it stuck to the very bone of the right
shoulder. Great endeavors were used to get it out, but to no purpose.
Benevenius does show, that it was not feasible without present death. The Man
seeing himself forsaken by Physicians and Surgeons, sends for a noted
Ariolus or Conjurer: who setting his two fingers upon the wound, with some
Charms he used, commanded the iron to come out, which presently without any
pain of the patient, came forth, and the Man was presently healed: And this the
Doctor, who I presume had the book, says, that Benevenius says vidimus we
have seen it, which Marcellus Donatus says, the Author ascribed to the virtue
of the words, and others to the force of imagination.

1. Here we may observe, that this may either be brought to pass by the
efficacy of the words or charms that he muttered, and then Observe. 1.
we must needs confess that charms are of great and stupendous force: or that
it might be effected by the imagination of the Charmer, and then we must
suppose (which the most do deny) that the imagination of the person imaginant,
has power to operate upon ex traneous bodies, if it had power to cause the
iron to come without harm forth of the wounded Soldiers body, or it may be
caused (and that in most probability) by the imagination of the party wounded
being excited and roused up by the uttering of the charm, in which the patient
(in all likelihood) had no small confidence. And so however the charm was an
accidental cause, or (as they use to say) causa sine qua non, of the bringing
forth of the iron.

3. Another History we must borrow from the aforesaid two Authors Donatus and
Dr. Casaubon, which they have transcribed forth Hist. 3.
of Johannes Baptista Montanus, because I have not the Author by Lection. in
Fen. 2. Avicen.
me, and is this: My self with mine eyes, you may (he says) believe me, have
seen it: A certain man who when he had made a circle and drawn some characters
about it, and uttered some words, he did call together above a hundred
Serpents. And further says, that though he did murmur certain words, yet he
holds, that the bringing of the Serpents together was not performed by the
force of the words, but by the power of a strong imagination, and that some by
the strength of imagination, not ofwords, are said to draw forth darts, and to
cure wounds.

1. And here we may take notice that this is a punctual and positive History,
plainly declaring the matter of fact, in calling together Observe. 1.
above an hundred Serpents, and this must be done either by the force of the
words, or by the strength of the persons imagination, or both, unless we must
admit the Devil to perform it, which may vainly be supposed, but cannot be
proved, by what natural means he should bring it to pass. But however the
relation is very credible, Montanus being a famous Physician and Professor at
Padua, and affirms it as seen with his own eyes.

4. To these we may add one of sufficient credit from the learned Masius, as it
is cited by Wierus, and Dr. Casaubon (which may be Hist. 4.
we have related before, but not to this purpose) and is this: I also Wier. de
mag. Insam. p. 92.
(he says) have seen them who with words (or charms) could stop wild beasts,
and force them to await the stroke of the dart: who also could force that
Domestic beastly creature, which we call a Rat, as soon as seen, amazed and
astonished to stand still, as it were immovable, until not by any deceit or
ambushes, but only stretching their hands, they had taken them and strangled
them. This is from his own sight, and he a Man of undoubted veracity.

5. Another take from the credit of Dr. Casaubon who fathers it upon Remigius,
but confesses that at the time of his writing the story Hist. 5.
he could not find it in Remigius his Book, and is this. I have seen a Man
(says he) who from all the neighborhood (or confines) would draw Serpents
into the fire, which was enclosed within a magical circle; and when one of
them, bigger than the rest, would not be brought in, upon repetition of the
charms before used, he was forced, and so into the fire he did yield himself
with the rest, and with it was compassed.

6. To these we shall adjoin another story written from Wierus by Hist. 6.
Dr. Moore thus: And (he says) Wierus tells us this story of a Antidot.
against Atheism c. 2. p. 166.
Charmer at Saltzburg, that when in the sight of the people he had charmed all
the Serpents into a ditch and killed them, at last there came one huge one far
bigger than the rest, that leap^ upon him and winded about his waste like a
girdle, and pulled him into the ditch, and so killed the Charmer himself in the
conclusion. And this great Serpent the Doctor takes (in his Appendix) to be a
Devil, or a Serpent actuated and guided by him, but upon what grounds of reason
I can no way understand.

These are the most material passages that in our reading we can find in
credible and learned Authors, to prove thereby the effects of charms de facto,
and we confess they are all short, and not sufficiently evidential, as such a
case may justly require; and therefore we shall here add some testimonies of
good Authors that do strongly affirm and aver the same. As not to stand upon
the authorities of the Cabalists, Platonists or Arabians, we find the truth of
the charming of Serpents avouched by Paracelsus (whose credit in this point,
may be equivalent to any others) who says thus: But (he says) answer me from
whence is this, that a Serpent in Archidox: Magic. l. (...): p. 695.
Helvetia, Algovia, or Suevia, does understand the Greek Idions, Osy; Osya,
Osy, etc. When notwithstanding the Greek tongue is not so common in this age,
with the Helvetians, Algovians, or Suevians, that the venenous worms should be
able to learn it? Tell me (he says) how, where and from what causes; Serpents
do understand these words, or in what Academics have they learned them, that
they should forthwith at the first hearing of those words, stop their ears,
with their tail turned back, lest they should be compelled to hear the words
again reiterated? For as soon as they hear them, they contrary to their nature
and cunning do forthwith lie immovable, and do pursue or hurt no man with
their venomous biting, when notwithstanding otherwise they on the sudden fly
from the noise of a man's going as soon as they hear it, and turn into their
holes. From whence it is manifest that Paracelsus knew of his own experience
that the charm (which it seems he knew) would make Serpents lie immovable, and
so that there was power and efficacy in words naturally without superstition to
work and operate.

Also the learned person Tobias Tandlerus Doctor of Physic and public
Professor at Witteberge, in his smart and pithy Oration de fascino and
incantatione, tells us this: That Tucci^ a Woman belonging to the Temple of
Vesta being accused of Incest, did by P. 88.
the help of prayer carry water in a sieve, as Pliny witnesses: lib. 28. c. 2.
nature. Histor. Who there with many examples, does extol the efficacy of words.
And further says: They are found that stay wild beasts with words, that they
efcape not the throwing of the dart. And those that render Rats being seen in
any place, stupid with secret murmuring, that they may be taken with the hand
and strangled.

Augerius Ferrerius, whom Thuanus calls Medicus Doctissimus, in Lib. 2. c. 11.
p. 220, 221.
his treating of Homerical medication, after he has quoted Galen's recantation
from Trallianus, and diverse arguments and examples to prove the efficacy of
words, charms and characters from him, from Aetius and others, he concludes
thus: Quorum experientiam cum ob oculos positam, and tot illustrium virorum
authoritate confirmata videris, quid facies? Nam iis quae sensibus exposita
sunt contravenire, sani hominis non est: Doctorum vero experimenta infirmare,
temerarium.

Lastly, for authorities sake we shall add the opinion of sagacious Helmont,
who writ a Book by him styled, In verbis, herbis, and lapidibus est magna
virtus; and of the efficacy of words says only thus much: De magna virtute
verborum quaedam ingenue dixi, quae magis admiror quam applico. By which it is
manifest that though Helmont did not make use of words or charms, yet knowing
the efficacy of them he could not but admire them.

These authorities joined with the examples may suffice to convince any
rational man that at some times and places, and by some persons, the using of
charms have produced strange effects: and therefore taking the matter of fact
to be a truth, we should come to examine the cause of these effects; but first
it will be necessary to premise some cautions and necessary considerations,
which we shall pursue in this order.

1. We are to consider the intricacy and difficulty of this point, Histor.
Nature. lib. 28. c. 2. p. 397.
which has exercised the wits of the learned in all ages, and forced Pliny to
say: Maximae quaestionis, and semper incertae est, valeantne aliquid verba and
incantamenta carminum. And again more particularly: Consid. 1.
Varia circa haec opinio, ex ingenio cujusque vel casu, mulceri alloquio for as:
quippe ubi etiam Serpents extrahi cantu cogique in poenas, verum falsumne sit,
vita non decreverit. It seems by Pliny that learned men of old have been very
much divided in their opinions about this matter, insomuch that he dares not
take upon him to decide it, but leaves it free to every man to believe as they
shall see cause. And therefore we ought not to be condemned, if we do not
absolutely decide it neither, it is enough if we bring so much light to the
matter that it may be better understood, though not absolutely determined, In
magnis voluisse sat est.

2. Again we are to note that some Authors of great credit and Consid. 2.
learning do hold these things to be but mere Aniles fabulae, of which opinion
(it seems) Aristotle, and Galen were, though Trallianus does affirm (though
some say falsely) that he made a retractation of that opinion, and this was the
judgment of the learned Spaniard Valesius, who in his book, De sacra
Philosophia, has taken great pains to persuade men, though he deny not
supernatural operations by Devils and Spirits, that enchanting by magical words
are impossible, and whatsoever is alleged by any ancient or late writer to
that purpose, he does reject as merely fabulous. But upon as good grounds may
any one reject this his single opinion as fabulous, because there are a whole
cloud of witnesses against him, of as great credit and authority as himself,
and experience every day will make it manifest, that great effects do follow
from the appension of charms and characters, not determining here whether they
cause those effects causally as efficients, or but merely accidentally and
occasionally, and therefore in this point Dr. Casaubon says well: As for
Valesius Vid. Credul. and Incredul; p. 101.
opinion (he says) though a learned Man, and for ought I know Pious and Wise;
yet it is no wonder to me, that any one man, though pious and learned, should
fall into an opinion very Paradoxical and contrary to most other men's belief,
especially in a thing of this nature, which most depends of experience.

3. Notwithstanding all this, for the most part all charms, spells Consid. 3;
and characters are inefficacious, fallacious, superstitious and groundless,
and hardly fit for an honest and wise man to use, except only to settle the
imaginations of patients, that they may more readily and hopefully take those
things that may effectually cure them. I say for the most part, not always,
because I grant that they do sometimes either efficiently or accidentally
produce real effects. But that they are sometimes fallacious is manifest in the
Charmer of Saltzburg, who though with his charms he could prevail against the
little serpents, yet that great one that came prevailed against him, and threw
him into the ditch and killed him. And how vain it is to put any confidence in
these idle trifles, and how fallacious and ineffectual and destructive they
are, may appear by two deplorable Centur. 3. Curat. 14.
examples. Amatus Lusitanus a learned and experienced Physician, and a man of
great repute and veracity does relate this: That in Hist. 1.
the end of the Spring, the Summer coming on, two young men did go from Ancona
to the City Auximum, and by the way, the one of them turning aside to make
water, found a Viper in an hole at the bottom of a Tree, with a great deal of
rejoicing, but with an unhappy success. He did contend with his companion, that
he could take the Viper with his hand, without any hurt, and did brag that with
the murmuring of certain words, he could make all Serpents obey him, lying
still as stupid. The other did laugh him to scorn. At last they come to a
wager. But the Viper more audacious than was right, remained always truculent
and unaltered. At last when he stretched forth his hand to take her, it being
stirred up with a mad and venomous fury, lifting up the neck did bite him in
the finger, which beginning to pain him, he quickly put his finger to his mouth
perhaps to suck forth the blood, but within a small while the unhappy young man
died by his own fault, neither did medical helps yield him any succor, but he
might have escaped, if he had not put the poison of the Serpent to his mouth.
And this woeful example may be a sufficient warning to all that they be not too
hasty to put confidence in these fallacious trifles. Another story we shall
give of our own knowledge, and is this. I had dismembered a pretty Young-mans
Hist. 2.
leg by reason of a Gangrene, his name Robert Tailor, a good Scholar, and had
been a Clerk to a Justice of Peace, and about three weeks after when the stump
was near healed, I being gone from home, his Mother lying in the same room with
him, but having gotten too much drink, he calling upon her to help him to the
Close-stool, but she not hearing, he scrambled up himself as well as he could,
but hit the end of the stump that was not quite closed, whereby the arteries
were opened, and a great Hemorrhage followed. And there being an honest simple
man that owed the house where he lay, having a vain confidence that with a
charm he said he had, he could undoubtedly stay the bleeding, and therefore
would not suffer them to call up my man to stay the Flux until day; which
continuing so long, the vain and fruitless charm prevailing nothing, though my
man when he came did stop it, yet had he lost so much blood that he died the
next day; and this may serve for a sufficient caution against vain confidence
in charms.

4. Further we are to consider, that there are many notorious Consid. 4.
impostures, frauds and cheats committed upon the poor ignorant, credulous and
silly common people, while some make the people believe that their diseases are
inflicted by such and such Saints, and therefore they must use such and such
strange lustrations, suffumigations and other vain superstitious Rites and
Ceremonies. Others pretend to drive away evil Spirits by exorcisms and
conjurations, and others to cure all diseases (in a manner) with words, charms,
characters, amulets, and the like, when the most of these pretenders are mere
ignorant Knaves and Impostors, that do nothing but cheat the too credulous
people of their money, and defame and dishonor the most noble Art of Medicine,
of which we have known diverse sorts, some of which we have mentioned before in
this Treatise. To such as these that ancient Author (supposed by some to be
Hippocrates) De Morbo Sacro lib. Sect. 3. p. 301.
De morbo sacro, does give sufficient reproof, and of whom he says thus: Ac
mihi certe qui primi hunc morbum ad Deos retulerunt tales esse videntur, quales
sunt magi, expiatores, circulatores, ac arrogantes ostentatores, qui se valde
pios esse plurimumque scire simulant. A most large Catalogue of these kind of
pestiferous impostors, and many others, you have at full and to the life
painted forth by Paracelsus in his Preface to his less Surgery, where he
has sufficiently stigmatized them with all those wicked marks and brands that
justly belong unto them. The same also is fully performed by learned Langius in
his Epistles, to whom I referr the readers.

5. We are to consider that though we should grant that words Consid 5.
or charms had in them no energie, nor efficiency at all, by any natural power,
and that the Devils power does not concur to make them operative; yet (as we
have partly showed before) they are of singular use and benefit to a learned
Physician, whereby he may settle the fancies of his patients, to cause them
more cheerfully and confidently to commit them to his hands, and to take what
he shall order and prescribe them, and this manner of their use is no way to be
dispraised or condemned, and we leave it as excepted forth of the dispute we
have in hand.

There are chiefly three opinions, amongst those that grant the truth of the
matter of fact, concerning the proper cause of these effects produced by words.
1. Of which the first sort are those that hold there is no efficiency at all in
the words themselves, which are nothing but the sign of the league and compact
betwixt the Charmer and the Devil, and that whatsoever is brought to pass is
only effected by the Devils power, and of this opinion are the greatest part of
the learned. 2. Are those that hold that the words or charms are but means to
heighten, the imagination, and that it is the strength of the exalted
imagination only that produces those things that seem to be effected by those
words or charms, and of this opinion was Avicen and many of the Arabians,
Ferrerius, Montanus and many others. 3. There are those that hold that there is
a natural efficiency in words and characters rightly fitted and conjoined
together in proper and agreeable constellations, and of this opinion were
Johannes Ludovicus de la Cerda, Johannes Branus Camisius Lusitanus, Paracelsus,
Galeottus Martius, Henricus Cornelius Agrippa, and many others; and of these we
shall speak in order.

1. The first opinion does takeup a false supposition for its ground, Reason 1.
against this opinion.
to wit that the Devil does make a visible and corporeal league with the
Charmer, by virtue of which compact the effects are produced; and if this
compact be not explicit, yet it may be implicit, and so the Devil operateth
the effects, thereby to draw the Charmer into his league and service: But we
have before sufficiently proved the nullity of any such Covenant, and showed
plainly that it is a false, impious and diabolical Tenent, and that there is
not, nor can be any other league betwixt the Devil and wicked men, but what it
spiritual, internal and mental, and therefore that the Devil does not bring
those effects to pass, by pretense of a league, that has no being or existence.

2. We have proved by the unanimous consent of all the whole Reason 2. against
this opinion.
army of the learned, that the Devil can work no alteration or change in
natural bodies, but by the applying of fit agents to agreeable patients; but
what agent could the Devil have applied to make the iron that stuck in the
Soldiers shoulder bone related by Benevenius, to come forth without pain?
surely none at all. For where an agent in nature is awanting to produce an
effect, there the Devil must needs also be lame, and can effect nothing; and if
either the words had a sufficient natural power to cause the iron to come
forth, or the Soldiers imagination exalted by confidence in the Charm and
Charmer, then the Devils help is in vain implored, or he brought in to be an
actor of that he has no power at all to perform, and there was no other
natural agent applied, and therefore it must of necessity be one of the two
that produced the effect, and not a Demon.

3. It cannot in any reason be imagined that the Devil, that for Reason 3.
against this opinion.
the space of above five thousand years has been the bitter and inveterate
enemy to the health of Man both in Soul and Body, should Vid. Spong.
Fosterianae expressio. c. 2. p. 7, etc.
now be become a Physician and an healer. We read that God sent forth evil
Angels amongst the people, but he sent forth his word and they were healed. But
it is manifest that the evil Angels since their fall, are ordained of God to be
the instruments and organs for the executing of his wrath, and the good Angels
are his ministering Spirits for the good of his people both in Souls and Bodies:
and therefore that the Devil should be the author, or instrument of curing any
disease at all, were to make him to act contrary to that end for which God has
ordained him, for he is the destroyer, that is ordained to destroy, but not to
heal.

4. But we shall take another argument or two from the learned Reason 4.
against this opinion.
pen of Henricus Brucaeus in his Epistle to Thomas Erastus, where about this
point he says this: What is that (he says) that the most of the Grecian
Physicians were ignorant of Demons; or that Vid. Miscell. Medic. Suet. lib. 6.
Epist. 17. p. 284.
it should be agreeable to truth, that they have not judged that Demons had any
power either in inflicting or taking away any diseases? For that sentence of
Hippocrates, that there is somewhat that is divine in diseases, Galen does show
in his Comment how it is to be understood, and Hippocrates himself in that
Treatise of the Falling Sickness does sufficiently open it. Notwithstanding
these chief men being Physicians and Philosophers, by whom the power of natural
things and words was principally looked into; they were more willing to assent
to things that were evidently apparent, than take away the force of incantation
by it self. By it self (he says) Because they have had no remembrance of
Demons, from whom the causes of such effects, which follow incantations, do
seem only they can possibly be derived.

5. Before he argues thus: But the curation of diseases, which Reason 5.
against this opinion.
are performed by conjurations and imprecations, he ascribes unto the Devil.
Notwithstanding (he says) some things do move a scruple to me, because that
some things of them do seem to be of that kind, which cannot at all be referred
to Demons, in which no league or compact does seem to interceed. For leagues or
compacts seem to be contracted, for that also those things comprehended are to
be performed to those that Covenant, that by that means those that Covenant
with him, may be withdrawn from the worship of the true God, or that some may
be confirmed in their impiety. Which causes in Men to whom the true God is
utterly unknown, have no place; for neither are they to be withdrawn from the
true God, whom they altogether ignore, or to be confirmed in impiety, when they
have been brought up in the worship of Idols from their tender years. For (he
says) Aloisius Cadamustus in the 18 Chap. of the Indian Navigations relates,
that Serpents seeking to destroy Sheep in the Kingdom of Senega, which is given
to Idolatrous Worship, they will on the night aim by heaps at the Sheep-folds,
from whence they are driven away with certain conceived words, and this reason
is not unknown to many others. And that Trallianus where he treats of the
stone, acknowledges the force of incantations in healing of diseases, and he
witnesses that Galen himself, taught by experience, did come over to this
opinion. For though Galen before (as we have showed) did account charms but as
Aniles fabulae, yet this Author Trallianus does quote a piece of Galens,
wherein he makes a retractation of that opinion, and it stands with good
reason that it might be so, Trallianus living near his time, and so might
(notwithstanding what Guitterrius bawleth to the contrary) have that part of
his writing that since might be lost; for I remember Paracelsus somewhere says
that in his travels he found the works of Galen, far more genuine and incorrupt
than those that were published and extant.

6. A further reason this Author gives us thus: Furthermore Reason 6. against
this opinion.
(he says) that it is not impious to frame to cure a disease with conceived
words, and cannot be persuaded to believe it, especially seeing that those
diseases that are caused by Magic, are Ut supra;
only to be cured by Magic. But (he says) I confess that compacts with Demons
are not to be entered into, but that compacts being entered into with others,
should pass to another, and should bind with the same impiety, that is not
agreeable to truth, seeing that the consent of those that make the league, does
effect and confirm the compacts. Which if it be (he says) far absent from us
(that is a compact) and in the use of conceived words, by which the malady is
taken away, there be contained nothing that is impious, and that we implore the
divine assistance; I do not see (he says) any thing hurtful to Religion, nor
unbeseeming a good and Pious Man. For as if things that are salutiferous to
mankind, should come from Men that were Atheists, we should embrace them, not
respecting the Authors: So if (he says) things that are profitable should be
showed of a Demon, I should not think they were to be rejected.

7. Lastly he says: Why may we not also refer effects in the Reason 7, against
this opinion.
sanation of diseases, which do accompany the enunciation or description of
conceived words, to those we call good or guardian Angels? Why should we not
judge that these would be as ready to ease and help, as others to hurt,
especially in diseases, where we are destitute of natural helps? And this
opinion (he says) Constantinus magnus did approve, Codicis lib. 9. tit. ^0.
leg. 4. The Science of them (he says) is to be punished, who being skilled in
Magical Arts are discovered either to endeavor the impairing the health of
men, or the drawing of chaste minds to lust: But for seeking remedies to humane
bodies, they ought not to be punished. But perhaps thon wilt say, that words
are in vain muttered forth, unless a compact do interceed. But that which
happened (he says) at Lipsick some twelve or fifteen years since, does Hist,
refell this opinion, where a little Wench, that by reason of her age did not
know what she did, while she imitated the whole action of her nurse, which she
had often seen her use, and therewith stirred up tempests; herewith the little
Wench raised up such Thunders and Lightenings, by which a Village, not far from
the City was burned: As (he says) D. Nenius told him, and was a thing known to
innumerable Citizens. For the Wench being brought to the Court, it was debated
whether by law she could be punished, but it was decided by the opinions of the
Lawyers, that she could not be punished, seeing that by reason of her young
age, she was altogether ignorant of what she did.

8. We cannot also but remember here some notable passages of Paracelsus where
he is speaking of the power of faith and strong confidence, merely considered
as a nude and natural power: And affirming its great force and operation to
effect strange things, he says: But truly we cannot deny, but that spirits do
commix themselves De superst. and Ceremon. l. p. 451.
with such a faith, in celebrated feasts, and the like, as though they had
performed those things. But not at all they, but faith only does these things:
As if a Man had honey, and did not know from whence it came, nor what kind of
creature did make it, and the Beetle should brag that she had made it. So the
Devils though they perform nothing at all, but the effects are merely produced
by the power of a natural or miraculous faith, yet they glory as though they
had done them (in all things being liars and deceivers) and therefore do they
what they can to confirm and raise up ceremonies and superstitions; From which
commotions faith is brought forth, and faith works those strange effects, and
therefore by reason of the superstition used, the Devils would make men believe
that they are authors of those strange effects, which are only wrought by the
Power of an humane Faith, that they might rob God of his Glory and have it
ascribed unto themselves. And therefore no persons do the Devils more service
than those that ascribe those works unto them that are wrought by natural power
and the strength of humane faith. From whence he concludes thus: Eodem modo
fides est in homine, ut laqueus quo strangulatur fur, ad multa utilis sit. Ea
sides facit, ut fiat. Si sides etiam in filum lineum est, similiter fit.
Interim tamen hoc nec Diabolus facit, nec fur, nec laqueus, nec carnifex: sed
adulterina tua fides, quam non impendis ut debebas.

Having sufficiently (we suppose) proved that in the producing the effects by
words or charms, the Devil does operate nothing at all in them, but only as a
lying deceiver and Impostor, labors to have the honor of those effects
ascribed unto him; we shall now come to the second, and that is those that hold
that the effects are solely produced by the force of the imagination and faith
of the Charmer, and so that imagination does work further than the proper body
of the imaginant, upon other extraneous bodies, and that the words or
characters avail nothing, but the fortifying and exalting of the faith of the
Operator, to prove which are brought these arguments.

1. When the Disciples asked our Savior, Why they could not cast forth the
Devil out of the child that was lunatic, and sore Argum. 1:
vexed, and often fell into the fire, and into the water, he told them; Because
of their unbelief, and said: For verily I say unto you, if ye Matthew. 17. 20:
have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, remove
hence to yonder place, and it shall remove, and nothing shall be impossible
unto you. Upon which place learned Beza gives us this note: Non fidem illam
generalem and historicam intelligit: Nec etiam fidem justificantem. Sed illam
demum specialem, and quibusdam Christianis particularem, qua animus quodam
spiritus sancti impulsu ad res mirandas perficiendas impellitur, and ista
vocatur fides miraculorum. And against diffidence our Savior orders the remedy
of fasting and prayer. But this was a power given by Christ Matthew. 10. 1:
unto them, which they (it seems) had lost, and are here taught to resuscitate
it by prayer and fasting. Others take it to be a natural power of faith or
strength of imagination in all men, which they may stir up by fasting and
prayer, therewith to operate that which is good, but being suscitated by the
means of images, pictures, superstitious ceremonies, and the like, and so may
effect either good or bad; but this later opinion we reject as unsound, and
contrary to the Scriptures, and so the argument does prove very little.

2. Helmont holds, that every man, in respect that they have Argum. 2.
been partakers of the image of God, has power to create certain entities, by
the power of imagination, and that these conceived Vid. de inject. matter. 601,
602.
Ideas do cloth themselves with a body in the shape of the image fabricated in
the imagination, and it is by these that those strange things are effected,
that are falsely attributed to Demons. And that man solely has this power.
Which (if his argument be well grounded) does prove plainly, that these strange
effects are brought to pass by the sole power of the fantasy of the person
imaginant, or using the charms, and neither by the power of the Devil nor of
the charms.

3. The argument to prove these things by, that they are brought Argum. 3.
to pass by the strength of imagination, used by Cornelius Agrippa, is this:
Non mediocri experientia (ait) comprobatum est, insitam a De occulta Philos.
lib. 3. c. 40: p. 419, and p. 137.
natura homini, quandam dominandi, and ligandi vim. And that there is an active
terror in man, (if it be rightly resuscitated in him, and that he know how to
direct and make use of it) impressed in him by the Creator, which is as it were
a terrifical character and signacle of God instamped upon man, by which all
creatures do fear, and reverence man, as the image of his Creator, and as by
the law of creation, to be Lord, and to bear rule over them all. And here I
cannot but mention that lepid (though tedious and ludicrous) tale that Dr.
Casaubon gives us of an horse-rider called John Young, that Of Credul. and
Incredul. p. 110.
could tame the most fierce Bulls and unruly Horses, as also by pipeing to make
the most courageous and fierce Mastiff to lie close down and to be quiet, by
the force of his imagination and charms. And this John Youngs Philosophy was
agreeable to this of Agrippa's, to wit, That all creatures were made by God,
for the use of Man and to be subject unto him; and that if men did use their
power rightly, any man might do what he did. Fides sit apud anthorem.

4. Avicenna, Algazel, Alkindus, Marsilius Ficinus, Jacobus de Forluio,
Pomponatius Paracelsus and others, do sometimes hold Argum. 4.
that the Soul (the sensitive and corporeal it must be understood) not by a
nude apprehension, or mere impery, but by the emission of spirits (or corporeal
beams, as we have showed before) do work upon external bodies, and so move and
alter them. Sometimes they hold, that the whole Soul (sensitive must be meant)
does go quite forth of the Body, and wander into far distant places, and there
not only see what things are done, but also to act something it self. And to
this opinion (only meaning of the immortal, and immaterial Soul) Dr. Moore and
Mr. Glanvil do seem to agree, namely that the Soul may for a time depart forth
of its Body, and return again. And to prove this the argument of Avicen is
this: Superior things (he says) have dominion over the inferior, and the
Intelligences do rule and change corporeal things. And that Vid. Thom. Fien. de
virib. imagine. Quaest. 12. p. 202. etc.
the Soul is a spiritual and separable substance. And therefore after the same
manner, may act in corporeal things, and change them as may be seen at large,
with responsions in the book of Fienus.

Now we come to the third and last opinion of those that positively hold, that
there is a force in words and characters (if rightly framed) to effect strange
things withal, and this is as strongly denied by many. Therefore we shall only
offer the most convincing arguments, that we meet withal, and leave it to the
censure of others, and that in this order.

But before we enter upon the positive arguments, we think it fit, lest we be
mistaken (though in part we may have touched some ofthem before) to lay down
some few cautions and considerations, which we shall do in this manner.

1. It is to be taken for a certain truth, that the greatest part of Consid. 1.
those pretended charms and characters that are in this our age used by
ignorant, superstitious, and cheating impostors; are utterly false, and of no
power or efficacy at all. And this was understood by our learned Countreyman
Roger Bacon, who tells us thus much. De mirab. pot. Art. and Not. c. 2.
For without all doubt (he says) all of this sort now a days are false, or
doubtful or irrational, and therefore not at all to be trusted unto. And to
this does Paracelsus fully agree, saying De Occult. Philos. p. 484.
: All characters are not to be trusted to, or any confidence to be placed in
them, nor in like manner in words. For the Nigromancers and Poets, being very
laboriously employed about them, have filled all Books with comments proceeding
forth of their brains, wanting all truth and foundation, of which some
thousands are not worth one deaf nut.

2. Yet for all this we are to consider, that all of them are not Consid. 2.
totally to be rejected, for Bacon tells us: That there are certain
deprecations of ancient times instituted of men, or rather ordained Vid. ut
supra.
of God and good Angels, that are both true and efficacious; and such like as
these may retain their first virtue. As in some Countries (he says) yet some
certain prayers are made upon red hot iron, and upon the water of the flood,
and likewise upon other things, by which the innocent are tried, and the guilty
condemned. And this was the trial that by the Saxons (when used in England) was
called Drdeall. Therefore Paracelsus says thus: Repeto ergo, characteribus and
verbis non omnibus fidendum esse, sed eligenda and retinenda, quae recta,
genuina, ex fundamento veritatis deprompta, ac multoties probata sint, which is
counsel good, sound and profitable. And somewhere he tells us that even those
true and genuine characters and Gamahuis that were rightly fabricated under due
constellations, and were in old time efficacious, may have now lost their
virtue because the configurations of the Heavens are altered.

3. Many of these strange characters or words were not by wise men inserted
into their works, that thereby any strange things might Consid. 3.
be wrought by them, but were invented to conceal those grand secrets that they
would not have to be made known unto the unworthy. And therefore Bacon gives us
this profound and honest Ubi. supra.
counsel: So therefore (he says) there are very many things concealed in the
books of the Philosophers, by sundry ways: In which a Wise Man ought to have
this prudence, that he pass by the charms and characters, and make trial of the
work of nature and art: And so he shall see, as well animate things, as
inanimate, to concur together, by reason of the conformity of nature, not
because of the virtue of the charm or character. And so many secrets both of
Nature and Art are of the unlearned, esteemed to be magical. And Magicians do
foolishly confide in charms and characters, judging virtue to be in them, and
because of their vain confidence in them, they forsake the work of Nature and
Art, by reason of the error of charms and characters. And so both these sort of
Men are deprived of the benefit of wisdom, their own foolishness so compelling
them.

3. The same most learned Countryman of ours Roger Bacon, Consid. 4.
does further give us this advice saying: But those things that are Ut supra
(...). 2*
contained in the books of Magicians ought by right to be banished, although
they have in them something of truth: Because they are mixed with falsities,
that it cannot be discerned betwixt that which is true, and that which is
false. And also Impostors and ignorant persons have feigned and forged diverse
writings under the names of ancient wise men, thereby to allure the curious,
and to deceive the unwary, which with great care and consideration we ought to
eschew. To the same purpose Paracelsus does caution us in this point. Cuilibet
ergo promptum sit, characteres and verba quaevis discernere posse.

4. But for all this (as we have often intimated before) charms and characters
though in themselves of none effect, may conduce Consid 4.
to heighten the fancy and confidence of a Patient, and render him more willing
to take those things that may cure. And to this purpose, the forementioned
Author Roger Bacon, from Constantine the Physician tells us thus much: But it
is to be considered, that a skilful Physician, or any other, that would excite
and stir up the mind, may profitably make use of charms and characters though
feigned, not because the characters or charms themselves do operate any thing,
but that the medicine may be received with more desire and devotion, and that
the mind of the Patient may be stirred up, and may confide more freely, and may
hope and rejoice; Because the Soul being excitated, can renew many things in
its proper body, so that from infirmity it may be restored to health by joy and
confidence. If therefore (he says) a Physician to magnific his work, that the
Patient may be raised up to hope and confidence, shall do any thing of this
nature, not for fraud, but because of this, that he may confide, that he may be
healed, it is not to be condemned. We brought this authority to confirm what we
had asserted before; and that these things are wonderfully prevalent, we have
before showed examples.

1. There are some, that to prove that words and characters have Argum. 1.
a natural efficacy* do allege some passages of Scripture, which we shall
propose as very probable, but not as necessarily convincing, and the first is
this: And they shall put my name upon the children Numb. 6. 27.
of Israel, and I will bless them. Which some understand that the name Jehovah
which they call Tetragrammaton, was worn upon them, and that thereby they were
blessed, and from thence they suppose that Hebrew names, especially that, are
very efficacious and powerful. Another is: The man clothed in linen, that had
the Ezck. 9. 4, 6.
Ink-horn by his side, is commanded to set a mark, or (as some read it) a Tau
upon those that mourned. This is the name of a letter the last in the Alphabet,
and has in the old books of the Hebrews (as Schindlerus tells us) the figure
of a cross, and such like the Samaritans use to this day. From whence by Tau,
some in Ezekiel do understand the figure of the Cross of Christ.

2. But to explicate what is meant by charms and characters, we are to note
that it is not to be understood of those words that are Explic. 2.
by humane institution significant according to the imposition of men, nor of
any sort of charms or characters, but of such, as by wise men are duly fitted
and joined together, in and under a right and favorable constellation, for it
is from the Influence of the Stars (as we have proved before) that words,
charms, images and characters do receive their energie and virtue. And to this
purpose is the true rendition of the words in the Psalm. Which hearkeneth Psalm.
58. 6.
not to the voice of those that mutter, the conjunction of the learned joyner.
That is, that the Serpent does not hearken unto, or obey the charms that are
framed or joined together by the learned joiner or framer of charms. So that
there is a great learning required to frame and compose charms rightly that
they may be efficacious. For Paracelsus witnesses that Serpents once hearing
an efficacious charm do forthwith stop their ears, lest they should hear the
words repeated again. Of both these sorts the learned Roger-Bacon does Ut supra*
tell us this: Of characters therefore according to the first manner, it is so
to be judged as we have showed in common speech: But of sigills and characters
of the second manner, unless they be made in elected seasons, they are known to
have no efficacy at all. And therefore he that does practice them, as they are
described in books, not respecting but only the figure that the exemplar does
represent, is judged of every wise man to do nothing. But those which know to
perform their work in fit constellations according to the face of the Heavens;
those may not only dispose characters but all their works, both of Art and
Nature, according to the virtue of the Stars. But because it is a difficult
thing to understand the certainty of Celestials in these things, therefore in
these things there is much error with many, and there are few that understand
to order any thing profitably and truly. And to this purpose Paracelsus tells
us: Certain Chirurgical Arts invented Chirurg. major. c. 8. p. 22.
of the first improvers of Astronomy, by which admirable things were (by an
Ethereal virtue) performed. But these after the decease of the ancient
Magicians, were so lost, were as scarce any footsteps do now remain. But it was
the Art of Celestial impressions, that they might draw down, the influent
action, into some corporeal substance. The thing is plain by example. The seed
of a Rose does obtain the virtue and nature of a Rose, yet for all that it is
not a Rose, but when being put into the earth, it does sprout, then at the last
it produces a Rose. By the same reason, there are certain celestial virtues
and actions in being, which being sown into Gemms, which were called of the
ancient Magicians, Peantides and Gamahii (otherwise gemmae huyae) from whence
they have afterward sprung up, no otherwise than seed, which does fall from
the Tree, and does regerminate. This was that Astronomy of the ancient
Egyptians and Persians, by which they did adorn Gemms with celestial virtues.
Neither are these things forthwith to be reputed impossible: For if we believe,
that the Heaven does send the Plague and other diseases upon us, why may we not
hope, that the benignity of its virtues may be communicated to us also? In like
manner if the Heaven does act upon the bodies of men, why may we not think that
they may wrest their darts into stones? Many are touched with such like
celestial darts which a Magician who has skill of the Firmament, may easily
(if they be noxious) shun: or if they be benign shall, by putting some body,
communicate it to that body, that now that body may fully obtain into it self
the virtue of that dart or influence. From whence stones are found amongst the
Egyptians, which being born do cause diseases: But again there are others,
that do thoroughly make sound those diseases. So (he says) we have seen Gemm^s
Huy^, that is Peantides, wherein the sign of the Sagittary was insculped
against weapons, which were prevalent against wounds made with Swords. Also we
have known (he says) that Magicians have rendered stones efficacious to cure
Fevers: nor only to have made them strong to cure diseases, but also wounds,
and their symptoms, to wit, the Haemorrhage, the Sinonia (or sinew-water)
Convulsions, and the Epilepsie. But as in that age the use of these was
frequent, and the authority great; so by little and little the sophistications
of false Philosophers being increased, they have come into desuetude and
contempt, and other childish things have been substituted in their places. But
these Stones (because now the site and influx of the Heavens are plainly
otherwise than they were in times past) are no more so efficacious as they were
then, therefore it is convenient that they be prepared anew.

The Art Magic, because it was more secret, nor known to vulgar Philosophers,
both because it did ingenerate wonderful virtues, not only to Stones, but also
to such like words, begun to be called the prestigious Art by an odious term.
For men being unskilful of these things, who notwithstanding did usurp the
title of the Art unto themselves, addicted themselves unto artificious
operations, crosses and exorcisms: From thence the vulgar, being unskilful of
the Magical Art, have begun to attribute this virtue to exorcisms, characters,
short prayers, signacles, crosses, and to other frivolous things. But the
matter (he says) is quite otherwise: for the constellation under which the
stones and words are prepared, does induce the virtues, not exorcisms.

And being entered upon this particular, we shall add some things to this more
fully, as first this from the great Georgius Phaedro, who Chirur. Minor. p. 78.
says, after he had showed the great virtue of some Roots and Herbs in curing
wounds and ulcers: But a Characteristical cure is that, which exercises its
natural power by words pronounced, written or engraven, by the qualities
celestial and various influences of the Stars, being friendly to our bodies.
And to this does fully agree, what is written by Trallianus at large and
Augerius Ferrerius Explic. Astronom. p. 654.
in his Chapter de Homerica medicatione, whither I referr the Reader, and
conclude this explication with that sentence of Paracelsus: Praeterea syderibus
nota sunt omnia, quae in natura existunt. Unde (inquit) sapiens dominabitur
astris, is sapiens, qui virtutes illas ad sui obedientiam cogere potest.

3. What is here fully explicated as also what we have formerly in this
Treatise proved both by reasons, authorities and examples does Argum. 3.
sufficiently manifest the great power of Celestial Bodies upon inferior
matter, and that according to the aptitude and agreeableness of the matter
prepared, and the configuration of the Heavens at the time elected, the
powerful influence of the Stars and Planets is received into the subject,
according to the purpose it was intended for. So that from hence it will
clearly follow, that if fit and agreeable words or charactes be framed and
joined together, when the Heavens are in a convenient site and configuration
for the purpose intended, those words and characters will receive a most
powerful virtue, for the purpose intended, and will effectually operate to
those ends by a just, lawful and natural agency, without any concurrence of
Diabolical power, superstition or ceremonies, and this is that which was
labored to be proved.

4. Thomas Bartholinus that most learned. Physician, and experienced Argum. 4.
Anatomist (though his credit be labored to be eclipsed by Dr. Casaubon, who
is always more ready to ascribe power unto Histor. Cent 2. Histor. 78. p. 280.
Devils, the worst of Gods creatures, than either to God or Nature) does
(touching this point) asserts this: Notwithstanding (he says) that words
framed or shut up in a certain Rhythme, may without any superstition work some
such like thing as the curing of the Epilepsie. For first, the air is altered
by the various prolation of words, as well that air, which does enter into the
little pores of the vessels ending in the skin by transpiration, as that which
is carried into the Ears, Nostrils, and Lungs. 2. The state being different of
the words uttered, does impress a different force, which the unlike
constitution of the rough Artery; and of the rest of the instruments of speech,
whether that state be hot or cold, it impresseth a virtue, which does either
acuate or make grave. 3. The breath is heated by the various prolation of
words; which either alone, or bound up in the Rhythme does califie cold things,
and discusseth flatulencies. And these may have a great diversity in operation,
according as the air and breath, and the several kinds of Atoms in them, may
be ordered in their site; motion, and contexture, so that thereby the various
effects may be produced, without Cacodemons, or vain superstition.

5. And if we consider it seriously there is something more than Argum. 5:
ordinary in this place of Scripture. And it came to pass, that 1 Samuel 16. 14,
23.
when the evil spirit from God was upon Saul, that David took an harp, and
played with his hand: so Saul was refreshed, and was well, and the evil spirit
departed from him. Upon which learned Tremellius gives us this note: That evil
spirit, that is, those fantastical pangs, or that furious rage, which did
proceed from that evil spirit; did cease. So that it is manifest that it was
the natural efficacy of the melodious sound made by David's playing upon the
Harp, whereby the Atoms of the air were put into such a motion, site and
contexture that thereby they became repugnant and antipathetical to those
contrary Atoms, that were by the means of the evil spirit stirred up in the
sensitive Soul of Saul, by which he was terrified or tormented, and by
overcoming them* and dissipating of them, he came to be refreshed, and for a
time those effects wrought by that evil spirit ceased. So that the argument
lies plain thus: If the melody of tunes or sounds modulated upon an Harp, have
power to refresh the mind, and to cause the rage of an evil spirit to cease;
then may words rightly framed in agreeable Rhythmes, which are but modulated
tunes or sounds, ease sick persons, and remove diseases: But the former is true
by the testimony of this Scripture, and so also is the later. Neither is the
objection of Hieronymus Jordanus against this of any force at all, where he
says that the reason of sweet Harmony, and magical words, are De to quod
Divin. est in morbis. c. 52. p. 183.
very far different. But it had been suitable for him to have showed us,
wherein that difference does lie, and not to have put it off with such a
pitiful shuffle, as that it is obvious to Tyronists. This is (indeed) a shift
used by many, that when they are not able to solve the argument, they put it
off with some impertinent diversion, or pass by it with some ironical Sarcasm.
But I must tell him, that tunes and sounds, that are framed by art in the best
ways that can be devised, thereby by modulating of the air, to cause it to have
several effects upon the auditory organs, differ not at all from right framed
charms and characters, that by disposing the atoms of the air several ways, do
produce various effects; I say there is no difference, except that constellated
words may be more efficacious than Music* because they are by a most curious
and secret art, not only composed and joined together, but also are prepared at
such chosen and fit times, that the Heavens may more powerfully infuse their
virtues and influences into them, which is not observed in the composition of
tunes.

6. There is no one thing (if true, and that Kercherus and others Argum. 6.
have not told us abominable lies) that has more induced me to believe Vid.
Athan. Kercher. l. magnet. mus. p. 761. etc.
that there is some natural virtue in words and charms composed in a right way
or Rhythme, than because those that are stung, or bitten with the Tarantula or
Phalangium, are cured with Music, Et Monselt. insect. Theatr. p. 220.
and that not with any sort of Music, but with certain proper and peculiar
tunes, which are diversified according to the color of the Tarantula that gave
the venomous prick or bite, and so by dancing they sweat forth the poison. And
Kercherus further tells us not only that those that are stung with the
Tarantula are cured with Music, but that the Tarantula's themselves with
dance, when those tunes are modulated that are proportionable and agreeable to
their humors. Now if tunes modulated in proportionable and sympathizing ways
agreeable to the humors, do cure those that are stung, then much more may
words and charms rightly composed and joined together, and that in a due
selected time under a powerful constellation, produce such effects as to cure
diseases, and move animals to diverse and various motions; for betwixt the
prolation of words putting the Atoms of the air into a fit motion, site,
figure, and contexture suitable to perform the end intended, and the vibrating
and various figuring the air in its motion by musical tunes, there is no
difference at all in respect of the material or efficient cause, and so either
of them may produce like effects.

7. There is also an experiment that has been sufficiently tried Argum. 7.
and attested, which does much induce me to believe that there is efficacy in
words and charms above their significancy by imposition and institution, and
that is this. They take two Lutes rightly stringed and laid upon a long table,
and then they lay a light straw, chaff, or feather upon the Unison string of
the one, and then they strike, or move the Unison string of the other Lute,
that lies at the other end of the Table, by which motion of the Unison-string
at the one end of the Table, the straw, chaff or feather upon the Unison-string
of the Lute at the other end of the Table (though it be of the longest sort)
will by the vibration of the air be moved; or struck off, and yet it will not
do it, if the straw be laid upon any other string, and then the Unison of the
other Lute moved: By which it is manifest that the striking or moving the
Unison-string of the one Lute does so figurate and dispose the Atoms of the
Air, that they are fit and apt to move the Unison-string of the other Lute, and
so to make the straw fall off, as being of an agreeable mood and tempet for the
susception of the motion, which the rest of the other strings (being of
different degrees and nature) are not: for the maxim is true, Quicquid
recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis. And this being so, it must needs be
also granted that words and rhythms fitly joined and composed, being pronounced
do put the atoms of the air into such a site, motion, figure, and contexture;
that may at a distance operate upon the subject for which they are so fitted,
and produce such effects, as they were composed and intended for: especially
being framed under powerful and suitable constellations, from whence they
receive their greatest force.

8. The chiefest objection that is usually brought against the natural agency
of fitly composed words or rhythms is a maxim of the Argum. 8.
Schools, ill understood and worse applied, which is this: Quantitates rerum,
nullius sunt efficaciae: unto which we shall render these responsions.

1. If quantity be taken mathematically, and abstractly, then it is true, that
it is of no efficacy or operation, because it is then only ens rationis, and
does only exist in the intellect, and so can operate nothing ad extra. But if
it be taken concretely, physically; and as materiate, than it is of force, and
very operative, as two pound quantity of lend will weigh down one pound of the
same lead, and two ounces quantity of the same Gunpowder, will carry a bullet
of the same quantity further, and more forceably, than one ounce of the same
will do: And one scruple of white Hellebor may be taken, when a Dram will
kill, and a fire of a yard Diameter will warm a man at a greater distance than
a fire but of one foot diameter.

2. Figures, characters, words or speech are (indeed) properly no quantities:
For figures and characters are only delineations and circumscriptions of some
kind ofmatter, and are all, whether natural Vid. System. Harm. Log. Hen.
Alstedii. p. 251.
or artificial, properly contained under quality, and denoting what figure or
Form the thing is of. Figure therefore properly is attributed to artificial
things, as to a circle, a square, a triangle, and the like; and form to animate
things, as to a Man, an Horse, an Ox, and the like: And so characters whether
engraven in metals, gemms, stones, clay, plaster or wood, or written upon
parchment, paper, or the like, of what figure or form soever they be, are but
qualities, and do qualify the matter according to the form and figure
impressed in the subject matter, which being artificially done, the matter is
the patient, the figure or character is the exemplar cause, and the force that
makes the impression is the efficient cause, and that these as qualities have
some efficacy, no rational man can deny.

3. But to make it more clearly manifest, let us suppose three various figures
that are Isoperimetral, as a circle, a plain square, and an equilateral
triangle: Though they be all of equal circumference, yet shall the circle
contain more than either the square, or the triangle; and therefore learned
Ramus does lay down this rule. Circulus e planis Isoperimetris inaequalibus est
maximus. But when Geom. l. 19. p. 144.
the question is asked, what is the cause, why a circle of figures of equal
circumference, contains the most? The answer is commonly made, Quia omnium
figurarum perfectissimus, and capacissimus est circulus; but if it be again
urged, what is the cause, that a circle of an equal circumference to a plain
square, should be more capacious than the square? Here (the thing being found
true by ocular experience) the capaciousness of the circle, more than the
square (they being both of equal circumference) can be ascribed to nothing else
at all, but only to the figure, and therefore of necessity, sigures have in
them some efficiency.

4. That which we call speech, or oration, is considered three ways. 1. That
which is mental and only conceived in the mind, and not expressed. 2. That
which is expressed or uttered by the vocal organs. 3. And that which is
written. And these are called mental, vocal and written. The two, that is,
mental, and that which is written, are referred to the predicament of quality.
And whereas oration vocal is by some referred to the predicament of quantity,
as it is the measure of sounds and syllables, as it is pronounced, Vid. Logic.
System. Harmon. Alstedii. p. 249.
whereof some are made long, and some short; and so while distinct sounds and
syllables are uttered in a certain mood, they are said to be measured, and to
belong to quantity: But if we will understand aright, one thing in different
respects may belong both to the predicament of quantity and quality. So the
prolation of sounds or syllables in respect of their modification, and
comparing one to another, some may be long, and some may be short, and have a
different part of time in their pronunciation, and so may Analogically, and by
way of similitude, be said to be measured, and consequently referred to the
predicament of quantity. Yet if we consider speech or oration, which consists
of sounds and syllables, in relation to the efficient cause, the material and
instrumental, which is the breath of Man by his several organs, moving,
modulating and figuring the air (which is the subject matter) into diversity of
sites, motions, contextures and moods, then we must conclude that words, charms
or rhythms, having efficient, material and instrumental causes, do belong to
the predicament of Quality, and are of great force and virtue naturally,
notwithstanding all that is or can be objected to the contrary.

5. Lastly, we are to consider that the breath of Man being variously modulated
by its passage from the lungs, by the throat, palate, tongue, and other vocal
organs, does make such several impressions and configurations of the moved
atoms in the air, that thereby so great a diversity of impulses or sounds are
made upon the drum of the ear, that thereby naturally we are able to
distinguish one from another. Now humane institution found forth the ways of
making these several sounds, or tones, to be appropriated to such and such
things, or to signify the diversity of creatures and things, according to the
several compacts and agreements of Men amongst themselves, so that what one
sound does signify in one language, may signify another thing in another. So
that not considering the institution or invention of this or that significancy
of several sounds in several languages, every sound, or articulate prolation,
does naturally make a distinct and several impulse upon the ear, and thereby
the senses, and consequently the mind are variously affected by them. And
therefore the younger Helmont does give us an apposite passage, or two to this
purpose, Englished thus: For as in those of ripe years, certain musical
modulations Alphabet. Nature. p. 20:
being heard, do often so efficaciously imprint in the mind the Idea of the
voice and tones, that diverse do sensibly feel them for so long a time in
themselves, as it were yet sounding, that they cannot, when they would, be
freed from them: From whence also (he says) the word enchanting seems with
the Latins and Gauls to have drawn its original. So the Idea of our Mothers
tongue impressed in infants, does so long adhere there, that to them about to
speak afterward, it does as it were place, and order the tongue, and so is the
only one mistress of their speech. And again he says: If in times past there
were found those, who by the benefit of musical instruments could move and
mollify the Ibid. p. 52.
mind of Man various ways: How much more humane voice, if it being moderated by
prudence, do break forth from a living spirit, shall not only have power to
effect those things, but also those that are far greater?

Having thus far largely handled this point, we shall only recapitulate a few
things, and so conclude this Treatise.

1. It being granted, that great effects have been produced by words, charms,
rhythmes, and tunes, we have removed all diabolical concurrence to those
effects, except what may be mental and internal, as in all wicked persons, when
they use natural means to a wicked and evil end, and that (as we conceive) by
sufficient and convincing arguments: And especially because, where there is no
natural agent, there the Devil can operate nothing at all, and if there be a
natural agent, his concurrence is not necessary.

2. As for the force of imagination upon extraneous bodies, we cannot in reason
affirm it to be none at all, neither dare, or will we assert that its power (in
that respect) is so vastly great, as many do pretend.

3. And for what strange effects soever, that are true and real, that do follow
upon the use of words, charms, characters, rhythms, and the like, we do
confidently affirm, that they are effected by lawful and natural means, but
withal that of this sort in this age, few or none are found out that are
efficacious. But that error, credulity, ignorance and superstition do put great
force, and stress upon these things, when really they produce no effects at all.

The Alarm that the Pendle-forest Witches gave to all this Kingdom, that they
were sent for to London, great sums gotten at the Fleet to show them, and
public Plays acted thereupon; and the Original Examination coming lately to
the Authors hand, it is desired the Reader will after these words Page 277.
line 4. [and had encouragement by the adjoining Magistrates] peruse these
following Depositions, viz.

The Examination of Edmund Robinson Son of Edmund Robinson of Pendle-Forest
eleven years of age, taken at Padham before Richard Shutleworth and John
Starkey Esquires, two of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the County
of Lancaster, the 10th day of February, 1633.
WHO upon Oath informs, being examined concerning the great meeting of the
Witches of Pendle, says that upon All Saints-day last past, he this Informer
being with one Henry Parker a near door-neighbor to him in Wheatleylane,
desired the said Parker to give him leave to gather some Bulloes which he did;
In gathering whereof he saw two Gray-hounds, viz. a black and a brown; o^e came
running over the next field toward him, he verily thinking the one of them to
be Mr. Nutters, and the other to be Mr. Robinsons, the said Gentlemen then
having such like. And says, the said Grayhounds came to him; and fawned on
him, they having about their necks either of them a Collar, unto each of which
was tied a string: which Collars (as this Informer affirms) did shine like
Gold. And he thinking that some either of Mr. Nutters or Mr. Robinsons Family
should have followed them; yet seeing no body to follow them, he took the same
Gray-hounds thinking to course with them. And presently a Hare did rise very
near before him. At the sight whereof he cried, Loo, Loo, Loo: but the Dogs
would not run. Whereupon he being very angry took them, and with the strings
that were about their Collars, tied them to a little bush at the next hedge,
and with a switch that he had in his hand he beat them. And in stead of the
black Grayhound one Dickensons Wife stood up, a Neighbor whom this Informer
knows. And instead of the brown one a little Boy, whom this Informer knows
not. At which sight this Informer being afraid, endeavored to run away: but
being stayed by the Woman (viz.) by Dickensons Wife, she put her hand into her
pocket, and pulled forth a piece of Silver much like to a fair shilling, and
offered to give him it to hold his tongue and not to tell: which he refused,
saying, Nay thou art a Witch. Whereupon she put her hand into her pocket again,
and pulled out a thing like unto a Bridle that gingled, which she put on the
little Boys head: which said Boy stood up in the likeness of a white Horse,
and in the brown Grayhounds stead. Then immediately Dickensons Wife took this
Inormer before her upon the said Horse and carried him to a new house called
Hoarstones being about a quarter of a mile off. Whither when they were come,
there were diverse persons about the door, and he saw diverse others riding on
Horses of several colors toward the said House, who tied their Horses to a
hedge near to the said House. Which persons went into the said House, to the
number of threescore or thereabouts, as this Informer thinks, where they had
a fire, and meat roasting in the said House, whereof a young Woman (whom this
Informer knows not) gave him Flesh and Bread upon a Trencher and Drink in a
Glass, which after the first taste he refused and would have no more, but said,
it was naught.

And presently after, seeing diverse of the said company going into a Barn near
adjoining, he followed after them, and there he saw six of them kneeling, and
pulling all six of them six several ropes, which were fastened or tied to the
top of the Barn. Presently after which pulling, there came into this Informers
sight flesh smoking, butter in lumps, and milk as it were flying from the said
ropos. All which fell into basins which were placed under the said ropes. And
after that these six had done, there came other six which did so likewise. And
during all the time of their several pulling they made such ugly faces as
scared this Informer, so that he was glad to run out and steal homewards: who
immediately finding they wanted one that was in their company, some of them ran
after him near to a place in a Highway called Boggard-hole, where he this
Informer met two Horsemen. At the sight whereof the said persons left following
of him. But the foremost of those persons that followed him, he knew to be one
Loind's Wife: which said Wife together with one Dickensons Wife, and one Jennet
Davies he has seen since at several times in a Croft or Close adjoining to his
Fathers house, which put him in great fear. And further this Informer says,
upon Thursday after Newyears day last past, he saw the said Loind's Wife
sitting upon a cross piece of wood being within the Chimney of his Fathers
dwelling house: and he calling to her, said Come down thou Loynd's Wife. And
immediately the said Loynd's Wife went up out of his sight. And further this
Informer says, that after he was come from the company aforesaid to his
Fathers house, being toward evening, his Father bad him go and fetch home two
Kine to seal. And in the way in a field called the Ellers, he chanced to hap
upon a Boy, who began to quarrel with him, and they fought together, till the
Informer had his ears and face made up very bloody by fighting, and looking
down he saw the Boy had a cloven foot. At which sight he being greatly
affrighted, came away from him to seek the Kine. And in the way he saw a light
like to a Lanthorn toward which he made haste, supposing it to be carried by
some of Mr. Robinsons people; but when he came to the place, he only found a
Woman standing on a Bridge, whom when he saw he knew her to be Loind's Wife,
and knowing her he turned back again: and immediately he met with the aforesaid
Boy, from whom he offered to run, which Boy gave him a blow on the back that
made him to cry: And further this Informer says, that when he was in the Barn,
he saw three Women take six Pictures from off the beam, in which Pictures were
many Thorns or such like things sticked in them, and that Loynd's Wife took one
of the Pictures down; but the other two Women that took down the rest he
knows not. And being further asked what persons were at the aforesaid
meeting, he nominated these persons following, viz. Dickensons Wife, Henry
Priestleys Wife, and his Lad, Alice Hargreene Widow, Jane Davies, William
Davies, and the Wife of Henry Fackes, and her Sons John and Miles, the Wife of
Denneries, James Hargreene of Marsdead, Loynd's Wife, one James his Wife,
Saunders his Wife, and Saunders himself sicut credit, one Laurence his Wife,
one Saunder Pyn's Wife of Barraford; one Holgate and his Wife of Leonards of
the West close.

Edmund Robinson of Pendle Father of the aforesaid Edmund Robinson Mason
informs,
THAT upon All Saints day last he sent his Son the aforesaid Informer to fetch
home two Kine to seal, and says that his Son staying longer than he thought he
should have done, he went to seek him, and in seeking of him heard him cry
pitifully, and found him so affrighted and distracted, that he neither knew his
Father, nor did know where he was, and so continued very near a quarter of an
hour before he came to himself. And he told this Informer his Father all the
particular passages that are before declared in the said Robinson his Sons
information.

Richard Shutleworth;
John Starkey.

FINIS.
The Printer desires the Reader to excuse some literal faults, as Nandeus for
Naudeus, Libanius for Libavius, and the like, the Author writing a very small
hand, and living at great distance that his perusal could not be gotten.


