The Weavers Answer, To the OBJECTIONS made by the LUSTRINGS COMPANY.
Clowdesly, Sherrad, and du Cloux, as first Makers of Alamodes and Lustrings in
England, had the sole making and vending thereof as a new, Invention by Letters
Pattents.

Silks were made in England, Time out of mind, fit for Hoods and Scarves, tho
not then known by the Name of Alamodes and Lustrings: And in the Year 1663
several Pieces of Alamodes and Lustrings were made by some Weavers; and others
made the same about 1670, and in 1684. All before any Patent obtained for the
same as a new Invention: And they had their Silks well dressed, as they can
give undeniable Evidence of; so that by the Satute of Monopoly 21st. Jac. 1.
Cap. 23. they ought not to be debarred of their Right.

Alamodes and Lustrings were made in small Quantities, and not in Perfection,
so that they were forced to leave off the Making.

Lustrings Company made any.

The Cause why the Weavers left off making them was, the great Importation of
French Goods, and for the same Reason the Patentees did forbear to make
Alamodes and Lustrings also. After the Prohibition of French Goods, Weavers, as
well as the Lustrings Company fell to work, and the Lustrings Company did not
molest any Weaver until under the Umbrage of the Act of Tunnage and Poundage,
the Lustrings Company in 1694 caused many Pieces to be seized, as being French
Goods; but upon Affidavit, that they were made in England, they were restored
to the Owners, who sold the same without any Interruption. And after that the
Weavers were not molested, until a Clause was Inserted in the Coal Act for the
Prohibition of French Goods to be Imported; whereby the Lustrings Company have
the Sealing and Marking Alamodes and Lustrings, made by them in England, and
gives not the Lustrings Company any Power to Mark or Seal the Weaver's Goods;
wherefore refusing to Mark and Seal the Weaver's Alamodes and Lustrings made in
England, they are deprived of their Rights and Liberties.

Lustring Company has 600 Looms at work, and imploys several Weavers.

Alamodes and Lustrings imported yearly from France into England; and the
Lustrings Company has made but Nine Thousand in Four years space, which makes
not 3000 Pieces a year: Now, in case the Weavers were encouraged, they being
above 10000, can set, many of them, 20. 30. or 50. Looms at Work, and so supply
England.

The Governors of the Weavers Company have given away their Rights.

Alamodes and Lustrings; but being Governors only, pro hac vice, and Trustees
for their Members, they cannot give away their Members Rights: And at a
Common Hall held the 28 th. of Januray last past, it was asserted to be the
Right of the Weavers to make Lustrings and Alamodes. by Majority of about 150.
to only Five for the Lustrings Company.

Lustrings Company offers to take all Weavers into their Company that will
contribute to their joint Stock.



Lustrings Company exchanges great Quantities of Cloth, monufactured in
England, for raw Silk; and the same cannot be carried on without a joint Stock
to destroy the Trade of Lion.

Lion they have no joint Stock, but every Weaver is at liberty to buy and sell
at pleasure. The more Weavers sell Alamodes and Lustrings, the greater
Consumption of Silks, and consequently the Manufactury of Cloth will increase
as the Manufactory of Alamodes and Lustrings increases. So that prohibiting the
Weavers to work for themselves, is to discourage English Weavers, and encourage
the Weavers of Lion.

Now, for as much as the Intent of the Clause is to Prohibit only French Goods,
The Weavers propose to have all their Lustrings and Alamodes Marked and Sealed
by the Lustrings Company, at the Weavers own Cost and Charge, in the Warp
before cut off the Loom, and the Mark to be cut off, indented in nature of a
Tally, whereof one Part to be kept by such as shall be appointed to Mark and
Seal their Goods, to direct to the Piece and the Man who made it, and the other
to go along with the Piece of Silk, to prevent and detect Smugling.

All which is humbly Submited.


