PROPOSALS Humbly offered to the Honorable the Commons of England Assembled in
Parliament, prepared the three Sessions last past, and now again presented by
William Way, with Five others, well experienced in the Trade hereafter
mentioned, who were the first Proposers of this Matter; for the raising of near
Two Millions, per Ann. on the Woollen Manufacture used in this Kingdom, and in
the Dominion of Wales, and about One Million on the Stock in hand, as a present
Supply to carry on the War against France, which will not prejudice, but rather
advance our Trade both Foreign and Domestic.
The following Methods being observed, viz.
1. A Strict Prohibition of the Exportation of White Clothes, will very much
improve our Trade both at Home and Abroad, it being well known that there has
been yearly transported by Bays, Northern Kersies, etc. above 200000 Clothes,
or Pieces, which has been carried to the Netherlands. and there Dressed, Dyed
and Shipped to Spain, Portugal, etc. So it is obvious, were they Dressed and
Dyed at Home, a mighty Advantage would accrue to the Merchants in Importing,
Buying and Selling of Dye-Stuff, and to the Subjects in general, in preparing
such materials, Dying, Fulling and Packing, etc. To prove that an Imposition on
the Woolen Manufacture will not be Grievous but Advantageous, it is well known
in Trade, that a Rise on a Commodity is an Advantage to the Retayler.

2. By having of our Clothes, Stuffs, Stockins, Hats, etc. carefully Sealed by
Officers appointed for that purpose, with a Distinction between the Right Good
and what is Defective, laying a severe Penalty on any Officer that neglects his
Duty, will give great Reputation to the Manufactory abroad, as well as a
general Advantage to the Subjects at Home.

A Rebate, or Draw-back, may be made out of the Custom-House to part, or the
whole paid on the Account of this Imposition, as it shall seem meet to your
Honors, by which means the Merchants may sell his Goods in any Foreign parts,
as if the Imposition was not laid, and to a greater Reputation, the Goods being
as before Examined, so that the Tax will only lie at Home.

That all Drapers, Cloathiers, Factors, Hosiers, Hatters, etc. pay the Duty
imposed within (...) weeks after an Account taken of all the present stock of
Goods they have Ready-made, they cannot put a stop to the present Trade, which
otherwise they may do to their own private Advantage, this will raise his
Majesty a great Sum of Ready-money for his present Occasion; and this will be
no more Loss to the Draper, Clothier, Hosier, Hatter, etc. than the sealed
Paper is to the Lawyers and Attorneys who are paid by their Clients. We find in
the last Sessions of Parliament, that there was a Motion made touching this
Imposition, but nothing coming to perfection (as we have been informed) for
want of Particulars how to lay it, and how to gather the Tax; but we have for
above these three Years last past been industrious to settle this point, some
of the Honourble Members of Parliament having had some of our Particulars so
long, and some since, as also some have fallen into Men's hands that have set up
to be the first Contrivers, which know little of it. Therefore we think fit to
inform your Honors, that we know the true use of the Wool to the best
Advantage, from the Sheeps back, to the Clothier, Merchant and Retaler's hands,
but are very unwilling to publish our Method for the use of other pretenders;
but are ready to show the Particulars where to lay it, and how to gather it,
for the best Advantage for the King and Subjects, when this Honorable House
shall command us so to do, as likewise to Answer all manner of Objections.


