A SHORT STORY Of the Rise, Reign, and Ruin of the Antinomians, Familists, and
Libertines That Infected the CHURCHES Of New England: And how they were
Confuted by The Assembly of Ministers there: As also of the Magistrates
proceedings in Court against them. Together with God's strange Remarkable
Judgments from Heaven upon some of the Chief Fomenters of these Opinions; And
the Lamentable Death of Mrs. Hutchison. Very fit for these Times; here being
the same Errors amongst us, and Acted by the same Spirit. Published at the
Instant Request of Sundry, by one that was an Eye and Ear-witness of the
carriage of Matters there.

Ephesians. 4. 14. Be no more Children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with
every wind of Doctrine, by the slight of Men, and cunning craftiness, whereby
they lie in wait to deceive.

Beware, lest ye being led away with the error of the Wicked, re fall from your
own stedfastness,

2 Pet. 3. 17. London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three
Crowns at the lower end of Cheapside, near Mercer's Chapel, 1692

To the Reader.
I Meeting with this Book, newly come forth of the Press, and being earnestly
pressed by diverse to perfect it, by laying down the Order and Sense of this
Story, (which in the Book is omitted) Though for mine own part, I was more slow
unto it; (not as if I think it contains any thing but Truth; but) because the
Names of some parties, that acted in our Troubles, that have, since that time,
(I hope) repented, and so God having pardoned their Sins in Heaven, I should
have been loath to have revived them on Earth; But considering that their Names
are already in Print without any act of mine, and that the necessity of the
times call for it, and it is requisite that Gods great Works should be made
known; I therefore, in a strait of time, (not having had many hours,) have
drawn up this following Preface, and prefixed hereunto, with some Additions to
the Conclusion of the Book. I commend thy self and this to the Blessing of God.

T. W.

The PREFACE.
AFter we had escaped the cruel hands of persecuting Prelates, and the dangers
at Sea, and had pretty well out-grown our Wilderness Troubles in our first
Plantings in New England; And when our Commonwealth began to be founded, and
our Churches sweetly settled in Peace, (God abounding to us in more happy
enjoyments then we could have expected:) Lest we should now grow secure, our
wise God (who seldom suffers his own, in this their wearisome Pilgrimage, to be
long without trouble) sent a new Storm after us, which proved the forest trial
that ever befell us since we left our Native Soil.

Which was this, that some going thither from hence, full fraught with many
unsound and loose Opinions, after a time, began to open their Packs, and freely
vent their Wares to any that would be their Customers; Multitudes of Men and
Women, Church Members and others, having tasted of their Commodities, were
eager after them, and were straight infected before they were aware, and some
being tainted conveyed the Infection to others: and thus that Plague first
began amongst us, that had not the wisdom and faithfulness of him, that
watches over his Vineyard night and day, by the beams of his Light and Grace,
cleared and purged the Air, certainly we had not been able to have breathed
there comfortably much longer.

Our discourse of them shall tend to show,

1. What these Opinions were. 2. How they spread so fast, and prevailed so
suddenly. 3. How they did rage and reign when they had once gotten head. 4. How
they fell and were ruined, when they were at highest.
The Opinions, (some of them) were such as these; I say, some of them, to give
but a taste, for afterward you shall see a litter of Fourscore and eleven of
their brats hung up against the Sun, besides many new ones of Mistress
Hutchinsons; all which they hatched and dandled; As,

1. That the Law, and the Preaching of it, is of no use at all, to drive a Man
to Christ. 2. That a Man is united to Christ, and justified without faith: yea,
from eternity. 3. That Faith is not a receiving of Christ, but a Man's
discerning that he has received him already. 4. That a Man is united to Christ
only by the work of the Spirit upon him, without any act of his. 5. That a Man
is never effectually Christ's, till he has assurance. 6. This assurance is
only from the witness of the Spirit. 7. This witness of the Spirit is merely
immediate, without any respect to the word, or any concurrence with it. 8. When
a Man has once this witness, he never doubts more. 9. To question my
assurance, though I fall into Murder or Adultery, proves that I never had true
assurance. 10. Sanctification can be no evidence of a Man's good Estate. 11. No
comfort can he had from any conditional Promise. 12. Poverty in Spirit (to
which Christ pronounces blessedness, Mat. 5. 3.) is only this, to see I have
no grace at all. 13. To see I have no grace in me, will give me comfort; but to
take comfort from sight of grace, is legal. 14. An hypocrite may have Adam's
graces that he had in Innocence. 15. The graces of Saints and Hypocrites differ
not. 16. All graces are in Christ, as in the Subject, and none in us, so that
Christ believes, Christ loves, etc. 17. Christ is the New Creature. 18. God
loves a Man never the better for any holiness in him, and nevertheless, be he
never so unholy. 19. Sin in a Child of God must never trouble him. 20. Trouble
in Conscience for sins of Commission, or for neglect of duties, shows a Man to
be under a Covenant of Works. 21. All Covenants to God expressed in works are
legal works. 22. A Christian is not bound to the Law as a rule of his
conversation. 23. A Christian is not bound to Pray except the Spirit moves him.
24. A Minister that has not this (new) light, is not able to edify others
that have it. 25. The whole letter of the Scripture is a Covenant of works. 26.
No Christian must be pressed to duties of holiness. 27. No Christian must be
exhorted to faith, love, and prayer, etc. except we know he has the Spirit.
28. A Man may have all graces, and yet want Christ. 29. All a Believer's
activity is only to act sin.
Now these, most of them, being so gross, one would wonder how they should
spread so fast and suddenly amongst a people so religious and well taught.

For declaring of this be pleased to attend two things.

1. The nature of the Opinions themselves, which open such a fair and easy way
to Heaven, that men may pass without difficulty. For, if a man need not be
troubled by the Law, before Faith, but may step to Christ so easily; and then
if his faith be no going out of himself to take Christ, but only a discerning
that Christ is his own already, and is only an act of the Spirit upon him, no
act of his own done by him; and if he, for his part, must see nothing in
himself, have nothing, do nothing, only he is to stand still and wait for
Christ to do all for him. and then if after faith, the Law no rule to walk by,
no Sorrow or Repentance for sin; he must not be pressed to duties, and need
never pray, unless moved by the Spirit: And if he falls into sin, he is never
the more disliked of God, nor his condition never the worse. And for his
assurance, it being given him by the Spirit, he must never let it go, but abide
in the height of comfort, though he falls into the grossest sins that he can.
Then their way to life was made easy, if so, no marvel so many like of it.

And this is the very reason, besides the novelty of it, that this kind of
Doctrine takes so well here in London, and other parts of the Kingdom, and that
you see so many dance after this pipe, running after such and such, crowding
the Churches and filling the doors and windows, even such carnal and vile
persons (many of them) as care not to hear any other godly Ministers, but only
their Leaders. Oh it pleases nature well to have Heaven and their lusts too.

2. Consider their slights they used in somenting their Opinions, some of which
I will set down: as

I. They labored much to acquaint themselves with as many, as possibly they
could, that so they might have the better opportunity to communicate their new
light unto them.

II. Being once acquainted with them, they would strangely labor to insinuate
themselves into their affections, by loving salutes, humble carriage, kind
invitements, friendly visits, and so they would win upon men, and steal into
their bosoms before they were aware. Yea, as soon as any new-comers (especially,
men of note, worth and activity, fit instruments to advance their design) were
landed, they would be sure to welcome them, show them all courtesy, and offer
them room in their own houses, or of some of their own Sect, and having gotten
them into their Web, they could easily poison them by degrees; It was rare for
any man thus hooked in, to escape their Leaven.

III. (Because such men as would seduce others, had need be some way eminent)
they would appear very humble, holy, and spiritual Christians, and full of
Christ; they would deny themselves far, speak excellently, pray with such
soul-ravishing expressions and affections, that a stranger that loved goodness,
could not but love and admire them, and so be the more easily drawn after them;
looking upon them as men and women as likely to know the secrets of Christ, and
bosom-counsels of his Spirits, as any other.

And this Opinion of them was the more lifted up through the simplicity and
weakness of their followers, who would, in admiration of them, tell others,
that since the Apostles time, they were persuaded, none ever received so much
light from God, as such and such had done, naming their Leaders.

4. As they would lift up themselves, so also their Opinions, by guilding them
over with specious terms of Free Grace, Glorious-light, Gospel Truths, as
holding forth naked Christ: and this took much with simple honest hearts that
loved Christ, especiaily with new converts, who were lately in bondage under
sin and wrath, and had newly tasted the sweetness of free grace; being now in
their first love to Christ, they were exceeding glad to embrace any thing, that
might further advance Christ and free grace; and so drank them in readily.

5. If they met with Christians that were full of doubts and fears about their
conditions, (as many tender and godly hearts there were) they would tell them
they had never taken a right course for comfort, but had gone on (as they were
led) in a legal way of evidencing their good estate by Sanctification, and
gazing after qualifications in themselves, and would show them from their own
experience, that themselves for a long time, were befooled even as they are
now, in poring upon graces in themselves, and while they did so they never
prospered; but were driven to pull all that building down, and lay better and
safer foundations in free grace; and then would tell them of this Gospel-way we
speak of, how they might come to such a settled peace that they might never
doubt more, though they should see no grace at all in themselves: and so (as it
is said of the Harlots dealing with the young man, Pr. 7. 21.) with much fair
speech they caused them to yield, with the flattering of their lips they forced
them.

6. They commonly labored to work first upon women, being (as they conceived)
the weaker to resist; the more flexible, tender, and ready to yield: and if
once they could wind in them, they hoped by them, as by an Eve, to catch their
Husbands also, which indeed often proved too true amongst us there.

7. As soon as they had thus wrought in themselves, and a good conceit of their
Opinions, by all these ways of subtilty, into the hearts of people; nextly,
they strongly endeavored with all the craft they could, to undermine the good
Opinion of their Ministers, and their Doctrine, and to work them clean out of
their affections, telling them they were sorry that their Teachers had so
mis-bed them, and trained them up under a Covenant of works, and that
themselves never having been taught of God, it is no wonder they did no better
teach them the Truth, and how they may sit till doomsday under their legal
Sermons, and never see light; and withal sometimes casting aspersions on their
persons, and practice, as well as their doctrine, to bring them quite out of
esteem with them. And this they did so effectually, that many declined the
hearing of them, though they were members of their Churches, and others that did
hear, were so filled with prejudice that they profited not, but studied how to
object against them, and censure their doctrine, which (whilst they stood
right) were wont to make their hearts to melt and tremble.

Yea, some that had been begotten to Christ by some of their faithful labors
in this Land, for whom they could have laid down their lives, and not being
able to bear their absence, followed after them thither to New England, to
enjoy their labors; yet these falling acquainted with those Seducers, were
suddenly so altered in their affections toward those their spiritual Fathers,
that they would neither hear them, nor willingly come in their company,
professing they had never received any good from them.

8. They would not, till they knew men well, open the whole mystery of their
new Religion to them, but this was ever their method, to drop a little at once
into their followers as they were capable, and never would administer their
Physic. till they had first given good preparatives to make it work, and then
stronger and stronger potions, as they found the patient able to bear.

9. They would in company now and then let fall some of their most plausible
errors, as a bait let down to catch withal; now if any began to nibble at the
bait, they would angle still, and never give over till they had caught them;
but if any should espy the naked hook, and so see their danger, and profess
against the Opinions, then you should have them fairly retreat, and say, Nay,
mistake me not, for I do mean even as you do, you and I are both of one mind in
substance, and differ only in words: By this kind of Iesuitical dealing, they
did not only keep their credit with them, as men that held nothing but the
truth; but gained this also, viz. that when afterward, they should hear men
taxed for holding errors, they would be ready to defend them, and say, (out of
their simplicity of heart) Such men hold nothing but truth, for I my self
judged of them, as you do, but when I heard them explain themselves, they and I
were both one: By this Machivilian policy, these deluders wrere reputed sound
in their judgments, and so were able to do the more hurt, and were longer
undetected.

10. What men they saw eminent in the Country, and of most Esteem in the Hearts
of the people, they would be sure still, to father their Opinions upon them,
and say, I hold nothing but what I had from such and such a man, whereas their
Judgments and Expressions also were in truth far differing from theirs upon
point of trial, but if it came to pass, that they were brought face to face to
make it good, (as sometimes they have been) they would wind out with some
evasion or other, or else say, I understood him so: for it was so frequent with
them to have many dark shadows and colors to cover their Opinions and
Expressions withal, that it was a wonderful hard matter to take them tardy, or
to know the bottom of what they said or sealed.

11. But the last and worst of all, which most suddenly diffused the Venom of
these Opinions into the very Veins and Vitals of the People in the Country, was
Mistress Hutchinsons double weekly lecture, which she kept under a pretense of
repeating Sermons, to which resorted sundry of Boston, and other Towns about,
to the number of fifty, sixty, or eighty at once; where after she had repeated
the Sermon, she would make her comment upon it, vent her mischievous Opinions
as she pleased, and wreathed the Scriptures to her own purpose; where the
custom was for her Scholars to propound questions, and she (gravely sitting in
the chair) did make answers thereunto. The great respect she had at first in
the hearts of all, and her profitable and sober carriage of matters, for a
time, made this her practice less suspected by the godly magistrates, and
Elders of the Church there, so that it was winked at for a time, (though
afterward reproved by the Assembly, and called into Court but it held so long,
until she had spread her leaven so far, that had not providence prevented, it
had proved the Canker of our Peace, and ruin of our Comforts.

By all these means and cunning slights they used, it came about that those
Errors were so soon conveyed, before we were aware, not only into the Church of
Boston, where most of these seducers lived, but also into almost all the parts
of the Country round about.

These Opinions being thus spread, and grown to their full ripeness and
latitude, through the nimbleness and activity of their fomenters, began now to
lift up their heads full high, to stare us in the face, and to confront all
that opposed them.

And that which added vigor and boldness to them was this, that now by this
time they had some of all sorts, and quality, in all places to defend and
Patronise them; some of the Magistrates, some Gentlemen, some Scholars, and Men
of Learning, some Burgesses of our General Court, some of our Captains and
Soldiers, some chief Men in Towns, and some Men eminent for Religion, Parts,
and Wit. So that wheresoever the case of the Opinions came in agitation, there
wanted not Patrons to stand up to plead for them, and if any of the Opinionists
were complained of in the Courts for their Misdemeanors, or brought before the
Churches for Conviction or Censure, still, some or other of that party would
not only suspend, giving their Vote against them, but would labor to justify
them, side with them, and protest against any Sentence that should pass upon
them, and so be ready, not only to harden the Delinquent against all means of
conviction, but to raise a Mutiny, if the major part should carry it against
them; So in Town-meetings, Military-trainings, and all other Societies, yea,
almost in every Family, it was hard, if that some or other were not ready to
rise up in defense of them, even as of the apple of their own eye.

Now, oh their boldness, pride, insolency, alienations from their old and
dearest Friends, the disturbances, divisions, contentions they raised amongst
us, both in Church and State, and in Families, setting Division betwixt Husband
and Wife!

Oh the sore Censures against all sorts that opposed them, and the contempt
they cast upon our godly Magistrates, Churches, Ministers, and all that were
set over them, when they stood in their way!

Now the faithful Ministers of Christ must have dung cast on their faces, and
be no better than legal Preachers, Baal's-Priests, Popish Factors, Scribes,
Pharisees, and Opposers of Christ himself.

Now they must be pointed at, as it were with the finger, and reproached by
name, Such a Church Officer is an ignorant Man, and knows not Christ; such an
one is under a Covenant of Works; such a Pastor is a Proud Man, and would make
a good Persecuter; such a Teacher is grossly Popish; so that through these
reproaches, occasion was given to Men to abhor the Offerings of the Lord.

Now, one of them in a Solemn Convention of Ministers, dared to say to their
Faces, that they did not Preach the Covenant of Free Grace, and that they
themselves had not the Seal of the Spirit, etc.

Now, after our Sermons were ended at our public Lectures, you might have seen
half a dozen Pistols discharged at the face of the Preacher, (I mean) so many
objections made by the Opinionists in the open Assembly against our Doctrine
delivered if it suited not their new fancies, to the mavelous weakening of
holy truths delivered, (what in them lay) in the hearts of all the weaker sort;
and this done not once and away, but from day to day after our Sermons; yea,
they would come when they heard a Minister was upon such a Point, as was like
to strike at their Opinions, with a purpose to oppose him to his face.

Now, you might have seen many of the Opinionists rising up, and contemptuously
turning their backs upon the faithful Pastors of that Church, and going forth
from the Assembly when he began to Pray or Preach.

Now, you might have read Epistles of defiance and challenge, written to some
Ministers after their Sermons, to cross and contradict truths by them
delivered, and to maintain their own way.

Now, might one have frequently heard, both in Court and Church-meetings where
they were dealt withal, about their opinions, and exorbitant carriages, such
bold and menacing expressions as these.

This I hold, and will hold to my death, and will maintain it with my blood.
And if I cannot be heard here, I must be forced to take some other course.

They said moreover what they would do against us (biting their words in) when
such and such opportunities should be offered to them, as they daily expected.
Insomuch that we had great cause to have feared the extremity of danger from
them, in case power had been in their hands.

Now, you might have heard one of them Preaching a most dangerous Sermon in a
great Assembly; when he divided the whole Country into two ranks, some (that
were of his opinion) under a Covenant of Grace, and those were friends to
Christ; others under a Covenant of Works, whom they might know by this, if they
evidence their good estate by their Sanctification: those were (said he)
enemies to Christ, Herod's, Pilates, Scribes and Pharisees, yea, Antichrists;
and advised all under a Covenant of Grace, to look upon them as such, and did,
with great zeal, stimulate them to deal with them as they would with such: And
withal alleging the Story of Moses that killed the Egyptian, barely left it
so: I mention not this or any thing, in the least degree, to reflect upon this
Man, or any other; for God has long since opened his eyes (I hope) But to show
what racket these opinions did make there, and will any where else where they
get an head.

Now, might you have seen open contempt cast upon the face of the whole general
Court in subtle words to this very effect. That the Magistrates were Ahabs,
Amaziahs, Scribes and Pharisees, Enemies to Christ, led by Satan, that old
Enemy of Free Grace, and that it were better that a Millstone were hung about
their necks, and they were drowned in the Sea, than they should censure one of
their Judgment, which they were now about to do.

Another of them you might have seen so audaciously insolent, and highflown in
Spirit and Speech, that she bad the Court of Magistrates (when they were about
to censure her for her pernicious carriages) Take heed what they did to her,
for she knew by an infallible revelation, that for this act which they were
about to pass against her, God would ruin them, their Posterity, and that whole
Commonwealth.

By a little taste of a few passages instead of multitudes here presented, you
may see what an height they were grown unto, in a short time; and what a
spirit of Pride, Insolency, contempt of Authority, Division, Sedition, they
were acted by: It was a wonder of mercy that they had not set our Commonwealth
and Churches on a fire and consumed us all therein.

They being mounted to this height, and carried with such a strong hand (as
you have heard,) and seeing a spirit of Pride, Subtilty, Malice, and Contempt
of all men, that were not of their minds, breathing in them (our hearts sadded,
and our spirits tired) we sighed and groaned to Heaven, we humbled our Souls by
Prayer and Fasting that the Lord would find out and bless some means and ways
for the cure of this sore, and deliver his Truth and our selves from this heavy
bondage. Which (when his own time was come) he hearkened unto, and in infinite
Mercy looked upon our Sorrows, and did in a wonderful manner, beyond all
Expectation free us by these means following.

1. He stirred up all the Ministers Spirits in the Country to preach against
those Errors and Practices, that so much pestered the Country, to inform, to
confute, to rebuke, etc. thereby to cure those that were diseased already, and
to give Antidotes to the rest, to preserve them from infection. And though this
Ordinance went not without its appointed effect, in the latter respect, yet we
found it not so effectual for the driving away of this infection, as we
desired, for they (most of them) hardened their faces, and bent their wits how
to oppose, and confirm themselves in their way.

2. We spent much Time and Strength in conference with them, sometimes in
private before the Elders only, sometimes in our public Congregation for all
comers; many, very many hours and half days together we spent therein to see if
any means might prevail; we gave them free leave, with all lenity and patience,
to lay down what they could say for their Opinions, and answered them, from
point to point, and then brought clear arguments from evident Scriptures
against them, and put them to answer us even until they were oftentimes brought
to be either silent, or driven to deny common Principles, or shuffle off plain
Scripture; and yet (such was their pride and hardness of heart that) they would
not yield to the Truth, but did tell us they would take time to consider of our
Arguments, and in the mean space meeting with some of their Abetters,
strengthened themselves again in their old way, that when we dealt with them
next time, we found them further off than before, so that our hopes began to
languish of reducing them by private means.

3. Then we had an Assembly of all the Ministers and learned Men in the whole
Country, which held for three weeks together at Cambridge (then called
New-Town) Mr. Hooker, and Mr. Bulkley (alias Buckley) being chosen Moderators,
or Prolocutors, the Magistrates sitting present all that time, as hearers, and
speakers also when they saw fit: a liberty also was given to any of the Country
to come in and hear, (it being appointed, in great part, for the satisfaction
of the people) and a place was appointed for all the Opinionists to come in,
and take liberty of Speech, (only due order observed) as much as any of our
selves had, and as freely.

The first week we spent in confuting the loose Opinions that we gathered up in
the Country, the sum of which is set down, page 1. etc. The other fortnight we
spent in a plain Syllogistical Dispute, (ad vulgus as much as might be)
gathered up nine of the chiefest Points, (on which the rest depended) and
disputed of them all in order, pro and con. In the forenoons we framed our
arguments, and in the afternoons produced them in public and next day the
Adversary gave in their Answers, and produced also their arguments on the same
questions; then we answered them, and replied also upon them the next day.
These Disputes are not mentioned at all in the following Discourse, happily,
because of the swelling of the book. God was much present with his Servants,
Truth began to get ground, and the adverse party to be at a stand, but after
discourse amongst themselves, still they hardened one another, yet the work of
the Assembly (through Gods blessing) gained much on the hearers, that were
indifferent, to strengthen them, and on many wavering, to settle them: the
Error of the Opinions and wilfulness of their Maintainer's, laid stark naked.

4. Then after this mean was tried, and the Magistrates saw that neither our
Preaching, Conference, nor yet our Assembly meeting did effect the cure, but
that, still, after conference had together, the Leaders put such life into the
rest, that they all went on in their former course, not only to disturb the
Churches, but miserably interrupt the Civil Peace, and that they threw contempt
both upon Courts and Churches, and began now to raise Sedition amongst us, to
the indangering of the Commonwealth; Hereupon for these grounds named, (and
not for their Opinions, as themselves falsely reported, and as our godly
Magistrates have been much traduced here in England) for these reasons (I say)
being civil disturbances, the Magistrate convents them, (as it plainly appears,
page 28, 29. of this Book) and censures them; some were disfranchised, others
fined, the incurable amongst them banished.

This was another mean of their subduing some of the Leaders being down, and
others gone, the rest were weakened, but yet they (for all this) strongly held
up their heads many a day after.

5. Then God himself was pleased to step in with his casting voice, and bring
in his own vote and suffrage from Heaven by testifying his displeasure against
their opinions and practices, as clearly as if he had pointed with his finger,
in causing the two Fomenting Women in the time of the height of the opinions to
produce out of their Wombs, as before they had out of their brains, such
Monstrous births, as no Chronicle (I think) hardly ever recorded the like.
Mistress Dier brought forth her birth of a woman child, a fish, a beast, and a
fowl, all woven together in one, and without an head, as page 44, describes, to
which I refer the Reader.

Mistress Hutchison being big with Child, and growing toward the time of her
labor, as other women do, she brought forth not one, (as Mistress Dier did) but
(which was more strange to amazement) thirty monstrous births or thereabouts,
at once; some of them bigger, some lesser, some of one shape, some of another;
few of any perfect shape, none at all of them (as far as I could ever learn) of
humane shape.

These things are so strange, that I am almost loath to be the reporter of them,
lest I should seem to feign a new story, and not to relate an old one, but I
have learned otherwise (blessed be his name) than to delude the world with
untruths.

And these things are so well known in New England, that they have been made
use of in public, by the reverend Teacher of Boston, and testified by so many
Letters to Friends here, that the things are past Question.

And see how the wisdom of God sitted this judgment to her sin every way, for
look as she had vented misshapen opinions, so she must bring forth deformed
Monsters; and as about thirty opinions in number, so many monsters; and as
those were public, and not in a corner mentioned, so this is now come to be
known and famous over all these Churches, and a great part of the World.

And though he that runs may read their sin in these judgments; yet, behold the
desperate and stupendous hardness of heart in these persons and their
followers, who were so far from seeing the finger of God in all these dreadful
passages, that they turned all from themselves upon the faithful servants of
God that labored to reclaim them, saying,

This is for you, ye legalists, that your eyes might be farther blinded, by
God's hand upon us, in your legal ways, and stumble and fall, and in the end
break your necks into hell, if ye embrace not the Truth.

Now I am upon Mistress Hutchison's Story, I will digress a little to give you a
farther taste of her spirit, viz. After she was gone from us to the Island, the
Church of Boston sent unto her four of their Members, (men of a lovely and
winning spirit, as most likely to prevail) to see if they could convince and
reduce her, according to 2 Thessalonians. 3. 13. When they came first unto her, she
asked from whom they came, and what was their business? They answered, We are
come in the name of the Lord Jesus, from the Church of Christ at Boston, to
labor to convince you of, etc -- At that word she (being filled with as much
disdain in her countenance, as bitterness in her spirit) replied, What, from
the Church at Boston? I know no such Church, neither will I own it, call it the
Whore and Strumpet of Boston, no Church of Christ: so they said no more, seeing
her so desperate, but returned. Behold the spirit of error, to what a pass it
drives a Man!

This loud-speaking Providence from heaven in the monsters, did much awaken
many of their followers (especially the tenderer sort) to attend God's meaning
therein; and made them at such a stand, that they dared not slight so manifest
a sign from heaven, that from that time we found many of their ears boared (as
they had good cause) to attend to Counsel, but others yet followed them.

6. The last stroke that slew the opinions, was the falling away of their
Leaders.

1. Into more hideous and soul-destroying Delusions, which rain (indeed) all
Religion, as, that the Souls of men are mortal like the beasts.

That there is no such thing as inherent Righteousness.

That these Bodies of ours shall not rise again.

That their own revelations of particular Events were as infallible as the
Scripture, etc.

2. They also grew (many of them) very loose and degenerate in their practices
(for these opinions will certainly produce a filthy life by degrees;) As no
prayer in their Families, no Sabbath, insufferable pride, frequ^nt and hideous
lying; diverse of them being proved guilty; some of five, other of ten gross
lies; another falling into a lie, God smote him in the very act, that he sunk
down into a deep swound, and being by hot waters recovered, and coming to
himself, said, Oh God, thou might have struck me dead, as Ananias and
Saphira, for I have maintained a lie. Mistress Hutchison and others cast out of
the Church for lying, and some guilty of fouler sins than all these, which I
here name not.

These things exceedingly amazed their followers, (especially such as were led
after them in the simplicity of their hearts, as many were) and now they began
to see that they were deluded by them.

A great while they did not believe that Mistress Hutchison and some others did
hold such things as they were taxed for, but when themselves heard her
defending her twenty nine cursed Opinions in Boston Church, and there falling
into fearful lying, with an impudent forehead in the open Assembly, then they
believed what before they could not, and were ashamed before God and men, that
ever they were so led aside from the Lord and his Truth, and the godly Counsel
of their faithful Ministers, by such an Impostor as she was.

Now no man could lay more upon them, than they would upon themselves, in their
acknowledgment.

Many after this came unto us, who before flew from us, with such desires as
those in Act. 2. Men and Brethren, what shall we do? and did willingly take
shame to themselves in the open Assemblies by confessing (some of them with
many tears) how they had given offense to the Lord and his People, by departing
from the Truth, and being led by a Spirit of Error, their alienation from their
brethren in their affections, and their crooked and perverse walking in
contempt of Authority, slighting the Churches, and despising the Counsel of
their godly Teachers.

Now they would freely discover the slights the Adversaries had used to
undermine them by, and steal away their Eyes from the Truth and their Brethren,
which before (whilst their Eyes were sealed) they could not see. And the fruit
of this was great Praise to the Lord, who had thus wonderfully wrought matters
about; Gladness in all our Hearts and Faces, and Expressions of our renewed
Affections by receiving them again into our Bosoms, and from that time until
now have walked (according to their renewed Covenants) humbly and lovingly
amongst us, holding forth Truth and Peace with Power.

But for the rest, which (notwithstanding all these means of Conviction from
Heaven and Earth, and the Example of their seduced Brethrens return) yet stood
obdurate, yea more hardened (us we had cause to fear) than before; we convented
those of them that were Members before the Churches, and yet labored once and
again to convince them, not only of their Errors, but also of sundry exorbitant
Practices which they had fallen into; as manifest Pride, contempt of Authority,
neglecting to hear the Church, and lying, etc. but after no means prevailed, we
were driven with sad hearts to give them up to Satan. Yet not simply for their
Opinions (for which I find we have been slanderously traduced) but the chiefest
cause of their Censure was their Miscarriages (as have been said) persisted in
with great obstinacy.

The persons cast out of the Churches, were about nine or ten, as far as I can
remember; who, for a space, continued very hard and impenitent, but afterward
some of them were received into fellowship again, upon their Repentance.

These persons cast out, and the rest of the Ringleaders that had received
sentence of Banishment, with many others infected by them, that were neither
censured in Court, nor in Churches, went all together out of our Jurisdiction
and Precinct into an Island called Read-Island, (surnamed by some, the Island
of Errors) and there they live to this day, most of them; but in great strife
and contention in the civil Estate, and otherwise; hatching and multiplying new
Opinions, and cannot agree, but are miserably divided into sundry Sects and
Factions.

But Mistress Hutchison being weary of the Island, or rather, the Island weary
of her, departed from thence with all her Family, her Daughter, and her
Children, to live under the Dutch, near a place called by Seamen, and in the
Map, Hell-Gate. (And now I am come to the last Act of her Tragedy, a most heavy
stroke upon her self and hers, as I received it very lately from a godly Hand
in New England.) There the Indians set upon them, and slew her, and all her
family; her Daughter, and her Daughters Husband, and all their Children, save
one that escaped; (her own Husband being dead before;) a dreadful Blow. Some
write that the Indians did burn her to death with fire, her House and all the
rest named that belonged to her; but I am not able to affirm by what kind of
death they slew her, but slain it seems she is, according to all Reports. I
never heard that the Indians in those parts did ever before this, commit the
like Outrage upon any one family, or families; and therefore Gods hand is the
more apparently seen herein, to pick out this woeful woman, to make her, and
those belonging to her, an unheard of heavy Example of their Cruelty above
others.

Thus the Lord heard our Groans to Heaven, and freed us from this great and
sore Affliction, which first was small, like Elias's Cloud; but after spread
the Heavens; and has (through great Mercy) given the Churches rest from this
disturbance ever since; that we know none that lifts up his head to disturb our
sweet Peace, in any of the Churches of Christ among us; blessed for ever be his
Name.

I bow my knees to the God of Truth and Peace, to grant these Churches as full
a riddance from the same, or like Opinions, which do destroy his Truth, and
disturb their Peace.

A POSTSCRIPT.
I think it fit to add a comfortable Passage of News from those parts written
to me very lately by a faithful hand, which as it affected mine own Heart, so
it may do many others, viz. That two Sagamores, (or Indian Princes) with all
their Men, Women and Children, have voluntarily submitted themselves to the
Will and Law of our God, with expressed desires to be taught the same; and have
for that end, put themselves under our Government and Protection, even in the
same manner, as any of the English are: which morning-peep of Mercy to them
(says he) is a great means to awaken the Spirit of Prayer and Faith for them
in all the Churches.



T. Welde.

A Catalogue of such Erroneous Opinions as were found to have been brought into
New England, and spread under hand there, as they were condemned by an Assembly
of the Churches, at New-Town, Aug. 30. 1637.
The Errors.

1. IN the Conversion of a sinner, which is saving and gracious, the Faculties
of the Soul, and Workings thereof, in things pertaining to God, are destroyed
and made to cease.

The Confutation.

1. This is contrary to the Scripture, which speaks of the Faculties of the
Soul, (as the Understanding and the Will) not as destroyed in Conversion, but
as changed, Luke 24 45. Christ is said to have opened their Understandings:
Ioh. 21. 18. Peter is said to be led whither he would not, therefore he had a
Will. Again, to destroy the Faculties of the Soul, is to destroy the
Immortality of the Soul.

Error 2. Instead of them, the Holy Ghost does come and take place, and does
all the works of those natures, as the faculties of the human nature of Christ
do.

Confutation 2. This is contrary to Scripture, which speaks of God, as
sanctifying our Souls and Spirits, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. purging our Consciences,
Heb. 9. 14. refreshing our Memories, Ioh. 14. 26.

Error 3. That the love which is said to remain, when Faith and Hope cease, is
the Holy Ghost.

Confutation 3. This is contrary to the Scriptures, which put an express
difference between the Holy Ghost, and Love, 2 Cor. 6. 6. And if our love were
the Holy Ghost, we cannot be said to love God at all; or if we did, it was,
because we were personally united to the Holy Ghost.

Error 4, 5. That those that be in Christ, are not under the Law, and commands
of the word, as the rule of Life. Alias, that the Will of God in the Word, or
Directions thereof, are not the Rule whereunto Christians are bound to conform
themselves, to live thereafter.

Confutation 4, 5. This is contrary to the Scriptures, which direct us to the
Law, and to the Testimony, Esa. 8. 20. which also speaks of Christians, as not
being without Law to God, but under the Law to Christ, 1 Cor. 9. 22.

Error 6. The Example of Christ's Life, is not a pattern according to which men
ought to act,

Confutation 6. This position (those actions of Christ excepted which he did as
God, or as a Mediator, God and man, or on special occasions, which concern not
us) is unsound, being contrary to the Scripture, wherein the example of Christ's
life is propounded to Christians, as a Pattern of Imitation, both by Christ and
his Apostles, Mat. 11. 29. Learn of me, for I am meek, etc. 1 Cor. 11. 1. Be ye
followers of me, as I am of Christ, Ephesians. 5. 2. Walk in love, as Christ has
loved us, 1 Pet. 2. 21. Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example,
that ye should follow his steps, 1 John 2. 26. He that says he abides in him,
ought so to walk, even as he has walked.

Error 7. The new Creature, or the new Man mentioned in the Gospel, is not
meant of Grace, but of Christ.

Confutation 7. The false-hood of this Proposition appears from the
Scriptures, which first propound Christ and the new Creature, as distinct one
from another, 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature.
Secondly, The new Man is opposed to the old Man, the old man is meant of Lusts
and Vices, and not of Adams person, Ephesians. 2. 22, 24. Therefore the new Man is
meant of graces and virtues, and not of the person of Christ, Col. 3. 9, 10.
Thirdly, the new man is expressly said to consist in Righteousness and true
Holiness, Ephesians. 4. 25. and to be renewed in Knowledge, Col. 3. 10. which are
Graces, and not Christ.

Error 8. By love, 1 Corinthians. 13. 13. and by the armor mentioned, Ephesians. 6.
are meant Christ.

Confutation 8. This position is near of kin to the former; but, secondly, the
opposite, 1 Cor. 13. means that love which he exhorts Christians to bear
one toward another, which if it were meant of Christ, he might be said to
exhort them to bear Christ one to another, as well as to love one another. 2.
Faith and Hope there mentioned, have Christ for their object; and if by love be
meant Christ, he had put no more in the latter word, than in the two former. 3.
And besides, it may as well be said, Faith in love, as Faith in Christ, and
Hope in love, as Hope in Christ, if that were the meaning. And by armor,
Ephesians. 6. cannot be meant Christ. First, Because two parts of that armor are
Faith and Hope, whereof the Scriptures make Christ the Object: Col. 1. 5.
Beholding the stedfastness of your Faith in Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 19. If in this
life only we had hope in Christ, etc. Now these Graces, and the Object of them
cannot be the same, Secondly, A person armed with that Armor, may be said to
be a sincere, righteous, patient Christian, but if by the armor be meant
Christ, such predication should have been destroyed, and you might more
properly say, a Christified Christian.

Error 9. The whole letter of the Scripture holds for a Covenant of Works.

Confutation 9. This position is unsound, and contrary to the constant tenor of
the Gospel, a main part of the Scriptures which in the letter thereof holds not
forth a Covenant of works, but of Grace, as appears, Ioh. 3. 16. 1. Tim. 1.
15. Mat. 11. 28. Heb. 8. 10, 11. 12.

Error 10. That God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, may give themselves to the
Soul, and the Soul may have true Union with Christ, true Remission of sins,
true Marriage and Fellowship, true Sanctification from the Blood of Christ, and
yet be an Hypocrite.

Confutation 10. The word [true] being taken in the sense of the Scriptures;
this also crosses the doctrine of Ephesians. 4. 24. where Righteousness and true
Holiness are made proper to him, that has heard and learned the truth, as it
is in Jesus.

Error 11. As Christ was once made flesh, so he is now first made flesh in us,
ere we be carried to perfection.

Confutation 11. Christ was once made flesh, Ioh. 1. 14. no other incarnation
is recorded, and therefore not to be believed.

Error 12. Now in the Covenant of Works, a Legalist may attain the same
Righteousness for truth, which Adam had in Innocence before the Fall.

Confutation 12. He that can attain Adams Righteousness in sincerity, has his
sin truly mortified, but that no Legalist can have, because true Mortification
is wrought by the Covenant of Grace, Romans 6. 14. Sin shall not have dominion
over you, for you are not under the Law, but under Grace.

Error 13. That there is a new birth under the Covenant of Works, to such a
kind of Righteousness, as before is mentioned, from which the Soul must be
again converted, before it can be made partaker of Gods Kingdom.

Confutation 13. This is contrary to Tit. 3. 4. where the new birth is made a
fruit of Gods love toward man in Christ; of any new birth besides this, the
Scripture speaks not. It is also contrary to 2 Cor. 3. where it is made the
work of the Spirit, (that is, the Gospel) opposed to the letter (that is, to
the Law) to give life; the new birth brings forth the new creature, and the new
creature argues our being in Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 17. It is true indeed, Gods
Children that are born again, must be converted again, as Mat. 18. 3. but that
conversion is not from that grace which they have received, but from the
corruption that still remains.

Error 14. That Christ works in the regenerate, as in those that are dead, and
not as in those that are alive, or the regenerate after Conversion are
altogether dead to spiritual Acts.

Confutation 14. This is contrary to Romans 6. 11. Ye are alive unto God, in
Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2. 1, 5. He has quickened us, 1 Pet. 2. 5. Living stones,
Gal. 2. 20. The life that I now live.

Error 15. There is no inherent Righteousness in the Saints, or Grace, and
Graces are not in the Souls of Believers, but in Christ only.

Confutation 15. This is contrary to 2 Timothy 1. 5. The unfeigned Faith that
dwelt in thee, and dwelt first in thy Grandmoother, 2 Pet. 1. 4. Partakers of
the Divine Nature; which cannot be, but by inherent Righteousness, 2 Timothy 1. 6.
Stir up the Grace of God which is in thee, John 1. 16. Of his Fullness, we all
receive Grace for Grace: but if there be no Grace in us, we receive nothing
from his Fullness, 2 Cor. 4. 16. Our inward man is renewed day by day, Romans 12.
2. with Ephesians. 4. 24. we are changed or renewed.

Error 16. There is no difference between the Graces of Hypocrites and
Believers, in the kinds of them.

Confutation 16. If this be true, then Hypocrites are wise, humble, merciful,
pure, etc. and so shall see God, Mat. 5. 8. but they are called fools, Mat. 7.
26. Mat. 25. 1, 2, 3. neither shall they see God, Mat. 24. 51. Mat. 13. 20, 21,
22, 23. Heb. 6. 7, 8, 9. the difference of the grounds, argues the difference
in the kinds of Graces.

Error 17. True poverty of spirit, does kill and take away the sight of Grace.

Confutation 17. This is contrary to Mark 9. 24. Lord, I believe, help my
unbelief: if this were so, then poverty of spirit should binder Thankfulness;
and so one Grace should hinder another, and the Graces of the Spirit should
hinder the work of the Spirit, and cross the end why he is given to us, 1 Cor.
2. 12.

Error 18. The Spirit does work in Hypocrites, by Gifts and Graces, but in Gods
Children immediately.

Confutation 18. This is contrary to Nehem. 5. 15. So did I because of the fear
of the Lord: Heb. 11. 17. Noah moved with fear, prepared an Ark.

Error 19. That all Graces, even in the truly regenerate, are mortal and fading.

Confutation 19. This is contrary to Ioh. 4. 14. they are Graces which flow
from a Fountain which springs up to Eternal Life; and therefore not fading,
Ier. 31. 39, 40.

Error 20. That to call into question, whether God be my dear Father, after or
upon the commission of some heinous sins, (as Murder, Incest, etc.) does prove
a man to be in the Covenant of works.

Confutation 20. It being supposed that the doubting here spoken of, is not
that of final despair, or the like; but only that the Position denies a
possibility of all doubting to a man under a Covenant of Grace, this is
contrary to Scripture, which speaks of God's people under a Covenant of
Grace, in these or other Cases, exercised with sweet Doubtings and Questions:
David was a justified man, (for his sins were pardoned, 2 Samuel 12. 12, 13.) yet
his Bones waxed old, through his roaring all the day long, and the heaviness of
Gods hand was upon him night and day, and the turning of his moisture into the
drought of Summer, Psalm. 32. 3, 4. and Gods breaking his Bones by withholding
from him the joy of his Salvation, Psalm 51 8. show that he was exercised with
sweet Doubts and Questions at least, as this Position speaks of; and the like
may be gathered out of Psalm. 77. 3, 4. where the holy Man Asaph, mentions
himself, being troubled when he remembered God, and that he was so troubled, he
could not speak nor sleep, and expostulateth with God; Will the Lord cast off
for ever? And will he be favorable no more? And ver. 6, 7, 8, 9. These show
that he had at least sweet doubts, as the Position mentions, and yet he was
not thereby proved to be under a Covenant of works; for he does afterward
confess this to be his infirmity, verse. 10. and receives the Comfort of former
Experiences, in former days, and his songs in the nights, and of Gods former
works, verse. 5, 6. 10, 11, 12. and he resumeth his claim of his right in God by
virtue of his Covenant, verse 13.

Error 21. To be justified by Faith, is to be justified by Works.

Confutation 21. If Faith, in this position be considered not simply as a work,
but in relation to its Object, this is contrary to the Scripture, that so
appropriateth Justification to Faith; as it denies it to Works, setting Faith
and Works in opposition one against another in the point of Justification, as
Romans 3. 27. Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By what Law? By the Law of
works? No, but by the Law of Faith; and ver. 28. We conclude, that a man is
justified by Faith, without the works of the Law, and chap. 4. 16. Therefore it
is by Faith, that it may be by grace, compared with verse. 4. To him that
works is the Reward reckoned, not of grace, but of debt.

Error 22. None are to be exhorted to believe, but such whom we know to be the
Elect of God, or to have his Spirit in them effectually.

Confutation 22. This is contrary to the Scriptures, which makes the
Commission which Christ gave his Disciples, in these words, Go, Preach the
Gospel to every Creature; he that believes and is baptized shall be saved,
Mark 16. 15, 16. where the latter words imply an Exhortation to believe, and
the former words direct, that this should not only be spoken to men known to be
Elected, or only to men effectually called, but to every creature; The
Scripture also tells us, that the Apostles, in all places, called upon men to
repent and believe the Gospel, which they might not have done, had this
position been true.

Error 23. We must not pray for gifts and graces, but only for Christ.

Confutation 23. This is contrary to Scripture which teaches us to pray for
Wisdom, Iam. 1. 5. and for every grace bestowed by virtue of the new Covenant,
Ezekiel. 36. 37. as acknowledging every good gift, and every perfect giving is
from above, and comes down from the Father of Lights. The whole 119. Psalm,
besides innumerable Texts of Scripture, does abundantly confute this, by
showing that the servants of God have been taught by the spirit of God to pray
for every gift and grace needful for them, and not only for Christ.

Error 24. He that has the Seal of the Spirit, may certainly judge of any
person, whether he be Elected or no.

Confutation 24. This is contrary to Deuteronomy. 29, 29. Secret things belong to God;
and such is Election of men not yet called.

Error 25. A man may have all graces and poverty of spirit, and yet want Christ.

Confutation 25. This is contrary to Mat. 5. 3. Blessed are the poor in spirit:
but without Christ none can be blessed, Ephesians. 4. 22, 24. he that has
Rightoousness and true Holiness, has learned the truth, as it is in Jesus, and
therefore has Christ.

Error 26. The Faith that justifies us is in Christ, and never had any actual
Being out of Christ.

Confutation 26. This is contrary to Scripture, Luke 17. 5. Lord increase our
Faith, Ergo, Faith was in them, 2 Timothy 1. 6. Faith is said to dwell in such and
such persons, therefore Faith was in them, Isa. 64. 7. No man stirs up himself
to lay hold upon thee.

Error 27. It is incompatible to the Covenant of Grace, to join Faith thereunto.

Confutation 27. This is contrary to Mark 16. 16. Preach the Gospel, He that
believes shall be saved, Rom 4. 3. Abraham believed, and it was accounted to
him for Righteousness, and Abraham is a pattern to all under the Covenant of
Grace, Romans 4. 24.

Error 28. To affirm there must be Faith on man's part to receive the Covenant,
is to undermine Christ.

Confutation 28. First, Faith is required on man's part to receive the Covenant
of Grace, according to these Scriptures, Ioh. 1. 12. To as many as received
him, even to them that believed on his Name, Mark 16. 16. He that believes
shall be saved. Secondly, to affirm there must be Faith on man's part to receive
Christ, is not to undermine Christ, but to exalt him, according to these
Scriptures, Ioh. 3. 33. He that believes, has put to his Seal that God is
True; and so honors Gods Truth, which cannot undermine Christ; Romans 4. 20. But
was strong in the Faith; giving Glory to God, etc.

Error 29. An Hypocrite may have these two witnesses, 1 Ioh. 5. 5. that is to
say, the Water and Blood.

Confutation 29. No Hypocrite can have these two witnesses, Water and Blood,
that is, true Justification and Sanctification, for then he should be saved,
according to these Scriptures, Romans 8. 30. 2 These. 2. 13. Acts 26, 18.

Error 30. If any thing may be concluded from the Water and Blood, it is rather
Damnation, than Salvation.

Confutation 30. This is contrary to the Scripture last mentioned.

Error 31. Such as see any Grace of God in themselves, before they have the
assurance of Gods Love sealed to them, are not to be received Members of
Churches.

Confutation 31. This is contrary to Acts 8. 37, 38. where the Eunuch saw his
Faith only, and yet was presently baptized; and therefore by the same ground
might be admitted.

Error 32. After the revelation of the Spirit, neither Devil nor Sin can make
the Soul to doubt.

Confutation 32. This position savours of Error, else Asaph had not the
revelation of the Spirit, seeing he doubted, (Psalm. 73. 13.) whether he had not
cleansed his heart in vain, and that God had forgotten to be gracious; then
also Faith should be perfect, which was never found, no not in our Father
Abraham.

Error 33. To act by virtue of, or in obedience to a command is legal.

Confutation 33. So is it also Evangelical, the Mystery of the Gospel is said
to be revealed for the obedience of Faith, Romans 16. 25. Also the Lord Jesus is
said to be the author of Salvation to all that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. If we love
Christ, we are to keep his Commandments, Joh. 14. 29.

Error 34. We are not to Pray against all sin, because the old Man is in us,
and must be; And why should we Pray against that which cannot be avoided?

Confutation 34. This is contrary to 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. 1 Cor. 13. 7.

Error 35. The efficacy of Christ's death is to kill all activity of Graces in
his Members, that he might act all in all.

Confutation 35. This is contrary to Romans 6. 4. Our old man is crucified wit^
him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that we should not serve sin:
contrary also to Heb. 4. 14. That he might through death destroy him, etc. and
1 Ioh. 3. 8. Whence we infer, that if Christ came to destroy the body of sin,
to destroy the Devil, to dissolve the Works of the Devil, then not to kill his
own graces, which are the works of his own Spirit.

Error 36. All the activity of a Believer, is to act to sin.

Confutation 36. Contrary to Romans 7. 15. as also to Gal. 5. 17. The Spirit
lusts against the Flesh.

Error 37. We are completely united to Christ, before, or without any Faith
wrought in us by the Spirit.

Confutation 37. The term [united] being understood of that spiritual relation
of men unto Christ, whereby they come to have life and right to all other
blessings in Christ, 1 John 5. 12. He that has the Son has life: And the term
[compleatly] implying a presence of all those bands and ligaments and means, as
are required in the Word, or are any ways necessary to the making up of the
union, we now conceive this assertion to be erroneous, contrary to Scripture,
that either expressly mentions Faith when it speaks of this union, Ephesians. 3.
17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by Faith, Gal. 2. 20. Christ lives in
me by Faith; or ever implies it in those phrases that do express union; as
coming to Christ, John 6. 35. and eating and drinking Christ, verse. 47.
compared with v. 54. having the Son, 1 John 5. 12. and receiving Christ, John
1. 12. and Marriage unto Christ, Ephesians. 5. 32. if there be no dwelling of
Christ in us, no coming to him, no receiving him, no eating nor drinking him,
no being married to him before and without Faith; but the former is true,
therefore also the latter.

Error 38. There can be no true closing with Christ in a promise that has a
qualification or condition expressed.

Confutation 38. This opinion we conceive erroneous, contrary to Esaias 55 1, 2.
Ho! every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters. Mat. 11. 28. Come to me
all ye that are weary and heavy laden. John 7. 37. If any man thirst, let him
come to me and drink, Revel. 22. 17. Let him that is athirst come. Mark 1. 15.
Repent and believe the Gospel: if the word indefinitely be sanctified, for the
begetting of Faith, if the Gospel it self be laid down in a conditional
promise, if the Apostles and Prophets, and Christ himself, have laid hold upon
such Promisea to help to Union, and closing with himself, then there may be a
true closing with Christ, in a Promise that has a qualification or condition
expressed.

Error 39. The due search and knowledge of the holy Scripture, is not a safe
and sure way of searching and finding Christ.

Confutation 39. This is contrary to express words of Scripture, Joh. 5. 39.
Search the Scriptures, for they testify of me, Act. 10, 43. To him give all
the Prophets witness, Romans 3. 21. The righteousness of God witnessed by the Law
and the Prophets, Esaias 8. 20. To the Law and to the Testimony, Act. 17. 11. The
Bereans were more noble, in that they searched the Scriptures daily. If the
Prophets give witness to Christ, if his righteousness be witnessed by Law and
Prophets, and that they be noble that daily search the Scriptures, and that
Christ so far allows their Testimony of him, that the Scripture says, there
is no light, but in and according to them, then the due searching and knowledge
of Scriptures, is a safe way to search Christ; but the former is true, and
therefore also the latter.

Error 40. There is a testimony of the Spirit and voice unto the Soul, merely
immediate, without any respect unto, or concurrence with the Word.

Confutation 40. This immediate revelation without concurrence with the word,
does not only countenance but confirm that opinion of Enthusiasme, justly
refused by all the Churches, as being contrary to the perfection of the
Scriptures, and perfection of God's wisdom therein: That which is not revealed
in the Scripture, (which is objectum adaequatum fidei) is not to be believed:
but that there is any such revelation, without concurrence with the Word, is no
where revealed in the Scripture, Ergo. 1 Cor. 4. 16. Presume not above that
which is written. Again, if there be any immediate Revelation without
concurrence of the Word, then it cannot be tried by the Word, but we are bid to
try the Spirits. To the Law and Testimony, Esa. 8. 20. To try all things, 1
These. 5. 21. So the Bereans, Acts 17. 11. and the Rule of Trial is the Word,
Ioh. 5. 39.

Error 41. There be distinct seasons of the workings of the several persons; so
the Soul may be said to be so long under the Fathers, and not the Sons, and so
long under the Sons Work, and not the Spirits.

Confutation 41. This expression is not according to the pattern of wholesome
words, which teaches a joint-concurrence of all the persons, working in every
work that is wrought; so that we cannot say, the Father works so long, and the
Son works not, because the same work at the same time is common to them both,
and to all the Three Persons, as the Father draws, Ioh. 6. 44. so the Son sends
his Spirit to convince, and thereby draws, Ioh. 16. 7, 8.

Error 42. There is no assurance true or right, unless it be without fear and
doubting.

Confutation 42. This is contrary to Scripture, the Penman of Psalm. 77. had
true assurance, v. 6. And yet he had doubts and fears of God's eternal mercy,
ver. 7, 8, 9. The best Faith is imperfect, and admits infirmity, v. 10. 1 Cor.
13. 10, 11, 12. Where there is flesh that does fight against every Grace, and
act thereof, and is contrary to it, there can be no Grace perfect, Ergo,
doubting may stand with assurance, Gal. 5. 17.

Error 43. The Spirit acts most in the Saints, when they endeavor least.

Confutation 43. Reserving the special seasons of God's preventing Grace to his
own pleasure; In the ordinary constant course of his dispensation, the more we
endeavor, the more assistance and help we find from him, Prove. 2. 3, 4, 5. He
that seeks and digs for wisdom as for treasure, shall find it, Hos. 6. 3. 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. The Lord is with you, while you are with him: If by endeavor be
meant the use of lawful means and ordinances commanded by God to seek and find
him in, then is it contrary to Mat. 7. 7. Ask, seek, knock, etc.

Error 44. No created work can be a manifest sign of God's love.

Confutation 44. If created works, flowing from union with Christ, be included,
it is against John's Epistles, and many Scriptures, which make keeping the
Commandments; love to the Brethren, etc. evidences of a good estate, so
consequently of God's love.

Error 45. Nothing but Christ is an evidence of my good estate.

Confutation 45. If here Christ manifesting himself in works of holiness, be
excluded; and nothing but Christ nakedly revealing himself to Faith, be made an
evidence, it is against the former Scriptures.

Error 46. It is no sin in a Believer not to see his Grace, except he be
wilfully blind.

Confutation 46. This is contrary to the Scripture, which makes every
transgression of the Law sin, though wilfulness be not annexed; and this
crosses the work of the Spirit which shows us the things that are given us
of God; 1 Cor. 2. 12. and crosses also that command, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Prove your
Faith, and therefore we ought to see it.

Error 47. The seal of the Spirit is limited only to the immediate witness of
the Spirit, and does never witness to any work of Grace, or to any conclusion
by a Syllogism.

Confutation 47. This is contrary to Romans 8. 16. to that which our Spirit bears
witness, to that the Spirit of God bears witness, for they bear a joint
witness, as the words will have it; but our spirits bear witness to a work of
grace; namely, that Believers are the children of God, Ergo.

Error 48. That conditional Promises are legal.

Confutation 48. Contrary to Ioh. 3. 16. Mat. 5. 3, etc.

Error 49. We are not bound to keep a constant course of Prayer in our
Families, or privately, unless the Spirit stir us up thereunto.

Confutation 49. This is contrary to Ephesians. 6. 18. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.

Error 50. It is poverty of spirit, when we have grace, yet to see we have no
grace in our selves.

Confutation 50. The weak Believer, Mark 9. 24. was poor in spirit, yet saw his
own Faith weak, though it were. Peter, when he was brought to poverty of spirit
by the bitter experience of his pride, he saw the true love he had unto Christ,
and appealed to him therein, John 21. 15. Paul was less than the least of all
Saints in his own eyes, therefore poor in spirit, yet saw the grace of God, by
which he was that he was, and did what he did, and was truly nothing in his own
eyes, when he had spoken of the best things he had received and done, Ephesians. 3.
18. If it be poverty of the spirit to see no grace in our selves, then should
poverty of spirit cross the office of the Spirit, which is to reveal unto us,
and make us to see what God gives us, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12. then it should
make us sin, or cross the will of God, which is, that we should not be ignorant
of the gracious workings of Christ in us from the power of his Death and
Resurrection, Romans 6. 3. Know ye not, etc. then would it destroy a great duty
of Christian thankfulness, in, and for all the good things which God
vouchsafes us, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18.

Error 51. The Soul need not to go out to Christ for fresh supply, but it is
acted by the spirit inhabiting.

Confutation 51. Though we have the spirit acting and inhabiting us, this
hinders not, but I may and need go out to Christ for fresh supply of grace,
John 1. 16. Of whose fullness we have all received, and grace for grace; 2 Cor.
12. 8. Paul sought thrice to Christ for fresh supply; Heb. 12. 2. Look unto
Christ the Author and Finisher of our Faith.

We must look up to the Hills from whence comes our help, Ephesians. 4. 16. By
whom all the Body receives increase, and to the edifying of it self.

Error 52. It is legal to say, we act in the strength of Christ.

Confutation 52. This is contrary to the Scriptures, the Gospel bids us be
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6. 10. and be strong
in the grace that is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 2. 1. and Paul says, I can do all
things through Christ that strengthens me, Phil. 4. 13. and that was not
legal strength.

Error 53. No Minister can teach one that is anointed by the Spirit of Christ,
more than he knows already, unless it be in some circumstances.

Confutation 53. This is also contrary to Scripture, 2 Cor. 1. It is God that
establishes us with you, etc. Ephesians. 1. 13. and 4. 12, 14. The Corinthians and
Ephesians were anointed and sealed, and yet were taught more of Paul in his
Epistles than only in some circumstances.

Error 54. No Minister can be an instrument to convey more of Christ unto
another, than he by his own experience has come unto.

Confutation 54. This is contrary to Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. the weakest Minister may
edify the strongest Christian which has more experience than himself.

Error 55. A man may have true Faith of dependence, and yet not be justified.

Confutation 55. This is contrary to the Scripture, Act. 13. 39. All believers
are justified; but they that have true Faith of dependence are believers,
therefore justified.

Error 56. A Man is not effectually converted, till he has full assurance.

Confutation 56. This is cross to the Scripture, Esa. 5. 10. wherein we see
that a Man may truly fear God (therefore truly converted) and yet walk in
darkness, without clear evidence, or full assurance.

Error 57. To take delight in the holy service of God, is to go a Whoring from
God.

Confutation 57. No Scripture commands us to go a Whoring from God, but first,
the Scripture commands us to delight in the Service of God, Psalm. 100. 2. Serve
the Lord with gladness, Esa. 58. 13. Thou shall call the Sabbath thy delight;
Ergo. Secondly, God loves not such as go a whoring from him, Psalm. 73. ult. But
God loves a cheerful server of God, 2 Cor. 8. Therefore such as serve him
cheerfully, do not thereby go a whoring from him.

Error 58. To help my Faith, and comfort my Conscience in evil hours, from
former experience of God's Grace in me, is not a way of Grace.

Confutation 58. What the Saints have done, and found true comfort in, that is
a way of Grace; but they did help their Faith, and comfort their Conscience
from former evidences of God's Grace in them, Psalm. 77. 5, 6, 11. I considered
the days of old, and called to Remembrance my Songs in the night; and by this
raised he up his Faith, as the latter part of this Psalm shows; and this was
in evil hours, ver. 2, 3. 2 Cor. 1. 12. This is our rejoicing, that in
simplicity and godly pureness, we have had our conversation; and this was in
sad hours, v. 4, 5, 8, 9, 10. Job 35. 10. None says, Where is God that made
me, which gives Songs in the night? here the not attending to former
consolation, is counted a sinful neglect.

Error 59. A Man may not be exhorted to any duty, because he has no power to
do it.

Confutation 59. This is contrary to Phil. 2. 12, 13. Work out your salvation,
etc. For it is God that works in you both the will and the d^ed, Ephesians. 5.
14. Awake thou that sleep, so 1 Cor. 15. ult.

Error 60. A Man may not prove his Election by his Vocation, but his Vocation
by his Election.

Confutation 60. This is contrary to 1 Thessalonians. 2. 4. Knowing your election,
because our Gospel came unto you, not in word only, but in power, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
13, 14. God has elected you to life, through Sanctification of the Spirit,
whereunto he has called you by our Gospel.

Error 61. All Doctrines, Revelations and Spirits, must be tried by Christ the
Word, rather than by the Word of Christ.

Confutation 61. This assertion of it extends to exclude the Word; we conceive
it contrary to Esa. 8. 20. John 5. 39. Acts 17. 11. also to John 4. 1, 2. Try
the spirits, every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, etc. where Spirits and Doctrines confessing that Christ is come in the
Flesh, are made distinct from Christ.

Error 62. It is a dangerous thing to close with Christ in a Promise.

Confutation 62. This is contrary to Ioh. 3. 16. Act. 10. 43. Esa. 55. 1, 2.
Mat. 11. 28. Ioh. 7. 37. If Christ in these places invite Men to come unto him,
and bids them incline and hearken, and tells them their Souls shall live, and
they shall drink and be refreshed by him, and by these Promises incourageth
them to close with him, then it is no dangerous thing to close with him in a
Promise, it is no danger to obey a command of God: but we are commanded to
believe the Gospel, Mark 1. 15. the Promise being a part of the Gospel.

Error 63. No better is the evidence from the two Witnesses of Water and Blood,
mentioned 1 Ioh. 5. 6, 7, 8. than Mount Calvary, and the Soldiers that shed
Christ's Blood, and these might have drunk of it; poor Evidences.

Confutation 63. Then what God has ordained or made an Evidence, is no better
than what he has not made; then Christ loses his end in coming by Water and
Blood, v. 6. then the Spirit should agree no better with the Witness of Water
and Blood, then it does with Mount Calvary, and the Soldiers: but the spirit
does agree with the Water and the Blood, and not with the other, 1 Ioh. 5. 7.
These three agree in one.

Error 64. A Man must take no notice of his sin, nor of his repentance for his
sin.

Confutation 64. This is contrary to David, whose sin was ever before him,
Psalm. 51. he considered his ways (and the evil of them) that he might turn his
feet to God's Testimonies, Psalm. 119. 59. If we confess our sins, he is
faithful and just, etc. If we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar, 1 John 1. 8, 9. 10. Job took notice of sin, and of his Repentance, I abhor my
self and repent in dust and ashes, Job 42. 6. David sees, and says, I am
sorry for my sins, Psalm. 28. 38. Solomon's Penitent must know the Plague in his
heart, that is, his sin, and the punishment thereof, 1 Kings 8. 38.

Error 65. The Church in admitting Members, is not to look to holiness of life,
or testimony of the same.

Confutation 65. This is contrary to Romans 1. 7. and the Inscriptions of diverse
Epistles, being directed to Saints, and Saints by calling; and 1 Cor. 14. 33.
Churches of the Saints, Acts 2. the Members there were said to repent before
they were admitted, and 1 Cor. 5. the incestuous person should not then have
been cast out for want of Holiness, and Paul could not be received into
Communion without Testimony, Act. 9. 26.

Error 66. To lay the Brethren under a Covenant of Works, hurts not, but tends
to much good, to make Men look the better to their evidences.

Confutation 66. If that be done ungroundedly, it is contrary to Esa. 5. 20.
where woe is pronounced to such as call good evil, etc. and, Ezekiel. 13. 22. that
make such hearts sad, as the Lord would not have sadded; and it is against the
rule of the Covenant, 1 Cor. 13. besides, it may trench upon the Devil's
Office, in accusing the Brethren, and then it will be good to tell untruth,
good to break House and Church Communion, then good to break nearest Relations,
then good to bite one another, and good to offend the little ones, Mat. 18.

Error 67. A Man cannot evidence his Justification by his Sanctification, but
he must needs build upon his Sanctification, and trust to it.

Confutation 67. First, this is contrary to 1 John 3. 18, 19. where the Holy
Ghost says, That by unfeigned and hearty love we may have assurance; and yet
neither there, nor any where else, would have us trust to our Sanctification;
so verse. 7. He that does righteousness is righteous, as he is righteous.
Secondly, If poverty of spirit, which emptieth us of all confidence in our
selves, may evidence a Man's Justification, without trusting to it, then may
Sanctification without trusting to it; but the former is true, therefore also
the latter. Thirdly, If it be an ordinance of God to evidence our Justification
by our Sanctification, then we may do this without trusting to it; but that is
apparent from 2 Pet. 1. 10. Ergo.

Error 68. Faith justifies an Unbeliever, that is, that Faith that is in Christ
justifies me that have no Faith in my self.

Confutation 68. This is contrary to Hab. 2. 4. For if the Just shall live by
his Faith, then that Faith that justifies, is not in Christ. So John 3. ult. He
that believes not, the wrath of God abides on him: It is not another's Faith
will save me.

Error 69. Though a Man can prove a gracious work in himself, and Christ to be
the Author of it, if thereby he will prove Christ to be his, this is but a
sandy foundation.

Confutation 69. This is contrary to these Scriptures, John 14. 21. and 28. He
that keeps my Commandments, is he that loves me, and he that loves me,
shall be loved of my Father; and I will love him, and will show my self unto
him, 1 John 3. 14. We know that we have passed from death to life, because we
love the Brethren: And 1 John 5. 12. He that has the Son has life: therefore
he that can prove that he has spiritual life, may assure himself that he has
Christ.

Error 70. Frequency, or Length of Holy Duties, or trouble of Conscience for
neglect thereof, are all signs of one under a Covenant of Works.

Confutation 70. This is contrary to these Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15. 58. Be
abundant always in the work of the Lord: If the Faithful in Christ Jesus be
commanded to abound always in the work of the Lord, that is, Holy Duties, then
frequency in Holy Duties, is no sign of one under a Covenant of Works: but the
former is true, therefore also the latter; as also 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17, 18. Psalm.
55. 17. Evening and morning, and noon will I pray and make a noise, and he will
hear me; and elsewhere, Seven times a day do I praise thee, Psalm 119. 146.
Psalm. 1. 2. So also contrary is the third branch to these Scriptures, 2 Cor. 7.
8. 11. the Corinthians were troubled in Conscience, and sorrowed that they had
neglected the holy duties of Church-Censure toward the incestuous person; and
Esa. 64. 7. and 8. Cant. 5. 2. Romans 7. 19. I do not the good I would; which he
lamenteth and complains of.

Error 71. The immediate revelation of my good estate, without any respect to
the Scriptures, is as clear to me, as the voice of God from heaven to Paul.

Confutation 71. This is contrary to John 14. 26. He shall teach you all
things, and bring all things to your remembrance, etc. Whence we reason thus.
If the Spirit reveal nothing without concurrence of the Word, then this
revelation of the Spirit, without respect to the Word, is not clear, nor to be
trusted: but the Spirit does reveal nothing, but with respect to the Word, for
John 14. 26. If the office of the Spirit be to Teach, and to bring to
remembrance the things that Christ has Taught us, Esaias 8. 20. Whatever Spirit
speaks not according to this Word, there is no light there.

Error 72. It is a Fundamental, and Soul-damning Error, to make Sanctification
an evidence of Justification.

Confutation 72. This is contrary to these Scriptures, Romans 8. 1. They that
walk after the Spirit, are freed from condemnation, and are in Christ, and so
Justified: So 1 John 3. 10. in this are the children of God known, etc.

Error 73. Christ's work of Grace can no more distinguish between an Hypocrite
and a Saint, then the Rain that falls from Heaven, between the Just and the
Unjust.

Confutation 73. This proposition being general, includes all gracious Works,
and being so taken, is contradicted in the Parable of the Sower, Mat. 13. 20,
21, 22. where the good ground is distinguished from the stony by this, that it
brings forth fruit with patience, so Hebr. 6. 9. there is something better in
the Saints, than those common gifts which are found in Hypocrites.

Error 74. All verbal Covenants, or Covenants expressed in words, as Church
Covenants, Vows, etc. are Covenants of Works, and such as strike Men off from
Christ.

Confutation 74 First. This is contrary to Scripture, Esaias 44. 5. One shall
say, I am the Lord's, and another shall call himself by the name of the God of
Jacob: Romans 10. 10. With the mouth confession is made to salvation. Secondly,
Contrary to Reason, for then the Covenant of Grace is made a Covenant of Works,
by the Writing, Reading and Preaching of the same, for they are verbal
expressions of the Covenant on God's part, as Church-Covenants verbally express
our closing herewith.

Error 75. The Spirit gives such full and clear evidence of my good estate,
that I have no need to be tried by the fruits of Sanctification, this were to
light a Candle to the Sun.

Confutation 75. This opinion taken in this sense, that after the Spirit has
testified a Man's good estate, the person need not to be tried by the fruit of
sanctification, is contrary to the scope of the whole first Epistle of Saint
John, where variety of arguments are propounded to all Believers in common, 1
John 5. 13. to distinguish the persons of Believers from Unbelievers; the water
is annexed to the Spirit and blood, 1 John 5. 8.

Error 76. The Devil and Nature may be cause of a gracious Work.

Confutation 76. The words are unsavory, and the position unsound, for taking
[gracious] according to the language of the Scripture, gracious words, Luke 4.
22. Let your speech be gracious: gracious words are such as issue from the
saving Grace of Christ's Spirit in-dwelling in the Soul, which neither the
Devil nor Nature is able to produce; for Christ professes, John 15. 3, 4.
Without me ye can do nothing: nothing truly gracious John 3. Whatever is born
of the flesh, is flesh; And Romans 7. 18. In my flesh dwells no good, (truly
spiritual and gracious) Genesis 6. 5. Every imagination of the thoughts of a Man's
heart is evil, and that continually: Besides, the Devil is that evil and wicked
one, only wickedness, an adversary to God's grace and glory; that which is
contrary to corrupt nature, and the hellish nature of Satan, and above the
power of both, they cannot be the causes of gracious works.

Error 77. Sanctification is so far from evidencing a good estate, that it
darkens it rather; and a Man may more clearly see Christ, when he sees no
Sanctification, than when he does; the darker my Sanctification is, the
brighter is my Justification.

Confutation 77. This is contrary to the Scripture of Truth, which rather
gives the name of light to Sanctification and Holiness, and even for this use,
to clear our Justification, 1 John 1. 6, 7. For the Holy Ghost concludes, as
from a clear and infallible promise, and proposition, that if we walk in the
light, as he is in the light, then does the blood of Christ cleanse us from all
sin; meaning, that then and thereby it appears that it is done: as by the
contrary, unholiness, and unholy walking is like darkness, which obscureth all
the goodly presumption, flourishes, and hopes of an unregenerate Man, verse. 6.
For this purpose, 1 Ioh. 5. 8. The water of Sanctification is made a witness;
now the nature of a witness is not to darken and obscure matters in question,
but to clear them; and Psalm. 51. 10, 11, 12. when David saw his heart so
unclean, and his spirit so altogether out of order, his Justification was not
then brighter, for then he should have had the joy of his salvation more full,
and not so to sink, as that he begs it might be restored to him, as implying,
that his joy for the present was wanting to him.

Error 78. God has given six witnesses, three in Heaven, and three in Earth,
to beget and build justifying Faith upon.

Confutation 78. This expression answers not the pattern of wholesome words, for
if this position be taken thus, God has given all these six witnesses both to
beget and also to build Justifying Faith upon, it is contrary to Scripture, for
God has not given all these six witnesses to beget Justifying Faith, because
the water of Sanctification, which is one of the six, does not go before
justifying Faith, but follows after it, for our hearts are justified by
Faith, Act. 15. 9.

Error 79. If a Member of a Church be unsatisfied with any thing in the Church,
if he express his offense, whether he has used all means to convince the
Church or no, he ^y depart.

Confutation 79. Contrary to the rule of our Savior, Matthew. 18. If thy Brother
effend* (convictingly) admonish; whence it is evident, that in our carriage
toward a private Brother, we must convince him, before admonish him, much less
separate from him. Therefore our carriage toward the whole Church must upon
greater reason be with like prudence, and tenderness; whence the argument
follows thus. An offense taken before conviction, will not bear an admonition,
much less Separation from a Brother or Church; but the offense in the question
propounded is such, Ergo.

Error 80. If a Man think he may edify better in another Congregation, than in
his own, that is ground enough to depart ordinarily, from Word, Seals,
Fastings, Feastings, and all Administrations in his own Church, notwithstanding
the offense of the Church, often manifested to him for so doing.

Confutation 80. It is contrary to the condition and station of a Member of the
Body in which he stands, 1 Cor. 12, 27. A Member must not put it self from the
Body upon its own thoughts; as the admission of a Member was by the consent of
the whole, so likewise must his dismission be. It is contrary also to the duty
of a Member, Ephesians. 4. 16. there must be an effectual working in every part for
the edification of the whole, which this departure from the administration of
all the holy Ordinances in the Church will necessarily hinder. It is contrary
also to the good of the whole Church, and the rule which the Lord has
appointed for the preservation thereof, 1 Cor. 14. 33. God is not the author of
Confusion, and therefore not of this practice which will certainly bring it;
for if one Member, upon these his imaginations, may depart, Why may not ten,
yea twenty, yea an hundred? Why may not the Pastor, upon such grounds, leave
his People, as well as they him, considering the Tie is equal on both parts?

Error 81. Where Faith is held forth by the Ministry, as the condition of the
Covenant of Grace on Man's part, as also evidencing Justification by
Sanctification, and the activity of Faith, in that Church there is not
sufficient bread.

Confutation 81. This position seems to deny Faith to be a condition at all,
or at all active, and so if condition in this place signify a qualification in
Man wrought by the Holy Ghost, without which the Promises do not belong to Men,
this is contrary to Scripture, for John 6. 48. Christ is the bread of life; and
yet in the same Chapter, Faith is held out as a condition of the Covenant by
the Ministry of Christ himself; and the activity of it is held forth in these
words, Verily I say unto you, Unless ye eat the flesh, and drink the blood of
the Son of Man, you have no life in you; and who so eats, etc. As for the
lawfulness of evidencing Justification by Sanctification (if it be understood
of that Sanctification which is by Faith in Christ) it is contrary to the
intent of the whole Epistle of John, besides many other places of Scripture,
which yet hold forth bread sufficient (if by sufficient is meant that D^ctrin,
which in its right use is wholesome and good food) for it was written the their
joy might be full; yet the evidencing of Justification by Sanctification is
expressly held forth, chap. 1. verse 7. where he says, If we walk in the light,
as Christ is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood
of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin: by walking in the light, in
opposition to walking in darkness spoken of before, verse. 6. Sanctification is
evidently meant, and this is expressly noted to be an evidence of our good
condition, when it is said, If we so walk, the blood of Christ cleanses us
from all sin.

Error 82. A Minister must not Pray nor Preach against any Error, unless he
declare in the open congregation, upon any Members inquiry, the Names of them
that hold them.

Confutation 82. This is contrary to Scriptures, which teach Ministers to Pray
and Preach against all errors by whomsoever they be held, when it calls them
Watchmen and Stewards, in whom faithfulness is required in all administrations:
yet withal it enjoyneth them, if a Brother sin not openly, to admonish him in
secret, first between them two alone, and afterward in the presence of two or
three witnesses, and after that (and not before) to bring the matter to the
Church, Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17.

Unsavory Speeches Confuted.
These that follow were judged by the Assembly aforesaid, as unsafe speeches.
1. TO say that we are justified by Faith, is an unsafe Speech, we must say, we
are Justified by Christ.
Answer 1. False, for the constant language of the Scripture is not unsafe; but
we are justified by Faith, is the constant language of the Scripture, Romans 5.
1. being justified by faith; the righteousness of faith, Romans 10. 31, 32.
Righteousness by Faith, Phil. 3. 9, 10.

2. The distinct phrase of the Scripture used in distinguishing Legal and
Evangelical righteousness is no unsafe speech; but such is this, Romans 9. 31,
32. Israel found not righteousness, because they sought it of the Law, and not
of, or by Faith, so Romans 10. 5, 6. The Righteousness of Faith, says thus, etc.
The Apostle makes these two so directly opposite, as membra dividentia, or
contrary species, that there is no danger one should be taken for another, but
that it is so safe, as that he that affirms the one denies the other: yea, in
the most exact expression that ever Paul made, to exclude whatsoever might be
unsafe toward a Man's justification, you have this phrase, yea twice in the
same verse, Phil. 3. 5. Not having mine own righteousness, which is of the Law,
but that which is through the Faith of Christ; And again, The righteousness
which is of God by Faith ((...)) Ergo, it is no unsafe speech, yea, it must be
said on the contrary from those grounds, that to say a Man is justified before
Faith, or without Faith, is unsafe, as contrary to the language of the
Scriptures.

And for the second part, that we must say, we are justified by Christ, it is
true so far, as that it cannot be denied, nor is it unfound or unsafe at all so
to speak, but if it mean a must of necessity always, or only so to speak, as
it is here set in opposition to the phrase of being justified by Faith, then it
is utterly false, for as much as the Scripture leads us along in the way of
other expressions ordinarily, and the Apostle gives us the truth of doctrine
and soundness of phrase together, Romans 10. 3. Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness to every one that believes.

2. To evidence justification by sanctification, or graces, savours of Rome.
Answer. Not so, 1. Rome acknowledges not justification in our common sense,
Scil. by righteousness imputed. 2. Rome denies evidencing of our justification
and peace with God, and teaches Doctrine of doubting, and professes that a
Man cannot know what God will do with him for life or death, unless by special
revelation, which is not ordinary: but if they mean old Rome, or Paul's Rome,
to which he Wrote, it is true, that it savours of the Doctrine that they
received, as appears, Romans 8. 28. All things co-work for good (the evil of
every evil being taken away, which is a point of justification, and this is
propounded under the evidence of the love of God) to them that love him,
because, Romans 8. 2, 9, 13, 14. the evidencing of our being in Christ, freedom
from condemnation and adoption, is prosecuted by arguments from sanctification,
as by having the spirit, being led by the spirit, walking after the spirit,
mortifying the deeds of the flesh by the spirit: and if hereto were added the
Doctrine of Sr. John, so abundant this way in his first Epistle (whereof I have
already made mention) I doubt not, but it was the Faith of the Church of Rome
that then was, so that the speech is unsavory, and casting a foul aspersion on
a good thing expressed in the Scriptures, but as for the point it self, that is
included, we refer it to it is place, to be discussed, when it is rightly stated.

3. If I be holy, I am never the better accepted of God; if I be unholy, I am
never the worse; this I am sure of, he that has elected me must save me.
Answ. These words savor very ill, and relish of a careless and ungracious
spirit, for howsoever we grant that our acceptance unto justification is
always in and through Christ the same in God's account, yet this expression
imports, that though a Man's conversation be never so holy and gracious, yet he
can expect never the more manifestation of God's kindness and love to him,
contrary to Psalm. 50. ult. To him that orders his conversation aright, I will
show the salvation of God; and John 14. 21. It implies Secondly, that though a
Man's conversation be never so vile and sensual, yet he need not fear nor
expect any farther expression of God's displeasure and anger to break forth
against him, or withdrawings of his favor from him, contrary to Psalm. 51. 8,
11, 12. where God breaks David's bones for his sin; and Jonah 2. 4. Jonah was
as one cast out of God's presence; and 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. If you forsake him he
will forsake you: And, in a word, it imports, as if God neither loved
righteousness, nor hated wickedness, contrary to Psalm. 45. 6, 7. and did take
no delight in the Obedience of his People, contrary to Psalm. 147. 11. The Lord
delights in those that fear him, etc. As concerning the last clause, He that
has elected me must save me: it is true, the foundation of God's election
remains sure, yet it is as true, that whom he chooses, he purposes to bring
to Salvation, through Sanctification of the Spirit, 2 These. 2. 13.

4. If Christ will let me sin, let him look to it, upon his honor be it.
Answ. This resorts the Lord's words upon himself, Prove. 4. 22, 24. Keep thine
heart, etc. Ponder thy Paths, etc. and therefore no less blasphemous, and is
contrary to the professed practice of David, Psalm. 18. 23. I was upright before
him, and kept my self from mine iniquity: The latter clause puts the cause of
God's dishonor upon himself, no less blasphemous than the former, and contrary
to Romans 2. 23. where the dishonouring of God is laid upon themselves.

5. Here is a great stir about graces, and looking to hearts, but give me
Christ, I seek not for graces, but for Christ; I seek not for promises, but for
Christ; I seek not for Sanctification, but for Christ; tell not me of
meditation and duties, but tell me of Christ.
Answ. 1. This speech seems to make a flat opposition between Christ and his
graces, contrary to that in Joh. 1. 16. Of his fullness we all received, and
grace for grace; and between Christ and his Promises, contrary to Gal. 3. 13,
14. Christ was made a curse, that we might receive the promise of the Spirit;
and, Luke 1. 70. with 74. And betwixt Christ and all holy duties, contrary to
Tit. 2. 14. and therefore hold forth expressions not agreeing to wholesome
Doctrine.

6. A living Faith, that has living fruits, may grow from the living Law.
Answ. This whole speech is utterly cross to the sound form of Words required,
2 Timothy 1. 13. Hold fast the form of sound words, 1. That a Hypocrite may have a
living Law, is contrary to Iam. 2. 17. where the hypocrites faith is called a
dead Faith. 2. That a hypocrite may bring forth living fruit, is contrary to
that, Heb. 9. 14. 3. That all this grows from a living law, contrary to 2 Cor.
3. 6. where the Law is called a killing Letter, and to Gal. 3. 21. If there had
been a law which could have given life, etc.

7. I may know I am Christ's, not because I do crucisie the lusts of the flesh,
but because I do not crucify them, but believe in Christ that crucifieth my
lusts for me.
Answ. 1. The phrase is contrary to the Scripture language, Gal. 5. 24. They
that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. 2.
It savours of the flesh, for these three things may seem to be expressed in it.
1. If Scripture makes not opposite, but subordinate, Romans 8. 13. I through the
Spirit crucify the flesh. 2. That if I do not crucify my lusts, then there is
an open and free way of looking to Christ, contrary to the Scripture, Mat. 5.
8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, both in boldness of
Faith here, and fruition hereafter, 2 Timothy 2. 19. Let every one that names the
Lord Jesus, depart from iniquity. 3. That believing in Christ may ease me from
endeavoring to crucify my lusts in my own person; which is so gross, that it
needs no more confutation than to name it. 4. The safe sense that may be
possibly intended in such a speech, is this, If I crucify the flesh in my own
strength, it is no safe Evidence of my being in Christ; but if renouncing my
self, I crucify the flesh in the strength of Christ, applying his death by
Faith, it is a safe evidence of my being in Christ: but this sense conveyed
in these words, is to conveigh wholesome doctrine in an unwholesome Channel, and
a darkening and losing the truth in an unsavory expression.

8. Peter more leaned to a Covenant of works than Paul, Paul's Doctrine was
more for free grace than Peter's.
Answ. To oppose these persons and the doctrine of these two Apostles of
Christ, who were guided by one and the same Spirit in Preaching and penning
thereof, (2 Pet. 1. 21. Holy Men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost, 2 Timothy 3. 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God) in such a
point as the Covenant of works and grace, is little less than Blasphemy.

9. If Christ be my Sanctification, what need I look to any thing in myself, to
evidence my Justification?
Answ. This position is therefore unsound, because it holds forth Christ to be
my Sanctification, so as that I need not look to any inherent holiness in my
self; whereas Christ is therefore said to be our Sanctification, because he
works Sanctification in us, and we daily ought to grow up in him, by receiving
new supply and increase of grace from his fullness, according to 2 Pet. 3. 18.
Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Proceedings of the General Court holden at New-Town, in the Massachusetts
in New England, October. 2. 1637. Against Mr. Wheelwright, and other Erroneous
and Seditious Persons, for their Disturbances of the Public Peace.
ALthough the Assembly of the Churches had confuted and condemned most of those
New Opinions which were sprung up amongst us, and Mr. Cotton had in public
view consented with the rest, yet the Leaders in those Erroneous ways would not
give in, but stood still to maintain their New Light, which they had boasted
of, and that the difference was still as wide as before, viz. as great as
between Heaven and Hell: Mr. Wheelwright also continued his Preaching after his
former manner, and Mistress Hutchison her wonted Meetings and Exercises, and
much offense was still given by her, and others, in going out of the Ordinary
Assemblies, when Mr. Will. began any exercise; and some of the Messengers of the
Church of Boston had contemptuously withdrawn themselves from the General
Assembly, with professed dislike of their proceedings, and many Evidences brake
forth of their discontented and turbulent spirits; it was conceived by the
Magistrates, and others of the Country, that the means which had been used
proving uneffectual, the case was now desperate, and the last remedy was to be
applied, and that without farther delay, lest it should be attempted too late,
when fitter opportunity might be offered for their advantage, as they had
boasted, and did certainly expect upon the return of some of their chief
supporters, who by a special providence were now absent from them: And for this
end the General Court being assembled in the ordinary course, it was determined
to begin with these Troublers of our Peace, and to suppress them by the Civil
Authority, whereunto there was a fair occasion offered upon a Seditious
Writing, which had been delivered into the Court in March, when Mr. Wheel. was
convict of Sedition, etc. under the hands of more than Threescore of them, and
Entitled, A Remonstrance, or Petition; the Contents whereof were as follows:

We whose Names are underwritten (have diligently observed this honored
Courts proceedings against our dear and reverend Brother in Christ, Mr. Wheel.
now under censure of the Court for the Truth of Christ) we do humbly beseech
this Honorable Court, to accept this Remonstrance and Petition of ours, in all
due submission tendered to your Worships.

For first, whereas our beloved Brother Mr. Wheel. is censured for contempt, by
the greater part of this honored Court, we desire your Worships to consider
the sincere intention of our Brother to promote your end in the day of Fast,
for whereas we do perceive your principal intention the day of fast looked
chiefly at the public Peace of the Churches, our Reverend Brother did to his
best strength, and as the Lord assisted him, labor to promote your end, and
therefore endeavored to draw us nearer unto Christ, the head of our union,
that so we might be established in Peace, which we conceive to be the true way,
sanctified of God, to obtain your end, and therefore deserves no such censure
as we conceive.

Secondly, Whereas our dear Brother is censured of Sedition, we beseech your
Worships to consider, that either the person condemned must be culpable of some
Seditious Fact, or his Doctrine must be Seditious, or must breed Sedition in the
hearts of his hearers, or else we know not upon what grounds he should be
Censured. Now to the first, we have not heard any that have witnessed against
our Brother for any Seditious Fact. Secondly, neither was the Doctrine it self,
being no other but the very expressions of the Holy Ghost himself, and
therefore cannot justly be branded with Sedition. Thirdly, if you look at the
effects of his Doctrine upon the hearers, it has not stirred up Sedition in
us, not so much as by accident; we have not drawn the Sword, as sometimes Peter
did rashly, neither have we rescued our innocent Brother, as sometimes the
Israelites did Jonathan, and yet they did not Seditiously. The Covenant of Free
grace held forth by our Brother, has taught us rather to become humble
Suppliants to your Worships, and if we should not prevail, we would rather with
patience give our cheeks to the smiters. Since therefore the Teacher, the
Doctrine, and the Hearers be most free from Sedition (as we conceive) we humbly
beseech you in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, your Judge and ours, and for
the honor of this Court, and the proceedings thereof, that you will be pleased
either to make it appear to us, and to all the World, to whom the knowledge of
all these things will come, wherein the Sedition lies, or else acquit our
Brother of such a Censure.

Farther, we beseech you, remember the old method of Satan, the ancient Enemy
of Free grace, in all ages of the Churches, who has raised up such Calumnies
against the faithful Prophets of God, Eliah was called the troubler of Israel,
1 King. 18. 17, 18 Amos was charged for conspiracy, Amos 7. 10. Paul was
counted a Pestilent Fellow, or mover of Sedition, and a Ringleader of a Sect,
Acts 24. 5. and Christ himself, as well as Paul, was charged to be a Teacher of
New Doctrine, Mark 1. 27. Acts 17. 19. Now we beseech you consider, whether
that old Serpent work not after his old method, even in our days.

Farther, we beseech you, consider the danger of meddling against the Prophets
of God, Psalm. 105. 14, 15. for what ye do unto them, the Lord Jesus takes as
done unto himself; if you hurt any of his Members, the head is very sensible of
it: for so says the Lord of Hosts, He that touches you, touches the apple of
mine eye, Zech. 2. 8. And better a Millstone were hanged about our necks, and
that we were cast into the Sea, than that we should offend any of these little
ones which believe on him, Mat. 18. 6.

And lastly, we beseech you consider, how you should stand in relation to us,
as nursing Fathers, which give us encouragement to promote our humble requests
to you, or else we would say with the Prophet, Isa. 22. 4. Look from me, that I
may weep bitterly; Labor not to comfort me, etc. or as Ier. 9. 2. Oh that I
had in the Wilderness a lodging-place of a wayfaring man. And thus have we
made known our Griefs and Desires to your Worships, and leave them upon Record
with the Lord and with you, knowing that if we should receive repulse from you,
with the Lord we shall find Grace.

Amongst others who had subscribed to this Writing, William Aspinwall was one,
and being returned for one of the Deputies of Boston, it was propounded in the
Court, whether he was fit to be received a Member of the Court, having
subscribed to the said Writing, which was so much to the Dishonor and Contempt
thereof, etc. Whereupon he was demanded if he would justify the matter
contained in the said Writing: which when he had peremptorily affirmed by the
vote of the Court he was presently dismissed: Whereupon Mr. Cogshall, another
of the Deputies of Boston, who had not subscribed to the said Writing, being
then a Deputy of the Court, spoke very boldly to the Court, and told them, that
seeing they had put out Mr. Aspinwall for that matter, they were best make one
work of all, for as for himself, though his hand were not to the Petition, yet
he did approve of it, and his hand was to a Protestation, which was to the same
effect; Whereupon the Court dismissed him also, and sent word to Boston to
choose two new Deputies; then Mr. Coddington the third Deputy, moved the Court
(by order from the Town of Boston) that the former censure against Mr.
VVheelwright might be reversed, and that the Order made against receiving such
as should not be allowed by the Magistrates might be repealed; whereby the
Court perceived their obstinate Resolution in maintaining this Faction, and
thereupon gave Order he should be sent for; and for the Law, the Answer was,
that whereas a Declaration had been made of the Equity of that Law, and that
specially for the satisfaction of those of Boston, and an Answer had been
published by some of them, wherein much Reproach and Slander had been cast upon
the Court, to which a Reply had been made above six weeks since, but was kept
in upon expectation that the late Assembly would have had some good effect, in
clearing the points in Controversy, and reconciling the minds of the adverse
party, but they continuing obstinate and irreconcilable, it was thought fit
the whole Proceedings about the Law should be brought forth; and accordingly
the next day, the Declaration, the Answer, and the Reply, were all brought to
the Court, and there openly read; which gave such satisfaction to those which
were present, as no man ought to object, and some that were of the adverse
party, and had taken offense at the Law, did openly acknowledge themselves
fully satisfied.

When the Warrant came to the Town of Boston, they assembled together and
agreed (the greater part of them) to send the same Deputies which the Court
have rejected, pretending that it was their liberty, and those were the ablest
men, etc. but Mr. Cotton coming amongst them, and perceiving their rash and
contemptuous Behavior, by his Wisdom diverted them from that course; so they
chose two other, but one of them they knew would be rejected, because his Hand
was also to the seditious Writing, as it fell out, for he refusing to
acknowledge his fault in it, was also dismissed, and a new Warrant sent for
another to be chosen, which they never made any return of, but that Contempt
the Court let pass.

When Mr. Wheelwright appeared, it was declared to him, that whereas he was
long since convicted of sedition and contempt of Authority, and time had been
given him from Court to Court, to come to the knowledge of his offense, the
Court thought it now time to know how his mind stood, whether he would
acknowledge his Offense, or abide the Sentence of the Court? His Answer was to
this effect, That he had committed no Sedition nor Contempt, he had delivered
nothing but the truth of Christ, and for the application of his Doctrine, it
was by others, and not by him, etc.

To which it was answered by the Court, that they had not censured his
Doctrine, but left it as it was; but his Application, by which he laid the
Magistrates, and the Ministers and most of the People of God in these Churches,
under a Covenant of Works, and thereupon declared them to be Enemies to Christ,
and Antichrists, and such Enemies as Herod and Pilate; and the Scribes and
Pharisees, etc. persuading the people to look at them, and deal with them as
such, and that he described them so, as all men might know who he meant, as
well as if he had named the parties; for he was present in the Court a little
before, when both Magistrates and Ministers did openly profess their Judgment
in that point, and that they did walk in such a way of evidencing Justification
by Sanctification, etc. as he held forth to be a Covenant of Works.

Secondly, The fruits of that Sermon of Mr. Wheelwrights, together with the
Declaration of his Judgment in that point both before and since, have declared
it to tend to Sedition: for whereas before he broached his Opinions, there was
a peaceable and comely Order in all Affairs in the Churches, and Civil State,
etc. now the difference which he has raised amongst men, by a false
distinction of a Covenant of Grace and a Covenant of Works; whereby one party
is looked at as friends to Christ, and the other as his Enemies, etc. all
things are turned upside down amongst us. As first, in the Church, he that will
not renounce his Sanctification, and wait for an immediate Revelation of the
Spirit, cannot be admitted, be he never so godly; he that is already in the
Church, that will not do the same, and acknowledge this new Light, and say as
they say, is presently noted, and under esteemed, as favoring of a Covenant of
Works; thence it spreads into the Families, and sets divisions between Husband
and wife, and other Relations there, till the weaker give place to the
stronger, otherwise it turns to open Contention; it is come also into Civil and
public Affairs, and has bred great Disturbance there, as appeared in the late
Expedition against the P^quids; for whereas in former Expeditions the Town of
Boston was as forward as any others to send of their choice Members, and a
greater number the other Town^, in the time of the former Governor, now in
this last service they sent not a Member, but one or two whom they cared not to
be rid of, and but a few others, and those of the most refuse sort, and that in
such a careless manner, as gave great discouragement to the Service, not one
man of that side accompanying their Pastor, when he was sent by the joint
consent of the Court, and all the Elders upon that Expedition, not so much as
bidding him farewell; what was the reason of this difference? Why, nothing but
this, Mr. Wheelwright had taught them that the former Governor, and some of
the Magistrates then were friends of Christ and Free Grace, but the present
were Enemies, etc. Antichrists, Persecutors: What was the reason that the
former Governor never stirred out, but attended by the Sergeants, with
Halberts or Carbines; but this present Governor neglected? Why, the people
were taught to look at this, at an Enemy to Christ, etc. The same difference
has been observed in Town Lots, Rates, and in neighbor Meetings, and almost
in all Affairs, whereby it is apparent what disturbance the seditious
Application of Mr. Wheelwright has wrought among us; therefore as the Apostle
says, I would they were cut off that trouble you; and as Cain, Hagar and
Ishmael, were expressed as troublers of the families, (which were then as
commonwealths) so Justice requires, and the necessity of the Peace calls for
it, that such disturbers should be put out from amongst us, seeing it is one of
their Tenants, that it is not possible their Opinions, and external Peace, can
stand together; and that the difference between them and us is (as they say) as
wide as between Heaven and Hell.

Further the Court declared what means had been used, to convince him, and to
reduce him into the right way, as first at the Court, when he was convict of
his Offense, the Ministers being called together, did labor by many sound
Arguments, both in public and private, to convince him of his Error and Sin,
but he contemptuously slighted whatsoever they or the Magistrates said to him
in that behalf; and since that much pains had been taken with him, both by
Conference and Writing, not only privately, but also by the late Assembly of
the Churches, wherein his erroneous Opinions, which were the groundwork of his
seditious Sermon were clearly confuted, and himself put to silence, yet he
obstinately persisted in justification of his erroneous Opinions; and besides,
there was an Apology written in defense of the Proceedings of the Court against
him, which though it were kept in for a time, in expectation of a Remonstrance,
which some of his party were in hand with, for justification of his Sermon, yet
it was long since published, and without question he has seen it: besides, the
Court has used much patience toward him from time to time, admonishing him of
his danger, and waiting for his Repentance, in stead whereof he has threatened
us with an Appeal, and urged us to proceed: To this Mr. Wheelwright replied,
that he would, by the help of God, make good his doctrines, and frees them from
all the Arguments which had been brought against them in the late Assembly, and
denied that he had seen the Apology, but confessed that he might have seen it
if he would. This was observed as an argument of the pride of his spirit, and
wilful neglect of all the means of Light in that he would not vouchsafe to read
a very brief Writing, and such as so much concerned him.

Although the Cause was now ready for Sentence, yet night being come, the Court
arose, and enjoined him to appear the next morning.

The next morning he appeared, but long after the hour appointed; the Court
demanded what he had to allege, why Sentence should not proceed against him:
He answered, that there was no Sedition or Contempt proved against him, and
whereas he was charged to have set forth the Magistrates and Ministers, as
Enemies to Christ, etc. he desired it might be showed him in what page or leaf
of his Sermon, he had so said of them; The Court answered, that he who designs
a man by such Circumstances, as do note him out to common Intendments, does as
much as if he named the party: when Paul spoke of those of the Circumcision, it
was as certain whom he meant, as if he named the Jews; when in Bohemia they
spoke of differences between men, sub una and sub utraque, it was all one as to
have said Papists and Protestants; so of the Monstrants and Remonstrants: for
by the means of him and his followers, all the people of God in this Country
were under the distinction of men, under the Covenant of Grace, and men under a
Covenant of works. Mr. VVheelw. alleged a place in Mat. ^1. where Christ
speaking against the Scribes and Pharisees, no advantage could they take
against him, because he did not name them: but it was answered, they did not
spare him for that cause, for then they would have taken their advantage at
other times, when he did name them. One or two of the Deputies spoke in his
defense, but it was to so little purpose (being only more out of affection to
the party, than true judgment of the state of the cause) that the Court had
little regard of it. Mr. VVheelwright being demanded if he had ought else to
speak, said that there was a double Fallacy in the charge laid upon him. 1. In
that the troubles of the Civil State were imputed to him, but as it was by
accident, as it is usual in preaching of the Gospel. 2. That it was not his
Sermon that was the cause of them, but the Lord Jesus Christ. To which the
Court answered, that it was apparent he was the Instrument of our Troubles, he
must prove them to be by such accident, and till then the Blame must rest upon
himself, for we know Christ would not own them, being out of his way. After
these and many other speeches had passed, the Court declaring him guilty for
troubling the Civil Peace, both for his seditious Sermon, and for his corrupt
and dangerous Opinions, and for his contemptuous Behavior in diverse Courts
formerly, and now obstinately maintaining and justifying his said Errors and
Offenses, and for that he refused to depart voluntarily from us, which the
Court had now offered him, and in a manner persuaded him unto; Seeing it was
apparent unto him, from that of our Savior, Matthew. that we could not continue
together without the ruin of the whole, he was sentenced to be disfranchised
and banished our Jurisdiction, and to be put in safe custody, except he should
give sufficient Security to depart before the end of March: upon this, he
appealed to the King's Majesty, but the Court told him an Appeal did not lie in
this case, for the King having given us an Authority by his Grant under his
Great Seal of England to hear and determine all causes without any Reservation,
we were not to admit of any such Appeals for any such subordinate State, either
in Ireland, or Scotland, or other places; and if an Appeal should lie in one
case, it might be challenged in all, and then there would be no use of
Government among us, neither did an Appeal lie from any Court in any County or
Corporation in England, but if a party will remove his cause to any of the
King's higher Courts, he must bring the King's Writ for it; neither did he
tender any Appeal, nor call any Witnesses, nor desired any Act to be entered of
it: then he was demanded if he would give Security for his quiet departure;
which he refusing to do, he was committed to the custody of the Marshal. The
next morning he bethought himself better, and offered to give security,
alleging that he did not conceive the day before, that a Sentence of
Banishment was pronounced against him; he also suffered to relinquish his
Appeal, and said he would accept of a simple Banishment; The Court answered
him, that for his Appeal, he might do as he pleased, and for his departure, he
should have the liberty the Court had offered him, provided he should not
preach in the mean time; but that he would not yield unto; so in the end the
Court gave him leave to go home, upon his promise, that if he were not departed
out of this Jurisdiction within fourteen days, he would render himself at the
house of Mr. Stanton one of the Magistrates, there to abide as a Prisoner, till
the Court should dispose of him.

Mr. Cogshall. THe next who was called, was Mr. John Cogshall, one of the
Deacons of Boston, upon his appearance the Court declared that the cause why
they had sent for him, was partly by occasion of his Speeches and Behavior in
this Court the other day, and partly for some light miscarriages at other
times, and that they did look at him, as one that had a principal Hand in all
our late Disturbances of our public Peace. The first things we do charge you
with, is your justifying a Writing called a Remonstrance or Petition, but
indeed a seditious Libel, and that when Mr. Asp. was questioned by the Court
about it, you stood up uncalled, and justified the same, saying to this effect:
that if the Court meant to dismiss him for that it was best to make but one
work of all, for though your self had not your Hand to the Petition, yet you
did approve thereof, and your Hand was to the Protestation, which was to the
same effect; whereupon you being also dismissed, used clamorous and unbeseeming
Speeches, to the Court at your departure, whereby we take you to be of the same
mind with those who made the Petition, and therefore liable to the same
punishment; upon this the Petition was openly read, and liberty was granted to
him to answer for himself. His first answer was, that what he then spoke, he
spoke as a Member of the Court: to which it was answered again, that 1. He was
no Member of the Court standing upon Trial whether to be allowed or rejected,
at such a time as he uttered most of those speeches. 2. Admit he were, yet it
is no privilege of a Member to reproach or affront the whole Court, it is
Licentiousness, and no Liberty, when a man may speak what he list; for he was
reminded of some words he uttered at his going forth of the Court, to this
effect, that we had censured the Truth of Christ, and that it was the greatest
stroke that ever was given to Free Grace.

To which he answered, That his words were mistaken; for he said that he would
pray that our Eyes might be opened to see what we did, for he thought it the
greatest stroke that ever was given to N. E. for he did believe that Mr.
Wheelwright did hold forth the Truth. He was further charged, that at the
Court, after the day of Elections, he complained of Injury, that the Petition
which was tendered, was not presently read before they went to Election.

To which being answered, That it was not then seasonable, and against the
Order of that day, but the Court were then ready to hear it, if it were
tendered; whereupon he turned his back upon the Court, and used menacing
speeches to this effect. That since they could not be heard then, they would
take another course. To which he answered (confessing he spoke over hastily at
that time) that his words were only these, Then we must do what God shall
direct us. He was further charged that he should say, that half the people that
were in Church Covenant in N. E. were under a Covenant of Works; this he did
not deny, but said, he proved it by the Parable of the ten Virgins, Mat. 15.
After these and many other Speeches had passed between the Court and himself;
by which it plainly appeared, that he had been a very busy instrument in
occasioning of our public Disturbances, and his justifying of Mr. Wheelwrights
Sermon, and the Petition or Remonstrance being seditious Writings, a Motion was
made for his Banishment, but he pretended that there was nothing could be laid
to his Charge, but matter of different opinion, and that he knew not one
Example in Scripture, that a man was banished for his Judgment: It was
answered, that if he had kept his Judgment to himself, so as the public Peace
had not been troubled or endangered by it, we should have left him to himself,
for we do not challenge power over men's Consciences, but when seditious
Speeches and Practices discover such a corrupt Conscience, it is our duty to
use Authority to reform both. But though a great part of the Court did incline
to a motion for his Banishment; yet because his Speech and Behavior at present
were more modest and submiss, than formerly they had been, and for that he
excused his former Intemperances by his much employment and public businesses,
it was thought fit to deliver him from that Temptation, so he was only
sentenced to be disfranchised, with admonition no more to occasion any
disturbance of the public Peace, either by speech, or otherwise, upon pain of
Banishment and further censure.


Mr. Aspin. THE next who was called, was Mr. William Aspin, to whom the Court
said, that his case was in a manner the same with Master Cogshals, his Hand was
to the Petition, he had justified Master Wheelwright's Sermon, and had
condemned the Court, and therefore what could he say, why the Court should not
proceed to Sentence? For he had been present and heard what was said to Master
Cogshall to have convinced him of his fault, and therefore it would be needless
to repeat any thing. To this he answered, and confessed the Petition, and that
his Heart was to it, as well as his Hand; and that that for which Mr.
Wheelwright was censured, was for nothing but the Truth of Christ, and desired
to know what we could lay to his Charge therein. The Court told him, that he
being a Member of this Civil Body, and going contrary to his Relation and Oath,
to stop the course of Justice in countenancing seditious Persons and Practices
against the Face of Authority, this made him to be a seditious Person. He
answered, he did but prefer an Humble Petition, which he could not do, but he
must intimate some cause why, and that Mephibosheth in his Petition did imply
as much of David's unjust Sentence against him as was in this Petition. The
Court replied that he was ill advised to bring that Example for his
Justification which makes clearly against him, for Mephibosheth does not charge
David with any injustice, not so much as by Implication, but excuses himself,
and lays all the blame upon his Servant. Then he alleged the Petition of
Esther to Abasuerus; but neither would that serve his turn, for she petitioned
for her life, etc. without charging the King with Injustice. He still fled to
this Plea, that it is lawful for Subjects to petition; the Court answered that
this was no Petition, but a seditious Libel, the mis-naming of a thing does not
alter the nature of it: besides, they called it in the first place a
Remonstrance, which implies that they pretended Interest, and is in the nature
of it a Plea, which challenges a right of a party: besides, they give
peremptory Judgment in the cause, and that directly opposite to the Judgment of
the Court; the Court declared Mr. Wheelwright guilty, they proclaim him
innocent, the Court judged his Speech to be false and seditious, they affirmed
it to be the Truth of Christ, and the very words of the Holy Ghost, which is
apparently untrue, if not blasphemous. Further in pretending their moderation,
they put Arguments in the peoples minds to invite them to violence, by bringing
the Example of Peter drawing his Sword, wherein they blame not his Fact, but
his Rashness; And that of the People rescuing Jonathan, which to make the more
effectual, they say that it was not seditious.

Lastly, It was great arrogance of any private man thus openly to advance his
own Judgment of the Court, therefore it will appear to their Posterity as a
Brand of Infamy, upon these erroneous Opinions, that those who maintained them
were not censured for their Judgment, but for seditious Practices: He further
pleaded, that no Petition can be made in such a case, but something may be
mistaken through misprision as trenching upon Authority, the Court answered,
that if they had only petitioned the Court to remit this Censure, or had
desired respite for further considerations, or leave to propound their doubts,
there could have been no danger of being mistaken. Besides there was no need of
such haste in petitioning, seeing the Sentence was not given, but deferring to
the next Court, Master VVheelwright ^^j^yned only to appear there. The Court
then being about to give S^ntence, Mast^ Aspin desired the Court to show a Rule
in Scripture for Banishment; the court answered as before, that Hagar and
Ishmael were banished for disturbance: he replied that if a Father give a Ch^ a
Portion, and sent him forth, it was not B^nishment: but it was answered, the
Scripture calls it a casting out, not a sending forth; and one said further
that he was a Child worthy of such a Portion.

Then the Sentence of the Court was for his dis-franchisemnnt and banishment,
and time given him to the last of March upon Security for his departure then,
which he presently tendered, and so was dismissed. The Court intended only to
have dis-franchised him, as they had done Mr. Cogshall, but his Behavior was
so contemptuous, and his Speeches so peremptory, that occasioned a further
aggravation, and it appeared afterward to be by an overruling Hand of God, for
the next day it was discovered, that he was the man that did frame the
Petition, and drew many to subscribe to it, and some had their names put to it
without their knowledge, and in his first draught there were other passages so
foul, as he was forced to put them out, and yet many had not subscribed, but
upon his promise that it should not be delivered without advice of Mr. Cotton,
which was never done.


William Baulston, and Ed. Hutchison. AFter these, two of the Sergeants of
Boston were called, William Baulston and Ed Hutchison, these both had their
Hands to the Petition, and just^fied the same; Will. Baulston told the Court,
that he knew that if such a Petition had been made in any other place in the
world, there would have been no fault found with it. The other told the Court,
(turning himself in a scornful manner) that if they took away his Estate, they
must keep his Wi^e and Children; for which he was presently committed to the
Offi^r. The Court reasoned a good while with them both, but they were
peremptory, and would acknowledge no failing, and because of their contemptuous
Sp^eches, and for that they were known to be very busy persons, and such as
had offered Contempt to the Magistrates, for that they were not of their
Opinion, they were dis-franchised and fined, Will Baulston Twenty Pounds, Ed.
H^tchison Forty Pounds.

The next morning Ed. Hutchison acknowledged his fault in his misbehaviour in
the face of the Court, and so was released of his Imprisonment, but both were
disabled from bearing any public Office.


Tho. Marshal, Dynely, and Dier. Rich. Gridly. ANother day were called four
more of the Principal stirring Men, who had subscribed to the Petition, Thomas
Marshal the Ferry-man, who justified the Petition so far, that he would not
acknowledge any fault; yet he answered more modestly th^n the former, therefore
he was not sined, but dis-franchised, and put out of his place. Dynely, and
Dyer had little to say for themselves, but persisting in their justification,
they were also dis-franchised: likewise Rich. Gridly, an honest poor Man, but
very apt to meddle in public affairs, beyond his calling or skill, (which
indeed was the fault of them all, and of many others in the Country) mean
condition, and weak parts, having nothing to say, but that he could find no
fault, etc. was dis-franchised.


Mrs. Hutchison. ALL these (except Mr. Wheelwright) were but young branches,
sprung out of an old root, the Court had now to do with the Head of all this
Faction, (Dux faemina facti) a Woman had been the breeder and nourisher of all
these distempers, one Mistress Hutchison, the Wife of Mr. William Hutchison of
Boston (a very honest and peaceable Man, of good estate) and the daughter of
Mr. Marvary, sometimes a Preacher in Lincolnshire, after of London, a Woman of
a haughty and fierce carriage, of a nimble wit and active spirit, and a very
voluble tongue, more bold than a Man, though in understanding and judgment,
inferior to many Women. This Woman had learned her skill in England, and had
discovered some of her Opinions in the Ship, as she came over, which had caused
some jealousy of her, which gave occasion of some delay of her admission, when
she first desired fellowship with the Church of Boston, but she cunningly
dissembled and colored her opinions, as she soon got over that Block, and was
admitted into the Church, then she began to go to work, and being a Woman very
helpful in the times of Childbirth, and other occasions of ^dily infirmities,
and well furnished with means for those purposes, she easily insinuated her
self into the affections of many, and the rather, because she was much
inquisitive of them about their Spiritual Estates, and in discovering to them
the danger they were in, by trusting to common Gifts and Graces, without any
such witness of the Spirit, as the Scriptures holds out for a full evidence;
whereby many were convinced that they had gone on in a Covenant of Works, and
were much humbled thereby, and brought to inquire more after the Lord Jesus
Christ, without whom all their gifts and graces, all their contributions, etc.
would prove but legal, and would vanish: all this was well, and suited with the
public Ministry, which went along in the same way, and all the faithful
embraced it, and blessed God for the good success that appeared from this
discovery. But when she had thus prepared the way by such wholesome truths, then
she begins to set forth her own stuff, and taught, that no Sanctification was
any evidence of a good estate, except their justification were first cleared up
to them by the immediate witness of the Spirit, and that to see any work of
grace, (either faith or repentance, etc.) before this immediate witness, was a
Covenant of works: whereupon many good souls, that had been of long approved
godliness, were brought to renounce all the Work of Grace in them, and to wait
for this immediate revelation: then sprung up also that Opinion of the
in-dwelling of the Person of the Holy Ghost, and of Union with Christ, and
Justification before Faith, and a denying of any gifts or graces, or inherent
qualifications, and that Christ was all, did all, and that the Soul remained
always as a dead O^gan: and other of those gross errors, which were condemned
in the late Assembly, and whereof diverse had been quashed by the public
Ministry; but the main and bottom of all, which tended to quench all endeavor,
and to bring to a dependence upon an immediate witness of the Spirit, without
sight of any gift or grace, this stuck fast, and prevailed so, as it began to
be opposed, and she being questioned by some, who marvelled that such Opinions
should spread so fast, she made Answer, That wherever she came, they must and
they should spread. And indeed it was a wonder upon what a sudden the whole
Church of Boston (some few excepted) were become her New-Converts, and infected
with her Opinions, and many also out of the Church, and of other Churches also,
yea, many profane persons became of her Opinion, for it was a very easy, and
acceptable way to Heaven, to see nothing, to have nothing, but wait for Christ
to do all; so that after she had thus prevailed, and had drawn some of eminent
place and parts to her party (whereof some profited so well, as in a few Months
they out-went their Teacher) then she kept Open-House for all comers, and set
up Two Lecture-days in the Week, when they usually met at her house, Threescore
or Fourscore persons; the Pretense was to Repeat Sermons, but when that was
done, she would Comment upon the Doctrines, and Interpret all passages at her
pleasure, and Expound dark places of Scripture; so as whatsoever the Letter
held forth (for this was one of her Tenants, That the whole Scripture in the
Letter of it held forth nothing but a Covenant of Works) she would be sure to
make it serve her turn, for the confirming of her main Principles, whereof this
was another, That the darker our Sanctification is, the clearer is our
Justification; And indeed most of her New Tenants tended to slothfulness, and
quench all endeavor in the Creature: And now was there no speech so much in
use, as of vilifying Sanc^ification, and all for advancing Christ and
Free Grace; and the whole Pedigree of the Covenant of Works was set forth with
all its Complements, beginning at Cain, If thou do well, shall thou not be
accepted? Then it is explained and ratified at Mount Sinai, and delivered in
the Two Tables, and after sprinkled with the Blood of Christ, Exodus 24. and so
carried on in the Letter of the Scripture, till it be complete, as the Covenant
of Grace by the Spirit, seals Forgiveness of Sins, one of the venters whereon
Christ begets Children, etc. and in the end, Wherefore is all this ado, but
that having a more cleanly way, to lay all that opposed her (being near all the
Elders, and most of the faithful Christians in this Country) under a Covenant
of Works, she might with the more credit, disclose and advance her Masterpiece
of immediate revela^ons, under the fair pretense of the Covenant of Free Grace?
wherein she had not failed of her aim, to the utter subversion both of Churches
and Civil state, if the most wise and merciful providence of the Lord had not
prevented it, by keeping so many of the Magistrates, and Elders, free from the
infection: for upon the countenance which it took from some eminent persons,
her opinions began to hold up their heads, in Church Assemblies, and in the
Court of Justice, so as it was held a matter of offense to speak any thing
against them in either Assembly: thence sprang all that trouble to the Pastor
of Boston, for his free and faithful Speech in the Court, though required and
approved: thence took Mr. Wheelwright courage to inveigh in his Sermon against
Men in a Covenant of Work (as he placed them) and to proclaim them all enemies
to Christ, Scribes and Pharisees, etc. whereas before he was wont to teach in a
plain and gentle style, and though he would sometimes glaunce upon these
Opinions, yet it was modestly and reservedly, not in such a peremptory and
censorious manner, as he did then and after; for they made full account the day
had been theirs: But blessed be the Lord, the snare is broken, and we are
delivered; and this Woman, who was the Root of all these Troubles, stands now
before the seat of Justice, to be rooted out of her station, by the hand of
Authority guided by the Finger of Divine Providence, as the Sequel will show.

When she appeared, the Court spoke to her to this effect.

Mrs. Hutchinson, You are called hither as one of those who have had a great
share in the causes of our public disturbances, partly by those Erroneous
Opinions which you have broached and divulged amongst us, and maintaining them,
partly by countenancing and encouraging such as have sowed Seditions amongst
us, partly by casting reproach upon the faithful Ministers of this Country,
and upon their Ministry, and so weaken their hands in the work of the Lord, and
raising prejudice against them, in the hearts of their People, and partly by
maintaining Weekly and Public Meetings in your House, to the offense of all
the Country, and the detriment of many Families, and still upholding the same,
since such Meetings were clearly Condemned in the late General Assembly.

Now the end of your sending for, is, that either upon sight of your Errors,
and other Offenses, you may be brought to acknowledge and reform the same, or
otherwise that we may take such course with you, as you may trouble us no
farther.

We do desire therefore to know of you, whether you will justify and maintain
what is laid to your charge or not?


Mistress Hutchinson. I am called here to answer to such things as are laid to
my charge; name one of them.


Court. Have you countenanced, or will you justify those Seditious practices
which have been censured here in this Court?


Hutch. Do you ask me upon point of Conscience?


Court. No, your conscience you may keep to your self, but if in this cause you
shall countenance and encourage these that thus transgress the Law, you must be
called in question for it, and that is not for your Conscience, but for your
practice.


Hutch. What Law have they transgressed; the Law of God?


Court. Yes, the Fifth Commandment, which commands us to honor Father and
Mother, which includes all in authority, but these seditious practices of
theirs, have cast reproach and dishonor upon the Fathers of the Commonwealth.


Hutch. Do I entertain, or maintain them in their actions, wherein they stand
against any thing that God has appointed?


Court. Yes, you have justified Mr. Wheelwright his Sermon, for which you know
he was convict of Sedition, and you have likewise countenanced and encouraged
those that had their hands to the Petition.


Hutch. I deny it, I am to obey you only in the Lord.


Court. You cannot deny but you had your hand in the Petition.


Hutch. Put case I do fear the Lord, and my Parent do not, May not I entertain
one that fears the Lord, because my Father will not let me? I may put honor
upon him as a Child of God.


Court. That is nothing to the purpose, but we cannot stand to dispute causes
with you now; What say you to your weekly public Meetings? Can you show a
warrant for them?


Hutch. I will show you how I took it up, there were such meetings in use
before I came, and because I went to none of them, this was the special reason
of my taking up this course, we began it but with five or six, and though it
grew to more in future time, yet being tolerated at the first, I knew not why
it might not continue.


Court. There were private Meetings indeed, and are still in many places, of
some few neighbors, but not so public and frequent as yours, and are of use
for increase of love, and mutual edification, but yours are of another nature,
if they had been such as yours, they had been evil, and therefore no good
warrant to justify yours; but answer by what authority or rule you uphold them.


Hutch. By Tit. 2. where the elder women are to teach the younger.


Court. So we allow you to do, as the Apostle there means, privately, and upon
occasion, but that gives no warrant of such set Meetings for that purpose; and
besides, you take upon you to teach many that are elder than your self, neither
do you teach them that which the Apostle commands, viz. to keep at home.


Hutch. Will you please to give me a rule against it, and I will yield?


Court. You must have a rule for it, or else you cannot do it in faith, yet you
have a plain rule against it; I permit not a Woman to teach.


Hutch. That is meant of teaching Men.


Court. If a Man in distress of Conscience, or other temptation, etc. should
come and ask your counsel in private, might you not teach him?


Hutch. Yes.


Court. Then it is clear, that it is not meant of teaching Men, but of teaching
in public.


Hutch. It is said, I will pour out my spirit upon your Daughters, and they
shall Prophecy, etc. If God give me a gift of Prophecy, I may use it.


Court. First, The Apostle applies that Prophecy unto those extraordinary
times, and the gifts of Miracles and Tongues, were common to many, as well as
the gift of Prophecy. Secondly, In teaching your children, you exercise your
gift of Prophecy, and that within your calling.


Hutch. I teach not in a public Congregation; the Men of Berea are commended
for examining Paul's Doctrine: we do no more but Read the Notes of our Teachers
Sermons, and then reason of them by searching the Scriptures.


Court. You are gone from the nature of your Meeting, to the kind of exercise,
we will follow you in this, and show you your offense in them, for you do not
as the Bereans, search the Scriptures for their confirming in the truths
delivered, but you open your Teachers Points, and declare his meaning, and
Correct wherein you think he has failed, etc. and by this means you abase the
Honor and Authority of the Public Ministry, and advance your own Gifts, as
if he could not deliver his Matter so clearly to the hearers capacity as your
self.


Hutch. Prove that, that any body does that.


Court. Yes, you are the Woman of most note, and of best abilities, and if some
other take upon them the like, it is by your teaching and example, but you show
not in all this, by what authority you take upon you to be such a public
instructor: (after she had stood a short time, the Court gave her leave to sit
down, for her countenance discovered some bodily infirmity,)


Hutch. Here is my authority, Aquila and Priscilla, took upon them to instruct
Apollo more perfectly, yet he was a Man of good parts, but they being better
instructed, might teach him.


Court. See how your argument stan^, Priscilla with her husband took Apollo
home to instruct him privately, therefore Mistress Hutchison, without her
Husband, might teach sixty or eighty.


Hutch. I call them not, but if they come to me, I may instruct them.


Court. Yet you show us not a rule.


Hutch. I have given you two places of Scripture.


Court. But neither of them will suit your practice.


Hutch. Must I show my Name written therein?


Court. You must show that which must be equivalent, seeing your Ministry is
public, you would have them receive your instruction, as coming from such an
Ordinance.


Hutch. They must not take it as it comes from me, but as it comes from the
Lord Jesus Christ; and if I took upon me a public Ministry, I should break a
rule, but not in exercising a gift of Prophecy, and I would see a rule to turn
away them that come to me.


Court. It is your exercise which draws them, and by occasion thereof, many
Families are neglected, and much time lost, and a great damage comes to the
Commonwealth thereby, which we that are betrusted with, as the Fathers of the
Commonwealth, are not to suffer. Diverse other Speeches passed to and fro about
this matter, the issue was, that not being able to bring any rule to justify
this her disordered course, she said she walked by the rule of the Apostle,
Gal. which she called the rule of the New Creature, but what rule that was, she
would not, or she could not tell, neither would she consent to lay down her
Meetings, except Authority did put them down, and then she might be subject to
Authority.

Then the Court laid to her charge, the reproach she had cast upon the
Ministers, and Ministry in this Country, saying, That none of them did Preach
the Covenant of Free Grace, but Mr. Cotton, and that they have not the Seal of
the Spirit, and so were not able Ministers of the New Testament: She denied the
words, but they were affirmed by diverse of the Ministers, being desired by the
Court to be present for that end. The matter was thus; It being reported
abroad, That Mistress Hutchison did flight them and their Ministry in their
common talk, as if they did Preach nothing but a Covenant of Works, because
they pressed much for faith and love, etc. without holding forth such an
immediate witness of the Spirit as she pretended, they advised with Master
Cotton about it, and a Meeting was appointed at his House, and she being sent
for, and demanded the reason why she had used such Speeches, at first she would
not acknowledge them; but being told that they could prove them by witnesses,
and persuaded to deal freely and truly therein, She said, That the fear of Man
was a Snare, and therefore she was glad she had this opportunity to open her
Mind, and thereupon she told them, that there was a wide difference betwixt
Master Cotton' s Ministry and theirs, and that they could not hold forth a
Covenant of Free Grace, because they had not the Seal of the Spirit, and that
they were not able Ministers of the New Testament.

It was near night, so the Court brake up, and she was enjoined to appear again
the next Morning. When she appeared the next day, she objected, that the
Ministers had spoken in their own cause, and that they ought not to be
Informers and Witnesses both, and required that they might be Sworn to what
they had spoken: To which the Court answered, That if it were needful, an Oath
should be given them: but because the whole Court (in a manner Man by Man) did
declare themselves to be fully satisfied of the truth of their testimonies,
they being 6 or 7 Men of long approved Godliness, and Sincerity in their
course, and for that it was also generally observed, that those of her party
did look at their Ministry (for the most part) as a way of the Covenant of
Works, and one had been punished about half a year before, for reporting the
like of them. The Court did pause a while at it, whereupon she said, That she
had Mr. Wilson' s Notes of that Conference, which were otherwise than they had
related: the Court wi^led her to show them, but her Answer was, She had left
them at home: whereupon Mr. Wilson (with the leave of the Court) said, That if
she brought forth his Notes, they should find written at the foot of them, That
he had not written down all that was spoken, but being ofen interrupted, he had
omitted diverse passages; then she appealed to Mr. Cotton, who being called, and
desired to declare what he remembered of her Speeches, said, That he remembered
only that which took impression on him, for he was much grieved that she
should make such comparison between him and his Brethren, but yet he took her
meaning to be only of a gradual difference, when she said, that they did not
hold forth a Covenant of Free Grace, as he did, for she likened them to
Christ's Disciples, and their Ministry, before his Ascension, and before the
Holy Ghost was come down upon them; and when she was asked by some of them, Why
they could not Preach a Covenant of Free Grace? She made Answer, Because they
had not the Seal of the Spirit: Upon this the Court wished her to consider,
that Mr. Cotton did in a manner agree with the testimony of the rest of the
Elders: and as he remembered, only so much as at present took most impression
on him, so the rest of the Elders had reason to remember some other passages,
which he might not hear, or not so much observe as they whom it so nearly and
properly concerned: All this would not satisfy Mistress Hutchison, but she
still called to have them Sworn; whereupon the Court being weary of the
clamor, and that all mouths might be stopped, required three of the Ministers
to take an Oath, and thereupon they confirmed their former testimony.

Upon this she began to speak her mind, and to tell of the manner of God's
dealing with her, and how he revealed himself to her, and made her know what
she had to do: The Governor perceiving whereabout she went, interrupted her,
and would have kept her to the matter in hand, but seeing her very unwilling to
be taken off, he permitted her to proceed. Her Speech was to this effect.


Mistress Hutchison. When I was in Old England, I was much troubled at the
Constitution of the Churches there, so far, as I was ready to have joined to
the Separation, whereupon I set apart a day for humiliation by my self, to se^k
direction from God, and then did God discover unto me the unfaithfulness of the
Churches, and the danger of them, and that none of those Ministers could Preach
the Lord Jesus aright, for he had brought to my mind, that in 1 John 4. 3.
Every spirit that confesses not, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is the
Spirit of Antichrist; I marvelled what this should mean, for I knew that
neither Protestants nor Papists did deny that Christ was come in the flesh; And
are the Turks then the only Antichrists? Now I had none to open the Scripture
to me, but the Lord, he must be the Prophet, then he brought to my mind another
Scripture, He that denies the Testament, denies the death of the Testator; from
whence the Lord did let me see, that every one that did not Preach the
New Covenant, denies the death of the Testator: then it was revealed to me that
the Ministers of England were these Antichrists, but I knew not how to bear
this, I did in my heart rise up against it, then I begged of the Lord that this
Atheism might not be in my heart: after I had begged this light, a twelve
month together, at last he let me see how I did oppose Christ Jesus, and he
revealed to me that place in Esa. 46. 12, 13. and from thence showed me the
Atheism of my own heart, and how I did turn in upon a Covenant of Works, and
did oppose Christ Jesus; from which time the Lord did discover to me all sorts
of Ministers, and how they taught, and to know what voice I heard, which was
the voice of Moses, which of John Baptist, and which of Christ; the voice of my
beloved, from the voice of strangers; and thenceforth I was the more careful
whom I heard, for after our Teacher Mr. Cotton, and my brother Wheelwright were
put down, there was none in England that I durst hear. Then it pleased God to
reveal himself to me in that of Esa. 30. 20. Though the Lord give thee the
bread of adversity, etc. yet thine eyes shall see thy Teachers; after this the
Lord carrying Mr. Cotton to New England (at which I was much troubled) it was
revealed to me, that I must go thither also, and that there I should be
pers^cuted, and suffer much trouble. I will give you another Scripture, Jer.
46. Fear not Jacob my servant, for I am with thee; I will make a full end of
all the Nations, etc. Then the Lord did reveal himself to me, sitting upon a
Throne of Justice, and all the World appearing before him, and though I must
come to New England, yet I must not fear nor be dismayed. The Lord brought
another Scripture to me, Esa. 89. The Lord spoke this to me with a strong hand,
and instructed me, that I should not walk in the way of this People, etc. I
will give you one place more, which the Lord brought to me by immediate
Revelations, and that does concern you all; it is in Dan. 6. When the
Presidents and Princes could find nothing against him, because he was faithful,
they sought matter against him concerning the Law of his God, to cast him into
the Lions den; so it was revealed to me, that they should plot against me, but
the Lord bid me not to fear, for he that delivered Daniel, and the Three
Children, his hand was not shortened. And see this Scripture fulfilled this day
in mine eyes, therefore take heed what ye go about to do unto me, for you have
no power over my body, neither can you do me any harm, for I am in the hands of
the Eternal Jehovah my Savior, I am at his appointment, the bounds of my
habitation are cast in Heaven, no farther do I esteem of any mortal Man, than
creatures in his hand; I fear none but the great Jehovah, which has foretold
me of these things; and I do verily believe that he will deliver me out of your
hands, therefore take heed how you proceed against me; for I know that for this
you go about to do to me, God will ruin you and your Posterity, and this whole
State.

When she had thus vented her Mind, the Court demanded of her, how she expected
to be delivered, whether by Miracle as Daniel was? to which she Answered, Yes,
by Miracle, as Dainiel was: Being farther demanded, How she did know that it
was God that did reveal these things to her, and not Satan? She Answered; How
did Abraham know that it was the Voice of God, when he commanded him to
Sacrifice his Son?

Mr. Cotton being present, and desired by the Court to deliver his Judgment
about Mistress Hutchison her Revelations, answered; There be two sorts of
Revelations, some are without and besides Scripture; those I look at as
Satanical, and tending to much danger; other are such as the Apostle speaks of,
Ephesians. 1. where he prays for a spirit of Revelation to be given them, those
are never dispensed but according to the word of God; though the word
Revelation be uncouth, yet in Scripture-sense I think it not lawful so to
express it, and whenever it comes, it comes with the Ministry of the Word.
Being again desired to express himself particularly concerning her Revelations,
he demanded of her (by the leave of the Court) Whether by a Miracle she does
mean a Work beyond the power of Nature, or only above common Providence? for
if (as you say) you expect deliverance from this Court, beyond the power of
Nature, then I should suspect such a Revelation to be false. To this she
answered, You know when it comes, God does not describe the way. Mr. Cotton
asked her again, Whether (when she said she should be delivered) she meant a
deliverance from the Sentence of the Court, or from the Calamity of it? She
answered, yea, from the Calamity of it. Mistress Hutchison having thus freely
and fully discovered her self, the Court and all the rest of the Assembly
(except those of her own Party) did observe a special Providence of God, that
(while she went about to cover such offenses as were laid to her Charge, by
putting matters upon proof, and then quarrelling with the Evidence) her own
Mouth should deliver her into the power of the Court, as Guilty of that which
all suspected her for, but were not furnished with proof sufficient to proceed
against her; for here she has manifested, that her Opinions and Practice have
been the cause of all our Disturbances, and that she walked by such a rule as
cannot stand with the Peace of any State; for such Bottomless Revelations, as
either came without any word, or without the sense of the Word, (which was
framed to Humane capacity) if they be allowed in one thing, must be admitted a
rule in all things; for they being above Reason and Scripture, they are not
subject to control: Again, she has given a Reason why she has so much
slighted the Faithful Ministers of Christ here, Why? It was Revealed to her
long since in England, that all the Pack of them were Antichristians, so as she
durst hear none of them, after Mr. Cotton and Mr. Wheelwright were once gone;
for they could not Preach Christ and the New Covenant (as she affirms,) Why,
but they did Preach somewhat, and if they could not hold forth Christ in a
Covenant of Free Grace, then must they needs hold him forth in a Covenant of
works; then are they not able Ministers of the New Testament, nor sealed by the
Spirit; for the servants of God, who are come over into New England, do not
think themselves more spiritual than other of their brethren whom they have
left behind, nor that they can or do hold forth the Lord Jesus Christ in their
Ministry, more truly than he was held forth in England, and seeing their
Ministry was a most precious sweet savor to all the Saints before she came
hither, it is easy to discern from what sink that ill vapor has risen, which
has made so many of her seduced party to loath now the smell of those flowers
which they were wont to find sweetness in: yet this is not all (though it be
too too vile) she can fetch a Revelation that shall reach the Magistrates and
the whole Court, and the succeeding Generations, and she has Scripture for it
also; Daniel must be a Type of Mistress Hutchison, the Lions Den of the Court
of Justice, and the Presidents and Princes of the reverend Elders here, and all
must sort to this conclusion, she must be delivered by Miracle, and all we must
be ruined; See the Impudent boldness of a Proud Dame, that Athaliah-like makes
havoc of all that stand in the way of her ambitious spirit; she had boasted
before that her Opinions must prevail, neither could she endure a stop in her
way, as appeared once upon a slight occasion, when her reputation being a
little touched upon mistake, yet so carried, as she could not get the party
upon that advantage which she expected, she vented her Impatience with so
fierce Speech and Countenance, as one would hardly have guessed her to have
been an Antitype of Daniel, but rather of the Lions after they were let loose.
The like appeared in her, when she could not have her will against her faithful
Pastor for his opposing her Opinions, as she apprehended; so as neither Reason,
nor Scripture, nor the Judgment and Example of such as she reverenced, could
appease her displeasure. So that the Court did clearly discern, where the
Fountain was of all our Distempers, and the Tragedy of Munster (to such as had
read it) gave just occasion to fear the danger we were in, seeing (by the
judgment of Luther writing of those troublous times) we had not to do with so
simple a Devil, as managed that business, and therefore he had the less fear of
him; but Satan seemed to have Commission now to use his utmost cunning to
undermine the Kingdom of Christ here (as the same Luther foretold, he would do,
when he should enterprise any such innovation under the clear light of the
Gospel,) so as the like has not been known in former ages, that ever so many
wise, sober, and well grounded Christians, should so suddenly be seduced by the
means of a Woman, to stick so fast to her, even in some things wherein the
whole current of Scripture goes against them, and that notwithstanding that
her Opinions and Practice have been so gross in some Particulars, as their
knowledge and sincerity would not suffer them to approve, yet such interest
has she gotten in their hearts, as they seek Cloaks to cover the nakedness of
such deformities, as in the mean time they are ashamed to behold.

The Court saw now an inevitable necessity to rid her away, except we would be
guilty, not only of our own ruin, but also of the Gospel: so in the end the
Sentence of Banishment was pronounced against her, and she was committed to the
Marshal, till the Court should dispose of her.

Another day, Captain John Underhill was sent for, and being charged with
joining in the said Petition, acknowledged the same, professing that he could
see no fault in it: being demanded a Rule by which he might take so much upon
him, as publicly to contradict the Sentence of the Court, etc. he alleged the
example of Ioab his rough Speech to David, when he retired himself for
Absalom's death, and that David did not reprove him for it. To this the Court
answered.

First, That Ioab was then in the matters of his own Calling, and being General
of the Army, had liberty, by his Place, to give advice to the King in causes of
that nature, but when he failed in the manner of his Speech, therein he is not
to be excused, and therefore not to be followed.

Secondly, Ioab did not contradict or reprove any Judicial Sentence of the
King, but only an inordinate Passion.

Thirdly, He was occasioned by an urgent necessity of the safety of the King
and State.

Fourthly, That which he spoke was in private, for the King had withdrawn
himself.

Fifthly, It appears that David did take it as a great miscarriage, for he
presently displaced him.

Again, in our cause, the Captain was but a private Man, and had no calling to
deal in the Affairs of the Court, therefore no warrant from hence. He insisted
much upon the liberty which all States do allow to Military Officers, for free
Speech, etc. and that himself had spoken sometimes as freely to Count Nassaw.

But it was answered, We are not to look at what some do tolerate, but what is
lawful, and there may be a reason of State, to connive at that disorder at some
season, which may not with honor and safety be permitted at another.

Being farther demanded, how they came so many of them, to be so suddenly
agreed in so weighty and doubtful a case? He Answered, That many of them being
present when Mr. Wheelwright was convict of Sedition, they were sore grieved at
it, and suddenly rushing out of the Court, a strange motion came into all their
Minds, so as they said (in a manner altogether) Come let us Petition; and for
his part, from that time to this, his Conscience which then led him to it, will
not suffer him to retract it.

The Court pitied him much, and were grieved at his obstinacy, that when all
his Arguments were taken away, he had no defense left, he would yet maintain a
bad cause by the light of a deluded Conscience; and withal they took notice how
these ungrounded revelations began to work, and what dangerous consequences
were like to follow of them, when so many persons upon such a sudden motion had
no scruple to enterprise such a Seditious action, nor can be brought by any
light of Reason or Scripture, to see their error; so the Court (when they saw
no other remedy) dis-franchised him, and discharged him of his place, but
allowed him his Quarters Means.

There were diverse who were not present when that sudden Motion, or Revelation
first set the Petition on foot, but were drawn in after, who soon found their
error, and did as freely acknowledge it, and desired to have their names put
out of it, which was easily granted, and their offense, with a Loving
Admonition, remitted.

It had been observed a good time since, that some of the Leaders of this
Faction (by occasion of new Disciples, being inquisitive about their Tenants)
would let fall these Answers, I have many things to tell you, but you cannot
bear them now; and there is a great light to break forth, if Men do not resist
it, and you shall see the bottom hereafter; and one of them reproved the rest,
telling them, that they had spoiled their cause, by being over hasty, and too
open, etc. And now it began to appear, what their meaning were, for after
Mistress Hutchison had discovered the Secret, by her Speech in the Court, then
others opened their Minds, and professedly maintained these Enthusiasms as the
Oracles of God. And that such revelations as Abraham had to kill his Son, and
as Paul had in the Ship, and when he was caught up into the third heaven, etc.
were ordinary, so that Mr. Cotton took notice of the danger of them, and
publicly confuted them in diverse Sermons. Among other like passages there was
one that fell out at Mr. Wheelw. his farewell to those whom he used to Preach
unto at the Mount.

One of his own Scholars told him openly, That he had Preached
Antichristianism, and had set up a Christ against a Christ; the same party
maintained immediate Revelations, without any word at all, saying, that the
free Promises were only for those under the Law, but we are to look for all
our assurance by immediate Revelation; and that in the New Testament there are
no signs, no not our Baptism, for the Baptism of Water is of no use to us when
once we are Baptized with the Holy Ghost: he said also, That a Man might be
adopted and not justified, and that every New Creature is as a dead lump, not
acting at all, but as Christ acts in him; and denied all Inherent
Righteousness; and that the Commandments were a dead Letter. These things were
so gross, as Mr. Wheelwright could not but contradict him; yet he did it so
Tenderly, as might well discover his near agreement in the Points, though his
wisdom served him to be more reserved till a fitter season; for that poor Man
being newly come on to the profession of Religion, must needs learn those
Points of M^. Wheelw. or draw them as necessary consequents from some of his
Tenants: And it is frequently found to be an effect of all unsound and unsafe
doctrines, that still the Scholar goes a step farther than his Teacher. So it
has proved in former times, Luther, and no doubt many of those who did embrace
his Errors, in the first Edition of them, yet lived and died in the true Faith
of Christ, but the succeeding Generations (inheriting those erroneous Tenants,
which they had drawn from their Godly Forefathers, but not their godliness)
proved Heretics and Schismatics to this day. So it has been in the Churches
of Rome, and others, and so we may justly fear in these Churches in
New England, howsoever that many that now adhere to these Familistical
Opinions, are indeed truly godly, and (no doubt) shall persevere so to the end,
yet the next generation, which shall be trained up under such Doctrines, will
be in great danger to prove plain Familists and Schismatics. This discovery of
a new rule of practice by immediate Revelations, and the consideration of such
dangerous consequences, which have and might follow thereof, occasioned the
Court to disarm all such of that Party, as had their hands to the Petition, and
some others, who had openly defended the same, except they should give
satisfaction to the Magistrates therein; which some presently did, others made
a great question about it, for bringing in their arms, but they were too weak
to stand it out.

Thus it pleased the Lord to hear the Prayers of his afflicted People (whose
Souls had wept in secret for the reproach that was cast upon the Churches of
the Lord Jesus in this Country, by occasion of the Divisions which were grown
amongst us, through the vanity of some weak minds, which cannot seriously
affect any thing long, except it be offered them under some renewed shape) and
by the care and endeavor of the wise and faithful Ministers of the Churches,
assisted by the Civil Authority to discover this Masterpiece of the
old-Serpent, and to break the brood by scattering the Leaders, under whose
conduct he had prepared such Ambushment, as in all reason would soon have
driven Christ and Gospel out of New England (though to the ruin of the
instruments themselves, as well as others) and to the re-possessing of Satan in
his ancient Kingdom; It is the Lord's Work, and it is mavelous in our eyes.
Mr. Wheel. is now gone to Pascal, Mistress Hutchison is confined in a private
House, till the season of the year shall be fit for her departure, some of
those whom God has left to be most strongly deluded, are preparing to follow
them, and we hope the Lord will open the eyes of the rest, and persuade them to
join again with their sometime dear and most beloved brethren, that Peace and
Truth may again flourish in New England, Amen.

After the Court had thus proceeded, some of the Churches dealt with such of
their Members as were found guilty of these erroneous and seditious practices,
the Church at Roxbury (after much pains and patience to reduce them)
Excommunicated five or six; and the Church of Boston, by the solicitation of
some of the Elders of the other Churches, proceeded against Mistress Hutchison,
the manner and issue whereof is set down in the next.


AT Boston in New England, upon the 17th day of October. 1637. the wife of one
William Dyer, sometimes a Citizen and Millener of London, a very proper and
comely young Woman, was delivered of a large Woman Child, it was stillborn,
about two Months before her time, the Child having life a few hours before the
delivery, but so Monstrous and Misshapen, as the like has scarce been heard
of: it had no Head, but a Face, which stood so low upon the Breast, as the Ears
(which were like an Apes) grew upon the Shoulders.

The Eyes stood far out, so did the Mouth; the Nose was hooking upward, the
Breast and Back was full of sharp prickles, like a Thornback; the Navel and all
the Belly with the distinction of the Sex, were, where the lower part of the
Back and Hips should have been, and those back-parts were on the side the Face
stood.

The Arms and Hands, with the Thighs and Legs, were as other Childrens, but
instead of Toes, it had upon each Foot Three Claws, with Talons like a young
Fowl.

Upon the Back, above the Belly, it had two great Holes, like Mouths, and in
each of them stuck out a piece of Flesh.

It had no Forehead, but in the place thereof, above the Eyes, Four Horns,
whereof two were above an Inch long, hard and sharp, the other two were
somewhat shorter.

Many things were observable in the Birth and Discovery of this Monster.

1. The Father and Mother were of the highest form of our refined Familists,
and very active in maintaining their party, and in reproaching some of the
Elders, and others, who did oppose those Errors. 2. The Midwife, one Hawkins
Wife of St. Ives, was notorious for familiarity with the Devil, and now a prime
Familist. 3. This Monster was concealed by Three Persons above five Months. 4.
The occasion of concealing it was very strange, for most of the Women who were
present at the Woman's Travail, were suddenly taken with such a violent
Vomiting, and Purging, without eating or drinking of any thing, as they were
forced to go home; others had their Children taken with Convulsions, (which
they had not before, nor since) and so were sent for home, so as none were left
at the time of the Birth, but the Midwife and two other, whereof one fell
asleep. 5. At such time as the Child died (which was about two hours before the
Birth) the Bed wherein the Mother lay, shook so violently, as all which were in
the Room perceived it. 6. The Afterbirth wherein the Child was, had Prickles
on the inside like those on the Child's Breast. 7. The Manner of the Discovery
was very strange also, for it was that very day Mistress Hutchison was cast out
of the Church for her Monstrous Errors, and Notorious Falsehood; for being
Commanded to depart the Assembly, Mistress Dyer accompanied her, which a
Stranger observing, asked another, What Woman that was? the other Answered, It
was the Women who had the Monster: which one of the Church of Boston hearing,
enquired about it from one to another, and at length came to Mistress
Hutchison, with one of the Elders of the Church, to whom she revealed the truth
of the thing in general only; this coming to the Governors ear, he called
another of the Magistrates, and sent for the Midwife, and (in the presence of
the Elder, to whom Mistress Hutchison had revealed it) they examined her, who,
at first, confessed, it was a Monstrous Birth, but concealed the Horns and
Claws, and some other parts, till being straightly charged, and told it should be
taken up, and viewed, then she confessed all: yet for farther assurance, the
Child was taken up, and though it were much corrupted, yet the Horns and Claws,
and holes in the Back, and some Scales, etc. were found and seen of above a
Hundred Persons. 8. The Father of this Monster, having been forth of the Town
about a Month, and coming home just at this time, was upon the Lord's day (by
an unexpected occasion) called before the Church for some of his Monstrous
Opinions; As that Christ and the Church together are the New Creature; There is
no Inherent Righteousness in Christians; Adam was not made after God's Image,
etc. which he openly maintained, yet with such shuffling, and equivocating, as
he came under Admonition, etc.
A brief Apology in defense of the General Proceedings of the Court, holden at
Boston the Ninth day of the First Month, 1636. against Mr. I. Wheelwright a
Member there, by occasion of a Sermon delivered there in the same Congregation.
FOrasmuch as some of the Members of the Court (both of the Magistrates and
Deputies) did dissent from the major part, in the judgment of the cause of Mr.
Wheelwright, and diverse others have since censured the proceedings against him
as unjust, or (at best) over hasty, for maintaining of which Censures, many
untruths are like to be spread abroad, whereby the most equal Judges may be in
danger of prejudice; and so the honor not of the Court only, but also of the
trial and justice it self may be blemished: It is thought needful to make this
public Declaration of all the proceedings, with the reasons and grounds
thereof, so far as concerns the clearing of the Justice of the Court. As for
such passages as fell by occasion, and are too large to be here inserted, such
as desire to know them, may receive satisfaction from three or four of Boston
(being Mr. Wheelwright his special friends) who took all by Characters (we
doubt not) will give a true report thereof; As for such as have taken offense,
that the cause was not first referred to the Church, we desire them to consider
these reasons.

1. This case was not matter of Conscience, but of a civil nature, and
therefore most proper for this Court to take Cognizance of, and the rather for
the special contempt which had been offered to the Court therein, and which the
Church could not judge of. 2. In some cases of religious nature, as manifest
heresy, notorious blasphemy, etc. the Civil power may proceed, Ecclesia
inconsulta, and that by the judgment of all the Ministers. 3. It had been a
vain thing to refer a cause to the judgment of those who had openly declared
their prejudice therein, both in the Court and otherwise, as by two Petitions
under the hands of most of them, delivered into the Court on his behalf, did
plainly appear. 4. The heat of contention and uncharitable censures which began
to overspread the Country, and that chiefly by occasion of that Sermon, and
the like miscarriages, did require that the Civil Power should speedily allay
that heat, and bear witness against all seditious courses, tending to the
overthrow of Truth and Peace amongst us, and this only by way of entrance to
the matter which now follows.

In the beginning of the Court, the Deputies upon the Fame of a Sermon
delivered by Mr. Wheelwright (upon the first day) which was supposed to tend to
sedition, and disturbance of the public Peace, desired that he might be sent
for, which the Court ass^nting unto, one of the Magistrates (his special
friend) undertook to give him notice thereof, and accordingly at the next
meeting he was in the Town. ready to appear, when he should be called for,
which was not till two or three days after, and then he was sent for (not by
the Marshal, as the usual manner is; but) by one of the Deputies his intimate
friend, upon his appearance he was made acquainted with the cause why he was
sent for, viz. To satisfy the Court about some passages in his Sermon, which
seemed to be offensive, and therewith a copy of it was produced, and he was
demanded whether he would own it, whereupon he drew forth another copy which he
delivered into the Court, as a true copy, (for the substance of it) so he was
dismissed very gently, and desired to be ready when he should be called for
again.

The next day he was again sent for by the former Messenger: About this time a
Petition was delivered into the Court, under the hands of above forty persons,
being most of the Church of Boston, (being none of the Petitions before
mentioned which were delivered after) to this effect, that as freemen they
might be admitted to be present in the Court in causes of Judicature, and that
the Court would declare whether they might proceed in cases of Conscience,
without referring them first to the Church. To this the Court answered on the
backside of the Petition, that they did conceive the Petition was without just
ground, for the first part of it, the Court had never used any privacy in
judicial Proceedings, but in preparation thereto by way of Examination of the
party, etc. they might and would use their liberty, as they should see cause;
and for the other part of the Petition, when any matter of Conscience should
come before them, they would advise what were fit to be done in it.

When Mr Wheelwright came in, the Court was private, and then they told him
they had considered of his Sermon, and were desirous to ask him some questions
which might and to clear his meaning, about such passages therein as seemed
offensive; he demanded whether he were sent for as an innocent person, or as
guilty? It was answered neither, but as suspected only; Then he demanded who
were his Accusers? It was answered, his Sermon; (which was there in Court)
being acknowledged by himself they might thereupon proceed, ex officio: at this
word great exception was taken, as if the Court intended the course of the High
Commission, etc. It was answered that the word ex Officio was very safe and
proper, signifying no more but the Authority or Duty of the Court: and that
there was no cause of Offense, seeing the Court did not examine him by any
compulsory means, as by Oath, Imprisonment, or the like, but only desired him
for better satisfaction to answer some questions, but he still refused, yet at
last through persuasion of some of his friends, he seemed content; The question
then put to him was, whether before his Sermon he did not know, that most of
the Ministers in this Jurisdiction did teach that Doctrine which he in his
Sermon called a Covenant of Works; to this he said, he did not desire to
answer, and thereupon some cried out, that the Court went about to ensnare him,
and to make him to accuse himself; and that this question was not about the
matter of his Sermon, etc. Upon this he refused to answer any further, so he
was dismissed till the afternoon; the reason why the Court demanded that
question of him, was not to draw matter from himself whereupon to proceed
against him, neither was there any need, for upon a conference of the Ministers
not long before there had been a large dispute between some of them and himself
about that point of evidencing Justification by Sanctification; so as the Court
might soon have convinced him by Witnesses, if they had intended to proceed
against him upon that ground.

In the afternoon he was sent for again in the same manner as before, and the
Ministers also being in the Town, and come hither to confer together for
further discovery of the ground of the differences which were in the Country
about the Covenant of Grace, etc. they were desired to be present also at the
Court, to bear witness of the Proceedings in the case, and to give their Advice
as the Court (upon occasion) should require: so the doors being set open for
all that would to come in (and there was a great Assembly) and Mr. Wheelwright
being willed to sit down by the Ministers, his Sermon was produced, and many
passages thereof were read to him, which for the better understanding we have
digested into this order following.

He therein describes two Covenants, the Covenant of Grace, and the Covenant
of Works; the Covenant of Grace he described to be, when in the point of
Justification, and the knowledge of this our Justification by Faith, there is
nothing revealed but Christ Jesus; but if men think to be saved, because they
see some works of Sanctification in themselves, as hungring and thirsting, etc.
this is a Covenant of works; if men have revealed to them some work of
Righteousness, as love to the brethren, etc. and hereupon come to be assured
that they are in a good Estate, this is not the assurance of Faith, for Faith
has Christ revealed for the object, therefore if the assurance of a man's
Justification be by Faith, as a Work, it is not Gospel.

Having thus described those who go under a Covenant of Works, he pronounces
them to be Enemies to Christ, to be Antichrists, to be flesh opposed to spirit;
such as will certainly persecute those who hold forth the Truth, and the ways
of Grace, he resembles them to the Philistines, who stop up with the earth of
their own Inventions, the Wells of true Believers; he resembles them also to
Herod, who would have killed Christ so soon as he was born, and to Herod and
Pilate who did kill Christ when he came once to show forth himself, and would
have kept him eternally in the Grave; he further describes them out of the
second Psalm, to be the people of God, as the Jews were, and such as would take
away the true Christ, and put in false Christ's, to deceive if it were possible
the very Elect; he also describes them by that in Cant. 10. 6. they make the
Children of Grace, keepers of the Vineyard, they make them travel under the
burden of the Covenant of Works, which does cause Christ many times from them.
He comes after to an use of Exhortation, wherein he stirs up all those of
his side to a spiritual Combat, to prepare for battle, and come out and fight
against the Enemies of the Lord; (those under a Covenant of works) he shows
whom he means thus to excite, alluding to David's valiant Men, to Baruch,
Deborah, Iael, and all the men of Israel, and bind them hereunto under the
curse of Meroz; He further exhorts them to stand upon their guard, etc. by
alluding to the 600 valiant Men, who kept watch about the Bed of Solomon, a
type of Christ; then he incourageth those of his side against such difficulties
as might be objected; as 1. If the Enemies shall oppose the way of God, they
must lay the more load upon them, and kill them with the word of the Lord, and
there he alludeth to those places which speak of giving the Saints power over
Nations, binding Kings in Chains, and of threshing Instruments with Teeth, and
foretells their flight by that in Esa. 21. 15. They shall flee from the Sword,
etc.

2. Though the Enemies under a Covenant of Works be many and strong, (as he
confesses they are) yet they ought not to fear, for the battle is the Lords,
this he inforceth by that in Josh. 23. 10. One of you shall chase a thousand,
and that of Jonathan and his Armor bearer.

3. Against tenderness of heart which they might have toward such under a
Covenant of works, as are exceeding holy and strict in their way, he animateth
his party by persuading them, that such are the greatest Enemies to Christ;
this he seeks to illustrate by resembling such in their zeal, to Paul when he
was a Persecutor, and in their Devotion to those who expelled Paul and Barnabas
out of Antioch. He takes it for granted, that these Holy Men trust in their
Righteousness, and that it thrusts out the Righteousness of Christ, and so
concludes and foretells from Ezekiel. 33. They shall die, and their Righteousness
is accursed, yet they transform themselves (says he) into Angels of Light.

4. That his party might not fear lest he should break the rule of Meekness,
etc. he brings in the Example of Stephen, Act. 7. 58. and the Example of
Christ, Ioh. 8. 44. and Mat. 23. 23.

5. To those who might fear, lest this strife should cause a combustion in
Church and Commonwealth, he answers and tells them plainly it will do so, but
yet to uphold their hearts, he arms them with the Prediction of Christ, Luke
12. 49. and tells them that it is the desire of the Saints, that that fire were
kindled, and with that in Esa. 9. 5. which he interprets of Michael and the
Angels, and with that in Mal. 4. 2. and by that in the Revelation, the Whore
must be burnt.

6. He arms them against persecution, by exhorting them not to love their lives
unto the death, but be willing to be killed like sheep, seeing it is impossible
to hold forth the Truth of God with external peace and quietness: This he
inforceth by the Example of Sampson, who slew more at his death than in his
life.

These passages of his Sermon being openly read Master Wheelwright did
acknowledge and justify the same, and being demanded (either then or before)
whether by those under a Covenant of works he did mean any of the Ministers and
other Christians in those Churches, he answered, that if he were showed any
that walked in such a way, as he had described to be a Covenant of Works, them
he did mean. Here diverse speeches passed up and down, whereof there was no
special notice taken, as not material to the purpose in hand.

The Court proceeded also to examine some witnesses about another Sermon of
his, whereat much offense had also been taken, and not without cause, (as
appeared to the Court) for in that he seemed to scare men, not only from legal
Righteousness, but even from Faith and Repentance, as if that also were a way
of the Covenant of works; but this being matter of doctrine, the Court passed
it by for the present, only they (and the Ministers present, diverse of them)
declared their grief to see such Opinions risen in the Country of so dangerous
Consequence, and so directly crossing the Scope of the Gospel, (as was
conceived) and it was retorted upon him, which he in his Sermon charge his
adverse party with, (though uncharitably and untruly) when he says they would
take away the True Christ, that to make good such a Doctrine as he held forth
(to common intendment) must needs call for a new Christ, and a new Gospel, for
sure the old would not own or justify it.

Then the Court propounded a question to the Ministers, which (because they
desired time of consideration to make answer unto) was given them in writing
upon the outside of Master Wheelwrights Sermon in these words; Whether by that
which you have heard concerning Mr. Wheelwrights Sermon, and that which was
witnessed concerning him, ye do conceive that the Ministers in this Country do
walk in, and teach such a way of Salvation, and evidencing thereof, as he
describes, and accounts to be a Covenant of works? To this question (being
again called for into the Court the next morning) they returned an affirmative
answer, in the very words of the question, adding withal, that they would not
be understood, that their doctrine and Master VVheelwrights about Justification
and Salvation, and evidencing thereof, did differ in all things, but only in
the point presented, and debated now in Court, and that of this their answer
they were ready to give reasons when the Court should demand them, and that to
this they consented, except their Brother the Teacher of Boston: After this (by
leave of the Court) the Ministers all spoke one by one in order, some more
largely, laying open by solid Arguments, and notorious Examples, the great
dangers that the Churches and Civil State were fallen into, by the differences
which were grown amongst us in matters of Religion, offering themselves withal
to employ all their studies to effect a Reconciliation, showing also their
desires that Mr. VVheelwright would be with them, when they should meet for
this purpose, and blaming his former strangeness as a possible occasion of
these differences of Judgment. Others spoke more briefly, but consented with
the former; and all of them (as they had occasion to speak to Mr. VVheelw. or
to make mention of him) used him with all humanity and respect; what his
carriage was toward them again, those who were present may judge, as they saw
cause.

The matters objected against Mr. Wheel being recollected, and put to the
vote, the opinion of the Court was, that he had run into Sedition and Contempt
of the Civil Authority, which accordingly was recorded to the same effect, and
he was enjoined to appear at the next general Court to abide their further
Sentence herein. And whereas motion was made of injoyning him silence in the
mean time, the Ministers were desired to deliver their Advice what the Court
might do in such a case: Their Answer was, that they could not give a clear
resolution of the question at the present, but for Mr. Wheel. they desired
that the Court would rather refer him to the Church of B. to deal with him for
that matter; which accordingly was done, and so he was dismissed: Such of the
Magistrates and Deputies, as had not concurred with the major part in the Vote,
(some of them) moved that the dissent might be recorded, (but it was denied) as
a course never used in this or any such Court. Afterward they tendered a
Protestation, which was also refused, because therein they had justified Mr.
Wheel. as a faithful Minister of the Lord Jesus, and condemned the Court for
undue proceeding; but this was offered them, that if they would write down the
words of the record, and subscribe their dissent, without laying such Aspersion
upon the Court, it should be received.

Although the simple Narration of these Proceedings might be sufficient to
justify the Court in what they have done, especially with these of this
Jurisdiction, who have taken notice of the passages in the general Court in
December. last, yet for satisfaction of others to whom this case may be otherwise
presented, by Fame or Misreport, we will set down some Grounds and Reasons
thereof, some whereof were expressed in the Court, and others (though not
publicly insisted upon, yet) well conceived by some, as further motives to
lead their judgments to do as they did.

And, 1. It is to be observed, that the noted differences in point of Religion
in the Churches here, are about the Covenant of Works, in opposition to the
Covenant of Grace; in clearing whereof much dispute has been, whether
Sanctification be any evidence of Justification.

2. That before Mr. Wheel. came into this Country (which is not yet two years
since) there was no strife (at least in public observation) about that point.

3. That he did know (as himself confessed) that diverse of the Ministers here
were not of his Judgment in those points, and that the publishing of them would
cause disturbance in the Country, and yet he would never confer with the
Ministers about them, that thereby he might have gained them to his opinion,
(if it had been the truth) or at least have manifested some care of the public
Peace, which he rather seemed to slight, when being demanded in the Court a
Reason of such his failing, he answered that he ought not to consult with flesh
and blood, about the publishing of that Truth which he had received from God.

4. It was well known to him that the Magistrates and Deputies were very
sensible of those differences, and studious of pacifying such minds as began to
be warm and apt to contention about them, and for this end at the said Court in
December, (where these differences and alienations of mind through rash
censures, etc. were sadly complained of) they had called in the Ministers, and
(Mr. Wheel. being present) had desired their advice for discovery of such
dangers, as did threaten us hereby, and their help for preventing thereof; and
it was then thought needful, to appoint a solemn day of humiliation (as for
other occasions more remote, so especially) for this which more nearly
concerned us, and at this time this very point of evidencing Justification by
Sanctification set into some debate, and Mr. Wheel. being present spoke
nothing, though he well discerned that the Judgment of most of the Magistrates
and near all the Ministers closed with the affirmative.

5. That upon the said fast (Mr. Wheel. being desired by the Church to exercise
as a private Brother, by way of Prophecy) when Mr. Cotton teaching in the
afternoon out of Isa. 58. 4. had showed that it was not a fit work for a day of
Fast, to move strife and debate, to provoke to contention, etc. but by all
means to labor pacification and reconciliation, and therein had bestowed much
time, and many forcible arguments, yet Mr. Wheel. speaking after him, taught as
is here before mentioned, wholly omitting those particular occasions which the
Court intended, nay rather reproving them, in teaching that the only cause of
Fasting, was the absence of Christ, etc. and so notwithstanding the occasion of
the day, Mr. Cottons Example, the intent of the Court for procuring peace, he
stirred up the people to contention, and that with more than ordinary
vehemence. Now if any man will equally weigh the proceedings of the Court and
these observations together, we hope it will appear that Mr. Wheelwright was
justly convicted of Sedition and Contempt of Authority, and such as have not
leisure or will to compare them together, may only read that which here
follows, and receive satisfaction thereby, carrying this along with them,
that the acts of Authority holding forth the face, and stamp of a divine
Sentence, should not be less regarded than the actions of any private brother,
which a good man will view on all four sides before he judge them to be evil.

Sedition and Contempt are laid to his Charge.

Sedition does properly signify a going aside to make a party, and is rightly
described by the Poet, (for it is lawful to fetch the meaning of words from
human Authority) In magno populo cum saepe coorta est seditio saevitabque;
animis, etc. whence it it does appear that when the minds of the people being
assembled are kindled or made fierce upon some sudden occasion, so as they fall
to take part one against another, this is Sedition; for when that furor, which
does arma ministrare, is once kindled, the Sedition is begun, though it come
not to its perfection, till faces and saxa volant: Tully says, Seditionem esse
dissensionem omnium inter se, cum ^unt alii in aliud, when the people dissent
in opinion and go several ways,

Isidore says, Seditiosus est, qui dissensionem animorum facit and discordias
gignit. He that sets men's minds at difference, and begets strife: And if we
look into the Scripture, we shall find examples of sedition agreeing to these
descriptions. The uprore moved by Demetrius, Act. 19. was sedition, yet he
neither took up arms, nor persuaded others so to do, but only induced the minds
of the people, and made them fierce against the Apostles, by telling them they
were enemies to Diana of the Ephesians. Korah and his company moved a most
dangerous sedition, yet they did not stir up the people to fight, only they
went apart, and drew others to them against Moses and Aaron; here was nothing
but words, and that by a Levite, who might speak by his place, but it cost more
than words before it was pacified. Now in our present case, did not Mr. Wheel.
make sides when he proclaimed all to be under a Covenant of works, who did not
follow him (step by step) in his description of the Covenant of Grace? Did he
not make himself a party on the other side, by often using these and the like
words, We, Us? Did he not labor to heat the minds of the people, and to make
them fierce against those of that side, which he opposed (and whereof he knew
that most of the Magistrates and Ministers had declared themselves) when with
the greatest fervency of spirit and voice, he proclaims them Antichrists,
Enemies, Philistines, Herod, Pilate, persecuting Jews, and stirred them up on
his part to fight with them, to lay load on them, to burn them, to thresh them,
and to bind them in chains and fetters, to kill them and vex their hearts, and
that under the pain of the Curse of Meroz? Tantaene animis coelestibus irae?
Would one think that any heavenly Spirit could have breathed so much anger,
when an Angel would have given milder language to the Devil himself? And all
this without vouchsafing one argument to convince these Enemies of their evil
way, or one word of Admonition or Advice to themselves, to draw them out of
danger. But it is objected, that he expressed his meaning to be of a spiritual
fighting and killing, etc. with the Sword of the Spirit only. It is granted he
did so, yet his Instances of Illustration, or rather Inforcement, were of
another nature, as of Moses killing the Egyptian in defense of his Brother;
Sampson losing his life with the Philistines, the fight of Jonathan and his
Armor-bearer, and of David's Worthies, Baruc and Iael, etc. these obtained
their Victories with Swords and Hammers, etc. And such are no spiritual
Weapons, so that if his intent were not to stir up to open Force and Arms
(neither do we suspect him of any such purpose, otherwise than by consequence)
yet his reading and experience might have told him, how dangerous it is to heat
Peoples affections against their opposites, a mind inflamed with indignation
(among some People) would have been more apt to have drawn their Swords by the
authority of the examples he held forth for the encouragement, than to have
been kept to Spiritual Weapons, by the restraining without cautions; such as
cannot dispute for Christ with Stephen, will be ready to draw their Swords for
him, like Peter; for furor arma ministrat, like him who when he could not by
any Sentence in the Bible confute an Heretic, could make use of the whole book
to break his head; we might hold forth instances more than enough. The Wars in
Germany for these hundred years arose from dissentions in Religion, and though
in the beginning of the contention, they drew out only the Sword of the
Spirit, yet it was soon changed into a Sword of Steel; So was it among the
Consederate Cantons of Helvetia, which were so many Towns as nearly combined
together, as ours here; so was it also in the Netherlands between the Orthodox
and the Arminians; so has it been between the Calvinists and Lutherans: In
every place we find that the contentions began first by disputations and
Sermons, and when the minds of the people were once set on fire by reproachful
Terms of incendiary Spirits, they soon set to blows, and had always a tragical
and bloody issue; And to clear this objection, Mr. Wheel. professed
beforehand, what he looked for, viz. that his Doctrine would cause combustions
even in the Commonwealth, as well as in the Churches, which he could not have
feared if he had supposed (as in Charity he well might) that those who were set
over the People here in both States, were indeed true Christians; yea, he not
only confesses his expectation, but his earnest desire also of such
combustions and disturbances, when he says, that it is the Saints desire to
have the fire kindled, as if he were come among Turks or Papists, and not among
the Churches of Christ, amongst whom Paul labored to quench all fire of
contention, but with the Corinthians, Romans, and Galatians, and wished that
those were cut off who troubled them, setting a mark upon such as made
division, and a note of a carnal mind: therefore this objection will not save
him, his offense is yet without excuse, he did intend to trouble our peace, and
he has effected it; therefore it was a contempt of that authority which
required every Man to study Peace and Truth, and therefore it was a seditious
contempt, in that he stirred up others to join in the disturbance of that
Peace, which he was bound by Solemn Oath to preserve.

But here he puts in a plea, that he did take the only right way for Peace, by
holding out the Lord Jesus Christ in the Covenant of Free Grace, for without
Christ there is no peace, but get Christ and we have all.

To this we reply, first, We would demand of him what he accounts a holding
forth a Covenant of Grace? for, saving that he says, this is a Covenant of
Grace, that is a Covenant of Works, no Man can discern any such thing by his
proofs, for there is not any one argument in his Sermon, to convince the
judgment that so it is, and if we search the Scripture, we find in the Old
Testament, Ier. 31. the Covenant of Grace to be this, I will write my Law in
their hearts, or, I will be their God, etc. and in the new Testament we find,
He that believes in the Lord Jesus Christ, shall be saved, and that it is of
Faith, that it might be of Grace; but other Covenant of Grace than these, or to
the same effect, are not in our Bibles.

Again, Though it be true, that get Christ and we have all in some respect, yet
we must remember him of what he said with the same breath, that Truth and
external Peace cannot possibly stand together, how then would he have us
believe, that such a holding forth Christ should bring the desired Peace? This
is some what like the Jewish Corban, I will give to God, and he shall help my
Parents; or, as when a poor man stands in need of such relief, as I might give
him, instead there of I pray to God to bless him, and tell him that the
blessing of God makes rich; or, as I give a Lawyer a Fee to plead my cause,
and to procure me Justice, and when the day of hearing comes, he makes a long
Speech in commending the justice of the King, and persuading me to get his
favor, because he is the fountain of Justice; This is to reprove the wisdom of
God, by looking that the supreme and first cause should produce all effects,
without the use of subordinate and nearer causes and means; so a Man should
live out his full time by God's decree only, without meat or medicine; this
plea therefore will not hold, let us hear another.

It is objected, that the Magistrates may not appoint a Messenger of God, what
he should teach: admit so much, yet he may limit him what he may not teach, If
he forbid him to teach Heresy or Sedition, etc. he incurs as well a contempt
in teaching that which he was forbidden, as sins in teaching that which is
evil. Besides, every truth is not seasonable at all times, Christ tells his
Disciples, That he had many things to teach them, but they could not bear them
then, Joh. 16. 12. and God gives his Prophets the Tongue of the Learned, that
they may know how to speak a word in season, Isa. 50. 40. and if for every
thing there be a season, then for every Doctrine, Eccles. 3. 1. The abolishing
of the Ceremonial Law was a Truth which the Apostles were to teach, yet there
was a season when Paul did refrain it, Acts 21. 24. and the same Paul would not
circumcise Titus, though he did Timothy, so the difference of persons and
places, made a difference in the season of the Doctrine: and if Mr. Wheelwright
had looked upon the words which followed in the Text, Matthew. 9. 16, 17. he
might have learned, that such a Sermon would as ill suit the season, as old
Bottles do new Wine, and by that in Esaias beforementioned, he might have had
known the Spirit of God does teach his Servants to discern of seasons, as well
as of truths; for if there be such a point in wisdom as Men call discretion,
sure Religion (which makes truly wise) does not deprive the Servants of God of
the right use thereof. When Paul was to deal with the Sorcerer, who did oppose
his Doctrine, Acts 13. he calls him the Child of the Devil, etc. but when he
answered Festus, (who told him he was mad, and rejected his Doctrine also) he
uses him gently, and with terms of honorable respect. Though Stephen calls the
Jews stiff-necked, and of uncircumcised hearts, etc, as knowing them to be
malicious and obstinate Enemies to Christ, yet Paul directs Timothy (being to
deal with such as were not past hope, though they did oppose his Doctrine for the
present) not to strive, but to use all gentleness, instructing them with
meekness, etc. 2. Tim. 2. The Prophet Elisha when he speaks to Iehoram very
roughly, as one not worthy to be looked at, yet he shows a different respect of
Iehosaphat, though he were then out of his way, and under a sin, for which he had
been formerly reproved, 2 King. 3. Christ himself, though he sharply reproves
the Pharisees, etc. yet he instructs Nicodemus gently, when he objected
against his Doctrine, and that somewhat rudely, Ioh. 3. The Apostles would not
forbear to Preach Christ, though Rulers forbad them. Act. 3. yet another Prophet
forbear at another season at the command of King Amasia, 2 Chronicles. 25. so we see
that this Plea of Mr. VVheelwright is as weak as the former, and will not
excuse him from Contempt.

If it be yet objected, that his Sermon was not at all for Contention, seeing
he raised and pressed an use of brotherly love; we grant he did so, but it was
ejusdem farinae, a Loaf of the same leaven with the other, for he applies it
to those of his own party, to persuade them to hold together, and help one
another against those of the other party, whom he sets forth as their
opposites, and encourages them thereby by the Example of Moses, who in love to
his brother killed the Egyptian.

A further objection has been made against the proceedings of the Court, as if
Mr. Wheelwright had not a lawful Trial, as not being put upon a Jury of
freemen. But the answer to this is easy, it being well known to all such as
have understanding of matters of this nature, that such Courts as have power to
make and abrogate Laws, are tied to no other Orders, but their own, and to no
other Rule but Truth and Justice, and why thrice twelve men sitting, as Judges
in a Court, should be more subject to partiality than twelve such called as a
Jury to the Bar, let others judge.

Now if some shall gather from that which is here before mentioned, viz. that
every Truth is not seasonable at all times, if we shall grant that what Master
VVheelright delivered was Truth, we must desire him to take only so much as we
granted, viz. by way of Supposition only; for letting pass (as we said) such
Points as were merely doctrinal, and not ripe for the Court (depending as yet
in Examination among the Elders) we may safely deny that those Speeches were
Truths, which the Court censured for Contempt and Sedition, for a Brother may
fall so far into Disobedience to the Gospel, as there may be cause to separate
from him, and to put him to Shame, and yet he is not to be accounted an Enemy,
2 Thessalonians. 3. Therefore when Mr. VVheelwright pronounced such (taking them at the
worst he could make them) to be Enemies, etc. it was not according to the Truth
of the Gospel. Again, to incense and heat men's minds against their Brethren,
before he had convinced or admonished them, as being in an estate of Enmity,
etc. is not to be termed any Truth of the Gospel; so likewise to bring
extraordinary Examples for ordinary Rules, as of John 8. 44. to incite his
party to the like practice against such whose hearts they cannot judge of, as
Christ could of theirs to whom he spoke, is as far from the Rule prescribed to
ordinary Ministers, 2 Timothy 2. 25. and to all Christians, Gal. 6. 1. and Iam. 3.
17. as that Example of Elijah (by which the Apostles would have called for fire
from Heaven upon the Samaritans) was different from the Spirit whereof they
were: so to resemble such among us, as profess their Faith in Christ only, etc.
and are in Church Fellowship, and walk inoffensively, submitting to all the
Lords Ordinances in Church and Commonwealth, to resemble such to branded
Reprobates, and Arch-Enemies of Christ, such as Herod, etc. we suppose has no
warrant of Truth. We might instance in other like passages, as his ordinary
inciting to spiritual Combats, by examples of bodily Fight, and bloody
Victories, (being very unsuitable) but these may suffice to prove that all he
spoke was not true, and by this is the offense more aggravated, for if it were
Seditious only in the manner, it must needs be much worse, when the matter it
self also was untrue.

But if any shall yet pretend want of Satisfaction, by all that has been
produced, (for indeed it is beyond reason, how far prejudice has prevailed to
captivate some Judgments, otherwise godly and wise) and shall object further,
that his Doctrine, etc. were general, and so could not be intended of any
particular persons, we desire such, first to remember what application Mr.
VVhe. made of the same in the open Court, viz. That he did intend all such as
walked in such a way. Then again, let the c^se be put in a reversed Frame, some
other had then taught, that all such as deny that Sanctification (as it is held
by the other party) is a good evidence of Justification, and that say or have
their Assurance by Faith, as a work of God in them, have it in the way of the
Gospel, that these were Enemies to Christ, etc. Persecutors of the way of
Grace, etc. and should have stirred up others against them, with like
Arguments, and Vehemence, as Mr. VVheelwright did, there is no doubt but Mr.
Wheel. and others of his opinion, would soon have pointed out those who must
necessarily have been intended by it; for it is well known that some proper
Adjunct, or some noted Circumstance may design a particular person or company,
as well as names, so Christ points out Judas by the sop, Paul the Jews, by
those of the Circumcision, and the Antichrist, by That man of sin, etc.

But we meet yet with another objection, viz. that disturbance of unity is not
Sedition, except it also lead to the hurt of Utility.

To this we answer, first, that if it tend immediately to such hurt; we deny
the Truth of the Proposition,; for if in the time of Famine, a man should stir
up the people to fetch Corn out of the houses of such as had it to spare, this
were to an immediate public Good, yet it were Sedition. If Jeremy (when he
taught the Jews, that they ought to set free their Hebrew Servants) had also
incited the servants to free themselves, this had not been free from Sedition,
yet it had not been against public utility; But they allege the examples of
Iehojadah, who caused a disturbance, yet without Sedition; we Answer, that case
was very unlike to ours, for Iehojadah being High Priest, was also Protector of
the true King, and so Chief Governor of the Civil State, and Athaliah being a
meet Usurper, he did no other, then if a lawful King should assemble his
Subjects to apprehend a Rebel; and though a Prince or Governor may raise a
party to suppress or withstand public enemies, or other evils, yet it does not
follow, that a private Man, or a Minister of the Gospel may do the like: we
read, Nehem. 5. 7. that he raised a great Assembly against those who did
oppress their brethren, but we read not that Ezra did so, upon the disorders
which he complained of, and yet that which he did, in assembling of the People,
for redress, etc. was by authority and counsel of the Nobles, Ezr. 10. 8.

2. That this course of Mr. Wheelw. did tend directly to the great hinderance
of public utility: for when Brethren shall look one at another as enemies and
persecutors, etc. and when people shall look at their Rulers and Ministers as
such, and as those who go about to take Christ and Salvation from them, How
shall they join together in any public Service? How shall they cohabit and
trade together? How hardly will they submit to such Overseers? How will it
hinder all affairs in Courts, in Towns, in Families, in Vessels at Sea, etc.
and what can more threaten the dissolution and ruin of Church and
Commonwealth? Lastly, if it be alleged that such warlike terms are used by
Christ and his Apostles in a Spiritual sense, we deny it not, but we desire
that the usual manner of their applying them may also be considered, for Paul
says, 1 Cor. 9. So fight I, etc. I beat down my body, etc. 1 Timothy 6. 12. Fight
the good fight of Faith, lay hold on eternal life, and 1 Pet. 2. 11. and Iam.
4. 1. there is speech of the fight of our lusts, and Ephesians. 6. 11. he bids them
put on Armor, but it is to resist the Devil, not flesh and blood, not to fight
against their Brethren, toward whom he forbids all bitterness and clamor, etc.
Ephesians. 4. And when he speaks of Spiritual Weapons, 2 Cor. 10. he does not draw
them out against the persons of brethren, but against high thoughts and
imaginations, etc. And if Mr. Wheelwright had found out any such among us, and
planted his battery against them by sound Arguments, he had followed our
Apostolic rule; Christ indeed threatens to fight against the Nicholaitans
with the Sword of his Mouth, and if Mr. Wheelwright had known any such here, as
certainly as Christ knew those, he might have been justified by the example,
otherwise not.

Therefore to conclude, seeing there be of those who dissent from Mr.
Wheelwright his Doctrines, who have denied themselves for the love of Christ as
far as he has done, and will be ready, (by God's grace) to do and suffer for
the sake of Christ, and the honor of Free Grace, as much as himself; for such
to be publicly defamed, and held forth as Enemies to the Lord Jesus, and
persecutors like Herod and Pilate, and the uncircumcised Heathen, etc. cannot
proceed from a charitable Mind, nor does it savor of an Apostolic,
Gospel-like, Brotherly Spirit.

Mistress Hutchison being banished and confined, till the season of the year
might be fit, and safe for her departure; she thought it now needless to
conceal her self any longer, neither would Satan lose the opportunity of making
choice of so fit an instrument, so long as any hope remained to attain his
mischievous end in darkening the saving truth of the Lord Jesus, and disturbing
the peace of his Churches. Therefore she began now to discover all her mind to
such as came to her, so that her opinions came abroad, and began to take place
among her old disciples, and now some of them raised up questions about the
Immortality of the Soul, about the Resurrection, about the Morality of the
Sabbath, and diverse others, which the Elders finding to begin to appear in some
of their Churches, they took much pains (both in public and private) to
suppress; and following the scent from one to another, the root of all was
found to be in Mistress Hutchison; whereupon they resorted to her many times,
laboring to convince her, but in vain; yet they resorted to her still, to the
end they might either reclaim her from her errors, or that they might bear
witness against them if occasion were: For in a Meeting of the Magistrates and
Elders, about suppressing these new-sprung errors, the Elders of Boston had
declared their readiness to deal with Mistress Hutchison in a Church Way, if
they had sufficient testimony: for though she had maintained some of them
sometimes before them, yet they thought it not so orderly to come in as
Witnesses; whereupon other of the Elders, and others, collecting what they had
heard from her own Mouth at several times, drew them into several heads, and
sent them to the Church of Boston, whereupon the Church (with leave of the
Magistrates, because she was a prisoner) sent for her to appear upon a
Lecture-day, being the 15th of the first Month, and though she were at her*
own house in the Town, yet she came not into the Assembly till the Sermon and
Prayer were ended, (pretending Bodily infirmity) when she was come, one of the
Ruling Elders called her forth before the Assembly, (which was very great from
all the parts of the Country) and telling her the cause why the Church had
called her, read the several heads, which were as follows.

1. That the Souls of all Men (in regard of generation) are mortal like the
Beasts, Eccles. 3. 18. 2. That in regard of Christ's purchase, they are
immortal, so that Christ has purchased the Souls of the wicked to eternal
pain, and the Souls of the elect to eternal peace. 3. Those who are united to
Christ, have, in this life, new bodies, and Two bodies, 1 Cor. 6. 19. she knows
not how Jesus Christ should be united to these our fleshly Bodies. 4. Those who
have union with Christ, shall not rise with the same fleshly bodies, 1 Cor. 15.
44. 5. And that the resurrection mentioned there, and in Ioh. 5 28. is not
meant of the resurrection of the body, but of our union here and after this
life. 6. That there are no created graces in the Saints after their union with
Christ, but before there are, for Christ takes them out of their hands into his
own. 7. There are no created graces in the humane nature of Christ, but he was
only acted by the power of the Godhead. 8. The Image of God wherein Adam was
made, she could see no Scripture to warrant that it consisted in holiness, but
conceived it to be in that he was made like to Christ's Manhood. 9. She had no
Scripture to warrant that Christ's Manhood is now in Heaven, but the body of
Christ is his Church. 10. We are united to Christ with the same union, that his
humanity on earth was with the Deity, Ioh. 17. 21. 11. She conceived the
Disciples before Christ his death were not converted, Matthew. 18. 3. 12. There
is no evidence to be had of our good estate, either from absolute or
conditional promises. 13. The Law is no rule of life to a Christian. 14. There
is no Kingdom of Heaven in Scripture, but only Christ. 15. There is first
engraffing into Christ before union, from which a Man might fall away. 16. The
first thing God reveals to assure us is our election. 17. That Abraham was not
in a saving estate till the 22 oh. of Genesis when he offered Isaac, and saving
the firmness of God's election, he might have perished notwithstanding any work
of grace that was wrought in him till then. 18. That union to Christ is not by
Faith. 19. That all commands in the word are Law, and are not a way of life,
and the command of Faith is a Law, and therefore kills; she supposed it to be
a Law, from Romans 3. 27. 20. That there is no Faith of God's elect but
assurance, there is no Faith of dependence but such as an hypocrite may have
and fall away from, proved Ioh. 15. for by that she said they are in Christ,
but Christ is not in them. 21. That an hypocrite may have Adam's righteousness
and perish, and by that righteousness he is bound to the Law, but in union with
Christ, Christ comes into the Man, and he retains the Seed, and dies, and then
all manner of grace in himself, but all in Christ. 22. There is no such thing
as inherent righteousness. 23. We are not bound to the Law, no not as a rule of
Life. 24. We are dead to all acts in Spiritual things, and are only acted by
Christ. 25. Not being bound to the Law, it is not transgression against the Law
to sin or break it, because our sins they are inward and Spiritual, and so are
exceeding sinful, and only are against Christ. 26. Sanctification can be no
evidence at all of our good estate. 27. That her particular revelations about
future events are as infallible as any part of Scripture, and that she is bound
as much to believe them, as the Scripture, for the same Holy Ghost is the
Author of them both. 28. That so far as a Man is in union with Christ, he can
do no duties perfectly, and without the Communion of the unregenerate part with
the regenerate. 29. That such exhortations as these, to work out our Salvation
with fear, to make our calling and election sure, etc. are spoken only to
such, as are under a Covenant of Works.
All which she did acknowledge she had spoken (for a Copy of them had been sent
to her diverse days before, and the witnesses hands subscribed, so as she saw it
was in vain to deny them) then she asked. By what rule such an Elder could come
to her pretending to desire light, and indeed to entrap her, to which the same
Elder answered, That he had been twice with her, and that he told her indeed at
St. Ives, that he had been troubled at some of her Speeches in the Court,
wherein he did desire to see light for the ground and meaning of them; but he
professed in the presence of the Lord, that he came not to entrap her, but in
compassion to her Soul, to help her out of those Snares of the Devil, wherein
he saw she was entangled, and that before his departure from her, he did bear
Witness against her Opinions, and against her Spirit, and did leave it sadly
upon her from the Word of God: Then presently she grew into passion against her
Pastor for his Speech against her at the Court, after the Sentence was passed,
which he gave a full Answer unto, showing his zeal against her errors,
whereupon she asked for what error she had been banished, professing withal,
that she held none of these things she was now charged with, before her
Imprisonment; (supposing that whatsoever should be found amiss, would be
imputed to that; but it was answered, as the truth was, That she was not put to
durance, but only a favorable confinement, so as all of her family, and
diverse others, resorted to her at their pleasure.) But this allegation was then
proved false, (and at her next convention more fully) for there were diverse
present, who did know she spoke untruth. Her Answer being demanded to the first
Articles, she maintained her assertion, That the Souls were mortal, etc.
alleging the place in the Eccles. cited in the Article, and some other
Scriptures nothing to the purpose, she insisted much upon that in Genesis 1. In
the day thou eatest, etc. thou shall die, she could not see how a Soul could be
immortally miserable, though it might be eternally miserable, neither could she
distinguish between the Soul and the Life; and though she were pressed by many
Scriptures and reasons alleged by the Elders of the same, and other Churches,
so as she could not give any Answer to them, yet she stood to her Opinion, till
at length a stranger being desired to speak to the point, and he opening to her
the difference between the Soul and the Life, the first being a Spiritual
substance, and the other the union of that with the body; she then confessed
she saw more light than before, and so with some difficulty was brought to
confess her Error in that point. Wherein was to be observed, that though he
spoke to very good purpose, and so clearly convinced her as she could not
gainsay, yet it was evident she was convinced before, but she could not give
the honor of it to her own Pastor or Teacher, nor to any of the other Elders,
whom she had so much slighted.

Then they proceeded to the third, fourth, and fifth Articles, about the body
and the resurrection of the old, which she maintained according to the
Articles, and though she were not able to give any reasonable answer to the
many places of the Scripture, and other arguments which were brought to
convince her, yet she still persisted in her error, giving froward Speeches to
some that spoke to her; as when one of the Elders used this Argument, that if
the Resurrection were only our union with Christ, then all that are united,
are the children of the resurrection, and therefore are neither to marry, nor
to give in marriage, and so by consequence, there ought to be community of
women; she told him, that he spoke like the Pharisees, who said, that Christ
had a Devil, because that Abraham was dead, and the Prophets, and yet he had
said, that those that eat his flesh, should never die, not taking the speech in
the true meaning, so did he (said she) who brought that argument, for it is
said there, they should be like the Angels, etc. The Elders of Boston finding
her thus obstinate, propounded to the Church for an Admonition to be given her,
to which all the Church consented, except two of her Sons, who because they
persisted to defend her, were under admonition also. Mr. Cotton gave the
admonition, and first to her Sons, laying it sadly upon them, that they would
give such way to their natural affection, as for preserving her honor, they
should make a breach upon the honor of Christ, and upon their Covenant with
the Church, and withal tear the very bowels of their Soul, by hardening her in
her sin: In this admonition to her, first, he remembered her of the good way she
was in at her first coming, in helping to discover to diverse, the false bottom
they stood upon, in trusting to legal works without Christ; then he showed her,
how by falling into these gross and fundamental errors, she had lost the honor
of her former service, and done more wrong to Christ and his Church, than
formerly she had done good, and so laid her sin to her conscience with much
zeal and solemnity; he admonished her also of the height of spirit; then he
spoke to the Sisters of the Church, and advised them to take heed of her
Opinions, and to withold all countenance and respects from her, lest they
should harden her in her sin: so she was dismissed, and appointed to appear
again that day sevennight.

The Court had ordered that she should return to Roxbury again, but upon
intimation that her spirit began to fall, she was permitted to remain at Mr.
Cotton's House (where Davenport was also kept) who before her next appearing,
did both take much pains with her, and prevailed so far that she did
acknowledge her Error in all the Articles (except the last) and accordingly she
wrote down her Answers to them all, when the day came, and she was called
forth, and the Articles read again to her, she delivered in her Answers in
writing, which were also read, and being then willing to speak to the
Congregation for their further satisfaction, she did acknowledge that she had
greatly erred, and that God had left her to her self herein, because she had so
much under-valued his Ordinances, both in slighting the Magistrates at the
Court, and also the Elders of the Church, and confessed that when she was at
the Court, she looked only at such failings as she apprehended in the
Magistrates Proceedings, without having regard to the place they were in, and
that the Speeches she then used about her Revelations were rash, and without
ground, she desired the Prayers of the Church for her.

Thus far she went on well, and the Assembly conceived hope of her Repentance,
but in her Answers to the several Articles, she gave no Satisfaction, because
in diverse of them she answered by Circumlocutions, and seemed to lay all the
faults in her Expressions, which occasioned some of the Elders to desire she
might express her self more clearly, and for that ever she was demanded about
the Article, whether she were not, or had not been of that judgment, that there
is no inherent Righteousness in the Saints, but those Gifts and Graces which
are ascribed to them that are only in Christ as the Subject? to which she
answered, that she was never of that Judgment, howsoever by her Expressions she
might seem to be so; and this she affirmed with such Confidence as bred great
astonishment in many, who had known the contrary, and diverse alleged her own
Sayings and Reasonings, both before her Confinement and since, which did
manifest to all that were present, that she knew that she spoke untruth, for it
was proved that she had alleged that in Isaiah 53. By his knowledge shall my
righteous Servant justify many; which she had maintained to be meant of a
knowledge in Christ, and not in us; so likewise that in Galatians, I live by
the Faith of the Son of God, which she said was the Faith of Christ, and not
any Faith inherent in us; also, that she had maintained, that Christ is our
Sanctification in the same sort that he is our Justification, and that she had
said, that she would not pray for Grace, but for Christ, and that (when she had
been pressed with diverse Scriptures, which spoke of washing and creating a new
Heart, and writing the Law in the Heart, etc.) she had denied, that they did
mean any Sanctification in us: There were diverse women also with whom she had
dealt about the same point, who (if their Modesty had not restrained them)
would have born witness against her herein, (as themselves after confessed)
wherefore the Elders pressed her very earnestly to remember her self, and not
to stand so obstinately to maintain so manifest an untruth, but she was deaf of
that Ear, and would not acknowledge that she had been at any time of that
judgment, howsoever her Expressions were; Then Mr. Cotton told the Assembly,
that whereas she had been formerly dealt with for matter of Doctrine, he had
(according to the duty of his place being the Teacher of that Church) proceeded
against unto Admonition, but now the case being altered, and she being in
question for maintaining of untruth, which is matter of manners, he must leave
the business to the Pastor, Mr. Wilson to go on with her, but withal declared
his judgment in the case from that in Rev. 22. that such as make and maintain a
lie, ought to be cast out of the Church; and whereas two or three pleaded that
she might first have a second admonition, according to that in Titus 3. 10. he
answered that that was only for such as erred in point of Doctrine, but such as
shall notoriously offend in matter of Conversation, ought to be presently cast
out, as he proved by Ananias and Saphira, and the incestuous Corinthian; (and
as appears by that of Simon Magus) and for her own part though she heard this
moved in her behalf, that she might have a further respite, yet she her self
never desired it: so the Pastor went on, and propounding it to the Church, to
know whether they were all agreed, that she should be cast out, and a full
Consent appearing (after the usual manner) by their silence, after a convenient
pause he proceeded, and denounced the Sentence of Excommunication against her,
and she was commanded to depart out of the Assembly. In her going forth, one
standing at the door, said, The Lord sanctify this unto you, to whom she made
answer, The Lord judges not as man judges, better to be cast out of the
Church than to deny Christ.

Thus it has pleased the Lord to have compassion on his poor Churches here,
and to discover, this great Impostor, an instrument of Satan so fitted and
trained to his Service for interrupting the passage of his Kingdom in this part
of the world, and poisoning the Churches here planted, as no story records the
like of a woman, since that mentioned in the Revelation; it would make a large
volume to lay down all passages, I will only observe some few, which were
obvious to all that know her course.

1. Her Entrance. 2. Her Progress. 3. Her Downfall.

1. The Foundation she laid, was (or rather seemed to be) Christ and Free Grace.

2. Rule she pretended to walk by, was only the Scripture.

3. The light to discern this Rule, was only the Holy Ghost.

4. The persons she conversed with were (for the most part) Christians in
Church Covenant.

5. Her ordinary talk was about the things of the Kingdom of God.

6. Her usual Conversation was in the way of Righteousness and Kindness.

Thus she entered and made up the first act of her course.

2. In her progress I observe,

First, Her Success, she had in a short time insinuated her self into the
Hearts of much of the people (yea of many of the most wise and godly) who grew
into so reverent an Esteem of her Godliness, and spiritual Gifts, as they
looked at her as a Prophetess, raised up of God for some great work now at
hand, as the calling of the Jews, etc. so as she had more resort to her for
counsel about matter of Conscience, and clearing up men's Spiritual Estates,
than any Minister (I might say all the Elders) in the Country.

Secondly, Pride and Arrogance of her Spirit.

1. In framing a new way of Conversation and evidencing thereof, carried along
in the distinction between the Covenant of works, which she would have no
otherwise differenced, but by an immediate Revelation of the Spirit.

2. In despising all (both Elders and Christians) who went not her way, and
laying them under a Covenant of works.

3. In taking upon her infallibly to know the election of others, so as she
would say, that if she had but one half hours talk with a man, she would tell
whether he were elect or not.

4. Her impatience of opposition, which appears in diverse passages before.

Thirdly, Her Skill and Cunning to devise.

1. In that she still pretended she was of Mr. Cottons Judgment in all things.

2. In covering her Errors by doubtful Expressions.

3. In shadowing the true end, and abuse of her weekly meetings under the name
of repeating Mr. Cottons Sermons.

4 In her method of practice to bring the Conscience under a false Terror, by
working that an argument of a Covenant of works, which no Christian can have
comfort without, viz. of Sanctification, or Qualifications, (as she termed it.)

5. In her confident profession of her own good Estate, and the clearness and
comfort of it, obtained in the same way of waiting for immediate Revelation
which she held out to others.

3. In her downfall there may be observed the Lords Faithfulness in honoring
and justifying his own Ordinances.

2. In that he made her to clear the justice of the Court, by confessing the
vanity of her Revelations, etc. and her sin in despising his Ministers.

2. In that the Judgment and Sentence of the Church has concurred with that of
the Court in her rejection, so that she is cast out of both as an unworthy
member of either.

3. The Justice of God in giving her up to those delusions, and to that
impudency in venting and maintaining them, as should bring her under that
censure which (not long before) she had endeavored and expected to have
brought upon some other, who opposed her proceedings.

4. That she who was in such esteem in the Church for Soundness of Judgment and
Sincerity of Heart (but a few months before) should now come under Admonition
for many foul and fundamental Errors, and after be cast out for notorious Lying.

5. That she who was wont to be so confident of her Spiritual Good Estate, and
ready (undesired) to hold it forth to others, (being pressed now at her last
appearance before the Church to give some proof of it) should be wholly silent
in that matter.

6. Whereas upon the Sentence of the Court against her, she boasted highly of
her Sufferings for Christ, etc. it was noted by one of the Elders (who bare
witness against her Errors) that the Spirit of Glory promised in Pet. to those
who suffer for well-doing, did not come upon her, but a Spirit of delusion, and
damnable. Error, which as it had possessed her before, so it became more
effectual and evident by her Sufferings.

7. Here is to be seen the presence of God in his Ordinances, when they are
faithfully attended according to his holy Will, although not free from human
Infirmities: This American Iesabel kept her strength and reputation, even among
the people of God, till the hand of Civil Justice laid hold on her, and then
she began evidently to decline, and the Faithful to be freed from her
Forgeries; and now in this last act, when she might have expected (as most
likely she did) by her seeming repentance of her Errors, and confessing her
undervaluing of the Ordinances of Magistracy and Ministry, to have redeemed her
reputation in point of sincerity, and yet have made good all her former work,
and kept open a back door to have returned to her vomit again, by her
paraphrastical retractions, and denying any change in her judgment, yet such
was the presence and blessing of God in his own Ordinance, that this Subtilty
of Satan was discovered to her utter shame and confusion, and to the setting at
liberty of many godly hearts, that had been captivated by her to that day; and
that Church which by her means was brought under much Infamy, and near to
dissolution, was hereby sweetly repaired, and a hopeful way of Establishment,
and her dissembled Repentance clear detected, God giving her up since the
Sentence of Excommunication, to that hardness of heart, as she is not affected
with any Remorse, but glories in it, and fears not the Vengeance of God, which
she lies under, as if God did work contrary to his own word, and loosed from
Heaven what his Church had bound upon earth.

FINIS.

