A General Mistake, Corrected: OR THE VINDICATION OF THE Right Honorable the
Countess Dowager of ESSEX, AND THE Bishop of SALISBURY; In the GAZETTE of the
31st of July last. No Argument against, but for the truth of the Murder of that
Great Patriot, Arthur (late) Earl of ESSEX.
In a Letter to a Friend,
August the 2d. 1690. SIR,
IN last Thursdays Gazette, you will find, the Right Honorable, the Countess
Dowager of Essex, and the Reverend Father in God, Gilbert, Lord Bishop of
Salisbury, have entirely disavow'd, what a Discourse touching the Murder of
the late Earl of Essex has fastened on them. Their Denial is thus worded: (Viz.)

Whereas in a Letter to a Friend, written by Mr. Lawrence Braddon, touching the
Murder of the late E. of Essex, an Account is given, Page 54, and 55, of some
Discourse, that the Countess Dowager of Essex, and the Bishop of Salisbury had
upon that Subject, at a Meeting with several Lords. The Countess Dowager and
the Bishop, find themselves so much w^^^g'd in that Relation, that they have
thought it became them, to Disavow it entirely, the whole Discourse fastened on
them, being false, and nothing to THAT PVRPOSE, having been upon that Occasion
mentioned by either of them.

July 24. E. Essex, Gil. Sarum.



I perceive this is (through Mistake) generally misapplied; for last Night
meeting with some, who (had been ever prejudiced against the belief of this
Murder, and) had often heard me say, That I doubted not, but that unfortunate
Earl was treacherously taken off, and that I was therein confirmed upon reading
a late Letter to a Friend, written by Mr. Braddon upon that deplorable Subject.
These Gentlemen believing, that by this Gazette they had got an Objection,
which at one Stroke entirely defeated the whole Power of the Proofs in that
Letter, (which they confessed they had not read) immediately very warmly
accosted me herewith; and upon this occasion very scurrilously reflected upon
Mr. Braddon, for imposing upon the World, such (as they called them) villainous
and false Proofs for that (pretended) Murder -- I (not then remembering that
particular part of the Book, to which this denial had Relation) did
immediately fetch the Discourse, and I then found, that this Vindication was so
far from denying any of the Proofs which had been brought to testify that
Treachery, that on the contrary, it entirely disavow'd the most material
Argument, I could ever yet hear brought to justify the Belief of the
Self-murder, which that Letter mentions in page 54, and 55, where Mr. Braddon
(after he had given numerous Evidences in many Particulars, which put together,
almost demonstrate the truth of that complicated Cruelty) says, by way of
Objection against the Murder, as follows, (Viz.)

I shall now mention one or two more Objections against my Lord's being
murdered and then draw to a Conclusion. The first is this, (viz.) the Right
Honorable the Lady Gou^^^ess-Dowage of Essex, having heretofore declared
(whether lately, I cannot say) That she did believe her Lord cut his own
Throat; and being so possessed, some time after this Committee had several
times sat, she desired several Lords (amongst which some were of this Right
Honorable Committee) to meet at her House; and after her Honor had acquainted
their Lordships with the occasion of her request, an eminent Divine (and now
Bishop) did inform their Lordships what were the Reasons that moved her Honor
to believe that her Lord did indeed lay violent hands on himself, the Chief, if
not the Only where of, was, That some sho^^ time before my Lord's Commitment to
the Tower, his Lordship seemed to be under a great concern of mind; but then
declared, That the trouble he was in did not arise from any thoughts of
Self-preservation, for Himself was the least of his Care; but the thoughts of
his Family, what would after his Death become of them, was what did indeed
trouble him: As for himself, be was resolved what to do; SEVERAL TIMES VERY
RESOLVTELY REPEATING THAT EXPRESSION, AS FOR MY SELF, I AM RESOLVED WHAT TO DO.
This I was told by a Gentleman then present, who (as I have great reason to
believe) would have represented every thing to the best advantage (as far as
Truth would permit) on the behalf of such Objections -- So far that Letter.

This you find is not brought by Mr. Braddon as an argument to prove my Lord's
being murder d^ but on the contrary, raised by way of Objection against the
Belief thereof; which Objection Mr. B. here says, he received from One then
present, but if that Gentleman (who is said to have given the Information) was
mistaken in his relation, the Author of the Letter for that deserves no
reflections, and it can hardly be supposed that Mr. Braddon would (without some
grounds) have raised such a material objection (as this would have been, had it
been true) against the proof of that Murder, for endeavoring the Detection
whereof he has been so barbarously treated by the Corruption of the late
Misgovernment: neither has the substance of what is here objected, been
discredited, (or at least rejected) by those who are and have ever been most
zealous for stifling this Discovery. For how often have these Gentlemen in all
public Places, urged (in effect) the same ( viz. the Countess and the Bishop
of Salisbury's Belief of the Self murder, and their satisfying several
Honorable Lords in the Truth thereof) as what should convince all men of the
reality of that Self-violent --. But this common, and (as these Men thought)
unanswerable Argument for such satisfaction, is now struck dumb, being stripped
of its Credit, when thus solemnly and publicly entirely disavow'd, and NOTHING
TO THAT PVRPOSE having been upon that occasion mentioned by either of those two
Honorable Persons --. The Gentlemen who at first so hotly assaulted me upon
reading this denial, and the things denied, finding this to be the TRVE State
of the Case, soon became more cool and ingenuously confessed they had been
imposed upon, and before we parted did frankly acknowledge their rashness in
their reflections -- wherefore they protested they began to doubt of the Truth
of the Self-murder in the Belief whereof they before thought themselves upon
good grounds well convinced --. And hereupon they did desire me to lend them
that Discourse, promising that they would read the whole, and without prejudice
weigh what is therein said to he proved -- after they have done this, I doubt
not but some, if not all of them, will be satisfied of the Truth of that most
barbarous State-treachery a more cruel Murder than which (in all its relations
considered) this Kingdom never saw. And that we never may see the like part
acted over again, but that the Actors, Aiders, Abetters, and Concealers of
this, may in this World receive their just Reward is the hearty Prayers of,

Sir your very humble Servant, T. W.

A Letter in Proof of the Murder of the late Earl of Essex, written by L.
Braddon Gent. who was upwards of Five Years prosecuted and imprisoned, for
endeavoring to discover the same. Sold by most Booksellers.

London, Printed for the Author, 1690.


