ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE LATE VINDICATION OF Slingsby Bethel Esquire Wherein the
Ancient and Laudable Customs of the City of LONDON Are asserted against the
scandalous Reflections he has made upon them. IN A LETTER TO THE LORD MAYOR AND
Court of Aldermen.
By a Loyal Citizen.
My Lord and Fellow Citizens,
AS it has been the opinion of many worthy Members of our City (since the
Election of this Sheriff) that we did very ill to call a Person to that Office
from his private station in the Country (though not so qualified for this place
by the Laws as some others were) so it has been of very great trouble to us to
find him not answer either the Design or Honor of such our Election.

It Is his pleasure to acknowledge he was getting an Estate by Trade when the
Rebellion broke out in England; and that I suppose fitted him afterward to
bear a part in that blustrous Government, as to have the honor to be nominated
a Steers-man in that Committee of Safety, which had like to have ruined the
whole Commonwealth.

And yet, it is true, a man may be of very ill Principles in 1658. and become a
wonderful good man again in 1660. when his beloved Estate and safety, begins to
be called in question; which made the pleasant Fellow, who (walking with a
great Lanthorn and Candle lighted at Noonday, on the 29 th. of May, on the
King's Return) said, That he had been seeking for a Roundhead all that day,
but verily and truly could not find One from Westminster to Aldgate.

But to come to the point: Was there ever such a man of Virtue heard of since
Adam (that managed a Trade) who thus confidently avers, That his conversation
has been such, in all his dealings in the World, as to deserve no reproach from
any man upon Earth? We all well know, that in Traffic and Trade in the World
the justest man falls seven times a day, as occasion may offer.

And it is to be supposed, that a man that gets an overgrown Estate amongst us
in a way of Trade, cannot get every penny so exactly just as not to be liable to
the reproach of any Tongue whatsoever; surely if that had been true which our
Sheriff affirms, he had never fallen under the present obloquy. But --

Now after all this, since you called him forth from his private retirement to
the Honor he now enjoys: Behold, (good man) how he calls in one of the
Prophets to testify against you, for maliciously reproaching, scandalizing and
making his Office troublesome to him. Why now, let any man judge if ever Sheriff
(since Richard the Ill's time) was so abused by his fellow Citizens: surely we
have not lost our manners and due regards to that Honorable Office, have we?
Come let us but impartially enquire into the reasons of these things.

First he says, We charge him with being a Papist and a Jesuit; and to color
our Lies call in the Kings Evidence to testify against him; Why truly this
could not be said but by an errant Tory, or some Masquerading Fellow; no loyal,
honest or sober Citizen could have offered such an affront to his Worship; And
yet Dr. Oats is a shrewd man too at guessing; -- But however, we may say there
was an odd Jesuitical Principle that actuated in the late times, to do even
such things as Jesuits would if they could; and so possibly there may be color
for some such tittle tattle among the People at the Election in Southwark: But
when Dr. Oats comes to Town he will clear this point.

And for the Election in Southwark, I may freely say this, That the Commoners
did very discreetly in Electing two unquestionable Loyal Persons, Capt. Rich
and Sir R. How; And in such Elections there do not want reflections on each
Candidate; for I have been told that some of the Sheriff's party did bespatter
them too with the Title of Abhorrers, and I overs of Arbitrary Power; so that
it is pretty even on both sides.

As for what he is accused of in being a Soldier of the late times, I am apt
to believe his Worship says truth; But what to say to that malicious whisper of
words spoken by him at Hambrough about the King's Death, I leave that to be
decided by Law; only a man would think our Sheriff no good King's man, since he
is thus traduced by Persons of the same Rank and Place he dwelt in, and his
daily Companions.

But for the next malicious slander, of his being one of those in Vizards that
assisted at the Death of His late Majesty; I profess I wonder any person should
be so confident to accuse him; for after all the imaginable care and scrutiny
to find the Truth, (by the Council and the Parliament) upon His Majesty's
Return, they never yet could learn who those bloody Villains were that
murdered our dear Sovereign o^ blessed memory; so that we might as well have
said they were two of Oliver's Chaplains, as well as our Sheriff and another
person in Masquerade; so far I must do him all the right I can. As to the story
of the Waterman's coat, it is very odd; such a thing might be; for all men are
not in a good humor with Watermen at all times: though a Kings Waterman (to some
constitutions) is more obnoxious than a City Waterman. And so much for that
point too.

But I shall now come home to the matter in hand (so far as concerns us
Citizens) in taking notice of our Sheriff's Vindication.

As for his Housekeeping, he does very elaborately let us know that he does
not dwell in a Garret, (nor hired Cellar or Pantry I suppose) and that if we
had not angered him, in choosing Mr. Pilkington (a mere Commoner) Alderman of
the Ward, and gave him the go-by, he would have dwelt in a larger (Taylor's)
House, and established his Tables, and taken in Officers, etc. Why truly this
is a very good reason for a man to be angry with Housekeeping and maintaining
any part of the Repute and Honor of the City; and so, for ought I see, we must
be contented with it; for there is an honorable thriftiness as well as an
honorable prodigal lavish Housekeeping, especially among the Magistrates of
the City of London; and for a man to relieve poor distressed Citizens, and
Prisoners, and others in want, when the Law of the Land provides for them
otherwise, is a thing so lavish and prodigal, that no Sheriff of London ought
to evade it, especially when the loss of being Alderman of the Ward and
Knighthood is in the case. And then when a man consults the wholesome Laws
against excess of Feasting, which our Sheriff says are the most wholesome, (nay
more wholesome Laws than the 35 th. of Eliz. or 16 th. of our King ten to one:)
why truly no man breathing would feast every day, or endure it in his House.

When I came to one Paragraph, (which is a quotation out of some modern Jesuit)
I protest I stood amazed to hear of a meritorious congruity as well as
condignity; Now where there can be no congruity, there ought to be condignity,
that is most clear; and therefore since we could not agree to make him Alderman
of the Ward, it is fit he should tell us of it by the way of condignity. And so
much for a meritorious congruity.

But since the preferment is gone, and we have abused him into the bargain, he
tells you, That he cares not a F -- for it, for he has tasted morepleasure in a
retired Life, than ever to thrust himself into troublesome and lofty places:
which yet to me seems strange; for if he had continued in his state of privacy,
and paid the usual Fine to the City, he might have been excused as well as
others have been, and consequently undergon no reproach; but some think 'twas a
fit time for such men to up and be doing something against Popery and Arbitrary
Government, and to preserve Liberty and Property, etc. to hinder wholesome Laws
made against Protestant Dissenters from being put in execution: Truth is, I
must needs say, that we that had so much throng and sweat to choose him, ought
not to bespatter him at the rate we have done; for he could not honestly deny
us when we chose him so freely, as he says; But yet not so freely neither, but
that there was tugging and pulling at it, and a world of pudder made by the
Tory and Tantivy party, viz. the folks of the Church of England, or the old
Protestants, who were generally against it.

Then, in the next place, comes in three or four Paragraphs of Rhetorical
Harangues upon the City to show a further reason of not keeping up the Port and
Grandeur of his Office by generous and public Housekeeping. Now here lies the
point; Can any Lord, Knight, Gentleman, Citizen, Stranger or Foreigner possibly
make a meal out of a dish of Sheriffs Paragraphs? Can any of the poor Prisoners
in any of the Gaols feed on a Basket of Paragraphs? If they can, much good may
they do 'em; I had, for my part, rather dine with my Countryman Sheriff
Cornish (who I hear retains a Western kind of generous Hospitality) than at
such a Feast.

The next Paragraph is to display the several Atchievments and common Customs
of the City, and (much like Jordan's annual Lord Mayors Show) tells us what we
observe and practice in relation to maintaining the public Honor and
Reputation of the City, but begs your pardon for appearing in them himself on
all occasions. First, because my Lord Mayor was not well lately. Secondly, that
the Easter Sermons were at Sepulchre's, when they should have been at the
Spittle. And another reason may be too possibly, because a Bishop and a Dean
preached; the latter having lately wrote an excellent piece against Protestant
Dissenting Brethren.

But now we are at Housekeeping again, and we will show more and stronger
reasons for no Feasting than for feasting: And first, he says, It Is of no
honor to the City, but a reat prejudice and scandal to the Government. (Still
our Worship saves our Bacon.)

2dly. That it is customary to feast Companies on set days, and entertain
particular Friends on others: From which I conclude our Sheriff loves not this
formal Feasting. 3dly. That the Honor the Sheriff gets by such feasting is not
tantamount to the charge, though two Guinies be given by every Livry-man for
his double Treat and Spoon. I Will assure you a very good caution these hard
times to our City Livry: men: But then, 4 thly. and beyond all, his Worship
compares this generous, honorable and hospitable way of the Sheriff's Feasting
to a poor Countrey-wedding, the way being to invite a great many to a great
Feast, (which however is beyond some Sheriffs too, by your leave,) on purpose
to get Money and Household stuff for them to begin the World with* Now how the
comparison will hold in this case let any man judge: But then we Livry-men must
have a care what we do now, for we are forbid to hearken to either Master or
Wardens this year, since the Sheriff resolves not to accept of our Guinies, for
the several reasons beforementioned.

Well, in the next place, you the several former Sheriffs, that have emulated
one another in Feasting on private days, and out-vy'd each other in splendor
and gallantry, (now one would think this should mean the King's being treated
at supper at some of your Houses not many years since,) I say you are severely
rebuked, and for ought I perceive compared to the wantons of Jerusalem, who
with so much fullness of Bread and Idleness provoked the heavy Judgments of God
to fall upon them. Now whether your sort of Feasting be like theirs, that is the
point: for my part I think hospitable Housekeeping and feeding the poor and
needy (as we may see at Lambeth House every day, and other good Houses) are
very laudable and honorable things, in no wise offensive, to God, to Religion
and good Custom; I think far from that riotous Feasting at Jerusalem. And so
much for Feasting without a Meal.

And now who would think that this very sin of Feasting should make our Sheriff
carefully and tenderly afraid, lest an Angel he sent from Heaven with the
Plagues of Sodom on our City too? God forbid we should ever requite the Lord so
for his stupendous Goodness to us in our late Deliverances from the hands of
Popish Conspiracy and Lanatick Rage, and I am, with his Worships favor, and on
better grounds and reasons, more afraid that the Whoredoms, false Oaths,
rebellious Witchcrafts (that stink in the Nostrils of Heaven) will bring
Judgments on us, as in the Case of Korah Dathan and Abiram, than Innocent
Feasting, by Sheriffs or other Citizens. And so much for this point too at
present.

But to conclude: Methinks among all the Worthy and Loyal Booksellers in our
City, Mr. Sheriff might have pleased to have chosen one out of them to Print
and Expose his Vindication, rather than Frank Smith (his Prisoner for Treason,
as some say;) but however, every man to his fancy; for my part I would never
have his Name to any thing I shall ever write, for this very reason. That he
never yet Printed any thing (save our Worships Vindication) but was either
Tinkerly Heresy, or Seditious Naked Truth, or Welsh Glosses on Divine ones:
And so I wish him a safe Deliverance, and our Sheriff well out of his
troublesome Office; Taking my leave and subscribe,

Tower Hill May 2 1681. My Lord and Fellow Citizens Your Lordships Servant* And
Faithful and Honest Brother Citizen, W. W.

H^amb^rough: Printed for the use of the English Merchants.


