A SERMON PREACHED AT St Mary Whitechappel, ON THE Second of DECEMBER, 1697.

BEING THE Day of Thanksgiving For the PEACE.

By RICHARD WELTON, Rector of the said Parish.

Published at the Request of the Parishioners.

LONDON: Printed for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the Royal Exchange
in Cornhill. MDCXC VII.

To my Honored UNCLE, Samuel Atkinson, Esquire.
SIR,
THE kind Reception I have met withal from my Parishioners, ever since it has
been my Happiness as well as Duty to Preach unto them; and the Encouragement
they have given me, in their Favorable Approbations not only of This, but all
my Other Undertakings, have obliged me to gratify them in their Requests, so
far as to appear in Public in the following Discourse.

It is contrary to the Dictates of my own Inclinations, thus to venture my self
Abroad: It Is purely to oblige them in this, as (to the utmost of my Capacity) I
shall be glad to do in all other Respects.

And yet, I must confess, it is with a Joyful Satisfaction I embrace this
Opportunity, to declare unto the World how deeply I stand engaged to Your
Goodness and Generosity; and from hence I presume upon the Freedom to offer You
These the First Fruits of my Early Endeavors.

To You, Sir, they do most properly belong in every respect; to You, that have
been my Worthy Friend and Patron by Your Kindness; my Father, by a perpetual
Affection and Indulgence.

To You therefore I humbly Address my self, and beg the Favor of Your
Patronage; knowing that (however deficient I may have been in the Management of
my Subject) You will Accept my Intentions; which are sincerely designed to
promote the Glory of God among those over whom his Providence has been so
signally wonderful: In giving them a Sense of the Mercies they have received at
his Hands; that thereby they may be won by his exceeding Goodness, to praise
him for it by their Lives and Actions, and consequently that they may prosper
and flourish; as They must do, whoever have the Blessing of God upon them.

This is my whole Aim in the following Discourse; which if it succeeds in any
measure, it then answers the Design and hearty Wish of,

SIR, Your most Obliged, most Affectionate, and Obedient Kinsman, RICHARD
WELTON.

A Thanksgiving-Sermon.
PSALM CVII. 8. O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the children of men!
BY a strict Enquiry into the Design of this Psalm, we shall find it (composed
by David) an Hymn of Praise, suitable to the Circumstances of most Men; wherein
the Royal Psalmist shows us the various and strange Revolutions which happen,
not by an Auspicious Contingency and Hit of Chance, but by the All-guiding Hand
of the Divine Providence, to the Kingdoms and People in the World.

There are several Instances offered to our View, which do directly express the
Wonderful Care of Almighty God toward his Creatures, in delivering them
wonderfully from their Troubles and Distress, as he did the Israelites from
their Egyptian Captivity, when no Power, besides the Hand of God, was able to
redeem them.

In the foregoing Psalm we may find the Particular Miseries of that People:
They were delivered into the hand of the heathen, and they that hated them were
the rulers over them; their Enemies also oppressed them: So that they became
their Slaves, for they were brought into Subjection under their Hand: And the
reason was, Because in their Prosperity they forgot God their Savior, which
had done great things in Egypt. They apostatized from God, though he had so
wonderfully delivered them from their Egyptian Bondage, even by the strange
Overthrow of Pharaoh and his Host in the Red Sea: And yet upon their
Repentance, God regarded their Affliction; and whenever they made their
Application to him, He constantly raised up the Spirit of Bp. Ely 's Paraph.
some Great Man to (Redeem or) Rescue them from the Cruelty of their Oppressors.

This he did for his own Mercies sake; and this was one reason why the Sweet
Singer of Israel composed this Anthem of Thanksgiving; even out of a deep Sense
of the Immense Love of Almighty God toward those that call upon him.

But besides this foregoing one, there are several other Arguments repeated in
this Psalm, of God's Indulgence toward Mankind; showing that no Circumstance
whatsoever is beyond either the Power or the Will of God, for the help of his
distressed Servants: Of that God who could guide the bewildred Traveller to a
Place of Rest and Habitation: Who could correct the starving Sharpness of
hungry Famine; turning the barren Wilderness into plentiful and well-spread
Tables of Quails and Manna: Of God who was able to calm the unruly Motion of
the proud Waters, and quell the stormy Wind into a gentle Breeze: Of God who
has delivered the Prisoners out of Captivity, even through Bars of Iron, and
Gates of Brass; turning the wilderness into a standing water, and fountains of
water from the rocks of stone.

These and many other Instances might be given of the Goodness of God upon the
World; from whence the Royal Prophet might well make his Inference; O that men
would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the
children of men!

The great share of which we have been Partakers in the strange Indulgence of
Almighty God, has laid as great an Obligation upon us to join our Voices with
Holy David: Since we have found by a most Blessed Experience, such signal
Effects of the Protection and Providence of Almighty God, as not only the
Israelites, but as any other People under Heaven could ever pretend to.

And here might be drawn a fair Parallel, comparable to the Context in every
Particular: To mention no more than these Two Instances:

1. The Wonders of God which we have seen in the Deep: Witness that Bold
Adventure, when our Invincible Armada rode in State on the Mediterranean; even
on the same Waters where that Christian Israelite (St. Paul) suffered
Shipwreck, when his Ship bulg'd upon that Coast: Where the Proud Waves do swell
to the height of Mountains, and yet our Tall Ships lived upon those Mountains,
to the Amazement of all Strangers, to the Defiance and Terror of our Enemies,
and the immortal Glory of our English Nation.

But then 2dly, to apply our Case yet more home; Might we not have compared our
Bondage to the Egyptian Captivity, at that Time when Antichrist began to appear
in his Deformity, and to lay that Yoke upon our Necks, which must in a small
time have pressed us down with Sorrow to the Grave? But of this I shall be more
particular in another Place: In the mean time it is sufficient only to remember
in these two Instances, the great Assistance we received then from the Hand of
God, in giving us the Victory over those that hated us; in delivering us from
the Strength of that Power, when all our own Power was gone, and we were
utterly unable to help our selves; in stopping the Carier of such prevailing
Philistines, and bringing us in Safety to the beloved Haven of Security:
Therefore let us praise God for his goodness, and declare the wonders that he
does for the children of men.

And that we may be the better disposed to such a Joyful Employment, I shall
address my self to these following Particulars.

I. To consider this Goodness of God in relation to the Inhabitants of this
Kingdom.

II. That all the Mercies which we have received, are the pure Result of his
Goodness. And therefore,

III. We have a great Obligation upon us to Praise God, and declare in our
Thanksgivings the Wonders that he has done for us.

This Goodness of God then will appear in these two Respects: From the
Consideration of the Dangers we have escaped, and in the Mercies we have
received.

1. He that will but open his Eyes, and look abroad into the World, cannot but
be sensible under what Distress this once most happy Island has so lately
groaned: How both Church and State were forced to bend under the heavy Weight
of a Misguided Scepter: When our Religion lay a bleeding; when it was sadly
changed into Superstition and Idolatry, and the Word of God was become
offensive, without a Leaven infused into it of Blind Zeal and Will Worship. And
though by a Miraculous Providence the Time of this Tragedy was of no long
Duration; though some Drops only fell down to warn us of that Shower of Blood
that must have followed (had not He in whom all Power is, stretched forth his
mighty Arm to help us), yet even those Drops were of themselves sufficient to
proclaim that Storm of Persecution that hung over our Heads.

What might we not have expected at that Time, when Cruelty was applauded as
meritorious! When the Face of Truth was eclyps'd, and the very Foundation of
our Church was shaken! When Vision was ceased among us, and we could discern no
Prospect of unrestrained Freedom in the Worship of God! When in the
Scripture Language, the Bells of Aaron had almost lost their Clappers, and
their Divine Noise could scarce be heard Exodus 28. 33, 34, 35.
amongst us! How great was the Prospect of our Danger, when the Candlesticks
were removed out of their Places, and the Light of our Temples were just
extinguished! With what reason might the ways of Sion mourn, because none came
up to her feasts; when her Gates were desolate, and her Priests lamenting! Did
we not see all this already begun with the distressed Church of England? When
our Gold was become dim, and our Sanctuaries neglected; and the Sons of Sion,
which once were comparable to Fine Gold, were at that time esteemed as Earthen
Pitchers. It might then be read in the Countenance of every man, what he was
not allowed to speak, when the Elders of the Daughter of Sion were commanded to
sit upon the ground, and to keep silence.

Thus the first Scene of this Tragedy was begun amongst us; whilst the Church
of the Reformation labored under these Agonies, traveling like the mother of
Ichabod in the abortment 1 Samuel 4. 19, 21.
of her children! Whilst our Land was filled with Idols, and with those Graven
Images which did excel them of Jerusalem and of Samaria.

This was the Danger of our Church at that time, when we had no Hopes of
Deliverance, till God with his own Right Hand repelled our Enemies, and did
Wonders for us; which will appear yet greater, from the Defect and
Mismanagement in Civil as well as Ecclesiastic Matters.

Corruption, Cruelty, and unjust Oppression, did they not cry out aloud, even
to the most Western Part of our Island? How were our Ears filled in those Days
with the Groans of the Oppressed! Was not the Seat of Justice in many Places
made the Seat of Spoil, that robbed many Hundreds not only of their Privileges,
but even of their Lives! Were not the Laws made then the Traps and Snares
wherein both Plaintiff and Defendant were equally trepanned! When Right and
Wrong were so in Name only, and Innocence too frequently was branded as an
Offender! When the Cause of the Fatherless was not taken part withal, nor the
distressed Widow relieved in her Calamity! Might it not then be said of ours,
as the Holy Prophet exclaimed against the Governors of Judah, her Magistrates,
and high-plac'd Officers, That indeed they should be blinded as to Respect of
Persons; but instead of that, they were blinded with Gifts and Bribes; for the
Matter was never examined by the Weight of its Merit, but by the Weight of the
Reward of the Mighty: And the Poor, the Just, and the Righteous Man, his Cause
neglected, and all of them equally oppressed and cashiered! How mournfully
(methinks) did the Prophet in his Time lament all this, when he said the City
was full of Judgment, and Righteousness lodged in her; -- but now Isa. 1. 21.
Murderers.

This not long since was the sad Decay both in Church and State; when evil was
called good, and good evil; light was put for darkness, and darkness for light:
When the Wicked were justified for Reward, and the Righteousness of the
Righteous was taken from him: When the Innocent was pronounced guilty, and the
truly Religious Heretical and Criminous.

But, blessed be his Name, we see the Tribunal is God's; and with what Strength
soever Authority may be grasped, still there is an All-wise Power above, who
can Infatuate the Counsel of the Crafty; who for his own Mercy sake can wrest
and take away the Sword out of the Hand of the Oppressors, although they have
the Strength of Legions to secure it.

And this is the Great Work which he has done for us, whereof we rejoice:
Rescuing us from a Captivity both in Body and Soul; both in Church and State;
and that from so Great a Power, from such otherwise Invincible Armada's, that
we may well say with Holy David, When the Lord turned again the captivity of
Sion, then were we like unto them that dream: For what could it appear
otherwise than a Matter of mere Fancy and Imagination, for us to have been thus
surpised by such a strange Deliverance, without Blood, almost without a
Struggle, from the Nefandous Stratagems of such a Convention; from the very
midst of such well-appointed Men, as might in a Good Cause have challenged,
have engaged the whole World, and overcome them? Therefore, Not unto us, most
gracious God, not unto us, but unto thy Sacred Name be the Praise and Glory! O
let us Praise our God for this his Goodness to us, and declare these Wonders
that he has done for us: Who has surpassed our very Hopes by the Greatness of
his Love, and has done more for us than our own Hearts could wish for, or we
were able to desire of him. But

2dly. We shall find this Goodness of God enlarged, not only from the Dangers
we have escaped by his means, but by the Immense Goodness of his Love to us, in
the Merciful Favors we have received.

And this has brought me to the Glorious Theme most proper for our present
Occasion: It Is the pleasant Countenance of Peace, that we are now to fix our
Eyes upon: They are the delightful Notes which she dictates, that we are now to
sing: A Melody so grateful, so enchanting to the greatest Part of Europe, that
I am persuaded no Voice could charm like this of an Universal Peace: No Sound
could yield so great, so melodious an Harmony: For what can be more tuneful to
a Christian Ear, than to hear the consenting Voices of all Christendom, joining
in a Symphony, and the sweet Consort of Peace and Concord.

Whoever is not sensible of this great Blessing, must be wholly ignorant of the
direful Effects of a Bloody War: No man that has ever tasted the bitter Cup of
an Invasion, or that has ever set his Foot upon the Bloody Stage of War, can
forbear to Praise the Living God, for the Divine Blessings of a Peace. He that
has heard the Clashings of the Sword and Spear, the direful Shoutings of
prevailing Parties, and the sad Mourns of poor Wounded Captives: He that has
beheld the fenced Cities begirt with bloody Regiments, surrounded with those
merciless Executioners of Death, that black King of Terrors, whilst no place
has been left open, but into the Grim Jaws of certain Ruin and Destruction: He
that has beheld the Heaps of wounded Bodies lie weltring in their own Gore,
whole Countries become an Aceldama, and Field of Blood: When the flourishing
Stateliness of whole Kingdoms have been laid Level to the Ground, and their
Lofty Turrets have retained no Memory but in their Ruinous Heaps and
Demolitious: When Cities by their general Conflagrations have become
Resemblances of the General Judgment: When Parents have beheld their Children
deflower'd before their Faces, prostituted to the Villainy of Insulting
Conquerors, and have taken it as a Favor to be sent out of the World, lest
they should be tormented with the Sight of such Barbarities: And on the other
hand, when Children have lifted up their Voices in the mournful Strains of
Lamentation and Sorrow, to behold the mangled Bodies of their murdered
Parents, stretched forth and dead: He, I say, that has ever beheld these common
Effects of the Rage of War, may easily be convinced of what reason there is to
Bless and Praise Almighty God for the Blessings of a Peace.

And though through a most Blessed Providence, this Favorite Island of Heaven
(as I may well call it) has been miraculously preserved in all these Jars and
Fightings round about us, from those Shocks of Violence, when almost the whole
World besides have labored under them: Yet even upon this very Account, our
Praises to our God for such singular Mercies, should rather be enlarged with
greater Acknowledgments: That We, over whom the greatest Danger was impendent;
We, who have deserved the greatest Judgments by our Sins, should yet come off
with the least Reproach, with so much Honor and Renown.

It Is true, and therefore we are obliged to acknowledge, That we owe this our
Deliverance and our Peace, in a great measure, to the mighty Valor of a Brave
Heroic Prince, whose Generous Conduct has made him Famous and Renowned in all
the Courts and Empires in the World: And in this our Gracious God has declared
his Goodness to us, in raising up such a Glorious Instrument to complete his
Wonders: For let me tell you, though this Mighty Man has already silenced that
sullen God of War, and purchased Peace for us; yet has he another Conquest to
pursue; an Achievement that requires an Arm no less Puissant than that
Conquering Prince's, who has reduced the violent Outrage of an Insulting Enemy,
into a calm Serenitude of Quietude and Peace: He has a Noble Conquest still to
make, by which he will obtain unto himself Another Crown in a Better Kingdom.

Sin, that Black Prince of Darkness, has set his Standard up in our Nation; and
God knows, he has his Thousands and his Legions that are daily fighting under
his Proud Banners. If we consider the whole Realm in all the common Qualities
and Dispositions of Men, shall we not find them all in a strange Defection from
Piety and Virtue; listing to Apostasy, and falling from God: Some running
confusedly into Divisions, and they know not what Schisms: Others making
Religion a Cloak for their Hypocrisy: Every one setting up his own Temple to
serve God in; and that is, in plain English, God has no Temple allowed him, no
Devotion paid him. Shall we not find them like those men of Athens, dedicating
their Lives and Actions, (...), to a God which they know not; of whose Goodness
and Mercy, of whose Majesty and Power, of whose Providence over them in this
World, and most Gracious Proffers of Eternal Life, they are resolved to be
ignorant, and not regard them. Is it not too plain, That our Religion, like the
Blessed Author of it, has scarce a Place where to repose its self? Is it not
too apparent, how the Temple of Bacchus is more frequented than the Temple of
God? Has not a degenerate Custom made it a common Practice for daring Men to
be, instead of fearing God, openly disputing against God; instead of Hearing or
Meditating on his Word, Blaspheming the Sacred Oracles of Life? And do not our
Ears glow even of the Blasphemy of the Multitude, who are resolved, rather than
there shall be no Divisions amongst us, to divide Almighty God even from
himself; to confound the Trinity in Unity, and as far as their Narrow
Capacities can reach, to destroy the Savior of the World? Thus do they run
together in whole Battalia's, fighting against the most High; and as it were
storming the Throne of the Son of God.

From hence then we may look into the true State of our Nation: What a mighty
Army there now is, revelling under the Black Ensign of Misery and Death; so
that our only Hope, next to the Good Providence of God, lies in the unshaken
single Courage of this Kingdom's Worthy.

And I do not in the least doubt but that this will be his next most Glorious
Enterprise, to bring the Infidel and the Atheist to the Knowledge of his Maker:
and by this means he will become as much a Favorite of Heaven, as by his own
Prowess he has made himself the Wonder of the World. But

3dly. It is the Goodness of God alone that has wrought out all these his
Wonders for us: For alas! what can we pretend to, as a Motive springing from
our selves, to prevail upon him to bless us in such Signal and Extraordinary
Mercies? If the Sin and the Profaneness of this Degenerate Age in which we
live: If the Oppression, the Extortion and Injustice so predominant amongst us:
If our Rebellion against God, and our Hatred of him: If our Contempt of all his
former Mercies to us, can be Arguments to plead for us, then indeed the Case is
otherwise; for we have nothing else to offer in our own behalf. No, no; our
Sins must be our Advocate, or there is nothing else that can come from us, to
interceed with God for us: And therefore what might we not have expected from
his Justice? What Visitation, but his Wrath? What Message, but the Punishment
of our Sins? And yet when our Iniquities cried out aloud, even to Heaven for
Vengeance; when our Transgressions were so great as justly to deserve some
Signal Scourge and Judgment from above; even then are we delivered by a mighty
Hand from the Scourge of Tyranizing Men; from the Fatal and Epidemick Cruelties
of the Children of Blood. Blessed God! So great is thy Love to thy sinful
Creatures, that thou art more merciful than we can be sinful.

In this then the Goodness of God is wonderfully apparent; that although he
hates Sin with a perfect Hatred, yet he regards Sinners with a stupendous
Love: For though we have rebelled against him, and revolted from him, yet still
he endeavors to draw us to himself and to his Obedience, by the Cords of his
Mercy: For this he has blessed us hitherto; he has brought to naught the Malice
which the Devil and Man had contrived against us: He has, if I may presume to
say so, new modeled the Most Christian Temper; changed the Nature of that
which was not long since stained with the Black Characters of Cruel and
Tyrannick, into a Generous Disposition of Restitution; to the Honor of
Himself, the Glory of our Mighty Monarch, to the Peace and Satisfaction of the
whole Christian World. And all this to bring us to a Sense of his
Loving Kindness, and our Obedience to his Righteous Commandments. And what
shall we render unto him less than this, for these the Benefits which he has
done unto us? Shall we not remember that this is the Lord's doing, and let it
be marvelous in our eyes? This is the Day which the Lord has made, shall we
not be glad and rejoice in it? For,

4thly. We have an indispensible Obligation upon us to express our selves in a
grateful Acknowledgment of his exceeding Goodness. And indeed, to show our
selves insensible of such Favors as we have so lately received, would be an
Ingratitude of the blackest Dye: This would be to tempt God afresh, and make
him to repent that ever he has done such Wonders for us. And I would have all
men seriously consider, that the same Almighty God who can do Wonders for our
Good and Happiness; if he finds we are resolved that his Goodness shall work no
good effect upon us; if we will not by that means be brought unto Repentance,
(for that is the only way to show our Acknowledgments of his Mercies) the same
All-powerful God then can send as great Instances of his Anger, in his
Punishments upon us. Let no man therefore be too secure, and think it beyond
the Power of God to punish, now there is a Peace among Men; for when God arises
in his Anger, with his Sword unsheathed, to execute his Justice upon those that
will not be by any means prevailed upon to turn from the evil of their ways;
when once the Sins of any People make them ripe for Vengeance; then it is that
God wants neither Strength, nor the Assistance of Insulting Men; but he has
ways enough to vindicate his Honor and his Justice, and to punish any
backsliding foolish People: It Is not always that he commissions the Sword to
pass through the Land: Sometimes he punishes by Famine, then by Pestilence;
these are more raging, cruel Enemies, than any other. It Is not, as I Am
informed, above Two and thirty Years, since this very Town did feel the
impartial Stroke of one of these unrelenting Executioners: And I am apt to
think that Tragic Time has not escaped the Memory of some that are here
amongst us: When the Tolls of Passing-Bells scarce ever ceased; when the Voice
of Mourning was never silent: When tenderhearted Parents dared not approach
the Beds of their Sick and Dying Children; and when they on the other hand
dared not approach to beg the Blessing of their dying Parents, for fear of the
Infection: When men awoke and rose well in the Morning, and yet were laid among
the Dead ere Night: When there was no Music but the Noise of Bells, to
proclaim the Rage of Death: When in each Hour the destroying Angel mowed down
Multitudes, and every Week's End brought the News of the Increase of Thousands.
Did you not then, if you might venture through the Streets, behold them filled
with the Voice of Lamentation, and the sad Liveries of Mourning. Thus then you
were convinced, that God could be provoked; and when his Mercies would not do
to reclaim men from their Sins, he had more ways than by a Common Enemy to
punish the Transgressors of his Will.

And shall not this prevail upon Us also to be wrought upon by his Goodness; to
Praise his Holy Name as we ought to do! We must be sensible that he tries by
all the softest ways of Tenderness and Love to win our Hearts to him, before he
pleads with us with his Rod in his hand.

Let us not then provoke so good a Benefactor, by a Contempt of his Indulgent
Favors, and because they are so continually multiplied upon us. What could he
have done more for us, that he has not done? Oh then! Shall we not praise this
God? Is there any thing that he can command us, and we ungratefully refuse it?
Surely, had we Hearts of Rock, we must be melted by his Goodness; and never be
so stupid, so dumb, as not to open our Mouths, to declare the Wonders that he
has done for us.

But what Anthem shall we devise to sing these Mercies! How shall we strain our
Voices to such a Key, as shall ever reach the Height of his Immense Love! O
let it be the Harmony of our Lives! Let all our Actions speak the Sense we have
of the Length, and Breadth, and Depth, and Height of the unbounded Goodness of
our Heavenly Father: Remembering that it is not for this time only that God can
enlarge his Love to this vast degree: His Almighty Power is as Immense, as his
Love is Infinite; and he can make his Goodness to shine upon every particular
Soul among us, as well as upon a whole Kingdom in general. And if God can thus
bless us with his Goodness here, how transcendent will his Favor be upon us in
another World!

To conclude: Let this be the Method of our Praises and Thanksgivings, To
redeem the Time that we have lost; to prove our selves worthy of these Favors
which we have received, keeping the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace.
Let the whole Course of our Lives be squared according to the Rule of God's
Precepts: That our Rejoicings may flow from the Peace of a Good Conscience;
then shall we have Peace indeed; even the Peace of God, which passes all
understanding. O let our Hearts be lifted up to God! whilst the remaining part
of our Lives is spent, not in a wild Profaneness, not in Revelling and
Debauches, not in the secret Murmurings of Factious Spirits; but in Sincerity
and Truth, in Virtue and Religion: with a Spiritual Joy and Gladness;
proclaiming and admiring the Goodness and wonderful Mercies of Almighty God;
praising and adoring his Holy Name; chanting out his Glory here, as it will be
our constant Employment and Pleasure to do in never-ceasing Hallelujahs, when
we shall come to see him, and enjoy his Blessed Presence in the next World:
Which that we may all do, God of his Infinite Mercy grant, for the sake of our
Lord Jesus Christ: To whom, with Thee, O Father, and the Holy Spirit, be
ascribed all Glory and Honor, Praise and Thanksgiving, both now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

