A SERMON Preached at the Anniversary Meeting Of the SONS of CLERGYMEN, IN St.
PAUL's Cathedral, DECEMBER 3. 1700.

By Richard West, M. A. Fellow of St. Mary Magd. Coll. Oxon: And Chaplain to
the Right Reverend Father in God, Gilbert L. Bishop of Sarum.

LONDON: Printed for S. Smith, and B. Walford, at the Prince's Arms, in St.
Paul's Churchyard. MDCC.

To the Much Honored, Robert Constable, Esquire Dr. Tho. West. Mr. Humphry Dene.
Mr. John Bernard. Mr. Richard Beaumont. Mr. Tho. Hussy. Mr. Henry Smith. Mr.
Matthew Shore. Mr. Tho. Burnand. Mr. Matthi. Hickeringill. Mr. Joseph Grace.
Mr. George Guy.
Stewards of the Late Feast of the Sons of the Clergy.
Gentlemen,
THIS Sermon was Preached upon a very Good Design, and at Your Request; and the
same Reasons have prevailed with me to make it Public. Which is all the
Apology I think my self obliged to make for it. Whether or no the many
Excellent Discourses that have already come abroad upon This and the like
Occasions, have awakened men's Zeal, it is certain there is a very Public Spirit
of Charity now among us. The Generous Examples of the Members of your
Charitable Corporation of the Sons of the Clergy, have not, it is probable, been
a little instrumental to that purpose. The breeding up of Poor Children to
Industry, to a true sense of Religion, and particularly in the Doctrines and
Worship of the Church of England, is one of your great Designs; and God be
thanked, You have had in this Noble and Ancient City, and in other Places, very
many Followers. By this means you may hope to raise the Honor, and promote the
Interest of our Church, and to secure to your selves those Blessings which will
always attend the Encouragers of such Honorable and Pious Undertakings. I am,

GENTLEMEN, Your most Faithful, Humble Servant, Richard West.

A SERMON Preached before the Sons of the Clergy.
PSALM CXXII. v. 8, 9. For my Brethren and Companions sakes,
I will now say peace be within Thee.
Because of the House of the Lord our
God, I will seek thy Good.

THis Psalm gives us a full and lively account of the pious zeal and concern
which King David expressed for the Good of the Church; and by what Steps and
Methods he thought it most advisable to proceed, for the advancing the Interest
of it; Namely, by promoting Peace and Unity among its Members, and by seeking
and praying for one another Good.

I shall have no occasion to press the necessity of following this Great
Example; nor shall I enter upon a description of the Virtues here recommended;
The Charitable design of our meeting this day, to establish a lasting
Friendship among Brethren, and to consult one another Good: Our forward
Intention to assist those amongst us that call for our Help, that they may not
be destitute of a Lot and Inheritance with the rest of their Tribe, has already
made any further discourse upon either of those Topics, Superfluous and
Unnecessary.

And therefore I think it to be more my proper business, to entertain you with
the prospect of those Happy Effects, which will necessarily follow such Noble
and Christian Designs. The Duties which the Text recommends to us, are Peace
and Charity. And in the sincere study and observance of both these, our present
Undertaking has firmly engaged us; so that to consider the success which will
necessarily attend it, may be of some use to create in us that true Pleasure
and Satisfaction which ought always to accompany the doing of Good.

The Method therefore I shall take in the following Discourse, shall be only
this.

I. In the First place, I shall endeavor to represent the Blessed Effects,
that will certainly follow our practice of these Virtues.

II. And then in the Second Place, I shall consider the Advantages we enjoy for
the promoting such good Works, and the returns we are obliged to make to God
for them.

I. First then, I shall endeavor to represent the Blessed Effects that will
follow the practice of these Virtues. I need not observe how much the Happiness
of Society depends upon it; that Men of Peaceable and Charitable Tempers are
the greatest Benefactors to Mankind; and that we more especially answer the
Ends and Designs of our Being, when we are most useful and serviceable to
others. Nor shall I mention how these good Offices raise a Man a Name and
Reputation in the World, command an universal Reverence and Esteem, and are the
most certain marks of a Noble and Heavenly Disposition. I shall also omit those
many Prayers and Blessings they will obtain for us, and that certain Interest
they will secure us in Heaven.

These are the natural consequences that flow from the exercise of these
Duties; and they equally belong to all those that consult the Benefit of
Mankind either of these ways. But there are other Advantages which we have more
particular reasons to expect from our present Endeavors; and which we are more
obliged than others to have an especial regard to.

I. And first, We may Hope by this means to advance the Interest of Religion.

II. Secondly, To raise the Honor of our Church.

III. And Lastly, To Vindicate the Clergy from Contempt.

And First, That our design of promoting Peace and Charity will be of great
advantage to Religion. And that I am persuaded is a Satisfaction that we of
this Assembly should be ambitious of purchasing at any rate. For it must be a
very pleasing Thought to every one of us, that we can be able to strengthen the
Interest, or support the Authority of that Religion, to which we owe so great a
share of our Well-being and Happiness in this Life, and all our Hopes of a
Better.

And that we shall do a very considerable service to it, by this means, is
evident, from the great stress the Divine Author of it, has laid upon these
Duties, and the Blessings he has pronounced to the observers of them. He has
made Love and Unity the Distinguishing Marks of his Disciples in this World,
and the Conditions upon which he will pronounce that joyful Sentence, Come ye
blessed, in another. To the Peacemakers he has given the Glorious Character of
being the Children of God; as tho they alone were of a Divine Original, and had
the true Image of God stamped upon them.

If then there is so high a value set upon these Virtues, and they have so much
the preference given to them above others, by God himself: If they are the
brightest Ornaments in a Christian's Life, and transform him into a resemblance
of the Divine Nature; we may be assured, the more we excel in them, the higher
do we raise the Honor and Reputation of Religion.

By this Method Christianity first flourished and prevailed in the World; that
love and unity which was so apparent among all its Disciples, and those lively
Instances which they perpetually gave of Kindness and Charity, gained it every
day fresh Admirers and Proselites. This Practice won upon Men's Tempers, and as
mild and gentle as it was, overcame all opposition. The like Behavior will
always recommend Religion; and then especially, when it appears in the Lives of
those who are dedicated to the Service of it. They are in Stations that make
them more observed, and their Actions more nearly looked into than other men's.
And therefore these Graces must shine brightest, and their influence reach
farthest, when they are most visible in their Conversations. This shows that
Religion has a true force and efficacy upon them; and they can propose with
better advantage, that greatest Example of Kindness and Charity that ever
appeared in the World, to the imitation of others, when they follow it in good
earnest themselves.

But it is yet more for the Interest of Religion, when their Children follow
their Steps, and have bequeathed to them that best of Inheritances, the
knowledge and practice of these Duties; and it will be much for the Reputation
of Religion, that those Early Impressions of Virtue and Piety, which were made
upon their Minds, still retain their full strength and vigor, and that no
other avocations can take off the Engagements were laid upon them to do good
unto all men, but especicially to those of the Household of Faith. For here it
is, that the Obligations of Religion, as well as nearness of Relation, first
challenge our Services. We are indeed forbid to do Ill Offices to any man, and
are commanded to follow peace with all in general; but we cannot be equally
serviceable to all; and there are some who have a better claim to our regard
than others. The sense of Gratitude has a particular tie upon us; and no one
here can doubt but Religion upon this account, can plead the best Right to our
Services; and consequently those who are nearest related to it, may challenge
our more especial Consideration. This is the true and regular method of showing
our Zeal for Religion; the most proper means to make it valued and esteemed,
and the best hopes we have left of raising the Credit of despised, neglected
Virtue.

I need not show the reverse of all this, or acquaint you how much Religion
will suffer by our disregard of these Duties: I must not open so Melancholy a
Scene, when we are met together to rejoice and triumph at the good we are
capable of doing for the House of our God; and where it is to be hoped there is
nothing at so great a distance from us, as a malicious, uncharitable Temper. I
will not suppose there is any here that pretends to be on the side of Religion,
that is not endued with the Spirit of it; or that is come hither to pray, and
use his Endeavors for the peace of Jerusalem, that would any way disturb its
Tranquillity. God forbid that there should be any one among us, as there was at
the Marriage Feast in the Gospel, not having on his Wedding Garment. Our
Savior indeed has told us, that there may be Wolves in Sheeps Clothing; and
we must not say, that it is impossible there may be an unchristian Spirit, under
the fairest Pretenses of Conscience and Zeal for God and his Church; but we
cannot but be sensible, that the Crime is of a higher nature, and the Injury
done Religion much the greater upon that account. We have a sad Instance in
Holy Writ of Corah and his Company, Numb. 16.
Sons of Levi, that rose up against Moses, and disputed the Authority of the
best of Princes and Lawgivers: They pretended indeed to be Holy, and to consult
the Good of God's own People; yet we find that their Offense was of a heinous
nature, and their Punishment very severe: Both of them were probably the
greater, for these two Reasons: The one was, that they insulted so Good and
Mild a Governor, that had the Character of being the meekest man in all the
Earth, and who it is probable if God Almighty had not interposed, and avenged
his own Cause, would have dismissed them with this gentle Rebuke, Ye take too
much upon you, ye Sons of Levi. The other reason was, That they were of that
Tribe; their being Sons of Levi rendered their Crime the more unpardonable. For
they being Teachers and Guardians of the Law, their Characters and Stations
made them more observed, and their Examples sooner followed than other Men's;
and therefore it was necessary their Punishment should be more exemplary, by
how much the more fatal their Examples would have proved to the Cause of God
and Religion. Some indeed of these Men's Confederates were of another Tribe, but
it is probable that Corah was the first, and the most considerable in the
Conspiracy; since he is often mentioned in Scripture as the Author of it,
without any notice taken of the rest. But God be thanked, these men were but
few in number, and it is to be hoped they have had fewer Followers. It Is very
observable, that when these Men were destroyed, most of their Children perished
with them; not upon the account, probably, of their being accessory to their
Crimes, but lest they should have sucked in the same Poison, and be infected
with the Pride and Arrogance of their Fathers.

There was once a Proverb in Israel, The Fathers have eaten sower grapes, Ezekiel.
18.
and the Childrens teeth are set an edge: Ill Nature it seems was then often
propagated, and the Children grew bad by Infection. The Parents were of angry,
turbulent Tempers, and the Children felt the Ill Effects of them. And this is
very natural; restless and haughty Spirits do a great deal of mischief; their
Ill Examples spread far, and their whole Posterity is commonly much the worse
for them. And thus the Evil Practices of those who pretend to Religion, prove
very prejudicial to its Interest; and the more sacred their Characters are, the
Consequences are still the more fatal and pernicious.

If we that have made it our business to enquire into Religion, who have been
constantly instructed in it, and have informed our selves thoroughly of the
Reasons and Designs of it, should oppose it in our Actions; and if we that have
searched into the Natures of Virtue and Vice, and understand the differences of
Good and Evil, should confound them in our practice, it is too certain that both
Religion and Virtue will fare the worse for us. If we our selves do not follow
the things that make for peace, do not preserve that Unity which ought to be
amongst us, and keep our Friendships inviolable, it is too much to be feared
that other men will have less notions of these Duties, upon our neglects. If we
cannot forgive and pass by Injuries; if our Resentments run high, and last
long; if we only carry an appearance of Peace and Reconciliation, with a design
to fall on with greater fury, and more security; like Ioab, to kiss, that we
may the better kill; it will occasion others to take more liberty in their
Revenge, and cite the Authority of their Teachers for it.

If we that have studied the Nature, and known the Excellence and Advantage of
Charity, and have often pressed and inculcated the Necessity of it to others,
should be mean or narrow-spirited in our Contributions, it is probable that we
shall not only give Offense to others, but put a Stop even to their Good and
Charitable Intentions. If we, that cannot of all men be ignorant, what we ought
to do for our Brethren and Companions sakes, should not contribute all we are
able to the encouraging and promoting this Good Design, begun and carried on
purely for their Interest, it cannot be supposed that others who are removed
something farther from the Relation, should be more forward in their Endeavors
to support it. Good Examples do great service in all such cases; and the higher
men's Characters and Stations are, so much the greater and stronger Influence
have they. The Royal Psalmist describes to us the Joy and Satisfaction he felt
in himself, when he was called upon to assist at the Worship of God. I was glad
when they said unto me, Let us go into the House of the Lord: Not only glad of
the opportunity of offering up his Prayers and Praises to God; but also,
doubtless, that he met with an occasion of countenancing Religion by his
Presence, and of encouraging others by his Example.

And thus have I considered the great service we shall do Religion by our
present Designs of promoting Peace and Charity; and have also observed how much
prejudice may be done it, by the neglect of these Virtues. The latter of these
I should have passed by, as being foreign to our present Business, had I not
thought my self obliged to take notice of that double Pleasure which always
attends such good Actions; the one arising from the sense of the Services we
do; the other from the thought of having avoided all those Inconveniences, all
that Uneasiness of Mind, and Guilt of Conscience, which are inseparable from
the contrary Practices.

II. I proceed in the Second place, to represent another Advantage of this Good
Design, namely, the raising the Honor of our Church: For we are not only to
consider the Service we can do Religion in general, but also how we can best
answer the Obligations we are under to that Church in particular, whereof we
are Members. And that these Virtues of Peace and Charity will advance the
Credit and Reputation of it, is more than probable, since they tend most to
Unite and Preserve it. And when it is like Jerusalem, compact together, and at
unity in it self, the gates of hell cannot prevail against it.

The Royal Psalmist repeats his Prayers and Wishes for Peace several times in
this short Psalm. Whether or no there were then any divisions in the Church, or
any heats or contentions among any of its Members, that occasioned his being
thus earnest and sollicitous: it is certain he very well knew, he could ask for
no other Blessing, that could gain it so much respect and veneration abroad,
that could make it so strongly oppose the attempts of its Enemies, or that
could so firmly establish and so long preserve it.

We are therefore very much indebted to the Wisdom of those, who first formed
this Charitable Corporation, and contrived this Annual Meeting, for the
preventing and making up, all such unnatural differences among us, and for the
preserving that Love and mutual Agreement, which is so necessary for the Honor
and Security of our Church.

We are this day, the best Constituted Church in the whole World, and its
Doctrines the most Pure and Primitive; and I hope we may add, that it is most
Catholic and Apostolical in its practice of Christian Duties. The first
Believers did more Honor and Service to Christianity by their good Actions,
than by their Faith; and they appealed to their Lives, for a confirmation of
their Doctrines: And I hope it may still be used for an Argument for the best
Religion in the World, that it is the best observed.

That we are reformed from the Errors and Corruptions that were crept into the
Church, is owing to the pious Care and Zeal of our Forefathers; but let it be
owing to us, that this present Age shall leave behind it more lasting Monuments
of Kindness and Generosity, of Love and Unity. It is a great Happiness to be of
the True Faith; but it will be a greater, to superadd to it the meek and
peaceful Spirit of the Gospel. This one would think should be made the chief
Mark of a True Church; for nothing, not even Faith it self, without Charity,
can ever make a good Christian; and I don't see, how it is possible it should
ever build or keep up a Church.

Love and Tenderness ought always to attend Truth, for they are the best able
to gain it Friends: They are of an insinuating Nature, and lay open an easy
Passage to the Understanding. A sour, ill-natured Argument was hardly ever
known to convert an Adversary, how strong and powerful soever it might be to
silence him. There Is no body can bear to be affronted even into Truth it self,
or to be browbeaten, though it should chance to be into Right Reason. Truth
indeed is Bold, but it is never Insolent and Imperious: But Falsehood and
Ignorance are generally so. And if we judge of them by that Mark, we shall not
often be mistaken: For we have great reason to suspect that for Counterfeit,
which is swelled with Pride and Ostentation. However it be, Truth never wants
an Haughty Advocate; and a Good Cause is always the worse for an Illnatur'd
Management. And what is more to our purpose, the Best of Churches must suffer
great Prejudice, if there is found an Uncharitable Behavior among any of its
Members. But it is my Business only to commemorate the Blessings we enjoy, and
not to tell of Mischiefs which it is to be hoped we shall never feel.

III. Let us then consider the Third and last Advantage of our Pious Designs,
and that is, The vindicating the Clergy from Contempt. This will be Justice to
the Memory of the Dead, as well as a Service to the Living. And I doubt not but
we shall guard off Contempt from them, at least set them above it, in relation
to those common Objections that are formed against them: And these respect
either their Self-Interest, their Poverty, or their Posterity.

I. And first, We shall in some measure vindicate them from the Imputation of
Self-Interest, or Private Designs. We are indeed many times upbraided upon
these accounts; but if our Enemies would but consider the many Charities that
have been bestowed by that Order of Men, they would be a little more sparing in
their Censures. We are told that Charity it self shall cover a multitude of
sins: And if God Almighty will be so merciful as to pass by a great many
Offenses for the sake of that one Virtue, methinks Men might overlook some
Defects for the sake of it too. I am persuaded I may venture to say, That the
Good Works of a great part of the Clergy speak for them; and it is but just that
the Number of those who have been serviceable to the World, should plead
something in the behalf of those who have been less so. God Almighty would have
spared even Sodom, if he had found but Ten Righteous there.

But I might wholly have omitted the defense of the Clergy, upon this Head of
Self-interest: If they had been led by Principles of such a nature, no doubt
but their Children would have acted upon the same Motives, and we should have
seen no such Generous Designs encouraged as we are now so happily engaged in.

Nor Secondly, will it appear, that the Poverty of the Clergy is a sufficient
ground of their Contempt. Poverty indeed is what a Man has no great reason to
be ashamed of, especially where 'twas not in his power to avoid it; and it is
Providence that places Men in low Conditions; nor does it detract at all from
real merit, and therefore is not a proper foundation of Contempt: Nor ought a
Man to be much valued upon the account of his Riches, if he has nothing besides
them, to defend him from being despised. But whatever these things may be in
the Theory, Wealth will command esteem, whether guarded by Internal Worth, or
not: And Poverty will be despised, let the Treasures of the Mind be never so
considerable. But I hope the Clergy have no great reason to suffer much in
their Reputation upon that account. I think it would be too mean to boast of
their Riches, whatever Advantages they might have that way; but we may very
lawfully commend their Bounty and Liberality. I might mention a great many
Instances of this kind, and recount a vast number of their Public Acts of
Charity; and I am confident I may suppose a great many more that were always
designed to be kept private. But I should not pass over in silence that
Generous Benefaction lately left by a Right Reverend Father, Dr. Turner, Late
L. Bp. of Ely who left 1200 l. to it.
to this Corporation of the Sons of the Clergy. But the perpetual Good it will
do, will be a more lasting Memorial than any Commendation that can be given it.

But I shall leave it to you to finish this Head, and to testify by your own
Examples, that the Liberalities which Providence and your Fathers have put you
in a condition to bestow, have raised both you and them much above Comtempt.

III. And this leads me to the other Objection against the Clergy, and which
you also can best answer; namely, that their Posterity are more unhappy and
unfortunate for the most part, than others: And this is urged not only by those
of the Romish Communion, as a Judgment upon us for transgressing their Order of
Celibacy; but is also pretended by some to be a Common Observation among our
selves. I know not from what particular Instances such general Conclusions are
drawn; both the Scriptures, and Matter of Fact declare on our side. The
Psalmist assures us, among all the Observations he had made, He never saw the
righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread. It Is indeed too certain,
that several of the Posterity of the Clergy are in low conditions, but thanks
be to God, there are others of them that are in a capacity to raise them
higher, and that don't want Hearts to do it: So that the meanest of them are so
far happy, that they are sure never to be destitute of the especial regard and
consideration of those who are in better Circumstances. But the Scriptures are
yet more full and express in this Matter, where they assure us, That they that
turn many to righteousness, Dan. 12.
shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever: Which does not only relate to
their Glorified State in Heaven, but also to the Happiness of their Posterity
on Earth: For the Stars are often spoken of in Scripture in reference to
Generations to come: As God often promised to the Father of the Faithful, to
increase his Seed as the Stars in Heaven for multitude.

And this Day I hope this Prophecy is in a great measure fulfilled, when there
are so many of us met together, to make Grateful Returns to God for the many
Blessings we enjoy. And particularly we must not forget, that he has raised One
from amongst us to be at the Head of the Church; Another to be the Chief
Guardian of Equity and Good Conscience; and that we had a Third, but the very
last year to be Governor of this great City. And what more shall I say, to show
that God has made good his Promise, That the Posterity of the righteous shall
be blessed?

There is indeed commonly one event to the righteous and to the wicked; and the
same Lot happens frequently to both, if they take measures alike in Affairs of
this Life. Providence does not often deny equal Success to the same Endeavors.
But granting this to be for the most part so, yet the Clergy have upon this
account as fair a prospect, at least, as others, to leave a happy Posterity
behind them, since they pursue the best Methods that can be taken for that end.

II. And this brings me to what I proposed to consider in the Second place; The
Advantages we have had for the procuring our own and others Good, and the
Returns we are obliged to make to God for them.

Now the greatest Advantages a man can have toward making his Life happy and
useful, are a careful Education, and Good Examples. These make strong
Impressions, and have a mighty Influence upon every Action of his Life.

I. And First, We ought to esteem it a very great Advantage to have had the
Happiness of a Careful Education; that the Principles of Kindness and Charity
were early sown in us, and had taken deep root in our Minds betimes. This is a
Blessing which we can never over-rate. And I question not, there is none of
this Assembly but has given God thanks many a time for the Happy Effects of it.
To this we ought not only to impute the prosperous condition we are in, but
those desires we find in our selves to be Benefactors to others: We that have
experienced the advantage of having our Lives and Manners formed in our younger
Years to Virtue and Religion, cannot but find a pleasure in contributing to the
breeding up of others in the same practice and exercise of them. Their
Misfortune and not their Fault has rendered them incapable of providing for
themselves, and it is our Happiness that we are able to remedy that Defect. It Is
a satisfaction that we have the Power, but it is certainly greater, that we have
the Wills to do it. And that we have both, is probably very much owing to the
careful management of our younger Years.

II. But Secondly, The other Advantage we had, was the Benefit of Good Examples
always before us. And that is not a less Happiness than the other. For Children
especially act by Imitation more than Instruction. A Virtuous and Good
Disposition is much sooner wrought in them by Example than Precept. Principles
are not easily instilled into them, and not quickly understood; and what they
See, does much more affect them than what they Hear: The sight of a good Action
fixes a lasting Idea, and is never forgotten. And if we had such advantages,
the same are we obliged to convey down to others. The Cause of Religion, the
Honor of our Church, and Gratitude to God, do all require it of us. There are
some who take much Pains to make others Miserable, to seduce them into bad
Courses, before they have learnt to know the Evil from the Good; and are always
contriving new Methods to make Proselytes to Vice and Irreligion. It must
certainly then be our Indispensible Duty, who profess to be of a superior Order
of Christians, to fence against these Opposers of God and Religion; and to
apply our utmost care and diligence, that others who have equal pretensions to
Immortality with our Selves, should not for want of right Management and good
Examples, be for ever miserably lost in another World.

The study of Peace and Unity among our selves will do no small service to the
Cause we espouse. For Religion never appears so inviting, as when it is adorned
with a sedate and quiet frame of Mind; that is its true and genuine Shape; and
it must appear Deformed, when it has lost its native Beauty and Excellence. If
therefore there are hatreds and variances among our selves, both our Order and
Religion will be aspersed, and the Enemies of God will take occasion to
Blaspheme.

Let us then take care that we give not the least suspicion of our dispensing
with those obligations we are under, to promote Friendship, and mutual
Agreement among our selves; and we need not fear any Attacks of our Enemies. We
shall then never be uneasy at any Reproach or Calumnies that are thrown upon
us, but shall follow with satisfaction the Blessed Example and Precepts of our
great Master and Savior; and Pray for them that despitefully use us. It would
be almost a Scandal to us to be spoken well of by those who treat our Religion
it self with Scorn^. And indeed our Savior has pronounced a Woe unto us, when
all men shall speak well of us. Let us then but have the pleasure of
discharging our Duties conscientiously toward God and one another, and we
shall never be dissatisfied with the delight which others take in contemning
and reviling us. Let us give no occasion to others to upbraid us with unhappy
differences among our selves, or with contemning and despising one another, and
no other Weapon formed against us can prosper.

But above all, let us put on Charity, the Great bond of peace and of all
virtues, and never be weary of well doing. Let us never suffer the ways of Sion
to mourn, and never shut our Ears against the Cries of Her Fatherless Children
and Widows: and then we may be sure that Heaven will hear those many Prayers
and Good Wishes they will send up thither for us. And, as we have had large
Advantages, perhaps beyond most others, by a Careful Education and good
Examples, so let us show that we are truly sensible of them, by giving others,
as much as we are able, the same Encouragements. By this shall all men know
that we are the true Disciples and Followers of Christ; and by this means we
may hope to see both our Church and Religion Flourish; and that Glory shall
dwell in our Sion. O let Righteousness and Peace Kiss each other; and then we
shall find that the Lord will Bless us, he will Bless the House of Aaron. The
Lord will Increase you more and more both you and your Children. Wherefore
praise the Lord, O Jerusalem, praise thy God, O Sion; for he makes Peace in
thy Borders, and has blessed thy Children within Thee.

FINIS.

