REASONS WHY THE PARLIAMENT of SCOTLAND Cannot comply with the Late King JAMES.

ADVERTISEMENT.
AN Answer to the Late King James's Declaration to all His Pretended Subjects
in the Kingdom of England, Dated at Dublin Castle, May 8. 1689. Ordered by a
Vote of the Right Honorable the House of Commons, to be burnt by the
Common-Hangman.

REASONS WHY THE Parliament of Scotland Cannot comply with the Late K. James's
PROCLAMATION, Sent lately to that KINGDOM, And Prosecuted by the Late Uiscount
Dundee.

CONTAINING

An Answer to every Paragraph of the said Proclamation; and vindicating the
said Parliament their present Proceedings against him.

Published by Authority.

LONDON: Printed for Dorman Newman, at the King's- Arms in the Poultry.
MDCLXXXIX.

TO His GRACE THE Duke of Hamilton, etc.
Their Majesty's High Commissioner for the Kingdom of Scotland.
May it please Your Grace,
THE following Paper ambitionates no meaner Patron, than a Personage who has
had the Honor, for a great many Years, to struggle against the Encroachments
made on a Kingdom, whereof he himself is the First Peer; and who has crowned
all his other Actions with that of giving a mighty and powerful Influence, on a
Revolution that, its hoped, may at last make us Happy. Accept of this as a part
of that vast acknowledgment Your Country owe's You; and Pardon the Address of

May it please Your Grace, Your Grace's Most Humble, and Most Obedient Servant,
I. W.
London, Aug. 12. 1689.
REASONS WHY THE PARLIAMENT OF SCOTLAND Cannot comply with the Late King JAMES,
etc.
IF one were to draw the Scheme of one of the most Despotick Governments in the
World, he needed not go so far as Constantinople, Moscow, or some of the
Eastern Courts, for a Copy to Design after; Scotland alone might sufficiently
furnish him with all the Idea's of Oppression, Injustice and Tyranny,
concentred for the space of Twenty Years and upwards in that Kingdom. To
display the Tragic Scene of these three Kingdoms in their most lively Colors,
would require the imitation of that celebrated piece of Antiquity, the
Sacrifice of Iphiginia, where every on-looking Grecian appeared sad, and the
sadder as they stood in nearer relation to the Royal Victim: But the Painter,
conscious of the weakness of Art, to express the grief of Agamemnon, chose
rather to draw a veil over a disconsolate Father's Face, than vainly to
endeavor the tracing the sorrows of his Countenance by the Pencil. England's
dismal State, for some years past, requires to be expressed in mournful
Characters, that of Ireland perhaps in more mournful yet; but to delineate the
unexampled misery of Scotland, surpasses the Power of History, or the Force of
Eloquence. To look back upon Athens under the Government of the Thirty Tyrants,
on Rome under the Triumvirate, or on these three Kingdoms under the Usurpation
of Cromwell, might surnish some weak draughts, to take up a Notion of the late
condition of that Nation; but all of them would fall short of the Scotch*
Original. It were in vain to attempt the History of Scotland, under the two
last Reigns, in a Paper of this kind; the Materials being large enough for the
most bulky Volume: And if ever I should venture upon it apart, it is more than
probable, I might find that Maxim verified at my cost, Curae leves loquantur,
ingentes stupent; and the rather, that I am not altogether able to divest my
self so far of Humanity, as to forget my own share in the Ruins of my Country.

My design, at present, is only to make some Reflections on a Proclamation
issued out by the late King James, with relation to his pretended Subjects of
Scotland, dated at Dublin the Fourth of May last, Signed by Himself, and
countersigned by my Lord Melfort; in which it is hard to determine, whether ill
Nature, or want of Politics, takes most place, both of them outvying one
another for Precedence. Only upon first view it will be found, that the late
Conspiracy in that Kingdom, is the Native Consequence of this Proclamation; and
though that Plot had amounted to a design of Assassinating their Majesty's High
Commissioner, and the whole Members of Parliament; yet the Actors of such a
Villainy are not only by this Proclamation indemnified, but fairly invited and
required so to do.

The Proclamation begins thus: James, etc. To all our Loving Subjects of our
ancient Kingdom of Scotland, Greeting. Whereas several of our Subjects, men of
pernicious Principles and wicked Designs, have taken upon themselves, contrair
to the Law of God, their Natural Allegiance to Us their Lawful and Undoubted
Sovereign, the Laws and Acts of Parliament of that Our ancient Kingdom, to meet
in an Assembly, to call themselves the States of that Kingdom, and therein
treasonably and wickedly to question Our Authority, and to judge of Our
Proceedings; and finally to dispose of Our Imperial Crown, which We hold from
God alone, Usurping Our Power which is not communicable to any, whether single
Persons, or Bodies Collective, without Our Authority be interposed thereto: And
that these Wicked and Lawless Persons still go on to oppress our People by
heavy Burdens, Imprisonments, and other things grievous to Our Subjects,
contrair to all Law and Equity, as well as to Our Royal Right and Prerogative,
uniting themselves with the Prince of Orange and his Adherents. All these
blustering Expressions might have a tolerable good Grace in the Mouth of the
Grand Segniour, or Great Mogul, who vainly arrogate to themselves the
High-flown Titles of King of Kings; but if they can be at any rate excusable in
King James, it must be upon the Supposition of these two Principles. First,
That King James, as King of Scotland, was so far an Arbitrary and Despotick
Prince, that he was not obliged to govern by Law, and could in no case forfeit
his Right to the Crown. And Secondly, That he was unjustly, by the States of
the Kingdom, laid aside. Now if it can be made appear, That in the first place,
the Royal Dignity of Scotland is so far from being an Arbitrary and Despotick
kind of Government, that it carries along with it, in its very Essence, a
mixture of Interests betwixt King and People, and an obligation upon the King
to govern, not by his own Edicts, or Will, but by the known Laws of the Land;
which are indeed the two great hinges of the Government: And in the second
place, That King James did forfeit his Right to the Crown, by subverting these
two fundamental Hinges of the Government, and thereupon that the States of the
Kingdom did justly lay him aside: I say, if these two General Heads be made
appear, then necessarily the other two supposed Principles fall in Consequence,
and the above mentioned Narrative of the Proclamation as built upon them, must
tumble with them.

As to the First General Head, That the Royal Dignity of Scotland is so far
from being an Arbitrary and Despotick kind of Government, that it carries along
with it, in its very Essence, a mixture of Interests betwixt King and People,
and an obligation upon the King to govern according to Law. Here I shall not
run up the length that our Histories have with any probability traced the
Affairs of our Nation, where we may, upon the one Hand, find our selves one of
the most Ancient Kingdoms of the World, under one Line of Kings; So on the
other, we shall meet all along the clearest prints of a bounded and mixed
Government: Nor shall we be able, in all the changes of our Monarchy, to
instance one of our Kings, that pretended to such an Absolute Power over his
Subjects, as every one of them was to obey without reserve; the new coining of
these Words, and the making use of the thing signified by them, being reserved
for the Reign of the late King James: Nor will I presume to pass Censure upon
some Acts of Parliament made of late, that have stretched the Prerogative of
the King, and the Obedience of the Subject beyond their ordinary limits; Acts
of Parliament being, in my Opinion, only subject to the Censure of those that
can unmake them. I shall only (to put this General Head beyond question) take a
short hint of the Nature of the Government of Scotland, as it is agreed to by
all Parties; and then fix upon that particular Constitution, by which the King
is obliged to govern according to the Laws of the Kingdom.

That the Government of Scotland, notwithstanding all the Acts of Parliament
made in the last two Reigns, in favor of the Prerogative, was and is a mixed
sort of Government, is clear from this part of its constitution, That the three
Estates of Parliament, and every one of them, are equally as necessary and
essential to the making of Laws, as the King is. It is the King, and the three
Estates of Parliament all together, that make Laws, and not the King alone, nor
the three Estates, nor the King with any one or two of the three Estates: Here
there is one Negative Vote lodged in the King, and another lodged in the
Parliament; for albeit the King, or his Commissioner, should bring in a Bill in
Parliament, stamped with the Royal Assent, the Estates of Parliament, by their
Negative Vote, may deny their Concurrence, and thereupon it proves an Abortive;
so on the other hand, whatever Sanctions are enacted by the Estates of
Parliament, they amount no higher than so many dead Letters, till once the King
withdraw his Negative, and imprint upon them his enlivening Assent.

This being the Native uncontroverted Constitution of our Government, I would
fain know what becomes of our new coined Absolute Power, which all were to obey
without reserve; since a Power in the People, to deny their Concurrence with
the King, in making of Laws, is an uncontroverted essential part of the
Original Constitution.

And to place this in as clear a light as possible, let us suppose the King
should cause be presented to the Parliament, somewhat in form of an Act, and
should back it with a Command to the Estates, to give their Concurrence; in
this case, by the Absolute Power we are to obey without reserve, the Parliament
is directly obliged to concur; and thereby that essential part of the
Government, which gives them a Negative Vote in making of Laws, is totally
unhinged: Yea farther, though the King should, without consulting his
Parliament, lay his Commands upon his Subjects, in matters that natively
require a Parliamentary Sanction, such as Taxes, and the like; this late
assumed Absolute Power does as much enforce obedience thereto, as if there were
an Act of Parliament concurring; because, if it should be pretended that such a
Sanction is illegal, as not done in Parliament; that very pretense it self is a
reserve upon their Obedience, and all reserves whatever, King James was pleased
to exclude. In fine, if a Man be obliged to obey without reserve, then all Laws
and Acts of Parliament, cease ipso facto to become obligatory, when once the
King takes it upon him, by Virtue of this Absolute Power, to command the
contrary.

As the Government of Scotland is in it self a mixed Government, so likewise
our Ancestors have been so careful to preserve it in an equal poize, that they
have thought fit ex superabundante, to bind up the King from invading the
fundamental Constitution, or venturing on an unlimited Power, by the most
Sacred Tie among Men, a Solemn Oath and Promise at his Coronation, to govern
according to the Laws of the Land, that is, these made by the King and
Parliament: And this Obligation upon the the King to govern according to Law, I
take to be the second fundamental Hinge of our Government.

That there was a Contract betwixt the King and People, equivalent to a
Coronation Oath, at the very first founding of our Monarchy, we have
considerable Vestiges in our History: And in Corbred's time, he is said to have
Sworn, Se majorum consiliis aquieturum: i. e. That he should be determined by
the advice of the Elders; which at that time must needs be something of the
Nature of Parliaments: And Gregory, named the Great in our Antiquaries, was
Sworn to maintain the Liberties of the Christian Religion: And Mackbeth another
of our Kings, is said to be Sworn to maintain the Commons of the Realm. Yea,
the Kings of Scotland were so far from pretending to an unlimited Power over
their Subjects, That we find in Finnanus's Reign, the Tenth of our Kings, a
formal Stipulation betwixt him and the People in these* Words, That the Kings
in time coming, should do nothing of any great Concernment without the
Authority of their public Counsel; that he should manage no public business
which belonged to the Kingdom, without the advice and conduct of the Elders,
nor should make Peace or War, nor enter into Leagues, or break them by himself,
without concurrence of these Elders, and the Heads of the Tribes. This
continued a fundamental Law of the Kingdom for a great many Ages; and the
breach of it proved fatal to a great many succeeding Kings. This I mention, not
because that I approve so narrow boundaries of the Royal Prerogative, as to be
divested of the Power of entering into Leagues, and of making Peace and War; but
to evince, that there was an express Contract betwixt the King and People, and
that the King did not pretend to hold his Imperial Crown of God alone, as the
Penner of King James his Declaration expresses it.

The Coronation Oath of Scotland, during the time of Popery, was express, as to
governing the People according to the Laws of the Land; but because it also
contained an obligation to maintain the Heirarchy and Errors of Rome, it was
altered at the Reformation, and made to relate to the Reformed Religion, as
then established by Law, and was enacted to be taken by all the succeeding
Kings of Scotland, at their Coronation: By it they are to Promise and Swear, as
in the presence of the Eternal God, That they shall during the whole course of
their Life, serve the same Eternal God, according as he is revealed in his most
Holy Word; and shall, according to that same Word, maintain the true Religion,
the Preaching of the Holy Word, the due Administration of the Sacraments, Now
received and preached within the Realm of Scotland; that is, upon the matter,
the same as to Swear to be of the Reformed Religion, since that Religion was
established, as the Religion of the Nation, previous to this Act. Thereafter
the King is to Swear by the same Oath, That he shall rule the People committed
to his charge, according to the Command of God, and according to the Laws and
Constitutions received in this Realm. Here I must confess my own weakness, in
the point of the late King James's Accession to the Crown; for my reason could
never persuade me of any Right he could justly claim to it, as long as this Act
of Parliament, enacting this Coronation Oath to be taken by all succeeding
Kings, was in force; since he neither did, nor could Swear it.

Thus the two fundamental Hinges of the Government of Scotland, being First,
That the Laws the People are to be governed by, are such as are made by the
King and Parliament: And Secondly, That the Government be administered by the
King according to these Laws from the Obligation of a Coronation Oath: If
either the King alone, or the three Estates by themselves, take upon them to
make Laws, then the one Hinge is broken off; and if the Government be not
administrated by the King according to these Laws, then the other Hinge is
broken off also; and in either or both of these Cases, the Constitution is at
an end and our Legal Government ceases.

Before I come to the other General Head proposed, There is one Objection that
lies naturally in my way, which I judge necessary to be removed. When I speak
of Laws being only made by the King and the Three Estates of Parliament, it
will be told me by a certain sort of Men, That this late Act of Parliament of
their present Majesty's Reign, Abolishing Episcopacy, seems to infringe that
fundamental Constitution; because one of the Three Estates is thereby removed,
viz. that of the Bishops. This is easily answered, when I have told them, That
before the Reformation, the Three Estates of Parliament were thus reckoned up,
the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, and Commendator of the Order of St.
John of Jerusalem, made up the First Estate, and were named the Lords
Spiritual; the Temporal Lords made up the Second; and the Representatives for
Counties and Buroughs together, made up the Third: But at the Reformation, in
respect of our being reformed by Presbyters, and of the great opposition of the
Bishops to the Reformation it self, the Parliament was pleased not only to
abolish the Errors of the Sea of Rome, but also the Hierarchy of Bishops, with
all their Privileges and Honors, whereof that, of being the First of the*
Three Estates, was one. The Church of Scotland having continued under the
Government of Presbyters, for a great many years, King James the First of
England, sound a way to restore Episcopacy, in spite of the struggling Genius
of the Nation: And albeit at that time the Bishops, by a tacit consent, took
their places in Parliament; yet, whether by neglect or design I know not, they
were never restored to that Privilege* of being accounted one of the Three
Estates* of Parliament; but were ever since reputed to make up but a part of
one Estate, in conjunction with the Temporal Lords; the Second being* the
Representatives of Counties; and the Third these of the Buroughs. This account
I judge the fitter to give, that a great many, who have not the occasion of
being acquainted with the Constitution of our Country, are inclinable to think,
that our reckoning up of the Three Estates, is parallel with that of England;
when indeed there can be nothing more different. England owed its Reformation
to Bishops, whereof some of them had the Glory of Sealing it with their Blood;
and that Order has ever since afforded the greatest Luminaries of the Church.
When Popery was abolished in England, the Heirarchy of Bishops was so far from
being laid aside, that it continued in the same State, as to all its
Privileges, and particularly that of being the first distinct State of
Parliament, as they found it at the Reformation. What I have advanced in point
of the present reckoning up of the Three Estates of Scotland, will appear
farther beyond all doubt, if we consider, That in most of the Parliaments of
King James the First his Reign, there was none of the order of Bishops, the
Hierarchy being not yet restored; and yet the Validity of these Parliaments
were never called in question, in any of the succeeding Reigns.

I come now to the Second General Head proposed, viz. Whether or not the late
King did forfeit his Right to the Crown, by subverting the abovementioned two
fundamental Hinges of the Government, and if thereupon the Estates did justly
lay him aside. In inquiring into this, I shall not give the Reader the trouble
of enumerating the several Cases, in which the greatest Champions of Regal
Prerogative allow, Kings may forfeit their Right; though such a digression
might be pardonable, being that King James's Proclamation insinuates fairly,
that in no case it can happen. I confess, I am so great a Friend to Monarchy,
as being the best of Governments, and most suitable to the Genius of our
Nation* that I could not wish it Precarious, nor the Royal Prerogative sunk
below what our Parliaments, preceding the two last Reigns, have determined it:
And I think the late King James had reason to say of the Laws of Scotland, the
same he was pleased to say of these of England, That they were sufficient to
make the King as great a Monarch as he could wish. There are a great many
Arguments that enforce the unreasonableness of that Opinion, That Kings may be
called to an account for every mis-management; and indeed, it would seem much
safer for the People, many times, to lie under the encroachments of their
Princes, then to endeavor a redress by a Remedy, that proves often worse than
the Disease: And therefore it is not mis-managements in general, though many
and great, that unmakes a King, but only such as shake and subvert the Essence
of the Government, and unhinge the fundamental Constitution of the Kingdom. And
if mis-managements of this kind can be justly charged upon the late King, it
follows necessarily, that immediately upon his so doing, our Constitution is at
an end, and our Legal Government dissolved* and thereupon He ceased to be our
King, and We to be his Subjects. And how far the late King is thus chargeable,
will appear in the following Considerations.

That the First Fundamental Hinge of our Constitution, viz. That the Laws the
People are to be governed by, be made by the King and Parliament, was subverted
by the late King, is evident, in his assuming a Power to annul and disable
Laws, by his two Proclamations for a toleration, Anno 1686. For a Power to
ease, annul, and disable Laws, is as much a part of the Legislature, as a Power
to make Laws; since properly, none can unmake Laws, but those that made them;
Yea, it would seem, that Power to annul Laws, should be greater than that which
made them, considering that all Nations by their Practice have agreed to this,
as a Principle in Politics, That to abrogate an ancient Custom or Law, is one
of the greatest stretches of the Legislature, and should be the Result of the
most deliberate and sedate Consultations. So that the Late King, by assuming a
power to annul Laws, made by King and Parliament, did at the same time arrogate
to himself a power, at least as great, if not greater, than that of both King
and Parliament together. Moreover, That the annulling of Laws is equivalent to
the making of Laws, is plain, in the Case before us; for there are a great many
Laws incapacitating Roman Catholics to enjoy public Offices and Benefices:
Now when King James assumed a power to annul these Laws, and from an absolute
Power, which every one was to obey without reserve, was pleased to capacitate
these Persons, whom the Laws made by King and Parliament had incapacitated,
This was equivalent, in the opinion of both the Giver and Receiver, and had the
same effects, as if there had been an Act of Parliament expressly made in their
favors.

But not only did the Late King in his Declarations for Liberty of Conscience,
by annulling of Laws, take upon him a power equivalent to that of making of
Laws, but did in a direct and express manner invade the Legislature lodged in
King and Parliament, by his imposing on his Subjects an Oath contrary to Law,
and, which even the King and Parliament together could not impose, because it
was in it self a subversion of the Constitution, as being an obligation to
support a Power directly destructive to both the fundamental hindges of the
Government. By this Oath the Subjects were obliged to the utmost of their
power, to defend, assist, and maintain the King and his Successors in the
exercise of their Absolute Power; and thus, as the Oath was created by this
Absolute Power, so the Absolute Power must be supported by this Oath, and
thereby all the remnants of natural Liberty, or a Legal Government, were
extinguished, being the Subjects were obliged by oath to maintain the exercise
of that which plainly destroyed them.

Some have been at a loss to find out the Reason of the difference of Styles in
the Late King's Declaration for liberty of Conscience in England, and that of
Ours; the Imperial Language of annulling and disabling of Laws being left out
in the English one, and in their stead, the softer words of dispensing with
Laws, made use of. I confess I know no other reason of this different Conduct,
but that we were brought to that state of Slavery, that it was not worth the
while to dissemble his Designs against us; and the English required to be
somewhat better smoothed over, because they had not been so fully accustomed to
an Arbitrary Government.

Thus I have made out, that King James, both by consequence, and directly, did
invade the Legislature, which is the main hindge of the Constitution, and
thereby subverted the Government: And if the Government was subverted, it must
necessarily follow, that the Kingly Power was subverted with it; and all our
Ties of Allegiance, whether founded upon oath, or otherwise, are extinguished,
when the Constitution we were obliged to maintain, is dissolved; and the King
of himself had divested himself of that Authority, which we were to defend and
obey. And if it be necessary to determine the time when this Dissolution
happened; I answer, That albeit for these many years our Slavery was designed,
and a great many steps made to it, which, perhaps, taken all together, might
amount to a Consequential Subversion of the Government; yet without all doubt,
in that Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, dated the 12th of February 1686*
which asserted an Absolute Power, which every one was to obey without reserve;
and thereupon a power to disable Laws, the Late King finished his Design, and
our Ruin: And from that Critical Moment I must fix the Epoch of the
Subversion of the Scotch Government.

But because there are some People so ridiculously fond of Slavery, that they
cannot endure to hear that any of the Kings of Scotland can forfeit his Right,
which I beg leave to say, is nonsense to deny, in the case of a total
subversion of the Government, as this in question is. I would sain know why
such a thing as forfaulture should be looked upon as so monstrous in Scotland?
We find that the Late King did not only assume a Prerogative to annul and
disable Laws, and such a power as we were not only to obey without reserve, but
to swear to maintain. We find that by virtue of this Prerogative and Power thus
assumed, He did actually annul and disable a great many Laws for security of
our Religion. Now suppose he had been pleased to impose Taxes upon his People
without a Parliament, and had levied them by his own Army or Dragoons borrowed
from the Invincible Monarch, and had to boot annulled all our Laws made for the
security of our Rights and Properties: And in fine, Suppose he had been pleased
to lay aside the whole body of our Laws, by one of these Royal Edicts, which
all were to obey without reserve. I would willingly know of these Gentlemen, By
what name to call such Practices; and whether in this case, we are patiently to
suffer a King to subvert the whole frame of our Government, and to render
Bondslaves those that were born free Subjects to the protection and privilege
of Laws. And such suppositions are both possible, and, perhaps might have been
actually existent, if some had continued at the Helm a year or two longer.

I might here resume some things with relation to this Absolute Power assumed
by the Late King; and the word Invincible necessity, mentioned in his first
Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, which I had occasion to hint at in my
Answer to the late Declaration to his Pretended Subjects of England, etc. but I
am not so fond of my own Notions, as to repeat them twice; and the rather, that
the entertainment the World was pleased to give that Paper, infinitely beyond
what it deserved, makes me think, that This can come to the hands of few, who
have not seen the other. Only I must say this, I take no pleasure to aggravate
the faults of any, or make the Consequences of them look more ghastly than they
are in themselves; much less would I be guilty of such a thing toward Crowned
Heads. However, I am not able to alter the just appearance of this, That the
public Safety can never be secured in any Constitution whatsoever, and that
the Ends of the Government are quite lost, if the Person who subverts it, does
not at the same time destroy and forfeit his own share in it.

I come to the second member of the second general Head, viz. To inquire
whether or not the Late King James did subvert that other main hinge of the
Government of Scotland, which I have explained to be an obligation to govern by
the Laws made by the King and Parliament; and thereupon, if the Estates of the
Kingdom did justly lay him aside? This Inquiry is indeed no difficult, though
an ungrateful and meloncholly task. For what man that loves his Country, can
look back upon its ruins, without emotions of tenderness! To enumerate all the
dismal Instances of the subversion of this hinge of our Government, for the
space of many years, requires such a Pen as sung the Fall of Troy, or the
Destruction of Thebes. And as the Subject merits to be set beyond the power of
Oblivion, I cannot but hope that this fertile Age will produce some one, that
shall dare to imitate Sueton's Character, by writing the Lives of some of the
Great, tanquam ipsi vixerint; and handle down to Posterity the fatal Methods
used for enslaving a freeborn People. And rather than the memory of these
Transactions should perish for want of a better Historian to perpetuate them, I
may perhaps be induced to venture my own Reputation in doing it, short of what
the Tragic Theme may bear, than that it shoud not be done at all.

But to confine this Head to as few words as possible; It Is equally evident,
that the Late King James did subvert this Fundamental of the Government, as
well as the former; For so far was he from governing according to the Laws made
by King and Parliament, that his whole Government, especially since the time of
his assuming a dispencing and annulling Power, was a continned downright
opposition to Laws. Here I need do no more, but refer the Reader to the Printed
Instrument of Government for settling the Crown of Scotland upon their present
Majesty's; in which we have contained a Summary of the Late King's more
palpable and gross breaches of this Fundamental of the Constitution, and which
I shall only explain a little, for the benefit of those that are Strangers to
our Country.

King James did not only lay aside a great many Laws and Acts of Parliament
made against saying of Mass* and against Jesuits and Seminary Priests, but
would needs, in the greatest and most public Cities of the Kingdom, erect
public Schools and Societies for Jesuits and Seminary Priests, and did apply
no inconsiderable part of the Public Revenue to that use. And farther, He was
pleased frankly to invade the Property of the Subjects, by inverting summarly,
without any previous Sentence, several Protestant Churches and Chapels into
public Masshouses, and particularly the great Church of Hollyroodhouse within
the Capital City of the Kingdom, the ancient Burying-place of our Kings, that
had been a Paroch Church ever since the Reformation.

In spite of Law, He not only caused to be erected Popish Printing-houses for
printing Popish Books, but refused to allow the Printing of Protestant ones,
merely because* they were against the King's Religion.

He not only did Invade the Laws of the Land, but the most Tender part of the
Law of Nature, in taking Protestant Noblemen and Gentlemen's Children from their
Parents and Friends, to be Educated in Foreign Popish Universities: As*
particularly the Earl of Wigton, and his only Brother, two of the most hopeful
Gentlemen, and one of the Noblest and Ancientest Families of Scotland, were
Ravished from the Arms of their Mother the Countess of Crawford, where neither
the Prayers nor Tears of the young Noblemen themselves, nor the Generous Offer
of the Earl of Crawford, to Educate them upon his own Charges, were able to
prevent so hard a Fate, Lundie, one of the most Ancient Families of the Gentry
of the Kingdom, and who had the honor to be among the first Reformers from
Popery, tho of an Age that made him Master of himself, was searched for, in
order to be sent the same Errand; and that in a manner only becoming the Action.

In open Defiance of a great many Laws to the contrary, the Late King James was
pleased to fill up some of the most Important Places of the Government with
Roman Catholics; such as Chancellor, Secretaries of State, Commissioners of
the Thesaury, Lords of Privy Council, Session, and Exchequer. He was pleased to
commit the Great Magazine of the Kingdom, the Government of the Castle of
Edinburgh, and the Custody of the Regalia, to one of that Religion; and to fill
up a great many Important Places of the Army, with the same Men that the Laws
had rendered Incapable.

Our Laws have wisely adapted the measure of Punishment to the Nature of the
Crime; some infering the loss of Chattels, and others the loss of Life and
whole Estate, whether in Lands or Chattels; and this last, our Law calls a
Forfaulture, and is only inflicted upon the most Attrocious Criminals; King
James did so far Subvert this Reasonable part of our Constitution, that some of
his Ministers did impose upon some Thousands of People, Fines that far exceeded
their whole Estates, and consequently amounted to a Forfeiture; and all this,
upon such Imaginary Crimes as this, Because the Wife went not to Church once in
three Weeks, tho the Husband did it; and I am able to instance above 400 thus
Fined, or rather Forfeited, for the like Minute Crimes, within the Bounds of
one single County.

It Is an uncontroverted Principle of our Law, That no man can be condemned to
die, but upon his being found guilty of the Crime by a Jury of Fifteen Men.
Notwithstanding of this great Security of our Lives and Fortunes, King James
was pleased to grant Commissions to Military Officers, impowering them to put
to Death without either Jury, Trial, or Record; and which Commissions were as
boldly put in Execution.

Nothing seems more directly founded on the Law of Nature, than that a Man
should not be deprived of his Liberty, without showing him a Cause for it; yet
how many hundreds have been in a manner buried alive in a sort of Dungeons, for
several years, without being told to this very day, what was their Crime.

The Buroughs of Scotland were always reputed as one of the Estates of the
Kingdom, and by their Charters ratified in Parliament, were Vested with a Power
to Elect their own Magistrates; yet King James did so far trample upon the
Liberties of this Third Estate, that without the pretense of either Surrender,
Consent or Sentence, he was pleased to Impose upon them for Magistrates, those
that were Strangers, and not Free of their Corporations, and a great many of
them Roman Catholics.

It were in vain to endeavor to confine to this Paper, all the Instances of
King James his Subverting this Hinge of our Constitution, viz. The obligation
to Govern according to Law: I shall conclude with one Paramount Instance, that
entails an Eternal Blot upon the Government of the Late King, and upon the late
Justice of our Nation; I mean, the Indictment of high Treason against that
Noble Person the late Earl of Argyle; of whom, to say too much were impossible;
and to say too little, were a Crime. It Is true, this Affair was Transacted in
the Late King Charles his Reign, but it justly merits the glory of being
accounted one of King James's Managements, since he was his Brother's
Commissioner, and upon the place at the time, and the source and promoter of
that great Person's Ruin. One would think that it needs must have been some
horrid Crime that could obliterate all the eminent Services done by this
Nobleman to the Crown, even in its lowest figure, that could provoke Justice to
convict him of no less than High Treason, to taint his Blood, and declare his
Family Ignoble; to forfeit his Estate; to extinguish his Honor, the first of
its Rank in the Kingdom; and to sentence Himself to die the death of a Traitor,
and all this to happen within a few weeks after that he had been seen to move
in the highest Orb of favor, and to entertain the then Duke of York with the
greatest magnificence at his House in Stirling. King Charles had reason to call
this Crime of the Earl of Argyle's, a Metaphysick kind of Treason, and a thing
he could never make sense of. But that those who are strangers to our Kingdom,
may have a short hint of this unintelligible Affair, I beg leave to inform
them, That in the Parliament, where the Late King James represented his Brother
as High Commissioner, there was an Oath or Test enacted to be taken by all
Persons in public Offices; in which Test, there were some things contained so
hard of digestion, and of apparent contradiction in it self, that a great many
Persons of all Ranks, scrupled it upon that score. Yea, the universal dislike
of it at first was such, as obliged the Bishop of Edinburgh, and afterward the
Privy Council it self, to emit a public explanation of this Test, and therein
to piece up, in the best manner possible, the seeming Contradictions contained
in it. Notwithstanding of all this, and that most of the Clergy, especially of
the North, did take this Test and Oath, with, and under express Explanations,
and were by Authority allowed them; yet the Earl of Argyle had his Life,
Honor, and Fortune sacrificed, for venturing on that which the meanest
Country Minister was permitted. But that the Ages to come, may know the very
words, wherein this Chymereal Treason lay, and thereby be the better capacitate
to have a true value of the Learning and Integrity of those Gentlemen that had
the honor of finding it out. I shall repeat the very Expressions which were
declared by the plurality of his judges to be in themselves High Treason: which
are these, according as they are set down in the Indictment, upon which he was
found guilty. I have considered the Test, and am very desirous to give
obedience as far as I can. I am confident the Parliament never intended to
impose contradictory Oaths, and therefore I think no man can explain it but for
himself, and reconcile it as it is genuine, and agrees in its own sense; and I
take it in so far as it is consistent with the Protestant Religion, and it
self: And I do declare, I mean not to bind up my self in my Station, and in a
lawful way, to wish, and endeavor any alteration I think to the advantage of
Church or State, and not repugnant to the Protestant Religion, and my Loyalty;
And this I understand as a part of my Oath.

Behold the transcendent Crime that brought one of the Greatest and Ancientest
Families of our Nation to ruin, and at last, one of the greatest and best of
its Subjects to the Block; and therein an unexampled Instance of an Arbitrary
Power, that scorned to be bounded by the mean and weak Bonds of Justice and
Law, but could boldly venture upon all that uses to be sacred among men, when
it was found needful to sacrifice to Revenge any that might have the honor to
oppose the Design of introducing Popery, and Arbitrary Power. It Is to be
regretted, that Death has exempted from a Temporal Bar the rest of this
Nobleman's Judges, that gave their vote against him, and has left us behind but
one of them; B. of F. a Person Justice must stoop to, before she can meet him;
and whom Heaven has denied any Qualities that might render him a suitable
Victim for the atonement of so Illustrious Blood.

Here it is but reasonable, that I should mention with honor a great many
noble and generous Persons, who merit to have their Names affixt on the Temple
of Fame to After-ages, for the glory of daring to make what opposition they
could to the enslaving their Country: Some of whom, neither Places of
Preferment, nor the honor of sitting at the Council Board, and on the Bench,
could tempt to betray the Liberties of the Nation; and of whom others were
proof against the Frowns of Princes, and could not be frighted by the loss of
Employments and Disgraces, from their Duty. But this fertile Subject I leave to
a better Pen.

Thus, I hope, I have made it appear, That the two great Hinges of the
Government of Scotland are, that the Laws the People are governed by, be made
by King and Parliament: And that the Government be administered according to
these Laws. I have also proved, That the Late King James has subverted both
these two Hinges of the Government; and thence, that our Constitution was
dissolved, and our Obligations of Obedience, and Oaths of Allegiance to that
King, are extinguished, and at an end. From all which it must follow by a
necessary Consequence, without necessity of proving it, That the Estates of the
Kingdom did justly fill up the Throne, vacant by the dissolution of the
Government; and thereby the abovementioned Narrative of King James's
Proclamation has now no more force than a Bull of Excommunication in Countries
where the Thunders of the Vatican have lost their force.

There is but one Objection that can be made with any shadow of reason against
King James his obligation to govern by Law, and it is so trivial, that it
scarce requires an Answer; and it is this, That he never took the
Coronation Oath, and therefore cannot be charged with unhinging that part of
our Constitution, To govern according to Law. To this, all I shall say, is
first, He was obliged to take it, as being an Oath enacted to be taken by all
the Kings of Scotland; and it were most unreasonable, that his Fault in not
taking it, should put him in a better Condition, or us in a worse, than if he
had taken it. Secondly, Whoever accepts the Regal Dignity in right of
Succession, is thereby understood to assume the Government with, and under the
same Conditions and Limitations that his Predecessors were under: So that King
James, by accepting the Crown of Scotland in Right of Succession to his
Brother, That very Right that entailed upon him the Crown which was once his
Brother's, does at the same time entail also upon him the necessary and
Essential Conditions of the Government, as they were stated in his Brother's
time.

The rest of the Proclamation runs thus. By all which they have incurred the
guilt and pains of High Treason (meaning the Parliament, as mentioned in the
former part) and Rebellion against Us, and Our Authority. Therefore We hereby
declare the said wicked Persons assembled, as aforesaid, consenting to such
Proceedings, Rebels and Traitors: Willing and requiring you, and all our Good
Subjects to take notice hereof, that you give them no obedience* concourse, or
assistance; But that to the utmost of your power you rise in Arms against,
assault, attach and destroy them, their Assistants and Abettors, and to take
and apprehend them, and bring them to condign punishment, according to the Laws
and Acts of Parliament of that Kingdom; their Estates and Goods to seize, and
employ for Our use, or your own subsistence, in Our Service. And for whatever
shall happen in prosecution of this Our Will and Pleasure, This shall be to
you, and all others concerned, a sufficient Warrant and Command: And for all
bloodshed, slaughter, mutilation, fire-raising, or other damage done to these
Rebels, their Accomplices, Assisters, Abettors, their Lands, and Inheritances,
Goods, or Possessions, a sufficient Indemnity, Pardon, Warrant and Approbation,
for now and ever: The which all our Judges are to explain in the most
favorable and extensive sense the words can bear, in favors of Our said
Subjects, obeying Our said Order as aforesaid. Declaring, We will make good to
Our Subjects whatever We promised them in Our Declarations in favors of the
Protestant Religion, and Liberty of Conscience, to all who will live peaceably,
and Rights and Properties of our People. Given at Dublin; etc. I would not have
been at the pains to transcribe these Expressions, if I did not think that the
very reading of these unexampled Invitations to Slaughter, Fire-raising, etc.
should excite a just horror in the minds of all men, of what we are to expect,
if ever Heaven, for the punishment of our Ingratitude, should suffer us to fall
under the Power of the Prince that uses them. And I have chose rather to pass
them over with a bare repeating of them, than by such an Answer as perhaps they
require, add Reflections upon a Prince, who has his Fortune too much sunk
already, and whom a great many Considerations obliges me always to treat with
all possible Respect.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
A Seasonable Discourse wherein is Examined what is Lawful during the
Confusions and Revolutions of Government; Especially in the Case of a King
deserting his Kingdoms: And how far a Man may lawfully conform to the Powers
and Commands of those, who with Various Successes hold Kingdoms. Whether it be
Lawful* I. In Paying Taxes. II. In Personal Service. III. In Taking Oaths. IV.
In giving himself up to a final Allegiance. As also, Whether the Nature of War
be Inconsistent with the Nature of the Christian Religion. Sold by Rich.
Ianeway, in Queen's-Head Court in Paternoster Row.

Ioannis Georgii Graevii Oration de Auspicatissima Expeditione Britannica. Cum
Potentissimus and Invictissimus Guilielmus Arausionensis Princeps, Angliae,
Galliae and Hiberniae Rex inauguraretur, Die xi Aprilis, Auctoritate
Praepotentium and Illustrium Ordinum Trajectinae Dioeceseos, Habita 1689.
Impensis D. Newman, ad Insignia Regalia in Vico vulgo vocato the Poultry.


