A SERMON Concerning Reformation of Manners, Preached at St. James's Church,
Westminster, Feb. 13. And afterward at St. BRIDES, To one of the RELIGIOUS
SOCIETIES.

By SAMUEL WESLEY, M. A.

LONDON: Printed for Charles Harper, at the Flower-de-Luce over against St.
Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. School.

To the SOCIETIES FOR Reformation of Manners, And the RELIGIOUS SOCIETIES In
the KINGDOMS of England and Ireland, THIS SERMON Is Dedicated by

Their hearty Well-wisher And humble Servant S. Wesley.

PSALM XCIV. v. 16. Who will rise up for me against the Evildoers, or who will
stand up for me against the Workers of Iniquity? Or as it is in the Old
Translation. Who will rise up with me against the Wicked, and who will take my
part against the Evildoers?
IF these Words had not been spoken by God himself, or, which is the same
thing, by the Psalmist in his Name and by his immediate Inspiration, it is
certain that any who should now have asked the same Question, must at least
have expected the Censure of two much heat and forwardness, or the yet more
severe one, of designing a Factious Combination instead of a Religious Union.
The Occasion of them, as well as of the whole Psalm, is judged to have been the
Affliction of Gods People in Babylon, where they had no Friend or Helper; in
which Condition they address themselves in the pathetic words of this Psalm, to
him who never fails those who trust in him: expressing their firm Faith and
dependence on the Almighty, and, that notwithstanding all they had endured, --
The Lord would not cut off his People, nor forsake his Inheritance, but that at
the last Judgment should return unto Righteousness. The time should come under
the Reign of the Messiah principally and ultimately, tho immediately and
imperfectly under Zerubbabel's and Joshua's Administration of Affairs, when
there should be a more equal distribution of things, and all good Men should
with one mind and one mouth glorify God, and adore his wonderful Providence
and Goodness.

And then it follows in the words of the Text, Who will rise up for (or with)
me against the Evildoers; who will stand up for me (or take my part) against
the workers of Iniquity? Who is there that has Courage or Zeal sufficient for
such an Undertaking, and to assist the Civil and Ecclesiastical Governors to
accomplish these happy Alterations; to reform Abuses, punish the Wicked,
depress the Proud and raise the Humble? Which great Work the Psalmist [ v. 17.]
ascribes primarily and immediately to God, tho not excluding Man's free Agency
and Cooperation, yet not depending upon them nor expecting much from them --
Unless the Lord had been my help, my soul had well nigh dwelt in silence.

But I shall not, in my Discourse from these words, insist any further on the
occasion of them, or their connection with the preceding or subsequent Verses,
but consider them as independent on the rest of the Psalm, and desire you to
take notice, that the -- Rising up for or with the Psalmist, here mentioned
against Bad men, implies Zeal and Courage, which he was then so solicitously
enquiring after, -- as the standing up for him, or as it is in the Syriac,
fitting and preparing a Man's self for such an Enterprise, may denote that
caution and prudence which was necessary on so emergent an Occasion; as both of
these Expressions imply an Union of good Men with the firmest Resolves and
steadiest Endeavors, against the workers of Iniquity.

From the Words we may deduce these Two Propositions.

I. That it is very difficult to persuade Men to engage in the Cause of God,
against Wicked Persons and Evildoers. Thisis fairly implied in the Words of
the Question -- Who will rise up with me? Who will stand up for me? What need
of such a careful and exact Enquiry, if the Answer had been obvious and easy?

II. That it is the indispensible Duty of Good Men, with united Councils, and
with the utmost Zeal and Prudence, to oppose Vice and Wickedness.

The former of which Propositions I shall insist on more briefly; the second
more at large in the Body of my Discourse, and then apply the whole.

First then, We may learn from these Words, that it is very difficult to
persuade Men to engage in the Cause of God, against wicked Persons and
Evildoers. The matter of fact is too plain and obvious, since neither Men's
Obligations to God, nor those to their Country, nor the Dictates of their own
Consciences, nor the Persuasions and Examples of better Men, nay, nor even
their own solemn Oaths, can oftentimes prevail upon them to the Performance of
this hazardous Duty. Nor are the Reasons less evident than the matter of Fact
is. The Singularity of such an Attempt, the Disuse of the Laws, the Opposition
of the Guilty, the Coldness of those who might and ought to encourage such as
act in this manner; the Disobliging Men's Friends or Neighbors, the Fear of
injuring their own Temporal Interest, but above all, the backwardness of those
who are in Public Offices, and that general Dis-regard which most Men seem to
have of their own and others Souls; together with the want of a true Love to
God and concern for his Glory, are but too plainly at the bottom of such an
unexcusable Negligence.

I shall not therefore need to insist any further on this Proposition, but
proceed to the

II. That it is the indispensible Duty of Good Men, with united Councils, and
with the utmost Zeal and Prudence to oppose Vice and Wickedness.

Which Point may be divided into three Parts.

1. That Good Men ought to oppose Vice and Wickedness?

2. That they should do this with united Councils and Endeavors. And

That 3. With the utmost Zeal and Prudence that a Matter of so high an
Importance needs and deserves.

In speaking to the first of these Heads, I shall first enquire into the strong
Obligations Men are under to the performance of this Duty; and then prove, that
it is their true Interest to answer those Obligations.

And one would think there should be but little need to insist on the former of
these Heads, to any who remember their Baptism; for by their Renouncing the
World, the Flesh and the Devil, they have actually entered into a War against
them; they have listed themselves under the Banner of the Cross, and have taken
a virtual Oath to be Christ's faithful Servants and Soldiers to their Lives end.
Now we cannot make this War Defensive only without great Disadvantage, nor will
it be policy to expect it at home, but rather to carry it into the Enemy's
Country, where we may expect, if not wholly to put an end to it, yet, at least,
more successfully engage against it. Daring and open Wickedness is a plain
Contradiction to the Almighty, and High Treason against the Majesty of Heaven;
against him who is a great God, and a great King above all Gods: and are not
all his Liege Subjects under the deepest Obligations to oppose it for that
reason; to hate that which his Soul hates, and which hates him, and would if
possible Dethrone him? Lest otherwise they be dealt with as Saul was for
sparing the Amelekites, when he ought to have obeyed the Commandment of the
Lord, and to have utterly destroyed them.

But we have yet a further Relation to the Almighty, which obliges us to be
valiant in his Cause and to fight his Battles. We are his Servants as well as
his Children and his Subjects; he saved us from our Enemies, he saved us when
Rebels, he rescued us from the Devil, he ransomed us by the Blood of his Son;
he has therefore by all imaginable Titles the Right of Dominion over us; we are
not our own, but are bought with a Price, and are therefore to glorify God
with our Bodies and Souls, which are his, and can by no means be accounted
either grateful or faithful Servants, if we desert the Interest of our Master;
if we refuse to engage in his Cause, or are patient while he is Dishonored.

Now if these Obligations (and to which many others might be added) did really
cross our true Interest, there might be some Pretense for our not pursuing
them; but if, instead of that, it shall appear, that the Public opposing of
Vice does highly conduce to our Private, our Civil, our Temporal and Spiritual,
and Eternal Happiness, what excuse can we make for our Negligence in this
matter?

As for our Civil Happiness, we are all born Members of a Community, and
consequently must desire the Good of the Whole, unless we can hate our selves,
who are Parts of it. Now it is hard to say whether has done greater Mischief to
the Public, either Ill Principles, which have taken Men off from that
Passionate Regard to their Country, which was so remarkable and so glorious
among the ancient Heathens, or else a Bad Life and a Dissolution of Manners,
which from a complication of many unhappy Circumstances, has of late so visibly
broken in upon us, both of which have so plain an Influence upon each other.
Thus much is however certain, that whoever truly loves his Country, will
heartily endeavor to make it better, which cannot be expected, considering the
Disingenuity of the Bulk of Mankind, without the due exercise of Discipline,
and the Punishment of those that do Evil.

But this is an Article which has been so often touched and so much exhausted,
that I shall insist no longer on it, only leaving it to the Consideration of
every prudent Person, whether there would be so much Baseness, so much
Falsehood, Treason, Bribery and Injustice; so much Unrighteousness and Strife
every where, were Persons generally influenced with the Principles of Probity
and Virtue; nay, had they not, on the contrary, abandoned themselves to the
Stream of Vice and Lewdness, which therefore it is the concern of every Good Man
to oppose with all his Might; to prevent, if possible, that threatening Deluge
which is likely to break in upon us, and cover the Face of our Land.

Nor is the Opposition of Vice, in order to the suppressing, or at least the
restraining of it, less conducive to domestic Happiness than it is to that of
the Public; it being evident, that the want of Discipline is the Ruin of
Families, and that the restoration thereof would make better Servants, better
Children, better Masters, and render all Relations much more useful, and
comfortable, and happy.

But Vice is further injurious to every Man's personal Happiness; to his Profit
as well as Reputation, to his Body as well as his Mind, by innumerable
Inconveniences it brings upon him. Of how base a Spirit therefore he must be,
who yields to that Sin which as it first brought Death into the World, so it
continues daily to slay its Thousands; brings the Judgments of God upon us,
emaculates Mankind, taints and poisons the very first Threads of Life, projects
its Mischief beyond the present Age, and loads Posterity with a feeble and a
miserable Offspring?

Let us next reflect on what passes in our own Minds, and the necessity there
is, if we consult their Happiness, to oppose Vice in others as well as in our
selves, because its Contagion is so very spreading and dangerous. Mistaken Men
may call the Proud happy, and so of other Sinners, but it is impossible they
should be so, and they know the contrary themselves: for what more severe
Tormentor can a Man have in his own Breast, than any uncontrolled Vice or
sinful Habit. There are few Men who are altogether lost to the sense of Virtue,
and to that natural Taste of Goodness at first imprinted on the Mind, and
consequently Vice must needs be a Torment to the Mind as well as to the Body,
since it is so contrary to our true Nature, and a Man must be as uneasy under
it, as a wounded Person with an Arrow sticking fast in his Body. Its true, an
Ill Man makes as good a Show as he can, and thinks he bears it well out, but
it is all Paint and Vernish; he has something within that denies him Ease; all
his Triumphs are but like the miserable Ravings of one in a Fever, who perhaps
looks as fresh as ever, and tells you he feels no pain, when it is but an
unnatural flushing, he is still sick at Heart, all within is disordered, and
he is not far from his End.

Nor is the eternal Interest of every Man less concerned in these matters than
the present quiet of his Mind: For unless we oppose Wickedness, 'twill as
certainly gain ground upon us, and hurry us away in the stream, as the Sea will
break in upon a Level, if there be no Beach or Banks to resist it. We know that
the Wages of Sin is Death, both temporal and eternal we know it is an acceptable
Service to God to oppose and resist it, that he himself has told us -- Those
who Honor him he will Honor; and that our blessed Savior has assured us,
That those who confess him before Men, he will also confess them before his
Father which is in Heaven.

II. I proceed to the second thing -- That as good Men are obliged to oppose
Vice and Wickedness, so they are to do this with united Councils and
Endeavors. What is a single Persons Duty in this matter cannot alter its
nature when it falls into the Hands of Communities or Bodies of Men, but may be
much more hopefully and successfully attempted by them; for the Offenders may
sometimes be such Sons of Zerviah, that they will prove too hard for any single
Person: Their Numbers may be so great, that there will need one somewhat
proportionable to oppose them, since Miracles are generally ceased, and tho
Sampson and others of old could slay their Heaps upon Heaps, yet it is not now
for single Persons to attack whole Armies; nor will a greater Number of
undisciplined Men, who fight loose and straggling, gain equal Advantages on the
Enemy, with a much smaller Body who engage with Discipline and Order. Its true,
that the Kingdom of Darkness is likewise the Kingdom of Confusion; but still
Satan will not fight against Satan, and all his Subjects unite themselves
against the Lord and against his Christ, to break their bonds in sunder, and
cast away their cords from them. Now in opposition to those infernal Legions,
did our blessed Lord institute his Church; being a regulated Society of Men, by
their very Nature and Constitution most firmly united together, and obliged to
love one another; by virtue of which mystical and indissolvable Union, a^ well
with Christ their Head, as with al^ their Fellow Members, sealed and confirmed
in the Holy Sacraments, they obtain that Strength and Stability that the Gates
of Hell shall never prevail against them.

And indeed were all the outward Members of the visible Church, but real
Members likewise of that which is internal spiritual and invisible; in short,
did all who bear the name of Christ walk worthy of their Holy Profession, there
would be no need of Discipline, nor of any such subordinate Union as I am now
recommending, in any Christian Commonwealth; any more than there would be need
of Laws and Sanctions annexed unto them in the Civil Government, did all Men
regulate themselves by the true Law of Nature and Principles of right Reason:
but since none can be so sanguine, as to expect such a happy state of things,
it lies upon Good Men to do what they can, and to use all those prudent Methods
which are in their power, to make the World a little better; to unite their
Hands and their Hearts, in some measure, at least to repress notorious Vice and
punish Gods Dishonor.

It Is almost incredible, to say, what happy Effects we shoud soon see from such
a close and firm Conjunction of all good Men in the prosecution of these
desirable Ends. Very considerable things have by Gods Blessing been already
done by some few who have devoted themselves to the Service of God and their
Country on this occasion; who have born the Burden and Heat of the day, and
entered themselves into Societies for the Reformation of Manners, both in this
and our neighboring Nation of Ireland. And may God increase their Number as he
will certainly reward their Labor. There Is a great Door opend, and no other
can be expected but that they should still meet with many Adversaries: There Is
yet but too much Employment for more Hands, and 'twou'd be the Honor as well
as the Interest of all good Men, to join with them in this Undertaking (nay of
the greatest Prince on Earth to own his Cause from whom he receives his Crown)
that by mature and united Councils, mutual assistance, more earnest application
and greater numbers, they might successfully prosecute what is so well began,
and what can scarcely be accomplished by any other methods.

III. I come now in the third place to the manner how we are to set about this
great Duty. It ought certainly to be managed with the greatest Zeal and the
greatest Prudence.

1. With Zeal. For since it is good to be Zealously affected in every Good
matter, much more is it so in this, which has so immediate an Influence on so
many great and momentous Ends. Zeal in moral Affairs seems to have much the
same surprising Effects which Motion has in Physical and Mechanical; it
produces what seemed at first impossible, it gives a new Mould and Turn to
every Action; it sets on work all the secret Springs and Powers of the Mind,
and makes them act with such a Force and Vigor as is almost irresistible. God
and Man hate a lukewarm Temper, which has often created greater Obstructions to
good Designs, than the most open Opposition against them; -- Who will rise up
with me, who will stand up for me against the workers of Iniquity? Who has
Courage, and Constancy, and Bravery equal to so glorious, an Underatking? As
that Zeal is Madness which pushes a Man on to illegal and indefensible Actions,
whatever be the motive of his engaging in them; so that Wisdom is Folly, which
hinders a Man from doing his Duty, and vindicating Gods Honor.

But still we must take care that our Zeal be tempered with Prudence; and if
ever we are to be wise as Serpents, we are certainly to be so in these Matters,
wherein we are sure to have the old Serpent himself our sworn and inveterate
Enemy: He may bruise the Heel of the Seed of the Woman, of the Members, as well
as of Christ their Head, by Backbiting and Reproaches, and by all the Calumnies
that Hell can invent, or its Emissaries utter. What need then have all those
good Men who engage in this honorable and weighty Affair of stemming the Tide
of Vice amongst us, what need have they to be always upon their Guard, and to
take care of their Steps, since there are so many who watch for their Halting.
To act by the most prudent and advisable Methods, to be zealous without being
passionate, which perhaps is one of the most difficult things in the World. To
give no just Offense to any, to prepare themselves against the doubtful Combat;
to expect to be hated and slandered by bad Men, as was their Master before
them, and for the same Reason too, because they testify against them that
their deeds are evil: to be sober and vigilant, to avoid what is scandalous as
well as what is sinful, and so on the contrary. By no means to forget
themselves, their own Persons, or their own Families, while they are so busy
in reforming others; and to suffer no Beam, or so much as a Mote in their own
Eye, while they are endeavoring to clear their Brothers Eye, which could not
fail of having an happy influence on their own Minds, as their instructive
Examples would on those of others; and be one of those natural and inseparable
Rewards which even in this Life attend Virtue and Goodness, and which in some
sort may seem to antedate an happy Eternity.

I proceed to draw some practical Inferences from what has been said.

( Use 1.) And the first may be to Reprove those who are so far from opposing
Vice and Wickedness, that they rather encourage it and support, as it well as
discourage others who are engaged against it: so far from rising up against
Evildoers, that they rise up together with them; and it is to be feared, that
too many will come under this Reproof who think themselves wholly innocent;
such are those who any ways countenance wicked Men in their lewd Practices and
infamous Behaviors: who choose the Company of ill Men, and therefore seem to
stand in the way of Sinners, and are in great danger of sitting in the seat of
the scorner -- tho they cannot be ignorant who has said, That he who walks with
wise men shall be wise, but a companion of fools shall be destroyed: not that
all Correspondence with Ill Men is forbidden, as to the necessary Offices of
Civil or Private Life; for then as the Apostle says, must we go out of the
World; but I speak of a voluntary Intimacy, a peculiar unnecessary Endearment
with bad Men, which if it does not make them better, will certainly make others
worse, whose Conversation is so pestilentially infectious, than which the Enemy
has scarcely a more dangerous Snare for the Souls of Men:

Unless, perhaps, some certain Societies in the Nation, of a quite different
sort from those already mentioned, and who, one would think, had for some years
last past entered into a sworn Conspiracy against Religion and Virtue.

There scarce seems any need to explain my self, that hereby I mean our
Infamous Theaters, which seem to have done more Mischief, than Hobes himself or
our new Atheistical Clubs, to the Faith and Morals of the Nation. Moral
Representations are owned to be in their own Nature, not only Innocent, but
even useful as well as pleasant; but what is this to those which have no Morals
or Morality at all in them, and which are the most Immoral things in the World;
which the more any good Man is acquainted with them, the less he must still
like them, and at which any modest Heathen would blush to be present. If we
ever hope for an entire Reformation of Manners, even our Iails and our Theaters
must have their shares. With as much reason may we exclaim against our modern
Plays and Interludes, as did the old zealous Fathers against the Pagan
Spectales, and as justly rank these as they did the others, among those Pomps
and Vanities of this wicked World which our Baptism obliges us to renounce and
to abhor. What Communion has the Temple of God with Idols, with those
abominable mysteries of Iniquity which outdo the old Fescennina of the
Heathens, the lewd Orgies of Bacchus, and the impious Feasts of Isis and
Priapus? I know not how any Persons can profitably, or indeed decently, present
themselves here before Gods Holy Oracle, who are frequently present at those
Schools of Vice, and Nurseries of Profaneness and Lewdness, to unlearn there
what they are here taught, out of Gods Holy Word. It recals to my mind a
Passage not unlike it, in the Book of the Kings, (2 Kings xvii. 30, 33.)
concerning those Samaritans who inhabited the Land of Israel after the
Captivity of the Ten Tribes; it is said of them, That every Nation made Gods of
their own; the Men of Babylon made Succoth-Benoth, that is, as Learned Men are
of Opinion, the Tabernacles or Temples, or if you please, Scenes or Theaters of
Venus; and others of them burnt their Children in the Fire to their Idols: --
so they feared the Lord and served their own Gods. The Application is but too
obvious and easy; would you suffer your Friend or your Child to resort every
day to a Pesthouse, or a Place infected with any contagious and deadly
Disease, whence you had seen many Persons carried out dead before you? If none
would do this who pretended to be in his right senses, what excuse can be made
for those who do worse, and are themselves frequently present, as well as
suffer others to be so, at that place which is so nearly allied to hers which
Solomon describes; whose House is the way to Hell, and her Gates lead down to
the Chambers of Death. And are they not too like those Jews Ezekiel mentions,
who when they had slain their Children in the Fire to their Idols, came into
Gods Sanctuary to profane it.

How can such Persons pray every day Lead us not into Temptation, when they
themselves wilfully rush into the very mouth of it? It Is true the Stage
pretends to Reform Manners, but let them tell us how many Converts they can
name, by their means, to Virtue and Religion during these last thirty or forty
years, and we can give numerous and sad Instances to the contrary, even of a
brave and virtuous Nation too generally depraved and corrupted, to which there
cannot perhaps be any one thing assigned, which has more highly contributed
than these unsufferable and abominable Representations; the Authors of which,
tho the Public should continue to take notice of them, would either be forced
so far to alter them that they would hardly be known, or else they would fall
of themselves, if Men would but withdraw their Company from them, as their
pretense there does actually encourage and support them. To close the Head,
whereon I Am sorry there is so much cause of insisting, since there are too many,
of whom we may without Breach of Charity believe, that they would rather forsake
the Church than the Theater, by their being so much more frequently and
delightfully present at the latter than they are at the former.

If Oaths, if Blasphemy, if perpetual Profanation of the glorious Name of God
and of our Blessed Redeemer, if making a scoff and a laughter at his Holy Word
and Institutions, and I know not why I should not add his Ministers too, which
is the very Salt, and almost the Imprimatur to most of the Comedies of the
present Age. If Filthiness and foolish Talking and profane or immodest Jesting,
and insulting over the miseries, and excusing, and representing, and
recommending the Vices of Mankind, either by not punishing them at all, or
slighty punishing them, or even making them prosperous and happy; and teaching
others first how to be wicked, and then to defend or hide their Wickedness, or
at least to think Virtue ridiculous and unfashionable, and Religion and Piety
fit for none but old People, Fools and Lunaticks; if Contempt of Superiors, if
false Notions of Honor. if height of Lewdness and Pride, and Revenge, and
even Murder be those Lessons which are daily taught at these Public
Play Houses, to the disgrace of our Age, corruption of our Morals, and scandal
and odium of our Nation; for the truth of which we may appeal to all the
unprejudiced and virtuous part of Mankind: Then we may further ask, whether
these are fit Places for the Education of our Youth, the Diversion of those of
riper Age, or indeed so much as tolerable as they now are, and without a great
and unexpected Reformation under any Christian Government. If they are so, they
may then continue in their present state, and we may still frequent them; but
in the mean time how can we presume to come hither unto Gods House and his Holy
Table, unless we could answer that pathetick Expostulation of God to his own
People, who lived not answerable to their Profession, What have thou to do to
tread my Courts, or take my Name into thy Lips, seeing thou hate to be
Reformed and have cast my Words behind thy back, and were Partaker with the
Adulterer.

But to go on with the other Inferences; and the

II. Shall be to recommend that Zeal and that Prudence to your Practice, which
is so highly necessary in those who set about the Reforming others.

And First for Prudence. Let every Man act in the station wherein God has
placed him, and by those Laws which are the Strength of our happy Constitution,
and with that meekness, patience and excellent temper of Mind, which our
Savior recommends to his Disciples, and then they cannot err in this matter.
Humility is certainly a great part of Prudence and a noble Christian Virtue,
tho hardly ever known or mentioned in the Ethics of the Heathens, and is highly
necessary to those who are engaged in this Work. For it is not easy to be
singular without a too great Opinion of our selves and being embittered and
soured by the Censures of others, as well as by their refusal to assist us in
what we know to be a necessary and an honorable Undertaking etc. those must
have a great Command indeed, of their own Minds, who never felt any risings in
them on such Provocations. However thus much is sure, that Modesty and Meekness
did never yet hurt a good Cause, and are so far from that meanness and
demission of Mind which betray whatever they undertake; that after all, they
are Arguments of the clearest Courage and Magnanimity. To close this Head, let
us always remember, that we are not to rise up tumultuously even against
Evildoers, but in an orderly and legal way. Those that strive must strive
lawfully, in this, as well as in all other parts of our Christian Warfare, and
prudently too, and therefore with united Councils and Endeavors.

Which will be no prejudice, but rather an advantage to their Zeal, when it has
so stable and so rational a Foundation.

And what further Encouragement can we desire, to set us about this necessary
tho invidious Employment with the utmost Zeal and Courage, than those we
already have? What stronger Arguments to persuade us to fix our selves as Iron
Pillars and Brazen Walls against the Workers of Iniquity? To set our united
Breasts against the Stream of Profaneness and Wickedness, which if we did, it
must of necessity give way, since Vice cannot act upon any settled Principles,
but is at the bottom cowardly and unstable. Is it number that we want to
encourage us? Why we have a thousand on our side even in the Breast of every
Ill man whom we bring to just Punishment. We have now, blessed be God, the
glorious Encouragement of Superiors, that the Sword of Justice shall no longer
lie rusting and idle, but be drawn and furbished up for the Battle, and glitter
against the Faces of Gods and our Countrey's Enemies. We may hope for the
concurrence of most good Men upon Earth, when they are satisfied of the
sincerity of our Intentions and t^^ Prudence of our Behavior. Nay of a^^ the
Heavenly Host above, all the Ho^^ Angels of God; who if they rejoice ^^ the
Conversion of one Sinner, cannot b^ unconcerned in any thing that looks t^wards
a more public and general Refo^mation.

But alas! after all this, what reason has every one who has any real Concer^
for God and his Country, to cry out wit^ the Father of old, To what dregs of
ti^^ are we reserved! when Men may almo^^ print or speak what Blasphemies they
pleas^ with Impunity and even with Triumph when too many of the inordinate
Magistrates will not act, nor the People generally assist them in the
Punishment of Evildoers; when it shall be reckoned patt of good Breeding, or
at least an Argument of Wit and Spirit, to ridicule al^ that is scared, and to
profane the glorious and fearful Name, -- The Lord our God, and yet the rudest,
the busiest, and the most clownish thing in the World, to reprove, to detect
and punish such notorious Offenders, tho by the most legal, prudent and
advisable Methods. But there is still one Comfort to those who do so, and that
is, that God sees not as man sees; that he is the God of Judgment, and by him
Actions are weighed, not in the unequal Scales of Prejudice and Partiality, but
by the unerring Standard of his own Immutable Justice.

And shall then a wretched Mortal, a Worm of the same Dust and Clay with our
selves, and which must soon be reduced unto the same Dust again: shall such a
one presume to affront my Father, my Patron, my Friend, my Benefactor, my
Savior, and I want Courage or Honesty to oppose him, to detect him, and to
bring him to that Shame and Punishment he so highly merits? Is this our
kindness to our Friend, or should we ever believe any Person to be ours who so
basely deserted us? Whom are we afraid of, that we forget the Lord our Maker?
Let all the Potsherds of the Earth fall down together, and humble themselves
before the King, the Lord of Hosts, and let him alone be exalted, whose Glory
is above the Heavens, and who shakes the Earth at his Displeasure: The
Mountains and the Hills shall flee away before him, and the Thunder of his
Power who can bear?

If we find our selves not yet warmed or concerned for any of these things, or
at least unstable, double-minded and wavering in our Duty; there is one Method
still remaining, which will scarce fail to give a true and lasting bent to our
Minds, and thoroughly engage us in this matter; and that is, the entire
Dedication of our selves to God, without exception and without reserve;
especially and more solemnly at the Blessed Sacrament, as often as the happy
occasion is offered, and then let us see whether we shall fear the World, or
whether that can ever hurt us! Let us make Gods Glory the principal motive and
end of all our Actions, actually advest unto it, and habitually regard it; let
us love God with all our Hearts, and then we shall never endure to hear his
Holy Name profaned without a just and a tender Resentment.

Let us read often the Lives of the Martyrs, and see what they suffered, for
his sake who loved them, and washed them from their Sins in his own Blood.
(Heb. 11.) They were stoned, were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with
the Sword, they endured Trials of cruel mockings and Scourgings, and Bonds and
Imprisonments and the most infamous and painful Deaths, not accepting
Deliverance that they might obtain a better Resurrection, a new and happier
State of things in a better World. They endured all this, in opposition to all
the World, for his sake whom they loved, and who, they knew, did then see them,
and would unspeakably reward them. Here was the Faith and Patience of the
Saints! Here were Christians indeed, and not in empty Name and outward
Profession only! These trampled the World, subdued the Flesh and conquered the
Devil, following the great Captain of their Salvation, as he himself led the
way, with Crimson Banners and Garments rolled in Blood; and shall we pretend to
follow them as they did him, and pray for Grace to do so, and yet be afraid of
a few hard words or Frowns from Fellow Creatures: be unwilling at the expense
of a little Reputation amongst mistaken or ill men, to rescue the Honor of God
and of Religion, and vindicate the Laws and Glory of our Nation and of common
Christianity.

Which is, in truth, the proper and immediate Office of the Magistrate, and all
others must rise up against Evildoers, a^ Assistants with him and in
Subordination to him. If he therefore, like Gallio, cares for none of these
things; if he does not rise up against the workers of Iniquity, how can he
answer his criminal Neglect before the Almighty Judge of all Men, with whom
there is no respect of Persons? If the Subordinate Magistrate refuses to
discharge his own Duty, much more if he discourages those who attempt the
Punishment of Offenders, he is at once guilty of Perjury and Injustice; he is
neither loyal to God nor to his Prince, nor true to his Engagements, nor
faithful to his Country. Blessed be God that there is now such great
Encouragement from our Governors, for every honest Man to act with his utmost
force in this Affair, and to make one attack more upon Vice, one further effort
to recover the Honor, the Virtue, the Happiness of our Nation; I mean the late
Address of our Honorable Representatives in Parliament, which [and his
Majesty's truly Royal Proclamation for the suppression of Vice, in pursuance
thereof; concerning both of which, we may say thus much with decency in
relation to what is past, that they are beyond the Example of former Reigns, and
without vanity in reference of what is to come, that they] will shine in the
Annals of our Country to all Generations. Now when Judgment thus eminently
returns unto Righteousness, who is there that is upright in Heart but will
gladly follow it? None will be refused who sincerely offer themselves even at
the Eleventh Hour. Shall we then stand all the day idle, when the Lord of the
Vineyard calls us out to this painful but glorious Work? Is not the punishment
of Evildoers a thing highly acceptable to Almighty God, and were not
Magistrates instituted by him, as for other great Ends, so to execute Wrath on
those that do Evil; or have not those whose proper business it is to do so and
yet neglect it, just reason to fear lest God should execute his Wrath against
them, and that their Lives should go for the Life of the Offender? Or is there
not still something very bad at the bottom of such a general Negligence, and if
Men were really virtuous themselves, would they not heartily encourage Virtue,
and discourage and punish Vice in others, and even root out all Evildoers from
the City of our God?

And who those Evildoers are, is easily resolved, and they are but too
frequently met with; such as Blasphemers, Swearers, Profane and Atheistical
Persons, the Unclean, and the Adulterer, with whom our Streets do in some parts
of the City still too much abound, and any other open and Scandalous Sinner.
These the Laws of God, the Law of Nations, and the Laws of our Country have
justly branded, as infamous Persons and Evildoers. They were certainly
esteemed such in former Ages, and the Nature of Vice and Virtue is as
unalterable and eternal as that of Good and Evil; and one would think they
should not change with the mode, and that nothing should make the latter a
Disgrace, the former a matter of Glory, or at least a subject of Diversion and
Laughter only in any civilized Nation. But so it is, and is likely to be still
worse if the Magistrate does not exert himself, and put the Laws in Execution
against all such Offenders: and indeed if all People do not more heartily and
unanimously join to assist the Magistrate in so doing; for which there is no
other effectual way but by giving Information against Ill-men and scandalous
Livers.

Good Manners are the Bond and Cement of all Societies, and good Laws the life
of good Manners; and unless these Laws are well executed, it is the same thing
as if we were without them, if not yet worse, because the contempt of the Laws
enhances the Guilt of the Offender, and Impunity renders him still more
obdurate, and they can never be executed, unless Information be given against
those who transgress them.

Magistrates, tho they are called Gods, because their Power is communicated
unto them from the Almighty, yet are they not like him every where present.
They see with the Eyes of other Men, and therefore if private Persons shut
their own Eyes against public Enormities, how is it possible for the
Magistrate either to detect or to punish them? It Is the Glory of Kings to
search out a matter, it is the Glory of all Loyal Subjects to assist them in it;
to Inform against profane and lewd Persons, as freely as to give their
Testimony concerning any other Breaches of the Peace, and to bring those who
glory in their Shame to just Punishment, that others may hear and Fear, and do
no more so wickedly* Is not misprision of Treason against the King of Heaven,
as notorious a misdemeanour as if it were against any Earthly King? What would
the Law say to one who should stifle or conceal a Felony or a Murder, and would
it not look upon him as an Accomplice in the Fact? What should we think our
selves of a Neighbor who should know the Person that had robbed us, and yet
would not discover him? Do we think it any ways infamous to detect an
High-way-man, or to seize him and bring him to Justice? and shall we be only
unconcerned for the Glory of God, and our own and our Neighbors spiritual
Welfare?

To say the Truth, Compassion and Charity, as well as Justice, oblige us to act
in this Affair, and will teach us to behave our selves both with Concern and
with Temper in it. O pity, pity poor Sinners, and pray to God to pity them, who
want the Sense and Grace to pity themselves; but show your pity to them, not by
a cruel Fondness, but by a kind and wholesome Severity. Would you suffer your
dearest Friend to dye for want of Cupping or Bleeding him when you saw him
laboring under the extremest Agonies? Alas these are all our Friends, for a
Christian has no enemies: we are all Brethren in the Profession of
Christianity; we have all one common Lord, should have one Faith, as we have
one Baptism, one God and Father of us all, tho too many are ignorant of him, or
rebellious against him. Why should we suffer such as these to tumble over a
fatal Precipice for fear of disturbing or disobliging them, by pulling them
back with some have and violence? Why should our poor Brother perish for whom
Christ dyed? I Am mistaken if here be not oftentimes the main point and stress
of this Affair. As one great end of punishing an Offender is for the Example of
others, so another end is to make him better, where he is not notoriously
incorrigible: now if you can but once convince him that you love him, and that
even your punishing of him is an effect of it, you are in a fair way to work
upon him; and you have ground to hope that you shall save a Soul and cover a
multitude of Sins.

As for that part of the Application which relates to that Union which ought to
be among good Men against the Workers of Iniquity, I shall turn it chiefly to
those who are already concerned in any Societies for the Reformation of
Manners, or in the Religious Societies. You expect not, my Brethren, any
Flattering Titles, nor dare I give any, lest my Maker should take me away. But
Truth must be spoken, and all due Encouragement ought to be given to such
glorious Undertakings. You are engaged in the best of Works, the preventing
Gods Dishonor; the promoting his Glory and your Countrey's Happiness: you have
not rested satisfied with a monastic Piety or Virtue, with being Good your
selves and then letting the World run which way it pleased; but have
endeavored to better others as well as your selves. Go on in the Name of God
to fight the good Fight and finish your Course, for you know what is laid up
for you; let not go your Hope and Confidence in your great Lord and Master!
Believe, be assured, that if you act sincerely and regularly in this Affair, he
will accept and reward you. Never look back now you have once put your Hand to
the Plough. Since you are so well assured the Work is of God, and it does and
will prosper, tho how much and how long, must be left to him who is the wise
disposer of all things. Who can tell what Mercies, what undeserved Mercies God
may yet have in store for a most Sinful, Ungrateful Nation, For he has mercy on
whom he will have mercy. This we are sure, that none shall miss of his Favor,
who perform those Conditions on which it is offered.

In the mean time, suffer a little, my Brethren! the Word of Exhortation;
remember the Eyes of God, Men and Angels are upon you; be sober, be vigilant,
and forget not who is your Adversary frequently; remember what spirit you ought
to be of, that of the Gospel of Christ, of the meek and lowly Followers of
Jesus. Avoid, as a pest, the saying to your Brother, like the proud Hypocrites
of old, Depart from me I am Holier than thou: Forbid none from casting out
Devils because he follows not with you. Have a care of calling for Fire from
Heaven upon those who do not receive you; a weakness whereof two of Christ's
best Disciples were guilty. Be careful and watchful and humble, and all Earth
and Hell can never hurt you. Praise the Lord of Life and Glory, if he has
touched your Minds with a true sense of your Sins, and given you rational
grounds to believe they are pardoned, for the sake of his dear Son our Lord, on
your hearty and habitual Repentance. Endeavor more and more to pull others out
of the Fire. Think not a private Admonition is sufficient in the case of open
and Scandalous Offenses, any more than it would excuse you in the concealment
of a Traitor, or any other notorious Offender. Be willing, be thankful to be
accounted the Filth and Offscouring of the World; the Disturbers of the
public Peace (by those who themselves notoriously break it) and such as turn
the World upside down, as you know who were called before ye. Think much of
Heaven. Forget not Death. Be constant at Sacraments, in Prayer Public,
Domestic and Private, never neglecting the latter, never when you can with any
convenience be present at it, the former. Neglect not to Sing the High Praises
of God. Remember the Poor, especially Gods Poor. Pity the Afflicted, especially
our dear Brethren who now suffer for the Word of God and the Testimony of
Jesus. Bless God servently, tho you can never do it sufficiently, for that
Peace and Liberty which our Nation now enjoys, and for the public
Discouragement of open and public Wickedness, and be ready to make more
vigorous Attacks than ever against it, now there is so great Encouragement for
it, and so fair an opportunity is offered. Follow the Lamb whithersoever he
goes, who came into the World for this very purpose, that he might destroy the
Works of the Devil, conquer the Kingdom of Satan, and establish the Kingdom of
God in the Hearts of Men; which consists not in Meats and Drinks, in little
distinctions and particularities, but in Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in
the Holy Ghost. Follow him in meekness, patience and humility; bearing the
Cross as he himself did before us, who when he was reviled, reviled not again*
when he suffered threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges
Righteously, and for the Joy that was set before him endured the Cross,
despised the Shame, and is now sat down at the Right Hand of the Majesty on
High.

To conclude all. Let every serious Christian, who has that Integrity and
Uprightness of Heart which the Psalmist here mentions, now consider more
earnestly than ever, how eminently such Designs as these would tend to the
exercising, and consequently the improving and increasing of many Graces or
Holy Habits, of his Prudence, and Patience, and Couroge, and Zeal, and
Meekness, and contempt of the World, and Integrity, and Humility; and yet
further, what great Rewards will he receive for his Faithfulness to God, even
in this World: supposing the worst, that he should suffer in his Estate or Good
Name by the Discharge of his Duty; O the Peace, the Joy, the Triumph, the
exultation of mind which a good Man possesses, when he reflects on any
Sufferings he undergoes for the sake of God, and for the Cause of despised
Religion and Virtue. How light are these Afflictions unto him, which others
would be ready to sink under, and how little does he think they deserve that
Name, when they work out for him such an exceeding and etenral weight of Glory!
He believes, he knows this from certain and infallible Causes; he knows in whom
he has believed: he bids the World do its worst, he has a Reserve beyond it;
his Treasure is not in it; he aspires to that better World, where he knows who
will meet him when this painful Life is ended, receive him into everlasting
Habitations, and say unto him, Well done good and faithful Servant, enter thou
into the Joy of thy Lord.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT
THE Life of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. A^ Heroic Poem:
Dedicated to H^^ most Sacred Majesty. In Ten Books Attempted by Samuel Wesley,
M. A. Chaplain to the most Honourabl^ John Lord Marquess of Normanby and Rector
of Epworth in the County of Lincoln. Each Book illustrate^ by necessary Notes,
explaining al^ the more difficult Matters in the whole History: also a
Prefaratory Discourse concerning Heroic Poetry. The Second Edition revised by
the Author, and improved with the Addition of a large Map of the Holy Land, and
a Table of the Principal Matters. With Sixty Copper Plates by the celebrated
Hand of W. Faithorn Printed by Benj. Motte, for Charle^ Harper at the
Flower-de-Luce over against St. Dunstans Church in FleetStreet. 1697.


