THE Churches PARADOX: OR THE SUBSTANCE OF A SERMON PREACHED at the Place of
Cumbusnethen in a Barn, in the Parish of Cumbusnethen in Clydsdale. By Mr. John
Welsh.

Zechariah 14 Chap. 6. and 7. Verses. And it shall come to pass in that day,
that the Light shall not be clear, nor dark. But it shall be one day which
shall be known to the Lord, not day, nor night: but it shall come to pass that
at evening time it shall be light.

THE TEXT.
Zechariah 14. Chap. 6. and 7. Verses. And it shall come to pass in that Day,
that the Light shall not be clear nor dark. But it shall be one day which shall
be known to the LORD, not Day nor Night: but it shall come to pass that at
evening time it shall be Light.


THere is diverse Cases that befalls the Church, while she is Militant here upon
Earth; Sometimes She shines, and is very bright as the Sun, clear as the Moon,
strong as an Army with Banners: Sometimes again, She is like dark Night; She is
under very great dark Clouds, She walks in Darkness, and has no Light, as it
is in Isaiah 50.10. But there is sometimes also that she is in a Case different
from both these, and that is, she has some Light, and some Darkness in her
Case, so that it can neither be said, that she altogether Shines, nor yet that
she is altogether in Darkness. This is the Case that Zechariah here speaks of
at this time in this place: If the Light should neither be Clear nor Dark,
neither altogether so clear as to be called Noontide of the Day; nor yet
altogether so Dark as to be called Midnight with her: But how then? but like
the Evening-tide, a little after the Sun set, before the Night come on, there
should be some Light and some Darkness in her Case. A mixed Dispensation of
Wrath and Mercy should be letten out upon the Kirk And there is some
comfortable things promised to the Kirk, while she is in this Case. And First,
It is promised to her, that this her sad Case shall be but for one day; that
is, but a wie while, a very short time.

Secondly, It is promised to the Kirk, that at Even, it shall be Light; that
is, when there is greatest appearance of sader and darker Night, then
immediately the LORD shall cause the Day Spring from on High to arise upon the
Kirk.

Now from these we shall speak but to Three or Four Things by way of Doctrine.

And the First Thing we see from the Words is this, That sometimes the LORDs
Dispensations with the Kirk is such, that they can neither be said to be Dark
nor Clear, neither like Night nor like Day; but somewhat of Light, and somewhat
of Darkness in the Dispensation; Somewhat of Judgment, and somewhat of Mercy
may be the Case of the Kirk.

Secondly, A second Thing we notice of this, That the time of the Kirks Trouble
though sometimes the LORD is pleased to lengthen, and to make it long; yet
sometimes also, as it is here, it shall be but a short while, and but for one
day.

Thirdly, That the Kirks Trouble though it be but for a short time, and but for
one day, and no body kens when it will end: Yet for the Comfort of the Kirk, it
is a day known to the LORD, though neither Enemies nor Friends kens when the
Day of Delivery will come, yet it is a day known to the LORD: It is a limited
time that GOD has set the bounds off.

Fourthly, That when the Kirk in all appearance and probability looks like a
thicker and blacker darkness and greater Desolations, then very shortly the
LORD will make Light to arise, and the Day Spring from on High to arise upon
the Kirk, even at the evening, at evening-tide it shall be Light.

Now a Work shortly to each of these Things: And now for the first which was
this, That the Kirk may be sometimes in a Case that can neither be Dark nor
Clear, neither Dark nor Light, neither Night nor Day; but as it were, somewhat
in her Case that looks Dark like, and somewhat in her Case that looks Bright
and Lightsome like again: This is Prophesied to be in the days of the Gospel,
that in the days of the Gospel there should be letten out upon the Kirk, such a
Dispensation as this: For this Prophecy has a reference to the days of the
Gospel. The Church of GOD will be sometimes in that Case, when it will not nor
cannot be said, that she is altogether Light, nor altogether Dark, nor that it
is altogether Night, nor altogether Day with her: But how then? Not Day nor
Night, but a mixture of both: Some thing that looks Light like in her Case, and
some thing that looks Dark like in her Case. It was so with the Church of
Israel in those days, when she was in the Land of Egypt; there was some thing
that looked Dark like in Her Case, and some thing that looked Light like in Her
Case; Again some thing that looked like GODs forgetting and forsaking of Her,
and some thing that looked like GODs Remembering and Delivering of Her again.
That which looked Lightsome and White like in Her Case was this, that the LORD
gave Intimation to Moses that He had seen their Affliction in Egypt, and was
come down to Deliver them; And had sent him Commissioner to Pharaoh to bid him
let the Children of Israel go, for he would have them out of the Land of Egypt
to serve Him: That looked Light like, that was Day like in their Case, and a
White Spot in their Cloud: And there was sometime they knew this, and had the
understanding of it, they rejoiced and was glad, and no question praised it
much, that was White like: But again, that which looked Dark like in their Case
was this, that instead of being Delivered out of their Affliction, they have a
New Affliction laid on: And Pharaoh instead of letting them go, he makes their
Bondage stronger and greater. This looked very Dark like, and the People grew
all Dejected and Heartless, and they gave no Thanks to GOD for this, nor to
Moses for his Pains; this looked very Dark like: So it was also with the Church
in the Days of the New Testament, some things there that looked very Dark like
in Her Case, and some things looked Light like in it.

And First of all, This looked Dark like in it, that when all the Church that
was at Jerusalem was called, the Honest Man Stephen was stoned, that was to
begin the New Testament Kirk with; that was Dark like: But here something yet,
that was Lightsome like with it again, the Ministers when scattered, went every
where Preaching the Gospel, and their Preaching had Good Effect upon many for
bringing them into JESUS CHRIST: Ministers was willing to Preach, and People
was apt to Hear; so that their Out-casting was their Gathering through GODs
Blessing; that looks Light like again. So in the time of the Babylonish
Captivity when the King of Babylon led the Church of Israel into Captivity from
Jerusalem, that was Dark like; the Temple is all burnt and broken down; the
Church and People led into Captivity, Enemies set up; the People of GOD
overthrown, that looked very Dark like: But this looked somewhat Lightsome like
again in the Dispensation, that the LORD kept still some Prophets and
Teachers among them, to point out to them their Duty, and what Israel ought to
do: They were not kept without Means, for they had the Word and Prophets
among them, that was Light like; and withal, it was manifested, that at the
end of the 70 Years that should be accomplished on them at Babylon, that then
they should be brought back again, and enjoy their own Land again, and their
former Privileges; this was White like, as ye may see, wherein both their
Conditions is set out in that 29. of Jeremiah 10. Verse. For thus says the
LORD, that after seventy years is accomplished at Babylon I will Visit you, I
will perform my Good Word toward you, in causing you to return to this Place.
There was Seventy years that was to be accomplished at Babylon under Captivity,
that was sad; that was Dark like: but there was a Return to their former
Privileges again after the Seventy years was accomplished; that was Blythsome
and Lightsome like again: They were casten out of the Kirk that was at
Jerusalem, that was sad: But they were a Kirk among themselves, that was
Lightsome like again. They were casten out of the Church that was at Jerusalem,
that was sad; but they were not casten out of the Heart and Mind of GOD, that
was Light like again; they had the Manifestations of His Good Will to bring
them back to their former Privileges, that was Light like.

Now that we may Apply this to our present Case, for that is the thing that we
stand most in need of: I say for Application, We may apply this to our present
Case; we may say it is the present Case of the Church of Britain and Ireland
this day; There is something looks very black like in our present Dispensation;
and there is something looks very white like and day like in our present
Dispensation, that is as so many white Spots in our Cloud, and is something Day
like in the midest of our Night. And in the First Room we shall speak a word to
what is very Black like in our present Dispensation and there be these Black
like Tokens in our present Case.

First, The LORD has taken away His Ordinances, that is a very Night like
Dispensation, a very Black like thing in our Case: I assure you it is very Dark
like. Many of the People of GOD they cannot see throw it: It is so sad, that he
should have emptied so many Congregations at once, is very Dark like.

Secondly, This is very Dark like in the present Dispensation, that there is
none to own Zions Case at this Time; all the Great Ones for the most part, they
pass by Her Case: All our Nobles has turned their back upon GOD and the Kirk,
and would command all their Subjects to do so likewise: And all that would look
a warm look to Zion, is the butt of their Indignation; that looks very Dark
like, that is a Dispensation very Night like. The Gentiles has also for the
most part turned their back upon Zion, and will own Her with no Help, and will
show Her no Compassion for Her Comfort, that looks Dark like; That is a very
Night like Dispensation.

Thirdly, This looks very Dark like in our present Dispensation, that the
People of GOD is so full of Divisions, that they cannot have Light together to
be of one Mind, in the matter of Sin and Duty; but that which one says is Sin,
another says it is Duty; one Godly Man having a Principle of Godliness, says
such a Thing is a Duty, another Godly Man says, na; but it is a Sin: This is
very Dark like; This is an Evidence of greater Darkness, when we cannot agree
in Judgment upon what is Sin, and what is Duty: But one of the People of GOD
says, such a thing is a Sin: Another says, na; but it is a Duty: O sad that
this should be among the Godly, even between the Godly themselves, it is very
dark like; it were nothing and it were so between us and our Enemies; it were
nothing to see this betwixt the Godly and the Wicked; but to see it among the
Godly themselves, it is very sad and dark like.

Fourthly, This looks Dark like in our present Dispensation, that there is so
much failing and fainting in the Ways of GOD as there are; and so great a
turning aside to crocked Paths; and that there are so few Valiant for Truth,
that is very dark like in the present Dispensation: This is also dark like,
that there is none that knows the time how long our darkness shall continue:
There is very few to whom the LORD is Revealing any thing of His Mind anent the
Delivery of His Work. He has hid Himself in His Anger. He has hid Himself in
His Wrath. He has shut up Himself as within a Stone-wall, and will not Reveal
any thing of His Mind to us; that is Dark like. This is also very Dark like in
the present Dispensation, that none stirs up himself to lay hold on Him; and
that there is so few to stand in the Gap to turn away His Wrath. And this is
also very Dark like, that all our Public Ordinances is gone; so likewise we
have letten all our Private Meetings go with them: As it were the Rulers by a
Wicked Law, has chased us all away from a Part of our Duty, and we have run
away from another Part of it unchased; They have violently shut us away from
the Public Ordinances, and we have run away from the Private Meetings of the
People of GOD, and we have not studied to Edify them: As if we were loosed from
our Ministry, when we were shut away by a Wicked Law; this looks very Dark like
also, and is an Evidence of greater Darkness, that there is so many Faithful,
Able and Honest Ministers taken away by Death at this Time; Some by the LORDs
Hand, and that by an ordinary Death; and others, that Enemies has Cruelly
Executed; and so there is many an Useful Instrument of His Work taken away;
which indeed might have been Useful Instruments, if the LORD had kept them
alive; Each one of them might have been as a Thousand, and if helped of GOD,
would have been very Useful for a Glorious Work: And now their being Removed
and Taken away, looks very Sad and Dark like, and is very Black like in the
present Dispensation; that the LORD (as it were) shines upon all the Designs of
the Enemy, and Discountenances (as it were) any Attempt of His People, that
they have for their own Defense; This is very Dark like, that almost there is
nothing that the Enemies takes in Hand, but it Thrives with them, and comes to
pass: And nothing that the People of GOD takes in Hand as a Mean of Defense,
but there are some mislook or other comes upon it; that is very Dark like, that
their Attempts and Endeavors Thrives not: It is also very Dark like in the
present Dispensation, that there is so much Profanity and Atheism like to get
footing among us: and instead of Professing the Protestant Religion; Folk is
not only not Professing it, but they are Denying it: And Folk is not only
Falling away from Godliness, but Falling away from the Profession of it: And
many turning Popish in our Kirk; This is very Dark and Night like.

And Lastly, This is very Dark like in the present Dispensation, that the more
GOD strikes, we are the more hardened; ay the more we are smitten, our Hearts
is the more hard: All these things looks very Dark and Night like upon the
Church of Britain and Ireland. These are very Black Tokens of a Sader and
Darker Night: But yet (as I have said before) there is also some Light like
Tokens in these Dispensations of GOD toward His People and Church at this
Time. So that our Dispensations that we meet with at this Time, are made up of
Light and Darkness: Something of Light, and something of Darkness is in the
present Dispensation; that the Church in these Lands is trysted with. For as we
have many Black like Tokens in our Dispensations to make our Hearts sad; so we
have some Light like Tokens also, that is as so many White Spots in the midest
of our Cloud that gives us ground of Hope, and I shall Name four or five of
them.

And the First Thing that looks Clear like and is some Token for Good, which is
a White Spot in the midest of our Cloud; The LORD is giving His People an
Answer at this Time, both of their own Prayers, and of many others, that has
gone before them that has died in the Faith. I say, He is now giving the
People of GOD an Answer of all their Prayers, and they never ken of it. What
was their Prayers say ye? Wa, was not this their Prayers that GOD would take
some Effectual way of Purging of His House, and of making His Inns Clean, and
of making Himself a Clean House? And now, is He not giving an Excellent Answer
to all these our Prayers, though we little Observe it? This was the Prayers of
the People of GOD, and they have now gotten an Answer. For Presbyteries did but
little in this: There was ay some Unworthy Ministers kept in, and Elders that
should not have been kept in, and because Formal, and Legal Process could not
be gotten against them, they were ay kept in, and not casten out, and they
being kept in, were ay as Pricks and Thorns in the Flesh and Sides of the
Honest Party; and this put them ay to their Prayers again, that GOD would take
some Effectual Way to Purge His House. And whether He be Answering these
Prayers or no, Judge ye and see. O but He is like now to take some Effectual
Way to Purge His House of many Naughty Ministers and Elders, that otherwise
would not have been casten out in have; He is doing more for the Purging of His
House in one Year now by this present Dispensation, than could have been down
in twenty Years by Presbytery. This is also Light like, that GOD is taking such
an Effectual Method, and thereby Answering the Prayers of the Saints for making
to Himself a Tight Building again, that's Light like.

Secondly, There is another Thing that looks very Light like, and Day like
again in the present Dispensation, and that is, all those that GOD has brought
to the Stage at this time to bear Testimony for His Cause, they have been
helped of Him to carry so Honorably for his Cause, that they have put Great
Respect upon it by their Sufferings, and has made it more Glorious than ever
before: So that He has made the Cause more Glorious by the Suffering of these
that has suffered for it; than ever they would have made it by their Actions,
and they had lived never so long. So that there is more Honor put upon the
Cause and Work of GOD by the Martyrdom of my Lord Argyle and precious Mr
Guthrie, and some others, that they have Banished, nor could have been put upon
it by all their Actions, and they had lived never so long: This is some little
White Spot in the midest of our Cloud, that Dying and Living, He makes ay His
People put Respect upon His Honest Cause.

Thirdly, There is something White like in the present Dispensation, that the
LORD is ay making that which Enemies are making and designing for the utter
Ruin of the Work of GOD to put themselves the further behind, and give
themselves the more ado: and also by consequence of that to breed some more
ground of hope to His People, and so it contributes to the Advantage of the Low
Work of GOD, and has Advanced it a great stap. There is some other Acts that
they have put forth against His Cause and People, has Advanced the Low Work of
GOD a great stap, the cruelty of their Designs, accomplished in their Wicked
Acts, has done meikle Good to this Work, tho they intended it for Ill: Some of
their Acts that they have now put forth, has put some Ministers to the Fields
to preach, that if they had not been so Cruel, would have sitten still at home:
But now the Cruelty of their Acts has put them to the Fields to preach, and
People to the Fields to hear them, which otherways would have sitten still in
their Nests, if so be their Acts had not been so Cruel; Their Acts that way
has done meikle Good to the Cause of GOD: For it has likewise bred in the
Hearts of the very Profane, a loathing of them and their Way, and a love to the
Truth more than before. Their sending out to Quarter, and Cess, and Plunder,
has been so far from Advancing of their own Cause, though they designed it for
that end, that it has brought many of their side often it, that was even almost
Complied and Banded with them, and had a Respect to them before this their
Cruelty I say it has brought many to turn their back on them, that was
Adhering to them, and beginning to Comply with them. This is also White like in
the present Dispensation, and is some little White Spot in the midest of our
Cloud, and gives us ground of Hope, that the LORD will arise yet with the Light
Day of the Gospel to the poor Church of Britain and Ireland, and that is, that
the LORD is beginning to plead the Cause of his People that when we are shut
up, and none left to plead our Cause, He is saying, that he will plead it
Himself, and in a manner indeed He has said, Put up your Sword and I will draw
Mine: He has said to His People, Put up your Sword, and fylle not your Fingers
on them; but I will let you see that I will lay them Heaps upon Heaps; I will
let you see what I will do with the Great Noblemen and Ladies that break my
Covenant at London, that would set their feet down upon the LORDs Ground, they
could not set their Noble Feet upon the LORDs Earth when they went down to the
Breach of GODs Covenant; but I shall gar them (says the LORD) be harled to
Holes and Dyke-sides where their Carcases shall be stinking upon the Ground;
when the Populus City London where all this Mischief was first contrived
against the Work of GOD, and the Covenant first burnt. I say all these
Mischiefs contrived and acted, GOD has dung His Sword against them ( viz. by
the Visitation or Plague) and laid them Heaps upon Heaps. GOD has given His
People a Seeing Mends of them, so that they are forced to pity their Enemies, and
say alas! alas for them, and Father alas for that, that is come upon them; this
is White like and is as a White Spot in our Cloud, and says, that GOD will yet
Avenge the Quarrel of a broken Covenant, for He is beginning to do so already.

Lastly, We have this to look too which is Clear like in the present
Dispensation, and is a White Spot in the midest of our Cloud, and that is, The
heinous Perfidelity of the Prelatical Party; that says, that GOD will be about
to be Avenged on them: We have this to be a Ground of Hope, that we had even
all those Men once in our Day, that is now crying down this Work, and spitting
upon it (as it were) and laboring to get it at under: These Men once in a day
cried it up, as fast as we do now; They cried up the Covenant, and cried up the
Cause, and put it up upon others to do so, and Suffer for, as well as the
Suffering Servants of GOD that are now Suffering for its Doing. I know there is
some of you in this Parish kens something of it, and has been Witness to it;
that once he that is turned Prelat among you, swore the Covenant before you,
and was very forward in it; and in a word, spoke als much for it as any other
about him; and swore you to your Covenant at your Sacrament ( viz. Mr. James
Hamilton Bishop of Galloway) and then shoke his lap, and said, So let GOD shake
every Man out of his Inheritance that bides not by this Covenant. We have this
Advantage of all these Enemies that they cried once, and that not long ago up
the Work, that we this Day own as fast as they are now crying it down; and
cried down Prelacy as fast as ever we cried it down, and does cry it down this
Day: But if they hold it as a Principle to be the Right Government of the
Church of CHRIST, it had been some Manliness in them to have cried it up: But
in this they are Beasted, that they hold ay be that Side that there is most
outward Advantage in; their Persidy says, that GOD will be avenged on them, and
gives His People ground of Hope: For the last Years they cried down Prelacy,
and up the Work and Cause of GOD as fast as any Body, and then it was but even
Saul among the Prophets with them: This may be a ground of Hope to us, and a
White Spot in our Cloud; Now so much for the Doctrine.

The Second Thing we would speak a Word to from the Text, is this, But it shall
be one Day, that shall be known to the LORD.

The Dictrine is that, Though sometimes the LORD may lengthen out the Trouble
of His Kirk for a long time, yet there is other times in which it will not be
long, but a short time, for one day, and that is, First, When Enemies Cruelty
is so great, and they are very Violent; then it shall be but for one day. Now
it is not long that they will Reign, when they are very Cruel and Violent in
their Course. Haman he had one day, a little while, and O but he was Cruel, and
the Acts that he made was to the utter overthrow of the Kirk of GOD, and he
will have it done all in one day; he will have all done in a little time; no
peace and peace, but he will have all done in one day well: Therefore the Kirk
has but one day of Trouble; He will not let her ly under this Tyrany, when
Enemies is very Cruel, but presently gives her an outgate. And so at the
beginning of the New Testament Church, there rose then a great heat of
Persecution; the honest man Stephen was stoned, and a great Persecution was
raised, but presently the LORD gave rest throughout all the Churches; but giff
it was Cruel, the LORD suffered it not to be long. That we may apply this to
our present Case and Dispensation this day, then it says our Darkness will not
be long.

First, This even says it, The great Violence of this Party that is now up, and
upon foot; the Violence now used by this Prelatical party against us, that
hardly would the like have been used by Turks, let be by Men of the same
Profession; yet their Acts has been, and is full of Violence against us: What
Violence was in that Act in the midest of Winter, to put so many Families to
seek their Lodging, and Winter Quarters, and in the middle of Winter to make
Desolate the whole Land from Preaching, that they shall not have a Word spoken
to them that now stands in need of a Word of Direction and Comfort in the
present Case.

Secondly, There was great Violence that was used by them in their taking of
the Lives of the Martyrs; what Violence did they use against them, they were
not only content to take their Lives, but they would have the most honorable
part of their Body, to wit, their Head denied the honor of a Burial; the like
of which was never done to Protestant Ministers by Protestant Ministers before,

Thirdly, Those that was banished it would not satisfy their Humor to give
them a months time to provide for Banishment, or so long time as was necessar
for expeding of their Affairs, but presently commands them to sail with
Violence and Tuke of Drum; so that they might neither see Wife nor Children, if
they came not to them: And then what Cruelty was used by them sinsyne in this
Land by Scourging some, and burning them upon the Cheeks, and then Banishment;
and I doubt who could express their Fault before six Judicious Auditors And
then what Cruelty was used against that Faithful Minister (to wit) Mr. Smith,
in putting him in the Thieves Hole with Irons upon him among Madmen, and giff
ye would know all his Fault, it was even because he would not call the Bishop
my Lord; and then because his Friends had access to him there, where they
communicated something to him for the Supply of his Necessity, they deny him
the Privilege, and put him in another Hole where no access is to be had to him
by none of his Friends to come to him and comfort him; this was great Cruelty:
This and such like says, that their day will not be long Ye know that because
Satan was shortly to be trodden under foot, therefore he was very Violent; and
so because GOD has a Party to Destroy, when they have accomplished their Work;
Therefore he gives them leave to tread them underfoot, and to go fast forward.
We thought that the former Bishops ran fast till they were in the Pit; yet he
gives their Liberty to put more Work through their Hand in one day, nor the
former Bishops would have done in a year: Now this speaks out also, that He
will not let this Trouble ly long upon His People, lest they make His People
put out their Hand to Iniquity. His People is even so sore put at, and so
taisled with them, by such Burdens that they put upon them, that if we think
our LORD JESUS CHRIST have a mind to keep His People free of Sin, and keep
their Garments Clean at this Time, and bring His People through as we know he
will; Then we think He will not let His People continue long under the Trouble;
for Enemies is very Cruel. Ye may read their Cruelty in that 51. of Isaiah 22.
chap. 23. verse, where the Violence of a parallel People is held out; Thus says
the LORD thy GOD that pleads the Cause of His People, I have taken the Cup of
Trembling out of thy Hand, and given it to the Hand of your Enemies, who has
said, bow down the Soul that we may go over. There the Wrongs they are doing to
the People of GOD; It is not their Bodies that will satisfy them; but either
they will have the Mastery of their Consciences or nothing else will satisfy
them. They will either have their Souls to bow down that they may gang over, or
they have no Satisfaction at all. The People of GOD would bear with them, or
make less din, if it were only their Bodies that they were seeking Victory
over; but they will have their Consciences also, they will have their Souls to
bow down that they may gang over.

Well farther I would make this Use of it, If the Churches Affliction last but
one day, because Enemies are very Cruel as ye may see them, then labor to bide
it out; Many a Man will repent it that he has not bidden out longer; Many a Man
will think with himself immediately in the day of their Delivery, O giff I had
stayed it out one day longer; O giff I had paid the other Find, and bidden the
other Stress and the other Pressere I had stained my Conscience: I may allude
to that word of Samuels to Saul, ye may ken that Samuel said to Saul he bides
him bide a while from offering a Sacrifice till seven days were ended; this was
the Word of the LORD to him, and then Samuel promised to be at him; well Saul
begins to be sore put at by the Philistines, and comes under Hardships; and so
he looking for no better of it, he disobeyed, and or ever the time come, he
goes and offers a Sacrifice, as many do when they begin to be sore pressed and
put at, they will Resolve that they will even Disobey the Word of GOD a little,
and go over the belly of their Light, and cross their Conscience, and go over
altogether. But well, Saul has no sooner offered the Sacrifice, but als soon
Samuel comes. O Fool thinks he with himself giff I had stand it out one day
longer, then it had been well. Could ye not stay it out one day longer? Can ye
not Suffer a Day Man? Can ye not endure to have the Cross upon your Back one
day? What if He had put it to you to bear it all your Days, behoved ye not to
have done it, before ye had done Worse; Will ye not be content to bear it one
day? It shall be one Day that shall be known to the LORD. O say ye, I wad bide
it out and I kent how long it would continue; but alas I cannot tell when that
day will be. Well says the LORD, indeed that is true, I will neither let
Friends nor Foes wit of that Day; But it is a Day known to the LORD: Let that
satisfy you; It is a Day known to Me, that Loves you as well as ye do your
selves, and there the Point. The Day of the Kirks Trouble, and how long it will
continue, or how soon it will end, is a Day that He keeps Secret, and neither
Reveals to Friends nor Foes: He will not let Enemies be Disposers of the Kirks
Trouble, for then it would last too long: He will not let Friends be Disposers
of it, for they would take the Short-cut of it, and it would last too short; It
is a Day known to the LORD: There is three Things here.

First, He knows when it will begin, and has the disposing of it as to the
beginning of it; it cannot begin a Moment sooner than He has determined.

Secondly, He has the Disposing of it as to the Darkness of it; He kens how
many Dark Clouds, and how Thick the Darkness will be upon the Kirk. And,

Thirdly, He kens also when it shall close, and all the Enemies of the World
shall not get it lengthened one hour, not not a Moment shall they lengthen it
longer. So I say the LORD has the Continuing and Disposing of the Churches
Trouble as to the Timing of it, and as to the Manner of it, and as to the
Period and Close of it, and all the World shall not get the Church holden a
Moment longer in Affliction, although it be always their Design. How long think
ye Pharaoh thought to have kept Israel under Egyptian Bondage? no doubt even
to the End of the World, and I nothing question but they thought so themselves
a little before they were delivered, that they would never win out of it; But
though the Devil and Enemies of the Kirk of GOD, set their Time to be at the
End of the World; yet GOD has set His Time also, and that was not their Time;
but it was that same Day 400 and 30 Years that they came into Egypt, that same
very Night they Marched out of Egypt; that same very Night was their Bondage
done: They might stay no longer, that same very Night behoved they to go: Might
they not have stayed till the Morn? No. Frae the Time was done, they might not
stay a Moment longer; that same very Night they behoved to March.

Now the Last Word is, at Evening Time it shall be Light, it shall be Light, it
shall be Light, and they had all sworn the contrary it shall be Light; and
Prelates and Malignants would all gather together against the Church as a Thick
Cloud, yet it shall be Light like, and it shall be Light at Evening that is
more; that even when Folk will expect or may expect a Dark Hour, then it shall
be Light at evening time when every Body will think a Dark Night is coming on
them etc. So the Note is this, that when most Darkness is suspected, then
immediately the LORD shall cause Light to arise on the Church. There is Two
Things we would speak a Word too:

The First is this, That notwithstanding the Kirk being in great Trouble for a
Time, yet She shall not continue in it; but it shall be Light.

Secondly, I shall speak a Word to this, That it shall be Light when it is even
at the Darkest Hour.

For the First, Though the Church be in Darkness for a Time, yet She shall be
Light, Why? Wa GOD is Strong enough to bring Light to the Church in Opposition
to Poor Pieces of Clay; since He has promised to make a Lamp always to shine
before His Anointed.

Secondly, It shall be Light, for GOD is Wise enough to bring Light about to
Her, though Men cannot see what Way it will come; He is Strong enough and Wise
enough to bring it about, both in Opposition to the Malice of Men and the Wyles
of Men; and for Grounds of Comfort to you (that are His People) that He will do
so, I shall give you these two.

And First of all, There is some Light already in the midest of our Darkness.
Secondly, It shall be Light; the People of GOD shall have Light; Light shall
shine for the Righteous: The Son of Righteousness shall arise with Healing
under His Wings: For He has made all His Friends within these Lands to look
for Light; they are all made to hope for Light, and lippens for it; this is
their Expectation Dying and Living; this they live in the hope of, and this
they Dye in the Faith of, because He has said, the Expectation of the Poor
shall not perish, Psalms 9.18. Thirdly, It shall be Light in this Generation,
because if no more Light would arise upon us, this would be a great
Discouragement for People in another Generation that owns GOD and His Way, when
it grew Dark with them, and a Cloud fell upon them; it grew Dark with you
Generation (say they) and they wan never out of it; they wan never from under
the Cloud, and so we think neither will we: This would put them out of all hope
of all Recovery of Light any more. Hence now since He has His People to bring
throw many Various Troubles, one after another, and has Truth to Convoy them
from one Generation to another, and His People to bear up that Way: There
though it were not for our sakes, yet for the Generation to come, that they may
not be utterly Discouraged when a Cloud and Darkness falls on them: Therefore
He will have Light to arise upon us; It shall be Light.

Fourthly, It shall be Light: There is this Ground for it, the LORD is putting
some more Spirits in His Ministers and People than before. He is beginning to
Work some more Light and Life at the Hearts of His People; Though it is true,
we are all far from the Thing that we should beat; yet some Ministers has more
Heart to Venture to Preach, and People has more Heart to Venture to Hear nor
they had before: This says it shall be Light.

But next, at Evening it shall be Light; It shall not only be Light, but it
shall be Light at the Evening; that is, when the greatest Darkness is looked
for: There the Point; The Church and People of GOD is never nearer hand a
Delivery and Daylight, then when it is Darkest; The Church of GOD is never
nearer hand Daylight, then when it is Darkest with Her: When in all Human
Appearance there is ay a Darker, and Darker-night coming, that is ay a great
Evidence of drawing near to the Light. Israel Light in Egypt came when in all
Men's Eyes it seemed to grow Darker, for their Bondage and Slavery is made
greater, their Task doubled; they are put to Impossibilities, they are
forbidden to have Straw given them, and yet to fulfill the Teal of their Brick;
They are put to impossibilities, and when put to Impossibilities, then it grows
Light. And if ye would spear-when the Church in these Lands will be Delivered,
it will be shortly after Ministers and People are put to Impossibilities; and
is there not something of that come forth already in some of their Acts,
wherein Ministers are charged to Flit Twenty Miles from their own Parish-Kirk,
and many such Acts which are like that, which the People of Israel was put to
in Egypt, which was Impossibilities; Go get you Straw, yet fulfill the Peal of
your Brick.

Well then when it is Darker nor ever it was before, then gather ye the more
Hope from it, that shortly it shall be Light; ay the Darker it grow, gather the
more Hope of Light; ay when there comes an New Act forth more Severe and
Crueller than the former, then bless GOD for that; your Delivery is nearer than
before, that is ay a New Token of Light: At Evening it shall be Light, That is
a New Token that Light is not far off. Indeed if ye look upon Things by Human
Reason, ye will plead your selves out; but we must plead by GODs Word and
Promise, and that Way we will plead our selves in: For that is contrare to
Human Reason, that at Evening it shall be Light. O say ye we were never so sore
put at as we are now; we were never so Stressed and Pressed as we are now: It
may be ye in this Place has not met with it yet; but Galloway and the West of
Scotland has met with it: Well, when this comes to your Door that ye are so
sore put at, wa all the better of that, it is a Token of Delivery, at Evening
it shall be Light. I shall say no more, the LORD bless what has been spoken
unto you.

Let (...)

