THE TROUBLE AND CURE OF A Wounded Conscience Set out in a SERMON Preached in
St. Mary's Church at Gates-head, in the County Palatine of Durham.

Upon Isaiah 57. Verse 21. There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked. By
RICHARD WERGE, A. M. Rector of that Church.

LONDON: Printed for Joseph Hall, at the Angel on Tine-Bridge, New Castle upon
Tine. 1685.

Isaiah 57. Verse 21. There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked.
WE read that Melchisedeck, who was King of Salem, King of Peace, was also King
of Righteousness. And the Psalmist tells us, that Righteousness and Peace have
kissed each other, Psalm. 85. 10. And the Prophet Isaiah 32. 17, 18. tells us,
That the work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness,
quietness: the Apostle joins Peace and Holiness together, Heb. 12. 14. Thus we
see that Peace and Righteousness, and Peace and Holiness, are like Hippocrates
his Gemelli, and like Rebekah's Twins, that went together; they are a most
lovely pair, which we meet in Scripture hand in hand together, like two
Turtle-doves that feed together and sleep together; and indeed these things,
which (in Scripture) God has so joined together, men must not put asunder; but
are to be looked upon as the Root and Branch, and the Fountain and Stream which
always go together; and as the two Tables of the Law, which ought not to be
severed.

Men must not think to sit quietly under their own Vines and Figg-trees, if
they disquiet God by their Sins; nor must they think to have inward-peace, so
long as they work Abominations. Have you seen the Shadow following the
Substance? As naturally does Anxiety and Trouble follow Sin. The rouling of the
Seas and the blowing of the Winds is not more natural, than for Sin to be
accompanied with trouble and horror, Sin being the true mortal-cause thereof.
In Heaven there is no fear nor trouble, because in Heaven there is no Sin. Our
first Parents conversed with God in Paradise very confidently; they never grew
timorous till they grew sinful; so soon as Adam Sinned, he presently became
acquainted with horror.

Zophar speaking of a wicked man, Job 20. 20, 22, 24. says thus: Surely he
shall not feel quietness; the bow of steel shall strike him thorough, terrors
are upon him: A wicked man being without God, and without Christ, is like
Noah's Dove without the Ark, in a restless condition. Tribulation and anguish
to every soul that sins, Romans 2. 9. What peace, so long as thy Mother
Jesabels Whoredoms and Witchcrafts are many in number? From whence come wars
and fightings among you? Come they not hence, even of your lusts that war in
your members? James 4. 1. What the Comoedian said of a person, may be truly
said of Sin, Davus hic perturbat omnia. It is Sin that makes all our
disturbances.

Holiness freeth men from torment, either by preventing the cause of it, or
directing to the cure: It removes the chief grounds of trouble and disquiet,
and it ministers all the true causes of Peace and Tranquillity of mind. (...):
Purity possesses men with an assurance of the best things, but Sin makes the
condition of men to be full of trouble and unquietness: Sin has been the
occasion of Wars between Kingdoms and Nations, so that thousands have been
slain, Cities, Towns, and Kingdoms have been made heaps of Rubbish and
dissolate Wildernesses, full of Briers and Thorns, and habitations for wild
Beasts, Dragons, and Owls, and other doleful Creatures. Sin has been an
occasion of much unquietness in the Spirits of men: there are many instances
and examples of this in Scripture, and in History; I will give you as it were
an handful out of a full Sack.

Cain when he had slain his Brother Abel, was a Fugitive and a Vagabond,
afraid that whosoever should meet him should slay him; crying out, That his
punishment was greater than he could bear, Genesis 4. Belshazzar's countenance was
changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his loins were
loosed, and his knees smote one against another, Dan. 5. In the New Testament,
we find Herod perplexed after the murdering of John, Luke 9. we find Judas
after his betraying Christ, so filled with despair, that he hanged himself,
Matthew. 27. 4, 5. We find the unworthy guest speechless; and Felix trembling
when Paul reasoned of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come, Acts 24.
25. We find (in History) Cajaphas the High Priest, who gathered the Council
against Christ, and suborned false Witnesses against him, was so perplexed that
he killed himself. Pontius Pilate, who condemned our Savior, soon after fell
into disgrace with the Roman Emperor Caligula, and was sent for by him to
Rome, to answer to some Accusations made against him; but by the way he fell
into such terrors of Conscience, as that he hanged himself. Nero that monster
of mankind, who most unnaturally murdered his Mother Agripina, and his Wives,
and his Tutours Seneca and Lucan, and fired the City of Rome; and then charged
it upon the Christians (that so they might be exposed to the fury of the
people) had at length such an Hell in his Conscience, as that he could rest
neither day nor night. Otho that murdered Galba, Cajus Marius that bloody
Tyrant in Rome, Tiberius the Emperor, Pausanias the Lacedoemonian King, And
Richard the Third (here in England;) these were all of them troubled with
fearful Dreams, and all of them felt the terrors and the lashes of Conscience
so violent, that they could take no rest.

And now, Would you know the occasions of this? Why, they are four.

First, The Law. Secondly, Sin. Thirdly, Satan.
And Fourthly, Conscience.

First, The Law is an occasion of this: The promulgation of the Law upon Mount
Sinai, was in a dreadful manner, with signs of Terror and the effects of
Terror; the Mount on which it was given burnt with fire, with darkness,
clouds, and thick darkness, Duet. 4. a tempest, and the sound of a trumpet, and
the voice of words; so terrible was the sight and voice, that Moses himself (a
man eminent in Grace) did exceedingly fear and quake. From the time of Adam
unto Moses, the Law of Nature was almost obliterated; and when God set out the
lively Image, the draught and abstract of it by Moses; it was in that dreadful
manner, that it flashed wrath upon the fallen Creature, and possessed those
that heard it with a Spirit of fear, terror, and trembling; the Law given upon
Mount Sinai, gendered unto Bondage, Gal. 4. 24. it was a ministration of death
and condemnation, it was a cuting and a killing letter, 2 Cor. 3. 6, 7, 9. I
have slain them by the mouths of my Prophets: they that escaped the sword of
Hazel and Jehu, were to be slain by the sword of Elisha, 1 Kin. 19. 17. The
word of God is compared to a two edged-Sword; the Gospel has one Edge to slay
Sin in the Believer; and the Law has another Edge to slay the Impenitent
Sinner. I have hewed them by the prophets, Hos. 6. 5. It is like that Sword,
Genesis 3. 24. that turned every way to keep Adam out of Paradise, so does the Law
in the Conscience of a Sinner, forbidding him (during his Agony) to enter into
the Paradise of comfortable thoughts.

The Law purely considered, without any respect had to the Covenant of Grace,
was given to discover Sin, to proclaim Wrath and Curses to the Sinner. The Law
so considered, persuades a Sinner that all those Armies of Plagues, and Curses,
and Sorrows, and Sufferings denounced therein, shall with an unresistable
violence take hold on him, and pursue him with that fury as that he shall never
be able to abide nor avoid it. The Law (also) being given upon Mount Sinai in
Arabia, the Ishmaelites Land (who descended from Hagar) out of the bounds of
the Land of Promise (considered purely and abstractively from the Covenant of
Grace, and not as given in subordination and subservenice to the Covenant of
Grace) is to discover Sin, and the wrath of God against Sin; and this works
terror in the Sinner.

Secondly, Sin is an occasion of this: Guilt is an adjunct of Sin. All the
world is guilty before God, Romans 3. 19. (...), liable to condemnation. Now this
guilt works horror; and upon this horror sometimes follows desparation.
Peracto scelere magnitudo ejus conspiritur, as Tacitus said of Nero. When a man
has committed a sin, then he sees the greatness of it; that thereby the Law
of God is violated; that thereby the Justice of God is offended; and then he is
ready to look upon himself as being excluded from those Gospel-priviledges,
Adoption, Acceptance, Pardon, Peace, Spiritual Life, Liberty, Grace, and Glory
in Jesus Christ; then he looks upon himself as a Debtor to God, bound over to
the penalty of his Law which he has broken; and then he is ready to accuse and
condemn himself, and is overwhelmed with desperation, ready to destroy himself.

Our Blessed Savior being a Sinner (only by imputation) met with conflicts
and desertions, and was in an Agony. Sin deprives men of God's favor, which is
the spring of comfort: it keeps men from an interest in Christ, who is the
Consolation of Israel. Sin blinds the mind, it hardens the heart, it deads the
affections, it alienates men from God, it works delusions, desperate thoughts,
horror of heart, and confusion of spirit: Sin follows men like an Avenger of
Blood; Sin is a bitter-sweet, like Esaus Mess, like the Israelites Quails, like
Adonjah's Dainties; when the Meal is ended, then comes the Reckoning. When Sin
is unmaskt then that which before appeared sweet and beautiful, will appear
bitter and ugly; that which before was delightful, will then appear dreadful.
Oh, the shame, the pain, the gall, the bitterness, the horror and hell that a
true sight of Sin will raise in the Soul! When the Dress is taken off, it will
appear more vile, and filthy, and terrible than Hell it self. This made Anselme
say, That if he should see the shame of Sin on the one hand, and the pains of
Hell on the other, and must of necessity choose one, he would rather be thrust
into Hell without Sin, than go into Heaven with Sin.

Thirdly, Satan is an occasion of trouble in wicked men: Those Serpents that
stung the Israelites, were called fiery Serpents; possibly in regard of their
color, or rather in regard of their effect. Serpents biting the Israelites did
occasion a burning in their flesh, which made a fiery heat in those whom they
stung; so the old Serpent (the Devil) does set the Souls of wicked men on fire,
so that they think themselves to be burning already, and expect to burn for
ever (hereafter) in Hell.

The Devil is called (...), an Adversary; he is (also) called a roaring Lion,
Pet. 1. 5, 8. as an Adversary he will spite men, and as a roaring Lion he will
affright men. The Devil is called (...), an Accuser, Rev. 12. 10. the Devil
does not only accuse God to man, as Genesis 3. 5. and man to God, Job 1. 9, 10.
but man to himself. Satan entered into Judas, Luke 22. 3. to accuse and torment
him with thoughts of his Blood-guiltiness: he is also called (...), from a
compounded Verb that signifies to strike through. We read of the Fiery-darts of
the Devil; these Darts he shoots through the Spirits of wicked men, and does
infect, poison, and burn: He is called the Envious man, Satan from his
craftiness, Belial for his mischievous wickedness, Cor. 2. 6, 15. Abaddon and
Appollyon, Rev. 9. 11. as being a destroyer, Beelzebub (which signifies a Prince
of flies) because he does vex and fret a Wounded Conscience, (even) as flies do
vex and fret a gaul'd Creature.

Fourthly, Conscience is an occasion of this: The word (...), which signifies
Conscience is a compound, it is derived from (...) which signifies to see or
know, and the proposition (...), which signifies with, the Latin word,
Conscientia, is, quasi cordis Scientia: So that the Greek, the Latin, and the
English word Conscience, (which is derived from the Latin) signifies a
Knowledge with, that is, with some other thing, even as of the Heart. What man
knows the things of a man, save the spirit of man, which is in him? 1 Cor. 2.
11. Thou know all the wickedness which thine heart is privy to, which thou
did to David my father: Solomon, there appeals to the Conscience of Shimei, 1
Kings 2. 44. And indeed Conscience is the private Register of men's Actions, it
is a faithful Monitor within their breasts, it is the Eye of the Soul, to
over-see the whole Occasions and Actions of the Heart and Life, it is the
Tongue of wicked men's Souls, that makes report of the aberrations of their
ways: The office of conscience is to bear witness, Romans 2. 15. and indeed it is
a faithful witness that will not lie, Prove. 14. 5.

Now the witness of Conscience is according to the qualities of men; it
excuses good men, Acts 23. 1. and thereupon follows Peace, Romans 5. 1. It
convinces and accuses wicked men, John 8. 9. it condemns them also, Titus 3.
11. 1 St. John 3. 20. aie, and it torments them, by occasioning shame and
anxiety of spirit, Levit. 26. 26. Prove. 28. 1. Romans 6. 21. Grief, Trembling,
and Desparation, these are usually the Adjuncts and Concomitants of a perplexed
Conscience.

There are three things considerable in Man's Conscience.

First, The Matter. Secondly, The Act. Thirdly, The Conscequence.
The Matter of Man's Conscience before the Fall, was a Conformity in the whole
Man, to the whole will of God.

The Act of Man's Conscience then, was to give a true testimony thereof.

And the Consequence (upon Man's continuance in that Estate) would have been
Peace and Quietness.

Such a good Conscience would have remained in man if he had continued in his
entire Estate: But by man's Fall, his good Conscience was quite lost, and now is
become (altogether) Evil. Every imagination of man's heart, is only evil
continually, Genesis 6. 5. And now man's evil Conscience shows itself to be so,
two ways.

First, In the defect of Trouble.

Secondly, In the excess of Trouble.

First, In the defect of Trouble: When Sinners have upon them a Stoical Apathy,
a Spirit of slumber upon them, as that they have no remorse at all in their
Hearts; they have no trouble for Sins past, but have a settled purpose and
resolution to continue in Sin. Such a Conscience is called a seared Conscience,
1 Timothy 4. 2. such a Conscience had they of whom the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4.
19. that were past feeling, and gave themselves over to lasciviousness, to work
all uncleanness with greediness; Such a Conscience had Pharaoh, such a
Conscience had Ahab, that sold himself to work wickedness. Such as these have a
Brow of Brass, they know no shame, Zep. 3. 5.

Secondly, An evil Conscience shows itself to be so, in the excess of
Trouble: When wicked men wanting Prayer, and Repentance, and Faith, and Hope,
and the Pardon of Sin, and the Inhabitation of the Spirit, and the comfort of
the Scriptures (which should be supports to them) are troubled above measure,
for that their Life is a burden to them: In the Morning they wish that it were
Night; in the Night they wish it were Morning. They are like the rageing Sea,
that continually casts up Mire and Foam: this was the condition of Cain, Judas,
and Spira.

Object. Why, but you will say, Why should wicked men be thus descriminated and
distinguished from others, as being restless and unquiet? Are not the best of
men by the voice of Gods Word, Law, and Gospel; and by the voice of Judgments,
and by the Acts of Conscience, informing, warning, correcting, and judicial in
a perplexed Estate also? Heman complains of troubles and terrors, Psalm. 88. he
was sensible of Gods fierce wrath, of an overwhelming wrath, a cutting,
killing, and surrounding wrath, v. 3, 6, 7, 15, 16. Yet Heman was one of the
wisest men, next after Solomon, 1 Kings 4. 31. The condition of Job was like
that of Heman; he thought that God wrote bitter things against him, Job 13. 24,
26. He was scared with Dreams, and terrified with Visions, so that his Soul
chose strangling and death, rather than life, Job 7. 14, 15, 20. He thought
himself to be set up as a mark to shoot at; he was a burden to himself; he went
mourning without the Sun, Job 30. 28. Yet Job was a great and good man: As for
his greatness, he was supposed to be the King of the Edomites; and as for his
goodness, he was one that feared God and eschewed evil, Job 1. David complains
Psalm. 38. 6. I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the day
long. I am feeble and sore broken; I have roared for the (very) disquietness of
my heart. Yet David was a man famous in his Generation, for Piety and Holiness;
he was a man after Gods own heart, 1 Samuel 13. 14. He is called the man of God,
Nehemiah 12. 36. Amiable and Delectable before God and Man: So his name (David)
signifies.

Now for Answer to this: We must note that the Troubles of Job, Heman, and
David, were Troubles not in the Conscience (only) but also in the Affections;
and this occasioned a Godly sorrow, as being an effect of Grace. And they had
the Use and Exercise of Prayer, and Faith in the midst of their Distresses, Job
42. 4. Psalm. 88. 1, 2. Psalm. 19. 12. Psalm. 51. 9. 1 Samuel 24. 5. 2 Samuel 24. 10.
So that the Issue of all their Troubles was glorious. After an Eseck, and a
Sitnah, there was a Rehaboth, Genesis 26. 20, 21, 22. after the Wind, Earthquake,
and Fire, there came a still Voice, 1 Kings 10. 11, 12. after an Hectic,
Health; after an Eclipse, clear Light, -- Sequitur post nubula Phoebus. After
Showers, Sunshine; after a Wandering in the Wilderness, a Canaans Rest. They
had secret Supports in their greatest Extremities, and (at the last) had an
answer of Peace and Comfort: But the Troubles of Cain and Judas, were no whit
the Troubles of Affections, but of Conscience only; and where there is a
trouble of Conscience only, it is to be looked upon (only) as a judicial Act
of God, upon the Conscience, and it is not to be looked upon as an Effect of
Grace, but as a part of the Wages of Sin. The Subject of Conscience is the Soul.
The Object of Conscience is Sin.


Now where the Conscience only is awakened and enlightened by a common
illumination, (so as to see Sin) it is then in a condition to accuse, and
condemn, and vex the Sinner. That trouble in the Conscience, which is only a
judicial Act, (consisting in Sense and Accusation) God in Judgment brings upon
the Transgressour. When Instruction, Direction, Councels, Cautions,
Threatenings, and Checks do not keep men from sinning; then God does (after Sin)
awaken the Conscience, to accuse for Sinning; and then the Soul is filled with
bitterness; and then the terrors of Hell do shake and confound the Soul. Men
so tormented, long after Death, and if it come not, they search after it more
than treasures, and rejoice when they can find the Grave. Conscience works upon
Sin, and Sin frets and vexes the Soul; so that Conscience becomes as a Worm
that never dies, Isai. 66. 24. Heaviness in the heart of man makes it stoop,
Prove. 12. 15. By the sorrow of the heart the Spirit is broken, Prove. 15. 13.
Such an one is as one bruised between the Wall and the Door. Nulla gravior
poena poena conscientiae, said Isiodorus: There is no punishment more grievous
than the punishment of a guilty Conscience. The Rack and Wheel are, and -- Vri,
virgis, ferroque, necari. Burning and Scourging, and all those bloody cruelties
invented by the Heathen Persecutors, are short of this: A wounded spirit who
can bear? Prove. 18. 14. Juvenal describes the sad estate of such men thus:

-- Cur tamen hos tu
Evasisse putes, quos diri conscia facti
Men's habet attonitos, and surdo verbere caedit,
Occulto quatiente animo tortore flagellum?
They that are guilty of foul Facts, are affrighted in their Conscience; they
are scourged and beaten with unknown blows. Their Conscience (like an
Executioner) whips, bites, and torments them: an evil Conscience sits as a
Judge, and it is called in as a Witness; nay more, an evil Conscience is,
Judex, Testis, Carcer, Tortor, Judicat, Accusat, Damnat. An evil Conscience is
a Judge, a Witness, a Prison, an Executioner; it keeps Sessions within it self;
it accuses, judges, and condemns. An evil Conscience is a plague which you
can neither fugere, nor fugare; it is an Evil which a Sinner can neither flee,
nor fly from.

Cain put himself upon the building of a City, to remove the troubles of his
mind; but that would not do it, Genesis 4. 17. Belshazzar thought by his Cups, to
remove the trouble of his Spirit; but that would not remove it, Dan. 5. 2. Such
men in the midst of their greatest delights, Singing, Dancing, and Dalliance,
are tortured in their Souls. As Lemnius speaks, Nocte dieque suum gestant in
pectore testem: Night and day they carry their Witness and Accuser within their
breasts. So that outward pleasures and delights cannot more cure their Wounded
Conscience, than a Crown of Gold can cure the Headache, or a Velvet Slipper
cure the Gout. A perplexed man in the midst of all outward pleasures, riches,
and honors, is like a Book of Tragedies, fairly bound up without, but black
within; the Leaves Gold, and the Lines Blood: no Friends nor Physic, no Gold
nor Silver, nor Favor of Princes, no Pleasures of the World can give comfort
in such a case; neither Crowns nor Kingdoms can give deliverance in such a
case. There is no Bodily Sickness but Nature (by the means of Physic) has
provided a Remedy; no Sore but Surgery has provided a Salve for it. There
is no outward misery but there may be some means to relieve it; Friendship
helps Poverty, Hope of Liberty eases Imprisonment, Favor revokes Banishment,
Time wears away Reproach; but none of all these things can relieve or comfort a
distressed Soul.

Pierius makes a continually hot baking Oven the Hierogliphick of a gauled
Conscience. And the Egyptians made a Mill an Hierogliphick of the same; both
for continuance and torture. A man so perplexed is (...), a self-Tormentor:
such an ones Conscience (like Titius his Vulture) does continually know him.
That which was feigned of Promethaeus (as being bound to a Pillar upon the
Mountain Caucasus, and an Eagle eating his Liver every day, and that which was
eaten in the day, grew up in the night, (that there might be no decay of his
torment) is true in this case; it is a Worm that never dies. Such an ones
House may be compared to Trophonius his Den, where were nothing but doleful
Echoes and sad Complaints. A perplexed wicked man may take to him Pashurs
terrible Name mentioned in Jerem. 20. 3. Magormissabib, that is, fear round
about: such an one is a terror to himself, and to all that are about him. What
shall I say more? A troubled Conscience is an Epitomy of Hell, an Extract, a
Quintesence, a Compound, a Mixture of all Malladies, Tyrannical Tortures,
Plagues, and Perplexities; Fear, Sorrow, Fury, Grief, Pain, Terror, Anger, all
these things come short of it. Were I to write a full Description of a Troubled
Conscience, (though I had Melpomene for my Muse, and had a Pen of Iron droping
Cruelty, and had Ink, and writing as Blood) yet I could not sufficiently
delineate it: And therefore in this case I shall do like Timanthes, who when he
was to draw out the Picture of Agamemnons Grief, (and was not able to perfect
it) covered it over with a Veil; he Pictured Calchas sad, Ulysses mourning, and
Menelaus more sorrowful than either of them; but as for Agamemnon, (whose
Daughter Iphiginia was to be sacrificed) he conceived his grief and sorrow to
be in summo gradu, not to be deciphered by Art; and therefore he covered his
Face with a Veil, and left every man to his own conceit about it. So in this
case, being not able thoroughly to describe the misery of an Afflicted
Conscience; I shall break off abruptly, as to the farther Explication of this
point, and shall leave every man to his own imagination about it. I have done
with the Tragical part.

And now I am apt to think that some drooping Spirits (groaning under the
pressure of Sin, and ready to despond and despair, by reason of some present
guilt upon them, for some foul facts committed) are ready to say to me, Must we
part thus? Are there no crumbs of comfort? Shall we hear no word of peace? Will
you let your voice be (still) like the hoarse sound of a Trumpet in a dead
march? Shall your Sermon be like Dracoes Laws, that begun and ended in death?
Is there no balm in Gilead? Is there no Physician there? Is there no way to be
reconciled to God, and to have a peace within our selves, and to have our
Wounded Spirits healed? Why, yes I shall (by and by) come to the Consolatory
part, and shall put you into a way to be at peace with God, and to have peace
within your selves, and to have your Spirits calmed, and your Consciences
quieted. But before I come to lay down any Rules of direction or means to
obtain this; I shall lay down Motives to persuade you hereunto.

First, God has promised it, The Lord will speak peace to his people, Psalm.
85. 8. Peace shall be upon Israel, Psalm. 125. I create the fruit of the lips:
peace, peace to him that is far off, and to him that is nigh, Isai. 57. 19.
that is, I will really accomplish that which I have promised (in giving peace)
both to Jews and Gentiles.

Secondly, Christ has purchased our Peace; The chastisement of our Peace was
upon him; there was a proclamation of Peace at Christ's coming into the World;
the great Design of Christ was to reconcile God to man, and to pacify man's
Conscience, Romans 5. 25. 2 Cor. 1. 5.

Thirdly, Others have obtained Peace within themselves: David, who for three
quarters of a year was in a Spiritual Lethargy, (being at length awakened, was
much perplexed) yet was at length restored to the joy of Salvation. Mr. Bilney
(for a whole Year) was in such anguish of Spirit, that he thought all the whole
Scriptures were against him, and founded out his condemnation; but afterward he
was endued with such Strength and Faith, that he did not only confess his
Faith in the Gospel, but suffered his Body to be burnt for the Gospels sake.
Luther about the year 1514, was in such an Agony of Spirit, that he felt
nothing but trembling and fearfulness, especially when (at Rome) upon his bare
Knees he was climbing up certain Steps of Pilate's Ladder, (which the Romanist
feigned to be brought from Jerusalem) when he was doing this (in a
Superstitious way) as a means to purge his Sins, and quiet his restless and
troubled Mind, by the illumination of the Spirit he came to a right
understanding of that Scripture, The just shall live by his faith; and then he
was exceedingly comforted, and his mind was pacified, and he set about the
Reformation, and became a wonderful Instrument of God (through whom God has
opened the light of his Word) to the World. Such examples as these (who have
found peace with God and within themselves) should encourage us.

Fourthly, Consider the Misery of a Troubled Conscience, A wounded spirit who
can bear? And a wounded spirit who can declare? As the troubles of the Soul are
insupportable, so they are inexpressible. A wicked man's Conscience is the
greatest Tyrant and Persecutour to himself; he needs no other fury to follow
him; this is both Accuser and Witness, Law and Judge, Executioner and
Punishment to himself. A Soul left to the temptations of the Devil, and to its
own darkness and unbelief; like Saul falls upon its own Sword, and becomes its
own Executioner: The wicked flees when none pursues: The wicked (in this
respect) are like Sheep, of which it is said, that when they run, they are
afraid of the sound of their own Feet: Sin does beget a dejection of Spirit and
fearful Terrors. After Herod had murdered John in the Prison, he was perplexed,
his mind was much about John; for when he heard of the great Miracles that were
wrought by Christ, he cried out, That it was John Baptist, risen from the dead,
Mat. 14. 1. Upon the commission of Sin there follows a Spirit of bondage unto
Fear; so that sinners are in a condition as if they were fettered and shut up
in Prison. They are full of anguish, vexation, and terror: they are afraid to
come near God, and afraid that God will never come near them in Mercy; they are
afraid to die, and afraid of Gods wrath, revealed from Heaven against their
Sins; they are afraid of what they have done against God, and afraid of what
God may do against them. Nicephorus Phocas the Greek Emperor, and Pausanius
the Lacedemonian King, (having done foul facts) were tired with a continual
vexation of Spirit, always afraid of Heavens vengeance. These troubles of
perplexed Souls are not Fabulous things, and we have the Word of God for it:
There is no peace to the wicked, says my God; in the Text. And these words are
several times repeated in this Prophecy: And Verba toties inculcata, vera
sunt, viva sunt, plana sunt, sana sunt. Words often repeated are true, and
lively, sound, and plain.

Fifthly, Consider the happy estate of those who are at peace with God, and at
peace within themselves.

First, They are related to God, as to a Father; they are related to a Wise,
Powerful, and Merciful God; they are assured of Gods care over them, and of his
providence and goodness toward them; they have the light of Gods Countenance
shining upon them; they are sensible of Gods favor, and of his loving
kindness, which is better than Life itself.

Secondly, They have an interest in Christ, who is the Brightness of his
Fathers Glory; they are ingrafted into Christ, and incorporated into that
Mystical Body, whereof Christ is the Head; they have an interest in the Merits
of Christ, and in all the Fruits and Effects of his Death and Bloodshed; and in
him they have a Spiritual Title to all the things of the World.

Thirdly, They have a right to all the rich promises in Scripture, both of
Grace and Glory.

Fourthly, They see all their Sins charged upon Christ, laid upon his
Shoulders, and pardoned as to themselves: they see all their Sins so remitted
as that they are not afrighted, neither by the magnitude nor multitude of their
Sins; besides all this, they are not afraid of the Faces of men, though rich,
honorable, and powerful; they fear not the Sons of Anak, nor the Gammodims in
the Towers; they are not afraid of reproaches nor losses, either of Goods,
Friends, or Children; they are not afraid of want, either of Food or Raiment,
though there should be no Flocks nor Herds in the Fields or Stalls, yet they
can rejoice in the God of their Salvation; they are not afraid of Banishment
into a Wilderness, or into a strange Land; they are not afraid of Imprisonment;
they can look upon a Prison as a Palace, and upon a Chain as an Ornament, and
upon Bondage itself as Liberty; they are not afraid of Wars, nor of Famine, nor
of Sickness, nor Death itself: the excellency of this Peace is such, and the
benefits and comforts of it are so many and great, as they cannot be thoroughly
known; The peace of God passes all understanding.

Now you will say, We are convinced that it is our Duty to seek after a Peace
of Conscience within our selves, But how shall we obtain it? The means are
there,

First, Resist the Devil. Secondly, Keep at a distance from Sin. Thirdly, Set
about Repentance. Fourthly, Hearken diligently to the Gospel.
I. Resist the Devil, Whose work it is to tempt to Sin, and then to accuse for
Sin, and then to tempt to Desparation. When Christ resisted the Devil he
departed for a season, Luke 4. 14. And do you resist the devil, and he will
flee from you, James 4. 7.

II. Keep at a distance from Sin: Pliny 10. Lib. 67. Epistle, writes thus of
the Christians of the Primitive Times: Stato die ante lucem convenire, and se
Sacramento obstringere, ne furta, ne latrocinia, ne adulteria committerent: By
break of the day they met together, and bound themselves by an Oath, against
the Sins of Adultery, Theft, and Rapine. Let your resolution be the same
against all Sin, as being that that has made a variance between God and you,
and a disturbance in your Souls. If iniquity be in thine hand, put it far away;
then thou shall be steadfast, and shall not fear, Job 11. 14, 15.

III. Set about Repentance: They who sow in tears shall reap in joy. Broken
hearts shall be bound up: The spirits of the contrite shall be revived: The
weary and heavy laden shall rest: There is a promise of comfort, to penitential
mourners, Mat. 5. 4. That woman who was a notorious Sinner (when she stood at
Christ's feet, weeping and washing his feet with tears) was forgiven and
comforted. Comfort does not follow Repentance as a Natural effect: Repentance
does not discharge us from the guilt of Sin, as an Act of ours; but as it is a
work of Grace, and as a means appointed (by God) for that end.

IV. Hearken diligently to the Gospel: The Gospel is called Glad Tidings; It is
a gospel of peace, Romans 10. 15. A word of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. 19.
Ministers of the Gospel are like Noah's Dove, which brought him an Olive
branch, a Token of Peace: Ministers are Ambassadors for Christ. It is a term
borrowed by the Apostle from Princes Courts, and applied to Ministers by a
decent Analogy; Ministers being as Ambassadors, who are Messengers from
Princes Courts to offer Peace.

The Scriptures (which are the Subject, and the Substance of Ministers
Preaching) are the Word of God, who is a God of all Consolation; and being
fitly applied are likely to revive and refresh fainting and fearful Spirits.
Here you will find promises of comfort, and examples of those who have found
comfort. Here you will find God merciful and gracious, forgiving Iniquity,
Transgression, and Sin. Here you will find that Gods Mercies hold proportion
with his Power; and that they are not to be limited by the bounds of your weak
understandings: And know, that as it is Blasphemy to limit Gods Power, so it is
Blasphemy to limit his Goodness.

The Scriptures will tell you, that God is a Father of Mercies, a God that
revives the Spirits of the humble, and the Heart of the contrite ones; that he
is nigh to them who are of a broken Heart, and saves such as be of a contrite
Spirit. And therefore hearken dilligently to the Ministry of the Gospel, as
being a Word of Peace, and a Word of Comfort. And know this, That it is your
duty to receive comfort, (when it is offered upon good grounds) as to do a duty
commanded It is a great Sin to reject or despair of Mercy: it is thought by
some to be a greater Sin in Judas to despair of Mercy, than it was to betray
the Person of Christ into the hands of them who crucified him. Oh, therefore
let not your stubborn Souls refuse comfort! But when Gods Mercy appears to you
in his Word Preached, yield to the credit of it, and be over power'd with the
Authority of it; let your Consciences be satisfied with those evidences that
God has made known in his Word, and passed upon your Souls for your
everlasting comfort.

Fifthly, Give your selves unto Prayer. Oration, sanat pestes mentis: Prayer is
a means to cure the Malladies of Diseased Souls: Prayer is the Compass by which
we sail. When all is clouded, no Star of comfort shining upon us, this will
hold us in the right Course, till we again discover Mercy. Out of the depth
have I called unto thee, and thou heardst me, Psalm. 130. 1. Prayer is a means
to obtain the pardon of Sin, James 5. 14. And upon the pardon of Sin follows
peace and comfort, Be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee, Mat. 9. 2. Let
the consideration of Gods All Sufficiency, his Faithfulness, his Grace and
Mercy, his Readiness to Pardon and Comfort; his rich Promises move you to pray
in Faith, in Humility, and with Fervency, that he would quiet your Spirits and
stablish your Hearts. And in your Prayer to the Lord Christ, plead his
humanity, that He Himself did once live in your Nature on Earth, as in a Veil
of Tears, and Misery, and in the shadow of Death; that He Himself was once
clothed on Earth with the Infirmities of man's common Nature; that He Himself
knows what it is to be tempted by Satan, by Men, both Friends and Enemies; that
He knows what it is to be in an Agony, to lie under a Spiritual Desertion, to
have a Soul exceeding sorrowful and heavy (even) unto Death. Entreat Him (as
being a Merciful High Priest, and as being touched with the feeling of your
Infirmities) to have compassion upon you, to relieve and succor you: remember
Him who cried out, Thou Son of David have mercy on me.

Sixthly, Labor after Righteousness in your dealings with men; that is a way
to obtain peace: Say unto the righteous it shall go well with him. A due
Administration of Justice by Magistrates, and Righteous dealing between man and
man, is a means to uphold Legem, Regem, and Gregem: The Law, the King, and
Country. And it is a means to procure peace to your selves: Mark the perfect
man, and behold the upright; for the end of that man is peace.

Seventhly, Set about the exercise of Charity. It was David's enquiry, 2 Samuel
9. 1. Is there any of the house of Saul left, to whom I may show kindness for
Jonathan's sake? And let it be your enquiry, Are there no poor members of
Christ, to whom we may show kindness for Christ's sake? True Religion lies
much in this. And therefore be not weary of well doing: Do good to all men, but
especially to the household of faith. This is a means to bring peace to you at
the last: The merciful shall enter into peace, and shall rest in their beds,
Isai 59. 1. If in your Charity toward the poor members of Christ, you have
respect to the glory of God, and the honor of Christ, and shall rest upon his
Approbation and Remuneration; you shall find (at last) that Christ will own it,
as being done to himself; and will so accept and reward it, Mat. 25. But
chiefly we must make sure of Christ when we have done all, or else we may miss
of peace and comfort: We must have comfortable apprehensions of the fullness of
Christ's Merits, or else we can have no peace with God, nor within our selves.

It was Luther's Observation: Says he, I have seen among the Papists, who have
painfully traveled, and upon mere Conscience have done much in Praying and
Fasting, and other Exercises for this End, that they might get peace of
Conscience; and when they had done all, they were smitten down with fear,
especially when death approached: They were then, says he, so fearful, that I
have seen many Murderers, and other Malefactors condemned to death, die more
courageously, and more comfortably than they. This was Luther's Observation in
his time, and there is reason for it; for although good works are evidences of
Faith, and signs of a sanctified Life; yet they can give no assurance of Gods
favor by their own merit or worthiness. It is impossible that the Conscience
should be pacified (as to God and itself) by any good things found in man: No,
not by Faith itself, (for the goodness or merit of it, as being done by us) but
as being a grace given us to apprehend the fullness of merit only in Christ.
And therefore when you have done all, make sure of Christ by Faith.

In the Creation we find God above us; In the Law we find God against us: But
in Christ we find God Emmanuel, God with us: O my dove, that art in the clefts
of the rock, Cant. 2. 14. This was the Speech of Christ to the Church, by the
mouth of Solomon. The Church was a Dove in the clefts of the Rock: This Rock
was Christ, the Rock of Ages, and those foramina Petrae, were vulnera Christi:
These clefts of the Rock, are the wounds of Christ. The Church in the wounds of
Christ, is as a Dove in the clefts of the Rock, quiet and safe from danger. The
Lord Christ was sent to bind up the broken hearted; and to proclaim liberty to
the captives; and the opening of the Prison doors to them who were bound; to
give them beauty for ashes; the oil of joy for mourning; and the garment of
praise for the spirit of heaviness, Isai. 61. 1, 3. He is that good sheperd
that gathers his lambs, and carries them in his bosom, Isai. 40. 11. The Lord
Christ is that Sun of Righteousness, that arises with healing in his Wings: He
is that Tree in the Revalation, the Leaves whereof, were for the healing of the
Nations: He is the great Physician of Souls: He cures us of the guilt of Sin by
Justification, of the pollution of Sin, by Sanctification; of the trouble of
Conscience, by Consolation: He is full of precious Ointment, his Name (Christ)
signifies so much: He has Oil and Wine to pour into your wounds, Luke 10. 34.
He has the Oil of Gladness, and the Oil of Love; But his Sovereign Medicines
are his own Flesh and Blood; By his stripes we are healed, Isai. 53. He has
slain the enmity, and has reconciled us by the Cross, Ephesians. 2. 16. We are
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, Romans 5. 9, 10. The blood of Christ
speaks better things than the blood of Abel, Heb. 12. 24. The blood of Abel
cries for vengeance, Genesis 4. 10. Mat. 23. 35. But the Lord Christ cries with
a loud voice, (as with the voice of a mighty Angel) my Blood for the
undeserving; my Blood for the ill-deserving; my Blood for sinners, for the
worst of sinners, for the chiefest of sinners; my Blood for all blood; my Blood
for the Sins of the World; nay, and for a World of Sins. Well might the Apostle
call this Blood precious Blood, 1 Pet. 1. 19. It is precious Blood in itself,
as being the Blood of the Son of God; it is precious in its Effects. Whereas
other blood calls for Revenge, this Blood calls for Grace, for Mercy, for
Pardon, for Reconciliation, for Acceptance, and Salvation: We are justified by
his blood, Romans 5. 9. and upon this follows our peace with God, Romans 5. 1. We
are washed also, and made white by this blood, Revel. 7. 14. Now the sense and
experience of the purity of heart, and a reformed life, lays before us a
ground of peace and comfort: Being washed and sanctified by this Blood, we have
a good, a pure, and a clear Conscience; in the testimony whereof we may rejoice
and take comfort, 2 Cor. 1. 12.

We read of Themistocles, that when he went to to make Peace with a Prince, he
carried the Princes Son in his Arms. And if you will make Peace with God (who
is the King of Kings) you must carry Christ a long with you, who is the Son of
God, and the Prince of Peace. If you can with old Simeon get Christ in your
arms, you may sing a Requiem as he did. When you are thus at Peace with God,
and within your selves; I would advise you to two things.

First, To be thankful. Secondly, To beware of Apostasy.
I. Be thankful: It is fit you should be so; Beneficium and Officium must go
together: every one that is servatus, should be servus: Praise is comely for
the Upright. The fire was kept burning continually upon the Altar, to show us
our constant Duty in this respect. God requires thankfulness for the least
Mercy: Gather up the fragments, that nothing be lost, said Christ, John 6. 12.
We must be thankful for the least Blessing; much more should we be thankful for
so great a Mercy as this. Has the Lord Christ spoken comfortably to you in a
Wilderness? Has the Lord Christ been to you as the Shadow of a Rock to a
Traveller in a weary Land? Are you brought out of a Dungeon into a Palace, out
of Darkness into Light, out of the Shadow of Death into the Land of the Living?
O then, set up David's Resolution! Psalm. 30. 11, 12. Thou have turned for me my
mourning into dancing; thou have put off my sackcloth, and girded me with
gladness, to the end that my glory may sing praise to thee, and not be silent:
O Lord my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever. And elsewere says he, I
will be glad, and rejoice in thy mercy, for thou have considered my trouble;
thou have known my soul in adversity. Oh, how great is thy goodness! How
amiable are thy tabernacles! How great are thy works! I will triumph in the
work of thy hands, Psalm. 90. 4.

Are you now delivered from the trouble and misery of a Wounded Conscience? Is
that confusion formerly in your Souls now rectified? Are you now under the
assurances of Faith? Is God in your Hearts? Is Heaven in your Eyes? Is joy in
your countenances? O then, let the comfort thereof enlarge your Soul, like an
Angel, let it put wings upon your Soul, like a Cherub; and let it set your Soul
on fire, like a Seraphim, with holy zeal of Gods glory, and the good of others.
With holy David be telling others, what God has done for your Soul: spread
forth the sweet odours of praise; be daily offering up the Sacrifice of
Thanksgiving.

II. Beware of Apostasy and Backsliding. Psalm. 85. 8. The Lord will speak
peace to his people, and to his saints; but let them not return again to folly:
After you have received Christ into your Hearts, (to revive and refresh you)
let not then your carriage toward Christ be like the carriage of the Jews
toward Christ, after they had received him into Jerusalem, Mat. 21. At his
entrance they received him as their King, v. 5. They spread their garments in
the way, they cut down branches and strewed them in the way: And the multitude
that went before, and that followed after, cried, Hosanna to the Son of David;
Hosanna in the highest. But the Scene was quickly changed; they received him as
their King; afterward they would have no other King but Caesar. Here they
cried, Hosanna, Hosanna; afterward away with him, away with him, crucify him,
crucify him; as if they would have had him twice crucified: Here they spread
garments in his way; afterward they cast lots for his garment: Here they cut
down branches to spread before him; and afterward they prepared a Cross, and a
Crown of Thorns for him. O let not your carriage be such toward Christ, after a
reception of Peace and Comfort from him! When you are got into Wisdoms ways,
(which are ways of pleasantness) take heed that you do not (then) start a side
lake a broken Bow. Say then concerning Christ, as Jacob did concerning the
Angel, I will not let thee go. Let Christ be written in your Hearts with Golden
Letters, as it was said of Ignatius. Let Christ be written in your Hearts with
indelible Letters, that neither temptations nor tortures may blot it out. Keep
close to Christ in all humility and reverence, in all duties, and by all means
keep up communion with him; be no longer as a barren Wilderness to him, lest he
be again as a Land of Darkness to you. Grieve not the Spirit of Christ, which
is the Cause of all Grace and Comfort: Resist not the gracious motions of the
Spirit of Christ, by carnal delights, or by sinful practices: Let his Spirit
have a full work: Let it be seen that the Spirit of Christ reigns in you, in
that you will do nothing contrary to it. Spiritus Christi ita nos tractat,
sicut a nobis tractatur: The Spirit of Christ will handle you as you handle it.
If you again grieve the Spirit of Christ, (by resisting the Holy motions of it)
He may again vex your Spirits, in withholding the comfortable influences of
it. And therefore have an high esteem of Christ, delight in him, and please
him, by your obedience in the course of your life. By this means you may be
like Saint Anthony the Monk, of whom it is said, that he always appeared of a
cheerful countenance. By this means you may be at peace with the creatures, at
agreement with the stone of the wall, and beasts of the Fields; so that you may
safely walk by the Lion, and tread upon the Basilisk: Hereby you may find
inward Peace in your Hearts and Consciences; and may be established in your
combat against the terrors of Sin, and the temptations of Satan; and may be
possessed with such quietness of mind, as may make you in a time of mourning
and suffering for Righteousness, to rejoice, not only in the promise, but in
the possession of such a Peace internal, as may end in a Peace eternal in the
Heavens: which is no less than the Felicity of the Saints in Heaven, and the
Glory of the blessed Angels, who having no jarring principles among them,
remain for ever in Love and Peace.

FINIS:

