THE SPEECH Of the HONORABLE Sir WILLIAM WENTWORTH, One of His Majesty's Privy
Council in Ireland: To the Magistrates and Citizens of the City of Chester, in
the Town Hall, before the Proclaiming of the King.
GENTLEMEN,
SINCE his late Majesty was pleased to do me that great Honor, as to make me
one of his Privy Council in Ireland, and that his now Majesty is also
graciously pleased to do me the same Honor, I think it my duty to declare to
you what I know of this High and Mighty Prince, King James the Second: Who is
the greatest Captain at Sea and Land now living, nor is there mention in
History of any one which did ever equal him in both, for Courage, Skill, and
Conduct. Never did so great a Warrior sit upon our Throne, never so great a
Soldier wear our Crown, never any one of our Princes was more knowing in the
Laws and Constitutions of these three Kingdoms; never any of greater
Moderation, Sobriety, and Temperance. A more affectionate Brother was never
known, nor a more Dutiful and Obedient Subject; else nothing could have made
him absent himself, when so many Calumnies and Injuries were falling upon him.
I have followed this great King, and been with him in all the Countries and
Places to which he was sent, and have heard him both in his Public and Private
Retirements, declare and promise that he would maintain the Church of England,
as it is now Established, and upon my Life he will do it, and make it as great,
nay greater, than either his Brother, Father or Grandfather did; for he has
constantlye and faithfully preserved his Word and Promise, and I dare say, not
one in these three Kingdoms, ever had either from him for any thing but he did
perform it. He is a strict observer of Laws, no advantage whatsoever could make
him break any of them; a Prince he is that did never fear any thing but to do
an ill, or an unjust Act; and from doing Justice and maintaining His and his
Peoples Rights, nothing whatsoever of danger or difficulty can stop or hinder
him; and since his frequent and late promises to maintain our Church of England
in its Rights, all the powers on Earth or their threats can make him break or
depart from them; nor any person whatsoever, let his Authority be never so
great, can make him forsake or recall the same: he will be sooner Torn in Pieces
than be drawn from his word, nothing can separate him from his promises. I have
heard him declare in the Parliament of Scotland, in an Excellent Speech, that
he would maintain that Form of Government in their Church as truly as any one
of his Predecessors had done; and yet he, as well as we, knows that upon it was
built that late Horrid Rebellion, and likewise this last Damnable Conspiracy
had thence much of its Rise, and I dare say at or before this day, he has sent
them all the assurances of performing it: and therefore how can we have the
least apprehension he will not maintain this our Church, of which not one
Member did ever forsake his Father's, or his Brothers Rights, and for which
that Glorious Martyr (his Father) did chiefly suffer: Therefore let no fear
possess you, for he will endeavor its Peace and Prosperity. Nothing so dear to
him as the welfare of his People: God Almighty send him but length of days,
then our Nation and Trades are sure to Flourish; then Glory and Riches will
surely come and abide among us; then we shall all think our Lives and Fortunes
well laid out; and given him, since there is nothing but his being taken away,
can take away our Peace and Prosperity, let us all pray, God save the King,
Long live the King. Amen.

In the Castle when I began the Queens Health I then told them, that she was a
Princess of the greatest Devotion, Bounty, and truest Charity of any one that
ever lived; that all the Loveliness, Sweetness, and Charms both of Body and
Mind that ever met in one person are found in her, and could we have but that
Happiness added to our many, as to have a Prince from these two, Charles the
Great, nor no Emperor would ever be so Glorious: A Blessing I and all that
know her do daily Pray for, which God Almighty grant us. Amen.

LONDON, Printed for W. H.


