The Welsh-Man's LETTER Dedicated to the Duke of Monmouth, and my Lord Gray;
And also, To all his Friends, Concerning this Horrid and Treasonable PLOT.
Cousin John Thomas, ap Rise, ap Morgan, ap Davis, ap William, as you are my
very good Cousins, as you know very well, by Evan Davis of Penquelthy, Morgan
and Rise of Llavibither, as also by our Cousin William of Abereustwith, and
David Thomas Her Father of Wales, and all over Gentlemen.
SINCE Her came to London, Her was meet with great many strange Sights, and
Prave things, whereof Her thought to give some account to Her Friends in the
Country, that they might know more then they do, or more then Her did before
Her came to the Inn of Law, called here an Inn of Court, but when Her remembered
you, and a many of Her Friends had been in London, your selves. Her forbore for
Her thought you were as wise (and knew much) as Her self, but now just now is
come strange things to light, then ever were Dreamed on, in the darkest Night
that ever was, such Villainous and horrid Treasons, and Rogueryes that was never
hear the like, a company of Ploody Plood-hound Rogues, had laid PLOTS and
Devises, and Contrivances, and Conspiracies, and Designs, and Twenty more vile
wicked Tricks, and Counsels in their Hearts and their Heads, and their minds,
and intentions, and Resolutions: To take away the Life of our Gracious Good
King, and his Prave Brother the good Duke of York, and God knows how many
more, for no more Reason, that Her can hear of, then Her have to prake her Head
to pieces against a Flint-Wall, or cut her own Throat with a Razor to save her
Life from the Hangman, and this has made such a Noise, a Quile, and Clutter
here in London, that Her am afraid it will Ring in your Ears there before Her
can make an end of Her Letter, and therefore Her was begin to tell. Her as fast
as ever Her can, but by the way her must know how to Effect these great
Villanyes, and Mischeifes, and they knew and Considered, they could not shoot
without a Gun, therefore they bought and provided Thunderbusses, and other
Busses with strange, and wicked Outlandish and Popish Names, which they say
will speak almost as loud as a Cannon, and Her am sure Her never Read of any
such Names in Wales, nor all Cristendom over, and then to see how God bless our
Good King; there come a man and tell all the PLOTS, and devices and stratagems
(that is a hard word) to the King before a knew a word on it, which made the
King, God bless Her, look about Her, and find out the Traitors, and as soon as
a have her, take and lock her up safe in one good place or other, some in the
Tower, and some in Newgate, and others good strong Chests, and Coffers, which
was find to keep her till her have occasion for her, and then take out 3. or 4.
as her has a mind to make use on her, as for example there was some needs to
use some of them the other day, and so go pull out Four notable Choice pieces of
that Quoin, but when was come to be Tried, was all prove very Rascals, and good
for nothing but the Hangman, and there they prove one to another Face, that
they were all Traitors, every one of them. For there were some that heard it
who had more Law then Her have. And yet Her have been getting, on it this seven
Years, who told Her all this Roguery, and Villanyes would bring Her to the
Gallows, or to as bad a place, and indeed they told her as true as if they had
been fortune tellers, or as cunning as the Old Woman of Mongomoery. For after a
while, that a dozen of honest men had Considered of the matter, Her quickly
told Her what Her should trust too, and after that they found it true enough,
for upon one of the Frydays in the very next week following, according to your
British account, three of the worst of them Rode out of Town into the Country,
but before they had gone very far, most of their Company quitted Her, for the
two Chief or Ringleaders of that Gang, delivered them over to the Hangman (as
Her told Her before) and he used them like Dogs; But stay a little before the
Hangman played his part, they began to prate, and talk after such a rate, that
had Her been there Her would have taken them to be all Welsh-men, for Her tuake
very strangly, and tell never a word of truth, but only lies, and perfect
falsehood and stories, for they said they knew of no PLOT, nor no Conspiracies,
or Treasons, and were about to dye wrongfully, and very Innocent and good
Protestant Subjects, but at last was better bethink themselves, when they saw
awle would not safe her Life's, was make a good End of a pad matter, and like
true English-Prittains declared the truth of the Story, and acknowledged
themselves to be Wicked Notorious Traitors, but still wa^ main good Christians
and Protestants, tho Her scarce believe her yet her said her Prayers, and
fulfilled the English provarb confess and be Hanged and there was an End of
these three. The next day after, not before, Her was find creat Hurly-Burlys
and Hububs,, in Holborne and Lincolnes-Inne-Feildes, which made Her peep out to
see what was the Cases, where was find new matter, as bigg as the the other, nay
Marry and Pigger too, for the two Ringleaders of all such sights, are two such
as the King, and Kingdom will have very good honest men, they call them
Sheriffs of London, and Middelsex (that stands for Middelsex) these two (as Her
told Her before) brought along with them another of the what-you-callems, a
very creat Her know not what beside Lord and Traitor, and put him up upon a
Stage like a Mounte-Bank, but was show such Tricks which Her don't lik, nor
shall never endure her self to show, for her came thither with a very fair
Head to her body, but before they had done with her, her was feigned to go away
without. And now Her will tell Her how it was, This Lord was found faulty by
those Her told Her of before, who sat there to hear them tell their Tails,
and a dozen more good Men and True, none of your old Ignorant-musses, of old
times and amongst them, they told him plainly what he must come to, (as they
did the rest) and they told Her truth, for these two Sheriffs brought Her to
the same End they did the other, and Her did much like them and Dyed as good a
Protestant Atheist as any of them, but before Her Death, Her must do as Her
Yoake-fellows had done, and made a short Harangue (another hard word) if Her
take notice, wherein Protestant like Her protested himself Innocent, and
Ignorant of any PLOT or Conspiracy or any kind of Treason, against the King and
Government, and so forgave all that did accuse him, or were witness against
him, because they told tales out of School, Contrary to their Oath of Secresy
(a pretty Equivocation to say a man's forsworn) and you would have thought (as a
Thousand others have done since) that this man had dyed a Martyr. But like a
Man of a special good Conscience, for he did conceive (because he had begun
with such horrid lies) what ever he should say afterward, would not find belief
with any that should hear him, and therefore he gave it under his own hand (as
some say, but none believe) in a Paper which he delivered to the Sheriffs, as
his Last Will and Testament, wherein he bequeathes the Prosecution of the PLOT
to those of the confideracy he has left behind, but he was Innocent of every
thing but Treason, and Ignorant of any thing but Contrivances, Designs and
Practices and Insurrections to destroy the King, and subvert the Government, a
very small thing not amounting to a Crime; but only to Misprision, an hard
word of his own but sure he was mistaken in it, for that word did not signify
any thing in this Case without Treason. And since it was but a mistake, we will
e'ne change with his Lordship and so let it go. Now this being over he said
some Prayers too, and so dyed like a -- Jesuited Puritan or a Canting
Equivocateing Protestant of the new Stamp, this is as much as the Post will
Carry for Sixpence; but Her hope Her shall have more work for Her shortly; in
the same affair, wherefore Her will now take Her leave and remain.

Your Exceeding Loving Cousin John Thomas, ap Griffith, ap Powel, ap Morgan, ap
David, ap Rice, ap Morris -- ap Cadwalleder, and an hundred more.

London, Ptsinted for the Author. 1683.


