Historia Vegetabilium Sacra: OR, A Scripture HERBAL; WHEREIN All the Trees,
Shrubs, Herbs, Plants, Flowers, Fruits, etc. Mentioned in the Holy Bible, are
in an Alphabetical Order, Rationally Discoursed of: SHOWING, Their Names,
Kinds, Qualities, various Uses, Natural Principles, Countries, Manner of
Propagation, etc. Also their Medicinal Preparations, Virtues and Dose,
Gallenically and Chymically Handled and Performed according to the newest
Doctrines of Philosophy, Herbarism, and Physic.

Absolutely necessary for all Ministers and other Persons, to understand the
Holy Scriptures, and to cure all Diseases. The like never attempted before.

By W. WESTMACOT, Med. Prof.

LONDON: Printed for John Salusbury, at the Rising Sun in Cornhill. 1695.

Liber Coll. Omnanim. Fid^l. defunct. in Oxon.

blazon or coat of arms

AN ADDRESS TO THE Learned and Reverend CLERGY, Of what Opinion or Persuasion
soever: Also a Word to Physical and Theological TYRO's.
Reverend Fathers, Pastors, and Learned Sirs,
IT is observable, That Readers in the generality do not study (especially in
reference to Contemporaries) what may benefit themselves, but blemish the
present Author's Repute: Therefore I shall be censured, I question not, by
some, for a Solecism of the first Magnitude, that I (who am but a mean Star in
comparison of those other splendid Planitary Orbs in the Esculapian Firmament,)
should presume to accost such a Grand Body of (Spiritual) Physicians, whose
Function is the Queen, and all other Arts and Sciences its Handmaids.

But considering that Books seem by Custom (that great Gubernatrix in these
modish days) to challenge a Dedication, and that they should be in some measure
adapted, and congruent to the Professions, and Intrinsic Worths of the Persons
they are directed to; I (without much Hesitation) quickly resolved to offer
this Sacred History of Vegetables, to your mature and sublime Understandings,
being emboldned thereunto, by considering, that as another Persons Ability
(whose Name is mounted on the Wings of Fame) might have gained Applause, so
perhaps my Weakness may deserve an Excuse.

The Subject Matter of it is gathered out of the Best of Books, which is the
Foundation of your Province, the Portraiture of it is altogether new; The
Usefulness of it to you, I shall not stand to declare, but leave it to your own
Experience and Judgment, but only shall say, it may be very serviceable and
advantageous to younger Students in their orderly and methodical reading of the
Holy Bible, as a Lexicon Vegetable, etc.

But that which is one great End of the Publication of this Scripture Herbal,
and the main scope of this Address, is the Desire, Request, and Hopes I have,
that some one or more, among such a Learned and Pious Tribe will illustrate and
improve this Phytological Tract, in the Subject of your own Province, either by
explaining the the Spiritual Sense of the Text to which any Vegetable relates,
or Spiritualising the Virtues and Uses of each of them, by a Theological
Commentary, Meditations, or practical Application, etc. or in any such way or
manner, (for herein is subject and room enough) as shall be the Result of your
better Judgments, and as the great Sanctifier of All things, shall dispose your
Hearts to such Sacred Emanations.

Now if the Grand Physician, should so far incline, illuminate, and direct any
Divine Genius to the Performance of such a Pious Improvement; It would render
this Herbal far more useful and acceptable, to every common Reader, and pious
Soul, containing then not only Advice and Medicines appropriated to the Body,
but also Spiritual Advice and Physic for the Soul: Here the Divine and
Physician, would both convenire in uno tertio, both their Aims are Curing, the
first heals Corpus per Animam, the last Animam per Corpus. And it is a felicity
to a Patient (whether sick in Soul or Body) to meet with Persons, both of much
Science and Conscience in their respective Professions. As he would discover
himself to be, that should be the Author of such a pious Work, provided he be
Orthodox in the same: He would be a great Instrument of doing good in his
Generation, by alluring and quickening Christians to Scripture study, and
advancing them in Scripture-Understanding, Holiness and Practice of
Christianity, and therein answer the Ends of his Sacred Function So, the
Advancement of God's Glory, and the Salvation of Souls.

Now having shot my Bolt, and though weakly and foolishly enough, I confess,
yet will it not anticipate a crowd of Zoilists, made up of all Parties, from
whom I expect carping Censures, the common fate to all Books, but the sharpest
detracting Blasts, will emanate, (as I guess) from the Medical Province, pufl'd
out by some Self-conceited Tyro's, that st^ut about and swell, inani Doctorum
Titulo, (as the Renowned Sylvius de le Boe complains) Traducing and
Calumniating all Authors and Practitioners, that are not so academically
plumed, when they themselves are more Verbal, than sensitive Artists: It is not
the ascertaining or starting some groundless insignificant Eloquent Notions, or
new lettered Hypothesis in the Theory, nor a Diploma of M. D. painted as a
reward, can make a Man the true Servant of Nature, Morbi non Eloquentiae, typ.
Lex.
sed remediis curantur, says Celsus. And the six Necessaria of Hypocrat^s, ^re
previously required to constitute a true Practical Artist, among which the
(...) is not the least, and Education from a Child, that is, working and
studying under a Practicer; a sensible canvasing the Elements and Principles of
the Materia Medica, by Pharmaco Chemical Inspection, (before over much
Phylosophical Contemplation) and then a sedulous Observation (at the Elbow of
an Experienced daily Practicer) of matter of Fact in Diseases, and of the
Methodical Application of Remedies, according to the Indicantia, etc. These are
the Manuductory Things, that Constitute an Expert and Real Artist, which agrees
with Aristotle, Nihil in intellectu quod non prius in sensu.

I Would not here be thought to declaim against Academical Studies, I have
Reason to revere those impregnating Fountains, and too highly Honor many of
the Faculty, thence dignified; I only aim at the Genteel Momi's, for whose
Fine* bred Education a Laboratory is too smutty, and the Materia Medica will
daub their Fingers. But I advise, he that would be a Conscientious and* Real
Artist to Remark what I have hinted at, and he will never have any reason to
repent, especially, when he comes to Practice, if he begins his Cures as Mesue,
in nomine Dei, and imitate Lelius a font Eugibinus, that in all his
Consultations, concluded with Prayer for Success: And remembering that of Crato
fuge Avaritiam (and intemperantiam) atque sine Invocatione Dei nil facias,
God's Blessing being the primum Mobile of all Success; For it is he only that
commands Health, the Physician is but Manus Dei. He that for a Sublime Wit, and
all the Ornaments of Learning, is Nature's Pride, without Religion, is but a
Learned Dunce; Great Parts, without great Piety, will procure one day the
greater Punishment: Therefore he is the most skilful Physician, (for a Soul and
Body) that by sincere Diognosticks, discerns the Plague of his own Heart, and
studies to heal his depraved Nature, by the renovating Balsom of the Blood of
Jesus, who (...) Sano.
has that Name (though chiefly in a Spiritual Sense) from his Healing Nature
and Property.

But hold Pen, Ne suitor ultra crepidam, yet, why? May not a Physician advise as
abovesaid, and inspect the Sacred History of Vegetables: We find many Divines,
(as Mar silius Ficinus was semel and simul) a Priest and Physician at once,
some of them being instigated by their unsatiable Avarice, do often here in the
Country, ex Officio, not ex Charitate, practice, and like Monopolizing
Ambodexters, get Money with both Hands, contrary to the Precepts of Holy Writ,
but verbum sat.

To conclude, quid feci, feci, I expect envious Detractions, for veritas odium
parit; I will not value the invective Sarcasms of Carping Sciolists, but shall
have just cause to rejoice, if any young Student, Theologically or Physically
inclined, may in the course of their Studies, reap in a little time what cost
me many Months, and if this Design take, and be acceptable, expect the Sacred
History of Minerals, etc. Now that the Faults of this Botanical Essay, may
redound to my self, the Profit to others, and the Glory to God, is the aim and
desire of,

Learned Sirs, Your most Humble Servant, W. W.

An Introductory PREFACE TO THE READER: Of what Religion, Profession, or
Calling soever, that uses to Read the Holy BIBLE.
Christian Reader,
IT was the well-designed Wish of Iacobus Acontus, a most Excellent Man, [that
not any thing should be Written and Published, unloss it were something New,
which should both be of the Author's own Observation, and might make for the
Glory of God, and the Edification of the Church, etc. That so nothing might be
done, which was already done, but what was yet to be done,] how far, Reader,
this Scripture Herbal is agreeable, and does answer to this Learned Man's
Option, will, upon thy perusal of it, sensibly appear unto thee; for never any
yet writ, as I could hear of, in a peculiar Tract, The Sacred History of
Vegetables, or Plants, which are mentioned by their proper Names, in the Sacred
Scriptures: So that I may say without Arrogance, it is a new Thing in its
Design, which will tend, I hope, to the Glory of God, and the Edification of
the Church.

Herbs and Trees are as old as the Third Day, springing then by virtue of the
Almighty's Herbascat Terra, Genesis 1. v. 11. Let the Earth bring forth, which
words are yet in force, as an uncovered or new dig'd Earth, without Sowing or
Setting any Seeds or Roots will prove unto you. Adam was the first Botanist we
read of, his first Work was the Art of Simpling in the Garden of Eden, which
some Expositors conceive to be the whole World, which is most absurd, for we
read Adam was driven out of Eden, and it must then follow out of the World; But
the soundest Judgments, Skilled in Divinity and Geography, place it between the
Rivers Tygris and Euphrates, in the delectable and fruitful Plains of Chaldea,
a Plantation fit for his Inspired Understanding: that Adam had knowledge in
Simples, may be more strenuously inferred from the Text, than that he was a
Chemist, and did dive into the Mineral Kingdom, as some fond and high flown
Chemists would fain have it believed, thereby to advance the Honor and
Antiquity of Alchymy.

But the first Botanical Author, that the Scriptures testify of, is the famous
Herbarist King Solomon, who writ copious Herbals, even from the stately Cedar,
to the common Herb Hysop; we have no reason to conjecture, that he employed his
Thoughts on Minerals, but that he made a strict Disquisition into the Nature
and Virtues of all Simples, is unquestionable; And least the Works of the
Wisest of Men should have fallen into Profane Hands, and have been too much
adored and abused by Heathens, Charmers and Magicians, to some impious and
nefarious Ends, or for greater Reasons than we can fathom, or ought to dispute.
All-wise Providence, which disposes of all Things for the best, snatched his
Books away, by causing good King Hezekiah (as some think) to burn them; And the
loss of them, which way soever it came to pass, must needs cause every Sober
Physician, (that is affected at the good or ill Success of Remedies, and
conscientiously tender of his Patients Health) deeply to lament for Books of
such an incomparable Value, must have conduced far more to the Health and
Welfare of Mankind, than the Works of all other famous Men besides: But the
ways of Providence are inscrutable, and I shall only hence observe. that the
Botanical Studies of this inspired and wisest Prince, concerning the same
Plants, which are to us Physic. Food and Raiment, is an Argument to me, that
Vegetables are more naturally and properly the Subject of Medicaments than
Minerals.

Now should I give an Account, how gradually the knowledge of Plants has been
advanced, and how in all Ages one or more Learned Men have successively
labored in the same, I should exceed the bounds of a Preface; some have given
us their Description and Figure, others have adjusted their Names, Kinds, Order
and Kindred; more have informed us of their Nature and Virtues, and some of
late have denoted their Alimental and Mechanical Uses, and a few have
Anatomically inspected their Texture and inward Structure, and demonstrated the
visible Constitutions and Uses of their several parts, together with their
Odours, Tastes, etc. deducing from thence their Qualities, Operations and
Virtues.

As for the ensuing Tract it contains variety of Matter, and differs much from
our common Herbals, being chiefly composed and done, according to the late
Doctrines of Phytology or Herbarism, grounded upon the Information of our
Senses, and confirmed by a Chemical Analysis of Principles and Experiment:
Whereas in our common Herbals, the Virtues of most Plants are with much
uncertainty, and too promiscuously ascribed to them; so that as one observes,
if you turn over a Herbal, you shall find almost every Herb to be good for
every Disease: Now for thy further Satisfaction, I will first declare the
Occasion of this Work; Secondly, Give you an Explication of the Method used
herein; and Thirdly, The Ends and Usefulness hereof.

As to the First, it is the product of Paternal Obedience: A Father, who was
not only a great Scholar, but a great Divine, commanding it, with this Saying
of Cassiodorus, [The Scripture is an Heavenly School, wherein we may Learn
whatsoever we are either to Learn, or to be ignorant of,] The Prerogative of
Scripture before Humane Writings, consists in its breadth and depth, being an
inexhaustible Fountain, affording always either a Rule, or some Sayings or
Examples, relating to whatsoever Subject we are to treat upon; In this
Vegetable Subject, it is more copious than at the first View I took it to be,
making mention of no less than Seventy and odd Trees, Shrubs and Herbs, many
whereof are Foreign to us, and peculiar to those Countries, where the Sacred
Scriptures were Penned: The Inclinations of my lean Genius, together with the
Reasons and Encouragements of some Divines, (particularly the eminently Learned
and Reverend I. B. in the County of Salop) caused me after some time, to put
the abovesaid Command to the Trial; And the Embrio of it being conceived upon
their further View and Approbation, it is grown up into the following Form.

And that thou may the better comprehend and understand its Methodical Shapes
and Order; Thou will find, Reader, in the first place, each Plant in its
Alphabetical Order, and in what Books, Chapters and Verses of the Holy Bible
they are mentioned in. Secondly.

N. K. D. P.] Signifies unto thee, their Names, Kinds, Description and Places;
bear you have the true and synonimous Names, both Latin and English adjusted;
The Differences of the Plants of the same Family, specified; The Parts and
Products, as Fruits, Liquors, Excrescences, etc. observed; The Art of Raising
them by Seeds, Slips, etc. and the Countries and Places where they most delight
in, are lastly denoted. Thirdly,

Virtues and Uses.] You have next in Order, grounded upon the Testimony of our
Senses, as aforesaid; And to render it acceptable and useful to the meanest, as
well as to the most accurate Philosophical Reader; I have inserted also the
Aristo^elian Qualities of every Plant, whether Hot, Cold, Moist, or Dry, to
which and occult Qualities, all the Effects and Operations of Herbs,
accumulated and set down in our common Herbals are attributed, and to please
others, have not forgot to place each Plant under that Planet, which is said to
have Influence and Dominion over i^: In a Word, the Medicinal Virtues ascribed
to each Vegetable, are no more than such as may be rationally deduced from the
Essential and active Principles of the Plants, as Salts, Spirits, Oils, Acids,
Bitters, Sweets, etc. or what the great Philosophers, and most Authentic
Practical Physicians of this Learned Age, both Galenists and Chemists, have
allowed they have, or affirmed of them in their Works; or lastly, They are such
as I have inserted of my own Knowledge, arising from a strict Disquistion of
the Principles, joined and confirmed with a sedul^us Experience of Twenty Years
Practice and upwards: Moreover, besides Medicinal, you have many other Uses
observed, that some of the Plants are good for, or may be put unto, relating to
Planters, Gardners, Mechanics, Husbandmen, etc.

Also I have not forgot to Point out their noxious Qualities and their Cures;
All which are adorned and conformed with Historical Observations of their
Propagation, Cultivation, Alimental and Mechanical Uses, and unusual Accidents,
etc. of them, so that every Reader may ^ind some what herein, relating to his
own Calling, Profit or Pleasure. Fourthly,

In the Shops.] Is the last Paragraph, containing under it the Names of all the
Preparations (Sc. Simple and Compound Medicines) of each Plant now kept for Use
in the Apothecaries Shops, and prepared according to the London Dispensatory,
set out by the Learned and Honorable College of Physicians, and you have not
only their Names, but also something of the Nature and Usefulness of the most
of them; Notifying also some other Medicines out of other Dispensatories, and
best Practical Authors, amongst which are divulged some Arcana's or Nostrums
(as they are termed) of some Eminent Practitioners and Learned Doctors of this
present Age, which I have picked up, having had such Means and Opportunities
for the same, as are not fit here to declare: And this I have done in gratium
Tyronum, and for the Legitimate Sons of Art, whether in Physic, Pharmacy, or
Chyrurgery, who will find several Things in this Tract, relating to their
respective Professions, which are not Vulgar, but Acceptable; and as for
others, that think they know and can do better, I wish they would oblige us
all, rather than Censure and sind Faults in others. Lastly,

I come to the End and Usefulness (which is the Summum bonum) of this
Theological Herbal, and how Serviceable and Advantageous to Christians it will
be. All those Persons whatsoever, that seriously peruse the Holy Bible, will be
sensible of for to Read, and not Understand, Advantageth not: In the Sacred
Scriptures you meet with Calamus, Juniper, Cypress, Olive, Palm, with many
other Outlandish and homebred Plants, which perhaps you know not any thing of,
nor for what Reasons the Holy Ghost, by the Inspired Penmen of the Bible, does
mention them in several places. Now Reader.

Keep this Expounding Herbal in thy House, and fly to it as a faithful
Interpreter, which will inform thy Mind, and add to thy Understanding; Here
thou may sind that the Sacred Word of God, yields not only Spiritual Physic,
for the Cure and Salvation of thy Soul, but also Medecines and Sustenance for
the Cure and Preservation of thy frail Body; Food and Raiment, and many other
things relating to some good end or other, in the way of thy Calling, is here
pointed out unto thee; and for thy Health thou will find here that the
All-Comprehending Word does yield thee Medicines easily prepared, opposing all
Diseases: And all this directed by the great El-shaddai, (Genesis 17. 1.) The
All-sufficient Helper, who is also pleased to style himself Jehovah Rophe the
Lord the Physician, (Exodus 15. 26.) And here let me digress a little from my
Province, and give thee three Rules as a Divine, as many of them do more often,
Physic: First Read the Scripture in an orderly and methodical Way. Secondly,
read it with a purpose to practice what you Read. Thirdly, Read it with Prayer,
That God would open thy Eyes to Understand the wondrous Things contained in the
same. There are many Souls, whose delight may be to repair often to this
Sanctuary of Scriptures, (as St. Austin styles them) but cannot discern any
thing there of the Lord or De Civ. Dei Lib. 20. Cap. 32. prope finem.
of his Glory, they frequently Read, (but like the Ethiopian Eunuch) Understand
not, or not to purpose what they Read.

To Conclude, if this Task, which to shun the Baits of Idleness, and to improve
the small Talent, the Almighty Instructor has entrusted me with, I first
entered upon, and now by Divine Assistance have finished, may be any ways
assistant and helpful to any Christian in Scriture Understanding, or to any
other good Purposes or Designs; I then have my Aim and Desire, and it will then
Encourage me to give the World a Second Part, to wit, The Sacred History of
Minerals; and not regarding the censorious Invectives of Ill-humour'd Men,
perhaps I may (Deo juvante) proceed to a Third Sc. Historia Animalium Sacra, in
which I find Wolfangius has done many things very well already. But that
Reader which would mightily advance this Work, for thy general Good and
Benefit, and cause me farther to inspect the Mineral Kingdom, is the
Illustration and Pious Improvement hereof, by the Hand of some Pious minded
Clergyman, as I have Requested in the preceding Address: For the Sacred
Scripture contains Matter and Words enough for thee; All others, and my self,
to expiate our Thoughts to a good End upon, it being (as one Emphatically
speaks) the Book of Life, Whose Original is Eternal, whose Essence is
Incorporeal, whose Knowledge is Life, Hug. de Arc. Noe.
whose Writing is Indelible, whose Inspect is Desirable, whose Doctrine is
Easy, whose Knowledge is Sweet, whose Depth is Unsearchable, whose Words are
Innumerable, and only One Word, (ALL) which All, that it may be unto the
studious Reader, is the the sincere desire of

W. W.

A CATALOGUE of all the Trees, Plants, Shrubs, Herbs and Fruits, mentioned in
the Holy BIBLE.
ALgum Trees. Almug-Trees. Almond-Tree. Anise. Apple Tree. Ash-Tree. Barley. Bay
Tree. Beans. Box. Brambles. Briars. Bullrushes. Calamus. Cane. Cassia. Cedar.
Chestnut. Cockle. Coriander. Cucumber. Cummin. Cynamon. Cypress. Elms. Figs.
Firr. Fitches. Flags. Flax. Garlic. Gophir-wood. Gourds. Grapes. Grass. Hasel
Tree. Hemlock. Hysop. Juniper. Leeks. Lentils. Lign Aloes. Lillies. Mallows.
Mandrakes. Melons. Mints. Mulberry Tree. Mustard. Myrtle. Nettles. Nuts. Oak.
Olive. Onion. Oyl-Tree. Palm. Pine. Pomgranat. Poplars. Pulse. Raisins. Reeds.
Rose. Rue. Rush. Rye. Saffron. Shittah-Tree, or Shittim-Wood. Spicknard.
Sycomore. Tares. Teyl-Tree. Thistles. Thorns. Tree of Life. Vine. Wheat.
Willow. Wormwood.
Historia Vegetabilium Sacra, OR A SCRIPTURE-HERBAL.
Algum Trees.
2 Chronicles. 2. 8. and 9, 10, 11. Ligna Thyina; Thya. (...) Sacrifico, quia
Sacraficiis apta. It is rarely mentioned by our late Botanists; The Ancients
differ about it, and so do Expositors, Theo^hrasus and Pliny will have it to be
the Tree of Life, I do not mean that in Genesis 3. 22.) of which, see orward.
Purchase says Dr. Dee writ a Tract almost solely of these Trees, wherein he
impanels a I^ry of 12 Sorts, viz. Fir, Box, Cedar, Cypress, E^ony, Ash,
Juniper, Larch, Olive, Pine, Oak, and Sandal Trees; To see which would prove to
be the Algum or Almugin. And gives it Pine, or Fir, as Josephus has, who from
some old Record, Building ^r Fragment, possible might assure himself; Some
judge it Cedar, because Algum grows in Lebanon; but whether Pine, as some
assert, or the choicest Cedar, I leave to the disquisition of the Learned
Divines. Only it was most precious, odoriferous and beautiful, fit to refract
Sounds, and the most durable Wood. for Theophrassus attributes great Honor to
the Thy^ of immorta^^^ Materiae, for the Pillars, Roofs and Rafters of old
Temples, as Soloman's was, Harps, Psalteries, and his Royal Palace, were made
and built of the never-rotting-Timber thereof.

Almond Tree.
ALmond. Genesis 43. 11. Exodus 25. 33, 34, and 37. 19, 20. Number. 17 8. Eccles. 12.
5. Jer. 1. 11.

N. K. D. P. Amigdalus, Amigdal^, (...), the Almond Tree is in Leaves and
Hours like the Peach-Tree, but it excels it in height, magnitude, and Age; the
Fruit is also like Peach, but only the Nut or Stone is included in a thin
Cotton, and soft Cutis (being also longer and smoother, which contains the
Kernel or Almond; in Taste bitter or sweet, which denominates two Trees, the
Roots whereof grow deep: Amigdalae Peruvianae, or Almonds of Peru, are of the
Taste of common Almonds.

Hot Countries are the Natural places of the early Vegetation of these Trees:
Quae prima inter Arbores evigilat, first awaking and germinating from their
Hyemal repose, before all others; Flowering in January, and acelerating its
Fruit to Maturity by March; but not till August here in England (if at all)
where these Trees are slowly propogated in some curious Gardens.

The bitter Almonds may be raised from our English Fruit serving for i^s own
Kind, or to make Stocks for ^precots or Peaches: The daily use of Almonds, ^y
the Apothecary. Confectioners, and Sadies, demonstrates, what vast quantities
are annually transported hither by the Merchants.

The largest and best Sweet-Almonds, by our Tradesmen, are vulgarly called
Jorden Almonds; the smaller Sort, Valentia Almonds, from a Province so named in
the hot Country of Spain; We have also Barbados Almonds, and other Sorts. Fine
Mouthed Venus lays Claim to the Sweet, and gives Mars leave to take the
Bitter.

Virtues and Uses.
The Sweet-Almonds are temperately hot and moist, do Nourish, Lenify, and are
anodine. And therefore are commonly allowed by Physicians, to be eaten with a
few Raisins, for a Supper, by their Gallican Patients. The Bitter-Almonds are
hot and dry in the 2 Degree, attenuate, open, cleanse, and provoke Urine.

In After-Pains, arising from the Sharpness of the Blood, Oil of Sweet-Almonds,
drawn fresh without heat, is excellent; but our ignorant Midwives give seldom
more than one Ounce, when certainly two, would do better; Also two Drams of the
same Oil, beat with a little Sugar Candy, given to a new born Child, is
excellent to cleanse it, and prevent Gripes. Almonds are also the Basis of many
sorts of Emulsions, prescribed in Fevers, Pleurisies, Catarhs, etc. according
to Indications and Mind of the Physician: And every charitable Lady and
Gentlewoman, knows how to prepare Almond-Milk, to nourish their poor and
languishing Neighbors.

The Oil of Bitter-Almonds, I have often prescribed (the best I find) in
Nephritick cases, to the honest Countryman, who boggles at no ill-tasted
Medicine,* when Life lies at stake; for the Truth is, they seldom crave help
till then: Some say the swallowing of 5 or 6 bitter Almonds in a Morning
fasting, prevents Drunkenness that day; but I judge if I should play the
good fellow, they would cheat my Head, and consequently my Feet also.

The Dry-Almond-Cakes (after the Oil is expressed) a thing of small value, are
used by some Barbers (and ordered by some Physicians as well as the Oil it
self) in Sweet-waters, Fucy's, Sacculets and Beautifying-Medicines. A cheap
Cosmetick-Ball, I have often used, framed of the dry Cakes, Oil of Tartar per
deliquium, and a little Camphire, beaten up together in a Mortar to a Paste,
Ball or Globulus, which has cleansed and beautified the Face, far beyond the
extolled Medicines of Mountebanks and Women.

In the Shop^. The expressed Oil of Sweet, and of Bitter Almonds is constantly
kept, but is apt to grow rancid and austere; therefore the Oil drawn fresh,
without heat, is the best for Internal or External Uses. A few drops of
Rose Water, may be added in the beating of the Almonds, to rarify the Oil,
facilitate its Extraction, and add to its Odor; a Secret not known, or at least
not used by every Artist.

In a Hoarsness, Oil of Sweet-Almonds, fresh drawn, Syrup of the Juice of
Ground Ivy aa ss, Sugar Candy powdered, ss, shake them well together till they
be well mixed, and look white, and lick it often with a Liquorace Stick: The
Syrup of Hedg-Mustard will serve as well with the Oil, if not better.

In Fits of the Gravel and Stone, after Clisters the next Potion is admirable.
Ol. Amigd. dulcium recent. extract. vin. alh. a^. iss. Succ. Lymon. Sir. Hor.
Pap. Dealth. a^. vj Decoct. fol. Parietar. vel Rad. Dealth. iiij. Ms. f.
haustus.

Ol. Amigdalarum amarum, or Oil of bitter Almonds also, any condited Almonds,
vulgarly called Almond Comfits, are generally kept in our Country Shops, the
last being prepared by the Consectioners more to please the Palate than for any
Medicin al use they are put to; the bitter Oil is good in pains of the Ears,
and Cosmetical.

Almug Trees.
1 KIngs 10, 11, 12. The same with Algum.

Anise. Matthew. 23. 23.
NK. D. P. Anethum is put by Jun. and Tremel. for Anisum, (...). Anethum is the
Herb Dill. Anise has round and hollow Stalks, divided into small Branches at
first, next the Ground, with somewhat broad round Leaves; but after some time
indented Parsly-like Leaves, only smaller and whiter; then appear Spoky Rundles
or Tufts of white Flowers, after Which, the Seeds sweet in Odor, do possess
the Top. There is a larger sort described by Clusius. It naturally grows in
Candia, Syria any other Transnearnie hot Countries, and is to be found in some
few English Gardens.

Virtues and Uses.
Anise-Seeds are under Jupiter, hot and dry in the 2d. Degree, being accounted
one of the 4 hot Seeds in the London Dispensatory, if fresh and not old, they
attenuate, discuss, and have an aromatic Taste; so excellent against Wind, and
Colds in the Breast. One Scruple of the fine Powder given to Newborn Infants in
Pap, cleanses their Bodies from Maternal Dregs, whence arise Gripes, Wind, etc.

In the Swellings of the Throat (vulgarly Almonds) and Palate, I use to order
Figs, Liquorace* ^aisius and ^n^se-Seeds, each a small proportion, to be boil
in Water, for ordinary Drink, and it seldon fails me; a good Cataphasm of green
Wormwood* and Hogs Grease beat up together, being applied outwardly.

In the Shops. The Power called Dianisum, Anise* Seed-Water, and Chemical Oil
of Anise-Seeds.

The common Anise-Seed-Water sold in our Country Shops* is the most fulsom and
i^s^lubrious of Strong Water, being a mere adulterated, and sophisticated
Hodg^-Po^ge* co^po^mded by the Wholesale Distillers, of other d^c^yed Dregs*
Waters and Spirits, with a few ^^cid ^n^ d^cayed Anise-Seeds, and good store of
^olossus or common Treacle to sweeten it; but if truly drawn, it expels
Wind, and warms a cold Stomach bravely.

Author* differ about the Distillation of the Oil of Anise-Seeds, and other
like Seeds, some will have them digested before Distillation, and pretend they
will yield the more Oil, the holy of the Seed bieng more opened: But they
consider not, that these Seeds do abound with Volatile Salt, which is of a
Median Nature; so that the Water cannot attract it to it self by the length of
Digestion: It Is true Digestion preceding, the Water will be more spiritous and
effic-cious; but it yields much more Oil, if the distillation be begun,
immediately after the commixtion of the Seed and Water.

The Use and Virtues of Chymmical Oil of Anise-Seeds are well known, being much
more efficacious in all respects than any other Preparation of Anise-Seeds; it
chiefly operates on the Breast and Lungs* and excellent in the Wind-Choliks*

Let the plain Countryman, in a Consumptive Cough, and stoppage of the Lungs,
take the following Electuary, much used by a popular Physician in
Worcestershire.

The Flour of Fen-greek Seed ss Liquorace-Powder ij common Molossus or Treacle
iij Oil of Anise-seeds 6 Drops, mix them, and lick it often, and esteem it (tho
a plain thing) an excellent cheap Medicine.

Apple Tree.
APples, Prove. 25. 11. Cant. 2. 3, 5, and 7, 8, and 8. 5. Joel. 1. 12.

N. K. D. P. Malus, Roma, (...) Heb. Tappuach. Malus* or Malum with an
Adjective, is a common Name to many Trees; as Malum Cotoneum a Quinor Malum
Granatum a Pomgranate, ac. But Apple Trees are properly called Mali, whose
Family or Kindred is so infinite, yet well known, tho of such diversity, as I
think it is harder, to number, and give a distinct* account of all Sorts of
Apples, than it is of Grapes and Figs: The Exotic Apples are, Balsamina
mirabilia, the Balm Apples: Rom^m Hierosolytanu^, Jerusalem Apples; Mal^
in^ana, Mad Apples; Roma amoris, The Love Apple. Stramonium, or Tho^ Apples,
have been in England about 100 Years; the Fruit or Apples of this green su^cous
Shrub, are round, or oval, coated and armed with many spicous Pricks; the
included Seed is black like unto Tare-Seed. Malus Sylvestris is the Crab-Tree.

Virtues and Uses
The Foreign Apples, and Thorn Apples are all under Saturn, cold in the 3^d
Degree. Thorn Apple is sown, fructifies and perishes the same year, I have
sowed it in March or April, gathered the thorny Apples at September, to p^serve
Seed for the ensuing year; Nay, I have known it (in some ground) spring again
from its fallen Seed.

English Apples are either Acid, so cold and binding: Sweet, hotter and
Laxative; or Subacid or Vinous* which are of a mixed Nature, and are the best
Cider Apples: Cider once in the year is drawn without fire through so many
Trees, as for many huge ^limbecks, in which it is prepared and brewed by- Divine
Chemistry, there needs no Furnaces, nor digesting Balneums Matrasses, nor
suffocating Smoke, to hasten our consuming Lungs* This Connatural Drink varies
in its Taste* Body, Strength, as it is more or less mixed with Water, or drawn
from various commixed Apples* or any other ways sophisticated: for the
Cyder-Sellers have Tricks. In Devonshire there is in esteem a wholesome, stout
Mulberry Cydor, they mix a black, full-ripe Mulberry, in the Grinding or
Pressing with a full bodied Cider, having a respect to the quantity commixed,
for the better Tincture and Relish.

We say the Spaniard is slow at every thing, but they may say the Englishman is
more slow, at the best Improvements of our own Country, or else we might have
Mulberry Cider, and Fruit enough in places, remote from the Cider Countries,
where we pay sauce for sophisticated stuff. I am of opinion, that
Elder-berries, mixed with a sweet Cider Apple, would make a wholesome, well
colored Cider, proper in many Diseases. As for Mulber^ies* they are scarce and
not improved; as wise King James the First, who first sent for them, did
design; but in their stead, your Turnip Cider is of late years, cunningly
imposed upon us for right Apple Cider, made by Fermentation, yet but a small
and weak bodied Liquor, as I found it this last Summer in the West.

It is generally granted if your Apples, be right Cider Fruit, so that it be
full bodied and strong, and kept in large Vessels, the larger the better; it
will hold good without decay some years: Sir Jo. Winter had a Vessel, contained
30, or at least 28 Hogsheds hooped with Iron Plates.

Cider is a kind Vehicle, and proper Menstrum for Medical Matters; the best
Pepin Cider, duly ripened, and kindly fermented, is a peculiar Remedy for a
Consumption. All strong and pleasant Cider, cleanses and exciteth the Stomach,
which if foul, (being the Kitchen of the Body) is the Mother of most Diseases.
This English Wine strengthens Digestion, and infallibly frees the Kidneys and
Bladder from breeding the Gravel and Stone: This is the Excellency of the best
Red-Streak, void of all Adulteration. B^^tle Cider is commonly more windy than
healthful, being generally a great Cheat, especially in Countries remote from
the Cider ones*

In the Shops. The Altering Syrup; the Magistral Syeup, and the Purging Syrup
of Apples; the Ointment called Pomatum.

But I must not forget to recommend to all Apothecaries and Chyrurgeons the
keeping of the vngt. Stramonis, or Ointments of Thorn-Apples; for I do affirm
from reiterated Experiments, that there is no Plant in the Vegetable Kingdom,
does sooner allay Inflammations, and cure all Sanable Burnings and Scaldings
from what cause soever, as this does. Those that know it, usually keep a Simple
Cyntment only of the Juice and Hogsgrease decocted, for the first Application,
till the Fire is fetched out, as they vulgar word it: And it is exceeding useful
in all hot cutaneous Eruptions, Pustles, Erisepelas and Inflammations,
particularly in the (...) and Gou^. Also another Ointment, that does digest,
mundify and incarn is made of the contused Leaves, or Juice; and Oil Olive
decocted to the consumption of the Juice, then strained, and a little Rozin,
Turpentine and Wax, being added; which besides Vlcerated Burnings, heals
fresh inflamed Wounds, and especially old Ulcers, upon the Glandulous Parts of
the Penis, and else where. I find Dr. Bates used it, under the title of Ol.
Pomosum.

Ash. Isa. 44. 14.
N. K. D. P. Ornus by Jun. and Tremel. vulgarly Fraxinus affrangendo quia
fragilis. Ornus is the Wild Ash, which Pena and others make to be Sorbus
Sylvestris, or the wild Service-Tree; it is called also Quicken-bean, or
Quicken-Tree, having white twisted Flowers in May, and clusters of Red Berries
toward Autumn, frequently seen in some part of our County of Stafford, in our
thick Copses (and mountainous Groves) according to that of Virgil. -- Saxosis
Montibus Orni. Dr. Plott in his Survey to Staffordshire, found the Sorbus
Pyriformis, which grows wild in the Moor-lands, though judged by some not to be
of English growth; for L'Obelius, Mathiol^ and Bauhin, place it in France,
Italy, and Germany; But the first that is said to find it in England, was my
old Friend, and most exact Botanist, Mr. Pit, an Apothecary of Worcester,
since dead, who sent the description of it to the Royal Society, which I shall
set down for the encouragement of young Botanists; yet hoping that Mr. Newton a
Botanist from London, whom I accdentally saw near Malverne Hills in
Worcestershire, on the 26 of July 92. going to search what Plants he cold find
on those Mountains, in order to the completing a large Herbal, he was about)
may find it, and give us a further account of it.

Philosoph. Transact. Numb 131. It resembles (says Mr. Pit) the Ornus or
Quicken-Tree, only the Ornus bears the Flowers and Fruit at the end, this on
the sides of the Branch, next the Sun, the Fruit has a dark red blush, and is
about the bigness of a small Jeneting Pear; in September of so harsh astringent
taste, that it almost strangles one, but being then gathered, and kept till
October, it eats as well as a Medlar.

The Ash-Tree is by some said to be Male and Female, and may be Raised by
Sowing Keys in October. or November. not too deep, as they do in South-Spain, or
Sow them with Corn, cut your Crop, and you find your Ashes; it may be Raised
from a Bough, slipped off with some of the old Wood, a little before the Bud
swells: It delights in any Land, so not too wet; for Ash like Cork-Tree will
grow where the Bark is peeled off.

I have seen the two Ashes, which Dr. Plott mentions, which grow near Gnosall
in this County; which, tho they grow out of the Ground almost three Yards
asunder; yet are joined by a cross piece passing between them, about five Foot
from the Ground; such Accidents and Excesses often falling to Trees in their
growth, which often looks miraculous hereafter.

Virtues and Uses.
Ash, say Astrologers is governed by the Sun. A late Author says the Wood of
it may be used instead of Guaicum* to cause Sweat; the Bark of the Tree is much
used in Diet Drinks, and prescribed by able Physicians, for the opening of the
Spleen and Liver, in Hypocondriack cases, Dropsies and Jaundice, etc.

The immortal Willis in his Chapter de Hemorrhagia, speaking of Remedies,
stopping Fluxes of Blood by Sympathy or Antipathy says, Hem Ligni ^ fraxino
Virgineo, etc. Also a piece of Wood cut from a Young Ash, first sprouting about
the time the Sun enters Taurus; the Efficacy of which remedy in the Civil Wars
many worthy of Credit a firm, to have tried, and aproved for stopping the
Haemarrhagies of wounded Soldiers; yea, some still with much Confidence do
prescribe it in all Fluxes of Blood. Thus far that learned Man.

The Berries of the Quicken-Tree, or Wild-Ash, are bitter and acid, purge
waterish Humors bravely, therefore good in the Sourvy, and in Dropsies in
Diet-Drinks. And it is said, it will yield a Liquor (if Tapt as we do Biroh in
the Spring) highly commended in Scorbutical and Splenetical Affects.

Some Authors confidently aver, a Serpent will rather creep through a Fire,
than over a Twig of Ash; This is an old Imposture of Pliny, who either took it
upon Trust, or else we mistake the Tree.

The Ash, and wild Ash. Trees in Calabria (A Country from whence our best Manna
is said to come) are esteemed, say Authors, because Manna falls as a Dew, and
congealeth on their Branches in the greatest Heat under the Dog Star, and is
not found on any other Trees; yet Mathiolus says, it is sometimes found on the
Fig Tree. Vid Chrisostom. Magnenus de Manna.

In the Shops. The Kernels of Ash-Tree-Keys, called Lingua Avis, or Semen*
Fraxini. and Sal. Fraxini. or Salt of Ash-Wood.

The Seeds are called Lingua Avis, being like the little Tongue of birds; they
are hot and dry in the 2d. Degrees. open inside, and are specifically appropriated
to the Spleen; the modern Chemists ( Glanber especially) highly extol these
Seeds, to break the Stone; and the Learned Sir John Floyer says, they resemble
in taste the Jesuits Powder, and are a good Diuretic in the Stone; the fixed
Salt of Ash-Wood, is drawn from the burnt Ashes, and made as Salt of Wormwood
is, and excels in the aforesaid cases, being usually prescribed in Chalybeal
and opening Electuaries, and in Ammoniack Pills (as it is in Pil. Tartar.
Quercitani) in Obstructions in the Hypocondies, Melancholy, Cachexies, or ill
habit of Body, Jaundice, Scurvy, etc.

Bark of Ash, Tamaris. Ivy, Hartshorn, Liquorace, of each i^ or a Pugill or
two, Bottle them up in a Bottle of Ale (or White Wine) for a Drink to be long
followed, in the Rickets, Spleen, Jaundice, Worms, etc. This being held, as a
great Secret, by some, and called the famous Ricket Wood, or Drink.

. Sem. fraxin ij. Miles Olis. Coriand. Ppr. Succin Alb. Pull. liqui^it. aa. j.
Terebint^* Venet. vel Cyprian. q. s. f. pil. instar pisorum, dos. iij. vel
iiij. quotidie primo and ultimo. This Prescription is the form of an usual Pill
much used formerly, by a Famous Doctor in Bristol, in Splenetical, Nephretical,
and other Chronical Diseases, altering, and adding to them, other Ingredients,
as he saw occasion, as Bac. Junip. Flor. Sulph Mast. Rhabarb. Oc. Cancror. etc.
And these generally concluded, a Course of Physic in Chronical Diseases, the
cure of which Disease was his Masterpiece. And tho these are plain and
Galenical, yet great things have been done with them.

Barley.
Exodus 9. 31. Lev. 27. 16. Deuteronomy- 8. 8. Ruth 1. 22 and 2. 17, 23. and 32, 15,
17. 2 Samuel 14. 30. and 17. 28, and 21. 9. 1 Kings 4. 28. 2 Kings 4. 42. and 7.
1. and 16. 18. 1 Chronicles. 11. 13. 2 Chronicles. 2 10, 15. and 27. 5. Jo^ 31. 40. Isa.
28. 25. Jer. 41. 8. Ezekiel 4. 9, 12. and 13. 19. and 45. 13. Hos. 3. 2. Joel. 1.
11. Jo. 6. 9, 13. Rev. 6. 6.
N. K. D. P. Hordeum. (...), Hordeum distichum is common Barley. Quod spica
binos ordines habet Hordeum dictich^m minus, is Sprat-barly, Hordeum
Polystichum, Square or Bear-Barly or Barly-bies, which is sowed commonly in the
Northern parts. Hordeum nudum, or Naked-barly, which chiefly grows in Germany.
If I should go about the descriptions of Barley, every Plough-boy would correct
me; or tell which is the most proper Soil, and Time, to Sow it, then most (...)
and Farmers, would contradict and laugh at me.

Virtues and Uses.
Our common Barley is cold and dry in the first Degree, and is under heavy
Saturn, and far colder than Wheat; the Flour digests, molifies, and ripens hard
Swellings in Pultiss^s; but it makes but a heavy, black, unwholesome Bread,
especially improper for Scorbutical and Melancholy Constitutions.

B^rly o^ Co^n, when ripe, and reap'l, its fermenting of principally vegitation
are shut up, and would, constantly remaindormant, till it either be committed
to the Ground, in order to fresh vegitation and multiplication of its Species,
or be Malted. Now by Malting, the vegitative fermentation is perverted, and the
same Principles driven on to another design of Fermenting in Water after
Malting, in order to the making our Drink; for Malting is a kind of
Fermentation, whereby the internal Spirit and Salt of the Corn (which is the
Soul and Life of it) is acuated, exalted and dilated; And then it is quite of a
more Noble alimental Nature, being fitted for the further Chemical Operation of
the Brewer, who, (if the Maulster, who is not the worst of Chemists, if he has
made it Secundum Artem, without an Empyreumatick Gust or Smath) extracts from
it, with a proper Menstrum (Rainwater is judged the best, especially Vernal
Rain for March-beer) our old English drink good Ale, which comes from the
Danish word Ocla, and (if without those vile Commixtures, and unwholesome
Additions. Some in order to its Energy, and other compotating ends, are accused
to use in the Malt-mash or fermenting Vate) is a most wholesome connatural
Drink.

Beer (which only differs from Ale, by being well Hopp'd, in order to its
Purgation and Preservation) was formerly more used by our old English Gentry
and Housekeepers, than in these days, being laid much aside, upon a vulgar
erroneous Opinion, possessing the Minds, not only of the Vulgar, but also of
some understanding Men; As that Beer high boiled with Hops, generates the Stone
and Gout; which is an absurd mistake, for Hops by Authors, are granted to open,
cleanse, and provoke Urine, and are prescribed often by some Physieians in the
Stone it self; so that it is not the Temperate use, but the abuse of old Beer,
in drinking it intemperately, even to Surfeiting, or suffocating the natural
Heat, whence Crudities, Phlegmatic Juices and Tartarous Humors are bred, and
grow predominant in the Body. Thus Food and other things may perform the same,
when taken at unseasonable times, and in such quantities, as to obtund, and
overpower the Calidum innactum, and so excite and beget unnatural Heats, even
to the calcining and overfixing the Balsamical and Nutritive Juices.

I will grant that too large Draughts of old sparkling rich and brisk Beer, may
put a Nephritick Person upon a Fit of the Stone, Gravel (or Gout) by exciting
the Humors, and precipitating the serous Salt Matter in the Blood, into the
Kidneys, by its active and diuretic Quality; but that it generates Gravel or
Stones, I cannot opine: And he that in his young days, accustometh himself to
drink his Ale, mixed or dashed with a little Beer shall never, when he is old
have occasion to repent; for Beerish drink keeps the Stomach clean, excite; the
Appetite, and carries off ill Humors by Urine; whereas, fat, new, ropy and
sweet Ale (which too often is none of the clearest) dulls the Appetite, creates
Clams in the Viscera, and lodges too long in the Urinary Passages.

And tho it is commonly said, that the torturing Malady of the Stone, is grown
more frequent and predominant, since that the use of Hops here in England; yet
let it be considered that this Disease reigned, and was known here, abundance
of Years, before this Vegetable was brought in use amongst us; And that it has
been Intemperance and Luxury, and other Causes, prevailing in these latter
days, (and not old Brisk, Spiritous Beer (without Fret and Bitterness) that
has been the Author of this crucifying Malady; for such as throw it upon Hops,
are mistaken in the original of Diseases.

Now such as would know more of Brewing, and of Malt Drinks, they may consult
Lob. and Jo, Bohinus. Lib. 8. Cap 2 where de Malto sive Byne, Beer and Ale are
largely discoursed of. And as for my self, it may be concluded that I am a
Toper at old Beer, by my appearing such an Advocate for it.

In the Shops. Only French Barley, and a smaller sort of it, called Pearl Parley;
I forgot to tell you under the first Head, that Hordeum nudum, otherwise called
Tritico-Speltum, Naked Barley, is sown at Hamstall Ridware in this County, where
it is called French Barley, because of its likeness to that in the Shops; so much
use^ by Physicians and Ladies, and at Brocton and Ellarton-Graing, where it is
called Bare Barley, and Wheat Barley, because says Dr. Plott, tho its Ear
be-shaped like Barley, its Grain is like Wheat, without any Husk.

Ptisan was a Meat of the Ancients (which we now call Barly-Cream) made by
decocting, cleansed and Par-boil'd Barley, till it bursteth. But Barley boiled
and pulp'd, best represents the Ptisan of the Ancients; we now call our
Barly-water Ptisan, which every Gentlewoman and Nurse, knows how to prepare, as
also the use of it; In France the Apothecaries keep Ptisans ready in their
shops, prepared of Barley, Liquorish, and Raisons, for sale, which are
ordinarily bought, and drank to cool, moisten, and cleanse; these Ptis^ns yield
nourishment, as is fit for Chollerick and Sanguin people in Fevers, and such
as have hot affections of the Liver, Stomach, and Reins.

Bay Tree. Psalm. 37, 35.
N K. D. P. Arbor indigena virens, Jun. and Trem. vulg. Laurus (...). Exo^ick
Herborists make this free differ in its leaves, for it grows plentifully in
Italy, and other hot Countries, the Laurus Sylvestris, or Tinus, the wild
Bay Tree, is not found in England, though the common Bay Tree, which is a
sempergreen, is now commonly found in most Gardens, though apt to die through our
Northern blasts, from which it should be defended in March, it rather delights
in the shade than Sun, and may be propagated by stems slips, or layers,
delighting in hot gravelly soil. Laurus Serasus, or Laure^l^ is the Laurel.
Tree, which is the Mezereum or Spurge Laurel, called Mezereum Germani^um,
Chamel^^, Laurea Tri^mphans, quia Triumphatores Laureo Coronabantur: It now
grows wild in this Nation, particularly in Cobham-Park in Kent, but is found
to be a chief Sempergreen and Ornament in the Gardens of the Curious.

Virtues and Uses.
Astrologers appoint the Bay Tree to flourish under the Dominion of the Sun,
and its domestic Sign Leo. And the Laurel they say is a churlish Martial
Plant. The leaves of Bays, are hot and aromatical, used in Baths and
^omentations, for cold distempers of the Nerves and L^mbs, and in hot
Ointments, as in Martiatum; many Barbers use them for their grateful smell, to
^erfume their Lavatories and Washes.

The leaves of Laurel are of a very hot and biting quality not ^^ed in Physic,
only many Country people give three leaves dried and rubbed to a fine pow^er,
in ^osset-drink, in an Ague, three times before the fits, which strongly Vomits
and Purges them, and I can testify, it has cured several; though Sir John
Floyer says, The Deco^^ion of the leaves and Roots, would neither purge nor
vomit his Dog; perhaps it operates more freely, being given in substance.

I^ is too churlish a thing, for silly Women to meddle of, being apt to
inflame, and ulcerate the Throat, and produce an Hypercartharis, except it be
first prepared as Esula, or Tythim^ls are, by steeping the leaves ^or 24 hour
in the best and sharpest Vinegar, then dried and powdered; then two Scruples or
a Dram, mixed with a few Aniseeds, and drank in Posset Drink, sweet Whey, or
Wine, will more s^fely operate upon libious Serosities; for I have known it
purge bravely poor people in dropsies.

The ol^ Naturalists say, The Bay Tree has a property not to be bur^ by
^^^^tning, and that it defends a Man near it, not only from the violence
thereof, but also from the Malignity of the Devil and Witches, and therefore
say they, the Cock resorts thereto in Tempests; This is like many other of
their Stories, but agreeable to this, is the Impress or Device of one, who
caused a Cock to be painted under a Laurel with this Motto, Sit Evitabile
fulmen.

The Laurel or Bay Tree, was consecrated to Apollo, growing plentifully on
Parnassus, under which it is feigned the nine Muses dwelt; hence it is the reward
of Poesy, and hence our Poet Laureat, For it is storied, That Apollo turned his
Mistress Daphna, (she flying from his Amors) into a Laurel-tree, whence it has
the name of Da^hnoides in the ancient Herbals. And every Schoolboy can tell
you, how the old Romans dedicated this Tree to Triumphs and Victory, sending to
their Generals, after a Conquest, a Coronet or Garland of Laurel, with which
triumphant Token they came home, (the Senators meeting of them) and were
received in great Pomp and State; hence also grew Bays, or Laurel by a
Metaphor, signifies a Victor, or denotes a Triumpher.

In the Shops. Bacca Lauri, or Bay Berries. Electuarium, and Emphastrum de
baccis Lauri. Ol. Laurinum, or Oil of Bays: and Vnguentum Laurinum, or
Ointment of Bays, these five standing preparations in our Dispensatories, and
Shops, demonstrate the great virtues this flourishing vegitable does yield, for
the Sanity of us Mortals.

The Bay Berries are hot and dry in the third degree: do mollify and resolve,
used chiefly in the Cholick, and pains arising from wind, excellent in
paralitical affects, and move Urine. As much of them in powder as will lie on a
new Shilling, has eased the after pains, given in Posset Drink: Experience
has made me greatly to value the Electuary, being excellent in the fi^s of the
Cholick or Stone, dissolved to an ounce in a Clister, and the Plaster seldom
fails in cold flatuous pains, applied to the Belly in the Cholick, or to other
afflicted parts.

The Oil of Bays, and the Ointment commonly sold in the shops, are generally a
sophisticated hodgpodge, and the Ointment, vulgarly called Oynt of Bays and
Quicksilver, commonly sold in some Countries to the Country folk, to cure the
Scabbado or Itch, is a very dangerous Ointment, and does often make work for
the Sons of Art. And I do here advise all rational persons, that they touch it
not themselves, nor Children, seeing that there are many other methods, and far
better and more safe Ointments to conquer that nasty, vexing, and spreading
Distemper.

Beans. 2 Samuel 1y, 21. Ezekiel. 4, 9.
N. K. D. P. Fab^ (...). The Family of Beans are large and well known, though not
so numerous as Pulse the large flat Garden Beans (in some Countries called
French Beans) being white, red, or blew in color. These again differ, and are
much less in other places: The manured field Bean faba equina, commonly sowed
for Provender, either alone, or with Pease, and then it is called in the Vale of
Evesham, Powse, and the sowing time about March Baniard: In some Countries
northward, are few or none of this sort, (as about us) are sowed, but the more
Oats. I do opine there is a specific difference, if well observed, between
the Garden and Field Beans, and not an aecidental one, as some Botanists hold,
caused by Soil: Phasecli, Kidny-Beans and French are (...) also, nursed up by
some Gardiners, and Flori^^^, to please the Mouth and Eye: The Fabae
Sylvestrts, vel veterum, is a wild black Bean, not bigger than a Pease and of
ill Taste and Odor.

Virtues and Uses.
Venus loers Beans, for the distilled water of the Flowers, is much used by
Ladies to varnish their beauty with, and wash away Freckles Green-beans are
Cold and Moist, and excrementious, when dry, cold and dry, binding and windy;
of the large Garden Beans is cooked that Excellent dish of Beans and Bacon, a
constant Treat at a Country House whilst they are in Season; Field Beans, and
Powse do feed Horses, and fatten Swine; the Kidney-beans boiled, shells and
all, are so eaten (as a rare dish) at some Tables, and nourish more than the
former being hot and moist, in the first degree, of easy digestion. Et Excitat
Salacitas: Some Authors forbid the use of Beans, as dulling the senses, and
procuring troublesome rest and dreams; but I have no complaints of them amongst
the people.

But that Beans and Pease may be rendered more excellent and useful, by being
malted, appears by the good, and well boiled Beer and Mum, which B^anmalt
affords to the Inhabitants of Germany; and our English Maulsters and Brewers,
do well know the Advantage of mixing a small proportion, with the ^arly, to be
malted together; for say they, it makes Beer to mantle, flower and smile at
you, in your Tankard or Glass, and renders it more I risk, Volatile and clear,
but two many, in Malt gives it an affrusive Smack and Gust; In some parts of
this County, they make Malt of Oats, which mixed with that of Barley is called
Dredg- malt in the Morelands, and of it they make a fresh and lively, drink.
my old friend and Patient, Mr Tho: Bowyer, who lived and died in the
Morelands,) a Gent. that was exceedingly tortured with the Stone and gravel did
often Keep Oaten-Ale, which (he said) cleansed the Stomach, raised the
Appetite, and provoked Urin, (as I my self found) bravely.

If there were sufficient store of Oats, how profitable might they be to all
Brewers, and middling sort of people, if Maulted, in a dearth of Barley;
Altering the Taste a little, with a handful or 2 of Hay, Heath or Ling, Broom,
and Ground Ivy, or Robin leaves, which also would preserve it.

The Contemplation on the variety of Vegetables and plants, which the great
Ruler of Nature, has provided, and designed, for one and the same end, and
usefulness, should put all those, whose Inclinations lead them to dive and
Search into the Secrets of the vegetable Kingdom, upon admiring, praising and
thankfully serving the God of all Variety, and also excite them, to a further
disquisition, into the Difference, and Nature of Plants, in order to the
Sanity, and sustenance of poor decaying Mortal, for though now we are crowned
with plenty, and variety, yet Dearth and Scarcity may come too soon and if the
inevitable Creator, of Nature and all its productions should for our Sinful
provocations, suffer it to fall upon us, most, of the Numberless Sinfall Souls,
in this Nation would be glad of Beans and Oats for Bread and Beer which now
make our Horses to Caper.

In the shops. Aqua Horum fabarum, or the Water of Bean flowers: Sal stipitis
fabarum, or the Salt of Bean stalks and shells.

The first salt, from the burnt Ashes of bean-stalk's (the method of which I
would here insert, but that it is so difficult to be well prepared, without
^cular inspection) is a great diureti^k, used chiefly in the Nephritis and
Dropsy.

The Ashes of these stalks, and of Wormwood, Broom, twigs of a Vine, and of the
Ash-tree, or any three of them are often prescribed by Physicians, to make a
Lixivium or Lie: eight Ounces of them, infused four or six hours, or all night,
in three or four pints of White Wine, Cider, Ale, or Water (by such who are
poor) close stopped on warm ashes, after filtrated, or well strained, then taken
from four to eight ounces twice or thrice a day, has cured many, by carrying of
the cause of a Dropsy by Urine; it being the fixed Salt, contained in the Ashes
of these Vegetables, that do the work.

In hard and swelled Testicles, Hydroc^le, or watery Tumors of the S^rotum, the
farina fabarum, or Meal of Beans mixed up with Vinegar, Water, Honey, and Oil
of Camomile into a Pultiss is excellent: or the Meal may be boiled up in Red
Wine, adding Camomile and Melilot Flowers powdered gross, some Oil of Roses
^and Camomile, so make a Pultiss.

Quaer. Whether the Boona Bean, sive Phaseolut Major, is the Faba of the
Ancients- Vid. Dod. and Jo. Bauhin.

Box-Tree. Isa. 41, 19, and 60, 13.
N. K. D. P. Arbor opaca. Jun. and dream. vulgarly Buxus (...) ^ drusitate and
opacitate foliorum; There is a lesser sort called, Bastard Dwarff Box, Chammae
Buxus: Box by some Authors is called the Europian Guaicum, it grows in most
Gardens.

Virtues and Uses.
This is another Sempergreen, the leaves being hot and dry, of a loathsome
smell, accounted to be under sullen Saturn: It is seldom used in Medicaments,
only some Practitioners make it a Succedaneum, to Guaicum, for the Bark of it
being bitter and rough, resembles its taste; therefore some use it in these
days in Decoctions. and Drinks to Gallican Patients; a piece of singularity and
fancy, seeing Guaicum wood is so cheap, and certain in that grand Cure. The
leaves chopped small, are mixed with Provender, to kill the Botts in Horses, or
boiled for a Drench.

This Vegetable is raised with ease, by slips, and the weighty and hard wood
thereof, is much used by Engravers, Carvers, Mathematical Instrumentmakers.
Pipe-makers, (as si Buxos inflare juvat, Virgil,) and other Mechanical persons,
as Box-Combs, which, as one says, bear no small part in the Mili^ia of the
Female Art. Box-hedges, formerly an ornament in Gentlemen's Gardens, are quite
laid aside, to give way to more exotic and rare Trees; yet I remember, still
curiously kept at Bellaport, the Seat of that lover of Antiquity, the learned
William Cotton Esquire a loving Patron, and most noble Benefactor to this most
ancient Burough.

In the Shops. Ol. Chym. Lign. Buxi, or the Chemical Oil of Box-wood may be had
in some shops, being draw'd as the Oil of Guaicum, and is said to equalize it
in virtues, being excellent in Contusions, Ulcers, pains and ro^^enness of the
Teeth; and is accounted by some to be the Ol. Lign. Heraclei Rulandi, and
looked upon to be highly Narco^ical; but Sir John Floyer says, he cannot
perceive my n^rcotick quality in this Tree. Box-wood yields more Spirits and
less Oil, than Guaicum wood; four pounds of wood, gratifying your pains, but
with one ounce of Oil, though you have four pound of Spirit or Phlegm; because
this wood is fuller of Sulphur than Guaicum, but is not so ponderous and saline.

Schroder says, The Extract of the wood of Box, is sudoriferous and specifical
against the Epilepsy, Worms, and Putrefaction, and the Dose of it a small Pill.
^ut this is never kept in the shops, and I only name i^ for Tyro's sake, who
may love to try Experiments, finding such a good Author commend it.

Bramble. Brambles. Judge. 9. 14, 15. Is. 34, 13. Luke 6. 44.
N. K. D. P. Cynosbatos, spina, Jun. and Trem. Vulg. Rubus vulgaris, vel
Sylvestris, (...), is the common Bramble, or Black-berry bush, known even to
little Children, who love to pick and eat the Berries, which are called, Mora
Rubi, Mora Bati.

Rubus Idaeus is another sort of Bramble, called Raspis or ^asberry-bush;
framboise, Hindberry-bush, the Berries are cal^ed, Mora Rubi Idaei. This sort
also grow wild in the North of England on the Mountains, and in Wales
abundantly, and called, Idaeus ab Ida Non^e.

The Rubus Alpinus, humilis; or Rubus Saxatilis is found in the North West
parts of Yorkshire, and on the sides of diverse Mountains.

Raspberries are now ma^^r'd in many Gardens, being raised by slips, off-Sets,
and Suckers, by the ^overs of Fruit, and Gardiners.

Virtues and Uses.
Bramble belongs to Dame Venus in Aries, say our Astrological Artists; and it is
fit it should, considering what excellent Wine is made by Ladies and
Gentlewomen, of these Berries: The unripe Fruit of the Bramble, are cold and
dry, and very astringent; but ripe Black-berries are more temperate, sweet, and
subacid, as are Rasp-berries, which are not so binding and rough, but of a more
grateful taste: the buds, tender tops, and leaves, dry and bind, are used in
Gargarisms and Lotions (with Allom and Honey) for Ulcers and Cankers in the
Mouth, and Inflammations of the Throat and Almonds: Rasp-berries are judged
more Cordial than Black-berries, and of both, are curiously prepared artificial
Wines, very bri^k and pleasant, especially of the Raspis. This ingenious Age
being wonderfully improved, so that every Gentleman's Housekeeper is become an
English Vintner, making various Wines, from the different Fruits they propagate
in their own Gardens. And these female Artists do strive to excel, and outdo
one another, in bragging of their Receipts, each hiding her own, as the best
and greatest Secret; when alas, all their Tricks and Methods do terminate in
(that great word) Ferment^tion; and every Chemical and Rational Brain can
Elixyrate such Domestic Wines, by the dictates of his reason; but to gratify
my Readers, of the Female Sex, I shall set down a way of preparing most
excellent Wine, from Black-berries, and Rasp-berries, which method (I am sure)
is none of the worst.

Take a gallon of Black berries, picked and cleans^d from filth and rottenness,
white powder Sugar half a pound, pour on them a quart of w^ll boil'^ (...),
half cold, into an earthen Stand or wooden Vessel that has a tap in the bottom,
and stir it, cover it close, and let it stand for a week, then draw it out into
another vessel, let it stand all night to settle, and pour off the clear the
next morning, and bottle it with a lump of Sugar in each bottle. You may run
the thi^ker part through a Flannel, and let it stand to settle and refine.

For the best Rasp-berry Wine, Take of cleansed Raisons of the Sun, four pound,
bruise them in a Mortar and put them into an earthen ^ot or Stean, that will
hold four gallons, to them add six quarts of ripe Raspberries* bruised with a
large Spoon, and pour upon them two gallons of boiling hot water, that has
boiled an hour, then add one pound and a half of Loaf Sugar, stir it, set it in
a Celler for three days, then let i^ run through a Flannel into a Run^let, in
which let it stand three days more, to refine: then bottle it with a ^ump of
Sugar: And observe, that your water, (for diver^ good reasons not suitable
here) sed in all your Artificial Wines, should first be very well boiled, even
to the consumption of one half of it; for thereby your Wines are more exalted,
rich and stronger-bodied, and will keep much longer.

And Note further, That crude Tartar powdered, and stirred in with your fruit,
and water (allowing about one ounce to two gallons) has greatly conduced (in
another Artificial Wine) to the raising of an higher ferment, and the making of
a more exalted, spirituous, and perfect Wine. And it might be worth while to
try it, in a small quantity of these or other sorts; but not too much, for
Acids hinder fermentation.

In the Shops. only Sir. Diamoron* or Mel Mororum, or Sir. e moris, (which you
please) and is the Diamoron Nicolai, made of the unripe juice of ^lack berries,
and Mulberries, of each lb i ss. Honey lb ij. boiled gently to a due
co^sistence of a Syrup, and is called Honey, or Syrup of Mulberries, a well
known Medicine for ^ore Mouths, a little burnt Allom being added to it; for
this Syrup cools and cleanses the Mouth and Throat, from filth and s^urfe in
Fevers and Inflammations, being ordered in Gargarisms, Mouth-Waters, with
Plantane Water and other things in the aforesaid cases.

Briar. Briars. Jud. 8. 7, 16. Isai. 5. 6, and 7, 23. 24, 25. and 10. 17. and
32. 13. and 55. 13. Ezekiel. 2, 6. and 28. 24. Micha, 7. 4. Heb. 6. 8.
N K. D. P. Paliurus. Spinus. Oxyacanthus. Spina and Sentis. All these are
named for Briars by Jun. and Trem There is a confusion of Names in Botanical
Authors about Brambles, Briars, Thorns, Haw-thorns, Barberries, Dog-thorn, etc.
but I shall, to direct the young Botanist, endeavor to explain and adjust them.

Rosa Canina Sylvestris, is the wild Briar, Hip-tree or Dog-Rose, called
Cynosbatus, Cynorrhodius: Rosa Canina Sylvestris Odorata, is the Eglantine
Rose, or Sweet Briar, which may be called Eglantinus: Paliurus is Christ-Thorn,
or White Thorn. Oxyacanthus is Haw-thorne, Oxyacantha is Barberries. Sentis and
Vepres are common words for Briars, and Brambles.

There is no specifical difference betwixt the Dog-Rose or Hip-tree. and the
Eglantine, exc^pt the Odor and fragrant smell And both are so vulgarly known
(the last being propagated often in Walks and Gardens* growing from Suckers,
Stems, or Slips, and often found wild in Hedges) that I shall proceed to their

Virtues and Uses.
It seems Venus in Aries, loves these sweet though prickly Plants, having a
respect for Mars, especially in his own house Aries. Both these Briars yield an
Exeres^ence* or Spongy-Ball, called, though falsely, Bedegaur, or Bedegnar, which
is Spina Alba, White Thistle, not White Thorn; and it is mistaken also for
Spongia quercini generis, or Oak-Balls.

The Rose-leaves of these Briars boiled in Whey, purge as Damask-Roses: Sir J.
F. says* The Fruit must lie and pu^re^ie before the Conserve of Hips be made.
Let the Apothecary observe that. And that he had after fermentation, distilled
a very fragrant Spirit from them: The Briar-balls dried and powdered* I have
given with good success in spitting of Blood.

In the Shops. Cons. fruct. Cynosbati, or Conserve of Hips, which is pleasant
and made like to Marmalade. It is said by Authors, to be a Lithontriptick, but
I know it to be a cooling, strengthening and somewhat binding Conserve, useful
in some Fevers, in a hot ^iver and Kidneys, and excellent in the Rhe^ma^ism.
Willis prescribes it in the Scurvy in a hot constitution, proper also in
H^morrhoides, Fluxes, and spitting of Blood. You have this Conserve in
Pharmacop^a Bateana, under the Name of Cons. Hepatica Corallitana, more
curiously made up with Red Wine, and Asterisked, as a thing the Learned Dr.
Bates frequently used; a sufficient commendation of its Excellencies. vid* Aq.
Cynosbati comp. Bateani. in morbis nephriticis.

An Eminent London Doctor, who is a Knight, prescribed this Conserve lately to
a worthy Country Gentleman, troubled much with the Stone and Gravel, and I
being consulted about the Bill, told the Patient, That I was of Opinion, it was
not prescribed as a mere provoker of Urine, or a breaker of the Stone, (for
this Gentleman had read much Physic) but to strengthen the Reins and Kidneys,
as some peculiar Medicines do; for that Diuretics over much used, did not only
heat and debilitate the Kidneys, but also forced away the Serous, and thinner
part of the Blood by Urine, and attracted the thicker and impure unto them,
whereby the Gravel and Stone was not diminished, but augmented and indurated.

As to Briar-balls, see Dr. Willis, in Exemplis Haemopticorum, cepitque bis in
die, etc. and took twice in a day, the powder of the tops, and chiefly of the
hairy Excrescences of Cynorrhodon, or Dog-briar; which only Medicine a certain
Physician renowned formerly, for the ^ure of spitting of Blood, used with great
success; neither did our Patient receive a less happy effect from that
Medicine; for presently after he escaped altogether free from a Cough, a
Catarrh and spitting of Blood.

I have inserted this Observation of Willis, to encourage young Practitioners,
(for the old think they know better things) to the Study and Use of simple and
cheap Medicin^s for the poor; wh^^h they mu^t look after as w^ll as the rich*
For Charity is an ess^ntial virtue in the co^stituting a practical Physician,
and visits and advice to the poor, b^^et Es^^mation and a good Name; and among
them. if ever you would experimentally know the virtues of Simples and cheap
Medicines, you have daily opportunity. Joh^nnes Praevotius has writ an inge^o^s
^ract in Latin, e^tituled, Medicina Pauperum, wherein there are plain and
simple Medicines for all Diseases in the poor: Paracelsus assigus it for an
only cause, why Hippocrates was so fortunate in his Cures, viz. because the
common people had a strong conceit of his worth. Spes and Confidentia plus
valent quam Medicina.

In the Rheumatism, with Phlebotomy, the following Electuary may be an Example
to a Practical Tyro. Cons. Rosar. Rub. j. fruct. Cynosbati ij. ^pec. Diatrion.
Sant. Coral. Rub. Subtle. pulv aa. j. Sir* Paralys. q. s. f. Elect Dos.
quantit. N^^ugland. post Phlebotiam, and ter in die, superbibend. cochl. 8 vel
10 Julap. sequent.. Aq. pap. Rb. xij Paralys. iiij. Lumbricor mag. iss.
Saccbar. op^. j. Ms. f. Julap. Remember a Glister once in two days, and
Phlebotomy three o^ four days till the pain abates.

Bull Rushes. Exodus 2. 3. Isa. 18. 2. and 58. 5.
N* K. D. P. Scirpeae, Junci, Jun. and Trem. vulg. Juncus ^quaticus m^ximus. In
some Countries they are called Bumbles, they are said to be a S^urnine Plant,
well known to ^^light ^^ Bog^y places, and River-si^es. The old Her^als say,
it is soporiferous, greatly offending the B^ain; yet the Seed^s good to stay
Flux^s. ^lcok upon it as cold and waterish, and did neve know it used in
Medicine* Pliny says, The Roots annually die, and they spring again from the
fallen Seed. Vix cre ^^. See Rushes

I d^^otes (in the last place quoted in Isaiah) an Hypocri^^* who on a
Fast Day, feigns to keep the public Fast* and ^ings down his head like a
Bull-Rush. As many such ^ypocritical Fasters at this time appear on our Monthly
Fasts, now appointed and solem^ized for the Welfare and Pr^sperity of The^^
Majesty's, Their Armies, Undert^king and Government; a sort of Men that T^im
all their ^ctions and Words in public Company, and for ^ivate ends and
self-interest, to a formal degree of Love and Loyalty toward our Magnanimous.
Incomparable* and most Heroic King William; but are a dege^erated, hollow and
rotten race of Protestants, most of which did think, when He was Prince of
Orange, He had a Just Cause and Call to undertake what he did, and become our
Deliverer* but ^ow do Cabal, Whisper, and Murmur* living in a hoping and
hankering condition* after the ^lav^ry and Fleshpots of Egypt. But haec
obiter, le^ving them always to ^ang their Heads like a Bull-rush, and the
Bull-rushes to the Matt-Makers, Chair-makers, etc.

Calamus. Exodus 30. 23. Cant. 4. 14. Ezekiel. 27. 19.
N. K. D. P. Calamus Odoratus. Jun* and Trvulg. Calamus A^om^ti^us. (...)
Aroma^^cal Reed* or sweet Garden-flag* Calamus is Arundo, a Reed, a Cane. The
true Calamus of the Ancients, I doubt, is scarce found in our Druggists Shops,
growing in India and Syria, at the foot of Mount Libanus. The Calamus in our
shops, is the Acorus verus; and the Acorus is ^ Root of the Flag-Tribe; they
are propagated in some of our Physick-Gardens, by off-sets and Su^kers, in a
Natural or Artificial Bogg, requiring moisture; but our Shops are furnished
from Turkey and other Countries.

Virtues and Uses.
C^lamus is bitterish, of hot and subtle parts, and emitteth a pleasant smell,
whence it is attributed in Canticles to the Mystical Spouse. It is used in
effects of the Womb and Nerves, is Di^retick, and Hepatick, being hot and dry
in the second degree and acrid.

In the Shops. The Roots: The Volatile virtues fly off, in the poudering of
them, without great ^are.

Acorus condited, is seldom kept.

Electuarium Diacoron. This strengthens the Nerves, and quickens the Senses,
useful in all Diseases arising from the coldness of the Brain, and sum
venerem excitat. The Dose is half a Dram, being hot.

Sweet-Care. Isa. 43. 24. Jer. 6. 20.
N. K. D. P. Calamus Odoratus. Jun. and Tr. Another Name given by our English
Translators to Calamus. These Plants of Reeds or C^nes, are of a large
affinity: see Reeds. Authors call Arundo Saccharin^, Sugarcanes, Sweet-Canes
also. Sugar Reeds in Brazile are called Tacomaxee, to which place it was first
Transplanted from the Fortunate Islands. Heretofore it was called Mel ^ru
dinaceum, or the Cane-Hony, but since Zucharum or Saccha^um.

Virtues and Uses.
The Invention of boiling and baking of Sugar is not much above 200 years, and
the Refining of it, is since that; a Venetian first sound the Art, and got
above 100000 Crowns by it, leaving it, and his Son, a Knight, who quickly
consumed it. Before our Ancestors used rough Sugar, as it is distilled from the
Canes, and more commonly Honey. Barbados carries the Name, chiefly of our
Sugars; But in St. Thomas, have been (and now more no doubt) ^0 Sugar-Houses,
called Ingenios, in each of them 200 Slaves to work, which did load yearly 40
Ships.

The Indians grind the Canes, as Tanners do Bark, and in some places, the
slaves turn a great Wh^el, as Dogs do a Spit; in others, a Water Wheel, as our
Iron Mills, the grinded Dust is boiled in great Cauldrons, till it has lost
its Sweetness, then strained through Strainers, made with Matts and Reeds, etc.
again boiled and evaporated to the consistence of Honey, which when cold, is
granulated to our Clyster or Kitchen Sugar; which is distributed into all parts
of the World, and by the Sugar-Bakers here in Europe, is purged and refined;
the Faeces or Dregs dreined from it, being our Mol^ssus or common Treacle.

The principle Knack, without which, all their Labor were in vain, is in
making the Juice, when boiled, to Kerne or Granulate, which is done by adding
to it, a small pr^portion of Lie: made with ( Vegetable) Ashes; without which
it would never come to any thing by boiling, but a Syrup, or an Extract: A
little fixed Salt crystallizeth and sixeth as it were, a great quantity of the
Essential Salt of this Plant. The finest Sugar of all, is made with Limewater
(and sometimes Urine) and Whites of Eggs.

In the Shops. Sugar is of continual use, in Syrups, Conserves, etc. It is said
to be of a temperate quality, but I rather opine it is hot; I look upon it as
Procatartick of the Scurvy, and the too common use of it, especially by
Children and Youth; insalutary and prejudicial to the whole ^ody, and is naught
in Hysterical Fits, by reason it rais^s Vapors.

In the Pestilence, or time of any ^pidentical, or contagious Disease, the
following Balsam is an admirable Preservative taken from the bigne^s of a Pea
to a small Nut, in a Morning lasting, dissolved in a Glass of Wine, Cordial
Water, or strong Beer or Ale may serve. Fill an Ivory Box, or a Silver one
gilt, with well refined Sugar, that is reduced to a very small Powder, upon
which let fall drop by drop, some of the distilled chemical Oil of Angelica
Roots, (or any other) until the Sugar be sufficiently impregnated and reduced
to a consistency, capable to be contained in the box, although it were turned
upside down.

Let no one wonder, that Sugar should cause Oil to mix well, and dissolve in
Water, for Sugar is a vegetable Salt whose Nature it is to work; so being mixed
of Sulphur and Mercury, whereby it is rendered perceptible of Oil, whose Nature
it alters, nevertheless so much, that it easily dissolves and unites it self
with Water, by reason of the saline Substance of the said Sugar. And those
Elec-Saccharums you find in Authors, are best prepared (and are properly such)
as this Balsam.

The Oil of Sugar, simple and compound, are standing preparations in some
Shops. The Simple Oil is made with Sugar Candy, and Spirit of Wine, (or best
Brandy, or by some Anise-seed Water) giving it flame to burn to a Syrup, in
Coughs, and Consumptions.

Cassia. Exodus 30. 24. Ps. 45. 8. Ezekiel. 27. 19.
N. K. D. P. Cassia. Jun. and Tr^vulg. Cassia Fistula. It is a round black Cod,
or Pipe, about two foot long, being the Fruit of a fair tall Tree, breaking the
Cod, or Bark, you find a soft, black, luscious Pulp, divided by many seminal
partitions; it is best chosen by its weightiness, and keep it not too dry. It
was unknown to the old Writers, and first by the Arabians, brought into use and
estimation; it grows, it is said, not in Europ, but the Merchants bring it us
from the Indies, Egypt, Brazil, which Schroderus notes as the best, I have
heard, it is found in Jamaica, large and fruitful.

Virtues and Uses.
The Pulp is temperate, only moistens, beloved by sweet mouthed Venus, say our
Astrologers; it is used to keep the Body Laxative, being familiarly sucked from
the broken Pipe, and swallowed in a morning fasting, it does gently purge
Choler and Phlegm, cooling and opening a hot body; an excellent Purge in the
Stone, or Hemorrhoids; but is apt to gripe from its moistness, therefore to be
corrected with a few Aniseeds, etc.

In the Shops. Cassi^ in Fistula, as it comes to us: Cassia extracta pro
Clysteribus, which is used in Glysters, Cassia extracta sine foliis Senae:
Cassia extracta cum foliis Senae: Diacassi^ cum manna. These four last
mentioned, are Electuaries, usually prepared and kept in Shops, for the use of
Physicians: which demonstrate the great Opinion the old Arabians and modern
Practitioners have conceived of this exotic Fruit. The simple Pulpe (is never
kept ready, but) ought to be freshly drawn whenever it is prescribed, in the
abovesaid cases, and the Dose of these Electuaries is from half an Ounce to
two Ounces. The Bark of Cassia, called Cassia Lignea, is also kept in the
Apothecaries* Shops, which is acrid and A^oma^ical, like Cinnamon, and often is
substituted for it, being near it in Virtues. The Trees from which they are
taken, are very much alike, but not the very same, as some will have it.

Cedar-Tree.
Cedar, Cedar-wood. Levit. 14* 4. 52. Numb. 24. 6. and 19. 16. Jud. 9. 15. 2 Samuel 5 11. and 7. 2, 7. 1 Kings 4. 33. and 5. 6, 8, 10 and 6. 9, 15, 16, 18,
20, 36. and 7. 2. 3, 7, 11, 12. and 9. 11. and 10, 27. 2 Kings 14 19 and 19 23.
1 Chronicles. 14. 1. and 17. 16. and 22. 4. 2 Chronicles. 1. 15. and 2. 3, 8, and 9. 27
and 25. 18. ^zra 3. 7. Job 40. 17. Psalm. 29* 5. and 80. 10. and 92. 12. and
104. 16. and 148. 9 Can. 1. 17. and 5. 15. and 8 9. Isai. 2 13. and 9. 10. and
14. 8. and 37. 24. and 41. 19* and 44. 14. J^r. 22. 7, 14, 15, 23. Ezekiel. 17. 3,
22, 23. and 27. 5, 24. and 31. 3, 8. Am. 2 9. Zeph. 2. 14. Zec. 11. 2.
N. K. D. P. Cedrus, Lignum Cedrinum. (...). This Sempergreen, Royal, and
Stately Tree surmounts all others in height, the leaves are small thick, and
odoriferous* the Heart of the Timber is odo^ous, fast, and red The Fruits, or
Cones, called Coni, are shorter, harder, and thicker than the Co^es of the Fir,
and Pine-Trees, and are to be found on the branches all times of the year, not
easily plucked off, and not ripe under two years.

There is another sort called Cedrus Ph^nicia. (Phoeni^ia being a Province in
Syria, wherein Mount Libanus has its first rising) which bears Berries;
therefore Baccifera were a better name, thereby to distinguish it from the
Conifero^s or great Cedar. Clusius describes it under the name of Oxycedrus,
from its sharp poi^^e^ leaves; it grows wild in France and Spain Ther^ are also
two smaller sorts which are Shrubs, called Cedar Juniper, or prickly Cedar: The
other is Lyci^n Ced^r, pricking not, these also bear small Berries, and do grow
in France, Italy, Spain, etc.

Jos^phus says, Cedar was first planted in Judea by Solomon, who planted for
posterity. M^lchior Lussy, in Per^grinat. Hi^rosolym, cap. 13. affirms, He has
seen them on Mount Leba^on, some so thick, that six or seven Men can hardly
encomp^ss one of them with their Arms stretched out: which may be supposed,
says the great Naturalist and learned Physician, Dr. Grew, above half as thick
again as the thickest Oak in England.

And Ranwolsius a Traveller, (and confirmed by Monsieur Mancony) says, Twenty
four Trees are left, where Solomon set fourscore thousand Hewers at work, for
the building the Temple and Palace: But the Relation of Travelers I am not to
question, only we are assured, the^e famous Trees have grown on Mount Lebanon,
where they t^rust their Roots between the Clifts of Ro^ks, the better to bear
themselves against the strong Storms that blow there; and now they grow in all
extremes, in moist Barbados, hot Bermudas, cold New England, in the Bogs o^
^merica, and Mountains of Asia, why then not more in Old-England, besides those
four that grow in the famous Physick-Garden at Chelsey, and at Fulham, as I am
informed, in the Bishop of London's Garden, and some other places.

Virtues and Uses.
All say, this is a Solar Tree, delighting most in Torrid Climes; it has a
fragran^ Turpentine smell, and said to be hot and dry in the third Degree,
bitterish and acrid to the Gust, yielding from its ^mooth Branches, a most
Balsamic Liquor, which the Sun and Air condensates to a white Rosin, called
Cedria, or R^s^^a Cedrina, subtle and odorous.

And it is affi^med, that some of our common Tar distills from the prickly
Cedars, when they are burnt.

These durable Trees, for their perpetuity, have been put to ^rofane, as well
as Sacred uses, for the Gentiles and Heat^ens Carved their Devils and Im^ges of
it, as well as Solomon and others, then (and since many years) did bu^ld their
Magnificent Houses, Adorned Places, dedicated to God's Worship, and
Wain-scotted Rooms therewith, being a Wood non putrescit, nec cari^mse^^it, so
not o^noxious to Worms: And its perfuming Odor, corrects the Malignity and
Putridness of a Morbifical Air, and consequently useful in all close, and
narrow, yet large and populous Towns: Cedar Wood is so dry and brittle, it will
not well endure Nails, but Pins, and so most precious and everlasting Utensils
have been ma^e thereof: so Cedro digna, a Saying of old, denoted a thing worthy
of Eternity.

In the Shops. There is not any thing in o^r Shops, which does proceed from
this renowned Vegetable, except there be any of the Rozin, o^ liquid pitch,
amongst the various sorts that are brought home by our Trading Ships.

This exotic Tree is but little used amongst us, and then for its rarity and
preciousness, as abovesaid; but the ancient Egyptians did Embalm their Dead
with the Juice and Rozin of it.

The Salinator, (the ^mbal^er being so called) first filled the Guts
Glyster-wise, with the Juice or Oil of Cedar, then salted without any Incision
or unbowelli^g, the whole Body with S^l Nitri, (or some other Salt) for 70 days
complete, on the last of which days, they draw out the Glyster, being of such
pow^rful virtue, that it brings the Guts and Viscera wasted away with it: and
the remaining Humidity of the Body were consumed by the Ni^re, and the Skin and
Bones only left which were well anointed with the Rozin, which preserved it
without putrefaction, (is so^e of old did Book^ to preserve them) abundance of
years* They ^^d two or three other ways more co^ly and rich, but this served
the poorer sort of people.

Much more could I say concerning this admirable Vege^able, which is in so many
places mentioned by the inspired Penmen of Holy Writ; but I leave it to any
future Expositor, Commentator, or Learned Divine, who will find it a very
copious Subject to Animadvert upon. See Almug. and Shittah-tree.

Chesnut-Tree. Genesis 30. 37. Ezekiel. 31. 8.
N K. D. P. Platanus, Caestanea. Jun. and Tr. Vulg. Castanea (...): Platanus is
the Plane-tree. A latitudine foliorum, The Leaves of Chestnut and Plane-Tree
being very broad. This Nut is said to be (...); Glans Jovis. Dioscor. Glans
Sardiana from the Island Sardinia Plin.

There have abundance of these Trees, grown in our Woods and Copses, formerly
in England (but destroyed for Timber) especially in Kent, whence still, and in
other places, they are well known to be a large big Tree, the Nut is armed and
coated with a spinous Husk, and falls out at Autumn; the Kernel is coated with
a thin; red Membrane or Skin; in some places the Frult is greater and pleasant,
in others smaller, and of a worse gust.

Fitz Stephens describing London, tells us of a large Forest of these Trees on
the Boreal part of it. But Caesar transplanted them first into Italy, from
Sard^s in Lydia, thence they came into France. England; but Portugal is said to
yield the best kind of them. Those in New England, are in figure like our
common Sort, but a little less, and are not Horse-Chesnuts.

Virtues and Uses.
The Fruit is sweet in Taste, the whole Tree rather hot than cold. Galen
affirmed it to be the best of all Nuts, nourishing well, but apt to bind, being
very dry and windy.

It Is a Masculine, robust Food, the Bread of the Flour being excee^ing
Nutritive, and Moufet says, in places where they abound, Bread is commonly
made of them: B^uy^irus does affirm in his Time (about 100 years since) they
were brought with the last Course to the Table of Princes, and the French used
to make, and eat Chesnut-^ottage. For it is recorded how Chestnuts relieved
France in the Extremity of their Civil Wars, when their Ploughs were forsaken.
As the Potadoes in Barbados did Ireland from two years Famine, in the memory of
many living.

In Italy they eat them with Bacon, instead of Beans, and in France they are
variously Cooked with Wine, Lemon Juice, Rosewater, Sugar, etc. and are
accounted a pleasant and nourishing Treat; but are dyspeptick, and bad in
Cholical Habits of Body, if eaten raw; if Roasted, they more easily descend,
are less windy, ^et Astringent. And it is certain the Rusticks are sustained by
them in Italy, and other Parts, and the Rich eat them decorticated, and
prepared as abovesaid.

The Timber is soft, and esteemed by the Joyners and others next to O^; And
formerly the Houses of old London were Built thereof. These Trees are raised
best by Sowing the Nu^s, as the ingenious Mr. Evelin has set down at large, in
his Book of Forrest-Trees.

In the Shops. Chestnut is set down amongst the Fruits in the London
Dispensatory, as is the Bark; but rarely found in the Apothecary's Shops, being
seldom prescribed to them.

In all Fluxes, especially Uterine, the red Skin dried is admirable, being made
into Powder, with its equal weight of Ivory. Dos. ij. in any proper (...).

In a Cough, and spitting of blood, an Electuary is made of the Farina
Castaneae, or Flour of Chestnuts and Honey.

And in the heart of Urine, an Emulsion of them, made with a decoction of
Liquorish and white Poppy-seeds, is excellent, says a late Author. And it were
a good and profitable Work if this useful Vegetable were by some public
spirited and landed Gent. sowed and propagated, for the Use and Help of the
poorer People, especially in scarce and indigent Times. They differ much,
according to the Soil, as you may observe by those that grow (though not common)
in some Gardens.

Co^kle. Job 31. 40.
N K. D. P. Vitium frugum, Jun. and Tr. i. e. fruges viti^tae, a corrupt Corn,
or spurious Grain, that Job in protesting his Integrity, wishes instead of
Barley, if he has done amiss. Which our Trausl^tors call Coc^le, vulg. (...), a
seminis nigredine, a wild or bastard Nigella* or Gith, or ^ockle, called also
Nigellastrum. Melanthium is the true Nigella Romana, or Gith called also
Githago, Gith, black Cummia, or Fennil-flower. It would be ridiculous for me to
describe this ill weed Cockle, so well known to the Husbandman, for a
prejudicial Enemy to his Corn not only whilst it grows up amongst it, robbing
it of its nutritive Juice in the Earth, but also the small black Seed or Grain,
is a great discredit to Wheat and Barley, if not well cleansed from it.

Virtues and Uses.
The color, ill taste, and vices of this Plant, demonstrate it to belong to
the ill natured Planet Saturn, being hot and dry in the second Degree. I am
unacquainted with its Medical Virtues, but do judge, where it is grinded with
our Bread-Corn, (for some have it more than others) it gives the Bread a
vertiginous Stupefaction. I find the old Herbals say, The parcked Seeds help
the Yellow Jaundice, and being decocted and drank, expels the Stone; and
Hippocrates does order a Pessarium of it in Morbis ^oemini^is; so by reciting
these virtues, the old Adage is verified, Every Weed is good for something.

In the Shops. It Is not used, but the Nigella Seeds are nominated by the
Honorable College of Physicians in their Pharmacopeia They are hot and dry in
the third Degree, accounted to be Pectoral, and Diuretic. And Schroderus
says, They are specifical in Quotidian and Quartan Fevers. They are black
Seeds, and usually kept in the Shops, and are an Ingredient in Electuarium de
bacc. Lauri. Antidotus Mathioli, etc.

Coriander-Seed. Exodus 16. 31. Numb. 11. 7.
N. K. D. P. Coriandrum (...). Coriander is propagated for its Seed, by the
Gardiners in fertile Soil, but most of it is brought from other Countries, as
Germany, etc. and is well known.

Virtues and Uses.
This Plant has a foetid rank smell, and said to be under the hurtful Planet
Saturn, cold and dry, offensive to the Head, and its foetor is esteemed
malignant: The leaves are proper in Pultisses, in hot Tumors and Inflammations*

In the Shop^. S^men Coriandri, or Coriander-Seed. They are hot and dry in the
third Degree, of an aromatic and sweetish taste, somewhat Astringe^^, and
Carmi^ative. They are excellent in weak and tender Stomachs, suppress Belchings
and Hiccoughs, being used to chew after Meat, and so defend the Head from
Vapors.

These Seeds are condited, and called Coriander Comfits, sold in most retail
Shops, both Seeds and Comfits are by Practitioners used in Digestive and
Peptick Confections and Powders, to close the Mouth of the Stomach, stay
Vomiting, and repress Fumes; and good in other flatulen^ cases; being often
prescribed in Vernal or Diet-Drinks, to correct other Ingredients, I mean the
Seeds (not the Comfits) in Drinks.

These Seeds are, or ought to be corrected and prepared, by steeping them 24
hours in White Wine Vinegar, then dried, to correct their volatile noxious
quality, which they derive from the Plant, and is apt to offend the Head: But I
fear the Apothecaries (most of them) are careless, and seldom mind it before
they use them, though ordered to be prepared so, by the College of Physicians.

The Decoction of these Seeds, and likewise of Fennil, Anis^ed, etc. does
signify little, as to their Virtue, for t^o' they lose much of their tastes
themselves, yet convey very little of them to the Liquors wherein they are
boiled; the greater portion of their Volatile parts, and so their Virtue and
Tastes therewith flying away: Therefore an Emulsion made from them with their
own Decoction, is much better, especially if the Medicine be intended to be
Carminative. Grew.

Cucumber. Numb. 11. 15. Isai. 1. 8.
N. K. D. P. Cucumer, Cucumis. (...) Cucumer a curvore: others a Cucuma quod*
ventrem magnum hab^at.

This Vegetable is of a large Family or Tribe, the Melons, Pepons, Pompio^s,
Gourds, Citruls, etc. are all related to it, they differ in magnitude, color,
ponderosity, figure, etc. meliorated and accelerated by the ingenious and
artificial propagation and experience of Naturali^ts, and Gardiners in hot
beds, from February until May, that they may vend them under one another, for
culinary uses. Cucumbers or Mutton-cumbers, are called also Cucumi^ Sa^ivus
vulgaris vel es^ulentus, and being so commonly known, needs not any
description. Cucumer Asininus, vel agrestis, wild Cucumber, is also well known
in hot Countries, and to those that make ^laterium.

Virtues and Uses.
This Fruit is to be chosen green, rather immature and not yellow: they are
cold and moist, under the Moon, yielding little good nourishment, though
Cooked, and Corrected several ways, by those that delight in them, being eat
most simple, they cool hot Stomachs, and Liver, and dull Venus; excellent,
says one, in Ulcers of the Kidneys and Bladder.

The Juice or distilled Water is prised in the beautifying Art, by some Ladies,
and used in deformities of the Skin. Fructus Cucumeris virtute ^itrosa
pr^ditus, etc. says Willis, Cucumbers being endowed with a Nitrous virtue, are
approved by Experience against the Imp^tigo or L^prosie; wherefore let them be
often eaten instead of a Sallad; and also slice and infuse three or four of
them in three pints of water, close stopped all night, and to the clear poured
out Liquor, add two or three Drachms of Sal Pruuell^. Dose half a pound, thrice
or oftener in a day, the Decoction of the Leaves and Fruit do profit also. And
let me add to what the Dr. has said, grounded upon Reason and Experience, That
the Leaves and Fruit are ^^ excellent Antiscorbutick, cooling and p^cifying the
exo^bit^nt Sulphurec-Saline Particles of the Blood, in an a^ust Dyscrasy of the
same, and hot Scorbutical C^^stit^tion: For they move Urine, and fix the
vola^ile Miasma of the ^loo^ by their Nitrous quality, and being waterish and
slimy, they obtund the igneous and faline predominancy thereof.

In the Shops. Semina quatuor frigida m^jora. The four greater cold Seeds,
accounted so by Artists, are emen Cucumeris, Cucumber Seed: Semen Citrulli
(called of the Ancients Anguria) Citrul Seed, and Seed of Gourds, and Melons,
of which see more forward.

These are used in Emulsions, in Feavours, Pleurisies, Phrensies, Stone, and
Inflammation of the Reins, and in cooling Drinks made by Decoction, often
prescribed by Physicians; particularly they are Ingredients in several Powders
in our Pharmacopoea Londinensis, or London-Dispensatory.

Elaterium (also in the Shops) is the bitter Juice of the wild Cucumber,
expressed, evaporated an^ insp^ssated to a hard Consistence. In the Election of
it the oldest is accounted the best; for it loses nor its Faculties in two or
three years, consisting of a great deal of volatile Salt and Sulphur, which
preserves its more ample Matter from Corruption, communicating a Colliqua^ive
and Purgative Virtue; for the whole Plant is hot, bitter and acrid, differing
from the Garden Cucumbers, in that this purges strongly, and the Garden not at
all; yet in being Diuretic they both agree. It is a violent Hydragogue,
purging Phlegm and Water, and often moves vomiting* to be used with Caution, and
not* at all to Women with Child. Dos. from iij. to x. o^* xv Gr.

Praeparatio Elaterii is in the Dispensatory, which is only the depurated Juice
inspissated, as I told you before, and ought to be corrected and meliorated, by
an Extract in Spir. Vini, etc. To conclude, Take what the Famous Willis says
thereof in Cap. de Remediis ad Asciten. Elaterium Hydragogon potentisfimum,
etc. Elaterium is truly held the most powerful Hydragogue, for that it most
sharply irritating the Splanchnick Fibers, and together dissolving, by a
certain corrosive Virtue, the Blood and Humors, compels whatsoever ^erosities
are contained in the Coats of the Bowels, Membranes, Vessels; also i^ the
Glandules and Flesh, to be cast out into the Cavities of the Stomach and Guts.
By which Medicine, happily operating, the falling of the Abdo^^^ does sometimes
follow. The Tincture or Essence may be extracted with Spirit of Wine, or
Tincture of Salt of Tart^r extracted or thus prepared: it is a Sovereign
Cathartick in the Gout, Dropsy, Lues, carrying off all remote malignant
Serosities, and other morbifick Humors in Chronical Diseases.

Emplastrum Sicyonium, or Emplaster of wild Cucumber Roots, is another
Preparation made from this Vegetable, propagated in some Physick-Gardens for
these uses. This Emplaster is seldom kept ready made by the Apothecaries. I
never used it, but Authors say it is purging and drying; and that being laid
upon a Dropsical Belly, it drives out the Water by Stool, and dries up the
Remainder, being seasonably and methodically applied.

In a Dropsy you have a proper Purge from this Plant the Elaterium, tho it is
seldom given of it self, but made up with some other Pill; (Note, the best
Elaterium is that which being held near a Candle, sparkles, and puts out the
light) Also it yields you a Plaster, which is proper in the same case. Vid.
Aqu. Cucumerum comp. Bateani in Nephrit.

Note, when Cucumbers at their first rising, have shot four Joints, you may
hasten the Fruit, by pinching of the head of the Stalk.

Cummin. Isa. 28. 25, 27. Matthew. 23. 23.
N. K. D. P. Cumminum. Cyminum, (...). This Plant grows like Fenil or Anise,
in lesser Asia, Egypt, Spain, Italy, and other hot Countries, whence the Seeds
are brought us; for Coriander and these Seeds* rarely come to perfection here,
especially to such a quantity as to serve the Shop^ ^o vend.

Virtues and Uses
This is a solar Seed, hot and dry in the third Degboth bitter and swe^t, so
differ from Coriander, of an Aromatic, but not pleasant Smell; do digest and
rarify, dispersing Wind and Flatus's of the whole Body: Useful in the Colic,
Tympany, Spleen and Vertigo, is Anodyne, and successfully used in Cataplasms
and Fomentations, Clysters, etc. provoke Urine, and warm the Matrix. Being made
into a Sacculus or little Bag, with Bay Salt, heated and sprinkled with a
little Vinegar, then applied, helps Stitches bravely, and pain of the Spleen.

In the Shops. Semen Cymini, or Cummin-seed are one of the four greater
Hot-seeds; the other three being Anise-seed, Caraway and Fenil-seeds; they are
not so much given inwardly by Practitioners, as the Coriander and these other
Seeds, by reason of their strong, bitterish savor and gust; if they are, they
ought to be corrected as Coriander.

The second Thing is the Powder called Diaspoliticum, made of Cummin-seed
prepared, Leaves of Rue, long Pepper aa. One Ounce, Saltpeter half an Ounce,
beat into a fine Powder; Dose is half a Dram, or as much as will lie on a
Sixpence, in some Syrup, or Cordial* Water or Beer: It Is excellent after Meat
to prevent the putrefaction of it, warms the Stomach before Meat, and
preventetl^ Crudities and windy Belching^*

The third Preparation is Emplastrum de Cymino, or Emplaster of Cummin-seed,
excellent in the Colic, if applied to the Belly, as has been often proved,
helps old Aches, and painful Tumors, caused by Cold and Bruises*

The last Medicine this Seed affords us is the Oleum Chym. Sem. Cymini, or the
Chemical Oil of Cummin-seed; the Dose 6 or 8 Drops in Broth, or other Liquor, A
great expeller of Wind, if it disturb the Spleen, Reins, stop Urine, or in a
tormenting Colic; but in these cases be sure to remember Clysters.

Cinnamon. Exodus 20. 23. Prove. 7. 17. Cant. 4. 14. Rev. 18. 13.
N. K. D. P. Cinnamomum. (...), in the Molucco Islands called Canama, from Can
which is wood, and Nama sweet, so Canama, by reason of its sweet savor.
Cinnamon is the Bark of a Tree as big as an Olive Tree, with leaves like a
Bay Tree, and Fruit like a small Olive, or Bay-berry, the interior Bark of it
being pilled (every third year) and dried in the Sun, then rolled as we see it,
is our Cinnamon; It Is an ever-green Tree, as are all or most of the Moluccoes,
and East India Vegetables; the best comes from Java, and Ceylan, stored with
whole Woods heretofore: At Ormur (an Island in the Bay of Persia, whither it is
brought first from India) it is called Darchini, or Wood of China, and thence
coming to Alexandria, it is called Cinnamon.

Virtues and Uses.
The Astrologers place it under Jupiter (the Sun I should think) being hot and
dry in the second Degrees. possessing a subtle, volatile, Sulphurous Salt (as all
Aromatical Bodies do) which if animated by a proper spirituous Menstruum,
yields as great quantity of an efficacious Spirit, as any Vegetable whatsoever.

The best Cinnamon is that which has the strongest smell, is quick upon the
taste, and looks of a reddish color. It is good to fortify the Stomach, to
help perspiration of gross Homours, to strengthen and rejoice the Heart, and in
Hysterical cases. Half a Dram of it fresh po^dered, and given to a Woman that
languisheth in Labor, is a Medicine worth Gold.

In the Shops. The Water of Cinnamon, the Spirit, the Chemical Oil, the Syrup,
and Powder called Diacinnamomum: All which are great Cordials* useful in the
cold affects of the Ventricle and Matrix, and in other cases, wherein Cinnamon
is well known to be proper and useful.

But observe, that the Virtues of Cinnamon are easily (and indeed too often)
lost by erroneous processes, and common Operations, (as in the Syrup and
Powder) its cordial subtle Salt being best extracted, and preserved with its
fragrancy by Chemistry, and not by common Pharmacy.

The Oil procures easy delivery to Women, is an admirable Corroborative, one
drop being mixed in a little Sugar Candy (to make the Eleosaccharum, or Balsam)
is easily dissolved in any Cordial or Hysterical Waters, or Wine. See under
Sweet Cane.

The Spirituous Water of Cinnamon, is nothing but a rarefied Oil, whose parts
are separated in water (all Aromatic Essences or Oils of Herbs, Wool^,
Flowers, and Barks, that are strong Aromatick^) by fermentation* so as they
become imp^rceptible, two or three Drachms is a sufficient Dose.

Tinctura Cinnamomi, or Tincture of Cinnamon (and of all other odor^ferous
Vegetable^) may be drawn in Spirit of Wine, in which the more Oily parts of
Cinnamon are exalted. This I have used instead of Spirit of Cinnamon Water,
being an admirable Cordial easily made, therefore I do here communicate it to
my Reader, whether Practitioners, Ladies, or others.

Take bruised Cinnamon, as much as you please, put it into a Mattress (a Bottle
may do) and pour upon it Spirit of Wine one Finger above it, st^p it close, and
set it in Digestion in Horse-dung four or five days, or longer; the Spirit of
Wine will be impregnated with the Tincture of Cinnamon, and become red;
separate it from the Cinnamon by siltration, and keep it in a Vial close slopt.
It must be used in a little smaller Dose than Cinnamon Water: It may ^e done in
the best Brandy also.

The Cinnamon or Almond-Caudle (Caudela Amygdalina) much used by the learned
Dr. Bates, (as it is in the P^armacopoeia Bat.) is very proper for
Child-bed-Women that are weak, especially if they are taken with any Looseness,
or immoderate Fluxes; and for Children and others, weakened through long
Fluxes, or over Purgations, and Vomitings. The Receipt is,. Ale or Beer not
hoped, a quart, Spring^ater one pint, Cinnamon a little bruised one ounce, boy^
it till the third part is consumed, strain it, and then add to i^ of the
largest sweet Almonds rubbed clean (but the skin not peeled off) and bruised,
threes^ore, boil it a little again, strain it and express it through a Sieve,
and sweeten it with two ounces of the best Loaf-Sugar, half an ounce of
Cinnamon may serve some times; it is a pleasant and refreshing Cordial, I do
assure you.

Lastly, I shall (besides the Caudle) advise all Pious and Charitable Ladies,
and Gentlewomen, who often do good amongst their poor Neighbors, to the use of
the Cordial Julep (or Syrup as some call it) in our Dispensatories, a thing I
have often prescribed to my great content, and satisfaction of my Patients.

. Rhenish-Wine a quart, Rose Water three ounces, Cloves bruised two scruples,
Cinnamon half a dram, Ginger two scruples, White Sugar three ounces,
(Ambergreese three grains, Musk one grain, but these may be left out) infuse it
all close stopped for all night, or two or three hours, setting the Bottle in a
Kettle of water over the fire, (Baln^o Mariae, as it is called) or for haste, on
hot embers in a J^g, or boil it presently, as often it is done, but with a
gentle fire, 'till about a quarter of a pint is wasted, strain and bottle it.
The Ambergreese and Musk ought to be added, if at all, when it is strained. So
have you though a plain, yet an excellent Cordial, White Wind (or Claret, if
binding is required) may serve, nay the best Cider now, etc.

Cypress-Tree. Isai. 44. 14.
N. K. D. P. Cupressus. (...). Cypress-Trees are Male and Female, the Male
bears Cones best, the Female is chiefly in our Gardens, and is most
Pyramidal. The Wood of this ever-green Tree is yellowish, fragrant, durable,
and precious; it came first from Creta, now Candia in Greece, says Pliny. The
Cones or Nuces Cupressi, Cypress-Nuts, vary in magnitude, according to the
Clime and Soil (as does the Tree) containing a flat grayish Seed. It Is now an
Ornament in the Gardens of our Great Men, and some will admit of no distinction
between the Male or wild Cypress, and the Garden or Female, but only a more
comely growth and equal form, in the latter attributed to the Soil and Art.

Its chief delight is in hot Mountainous Countries, as the Isle of Coos,
Cyrene, Rhodes, Cyprus, which took its Name from the abundance of these Trees,
say some Geographers, where a Gum flows (in these Solar Regions) of a resinous
substance, not much inferior to Mastick, which is our Rezina Cypria, or Cyprus
Turpentine, as some think. Whether any resinous matter flow from it here in
England, I know not.

Virtues and Uses.
Astrologers say, (for what reason I know not) Saturn governs it; it is
accounted dry in the third Degree, and it is a very great Astringent: the Fruit
(called also Galbuli a Galbo color) and Leaves smell of Turp^ntine, and the
Leaves have a bitterish taste, without any manifest heat.

The Chips of Cypress-wood add a flavor to Muscadine and other rich Wines; its
bitterishness preserves it from Worms; and Vitruvius says, The works of
Cypress perman^n^ ad Diuturnitatem. The Timber thereof was in great esteem with
the Ancients, the Temple of Diana and other famous Structures have been built
therewith: now being used for Chests, Drawers, Harps, and all kind of Musical
Instruments (being a sonorous Wood) the valving doors of St. Peter's-Church at
Rome, were of this Wood from Constantine till Pope Eugenius IV. almost 600
years, and were then (as sound and fresh as if they had been new made) by that
Pope changed into Brass.

Plato chose it, as it is said, to write his Laws in it, for its durability,
before Brass; and the Athenians used to bury their Heroes in Coffins of this
Wood, says Thucydides; and Semiramis built the lasting Bridge over Euphrates
with it. Is. Voss^us affirms it not fit for Shipping; but Bochartus, Fuller,
etc. have conf^ted him.

The Seeds seldom ripen with us, but are commonly brought in the Nuts, which
being sowed in April, says Mr. Evelyn, and lightly watered after Sunset, till
they are come up, (then ^e sparing of it) may after a year be transplanted into
sandy, light, and warm Soil, in which they thrive best; whence Cardan says,
juxta aquas ares^it, never thriving in boggish cold Earth. It may be cut to the
Roots, and yet springs again a fresh, which orethrows that Tradition, viz. It
being a Symbol of Mortality, it is never to be cut for fear of killing it.

Many will have Noah, Gophir, or Ark-wood, to be the wood of the wild Cypress,
as dedicated to the dead, because Cypress used to be worn at Funerals. But of
this see more under Gophir and Shittim-wood.

That this Vegetable has been exceeding plentiful in several parts of the
World, does appear by our most authentic Geographers; and I find a vast large
Wood of it in Candia, Anno 1400. was fired by malice or accident, and burnt
continually for seven years, being fed so long by the unctuous and resinous
nature of the Timber.

In the Shops. Nuces Cupressi, or Cypress Nuts, are hot in the first, and dry
in the third Degree; great binders, stopping all Fluxes of Blood: Both the tops
and leaves of Cypress (with the Nuts) are of late years, much used in
Medicines, and often prescribed by Physicians, as young Students in Physic may
observe in practical Authors, Willis, etc. in Dysenteries, Ruptures, Diabetes,
Haemoptysis, S^rangury, Profluv. Catameniorum, and Diaphoresi nimia and
depravata Also in Vulnerary Drinks, Gonorrhea's, and other cases that temperate
Corroboratives are required in, as in laxative Hecticks, Atrophia's, etc.
arising from a hot Scorbutical Blood; in Diet-Drinks, Decoctions, Milk-Waters
distilled, etc.

Elmes. Hos. 4. 13.
N. K. D. P. Robur. Jun. and Trem. Vulg. vlmus quod vliginosis locis and
humidis melius profici^* says an old Herbalist; but he was mistaken, for it
thriveth well, if not better, in dry* Lands and Hedgerowes in some Countries;
there are two sorts well known, vlmus folio glabro, the smooth-leav'd or
Witck-Elm; and the vlmus vulgaris, or common Elm. Some Botanists* make two more
kinds, from these, to no purpose, altered only by the nature of the Soil and
Clime: Mr. Evely^ calls them, the Mountain-Elm, thought to be the Oriptelea of
Theophrastus, of a smaller leaf, and the French-Elm or Ver^acula, Domestic,
Native, having thicker or more ^labrous leaves.

Virtues and Uses.
A Saturnine Tree; the Leaves and Bark be moderately hot, are mucilaginous,
seldom used, and rarely mentioned in Materia Medica, but have a cleansing
quality, if used in deformities of the Skin, by rub^ling and washing the part
with the Liquor found in the Blisters of the Leaves; the fat scum of the
Decoction of the Roots, boiled long, is said to procure Hair on a Bald Pate;
and the Decoction of the Bark and Leaves, is a good Fomentation in the hot
Gout, indurated Tumors, shrunk Nerves, and eases and cool^th burnings; the
Leaves bruised with Vinegar, or the Juice extracted, removes Scurff, Morphew,
and Beautifies the Skin and Face.

This Tree is propagated by Suckers taken from the Root of the Mother-Tree in
October, or in March, when the Buds appear; for the smallest Suckers will grow
when the Sap stirs first. It is unfit for Copses and Woods, because it loves a
spaciou^ place to branch out in; it may be transplanted at twenty years old,
but then refresh him with water, and disbranch him, leaving only the top, of
which brave Walks are quickly raised.

The Timber if it lie wet, or dry, in extremes, is of excellent use, says Mr.
Evelyn; our second Charcole is made of it, and the dried Leaves kept sweet, are
good for Cattle in a scarce year of Fodder: Bees are said at their first flying
abroad in the Spring, to surfeit on the blooming Seeds, which kill whole
Stocks. Let the Bee-masters or good House-wives observe this.

Elm is a fast and hard Wood, its hardness depending on the closeness of the
Wood, a cross-grained Timber cleaving unevenly and difficultly, to and fro,
therefore is best for the Hub of a great Wheel, for Water-Pipes and Pumps, not
because it is the most durable Wood, but because it will not split nor crack,
therefore also it is used for Coffins, Saddles, and Soles of a Mill-Wheel, the
Keel of a Boat, lest they should split. The Leaves may serve for Fodder.

The Planks or Groaning-Boards, exposed as a kind of Prodigy some time ago, to
the view and hearing of many people, were of Elm; the Aer-Vessels of this Wood,
being more large t^an in other Timber, upon the application of the
Red-hot-iron, as was usual, the Air and Watery parts in the Timber were
rarefied, and every Vessel became as it were, a little Windpipe for their
Expiration, and so many Pipes playing together, made a kind of big or groaning
noise. Grew.

The acci^^nts attending Trees, are remarkable, particularly in their excessive
growth, but scarce any County ere produced such Monsters as Staffordshire, as
was the prodigious Witch-Elm that grew and was felled at Field (within memory)
by Sir Harvey Bagot; the greatness and products of which Tree, I shall (for the
diversion of my Reader) take out of Dr. Plot's Natural History of this County,
which large Book may not, perhaps, fall into such hands as this lesser Tract
may do.

It was so great and tall, that two able Workmen were five days in Stocking or
Felling it down.

That it fell 120 foot, or 40 yards in length.

That the Stool was five yards two foot Diameter.

That the Tree at the But-end was 17 yards in Circumference.

That it was eight yards and eight inches, that is 2^ foot and a half about by
girth-measure in the middle.

That 14 loads of Firewood, each as much as six Oxen could draw to the House
at Field, being not above 300 yards distant, broke of in the fall.

That there was 47 loads more of Firewood, as large as the former, cut from
the top.

That they were forced to piece two Saws together, and put three Men to each
end, to cut the Body of it in sunder.

That there was cut of it 80 pair of Nathes for Wheels, and 8000 foot of sawn
Timber in Boards and Planks, after six score per Cent. which at 3 s. per Cent
came to 12 l. All which is attested (in a Paper) foreseeing it would not be
believed in after times, under the Hands of

Sir Harvey Bagot. Will C^^per, Steward* Roger Shaw, Bailiff. Walt. Dixon,
Surveyor. Cutters.
Lawrence Grews, Humphry Chettom,
Stockers.
Francis Marshall, Thomas March,

They computed it to contain 96 Tuns of Timber, a vast quantity for one Tree,
requiring good testimonies for its belief.

In the Shops. No standing Preparation; but two things I shall give you worth
your knowledge, the first is the Gargarism for sore Mouths, which Dr. Bates
much used, as his Pharmacopoeia shows it.

. The fresh inward Bark of Elm iiij. boil it in water ^^iij. to one half,
strain it (and it will look red) and put to it Syrup of Raspberries and
Mulberries, each iss. and mix them well, Syrup of Black-berries or Honey of
Roses may serve instead of the other Syrups, or good Honey to sweeten it for
the poor; I have prescribed it often with good effect.

In the Hip-Gout or Sciatica, take the whole Ba^k of this Tree, bruise it well
and boil it in water, almost to the thickness of a Syrup, then add to it a
third part of Aqua Vitae ( or the smaller Brandy.) It is a singular Remedy
against the tormenting pain in the Hip, if the part be fomented or ^athed
therewith; as some of my poor Country Patients can attest; and I do here
publish it to the World for a great Secret.

Fig Tree.
Figs. Fig leaves. Genesis 3. 7. Numb. 13. 23, and 20. 5. Deuteronomy. 8. 8. Judge. 9. 10.
1 Samuel 25. 18. and 30. 12. 1 Kings, 4. 25. 2 Kin. 18. 31. and 20. 7. 1 Chronicles.
12. 40. Neh. 13. 15. Psalm. 105. 33. Prove. 27. 18. Cant. 2. 13. Isai. 34. 4. and
36. 16. and 38. 21. Jer. 5. 7. and 8. 13. and 24. 2. and 29. 17. Hos. 2. 12.
and 9. 10. Joel 1. 17, 12. and 2. 22. Am. 4. 9. Mic. 4. 4. Nah. 3. 12. Hab. 3.
17. Hag. 2. 19. Zec. 3. 10. Mat. 7. 16. and 21. 19. and 24. 32. Luke 6. 44. and
13. 6. Jo. 1. 48. James 3. 12. Rev. 6. 12.
N. K. D. P. Ficus, (...). Our common dry Figs are called Carica, the unripe
Fruit. Grossus Fi^us, is the Fruit, as well as the Tree, (...), produco, ob
foecunditatem: The Fruit is (...).

The Ficus Sativa, or Garden Fig Tree propagated here in England, seldom grows
but against Walls, as is well known by our Gardeners, and others, who keep them
more for Rarity than for the Fruit they yield, Figs seldom coming to Maturity
with us, but grow plentifully in Solar Regions, in Spain, Italy, etc. where
they produce fresh Fruit three or four times in a year.

The Ficus Sylvestris, vel Caprificus, or wild Fig Tree, in which the Worm
Psenas is bred, which Pliny says, causes other Trees to ripen. This grows
also in the hot Countries.

Our English Trees are low, and full of pith like Elder in their Branches,
whence the wood is weak and unprofitable, thence unprofitable Reasonings and
contemptible Arguments are called Ficulnae rations.

The Ficus Indica, or Indian Fig Tree grows in both Indies, where it is called
Arvore de Raise, or the Tree of Roots, because its small thready twigs hanging
downward to the Earth, do take root, and so new Trees are propagated, even to a
Wood.

Goropius Becanus says, Great plenty are found on the Banks of Acesines, a
River running into Indus, where Alexander built his Fleet of Galleys, in or
near the Kingdom of Porus.

The English Fig Tree is raised by Seed, Slips, and Suckers, and ought to be
set in hot Sunny places, and defended from the blasts of Boreas; the want of
heat, and budding late, prevents its maturity: If the fruitful buds were
inoculated into some early Pear as Bergamos, it might probably produce their
maturity in the heat of Summer.

Virtues and Uses.
I know not of any use in Physic, our English Figs are put to, they are round
and long like Pears, and are a Rarity in some great Gardens, and eaten so by
Ladies, last Summer (91.) they arrived to a good height of maturity in some
well-managed Gardens, particularly at Trenham, but this last Winter has killed
(through its coldness) many of them, and this Summer there is no mature Fruit.

The Astrologers call it Jupiter's Plant, the Leaves burn the Tongue, of subtle
acrid parts, therefore are a hot Caustic, especially its Ashes; the Leaves
decocted, may therefore be good to wash sore Heads in the Lepros^e, Morphew,
and cutaneous running sores.

It is upon Record in the Epistles of the Emperor Julian the Apostate, that the
Fig Trees were seldom or never without Fruit, the old not fully fallen off,
till the new come on; which report, if true, (for certainly he did not flatter
our Savior Christ) gives an answer to that difficult Text, where our Savior
cursed the Fig Tree for not bearing Fruit, whence it is said, The time of Fruits
was not yet come.

For though the time of new Fruits was not yet come (being early in the Spring)
yet our Savior might, being hungry, expect to find some old; and failing of
his expectation, laid that curse upon it.

Becanus affirms, The Indian-Fig was the Tree of Knowledge, and takes the
Honor of finding it out: but Moses Bar-Cephas conjectured this 600 years
before Becanus was born, who also fancied, the Leaves of this Tree covered the
Nakedness of Adam and Eve, and that the large Trunk or Body of the Tree, hid
them from the presence of the Lord God; but Sir Walter Raleigh explodes these
conjectural fancies of Becanus, and says, It is a shame to repeat what
magnitude Strabo, Aristobulus and others give to this Tree, As that 400
Horsemen might shadow themselves under it, for that he himself saw 20000 in
one Valley in America, not far from Paria, growing in a moist Land, which had
no such large Trunk, nor Leaves, nor delicate Fruit as they talk of. But I have
dwelt too long upon this Subject, (not in my Province) and shall leave it to
any future Commentator, or learned Expositor, a Naturalist, or Divine.

In the Shops. Only d^y Figs, and not at all times of the year neither; Figs do
dissolve and ripen, are used in the Small Pox, and Diseases of the Lungs, in
Pectoral Decoctions, Squinzey, Sore Throats, etc. A Fig sliced and tosted, and
applied to an aching Tooth, has sometimes given ease. And the Milky juice of
the unripe Figs, I have known prove a good cleanser and smoother of the Skin;
mark that, you Women, and Morphew'd Ladies, that have it in your Gardens.

Firr-Tree.
Firr-Wood. 2 Samuel 6. 5. 1 Kings 5. 8. and 6. 15, 34, 9, 11. 2 Kings 19. 23. 2
Chr. 2. 8. and 3. 5. Psalm. 104 17. Cant. 1. 17. Isai. 14. 8. and 37. 24. and
41. 19. and 55. 13. and 60 13. Ezekiel. 27. 5. and 31. 8. Hos 14 8 Nah. 2. 3. Zec.
11. 2.
N. K. D. P. Abies* (...) This Stately Coniferous Tree has a smooth even Body,
serving to make Masts for Ships, whence the Dutch call it Mastboom. The two
principal Species are the Male, the most beautiful in altitude and smoothness,
and Female sof^er and whiter. They are raised from the Seeds taken out of the
Cones, when laid before the fire, or in warm water (as Fine are) or propagated
by Layers; transplant them at two or three years growth, and after three or
four Springs, they will shoot prodigiously in height, provided they be the
Abies ^^gitima v^l Mas Bellonii, whose Cones or Apples always stand upright,
the Leaves fl^t and thick set on the Branches, only on two sides, so that (as
Parkinson calls it) they show like the Teeth of a Comb.

There are 36 of this sort grow disorderly, of an excessive height at Warton,
(on the Land of the Right Worshipful Sir Charles Skrymsher of Norbury in this
County) in the Hedges and Fields, many of them being about 40 yards high, and
one of them is 47 yards and a half, (seven yards higher than the aforesaid Elm)
having the advantage of a rising ground, they appear pleasantly as so many
Spire-Steeples to Travelers at a far distance on the Roads, particularly, as
you ride Worcester Road from Tonge-Castle to Newport.

The Female or common Firr, is the Picea alba Dodonei, or ^oemina Ba^hini, the
Leaves are round, and thick set on all sides of the Branches; the Scotch Fir
are a Species of this sort with us. Firr-Trees being raised greatly in our
English Gardens, Walks, and Avenues for Ornament, But they naturally grow on
high Mountains in Greece, Spain, France, Italy, Poland, Denmark, etc. Simlerus
says, The Male-Firr grows abundantly in Burgundy and the Alps; sometimes in
height above 130 foot. In the High-lands in Scotland, they are to be found, but
not in Ireland, except planted.

Firr and Pines, no doubt, are Natives of Eng. and formerly growed as other
Timber, naturally themselves; for it is well known, that a grand number of the
entire Trees, have been found buried under ground* and vast quantities of the
Wood painfully dug up by the poorer sort, finding the stumps in Mossy and Boggy
Heaths in Cumberland, Lancashire, Cheshire, Staffordshire, particularly in the
Moss-pits, and Shebben-pool near to those that grow so bravely at Warton
aforesaid.

Dr Merret in his Pinax, tells us of Subterraneous Trees in several places in
England, whether, as it is vulgarly thought, Noah's Flood buried them, or some
Earthquake or Inundation since, is a Query I shall leave to the Learned.

Virtues and Uses.
This A^omatic^l and ever-green Vegetable, belongs to Mars, and so helps him to
a Balsamic Gummy Juice, flowing from the young Trees, called L^^rym^ Abietis,
the Tears of Firr (which is brought over Sea to us, as a Species of Venice
Turpentine) to cure his wounds with.

A^iegna Rezina, or dry Rosin, flowing from the old Trees, is a Succedaneum to
Thus, and some say is really Frankincense: The Leaves have a bitterish
Turpentine taste and smell, and the Tops also, much used now in the Scurvy, and
Stone, in Diet-Drinks and Milk-Waters, in Wound-Drinks, cleansing and sweetning
the Blood: The Cones are seldom used; the Bark dries and binds, the Gummous
Juice or Turpentine, and the Rezine are more sharp and cleansing than those
that emanate from the Pine. See Pine Tree.

The Swedes in a War against the Muscovites, were so orespread with the
Scurvey, that their Soldiers languished and wasted away to nothing, till once
encamping near Fir-Trees, they began to boil the Tops of them in their Drink,
which recovered the Army even to a Miracle, whence called by them the
S^o^b^tick-Tree to this day. The Balsam, or Turpentine of this Vegetable,
proves so effectual in preserving (even dead Bodies themselves) from
Putrefaction and Corruption: and he that tries the true Ethereal Oil or Spirit
of Turp^ntine, shall find it comes not far short of Spirit of Wine, in the
conservation of Bodies from corruption.

In the Shops. Colophony is the Rezine of the Firr-Tree boiled, or Turpentine
after the Oil is distilled, left hardened in the bottom of the Veica or Re^ort,
which ought to be slowly melted in water, to strain it through a cloth, to
purify it, and then boiled to the Rozin, or Colophony kept in the Shops, which
digests, agglutinates, and consolidates, in Salves and Emplasters, and may be
used instead of boiled Turpentine, in inward Medicines. But more of
Terebinthinate and Rezino^s Substances in my next Tract, to which they do more
properly belong.

That the Tops of Firr, and the shavings of Firrwood or Deal-boards, are now
much used instead of Hops, to preserve and invigorate Drink, is well known; but
Dr. Merret, in his Observations upon Wines, affirms, Those ^iquors in which the
shavings of Firr are put, may be apt to create pains in the Head; this may be
occasioned by the strong Turpentine odor they give the Drink, if not well
boiled, fermented, and aged.

The Inhabitants of Saxony (says one) a Province of Germany, have so great
esteem for the Liquor c^lled Mum* that they fancy their Bodies can never decay,
nor pine away, as long as they are lined and embalmed with so powerful a
Preserver, in which this Balsamic Vegetable Firr is the chiefest Ingredient of
the Vegetables that are in it. Dr. Willis prescribes Mum in Chronical
Distempers, as S^u^vey, Dropfey, etc. and Physicians order it against the
breeding of Gravel and Stones, in some sorts of Consumptions, cold Stomachs,
Gonorrhea's, obstructions: But it is seldom truly made.

And because this Liquor is now much made in England, I shall here set down the
Preparation thereof, as it is Recorded among the Secrets of the Family of
Bru^swick, a City and Province in Germany, taken out of the Great Dukedom of
Saxony, whence our best Mum is called Brunswick Mum.

Boil the water first, to the consumption almost of one half, brew so much, as
to sill a V^ssel of 16 Gallons, with seven Pecks of Wheat-Malt, one Peck of
Oat-Malt, and one Peck of ground Beans, and when it is tuned, let not the
Vess^l be too much filled at first, when it b^gins to work, put to it of the
inner Bark of Firr twelve ounces, Tops of Firr and Birch, each four ounces,
Carduus dried, one Physical handful, Flowers of Rosa Solis, half a handful,
Burnet, Marjoram, Avens, Pennyroyal, Elder-Flowers, wild Thyme, each half a
handful, Cardamom-seeds bruised, two drachms; see that the Liquor work over the
Vessel as little as may be, fill it up at last with your brewed Liquor, putting
into the Vess^l three new-laid Egg^, not broken, stop all close, and drink it
at two years old.

Aegid. Hoffman renders it more effectual in the S^urvey, especially in a sort
arising from a thick Saline Blood, and in cold Constitutions, by adding
Water-^resses, Brook-lime, and wild Parsley, with Horse-Rhadish roots sliced,
each one handful and a half; Bay Berries one ounce. It is a hearty and
Stomachical Drink for a mornings-draught. Note, That the Tops of Firr (and
other Herbs) ought to be gathered and dried in their proper season, when it
abounds most with gummous Balsamic Juice. Vi^. Decoctum Scorbuticum in
Pharmacopoeia Batean.

Fitches. Isai. 28. 25, 27. Ezekiel. 4. 9.
N. K. D. P. Melanthium* Zea. Jun. and Trem. vulg. vicia, a vinciendo, from
binding or wrapping, as Varro notes, vel quod ad mo^um vitis ^^^eat. This well
known Vegetable, has degenerated and branched into many kinds, as Orobus the
bitter Vetch, Ervum the Bird-Fitch. Araccus sive Cracca Major wild Fitch, or
strangle-Tare. Vicia maxima dumetorum Bush-Vetch. Vicia Sylvestris, sive Cracca
minima; small wild Tare, or ti^e-Tare, growing too frequently amongst Corn. The
Hatchet-Vetch, the Milk-Fitch, Tare everlasting; with others better lost than
found by the Husbandman in his Corn: who also in some places, calls them Tares.

Virtues and Uses.
Saturn sure claims this Plant, and it is fit he should have it, it is so like
him in its nature, the Seed^ being of a heavy, dry, and binding quality, are
hard of digestion, and bind the Belly, ingendering a thick melancholy Blood, if
eaten in Bread, or as Pease. Chiefly sowed for Cattle, and Horses in some
Countries, to which they tedder, or hitch them to eat whilst green, by which
the Land is enriched* The Juice of green Fitches is given in the Scurvey, says
Sir J. F. to hinder the great fermentation of the Blood.

The bitter Vetch, or Orobus, is hot and dry, cleansing, cutting, and opening,
yet it causes the Headache, and troubles the Belly, says Dioscorides. The
Meal takes away Frec^^es and Sun-burning, being mixed with Honey and applied;
and staieth running Ulcers, Phag^dens, etc. but I know not any thing of these
Vegetables experimentally.

In the Shops. There is not any standing or appointed Preparation or Medicine,
only the Sem. Orobi, called also Ervi^, are set down amongst the Catalogue of
Seeds in the London-Dispensatory. See Cockle for Melanthium.

Flags. Exodus 2. 3, 5. Job 8. 11. Isai. 19. 6.
N. K D. P. Alg^. Vlva. Jun. and Tr. Vulg. Gladiolus. Alva and Vlva is Fucus or
Sea-wrack. Gladiolus sive I^is Lutea Palustris, is Water- Flag, or Water
Flower-de-Luce, and the Acorus Adulterinus in the Shops, is the Roots of it,
whence it is called Pseudacorus, or Acorus Palustris, yellow Water
Flower-de-Luce: These Flags and Flower-de-Luces, are all related and derived
from one Genus, differing in length, breadth, odor, color, flowers, some for
Beauty more than Medical uses, and e contra, some with tuberous and knobby
Roots (as the Roots of the Iris vulgaris, Garden or common Flower-de-Luce which
are called also, Radix Marica, good to help the Piles) others with bulbous or
Onyon-like Roots.

Both these sorts are commonly known; Water- Flag (as Seggs or Sedges, as in
some Countries they are called) being like the Garden- Flag or Flower-de-Luce,
only grows taller, and the Leaves are sharp edged (thence called also
Sword-Flag) with a yellow Flower, growing by River sides, and moist boggy
places, the Flower appearing from May to July.

The Garden- Flag or Flower-de-Luce (called (...) Orri^ Sacra, the Ancients
having esteemed it Holy) bear a blue and yellowish Flower, the Roots being
thick, long, and tuberous, with hairy threads; flowering from April to June.
There are many kinds of this, as the Florence, Turkey, French Corn- Flag, and
many others propagated in the Gardens of the curious Florist, even to above
twenty, with different Flowers.

Virtues and Uses.
Flags are reckoned under Luna, the Roots being cut, look raw like Flesh* and
being chewed, burn the Mouth as Orris or Garden Flower-de-Luce does, are hot
and dry in the second Degree, bind, condense, and stop Fluxes, strengthen, and
may well be preferred before the Galanga Major, or Foreign Acorus in the Shops.

These Flags in Foreign parts, are used to cover Sheds, Cabbins, and Huts, for
Seamen and Fishermen, as some Thatch with them in some places of England.

In the Shops. Radix iridis, or Orris Roots; as there are many kinds of
Flower-de-Luces, so the Roots differ, but the Florentine Orris Root is esteemed
the best; the green Roots of Flower-de-Luce, are bitterish and burning,
reckoned almost hot in the fourth Degree; dry Orris Roots are very fragrant,
hot and dry in the second Degree, are Pectoral, used in shortness of Breath,
provoke Urine, and give a curious fragrant relish to Beer, if boiled in it, or
infused in the Barrel. Outwardly used in Bags, and quilted Caps for the Head,
in sweet Powder for Linen, and Hair-Powder by Barbers.

Species Di^ireos Simpl. is a constant Powder in the Shops, prescribed in
Linctus's and Electuaries in Coughs, shortness of Breath, and Colds. Succus
Ireos nostratis, the Juice of our Orris, or Flower-de-Luce (after the French)
is most commonly extracted out of that which bears the purple or blue Flower,
has a very hot acrimony, is often prescribed as a Secret by some, as an
excellent purger of waterish Humors in Dropfies, being easy and cheap for the
poor. Dose is six drachms to one once and a half, or two ounces of it self, or
drawn out with White Wine, or mixed with Posset.

In a Dropsy Mass^ria order thus,. Juice of Flower-de-Luce newly drawn with
White Wine, three ounces, Manna one ounce and a half, mix them for a P^tion.

Platerus gave it with Honey, others with Broth or Gruel corrected with
Cin^amon. I cured a poor Woman of Stafford formerly, of a Dropsi^, with no*
other Purge; it powerfully provokes Urine and Stool, but is not sa^e to
Children, Old Age, nor Pregnant Women.

In the biting of a mad Dog, the Radices Gladioli* or Water-Flag, with the
Roots of Morsus Diaboli, or Devil's- bit, are by some boiled in Water, others
in Milk, and given for a week or nine days to the Patient; and the learned
Physician Sir J. F. of Litchfield, in his Touchstone of Medicines, says* The
Astringency of the Root, hinders the fermentative virtue of the animal Venom
from producing a Fever in the Blood, and probably dulls the activity of the
Venom, which consists in a volatile Salt, and the Acrimony of the Root preserves
the Blood from co^gulation. I* the two Roots were powdered with all, or some of
the Ingredients in the Pulvis Antilyssus in the Soud. Pharmacopoeia, it would
be more efficacious in such Bites.

Because Orris Roots are the ^asi^ of Damask, or sweet sce^ted Powder, and of
Hair Powders, I shall oblige my Female Readers, and Ladies, with the two
following Receipts.. Roots of the best Florentine O^ris xiiij. Lignum Rhodij ij
Leaves of Marjorum iij. Cloves j ^emo^ P^^l v. Cyperus j Calamus Aromaticus vj
(...) iiij. Red Ros^s ij. Benj^min, Storax, a^ j (...) danum ss, b^^ise them
all to a gross (...) to ^^y among your Cloat^es, sowed up in a thin small (...)
carry about you) to preserve them from Moths, and give them a pleasant odor.

. Starch sifted fine, one pound, Orris finely powdered, four ounces,
Apoplectick Balsom, 20 grains, and rub all in a Mortar together. So have you an
excellent and cheap Hair Powder, correcting ill scents, and infectious Air, and
wholesome for the Head and Brain.

Flax. Exodus 9. 31. Josh. 2. 6. Jud^. 15. 14. Prove. 31. 13. Isai. 19. 9. and
42. 3. and 43. 17. Ezekiel. 40. 3. Hos. 2. 5, 9. Mat. 12. 20.
N. K. D. P. Linum Ellych^ium. (...). The Linaries as well as the
Flower-de-Luces, are a numerous Tribe.

Linum ^a^ivum, or Garden Flax, is known to every good House-Wife; some call it
Lyn, whence Linen Cloth is made of it; its Seed is called Lyn-Seed, whence
Linseed. Oil, Linum Arvense, sive Sylvestre, wild ^la^. Linaria lutea vulgaris,
is Toadflax. The wild differs* little or nothing from the manured. There are
two or three other Species amongst Authors.

Besides what is cultivated in England, great quantities come from Russia,
Holland, and other Countries, or else our own Hemp and Flax would not serve our
Cordage Trade, etc.

Virtues and Uses.
Venus no doubt, rules over this good House-Wife Plant; the best way of
manuring, and ordering of it, is held to be in this County of Stafford, where
they sow it, generally, in April on new-broke ground* and some sow their Ground
one year with Flax, the next with Hemp, all along succ^ssively, so that one
piece of Ground serves them (without mucking) finding the Soil is mended by the
one, when impoverished by the other: When ripe, it is pulled and set up in
maniples, or large han^fuls, to dry them, then ripple it through a double
toothed Iron Comb* or Engine for the Seed; the boles of Seed are dried* and
kept on a Po^rded, or Plastered Floor till March, then threshed and winnowed:
When the Flax is well dried, they stake it down in water four or five nights,
then spread it on the ground to dry, turning it every three days: when dried,
it is laid up, and when my Dame pleases, Crack the Countryman comes with his
Instrument Brake, to separate the Tow from the course Flax or hurds.

In our Northern parts of this County, some, instead of soaking it in water,
spread it on the ground, to be watered by Rain, which if long absent, make it
look blackish* but they affirm it to be stronger Flax* In like m^^ner do they
or^er their H^mp.

Now ^lax th^s ord^red and prepared, is (amongst other Uses) p^t to a no^le and
most necessary ^o^^, by the careful and industrious House-Wife, viz. The making
of Linen-Cloth for our Corporal and Domestic uses, for our ^e^s, and ^or o^r
Boards, much encouraged of late in this Kingdom, by the great Example of o^^
Gracious Queen Mary, in whom (...) Virtues do conce^^^^, who has Erected a
Co^^^tion for the Linen Manufacture, whereby a vast Employment is given to the
Poor, and infinite deal of Money kept in the Kingdom, that Holland and France
devoured, with other inestimable benefits.

Linen Cloth is nothing but that which we call Flax (passing through many
hands, and with much pains) curiously twisted, enterlaced, and conjoined to a
large breadth, and length, for the better service of Man; and our ^lax or Tow,
ready to be spun, is only the Sap-V^ssels, or Woody Fibers of the Bark of this
useful Vegetable Flax, which through its toughness, is so highly serviceable;
And Scotch-Cloth is only the House-Wifery of the same parts of the Bark of a
Nettle.

Whence it is very probable, that there are many Plants, whereof might be made
good Tow. And of some, especially in some respects, better than of Flax it
self, Because, as says that great Philosopher Dr. G^ew* (whose Favors I
retain with a grateful resentment) That even Hemp, although it will not make so
sine a Staple as Flax ( for all our fine Hollands are made of Flax) yet Flax,
which is but of the same sineness as Hemp, will never, by all the Art yet
known, be ma^e so white as Hemp is made; the qualities therefore of the b^st
Tow that can be in nature, are, that the S^a^le be long, small, ^ough, and
white. So that if in the ^ark of any Plant, we can find these qualities, or any
of them to excel, we may be sure, it will be of better use, in some respects,
for the making of Cloth, or other purpose, than Fl^x it self.

Flax (and Hemp also) after much vexation and hardship in its dressing and
ordering, being transformed into this curious and useful expansion, called
Cloth, rests not so, but is cut, rent* and torn* for the conveniences and
service of undeserving Mortals, by whom it is at last rejecte^ (being vil^ and
base) as Rags. yet unwilling to forsake the service of Man, once more presents
it self, to the profit of the poor Beggars, who pick up this castaway, (like
themselves, torn and contemptible) to undergo ten thousand times more vexations
and contusions by the Hammer, from something into nothing, ad Putrilaginem; but
even to admiration, from this sl^ppery and rotten Mucilage, with another
artificial help, it is again, as it were, revived and transpeciated into a quite
different and highly useful form, ca^ed Paper; in which form* it presents it
self once more, to be the greatest Messeng^r of the World, and to be the
chiefest Interlocu^or between Man and Man, to outlive all, and be most Men's
Executor: so be brief, it is concerned in Sacred, Civil, Foreign, and Domestic
Affairs.

No Nation uses more Paper, than we in England, and so little made* (except
Brown Paper and Past-Board) that is a grand reflection on our National
Improvements, and highly prejudicial to our English Interest; but if the Linen
Manufacture go on, the Paper Trade as depending and being made thereon, might
be improved, for if we made but the W^it^ Paper we use, it would set thousands
on work, and much more benefit and profit would it bring to the Nation, if it
were made for Exportation.

I know not of any Physical Virtues that are in common Flax. but what r^sts in
the Linseed. Lin^ria or Toa^-Flax, which is a kind of Snap-Dragons, having
suchlike Flowers, which are swe^t, bitterish, and mucilaginous; an Ointment
may be made of the Flowers, to ^ase the pain of the H^morrhoi^s. Also, the old
Herbals say, ' it is hot and dry, and commend it as Diuretic, and us^ful in the
Jaundice, and Dropsy, but it is seldom used by Physicians in these days,
inwardly.

Rags of all sorts laid upon Land, enrich it greatly, one load going as far as
ten of Cow Dung, as it is affirmed; for reasons not fit here.

In the Shops. Semen lini, or Linseed, and Oleum lini, or ^ins^ed-Oyl, both
which, and their Virtues and Uses are well known. They digest, mollify,
suppu^at^ and ease pain, being hot in the first Degree, and temperate in the
rest. Linseed smells ranci^, and ^s mucilaginous, used much in Pul^ises to
discuss, or mollify ^ot Tumors; and the Oil also, and to extend shrunk Sinews,
and sometimes ordered in ^lysters in the Colic, and inwardly in Pleuretick
^o^ghs: but I fancy it not inwardly.

^aper has some use also in Physic, for the pieces ^^ it l^ghted in a Room,
relieve Women in Hysteri^^l fits (if they receive the fume of it) as many ^^mes
they are, by any di^agreeable smell.

Lemery that honest and ingenious Chemist, draws an Oil and Spirit from Paper,
the Oil he commends in Deafness, being put into the Ear, with a little Cotton,
and in the Toothache. The Spirit rectified, is an Ap^ri^ive and Diuretic. So
to conclud, The Wisdom of the Almighty, is wonderfully to be admired, and
contempla^ed, in the production of this Vegetable (...) so many ways useful to
Mankind, though little used in Physic.

Garlic. Numb. 11. 3.
N. K. D. P. Allium. (...). Besides the ^ll^um S^tivum, or the common Garlic,
I (...) only mention the Silvestre, wild, or Crow-Garlick, and the Allium
Ursi^um, sive latifolium, Ramsons; as being well known, leaving the Mountain,
as Clusius has it, and the Turkey Garlic.

Garlic is propagated by its Cloves, (as well as by its Seed) set in the
Spring, and is well known at the Mouth of him that has eaten it.

Virtues and Uses.
Garlic is an Herb of Mars, hot and dry in the fourth Degree, has an acrid
taste, and abounds with a volatile Salt, raises Blisters, if applied to the
Skin. Galen calls it Theriaca Rusticorum, because it is good against Infection,
and the Plague, resists Poison, and venomous bitings, used in Colds, and
stoppages of the Breast and Breath, for which Distempers the Countryman eats
it, as also to warm the Stomach and help digestion; but let those that use it
so familiarly, remember, all vehement hot things not only offend the Brain, but
are fuel to the fire in hot and choleric Constitutions, engendering sharp and
naughty Blood, and attenuating the humor in melancholic temperaments, thereby
inciting ireful Passions in the one, and fanciful Chimera's in the other part
of the Body. The wild Garlic and Ramsons, are much of the like nature* the
last being often eaten in the Spring by laboring Men, with Bread and ^utter,
and other things.

In the Shop^* ^yr d^ Allio, or the Syrup of Garlic, though not appointed in the
London Pharm^^op^ia, is kept in many Shops, as being excellent in rotten
Coughs, Raucedo's, in the beginning of Consumptions and Dropsies, especially of
the Breast, in Convulsive Asthma's, and Chin-Coug^s, and Wo^ms.

The best Receipt is, Garlic st^ipped from the skins, ten or twelve cloves
slice^; A^is^d bruised half an ounce, Ella^ampane sli^ed, thre^ ^r^^hm^;
Liquorish, two drachms; infuse three or four days in a pint and a half of
Spirit of Wine ( or best Brandy). close stopped, and warm, in B. M. or warm
Embers; strain it clear and hot into a Silver Dish standing on hot ^^^ls,
wherein is one pound and a half of the s^^est. Sugar, give fire to the Liquor,
stirring it whilst it burns, then strain it through a Wooll^n Strainer, and
keep it for use. If it be strained well the first time, it will scarce need it
the last.

In Chin-Coughs, let the Soals of the feet of Children be rubbed with the
following Ointment; which I have long prescribed with great success, and find
it amongst Dr* Bates's Medicines, under the Title of Unguent Soleare.. Roots of
Garlic bruised, four ounces, Hogs grease eight ounces, boil them till the
Juice of the Garlic is wasted, strain it, and add S^ff^on i^ p^wder one
dram, Spirit of Salt two scrupl^s, mix them into an Ointment. This also has
eased the pain of the Piles, as the fume of Garlic does on ^he hot coals

In the hot Gout, I am assured by an experienced Surgeon, my Neighbor, That a
Cataplasme framed of the cloves of Garlic and Houseleek beaten alone, has
dispersed the pain, and relieved the part. See Onions.

Gophir-Wood.
Genesis 6. 4. Signum Gophir. The Hebrew word Gophir is once, and only used in
(this place of) S^^^pture, and is diversely understood; the Geneva Translation
calls it Pine Tree, the Rabbine, Cedar; the Seven^, Square Timber; others say
Firr, and more Cypress; but all agree, it was a solid, light, agile Wood, that
rottenness and Worms had no power on; if the word signify any special kind of
Timber, no doubt Noah obeyed the Voice of God therein; though it is most pro^a^l^,
((...) inquisition) that the ^^rk was built of Cedar-w^^d: for so Sir Walter
Raleigh and many of our modern Commentators opine.

Gourds. Wild Gourd. 2 K. 4. 39. Jon. 4. 6, 10.
N. K. D. P. Colocynthidum agrestium* Rici^um. Jun and Tr. Vulg Cucurbita,
Gourds are of the Cucumer-Family, of which see more under that Plant. They are
raised in the Gardens, as Cucumers are, in these cold Regions: But the wild
bitter Gourd grows in pain, Italy, Egypt, and other hot Countries, and its
Fruit or Gourd called Colocynthis, or Coloquintida, is brought us only for its
Medical use.

Virtues and Uses.
This Coloquintida, or bitter Apple, as the Vulgar call it, is extremely
bitter, as he that powders it can well tell, being hot and dry in the third
Degree, it purges violently Phlegm and other viscous humors; it consists of a
volatile subtle dangerous Salt, which procure strong Colliquations, and
Corrosions of the Ventricle and Guts, by Hyper-Catharsis, or over-purgings.

Yet nothi^^ more frequent among the Country People, than a pennyworth or two
of bitter Apple, to purge them, accounting that the best Physic, (poor
ignorant Creatures) which gives the most Stools, but it has purged many into
their Graves, and others into languishing Diseas^s, to my knowledge; December.
1st 1674. I was sent for to a Countryman in Salt near Hopton-Heath, who was
swelled like a Barrel, upon the taking of this pernicious Apple, given him by
his Wife, which could never be brought to work upward nor downward, but in few
hours it killed him; more ill accidents, and mortifical effects of a later
date, occasioned by this corrosive and wild Fruit, I could here denote; but
where, or by whom committed and suffered, except I had the consent of them, to
whom I profess to owe much respect for their (since) Kindness and Favors, the
Reader must excuse me; and remember the old saying, Foelix quem -- happy is he,
whom other Men's failings and dangers do make to beware.

But though this Fruit be so exceeding perilous in the Apple it self, and but
little better in the Troc^-Alhandle, as they are commonly prepared, yet
exceeding useful and safe is the Cathartick Extract thereof, made with
distilled Vinegar, impregnated with Sal Tartari Sennerti, which Menstruum
fixes in a great manner, the malignant volatility, which predominates in this
Fruit, whereas Spirit of Wine (which is the usual Menstruum) does rarefie and
subtilize its volatile Sulphurous Salt, carrying it into the very Veins and
Arteries, whence it attracts the best defecated and Spirituous Blood.

Also some, as I have often with good effect, advise the infusion of this Fruit
in the Urine of a healthful young Man, all night or longer, according to
Riverius, before it is used* and Dr. Grew says, The great Cathartic^ power of
Colocynthis lies not so in an Alcaly, as an Acid, therefore the best
corre^ors, or refractors of the force of this purging fruit, are some kind of
Alkalies, as particularly that of Urine.

In the Shops. Coloquintida. Trochisci Athandle. Pilex duobus. The Troches are
prepared by some ^^^thecaries (different from the Dispensatory) by three
pulverizations, as often beating it up when dried, with the same Menstruum of
Vinegar abovesaid; without the pretended Correction of it by the addition of
Aromatical substances, and Gum Tragacanth, which Troches certainly are the
safest and best, and most fit to prepare the highly renowned Cathartick
Tincture, which is judged to be Rullandus his Spir. vitae deauratus.

The Pil. ex duobus required to be refined, and more elaborately prepared, by
the noble Art of the Pharmaco-Chymist. These Medicines are like Swords, not to
be trusted in Mad-Mens hands, but require the management of a discerning and
expert Artist, therefore I Will leave their further Virtues, Uses and Doses, to
such an one.

Grapes.
Genesis 40. 10, 11. and in one or two and thirty Chapters more: Vva. Botrus. For
the Texts, where named, also for the difference, uses, and virtues of Grapes,
see Vine.

Grass.
HErba tenera is often used in Scripture by Jun. and Tr. comprehending all kind
of tender Herbs, and edible Grass, which is eaten or cut for the use of Man or
Beast; and the word Grass in our Translation, specifying no particular sort, as
Dog-grass, Panick-grass, Gramen Parnassi, with abundance more kinds, I shall
leave it as I find it.

Hasel-Tree. Genesis 30. 37.
N. K. D. P. Corylus. (...). There are many sorts of Nuts, differing in
magnitude, figure, color, etc. the common wild Hasel Nut-Tree is called
besides Corylus, Nux tenuis, or parva, to distinguish it from Nux juglans, or
Wall-Nut-Tree; the Fillberd is Nux Avellana, ^ Avellina, or Abella, a Town in
Campania antiqua, the most fruitful Province in Naples, if not in Itally, now
called Terra di lavoro, which abounded with Nuts. Witch-Hasel is a kind of Elm.
These Trees are well known, the common Hasel or Nut-tree growing in most Wo^ds,
and Hedges, the Fillberd and Wall-Nuts are manured in many Gardens and Orchards.

Virtues and Uses.
The small Nut and Fillberd, are reckoned under Mercury, because it may be
through his nimbleness, he could skip from bough to bough to preserve them. But
Wall-Nuts (the (...), Jupiter's Nut, though some say it is a Ches-nut) is (as it
is fitting it should, if a Nut for a God) under the Sun.

The v^lgar mean Hasel-Tree, was beyond all other uses exalted, (no^ in making
Hurdles to infold our innocent Sheep, an Emblem of the Church) when its Rods or
Branches were interwoven upon Stakes sixth in the ground, to make the Walks of
one of the first Christian Oratories in the World, viz. at that venerable
Fabric at Glastenbury, founded, as sto(...), by Joseph of Arimathea.

The shells and red skin on Fillberds, bind, and are excellent in Fluxes* the
Kernels, ordered as Almond-Milk, strengthen the Lungs, and help an old Cough:
Nuts whilst green, or fresh, are sweet and loosen the Belly; when dry, are
cold, dry and bind, of a terrene substance, clogging the Stomach, slowly
passing through the Belly, yet probably do absorbe the noxious juices, and
superfluous moisture of great Drinkers, being an excellent Junket instead of
Tobacco in their compotating humors.

Wall-nuts dry, are hot and dry, the Oil drawn as Oil of Almonds, is a
Cosmetick. These Kernels, and green Bark or Husk, are Alexipharmacal, the Husks
being a chief Ingredient in Treacle-Water distilled. And King Mithridates*s
Medicine against Poison, Plague, and Pestilential Fevers, was two dry
Wallnuts, two Figs, twenty Leaves of Rue, beaten with a few corns of Salt, and
eaten fasting.

In the Shops. Ol. Avellanarum per Expressionem. Aq. Juglandium composita, or
Wall-Nut-Water compound.

This Water seems to be invented by the College, to facilitate and procure
Vomiting, and to that end may be mixed with Vomits; it sends clammy Phlegm and
Choler from the Stomach, and adjacent parts, and opens Obstructions thereof: it
is good in the Green Sickness, Surfeits, and Aguish Maladies, and Epilepsies
arising from the consent of the Stomach, and Pestilence.

Honey of Nuts Diacaryon, or Dianucum may be mixed in Vomits, or given in the
cases with the Water.

Rulandus's Ol. lign. Heraclei, with which he destroyed Worms, and did other
great Cures, prizing it as a great Arcanum, or Nostrum, as they are now termed,
is concluded by some to be the Oil of Haselwood; (others say of Box) for the
Fillberd is called, by some Authors, Nux Heracleoticae, or Nux Pontica, being
first transplanted from the City Heraclea, in the Province of Pontus in Asia
minor, thence to Greece, and so came into Avellina or Abella as abovesaid. And
Dr. Bates judged it, to be the Oil of this Wood, as it appears in his
Pharmacopoeia, where also you have Emulsio de Avellanis.

Hemlock. Hos. 10. 4. Amos 6. 12.
N. K. D. P. Cicutae. (...). It Is known to most, being called also Kex, or
Kedlock: Cicutaria palustris, is the wild Water-Hemlock. It grows by Ditches
sides, shady places, and stinking fat Soyls; and flowers and seeds in July, or
rather later.

Virtues and Uses.
It Is unsavory, and stinks like Saturn, being cold in the fourth Degree,
accounted among the Narcoticks, and poisonous Vegetables by some of the
Ancients; who never gave it inwardly, though Storks, say Naturalists, feed on
it: It is outwardly used in pains, mightily discussing hard Tumors, Ganglions;
and the Leaves and Roots (or the Juice of it) is exceeding good in Pultisses in
all hot Tumors, and Inflammations, St. Anthony's Fire, painful Gouts, asswaging
any violent pain, by its cold stupefying quality; I have used the Juice safely
in Collyriums, in Ophthalmia's, and beaten up with Bay Salt, fine bole to a
Pultiss, and applied to the wrest, is a common and tried Medicine by many old
Women, to cure the Pin and Web in the Eye. A Fomentation of it has cured a
Pri^pismus; if mistaken and eaten, (the Roots being alike) for Madneps or wild
Cicely, which is the Cicutaria vulgaris, or for Pars^ips, it is necessary to
Vomit, and take an Antidote.

In the Shops. Emplastrum e cicuta cum Ammoniaco, or the Plaster of Hemlock
with the Gum Ammoniack. This Plaster is certainly the most excellent of all
Spleen-Plasters, excellent in painful Cancers, Scir^hous Tumors and dolorous
Nodes, in all which, and more cases, I have often experienced it.

Dr. Bowle's Secret, imparted by Mr. Ray; Pulv. Radicum ad grana 20 in febribus
malignis vel quartana ante paroxysmum exhibitus omnibus, quae Ego unquam
expertus sum, Diaphoreticis antecellit. Not fit for vulgar knowledge, lest any
one should prejudice themselves by it.

In swellings of the King's Evil, See Emplast. ad Strumas, Batei.

Hyssop. Exodus 12. 22. Lev. 14. 4, 52. Numb. 19. 6, 18. 1 Kings 4. 33. Psalm 51.
7. Jo. 19. 29. Heb. 9. 19.
N. K. D. P. Hissopus is the Greek and Latin Name, and so the Germans, French,
Spaniards, and Italians call it. The old Herbalists make different kinds, by
the Flowers and Leaves, only altered, I believe, by the Soil and Clime.

Hyssop grows in most Gardens, and the Gratiola or Hedge-Hyssop, is nursed in
some Physick-Gardens, though it grows wild in moist places. And some make two
or three sorts of it, according to the breadth and narrowness of the Leaves.

Virtues and Uses.
Hyssop belongs to the benevolent Planet Jupiter, it is bitterish, hot and dry
in almost the third Degree, well known to be a cleansing and opening Pectoral,
by those that use the distilled Water, and Syrup for Coughs, Hoarseness, and
Rheumatick Distillations.

Mr. Lavers the Eminent Bone-setter in Somersetshire, told me as a great
Secret, in Bristol, That green Hyssop beat into a Conserve with a little Sugar,
and applied to a fresh Wound, would presently stop the Blood.

Hedge-Hyssop is like Mars, a violent purger of Choler and aquaeous humors,
working both by Stool and Vomit, not safely or vulgarly used, except purefied
and refined by the Spagyrick Art. Grati^la and Sold^nella are seldom used by
themselves in this refining Age, neither are any curious and very efficacious
Medicines, prepared of those Simples, they are usually mixed with other
Hydragogues, and chiefly are Ingredients in compounded Drinks and Apozems,
says the Famous Willis. Schroder speaks of the Inspissated Juice of Gratiola,
Dose one scruple ad ^ss. in Dropsies and yellow Jaundice.

In the Shops. the dry Herb. Hyssop-Water and Syrup of the Juice of Hyssop, and
Syrup of Hyssop Compound.

These are all much used in Infirmities of the Breast and Lungs, only it ought
to be remembered, that Hyssop is a hot Herb, acrid and Aromatic, and therefore
to be left out in Pectoral Decoctions, and other Medicines, where the Patient
is Feverish, or inclined to a Hectic.

There seems a manifest absurdity in the Modus f^ciendi of the Compound-Syrup;
the volatile part of the Roots and Herbs, is lost in the Decoction, the Gum,
Fruits, and Seeds render it clammy, and mucilaginous: as he that Clarifies it
shall find; and as it can never be well made, according to that prescription
Pharmacop. ^ond. so it cannot have the Virtues which are attributed to it: In
cold Diseases of the Breast, to help to attenuate, and cleanse the crass and
viscous matter, which does obstruct it with viscous and incrassating
Ingredients, more like to procure Obstructions, is absurd. Therefore the true
and ingenious Apothecary knows how to rectify the Methodus ^^endis, by leaving
out the clammy Ingredients, and adding some Ground Ivy, Hedge-Mustard, or other
proper Ingredients in their stead. Otherwise it were much better to use the
simple Syrup of the Juice, as I do always, in the place of it, or some other.

For (admired therefore be the great Creator) the Materia Medica is large and
plentiful; and he is no Real, nor Legitimate Physician, that is not ex
abundanti of the same, (methodized and digested so in his Judgment and Memory,
as to be) able ex tempore, (and without flying to his Books and Manuscripss, as
I have seen some do) to prescribe such Medicines as are app opriated,
answerable, and indicated, to the I^dicantia of Diseases: For since the power
of Nature and Skill may reach much farther, than many distrustful, lazy, and
timorous Men have imagined, it will not be charitable to rely too much upon
the Prognostics, even of Famous Writers, when they tell us. That such and such
Diseases, or Patients in such and such Conditions, (as one says) cannot
possibly be cured. But rather to follow the sober Council of Celsus, Oportet
(says he) ubi aliquid non respondet, non tanti^putare Authorem quanti aegram,
and experiri aliud atque aliud. Where a Medicine or Prescription answers not,
we ought not so much to esteem the Author and his Medicines, as the Patient,
and to try somewhat farther and farther.

Iuniper-Tree. Juniper Roots. 1 Kings 19. 4, 5. Job 30. 4. Psalm. 120. 4.
N. K. D. P. Juniperus. (...). Juniper, ^ Junis and Pario, quia novellos, and
juniores fructus parit, Antiquis maturescentibus. There is a Major and a Minor
Juniper-Tree, grow on the Alps, and other Countries; and Iseland near Norway,
is said to yield neither Corn nor Trees, except Juniper only: The Juniperus
Alpina Minor, or low Mountain Juniper, grows on Snowdon-Hills in Wales, and on
the Hills in Westmorland, where it is called avin, and there they give the
Decoction of it to kill the Bots and Grubs in Horses.

Though this Vegetable is a tall Tree in Foreign parts, yet here in England* it
is a low Shrub, spreading near the ground, with Leaves much like Furz, of a
bluish-green-colour, but not so sharp as Furz, or Gorse, and continue all the
year: The Flowers are so small, that I could scarce discern their color, which
seems yellow by the meal or dust that falls from them; after which, the
small green Berries come not to a full ripeness or blackness (known by their
sweet, bitterish, and perfuming taste) until the Sun has elixyrated them by
two annual visits, they continuing green two Summers and one Winter, and ought
to be gathered in September; always finding green Berries on this Shrub, when
you gather the smooth blacks) the Sun being in the Sign Virgo.

It is planted in some Gardens, and is found in some Countries of England, upon
diverse Woody Hills, Commons, and Parks, as in the Woolands in Wor^estershire,
not far off Hewel-Grange, and F^cknam: Betwixt Bristol and Bath, in that Road,
from Lawford^s- Gate; on the Chalk-Hills in Oxfordshire and Buckingham-shire;
on Juniper-Hills near Cambridge; where also grows the famous Lunaria Minor, as
the most Ingenious Gent. and Botanist, Mr. Harding, of Jesus-College, informed
me.

Virtues and Uses.
This Balsamic Solar Shrub yields such excellent and useful Remedies, that it
deserves no common nor mean ^ulogies. It has an Aromatic, Gummous and Oleous
smell, with a bitterish Astringency if chewed in the Mouth, both in its Wood
and Leaves. The Ashes are excellent made into a Lie, in Dropsies. See under
Beans. The Wood of Juniper dries, as S^ssafras; and Scaliger denotes it to be
in great esteem for a Specific Antevenereal among the Africans; and ^lat^rus
affirms, He cured many poor Gallican Patients with it; and it is by some ordered
in drying Drinks to strengthen the Brain and G^nus Nerv sum in Palsies,
Epilepsie, Gout, Catarrhs. And Sylvius de la Boe much used it in Dropsies of
the Breast, Jaundice, bilio^s Diarrhea, and other cases: Rasped in Cucup^is,
quilted Caps, Sacculets. And the Ashes of Juni^er are good to rub Scorbutical
Gums, and cleanse the Teeth, as I saw the good effects of it in Bristol.

The Berries have an internal substance, of a Balsamic and viscous
consistence, containing small Grains or Seeds, which masticated, yield a sweet
Balsamic taste, with no unpleasant bitterness, arising from a subtle Sulphur
and volatile Salt, in which two consist the excellency of these Berries, which
are reckoned hot in the third Degree, and dry in the second Degree, do
attenuate and dissipate in general; are in particular, a great Diuretic,
Sudorifick, and Alexiterick, used in Distempers of the Womb, dissipate flatus's
in the Hypochondriack Passion, in the Colic, and Convulsive Asthma, bravely
dissolve tartarous slimy substances, and Gravel; driving them forth of the
Kidneys and Bladder; being much used in Diet-drinks, and Apozems.

The Bark of Juniper is thin, and chops in hot Regions, from whence flows the
Rezin or Gum Juniperi, (most probably from the Cedar-Juniper) of which some
make Varnish, by dissolution in Linseed-Oyl; Of old this Gum was used to
preserve Parchments and Manuscripts, with other Books. It is excellent against
the Defluxions of the Brain, and is an Ingredient in Suffi^^ or Fumigations,
and Perfumes (used also as the Wood rasped) especially in cold affects of the
Nerves, vid. Scarsius de Junipero.

In the Shops. Baccae Juniperi, or Juniper-^erries and Ol. chym. Juniperi, or
the Chymical-Oyl of Juniper Berries, and Sal. Juniperi, or Salt of Juniper.

It may be admired our Dispens^tories afford no more standing Preparations of
such an efficacious Vegetable, but other Authors supply its deficiency, as the
Elix. Juniperinum* Extractum* Gummosum in Pharmacop. Quercitani. And the simple
Extract of the Berries, which is the Treacle of the Germans, and instead of
Honey, receives the Powders in the famous Orvietan-Antidote, called Electuar.
Orvietanum.

The Aetherial Oil of the Berries, is excellent in the Colic, the Salt made
from calcined Ashes, is an Ingredient in that much used Powder, called pulvis
Ari compos. But the best Medicine this Vegetable yields us, through the help of
the Chemical Art* is the Spirit, which penetrates as in a moment the whole
Body, as is evident, in giving the first Urin, made after a small Dose, the
smell of Orris or Vicl^ts. The Dose is from thirty to a hundred Drops, in
Broth, White Wine, or its own Spirituous Water which is drawn at the same time
as the Oil. But this Spirit and Water is much more exalted and invigorated with
some four or five drops of its Oil, (made into an Eleosaccharum with Sugar, so
that it may the better dissolve and commix in the Dose.

But ( in gratiam Tyronum, and others, who are not skilled in, or else disgust
and relish not Spagyrick Preparations) I shall set down an Electuary kept as a
Nostrum, for the use of Dr. ^. sometime an Eminent Physician in the City of
Worcester, in some of the Shops there.

. Bac^. Junip^r* opt. lbij cont^nd. opt. and Infun^. in A. F. lbiiij, per 24
hor. deinde coq. ad lbss. (and if then pulped, it were cer^ainly b^tter) tunc
^dde S^cchar albis. lbi^. and coq. ad ^^nsistent. Electuar. cui add z. z. ij.
Call. Aromat. Cubebar. aa. ss. in pulv^re, and f. El^^^ar.

It is very ^^si^ to apply, to each of these precited Remedies, the^r proper
Virtue, for it is common to all, since they ar^ extracted, and made from this
Balsamic Shrub Juniper* which contained them.

To bring away the After-^i^th, give about thirty drop^, or any number between
25. and ^5 of good essential Oil of Juniper in a good draught of any convenient
Vehicle. This is in the little Book of (that bull^ of Learning) Mr. ^oyle's,
called Medicinal Exp^riments: Ma^e an El^o-Sac^harum, with the O^l (^s I have
showed how, in this Book) so that it may the better dissolve.

Note* g^ther the Berries when the Sun is in Virgo, they are used ^^ Coffee or
Tea in Lapland, and other Northern parts, and adored almost.

Leeks. Numb. 11. 5.
N. K. D. P. Porrum. (...) Porrum Capitatum, is the set or headed Leek. Porrum
sectile is the cut or unset Leek; which differ not in Genus, but only by
culture, that being transplanted in Autumn and this sown in the Spring. Chives
or Cives, called Scoenoprason, belong to the wild Leeks, yet thrive greatly in
our Gardens, when cut, and endure the coldest Winter.

Virtues and Uses.
Leeks are hot and dry in the 3 degrees. like Mars their Captain, from whom they
infuse great courage and valor into the Welshmen, especially on St. Taffy's
day.

This is a Culinary Herb, and seldom mentioned in the Matter of Physic, draws
near to Garlic and Onions in virtues and vices; offends through its heat, the
Head and Eyes, except boil*d and eaten with cooling Herbs, cause and increase
bad Blood, yet attenuate, open the Breast, and are Diuretic: Outwardly they
help the noise of the Ears, and mitigate and discuss tumid and painful
H^morrhoids, either boiled to a pultiss, or fried with Butter, or the green
Blade applied, as once I knew it to great advantage, in the Piles.

The most ancient Egyptians, whose Religion was the worst of Gentilism,
attributed divi^e Honor among other Creatures to Leeks, Garlic and Onions,
for which they were publicly scorned by the Pens of the Poets.

Porrum and caepe nefas -- Thus Englished.
To bite an Onion or a Leek is more
Than deadly Sin. The Numen they adore,
Grows in their Gardens. And who does not know
What monstrous shapes for Gods in Egypt go!
As well as the Cambro-Britains (to whom I am related) are said to love Leeks,
yet I know not of any in all my Travels among them, that is a mere Glutton in
eating, or overmuch delights in them; which if I did, he should change his
ancient Name, for Nero the bloody Emperor, who being a Glutton in devouring
Leeks, was in scorn nicknamed Porrophagus.

Lentils. Genesis 25. 34. 2 Samuel 17. 28. and 23. 11. Ezekiel. 4. 9.
N. K. D. P. Lens, Lenticula (...). Lentils are a kind of Pulse, of which there
is a Major and a Minor sort, which are ma^ur'd in the fields beyond Sea, and
are cultivated in some places in England, for Fo^der instead of Fitches, and
are called Tills, not differing much from wild Fitches or Tares. having little
brownish Flowers mixed with white, which do produce a small flatCod, containing
brown or white Seed.

The Lens Minor, Mr. Ray says, are sown in the fields in Cambridge and
Huntington-shire, alone, and mixed with Barley.

The Lens Palustris, is Duck meat, or Water-Lentils, called also Lenticula
aquatica, well known to grow in Ponds, Lakes, Ditches, and standing Waters,
being in its freshest Beauty in the beginning of the year. Dills or Lentils are
sowed at Weeford in this County.

Virtues and Uses.
Lentils I suppose, being so near related to Fitches and that large Tribe, must
with them be governed by ill natured Saturn: They are temperate as to heat and
cold, yet dry, say our old Herbals, in the second Degree, and a stringent.

Being husked (they lose their binding virtue) and boiled, do loosen the Body,
are never used inwardly in these days, and Gallen and the old Authors say, They
are hard of digestion, breed Atra Bilis, Leprosy, and Cankers. Mr. Ray says,
They dull the Sight, and are an enemy to the Head and Genus Nervosum.

Outwardly they may be used in Lotions, Fomentations and Caetaplasms in
Maladies, where Indications call for such qualified Plants. See Fitches, Tares.

Ducks-meat is crud and watery, cold and moist in the second Degree, used in
all Inflammations, St. Anthony's Fire, Erysipela's alone, or made into a
Pultiss with Barley-meal, or with Wheat-flour, in hot Tumors and Phlegmons.
Mathi^l. says, The distilled Water cools inward In^l^^mations, and redness of
the Eyes. And Mr. Ray says, Dr. Bates communicated it is him, as an infallible
Secret in the Jaundice, being infused in White Wine and drank for nine days,
but it is not remarked in the Pharmacop. Batean. as I can find. It may allay an
inflamed Sulphurous Blood, in which Choler prevails, and often gives a Jaundice
color, but not cure, the Jaundice proceeding from obstruction, as Sir J. F.
truly and rationally concludes.

Being once called to a Patient, far from better Medicines, I was forced to
frame a Cataplasm of Ducks-meat, Peans powdered to Meal, and a little Vinegar,
which applied, strangely pacified and eased an Inflammation of the Penis and
Priapism.

Ligit-Aloes. Numb. 24. 6.
N. K. D. P. Santalus. Jun. and Tr. Vulg. Xyloaloes. Agallochum (...). The Wood
of Aloes is a precious o^oriferous Wood brought ou^ Druggists from the Indies.
Bitterish, Resinous, Dense, Ponderous, with Nigro-purpureous, and Cineritious
Veins, exudating a Balsamic Aromatic Liquor, and Fume, if held near the Fire
or Candle. The best sort is of high esteem amongst the Princes of India, and
said to have been worth its weight in Silver, in Camboia, a Province in the
East Indies, and there called Calumba, Calumbart. A second sort not so good, is
there called Agula, and by ^vicen, Agallagen, and is most in use in our Shops,

Virtues and Uses.
By reason of the Noble and Great Virtues it does possess. the Germans give it
the Name of Lignum Paradisi, or Wood of Paradise (it is counted hot and dry in
the second Degree, refreshing the Vital and Animal Spirits, corroborating the
Heart, Womb, and all the Viscera, especially the Brain, and by its bitterness
kills Worms, and is an excellent Perfume, being outwardly used in Cucuphis,
Cordial Epithems, Pastilli Odorati, or Pomanders.

In the Shops. It Is an Ingredient in several Cordial Powders, but there is no
preparation denominated from it in the last Pharmacop^i^. Valerius Cordus has
sp^c. Diaxyloaloes. A^gelus Sala extracts the Resine of it with Rose Water and
Spirit of Wine. Quercetan with Waters of St. John's- Wort and Centaury, and
accounts it a peculiar Remedy against the Worms. And many Pra^itioners use the
Extract of it, as a great Cordial and Se^ret.

Lilly. Lillies. 1 Kings 7. 19. 22, 26. 2 Chr. 4 5. Cant. 2. 1, 2, 16. and 4.
5. and 5. 13. and 6. 2, 3. and 7. 2. Hos. 14. 5. Mat. 6. 28. Luke 12. 27.
N. K. D P. Lillium. (...): Potius Lilli^, quasi (...), i. e. valde mollia.
There are Lillies of the Garden, Wild, Native, and Foreign, distinguished most
by their Flowers, by the curious Florist, for Lilli^ flores amabiles sunt.
Those well known, are

White Lillies, called Lillium album seu commune. Also Rosa Junonis, because as
the Poets feign, After Hercules (Jupiter's Bastard by Alcmena) had secretly
su^ked Juno's Breast while she slept; her Milk flowed out plentifully, some
whereof sprinkled that Circle in the Heavens, called Via Lactea, or Galaxia,
Milky way, or by some, Watling-street; and some fell on the Earth, and produced
the lovely Lilly.

Red Lillies, called Lillium Rubrum, besides other names by the old Herbarists,
Dodonaeus and Baptist. ^orta think it the Hi^cynthus and Cosmanda^os of the
Poets. Ovid Met. lib. 10. feigns it Originated from the Blood of the Boy
Hiacynthus, which perished playing with Apollo, who for his sake, did
Characterize his mournful sighs in Ai Ai, in this Flower.

The most useful of the wild sorts, (mentioned also in Cant. as well as the
Garden) is first, the Lilly of the Valley, known by the name of Lillium
convallium, or May-Lilly flowering in May, (the former in June;) this has a
small stalk, and small white flowers, like little Bells, with turned edges, of
a pleasant smell, after which come small red Berries* the Root is small, and
creeps abroad in the Earth. I give this short Description, to encourage our
Country Apothecaries, to keep the Conserve of this Cephalic Vegetable in
their Shops. There is a red sort also, not used.

Secondly, the Water Lillies, called Nymphaea* both in Latin and Greek, and
Nenuphar by the Arabians, bearing a white flower, with yellow thr^ms in the
middle, is well known to the Apothecaries Boys, who gather them in standing
Waters, and sides of slow Rivers, in the flowering time of May or June, for the
uses of the Shop. Besides this white, the Nymphaea Flore luteo with a yellow
flower, is not much used.

Virtues and Uses
The Garden Lillies are said to be under the Moon, moderately hot, Mucilaginous
and Bitterish, and smell fainty; more used outwardly, than inwardly, every
Female Surgeon, and Dame of a Family, knowing, how to make a Pultiss with the
Roots, to Ripen and draw a Whitloe, Felon or Impost, using at the same time, a
little of the Oil of the Flowers, which caseth Pain and Moll^fies.

The Lilly of the Valley is Mercury's Herb, the Flowers have an Aromatic Odor,
and a sharp bitterish Gust; for making some Sneezing Powder of them, a while
since, I often t^y'd them; they are Car^iack, and a great Cephalic, and
prescribed by practical Authors* as Willis, in Apoplexies, Palsies, and
Diseases arising from the Brain and Genus Nervosum; as the Gout, Obliviousness,
and in Constitutions, rather Cold than Hot; these Flowers being hot and dry in
the 2 Degree.

Water Lillies are under the Moon, say some Astrological Artist^, under Venus
say others; and so the Old Authors tells us, these Flowers are Cold and Moist;
and as such most Practitioners have prescribed them in Feavors, Phrensies,
Fluxes, Gonorrhea's, heat of Kidneys; and whereas others, that depend more upon
the Demonstration of their Senses, and Activity of Vegetative Principles,
conclude it not so Cold, as it is reputed.

In the Shops 1. Oil of White Lillies. 2. Cons. Flor. Lill* ^^nv^ll. or
Conserve of the Flowers of the ^illy of the Valley. 3. And the Water of the
same. or Aq. Flor. Nymph* or the simple Water of the Flowers of Water Lillies.
5. The Syrup of the same simple. 6. The Syrup of the compounded. 7. The
Conserve of the same. 8. O^ Nenupha^inae, of Water Lillies.

I know the Oil of Lillies is a very proper thing for Mi^wives and other good
Women, to have by them but how the Root boiled and Drunk, should help sp^edy
Deli^ery, and expel the after Birth I cannot conceive, being accounted, cold
and binding, and used in Fluxes, Gonorrheas, Dysury, etc. Noct^^nal Polutions,
Haemoptys^, in all which and more Cas^^, the simple Syrup, and compound also
are very serviceable to Physicians, and their Patient^.

The Generality of whom, (if I may a little digress) when once they are
persuaded or forced to fly unto a Physician, for help, do like Asa King of Juda
rely more on the Medicines, and the Physician then on God, for which he was
reprehended by the Prophet. A fit caution to be observed by my Reader and all
Men. It is repo^ted by Suidas (Greg-T^olos. To 2 Lib. 28. Cap. 7. speaking of
Ezekiah) that there was a great Book of old, of King Solomon's Writing* which
contained Medicines, against all Diseases, and lay sti^l open, as they came
into the Temple. But Ezekiah King of Jerusalem, caused it to be taken away,
because it made the people secure, and to neglect their Duties i^ calling, and
relying on God, out of a confi^ence of those Remedies.

Minutius that worthy Consul of Rome, in an Oration he made to his Soldiers,
was much offended with them, and taxed their ignorance, that in their Misery,
they called more on him, than on God* A general fault, we all, (the best of us)
are too apt to rely more on the means, than on the great Elshaddai, the
All-sufficient: and the Speech of Minutius concerns us all in the Application.

On the other hand, to pray alone, or rather to trust God and Nature, as the
poor ignorant Vulgar; and too many others term it, and reject ordinary means,
is to do like him in Aes^p, that lay on his back, when his Cart was stall'd,
and called aloud. Help, Hercules; but to little purpose, except as his Friend
advised him, he whipped his Horses, and put shoulder to the Wheel: God work^ by
Means, as Christ cured the Eli^d man wi^h Salve made of Clay and Spittle: The
Lord has created Medicines on the Earth, and of such does the Apothecary make
his Confections, and he that is wise will not abhor them. Eccles. 38. And the
same God has created Physicians, to whom he has given Knowledge and Skill,
that he might be glorified in his wondrous Works. ^erse 6. They are his
immediate Ministers, who are the Dispensers of such Treasures, as Medicines of
the Earth, and to be honored for Necessities sake; with such does he heal Men,
being God's hand, as one calls them, to take away Pains; therefore when thou
have need of him, let him not depart from thee, for an hour may come, that
their Medicines may have good success. Verse 7. 13. And be so wise, as as to be
ruled by him, and vary not a tittle from his Rules. For without this exact
obedience, and thy Nurses due Attendance, thou expectest a Cure invain.

Mallows. Job. 30. 4.
N. K. D. P. Herbae Jun. and Tr. Vulg. Malvae (...) Mallows, it may be, from
its mollifying virtue, but some will have it Malva, from the Hebrews, who call
it Malluach, for Melach, does signify Salt; and this succous Vegetable is
chiefly found in old ruinous, salt Dunghill places, which abound with fat, and
Terraqueous and Nitre-Saline Juices. Others will have it denominated from the
Chaldee, Malluach, leaving out the guttural letters, c^. as Rabbi David Kim^i
denotes it.

Malva hortensis is the Hollyock, whith is Garden-Mallows, called also Malva
Arborea, or Tree-Mallows growing tall.

Common or wild Mallows, called Malva vulgaris, seu Sylvestris. Marshmallows
called Althea, Bismalva, being twice as good as the common. French or Jews
Mallows called Malochia, a Pot-herb in Egypt, Spain and other hot Regions, and
is propagated in some curious Gardens with us; but seldom comes to flower;
there are other kinds, as Vervain Mallow, etc. but these are those that are
well known, and commonly used. The Marshmallows so called from the Marshes, and
Morish places, where they grow, but now are in most Physick-Gardens, the old
Stalk diyng at Winter, springing again at April or May, at which time the Roots
are at the best to be used, for the standing Medicines in the shops. It is
propagated by Stems or Slips.

Virtues and Uses.
Common Mallows are moderately hot and mo^st, and the Marshmallows are also
hot, but drier than the rest, being all mucilagi^ous; I know no reason but that
Mallows with us may be as excellent a Potherb as they are beyond Sea, but our
Ignoramus's condemn it as a Weed, Horace could say, -- Et gravi; Malva Salubres
corpori.

Mallows, especially the Marsh, by the mucilaginous substance are greatly
profitable and helpful^ First in the Stone and other Diseases of the Reins and
^^adder. Secondly, in Distempers of the Lungs, as Coughs, and salt C^tarrhs.
Thirdly in Fr^sions and sharp Fluxes of the I^t^s^ines, (the Decoction of the
Roots, and macilage of the Seeds especially.) Lastly, outwardly to (...) Tumors
and give ease in Pultesses. Some eat the tender Leaves and Stalks in the
Spring, with Water-Cr^ss*s, Mercury, Ne^les, Redleggs, Comphry tops, Leaves of
(...), and other Herbs, boiled and Cooked to a piece of ((...)) Beef, a Dish I
much delight in, and the tender Stalks Cooked like Asparagus or Sperage, are
hardly distinguished from it, only it bur^s not the Throat as Sperage does. The
first tenderils of Hops may be so Cooked, and pass for a Bastard Sperage.

In the Shops. Mallows and Marshmallows dried, and are two of the five
Emollient Herbs, nominated in our Dispensatories, and are used frequently in
Glisters, Baths, and Fomentations, in the aforesaid cases.

The simple destilled Water of Mallows or Marsh-Millows.

The Syrup of Marshmallows, or Althea; and the Vnguentum.

Dialthea, a well known, and much used Ointment.

The Pulvis Dialthea, inserted by the College in the last Edition, and
Correction of their Pharm^copoeia.

In the Stone or Gravel, or in such Constitutions Inclining to the same; I have
often known one ounce of the Syrup taken in six or eight ounces of ^irc^-Water
(which flows from the Tree) drank for a month or six weeks, for a mornings
draught in the Spring time, not only for preventions sake, but to carry off
Gravel and Stones. For this Syrup, and the Pulvis Dialthea, are chiefly
appropriated to such Diseases. The Dose of the Powder may be a ss. ad j.

But certainly the Virtues of this useful Syrup might be more exalted, if the
modus faciendi were ordained in a more refined and Spagyrick method.

Saccharum Dial^hae, or Sugar of Marshmallows, is much used (and constantly
kept in a great Practical Shop) by two Eminent Doctors in Consumptions, etc. in
a Neighboring Country, not here to be named. It is made with a strong
Decoction of the Roo^s and Sugar, bo^^ed to the consistence of Tablets, and so
carried about one, and familiarly used to dissolve in the Mouth, or with Aq.
lactis cum her^is p^ctoralibus and limacibus. Vid. Tabul. Dialthaeae. B. (...).

Mandrakes. Genesis 30. 14, 15, 16. Cant. 7. 13.
N. K. D. P. Flores Amabiles. Jun. and (...) Mandragora Lat and Gr. Terrae
Malum. (...)morphos. Herb. Dudaim.

Mandrakes naturally grow in Countries bordering on the Medeterranean-Sea, in
Spain, Italy, and by all Authors are reckoned Male and Female. Dioscorides
tells us, 'Twas called Circea, because Circe ( which the Poets feign to be the
Daughter of Sol and Persis) an Enchantress, expert in Herbs, used it as a
Tempting-Powder in amorous concerns.

Mandrakes are nursed up in some well managed Gardens with us, by Seed, though
they may be propagated from particles of the Roots.

The Male, or Mandragora Mas, is the most common, having a great black Root,
though white within, with interwoven and circumplicated Coats, or Branches,
whence arise many large Leaves, lodging on the ground, and then on a tender
Stalk, diverse pale green Flowers, consisting of five round Leaves apiece which
produce a Husk, which when ripe (in July) contains a golden colored Fruit as
big as a Pear-Maine, which yields a whitish flat Seed. which affects the Nose
with a Narcotick Stuffing Odor: The Female is every way smaller, and more
rarely raised, flowering not till August, therefore seldom yields a perfect
Fruit or Apple.

Virtues and Uses.
By its ill hogo and foetid scent, it should be influenced by Saturn, being
cold in the third Degree, if not in the fourth, of a strong Narcotick and
S^poriferous nature, never used inwardly that I know of: Lev. Lem^ius tells us,
How being sat in his Study, a sudden drowsiness seized him, caused by a
Mandrake-Apple that he had laid on a Shelf. And it passes in the old Herbals,
for one of the cold poisonous Class, with the Nap^llis, or Wolfe-banes,
Hen-bane, etc.

I shall only reflect upon two Errors concerning this much talked of Vegetable;
the first is, that it being carried about one, it procures Love, and fertility,
instead of Sterility, for which reason, some have imagined, Rachel desired her
Sisters Mandrakes, as the Text is translated: but let them consider, young
R^uben brought home ^lores amabiles, amiable and odoriferrous Flowers, for so
the Hebrew word in Cant. 7. 13. imports; but in these Flowerr there is no such
delectable odor, moreover we do not find she conceived thereupon: But grant it
the Flowers of Mandrakes, and that they should stir up Venery, and cause a
tickling in the Skin, as Opium, and others of that nature are said to do, and
yet stupifie the Members, and lay them asleep, which is not without admiration;
yet different Countries and Climes vary the nature of Vegetables, and also give
different qualities and substances, as cold, which may cause stupidity, and
hot, which may cause a tickling in the skin: or else we may say, it excites
Venery acc^^e^tally by t^mperating the excessive heat of the ^o^^, which is an
enemy to Venus: And Avicen and others say, The Apples and Seeds refrigerate a
hot Matrix and therefore some have absolutely concluded. That Rachel desired
them for her hot and dry Body, the supposed cause of her Barrenness

But notwithstanding for any one positively to affirm, these lovely Flowers
were Mandrakes (Apples as the Greek translates it) is too magi^^^^ and singular
an opinion; for whereas though some of the Hebrew Interpreters expound the Hebrew
word, which is lovely or amiable, to be Mandrakes, yet others of them say, it is
Indicum gelseminum, and others the Violet Flowers, or Lillies; which have a far
more fragrant smell than Mandrakes; and lastly, some expound it Phil^ra
amatoria. amatorious Philters: Moreover let it be considered, that it was in
Wheat Harvest time, before Gelseminum or Mandrake-Apples could be ripened, and
it is likely the young Child Reuben would be more fond of the delicate and sweet
Flowers of the Fields, than of ill scented and immature Apples. To conclude,
(if not too much already) seeing the signification of the word is uncertain; it
rather appears to me, to be some other Vegetable than Mandrakes.

The next Error is, that it is apparent by the abovesaid description, that
there are no Masculine, nor Feminine shapes belong to this so much admired
Plant, though some cheating Wanderers have impos^d upon, and mocked the credulous
Multitude, by showing a Briony Root carved into humane shapes, for a Mandrake.

And other Imposters cut the Figure of an ugly Image, with a form of a Face, at
the top of the Root of Mandrakes, leaving those threads, stringy Roots, or small
Fibers which sprout from this Root, and many others, to hang down, and resemble
a (...) and long Beard, and so show it abroad as a Miracle; but see the many
false conceptions concerning this Vegetable, confuted by Dr. Brown in his Vulg.
Err.

The Death most painless, has been noted to be, says my Lord B^^^n, upon the
taking a Potion of H^mlock or Mandrake Apples, which inhumanity was the form of
Execution of Capital Offenders in Athens; the cause is, that the torments of
death are criefly raised by the strife of the Spirits, and the cold Potions
quench the Spirits by degrees, like to the death of an extreme old Man: I
conceive it, says that great Man, less painful than Opium, because Opium has
parts of heat mixed.

Notwithstanding the apprehensions some have of the no^ious quality of this
Vegetable, yet old Herbals say, The Apples may be eaten with ^epper and hot
Spi^^s, and some Practical Authors talk, How a s^ruple of the inspissated
Juice, was given to those that ^ere to suffer Amputation, or a Member to be cut
off, to render them insensible of pain; but I judge it would not work such an
effect; I know not what the Decoction ^^ the Root or the Juice of the Apples or
Bark and Leaves might do in a large Dose, perhaps take away all their Senses
for ever.

In the Shops. The Root, Leaves, Apples, and (...), are nominated amongst the
Simples in the (...)

(...) Oil of Mandrakes, called Oleum Mandragorae (...), is also therein, being
a Composition of the (...) and most stupefying Ingredients that can be (...) to
be put together, but is seldom kept or prepared, nor did I ever see it
prescribed. Yet it may be anointed upon the Temples and Noses of those that are
in high Frensies, upon the Forehead and Temples in great Head-achs, and upon
the Pulses and Soals of the Feet in great watchfulness, and in (...) vigili; it
will give ease to any Pain, and cool any Inflammation, if there be no other
Indications, and Symptoms to prohibit the use of it.

Melons. Number. 11. 5.
N. K. D. P. Pepo. Jun. and Trem. vulg. Melo. (...), ex (...) Coquo, emollio,
quia coctus a sole* The best Sort are called Musk-Melons, by reason of a sweet
Musky Smell. Mathiolus and others call the greater Pepones, Pompions, the
lesser Melopepones, Melons, thy differing only in Size, Shape and Smell,
belonging to the Cucumeral Tribe. See Cucumbers.

Tho these Plants have but a small slender Stalk, yet produce a vast bulky
Fruit in well managed Gardens, and differ according to the Soil and heat of the
Hot-beds; some Gardiners raising as great ones (tho I doubt not so wholesome) as
those in the hot Countries, where they prosper best.

I have seen them raised (which seems to be the most wholesome) Mr. Speed's way,
cap. 14. which he says will produce as good Musk-Melons as any are in Italy.
Plant them under a Wall or Pale, toward the Sun, in the best Mould you can
get, laying under the Mould, a quantity of fresh Barley Straw, and so by using
the Seasonable Covertures, and necessary furtherances, (as to Cucumbers) you
attain easily your desire: If the Straw make the Earth too hot, thrust a Stake
through the Soil, to the Straw, that some of the heat may evaporate.

Virtues and Uses.
These Pulpy Fruits are held by Galenists, but cold and moist in the 2d degrees. if
so, then they are not so cold as Lettice and Purslain, and are, as Cucumbers
(or Cow-cumbers, as the vulgar style them) under the Moon. The Flesh or
internal Substance is slimy and sweetish, yielding crude and waterish
Nourishment, of harder digestion than Cucumbers, and are more fit for robust
and rustic Bodies, (which are hardly prejudiced by any thing that usually
fills the Belly) who eat them boiled in Milk, and buttered; others slice the
Pulp, and fry it with Butter and some bake the Slices with Apples, the two
former ways, being the most wholesome, the latter being more crude and windy,
but they are usually corrected, with Pepper and Spices.

They provoke Urine, and cool hot Stomachs, good for Hectical Bloods (says
one) that cannot bear A^ids: The Spaniards and Italians eat them, to cool the
boiling rage of Lust: if they do remain long in the Stomach, they are apt to
putrify, and cause pestilential Fevors, and produce Surfeits and Loosenesses.

In the Shops. Melon-seeds are one of the four greater cold Seeds, which by
their slimy and mucilaginous Substance, do obtund hot acrimonious Humors, and
allay, and temper acrid Salts, so good in Emulsions in heat of Urin, Coughs,
Consumptions, and preternatural Thirsts.

Mint. Matthew. 23. 23. Luke 11. 42.
N. K. D. P. Mentha (...); the Name of Pluto's Harlot, transformed into a Herb,
as the Poets do fabulate. But (...) also is Mentha, (i. e) Suavis odor, A sweet
smell (which strongly flows from this good House-Wifes Herb) more properly
gives it the Name.

There are many sorts of Mint, as Speer-mint, Mentha Spicata, crisped or curled
Mint, M^n^ha crispa, with others of the Garden, which yield little or no good
Seed, and are propagated by Off-sets and Slips from the Root.

The wild sorts are Horse-Mint, Mentha caballina, or Mentastrum aquaticum;
Water-Mint, Sisymbrium sive Mentha aquatica Calamint, or M^untain-Mint,
Calamintha Nep, or Cat-Mint, Mentha nep^ta, sive Cataria; these are all very
well known, by good Women, and by the young Botanists, and Herb-Women belonging
to Apothecary's Shops.

Virtues and Uses.
Garden-Mints are held to be hot and dry almost to the end of the 3 degrees. and
all the Astrological Writers place it under Venus, who (it may be) gave it the
quality (to cross the Milk-Maids) of preventing the coagulation, curdling, or
cheesing of Milk, if steeped in it, although the Coagulum or Rennet be thoroughly
mixed in the same; And therefore nothing more usual, with some Physicians, who,
when they appoint their Consumptive Patients a Milk-Di^t, then to order a Sprig
of Mint to steep in the Milk, some short time before they drink it: The Stomach
of such Patients being too apt (through a peculiar degenerated Acid Humor, (
Rennet) or Serum, which lurketh therein, raising Flatus's and Eructations) to
curdle the Milk, as their too often Vomiting of a cheesy Substance after it,
does make it evident. Now

Mints have a biting, aromatic, bitterish Sapor, with a strong fragrant Smell,
abounding with a pungent Volatile Salt, and a subtle Sulphur, which disvig
orate and destroys Acids: And herein does lodge the Causation of such
Medicinal Virtues in this Herb, and others of the like Nature. And so a Pultiss
of Mints mollifieth the hardness of Women's Duggs, arising from the Coagulation
of their Milk; the further uses of Mint is in Weaknesses, Flatus's and
Crudities of the Stomach, in Vomitings, Colic Pains and Indigestion; All
which, and more Virtues arise also partly from the great quantity of sixth
Lixivial Salt, which may be made from it; for lbj of dried Mint (or that after
it has been distilled) calcined, has yielded above half an Ounce of Salt; and
therefore must cause this Vegetable to be so excellent a Stomachick.

^ Calamint is, to my knowledge, used by many Physicians, before the Garden
Mint, by reason of its greater Virtues, which its Name, (...) imports Quasi
elegans aut utilis Mentha, A choice and profitable Mint, one of the good
natured Planet Mercury's Herbs (to be found on upland and dry Grounds) respects
and operates strongly on the Womb and Feminine parts, warms the Viscera, but
especially is a great Cephalic withal, exciting the motion of the Spirits, and
heating the Nervous Fibers, as one well observes, and as my self have often
experienced: it is also ^ectoral and epatick: It kills Worms, and expels
the Foetus and dead Child, if decocted in Wine, and drank. The other Mints are
much of the same Nature as these.

In the Shops. The dry Herbs. 2dly, Mint-water. 3^ly, Spirit of Mints. 4thly,
Syrup of Mints. 5thly, The Conserve of the Leaves. 6thly, The Simple Oil.
7thly, The Chimical Oil.

Of Calamint, the Powders called Diacalaminthus Simplex, and composit.

The Spirit of Mints is a good Cordi^l, dispenses Wind, and stays Vomiting,
it is very hot, and ought to be given in a small Dose, half a Spoonful or less.
The Chimical Oil, corrects a Dose of Purging Pills, preventing their Griping,
and renders them more Stomachical, expelling Wind, if a drop or two be added
unto them, when beat up,

The Diacalaminth Simple warms the Stomach, procuring Dig stion, especially in
old Age, cutting gross Phlegm, expels Wind, and provokes the Menses and Urine.
The compound Powder is more appropriated to Women than the former, expels the
Birth, Afterbirth, and cleanses them after Labor. Dos. of each is ss at a
time. If the Midwives will take notice hereof, they may give it in a Draught of
White Wine Posset Drink, or other-Liquor.

The Syrup of Mints is binding, as made with the Juice of Quinces, it is
pleasant comforts the Stomach, procures an Appetite, and greatly stays
Vomitings: The Oil of Mints Simple does the same, if the Stomach be anointed
therewith.

Mullberry-Trees. ^ 2 Samuel 5. 23, 24. 1 Chronicles. 14. 14.
N. K. D. P. Morus. The Fruit Morum. (...) Morus, quasi Maurus, ^ (...) niger,
obscurus, vel a mora i. e. a tarditate (...). because it bloometh not till the
rigor of Winter is past, about May or June, and therefore called by the old
Writers, Sapientissima Arbor.

This Exotic Tree was sent for by King James I his Command, from Italy and
France, who did with extraordinary care recommend the propagation of it, to
this slothful Nation, by a Book of Directions, Acts of Council, and in his
admirable Letter to all the Lords, Deputy Lieutenants, Gentry and Ingenious,
which may be seen in Hartlib's Legacy, 14. Defic. p. 59. Edit. 4. The
Black-fruit-bearing Tree is most common, called Morus celsa vel niger: though
the White, so called from its pale colored fruit, is recommended and cried for
its surpassing uses, the fruit is more luscious in taste, and lesser than the
black, both well known to Inhabitants where they grow, being large and tall
Trees in some Orchards or Gardens, in some Countries, but not very common.

It is nursed up from foreign Seed rarely (hea^ being wanting) coming to
perfection here, but the sowing of ripe Mulberries themselves, (or after the
Juice is expressed, or the Excrements of Hogs, yea Dogs, which will frequently
eat them) does produce young Plants abundantly; but it is best to bruise them
with fine rich Mould, and sow them in rich, succulent, fine and rank Soyi; they
are also raised by Suckers, Slips and Layers, delighting in the Sun, and where
Vines prosper most, hating watery low Grounds, though loving to be well watered
at first.

Virtues and Uses.
The Timber of this Tree, for its durableness, is of incomparable ^se to
Joyners, etc. also to make Hoops, Bows, Wheels, etc. instead of Oak, for it
lasts as well in the water, and its Bark will make Bast-^opes, no Vermin nor
Caterpillar dare attack it, except the curio^s Bombyx, the Leaves (for which
they are chiefly propagated, producing abundance as well Leaves as Fruit)
appear about May or June, the Silkworms then seeming, after a Winters sleep,
to revive, feed, and work, answerable to the ends of their Creation; the white,
rather earlier than the black, being chiefly prized, yielding a Food, producing
a finer Webb.

The fairest Mullberries, Rome (when in her height and Luxury) preferred before
any ^ruit they had from Africa or Asia, some hundreds of years, before Italy or
Naples thought of Aurelian Silk; and France, (which is strange) was ignorant of
the Silken Manufacture, above a thousand years after Italy had made it; yet
it is prodigious, to consider what a gainful progress, within a hundred years
the French have made in it, to our shame be it spoken: since where these Trees
prosper, the wonderful Silkworms will thrive also

I suppose some may meet with the Tract, who may not read the many large
inviting Discourses extant, to the propagation of this famous Tree, and
consequently of the Silken Trade: Therefore have I been the larger, to invite
my Native Countrymen and Ladies (who I wish were as willing as witty) to the
Planting and Cherishng of it; for we may make it here better, and cheaper, and
save the Money sent to France and Italy, if we had but enough to furnish our
selves.

Besides the Leaves nourish Cows, Sheep, and other Cattle, and boiled with Bran
feed young Porkers, in Devonshire and those places, where they grow; the
blacker sort of Fruit is the most common, and of it they make a sort of
Mullberry-Cyder; see Apples. And so leaving you to the larger Discourses of
Columella, and his Junior two hundred years Palladias, (both ignorant of the
Silken Trade) Mr Lvelyn, etc.

I shall (resuming my own Province) with the Astrologer, assign it to the
mutable Planet Mercury, being as variable in its Uses and Virtues, For the ripe
Berries are laxative, being sweet and slimy, and the unripe (especially if
dried) bind, stop Fluxes; the Bark of the Root has a purging quality, and the
Bark of the Tree is bitterish, (as is the Root) and hot, and is astringent.
Gal. says, The first Buds have a middle faculty, both to bind and scour; and
the Leaves and tender Tops are very temperate. The Berries by their acidity and
sliminess, are good to heal sore Mo^ths, and an excellent Wine is made of the
ripe Fruit in some places.

In the Shops. Diamoron, or Honey or Syrup of Mullberries, of which see more
under Bramble.

Mustard Seed. Matthew. 13. 31. and 17. 20. Mark 4. 31. Luke 13. 19. and 17. 16.
N. K. D. P. Mustard, quasi mustum ardens, being use^ to hasten the
Fermentation and Depuration of new Wine, or Must. In lat. Sinapi, or Sinapis;
(...), a (...). Hurting Mustard, a (...) Laedo, by its volatile Acrimony,
hurting the Nose and Eyes.

Garden Mustard is as well known, as it is manured with us, keeping possession,
in that Land, where it has once got footing; flowering in July, and yielding
the Gardener its Seed in August, either whitish or reddish, or purpureous. The
wild sorts are Hedge-Mustard, or Frysimum. Treacle-Mustard or Thlapsi. and many
others, but these are chiefly used, and well known to the Herb-Women and young
Botanists.

Virtues and Uses.
They are under the sharp and offensive Planet Mars, and in the old way of
Physic, which is now exploded; Common-mustard is hot and dry in the 4th degrees.
but those that more accurately, demonstrate the Virtues of Simples, from their
Sapors, Odours, and essential Principles of Plants, do find it to abound with
an acrid heat, yielding a volatile Salt, which upon con^usion assaults the Nose
and Eyes. The Seed being made into Mustard, corroborates the Stomach, and
provokes an Appetite, and greatly helps Digestion, in stoppages of the Breast;
it bravely cleanses, and causes expectoration, cutting gross Phlegm, and good
in Gargles, in Lethargies and Palsies, to draw humors from the Head, and
outwardly exulcerates the Skin, in Vesicatori^s or Synapismes, and provokes
Sneezing, being infased in Drink, it is a great A^tiscorbutick and Diuretic.

Erysinum Lat. and Gr. by Gerhard Bank-Cress, is accounted hot and dry in the
third Degree, has Cress-s^por, being a wild Acrid, and endued with a volatile
Salt, an excellent Her^ in all Diseases of the Breast, and Lungs, the Decoction
of it is given in Hoarsnesses, Jaundice, Pleurisies, and Dropsies of the
Breast, in Pectoral Decoctions, etc. Treacle-Mustardseed is also hot and dry in
the third Degrees.

In the Shops. White Mustard-Seeds are an Ingredient in some Antidotes, as
Electuarium de ovo: Treacle Mustard Seed, semen thlapsi are in Mithridate,
Theriaca Andromach, and Antidote of Mathiolus. For these Seeds resist Poison,
break inward Apostems, faetum necat, as Authors say, if followed, and given in
a Dose to ij. it purges Choler: Syrup de Erysino, is made of the Juice of
Hedge-mustard, and deserves for its surpassing Virtues, to be kept in more
Shops than it is, having experienced it to be a singular Remedy in cold
Distempers of the Breast and Lungs, Asthma's and Hoarseness, in which there is
no better Syrup in the Shops.

Consulting Dr. Dickenson formerly by Letter, about an Eminent Gentleman, who
had labored long under a Nervous Distemper, he ordered, That a draught of the
following Ale were drank every morning, and at four or five a Clock.

. Mustard Seed lbj. infuse it in a pottle Bottle of small Ale for three days,
strain it as you drink it: and you may fill it up ten times, upon the same
Mustard Seed, and it will be rather-stronger than at the first; This Drink also
is good in Dropsies, Sciatica, and inveterate Scurvey.

In the Palsy.. Mustard Seed dried and powdered, v. Nasturtium-Seeds ij. Syrup
of the Juice of Sage lbi. or so much as is sufficient to make it into an
Electuary. Dose is ss, daily for some months. In cold Paralytical habits, to
prevent also. Batean.

In many Shops as I could name, to which famous Physicians do belong, the
Leaves of Hedge-Mustard are kept in fine Powder, as also of Ground Ivy. And Dr.
Willis orders in a Consumption, thus.. Powder of the Leaves of Hedge-mustard
iss. scummed Honey iiij. mix them for a Lohoch to be licked with a
Liquorish-stick, especially first and last; it is most convenient in a cold
Constitution, and new Consumptive Cough.

In Colds, Hoarsenesses, Stoppages of the Breast and Lungs, I am wont for the
poor People, to prescribe two spoonfuls of good fresh Mustard; with four or six
spoonfulls of Honey, Oxymel, Syrup of Hedge-Mastard, or other Pectoral Syrup,
and very often common Treacle or Molossos with a few drops of Oil of Aniseeds;
which though ordinary, I have seen great effects by it, and do here publish it
for the sake of the Poor. Or. Bals. Lucatel. ss. flor. Sulphuris j flor Benzoin
i. pull. fol. Erysini vel. baederae terr. q. s. f. pil. instar pisor. cap. iij.
primo and ultim. for richer Consumptive Patients.

An outward Oil to rub the Spina dorsi, and Paralytick Members, called Ol.
Paralyticum.. Mustard Seed lbiij. Castor ss. Cloves ij. Nutmegs iij. Spirit of
W^ne iiij. bruise them well, and infuse them in Balneo Mariae for 24 hours,
then press out the Oil strongly with a Press. An excellent Oil in the dead
Palsy, in cold Aches, Weaknesses, Pains, and benummedness of the Limbs; it
also strengthens the Nerves, and Stomach if anointed therewith, and at the same
time; give it inwardly from 20 to 60 drops, in a draught of Sage Ale. It has
done wonders, it is somewhat costly, and therefore I recommend it to the Rich
Ladies to keep by them for their Poor Neighbors. It being the Secret of a
great Physician, I formerly was Assistant to in his Practice.

Myrtle-Trees. Neh. 8. 15. Is. 41. 19. and 55. 13. Zech. 1. 8, 10, 11.
N. K D. P. myrtus. Lat. and Gr. (...): a (...) vel. a (...) odoramentum, ob
odoris Suavi^atem. Vulg. Myrtillus, and the Berries Baccae Myrtilli;
Myrtle-Berries.

There is more than half a dozen sorts of this Vegetable, found in hotter
Regions, as in Spain, near the Seacoasts, France, Italy, though this fragrant
Plant came first from Greece: The vulgar Italian wild Myrtle grows somewhat
high, but is not so fragrant, others like to Shrubs, and some much lower, as
are two sorts, which I have seen, the Myrtus minor and mucronata, and Myrtus
florifera duplex, in the Conservatories of the Curious, both in Cheshire and
Staffordshire.

Dutch Myrtle. Myrtus Brabantica, or by some Elaeagnus Cordi, sweet Gaul, grows
in the Fens of the Isle of Ely, and in other places, and in some Gardens:
Myrtle is a tender Evergreen Plant, easily destroyed by cold, seldom or never
perfecting its Berries with us, but is raised by exotic Seed, and will
strangely be propagated by Layers: A few Mats or Straw it is said secure it
better than Pots or Boxes, in which the Roots are confined and grow arid.

Virtues and Uses.
This pleasant Vegetable is reckoned under Mercury's Government, and generally
said, to be temperately cold and dry (if any thing can be said to be so) and
greatly astringent; but he that tries, shall find, both by smell and taste, it
has a thin warm Essence, emanates from the green fresh Leaves and Flowers,
giving a very quick fragrant smell, and a sharp rough aromatic Sapor; the
dried Leaves must needs therefore dry and bind more than the fresh; and if you
make a Decoction of them, they make a pleasant Drink like Tea: And some do
affirm (with Simon Paullus) the Leaves of the Brabant or Dutch Myr^le, is
prepared and vended hither as the true Tea. It must needs be good (either
Leaves or Flowers of Myrtle) against Catarrhs, Rheums, Fluxes of the Belly and
Stomach, strengthening the same, and be a refeshing Cordial to the Animal
Spirits. Also in Haemoptysin and all other Issues of Blood: But I think it is
very seldom used (except the Berries) in the Materia Medica, and kept more for
the Rarity and curious smell, than for any other use. The Excrescence of this
Plant called Myr^idanum, is the strongest binder of all, and operates as Acacia.

In the Shops. Myrtle-Berries, Syrupus Myrtinus, or Syrup of Myrtle. Oleum
Myrtinum, or Oil of Myrtle-Berries. These Berries are cold and Earthy, do dry
and bind powerfully. The Syrup is compounded of such binding Ingredients, as it
excess the Syrup of Quinces, and Red Roses, in a binding faculty: yet comforts
the Miscera, in Vomitings. Fluxes, Haemoptysis, and Corrosions of the Intrals.

The Oil is cooling, thickening, and binding, and has the effects of that of
Quinces, strengthens the Brain, Nerves, and Stomach, if used as an Ointment, or
in a strengthening Emplaster.

I have said that Myrtle is an Evergreen Vegetable, now an Evergreen is one
degree above a Plant, whi^^ is simply Peren^^al: Of this only the Trunk and
(...) live all the Winter; of that also the expanded Leaves. Myrtle, Cypress,
Cedar, Juniper, Ivy, Firr-Tree, Pine, Olive, and all Resinous Piants, which for
the most part have a fragrant smell, are Evergreens, by reason the Juice
wherewith they are nourished, is viscous, and not easily dissipated; In all
such, Sulphur (hence the smell) abounds, with a little Salt and Spirit. But the
most pleasant sort of Myrtle, I met with, is the Nutmeg-Myrtle in
Trentam-Garden, where the Ingenious Mr. Fleming, the Gardener, showed me not
only this, but also several other curious Rarities. As also there has been
some variety of them in the curious Garden and Green-House at Dodington-Hall in
Cheshire, the Noble Seat of that favourer of all Ingenuity and Goodness, Sir
Tho. Delues, Bart.

Nettles. Job 30. 7. Prove. 24. 31. Isai. 34. 13. Hos. 9. 6. Zeph. 2. 9.
N. K. D. P. Urtica, Chamaeleon Jun. and Tr. Vulg. Vrtica, Herba-cujus folia
acriter urunt, (i. e.) pungunt, unde Nomen, a Nettle. The greater stinging
Nettle is Vrtica urens major, and the lesser is V^tica urens minor, and the
Roman Nettle is Urtica Romana. The V^tica iners or mortua is dead-Nettle or
Archangel, called Lamiaum. Chamaeleou is a sort, of the Thistles. The sense of
Feeling, beyond Seeing, will discover the stinging or burning Nettles to any
one, for they truly merit the name Vrtica, ab urendo, from their burning
facuity.

Virtues and Uses.
This vexing Vegetable is hot and dry in the second Degree, of subtle
acrimonious parts, are l^sted under Valiant Mars, who has Armed them Cap-a-pe
with Flaming Swords, to offend those that dare to lay hands on them. Nettle
Roots are aperient, incide, absterge and mo^lifie, provoke Urine, and expel
Gravel; and are held by some good Women, and some Practitioners, a great
Arcanum in the Jaundice, which is the Aatictericum Gesneri, thus prepared,. Of
the greater Nettle Roots sbj. beat them well together with White Wine, (so much
as is sufficient) adding one scruple of Saffron to draw out the Juice-Dose is
four or six ounces on mornings in ^ed. being covered well to sweat gently after
it. But it will be convenient to purge first.

The Juice and Leaves, Conserve or Syrup, are excellent in the Affects of the
Breast, (as also the Seeds are Pectoral) carrying off by Urin, plenty of Serum,
and by their Acrimony open Obstructions, and so very proper in Empiema, inward
Apostemes, Pleurisies and Peripneumonia's that are ill cured, or unskilfully
managed; in Orthopnea and old Coughs-The Juice of the lesser Nettle stays
nasal Fluxes of Blood, if drunk, and used outwardly, and cures their own
troublesome stingings, as Parkinson says; but I fancy warm Honey or Oil of
Roses does it better: They are esteemed a peculiar Remedy (especially the Seed)
and Antidote against the venomous bitings of Dogs, and other mad Creatures, and
resist the cold Poisons of Hemlock, Hen-bane, Solanums and Mandrakes.

Winters are generally cold and moist, and if Mars that is hot and dry, has
any thing to do with Nettles, you may guess at the reason why Nettlepottage is
so much eaten by some in the Spring, while the Buds and Tops are tender; ( to
wit) to rarefie, and attenuate gross viscous humors, accumulated in our Bodies
and Blood, by the coldness, and moistness of the Winter, and to open
Obstructions, cleanse, and carry off the superfluous Serum of the Blood by Urin.

In the Shops. Common Nettle-Seed, Roman Nettle-Seed: The Conserve Flor. Lamii.
alb. and rubr. These Conserves of the Flowers of Archangel, are prized as a
great Secret by some Midwives and others; and by Physicians too, the Conserve
of the white Flowers, to cure the White Fluor, and the Conserve of the Red
Flowers, to stop immoderate Months. Besides these Flowers are deoppilative,
Emollient, open and soften a hard Spleen; and I have been told, that the
bruised Leaves applied to the Nape of the Neck, have stopped the bleeding of
the Nose.

In exorbitant Haemorrhagies, and effusions of Blood, from any part, proceeding
from an acrimonious dyscrasy, or the Mouths of the Vessels being over lax, in a
Scorbutical Blood, Tyroes may observe, that Dr. Willis use'd to prescribe to
the poorer sort, thus,. Tops of stinging Nettles, and Leaves of Brooklime, each
four handfuls, bruise them and press out the Juice, and keep it in a Bottle,
take two or three ounces in a morning, and also at four a Clock, for some time,
as I have ordered, in a Decoction of Plantane Leaves.

Nuts. Genesis 43. 11. Can. 6. 11.
N. K. D. P. Nuces, (...), Nux. By old Jacob's Command to his Sons, I take them
here as Nutmegs; (...), Nux Myristica Aromatites, Nux unguentaria, and
Muschata, this Tree and Fruit are called. The Nutmeg-Tree is as big as a
Pear Tree, with green Leaves, like Orange-Tree Leaves; it fructifies as our
Wallnut-Tree with an external thick Husk, which in time grows dry, chaps, and
dilates to make way for the Nutmegs which is covered with another Coat, of a
splendid Crimson Color, but quickly by the Air is changed to a citrine
duskishness, and being pulled off from the Nut, is that which we call by the
Arabian Name Maciz or Mice. It grows in the Islands of Banda, and the
Moluccoes in the East Indies, and gathered in September.

Others Sorts of Nuts are the Indian Nut, called Cocus. The Indian Hazel-Nut,
called by the Indians Caramei; by the Pexsians and Arabians Ambela; these Nuts
are there eaten familiarly. The vomiting Nut, called Nux vomica. The Pistach,
or Fistick Nuts, Nux Pistachia. Earth Nuts, Nucula terrestris, or
Bulbocastanon, called also Pig-nuts, because Pigs rout in the Earth after them;
Some Botanists say there is a Majus and Minus of this last sort; but Mr. Ray
thinks there is but one Species, the Roots are bulbous, and taste sweetish like
to Chestnuts, and are well known. See Chestnut and Hezel-Nut in this Book. There
is the Barbados Nut, and other Sorts also, not so proper here.

Virtues and Uses.
Nutmegs and Mace are well known to all people to be hot and dry; some say in
the 2d degrees. and are Astringent; and according to the Modern Naturalists have an
Oily, Aromatic Smell, and a hot bitterish, and Aromatic Sapor. Being a solar
Fruit, chiefly respecting the Head and Stomach, and a refreshing Cordial; the
best Nutmeg is that which is most weighty, and fat, so that the Oil follows a
Needle, when run into one. Mace is like Nutmeg in Virtue, but not so strong;
yet I think better for the Stomach, both carminative, and mixed in Hystericals.

The Cocus, Indian Nut, or Coco-Nuts, are formed like a Melon or Date, some are
big as a Cabbage. This Tree is said to yield Meat, Drink, Clothes, Medicines,
all Utensils for Shipping, and other Building, yea, even the Shell is prised
with us for Drinking-Cups, tipped with Silver; various Boxes, as Snush, and for
other uses; for these Shells are of different Shapes, greater and smaller,
finer and coarser, etc. See Palms.

Earth-Nuts (or as some call them Ground-Nuts) are moderately hot and dry,
reckoned to be under Venus, and incite her Frolicks; may be used as Chestnuts,
and eaten raw, or roasted; beyond Sea they are boiled, and eaten as we do
Turnips: The Powder in Electuaries, helps spitting or pissing of Blood.

In the Shops. The Chemical Oil of Nutmegs: The Oil of Nutmeg by Expression:
Condited Nutmegs; the Chemical Oil of Mace; the Oil of Mace by Expression. The
Pistach Nuts; the Vomiting Nuts. The Male-Nutmegs is sometime found at the
Druggists, which differs from the common Sort, in that it is longer and weaker.

Pistach-Nuts used in Medicines are hot and moist, concoct humors in the Chest,
open the Lungs, are used in consumptive cases, and are an Ingredient in the
Analeptick Antidote. It is the Fruit of an exotic Tree.

Vomiting Nuts are the worst (as Nutmegs are the best) of Nuts, are cold in the
4th. degrees. belong to the poisonous Class. Some judge it to be the Root, and not
the Nut of a Vegetable: It Is not to be given inwardly, the Apothecaries sell it
to give ravenous Fowls, powdered and strued on Flesh, and laid to render them
stupefied and drunk; it also intoxicates Fish, mixed (with other Narcoticks, or
of it self) in some proper Paste. A crime against the Law, but too often
committed without Punishment.

In stoppages of the Breast, and Co^^s in Infants and Children; the Mothers and
Nurses, had better mix the Oil of Mace, with twice as much Dialthea, or
Ointment of the Flowers of Oranges, melting them together, and apply them warm
to the Breast; or drop one Drop of Oil of Amber to it, or of Anise-Seeds.

Also the distilled Oil of Nutmegs, helps the Gripes in Infants, if the Navel
be anointed therewith. Schrod. The Oil of Mace strengthens the Stomach, and
stays Vomiting, helps Digestion, expels Winds, penetrating more than Oil of
Nutmegs, consisting of thinner parts.

Oak.
Genesis 35. 4. 8. Jos. 24. 6. Judge 6 11. 9. 2 Samuel 18. 19, and 10. 14. 1 Kings
13. 14. 1 Chronicles. 10. 12. Isa. 1. 29, 30. and 2. 13. and 6. 13. and 44. 14.
Ezekiel. 6. 13. and 27. 6. Mos 14. 13. Amos 2. 9. Zech. 11. 2.
N. K. D. P. Quereus, Robur, Lu^us, (which is a Grove) Jun. and Trem. vulg.
Quercus. (...). The Fruit called Acorns, is called Glans, for an Acron is the
Nut of an Oak, the Acron-Cup is Capula, or Galix glandis. The Spongious
excrescence, or Oak-apple, is Spongiae quercini, or Bedeguar, by some. Misletoe
is viscus quercinus. Polypody or Oak-Fern, is Polypodium Querci.

There are many kinds of foreign Oaks, the Scarlet Oak is Ilex coccigera. The
Holme Oak is called Cerrus: the Cork-Tree or Cork-Oak is Suber: the Gall-Oak,
or Gall-Tree is Gallae Arbor.

But the two Sorts, most common with us, are the Quereus Vrbana, the stately
tall Oak, and Quercus vel Robur Sylvestris, the Dwarf Oak, spreading more, and
brings a smaller Acorn. These are raised by the Acron, and should be
transplanted young in October; they are raised also by Off sets and Suckers.

The renowned Forest of Deane in my native County of Gloucester, has yielded
the best Oak in Europe, for the King's Ships, and other uses. And among many
other places, in the Park at Madeley Manor, in this County of Stafford
(belonging to the Ingenious, and very hopeful young Heir, the deservingly
honored John Crew Offley Esquire) does grow the Que^cus Vrbana or stately Oak,
surpassing, all in this County both for quantity, greatness and goodness. And
the Dwarf-Oak grows plentifully in a great Common called Horrel-Wood, belonging
to Defford and other Villages, the Right Honorable Lord, John Lord Coventry
being the Proprietor of them.

Virtues and Uses.
This of old was Jupiter's Tree, called Jovis Arbor, for amongst the Celtae,
Heathens of old, a tall Oak was the very Idol or Image of Jupiter: and those
Magi of old to the Gauls and Britains, termed Dryadae Druids, worshipped the
Oak, in Greek (...), whence also Druina, a Mystical Name of late for England,
which formerly has contained vast Forests and Woods of this Royal Tree. And
now in New England in the inland parts, there are large Forests of Dwarf-Oak.

The Leaves, Bark, Acorns, and their Cups, greatly bind, and are dry in the
third Degree, being very rough if chewed, and of a cold quality. The
Acorn-Kernels are not so cold, nor binding, the Bark is a great binder; the
thin skin under the Bark, and that which covers the Acorn, are best to stop
the Bloody Flux, and spitting of Blood, Lasks and Feminine Fluxes. The
Decoction of the Bark, and the Powder of the Cups, greatly bind also. I have
used 'em in Gonorrhea's with good success.

The Buds of Oaks kept dried, are very proper in Wound-drinks, or the young
Leaves. The Acorn binds least of all, if eaten, has a very rough sweetish
taste; the Austere parts of the Sap, which in a Nut are drained off into the
Shell, (so made sweeter) being here imbibed by the Kernel it self; they are
hardly concocted, and of ^rude and cold nourishment, yet Men ^eretofore (nay
Jupiter himself) fed o^ Ac^r^s till their Luxurious Palates were deba^c^^d; and
when the Romans second Course at Table was served up of M^st, then Men had
Hearts of ^ak, (i. e) living naturally strong, and healthful by feeding on
things easy, parable and plain.

For the Glorious and Wise Romans highly esteemed the Oak: for Pliny c^omments
thus, Glan^iferi maxim generis omnes quibus honos apud Romanos perpetuu:
Mast-^earing-Trees were principally those the Romans held in great esteem, for
they had amongst their Crowns of Honor and Reward, the C^rona Civica, which
was made of Oak, whence called also Corona quercea.

But to return to the uses of Acorns: In Mast-Countries (as in the Wood-lands
in Wor^^stershire, and other places) where Hogs feed on them the Swines-flesh
is rendered hard and sound: One peck of Acorns, with a little ^ra^ per diem,
it is said will augment a seeding Hog one pound a day in weight ^or two months
together: But it is good to mace^ate first in water: And* if Acorns be powdered,
or grinded small, they will f^t Pigeons, Turkeys, Peacocks, etc. An^ from the
Leaves of Oak, Bees gather Honey^ews very much, as Mr* (...), the great
Be^-Master, tells us in his Tract of Bees.

The Oak-Apples bind and stop F^uxes also, and (...) ^alled Omphaci^^^, are dry
in the third Degree, and cold in the second, very harsh* repel Rheu^s, and
F^uxes, especially those of the Throat and* (...) but their chief use is for
the ^yers, brough^ ^^om Italy, Spain, and other Countries, being ga^ere^ before
they are ripe.

And in Foreign parts, the Scar^^^-Oak is esteemed ^^e (...) the Acorn whereof
is eaten in Spain; ^^^ (...) or Berries are called Chermes (the Juice of which
is the Basis of the Cordial Confection called Alkermes) and co^cus B^ph^^^^s,
yielding as so^^ ^ave thought, the Maggot, which is our Cochin^l^, that is such
a great Cordial, and colors the fine Scarlets* but this opinion of these
Berries and Insect, is now of late exploded by the Inge^ious.

The Cork-Oak is a courser sort, of it our Cork^ are made, and those Corks
taken out of Wine-Vessels, do absorbe and bind, and may well be ordered with
other things against the Bloody Flux; And Riverius has an Observation, That a
Co^k-stopple, long used, and drenched with Wine, burnt to Ashes, and ^ drach^
taken with White Wine, cured one of the Coli^k pain, that it never returned
again.

The several uses of Oaken-Timber is universally known. The Sap of Oak is more
tough than the Heart, although the Heart be more durable, because of its
Oyliness, there being a lesser proportion of Oil in Bee^h, Birch, and other
Trees, than there is in Oak, so they are apter to imbibe the moisture of a dark
Air, and so rot, or breed Worms: for the Oak and all ponderous Woods and
Shrubs, as Box, Ash, Elm, have Salt abounding, with a mean of Su^phur or Oil,
and a small proportion of Spirit; such flourish to longaevity, and their annual
vegetation is ^aintained by a Nutritious Juice under the Bark, tho* their
Leaves fall. It is observable, that three years growth in an Oak, (I do not
mean in an Acorn that spontaneously grows*) is as thick as five in an Elm.

The Bark of Oak, which is somewhat Resinous a^ Dr. Grew sa^^h, does exceed all
other Barks, for the Tanner and Dv^^ and the young Bough^ of the lop'^ Oak in
the Spring time, serve the Tanner as well as the Bark, as many Tanners have
experienced within these few years: The Saw-dust and Ashes of the Oak also*
challenge a preference; and for Fire or Cha^coa^ there is no Wood equals it.
The Mast exceeds all other Mast of the Forrest-Trees; for the Hams from
Westpholia and other parts of Germany, are of those Swine that feed on this
Mast; but it is best to give Pigs a few Pease after them: Oats being scarce in
the year 1681. Acorns were dried on a Klin, and given to Horses by the poorer
sort of People, Colliers, and such, in some parts of Staffordshire, and
Cheshi^e, near the famous Hill called Mow-Cop.

It is greatly his Interest, that minds the thriving of young Trees, that they
be set that the Roots may run just under the Turfe, in the Surface of the
Earth, the higher the better, provided they are kept moist, with some wet
Straw, and defended from injuries the first year; for some bury the Roots in a
depth of thick Clay or Gravel, so that they cannot shoot a sprig of a span long
for many years, for a Tree will thrive as well upon a Stone Wall that is washed
with Rainwater, as in a hole a yard deep; this I speak generally, and not of
such particular Trees as delight in a singular Minera of Earth.

To conclude with what Rapinus says,

Si^ quando armandae Naves, etc. Thus translated. When Skips for bloody Combat
we prepare
Oak affords Planks, and Arms our Men of War:
Maintains our Fires, makes Ploughs to till the ground,
For use, no Timber like the Oak is found.


In the Shops. Galls. Acorns, and their Cups, ^ark, and Buds, Misletoe; but no
Composition, that derives its Name from any of these. The Bark and Leaves are
used by Surgeons in Vulnerary Baths and Fomentations: in Mouth-Waters: and is
boiled by the Countryman in Ale, to drench his Cows that ^^ke bloody water.

Misletoe grows on many other Trees besides the Oak; I have used (the Viscus
Oxyacanthus) that of the Haw-Thorn in the vertigo, stupidity, and dullness of
the Head and Intellectuals, in a Decoction, and found it excellent. Misleto of
Haw-Thorn and Crab, I tasted this Summer in Glocestershire, bitterish and
acrid, its acrimony overcomes its bitterness. Sir J. F. says, The Virtues of
the Tree and Misleto so much differ, that it cannot be better on one Tree than
another; he could find no excellency in that of the Oak above others. It tastes
bitter, astringent, hot and acrid, by which it is good for the Epilepsie; it
ought to be given forty days. I never had it so as to be able to say it was the
true Misleto of the Oak, so never experienced it; but some say they have cured
the Falling Sickness with it; and the famous Mr. Boil (in whom all Learning did
concenterate) tells us of a radicated Epilepsie, That was cured by the Powder
of it, given as much as a six pence would contain in black Cherry-water, or
Beer, for some days near the full Moon. Old Dr. Tristram of Bell-Broughton in
Worcestershire, a skillful Botanist (and one that understood the Virtues of
some Herbs experimentally, as well as any Man in England, carrying on a great
popular Practice, with Simples, Decoctions, etc.) used that Misleto of the
Haw-Thorn, in Cephalic cases with strange success.

Acorns decocted in Milk, help exulcerations of the Bladder, pissing of blood,
caused by corroding Medicines, Cantharides, or other poisonons corrosive
things. And the Powder of them eases Stitches, and pains in the Colic and
Sides: And Dr. Bates had a Powder which he called, the Iliack, or Colic
Powder, thus made.. Acorns without their Cups iss. Nutmegs ij. Sugar ss. mix
them, and make a Powder called also Pulvis Lateralis.

Olive Tree.
Olive, Genesis 8. 11. Exodus 23. 11. Deuteronomy. 6. 11. and 24. 20. and 28. 49. Jos 24.
13. Jud. 9. 8, 9. and 15. 5. 1 Samuel 8. 14. 1 Kings 6. 23, 33. 2 Kings 5. 26. 1 Chronicles. 27. 28. Neh. 5. 11. and 8. 15. and 9. 25 Job 15. 33. Psalm. 52. 8. and
128. 3. Jer. 11. 6. Hos. 14. 6. Am. 4. 49. Mic. 6. 15. Hab. 3. 17. Hag 2. 19.
Zec. 4. 3, 12. and 14. 4. Mat. 21. 1. and 13. 3. Luke 19. 29. and 21. 37. and
22. 39. ^o. 8. 1. Romans 11. 17, 24. Jam. 3. 12. Rev. 11. 4.
N. K. D. P. Olea, Oliva '(...). There are 2 sorts, the manured Olive, called
Olea Sativa, and the Oleaster or wild Olive Tree: The first grows tall, with
many Branches loaded with Willow-like-leaves, of a perennial verdure, the Fruit
or Olive follow the Blossoms and are green, then pale and purplish, but when
full ripe, black, and do contain a Stone. These differ, some bigger, others
less, some oval, long, round.

The Oleaster, or Olea Sylvestris, is much smaller, and armed with sundry sharp
thorns in its Branches, the Fruit scarce arriving to Maturity. These
Olive Trees thrive only in hot Countries, being propagated by Stickers, and
Layers, thriving best within 40 or 50 miles of the Sea; flowering about
Midsummer, but the Fruit come not to maturity till toward Winter.

The finest and sweetest Oil comes from Candia, Majorca, Zant, and the Isles in
the Mediterranean Sea. A stronger tasted Oil from Provence in France. Wild
Olives flourish naturally in Spain, Italy, Portugal, and other hot Regions,
never bear Fruits in cold Climates, nor scarce live a Winter.

Virtues and Uses.
Olives are reckoned to please the Palate of Venu^, and when gathered, they are
laid a while to wither, then by g^ining, and some water being added, to rarefie
and extract the Oil, it is pressed out; some that yield not much Oil, are the
fittest to eat, and are gathered unripe, and are pickled for use, and called
Colymbades; The wild Olives are much delighted in, and are gathered to be
eaten, and those that yield any Oil among them, give us a green, colder, and
more astringent Oil than the manured.

This Vegetable is of a median temper, the Branches, Leaves, and tender Buds,
(especially of the wil^^) do cool, dry, and bind; but the Oil of unripe Olives,
called Oleum Omphacinum, does cool and bind most; and the ripe Oil does
mollify, and is anodyne, and the older it is the more it warms, and
discusseth. Its properties are distinguished by its sweetness, and odor, if
rancid the worse.

Oil is used in Sallets, to preserve the Stomach from the corrosive acrimony of
the Salts in Vegetables, and to hasten by its slipperiness, the expulsion of
cold Herbs out of the Stomach. Olives pickled, do (as all pickles) cause an
Appetite, yield little nourishment, apt to offend the Head and Eyes* the pure
Oil of them, if really sweet and fine, is far more beneficial to those that can
eat it eaten with a Toast fasting, it opens the Belly. And the Mountebanks
usually fill their Stomachs with Oil and fresh Butter, before they swallow
poison, to defend the Stomach, and dint the edge of the poisonous Salts, and
occasion Vomiting. The Faeces or Lees of Oil called Amurca, is most astringent.

The Timber of this fat Vegetable, is of so curious, smooth and durable a
Grain, that without much Polishing, it is made into rich Cabinets, Pendulum
Cases, etc. and Solomon made the Cherubins and the Doors and the Posts of the
Temple with it. And the Jews used to make Booths or Huts, with the Boughs of
it, at their Feasts, being an Evergreen, and so pleasant to behold: and hence
the Faithful and Godly Men are compared to the green Olive Tree in Psalm. 52. 10.

In the Shops. The best eating Oil, that is fresh old Oil called Omotribes, and
Oil Omphacine, the several and diverse uses these are put to in Pharmacy, and by
Tradesmen, and Women, would be ridiculous and needless for me to relate.

Olives pickled, are more kept for the Cook, than Medicinal Uses.

Onions. Numb. 11. 5.
N. K. D. P. Cepae. (...) Many sorts of Onions are distinguished in our old
Herbals. The white and red, are only I think propagated in our Kitchen-Gardens.
They are sown in March, and are usually ripe in August, then to be taken up,
and dried in the Sun, and reserved for use in places rather dry than moist:
Being sown with Bay Salt, they have prospered exceeding well, and remember when
grown to some reasonable bigness, to bend or tread down the Spindle or Stalk,
which will make the Head the larger, and so you ought to do by Garlic.

Among the Exoticks the Sea-Onion, or Squills, called Scilla, or Squillae,
being a great bulbous Root, is much used in the Practice of Physic: it grows
by the Seaside in Salt-Marshes, in Spain, Italy, and other Countries, as the
common Spanish, that of Valentia, etc. Ascallions, are tender young Onions, a
kind that grow'd in Ascalon a City of Judea.

Virtues and Uses.
This culinary Root is ruled by fiery Mars, and is very offensive like to him;
being hot and dry in the fourth Degree, yet not so hot as Garlic; the Juice is
of thin, aqueous substance, endued with a biting and acrid volatile Salt, which
fumes and offends the Eyes, and Nose, like Spirit of Soot. They are very much
used several ways in the Kitchen, notwithstanding their rank smell, arising
from a rank Oil in them; but yield little nourishment, only do well tempt down
other Herbs in Sallets, and correct the coldness of Lettice and others. They
hurt Choleric and hot Constitutions, causing Headachs, and Sleepiness, and are
more wholesome boll'd than raw.

They are excellent for the first applications in Burns and Scalds, bruised
with a little Salt, before blisters arise, which it will prevent, as I have
often experienced. For they mightily draw, as you may And, by laying one peeled
on a Dunghill, which by, drawing putrefaction to it, will be rotten in less
than a days time; it is likely it will do so in a Postilential B^bo, and in the
bites of mad Dogs, and other venomous Creatures. The Juice snuffed up in the
Nostrils, purges the Head, in Lethargies* The roasted Root will draw and ripen
Apostems, and may be good boiled in Pultisses: The Juice is droped into the
Bars, for to cure pain in them. They are a great Diuretich, sliced and infused
in White Wine all night; for a mornings draught, has brought away abundance of
Gravel and Stones, or in Rhenish, removes the stoppages of Urine.

Squills, ought to he fresh and full of Juice, then are hot and dry in the
second Degree, more rank and acrid than Onions. All the preparations of them do
attenuate, and out viscous humors, strongly used in Asthma's, cause
Expectoration. The Wine of Squills taken every morning, is said to preserve the
Body in health, to a great old Age, cleansing the Stomach of filth, and the
Body of excrements, helping Digestion; no doubt it is a good Medicine. I fancy
it much.

In the Shops. The Root hanging up in the Shop, but not too long, lest it grow
dry. The Vinegar of Squills. The Wine* Oxymel Simple and Compound, Lohoch
Scilliticum. Honey of Squils. Trockisci de Scilla. Scilla^ppr. the Wine (which
is best for Vomiting) Vinegar, and simple Oxymel are most used to mix with
Vomits. Dose is from j. to ij. which of it self will Vomit an easy and
ticklish Stomach; they are very safe workers, operating by nauseating the
Stomach by their taste, and smell, and inciding humors. The Troches of Squills
are made for Venice-Treacle, being the first Ingredient in it: They are made of
prepared Squill's.

In an old Cough, Stoppage, or shortness of Breath, let the Countryman roast
an Onion under the Embers, and bruise it with a little Honey, Sugar Candy, and
Oil, and take it fasting, or at bedtime.

Or take this simple Syrup of Garlic, ordered by a great Doctor.. Cloves of
Garlic peeled iiij. boil them till soft, changing the Water twice, pour the
water off, and put the Garlic into a Vessel, unto which put Syrup of Vinegar
^^ ss. stop it up close, and set it in a Skillet, with Hay under it, and in
water, and boil it for half an hour, and so you have a Syrup of Garlic: Eat
four or five Cloves every morning, and also a spoonful or two of the Syrup.
Good in Consumptions, kills Worms bravely, helps Digestion, and provokes an
Appetite, good in Dropsies and other cases.

The Preparation of Squills as it is in the Pharmacopoeia, is appointed to
o^tund the Acrimony of them, being strongly acrid and bitterish, making the
Skin smart if rubbed thereon.

In a Suffocating Asthma, to dissolve thick humors, and discuss Vapors.
Oxymel of Squills, and Cinnamon Water, equal parts mixed, has done great
matters, though plain, taken a spoonful or two at a time.

Oyl-Tree. Isai. 41. 19.
ARbor Oleosa. This I take to be the Olive Tree. Also the Pine Tree is
translated for Arbor Oleosa in another place.

If it be asked how a Vegetable comes to have Oil in any part, since the Sap,
by which the Root is sed, seems to be nothing else but Water; and that many
Plants, which yield a deal of Oil, as Mint, etc. will grow in water: It Is
answered, That the Sap or Water, is not made Wine or Oil; but the Oil, and all
other Vegetable principles are actually existent in, and mixed per minima, though
in an extraordinary small proportion with the water, even as we see the
distilled Waters of Aniseed, Pennyroyal, etc. to be impregnated with their own
Oils, which give the taste and smells to such Waters. Now these Vegetable
principles being in or together with the Water, received into the Plant, are
separated in very different proportions, by the several parts and Vessels of
the Plant, adapted to their proper and peculiar uses, to the service of the
whole. So then there is a certain proportion of Oil, or Sulphur, more or less,
mixed with all the Water in the World.

Palm Tree.
Exodus 15. 27. Lev. 23. 40. Numb. 33. 9. Deuteronomy. 34. 3. Jud. 1. 16. and 3. 13.
and 4 5. 1 Kings 6. 29, 35. and 7. 36. 2 Chronicles. 3. 5. and 28. 15. Neh. 8. 15.
Psalm 92. 12. Cant. 7. 8. Jer. 10. 15. Ezekiel. 40. 16, 37. and 41. 18 Joel 1 12.
Jo. 12. 13.
N K. D. P. Palma. (...). Palma quod expansis ramis in modum Palmae hominis. It
is called also the Date-Tree, from its Fruit called Dates, Dactyli a
similitudine Digitorum.

The Palm Tree is a very large Tree, having a thick Trunk, and many Branches.
And is an Evergreen, whose Leaves, it is said, do never fall, they grow in
Couples, Male and Female: And both thrust forth Cods full of Seed, but the Male
produces Flowers only, and not Dates; and the Female is only Fruitful: and
it is observed, brings not any, except it be Planted near the Male, to which
they seem to incline, having their Boughs extended toward it, more on that
side than on any other. Whence the Ethiopians do usually plant them so, that
the wind may carry steams, Effluvia, or powder of the Flowers, or Seeds from
the Male to the Female.

They grow chiefly in Egypt, Syria, and the Eastern Countries; as in
Phoenicia, so called by the Grecians, fom the abundance of Palm Trees there
growing, from (...) a Palm, which was anciently the special cognizance of this
Country, as the Olive Branch is of Spain, the Elephant of Africa, the Camel was
the Ensign of Arabia, and the Crocodile of Egypt. Also Idumaea, (i. e.) Edom
is much celebrated, by some Writers of ancient times, for Palm Trees, as
Arbusto Palmarum dives Idume in Lucan.

And the Country of Numidia, which is Africa, ^s called, I find, Dactylorum
Regio, in the Arabic Bilelulgerid, which signifies a Date-Region, from the
abundance of these Trees flourishing there. They grow also in the Canary
Isalnds, amongst which, says ^. Bauh. There is one called the Palm-Island. The
barren kind grow in Italy and Sicily, and are called Pal^ises, or Chamaeriphes,
or wild Palms.

Virtues and Uses.
Dates ought to be soft, full, fleshy, and blackish without, or with a
yellowish red, in the carnous substance, having a sweet vinous Sapor; being
thought to be hot and moist in the second Degree; but if not ripe, hot and dry
and somewhat astringent, and Astrologers have given them to Mars, perhaps to
please the Lady Venus with. Those that are grown dry, or such as come not to
ripeness in colder Regions, do greatly bind, are hard of Digestion, and breed
gross Humors; but ripe and good, they nourish more, and strengthen the Child
in the Womb, stop Loosenesses, Fluxes, and Vomitings of such Women; they
strengthen the Back, and Venus; our Ladies and Gentlewomen know to what ends to
use them very well. As well as the Indians do the Drink called Sura, which
Linschotens speaks of, that flows from the Blossoms out.

The Boughs and Leaves, it is said, do strongly cool and bind, and are used in
some Countries to make Garments, Baskets, Matts, and to Thatch Houses. The
inward Pith of the Tree is an excellent Sallad, better than an Artichoa^, which
it resembles in taste. And the Fruit is commouly eaten: the Tree tapt two or
three foot above ground, (as the Birch-Tree) yields an excellent Wine called
Mignerol, like the white Champain^, thence are termed Wine-Palms. The
Date-stones feed their Goats, whereby they grow fat and yield store of Milk.

In the Journal des Scavans, May 11th 1682. a French Author in the Description
of Hispaniola, (where the French had got footing, but formerly the Spaniard)
says, The Palm Tree is indisputably the most profitable of all Trees, and
reckons four kinds there, two most considerable, one whereof yielding Dates for
foo^, the other called Wine-Palm, which Liquor ferments it self so high in few
days, that there is no Wine more pleasant.

The Fruit of the Indian Palm, is called Coquos, full of a waterish Liquor,
each Date containing the measure of a pint or two, very transparent and
pleasant for Drink; the Pulp within is tender and soft, but after a longer
maturation, waxes harder, and eats like a Hasel-Nut. Finally, this Vegetable
is said to yield whatsoever is necessary to the life of Man. And it is said to
contain Materials for a whole Ship: Its Wood being light and spongy, they cut
into Planks; of the outward Husks of the Fruit, they make Cordage, the Sails
are made out of the Leaves, which the Indians call Olass. Athanasius says,
Anto^ius the Ermite gave him a Coat of the fine Flax thereof.

It is the nature of this Tree, though never so ponderous a weight were laid upon
it, crescere sub pondere, not to yield to the burden, but still to resist the
heaviness of it, and to endeavor (as does Chamomile the more it is trod on) to
lift and raise it self upward, for this cause planted in Churchyards in the
Eastern Countries, as an Emblem of the Resurrection; instead whereof we use the
Ewe-Tree in these colder Regions: For the same reason, (as also Palm-Leaves
being firm and durable) given by the Romans to their Victorious Combatants and
Conquerors in their Coronet, called Palma Lemniscata (because the Garland or
Coronet was tied about with certain Woolen Ribbands called Lemtisci) and so
from its repugnant Energy, and hardiness, it is the Emblem or Hieroglyphick of
a Soldiers Life: Nay,

Heywood in his Hierarchy of Angels, says, It Is the Hieroglyphick of Man,
first, because it is barren, unless planted near the Female, a Coitus being
imagined, being full of Maesculine Gems, like Seeds. Secondly, because in the
upper part thereof, there is a kind of Brain, which the Hebrews call Hallulab,
and the Arab, Chedar or Gemmar, which being bruised, the Tree instantly
withers, (as Man dies presently upon the perishing of the Brain) The
property only of this Vegetable: On the Top, or Head, there grows that which
resembles Hair, the Branches resemble the Arms and hands, and the Fruit like
Fingers; hence figuratively, it is used for precedence, as huic equidem,
consilio Palmam do, in Terence; sometimes for the Victory it self, as non
auferent tamen hanc Palmam, in ^liny: And plurimarum Palmarum Homo, for a Man
that had won many Prizes in the Fenci^g-Schools, as in Tull. pro Rosc. more
naturally for the sign of Victory, as in that of Hor.

-- Palmaque nobilis
Terrarum Dominos evehit ad Deos.
The Palm, of Victory a Sign,
Equals Men to the Powers Divine.
In the Shops. Dates. The Electuarium Diaphoeni^on, and the two Emplasters,
called Diaphoenicon calidum, and frigidum, that is the one hot, the other cold.

The Diaphoenicon Electuary strongly purges Phlegm and Choler, useful in
Glisters, in the Colic, purging all cold and crude Humors, for it warms.

The hot Diaphoenicon or Emplaster of Dates, greatly strengthens the Stomach
and Liver, and helps Fluxes and Vomitings, if applied to the Belly or
Stomach, being a good Stomach-Plaster in a cold Constitution, or Disease, as
the cold Emplaster is in hot Tempers, in the same cases. But I think they are
seldom used or kept in many Shops.

The Diacalcitheos Plaster, vulgarly called white-Plaster, is ordered by Galen,
and Authors of old, to be stirred with a Slice or Spatula made of a Bough, or
Wood of the Palm Tree, to augment its cooling. and strengthening virtue and
efficacy, and thence also formerly called Diapalma in our London-Dispensatory.

The Indians make Sugar called Jagra, in the East Indies, of the Liquor Sura,
by boiling the sweet Liquor, and setting it in the Sun to congeal; for the
Liquor is sweeter than Whey, as you may see more of it in Linschotens's
Voyages, cap. 56.

Pine Tree. Neh. 8. 15. Isai. 41. 19. and 60. 13.
N. K* D. P. Arbor Oleosa. Tae^a. Jun. and Tr. Vulg. Pinus. (...). Pinus, not
very well derived, a Piana: because the Leaves of Pine are dura a^ aculeata,
hard and very sharp, or a (...) Pinguis; or (...) ^t in ^n mutato. Taeda
signifies strictly the fa^ Torch-Pine, or the middle or Heart of a Pine full of
Rezin or fat Liquor, that will burn like a Torch.

There are many Species of Pine, Pitch and Turpentine-Trees, being all of a
Genus: some reckon ten sorts of Pine-Trees, I shall chiefly insist on the Pinus
Sa^iva, the Garden or manured Pine Tree, and Pinus Sylvestris or Pin^ster, the
wild Pine Tree. The first, is by some accounted the Female, the last being
lower and courser, is called the Male, of which there are most sorts. The Cones
or Pine-Apples are called Coni, or Stro^ilus, which contain a Nut, called Nux
Pinea: These hang commonly two years before they are ripe, and ^hen ought to be
gathered in June before they gape, for always some green, and some ripe, are
found on the Trees, as the Berries are on the Shrub Juniper.

From Larix the larch Pine, flows the best and most Venus Turpentine in the
hottest Season; and from a wild kind called Picea, or Piceaster, the Pitch*
Tree, emanates most Pitch.

This stately Evergreen is now a common Ornament about the Gardens and Houses
of our English Gentry* so that I shall not meddle with any Descr^ption of it,
le^^ they or their Gard^^ers should correct me. They thrive best in Greece,
^p^in* France, and the remote hot Countries of the World, but as beauti^^^ with
us, through the Care and Skill of expert Gardiners, as any where.

In Foreign parts, the Turpentine-Trees delight in cold, high and Rocky
Mountains, the Firr grows tallest and tapering, ( ^bies in Montibus al^is) and
loves to be alone; but Pine in Woods, on Mountains, especially the wild in some
Regions, where none other Vegetables do grow; and in some cold Regions also, as
Germany, Poland, Sweedland, Leifland.

They are raised with us, by the Kernels, the Pine will hardly bear a remove
(best sowed where you intend they shall grow) unless very young, and then not
in over rich or fat Land; Firr will grow better transplanted, and may be
propagated by pricking the Slips in the ground at about two yards distance, as
I am informed by one that has quickly raised a fine Walk: but you must be
careful to preserve them moist, therefore over hot, Sandy, or Gravelly Land is
not so proper.

These Trees for the first half dozen years, grow but slowly, but do come on
wonderfully afterward, the Pi^aster bears the proudest, and most stately
Branches, and fairer Leaf. Mr. Evelyn tells us of one, that shot sixty foot in
height, in a little more than twenty years.

Virtues and Uses.
Pine-Trees are of great use both at Sea and Land, the Timber being well known
to Ship-Wrights, Carpenters, and other Mechanics -- V^ile Lignum, Navigiis
Pinos, Geor. 2. Astrologers account this Balsamic Tree (how truly I know not,
for I think it is influenced by a far more benig^e Planet) under Saturn, the
whole Vegetable has a Turp^ntine sm^ll, and has a rough, bitter Sapor, being
reckoned cold and dry in the second Degree, and a great astringent, especially
the Scales of the Cones and Park of the Tree, the Tops and Leaves being almost
of the same temperature, stopping Lasks and Dysenteries, and provoke Urine
greatly, through their Turpentine quality.

And indeed the Tops and Twigs of these resinous Plants and Trees, which are a
great number, as Firr, Cypress, Pines, Juniper, Ivy, etc. that emit Balsamical
^ffluviun^s, are of late years often prescribed by Physicians in Diet-Drinks,
Decoctions, and Milk-Waters distilled, and others in the Scurvy, Dropsies,
Nephri^is, inward Ulcers and Fluxes: And where they grow about Houses of the
Gentry in abundance, do correct the malignity of the Air, by their Balsamical
and Odorous Emanations. And though Barthol. in his Medicina Danorum dissert. 7.
disclaims the use of Hops, and substitutes the Shavings of Deal-boards, Tops of
Pine, Firr, Sage, etc. the chief end of boiling Hops in our ^nglish Drink, is
by their bitterness, to allay the strong sweetness, or lusciousness of the
Malt, and so both the ^itter and sweet uniting themselves, make a well tasted
and wholesome Drink. Now this may be do^e by Broom, Ling or Heath, Wormwood,
Juniper, Firr, etc.

I know a good Family, that for 16 years past, that has always used Broom and
Robin-Herb, or Groun^^* Ivy dried, instead of Hops, and it preserves Drink as
well, and as pleasant in taste, provided it has Age; some in the Morelands,
boil the Eri^a vulgaris Heath dried, (as Dr. Plott observes they do about
Sheuston, not f^r off Litch^^el^ and ^a^ck-Wood) in their Drink, which I have
drank of, and f^und no ill taste: And it is very strange, seeing other wholesome
and bitter Herbs, will as well supply the place of H^ps, that People will buy
them for their Ale and B^er, though they are of never so great a price or value.
But one great reason of their propagation and general use, is the advancement
of Land, by them, to the highest improvement, usually to 40 l. or 50 l.
sometimes 100 l. per Acre, and yet not enough planted to serve us, but have
them from Flanders and Holland, etc. because our Countrymen are loath to bestow
their Labor and Industry about a Plant, that is so subject (beyond all others)
to the various mutations of the Air, from the time of their Buddi^g till
plucked, as over much Drought or Wet, Milldews often totally destroys them. But
those that have any part of a Crop, and the Shopkeepers and Tradesmen will
never encourage the use of any other herbaceous Plant in their stead, (though far
more wholesome, no not in such a scarce Summer as this is like to prove) because
they get abundance by them, even as some have, vast Estates. And our poorer
sort of People, will not go out of their road, but Hops will use at any rate;
they are such Ignoramuses.

And indeed, often have I wondered, that Drinks prepared with Elderberries,
Juniper, S^ge, and 20 other things, are not only more encouraged by our Gentry,
but also ushered into Publick-Houses, instead of Coffee and other foreign
Liquors seeing the simple Decoctions of those Simples, sweetened with Sugar,
make pleasant Liquors to the Eye and Taste, and beneficial to the Body; and how
much more, if meliorated by Skill and Art.

The Timber of Pine-Trees is lasting and durable, not subject to Worms, nor
rottenness, and the Heart of Deal (as the best Deal-boards, which frequently
are sawed from Pine) if kept dry, is said to be everlasting; and Mr. Evelyn
says, a Pine-Nut, or a Wallnut set, (they are best preserved in Sand) does
usually overtake a Tree of ten years growth, which was planted at the same
instant; a worthy Observation, in which the Noble Poet was mistaken, Geor. l.
2. Nam quae, etc.

Trees which from scattered Seed do spring, are made Come slowly on for our
Grand-Childrens shade. The wild kinds yield most Rozen, Turpentine, and Pitch,
all which flow naturally in very hot Climates, from these Trees, and more is
forced out by the burning of the Wood and Timber: Pix liquida, or liquid Pitch
in Brabant Teer, in English Tar, is made out of that sort of Pine, in
New England, from which naturally Turpentine extilleth.

The Tar-makers burn the hardest Knots of these Trees, almost as we do
Charcoal, or more like a Lyme-Kiln, catching the Tar at the bottom, a kind of
Distillation per Descensum; the knots afterward are an excellent Charcoal; The
worst Pitch is Tar boiled up, adding some course Rozin to harden it: from the
fuliginous vapors and smoke of these Trees when burnt, the stuff called
Lamp-black, and Printers black is gathered, being a light Soot.

I find no noxious quality in this Tree, except that of Pliny be true, lib. 17.
cap. 12. where he says, That no Plant will prosper or thrive under the
Branches or shadow of the Pine; but I am confident he was mistaken, or it may
be they would not in his Country.

In the Shops. Turpentine of all sorts, Stone-Pitch, Tar, Rezin Burgundy Pitch,
Naval or Ship-Pitch. These not properly belonging to Vegetables, I shall leave
them (to be discoursed of perhaps in another Tract.)

Pine-Kernels, Nuclei Pinearum: the expressed Oil, as Oil of Almonds is drawn.
Lohoch de Pino, Vnguentum Resinum, or Ointment of Rezin.

Pine-Kernels are Ingredients in Antidot. Anale ptica, or the restaurative
Electuary, much used by ^ome heretofore in Consumptions, Atrophy. Also in
Diapenidion, Diasatyrion, in Lohoch de p^pavere, and other Preparations. They
are temperately (...) and moist, being fresh Kernels are very Pector^ ^ourish
well, and good for such as pine away, also help hot Urin, and Distempers of the
Reins. The Lohoch of Pin^-Nuts, is also appropriated to Coughs, and Distempers
of the Lungs, and to Hectical Bodies; for which also the Diapenidion or
Penedies are proper (the three Spices being left out) also in Hoarsnesses and
Salt Catarrhs.

The Ointment of Rezin, is made of the best Pine Bezin Turpentine, Wax, and
pure Oil, each equal parts melted together into an Ointment; and is a curious
gentle drawer and breeder of Flesh in Wounds and plain Ulcers, and helps
Pains, Sprains, and weakness of the Nerves.

TAR PILLS
Are a Nostrum in some Shops. Tar being Pix liquidae or liquid Pitch, is of a
hot Balsamic Nature, and these Pills are cheap and easily prepared, yet not
the worse to be thought of, in Colds, Stoppages and Stuffings of the Breast and
Lungs, and Consumptive Coughs, where there is no Hectic.. Flowers of
Brimstone, Aniseeds and ^iquorish powder each equal p^ts, and with fine Tar so
much as is sufficient, make it into a Mass like Paste, so as you may roll it
into small Pills, swallow three, mornings and at night, first and last: A
standing Pill, used by great Physicians in a great Town I know. See a more rich
Pill in Willis s Pharmacop. Rational. par. fol. 97. made up with Tar.

Pomgranates.
Exodus 28. 33, 34. and 39. 24. Deuteronomy 8. 8. Numb. 13. 25. and 20. 5. 1 Kings 7.
8. 1 Samuel 14. 2. 2 Chr. 3. 16. and 4. 13. 2 Kings 25. 17. Cant. 4. 3, 13. and
6. 7, 11. and 7. 12. and 8. 2. Joel 1. 12. Hag. 2. 19.
N. K. D. P. Malum granatum, vel Punicum, or Malus granata, sive Punica, Poa
sive (...). Heb. Rimmon. Which names signify the Fruit also.

There are two kinds, the manured and wild; of the last, two sorts, the
greater, or Malus punica Sylvestris major and the lesser, or Balaustium majus,
and minus, because these wild sorts only bring forth the Flowers in the Shops,
called Balaustins. And the Flowers of the manured or Garden, are called Cytinus
the Bark, or Rind, or Peel, is called Malicorium, or Cortex Granatorum.

The Milus punica sativa, or Garden Pomgranate-Tree, rises not above seven or
eight Cubits high, spreading into many slender, tough, brown-coloured Branches,
clothed with many green glistering Leaves, like to P^ivet, defended with
thorny Weapons, confusedly set, beautified with a Crimson Carnation-coloured
single Bell-flower, fixed in a Cup or Husk, with threads in the middle; lastly,
the whole is crowned with a great round, smooth, hard ruddy-coloured
Pomgranate, which when ripe, contains reddish grains, soaking in a plentiful
quantity of clear Juice like Wine, of a sweet and sub-acid taste, which
sometimes corrodes the Bark and destroys the Fruit.

The wild, are a shrubbish low Tree, and do only bring forth the Flowers or
Balaustines, which are double, and of a bright Crimson, or a more sad red
Orange-tawny color.

They grow in Italy, Spain, Egypt, Nova-Hispania, and other warm Countries,
especially in Granada a Province in Spain, so called from Granata or
Pomgranates that fructify plentifully* there; a Pomgranate Or being the Arms
thereof: They grow also with us, by the help of Conserva^^^ies, and Hot-Houses,
in the Gardens of our curious Gentry, yet come to no perfection, for they very
rarely flower with us.

The reason why such tender Trees do not fructify with us, that are more
accustomed to hotter Climates, is chiefly through the defect of concurring
Causes, amongst which are most considerable, the want of a competent heat, that
is lasting and equiparable to the heat of the Climate, and nature of the Plant
in its Native Soil: for the presence of our intense cold or Frost in Winter
time, reaching the Roots of such tender Trees, prevents their Fruitbearing by
suspending the fermental action of the Principles, if not totally kills them.

Virtues and Uses.
This vinous Plant is placed under the Sun, by some under Venus, more truly; by
others, the Sweet Juice, or Wine is moderately hot, but with us rather cooling
and astringent, through its sowrness, pleasing a hot friguting Stomach, and
stays Vomiting, and Fluxes from Choler, useful to Women with Child, yet this
Fruit yields little nourishment.

The Cortex or Pomgranate Bark tastes rough, hottish and biting, excellent in
all Fluxes whatsoever in Man or Woman. The Balaustines also thicken, dry and
bind very much, and are good in Decoctions* to amend the laxity of the Gums,
and looseness of the Teeth, in the Scurvy, especially boiled in Claret with a
little Myrrh: Also they are Bark and all boiled in Gargarisms, against the
Relaxation, and falling down of the Uvula and To^sils.

In the Shops. Balaustines, called Flores Bal^ustiorum, and Pomgranate Bark;
and the Syrupus Granatorum, and Juice or Wine.

If the Wine of Pomgranates do stay the immoderate Longings of Women with Child
(unless the coldness of the Stomach hinder) as it is recommended by some to do,
why may not the yrup do the same, being only made of the Juice and Sugar and
excellently does quench the thirst in burning Fevers, cuts and fits viscose
humors for Expectoration, and corrects the boiling heat of Choler, pleasant to
the taste, and useful in Diarrh^a*s and other Fluxes.

The Bark I have found to render Ink more black and durable, if bruised and put
in it with Galls, a little Allom or Sugar*

The Palate of the Mouth and Uvula being (as it is vulgarly termed) down, touch
them often in a day, with the following Powder, either blowed up with a Uvula
spoon, or with your Finger,. Balaustines, Roots of ^istort, and Tormentil aa.
ss. Alum ij. beat them to a fine powder, It was a great Doctor's Nostrum, and
is very good.

Poplar. Poplars. Genesis 30. 37. Hos. 4. 13.
N. K. D. P. Populus. (...). Populus, it may be a (...), multus, a frondium
multitudine.

This vimineous Tree is properly but of two kinds, Populus alba, and nigra, the
white and the black: But the Aspen-Tree is accounted a Species of this
Vegetable, and called Populus tremula, or Lybica, Plin. which bears a trembling
Leaf: And C. Bauhin in his Pinax, and others make a Populus alba foliis
mi^oribus, the smaller* leaved Poplar* or Abele-Tree; but Mr. R^y is of
Opinion, it differs not from the Populus alba.

The white Poplar is not so frequently found as the black, which is not to be
found neither in every County; they grow best in moist ground, near the Margins
of Rivers, but not in the water as the Willow does, being easily increased by
the straight Branches, or Sets and Slips, but cut not off the top, till they
have stood two or three years, then head them at 10 or 15 foot high, and they
will yield a large Brush or Shroud, in a few years, the Branches of which you
transplant, if you let them shoot upright, they are then more Ornamental.

The Aspen differs little from the Poplar, only it will grow not only in moist,
but in dry ground, in Copses, etc. as the most ingenious Gent. Mr. J W. in his
Book of Agriculture, observes The Abele-Tree is a finer kind of white Poplar,
which in three years arises to an incredible altitude, in twelve years be as
big as your middle, and in eighteen arrive to full perfection. These
Poplar-Trees grow plentifully in the West Indies.

Virtues and Uses.
These Trees come under the Aqua^ical Class of Vegetables, the Astrologers fall
out about it, some say it is Saturn's Tree, others the Moon's, the (...) bed Sir
is cold and dry, the Noctur^al (...) is cold and moist, its no great matter to
stand about; for these Trees in their Medical effects, may be ro^^ted to both.
The Bark of them all is bitter, astringent, and of a L^urel-taste, and Sir J.
F. says, They co^^ nearest to the Jesuits-Bark of any English Trees. (...)
have found the Buds (called Oculi or Gemmae in (...) Shops) of the black
Poplar, clammy and resinous* Query, if the Bark be not so too*

The white has a cleansing property, says Galen, and Dioscorides says, is
used chiefly outwardly and inwardly in the Sciatica, and Schroder in the
Strangury, and Burns. Serenus Sammonicus gives it the following ^ulogy.

Saepius occultus victa coxendice morbus
Perfurit, and gressus diro languore moratur
Populus, alba dabit medicos de cortice potus.
And an ingenious Author well known, says, The Fungi or Mushroms which spring
from the putri! Stumps of this Tree, have not a venomous malignity, being
gathered after the first Autumnal Rains.

The black Poplar is reckoned more cooling than the white, the Buds of which
are well known to the Apothecaries, and gathered early in the Spring, to be
macerated in Oil and Hog's Grease, in order to make the Ointment called
Populeon, when the other Herbs are ready sprung.

The Leaves bruised with Vinegar ease the Gout, and may serve for Fodder in
scarce years; the water* in the hollow places of this Tree, is said to cure
Wa^ts, Pushes, Wheales, Ring-Worms, and dry Scabs; the Countryman may* easily
try it, washing the part often with it for it seems probable.

The shade of this Tree is of ancient estimation, and the white Wood is of*
(besides Fuel for the fire) singular use for the Turner, and sought after by
the Sculp^or, and for several rustic Utensils, as for the Gardener, etc.

In the Shops. Oleum, and Vnguentum Populeum. The Oil, and the Ointment of
Poplar Buds.

The Oil is a fine Cooler, but the Ointment, which is well known, is much
better, being excellent in Burnings, any kind of Inflammations, where unctuous
applications are proper, in heat of the Reins, arising from the Stone, or
Gonorrhea, in Fevers or Head-achs, applied to the Temples; it provokes sleep,
and gives ease. And is often applied to the Wrists, and So^ls of the Feet, in
Fevers, burning Agues, especially may be very beneficial to Children, who will
not take many inward Medicines, and also to others; I have often prescribed it
as follows:. Ointment of Poplar ij Telar. aranear. i. e. of Spiders, Cobweb,
so much as will make it up to a thick Consistence, to be spread on Leather.
This Ansifebrifick Plaster was the Secret of a very great Practitioner, and
borrowed no doubt, from Emplast febri^ug. Strobelbergeri.

Pulse. 2 Samuel 17. 28. Dan. 1. 12, 16.
N. K. D. P. Lens. Legumen. Jun. and Tr. Lens is Lentils, of which see before.
Legumen is all kind of Pulse. For the Leguminous-Tribe is large in the
Vegetable Kingdom, comprehending many Relations. As Beans, Pease, Tares,
^^tches, Lentils* Ciches, Chichlings, another Siliquous Vegetables, most of
them having their sub-divisions, as Sugar-Pease, etc.

But I Will take Pulse here properly as Pease, of which we have the Garden or
Rouncivals called Pisum Majus, and the Field-Pease called Pisum minus vel
arvense. The Husbandman and others know them by the Epithets of brown, gray,
white, blue, red, and others, as Maple-Pease, called Pisum Flore Roseo Semine
variegato. and English Sea-pease, or Pisum Marinum. Also Birds Pease and
Everlasting Pease* which yields a great Burden every year after the first; and
last always, with care: Of which you may see more, if you delight in Husbandry,
in that excellent piece of Agriculture, written by Mr. J. Woolridge.

Cich-Pease, or Cicers, called Cicer rubrum, in the Shops, are sown in Gardens,
and in some Fields, later than Pease, but will be ripe as soon. The exotic*
Oily Pulse, called Sesamum is brought to the Druggists, from Alexandria, Creta,
and the Indies, where it grows of it self naturally.

Virtues and Uses.
Pease are much like Beans, less windy, but sooner pass through the Body, they
have no effectual manifest quality, if any, rather cool, tasting slimy, raw,
and some sweeter than others, and may be very proper to cool hot Scorbutic
Bloods, that have lived on Salt meats, nourish not much, and yet old Herbarists
say, they excite Venu^, and Milk in Women's Breasts.

The Pisum album majus, or the great white Garden Rouncival was sown at Milwich
in this County in the Field, which did run well upon the ground, and kern well,
notwithstanding their length; And he that attempted it, had such success, that
he sold the Pease to his Neighbors for 10 s, the Bushel.

But the profits and uses of Pulse are so generally known, as well for Men as
Beasts, that I shall leave them, and proceed to tell you of One (in a certain
Tract published by Mr Hartlib) that pretends to draw from Pease, very good
Spirits or Aqua-Vitae, without M^ulting, thus.

Let Pease be taken and steeped in as much Water as will cover them, till they
swell and come, and be so ordered as Barley is for Malting, only with this
difference, that for this work, if they sprout twice as much, as Barley does,
it is the better. The Pease thus sprouted, if beaten small, (without drying) and
put into a Vessel and stop^ with a Bung and Rag as usually, will ferment, and
after two or three or four months, if distilled, will readily yield a strong
Spirituous Liquor; and says, one Bushel of Pease will yield two Gallons or
more of Spirit, as strong as the strongest Aniseed-Water in London, and better
tasted than Malted Grain.

Now this Process is no more than bare Fermentation, by which a Man may draw a
Spirit from almost any green Vegetable, being beaten and mashed with a little
Water, if not moist enough of it self, (as I have from Elder-Berries,
Black-Cherries, and even from that Flower (which is not very Juicy) Red Poppey,
or Corn-Rose, an excellent Spirit, a thing hardly known or used) Barrelled up
and suffered to stand (as the thing I mentioned have done) a quarter of a year
before it be distilled of, and rectified.

In the Shops. Red Cicers, Sem. Sesami. Oleum Sesaminum. Cicers are reckoned
hot and dry (much like to Bean and Pease when green, but thought to yield a
stronger nourishment) in the Shops, and do mollify, and lenifie, provoking
Urine, cleanse the Reins of Gravel, and waste the Stone, being mu^ilaginous,
and slimy, yet somewhat bitter on my Palate; and are used in Nephritick
Decoctions, as Forestus has one, the Basis whereof are Cicers, which some
commend above all Apozems in Distempers of the Reins and Nephritis, you may see
it in Decker's Notes on Barbetian, prax. cap. 8.

But Dr. Grew says, He questions not but that in some cases wherein Cicers are
esteemed a good Medicine, a Decoction of the better sort of Pease, especially
that we call the Sugar-Pease, may go beyond them, as the Meal of Beans does
beyond that of Fenugreek.

The Sesamum Pulse, which some say is Tur^y Millet, is moderately hot and
moist, and so is the Oil which is made by expression but seldom or never kept,
both being emollient, dissolving the hardness of the shrunk Nerves, and are
Paregorick in the Colic, and used in Coughs and Pl^urisies, in a Linctus,
says Schrod. And I have heard the Oil cried up as a brave Cosmetick: But I
never knew it used inwardly, I suppose it may nauseate the Stomach.

Raisins. 1 Samuel 25. 18. and 30. 12. 2 Samuel 16. 1. 1 Chronicles. 12. 40.
N. K. D. P. Vvae Passae Jun. and Trem vulg. Passula. Vva.

Vines in foreign Countries, produce some Grapes fit for the Wine Press, others
for Raisins: which are ripe Grapes dried with the heat of the Sun, or other
artificial heat, and are chiefly of three sorts, which also differ in goodness,
according to the Country, Clyme, Soil, and other concurring Causes.

The largest Damasco-Raisins are called Vvae Zibethae or Damascevae, the common
Raisins of the Sun, are Vvae and Passulae. And Currants or small Raisins, are
Vvae Corinthiacae. Raisins called Malaga (a Town of great Traffic and much
Resort, especially for Raisins, Almonds, and Malaga-Sacks, situate in Granada,
a Provence in Spain) are a worser sort, as also the Palermo and Smyrna Raisins:
And English Currants.

Virtues and Uses.
Raisins and Currants contain not only a sweet Juice, but also a true Sugar,
which lies curdled in the Pulp, as the more Saline parts do in green Soap, the
like is gathered on the outside of a Fig, saving that it is more Nitrous, as
being open to the Air. Our great Raisins (called by some, majores Germanicae)
which are chiefly in use with us, do nourish through their sweetness and
temperate substance, open Obstructions, cut viscous Humors, causing them to be
more easily spit up, and are Diuretic, good in P^isans and Drinks, in Coughs
and Hoarseness: but let it be remembered by Tyro's in practice, that they are
rather heating, so not so proper in Medicines given in hot Tempers, Febrile,
and Hectical Habits, and Coughs. The Stones are a stringent, and therefore
often ordered to be exempted, in many prescriptions: The best Raisins have a
thin Skin.

Currants are very nourishing also, and open the Belly, are not so hot as
Raisins, being beat up with some Rubarb into a Mass, or into an Electuary, and
eaten fasting, often cure the Jaundice, and kill the Worms bravely in Children,
that will eat it three or four mornings about the change or full of the Moon,
good also in Dropsies, Weak Stomachs, Rickets.

In the Turkish Dominions, where Wine properly so called, is forbidden by the
Law of Mahomet, the Jews and Christians keep in their ^averns, a Vinous Liquor
made of fermented Raisins; and indeed by the bare fermenting of Raisins and
Water in a due proportion, without the help of Barm, Leaven, Tartar, or other
additament to further their working; the late great Philosopher Mr Boil says,
He diverse times in a few days, prepared a good Vinous Liquor, which being
distilled, afforded a great quantity of inflammable Spirit, like that of other
Wine. And I question not, but that the Distillers make use of the Stalks and
foulness of Raisins, to a far greater profit than our Country Shopkeepers, who
throw them away, as good for nothing, when they might with a little Care and
Skill, raise a pleasant Vinous Liquor from them, with some small Additament, as
I my self have done; The great Red English Currants make the best artificial
Wine, equal to that of Gooseberries, and from both may a strong Brandy be
drawn. The Juice of them with equal quantity of Water, makes Vineg^r very good.

In the Shops. Lohoch de p^ssulis, Mel passulatum, and Electuarium passulatum.
The Lohoch, the Honey, and Electuary of Raisins, are Medicines in the
Dispensatory.

The Lohoch is good for Children that have Coughs, and inclined to the Rickets,
Consumptions, or Convulsion-fits, the Honey of Raisins opens costive Bodies
that are Phlegmatic; and the Electuary purges curiously Choler and
Melancholy, cleansing the Reins and Bladder, evacuates viscous, and salt, sharp
Humors from the Breast and Lungs. Dose may be ss. to j. fasting.

Purging Plums or Raisins,
Which are fine, and pleasant laxative Medicine^ for young Children, and other
squeasie Stomachs* and weak Bodies that are costive, being a proper thing for a
Charitable Ladies Closset.. Sena well pick^ one Ounce, Ginger and Cinnamon each
one Scruple, Spirit of Wine lb ss. steep them warm and close stopped, for six
hours, all night on warm Embers, or in B. M. then when cold, strain it, and to
the Liquor add of white Sugar one Ounce, best Raisins of the Sun four Ounces,
boil or stew them gently rather, till the Plums are soft, and so keep them
together for use, a Child may eat half adozen in a morning. ^o ^runes may be
preserved also, or you may take out the Raisins, when you take it off the fire,
sprinkle them wi^h Sugar, and dry them, and then they are a Candied Loosning
Plum The best Brandy may serve for Spirit.

Physicians ought to study in prescribing their M^dicines, how to please the
Palates of their Patients in some degree and measure, (as it is said the Ladies
Doctor, the famous Dr. Tbo Cox did) for thereby the Dose is swallowed more
willingly, stays with the Stomach more quietly, and obliges the Patient to a
good Opinion of his Doctor, which, by the way, is no small adjuvant matter, in
order to a Cure; for where the Patient has a high Opinion of his Physician, it
is happy for them both, the Physic having thereby the better effect.

Reeds.
Paper-Reeds. 1 Kings 14. 15. 2 Kings 18. 21. Job 40. 21. Isai. 19. 6, 7. and
35. 7. and 36. 6. and 42. 3. Jer. 51. 32. Ezekiel. 29. 6. and 40. 3, 8. and 42.
16, 20. and 45. 1. Matthew. 11. 7. and 27. 29, 48. Mark 15. 19. Rev. 11. 1. and
21. 15, 16.
N. K. D. P. Arundo. Calamus. Papiri. Jun. and Tr. Vulg. Arundo ab ariditate,
quod cito arescat. (...).

This Vegetable is of great affinity with us, and in foreign parts. The common
Reed, is called Arundo vulgaris sive vallatoria, and is well known to grow on
the sides of Rivers and Ponds. Arundo f^orida, or flowering Reed, which is of
no great use. Matt-Reed called Spartum, which grows on the Seacoasts, and
River-sides. Cane-Reed called also Cypress-Reed, is Arundo Cyprica, which grows
in Spain and other hot Countries, twenty or thirty foot high. Paper-Reed called
Papirus Nilotica grows above three yards high by the River Nilus, called by
Aegyprians Berd. Arundo Saccharina, Sugar Reed, or Cane; see Sweet-Cane before;
as also Calamus Aromaticus; and Cassia, which some count a Reed.

Virtues and Uses.
The common Reeds in the old Herbals, are said to be hot and dry in the second
Degree, I know not any thing of their Medicinal Virtues, and am loath to go into
the Water, this wet Summer, to taste the Roots. But old Authors say, The Roots
stamped, draw forth Thorns and Splinters out of the Flesh, and that burn^ Ashes
of Reeds, mixed with Vinegar, cure the Scurff and falling off of the Hair: The
smallest Reeds (for they differ in magnitude) serve for Thatching of Houses,
and Sheds of Watermen and Fishermen, and do stop the Chinks of Ship^, better
than Glue or Pitch, says a famous Author.

Matt-Reed is only useful to Mechanics, of which also are made Matrs, and
Frailes or Thrailes, in which the Grocers send their Fruit to the
Country-Shop-Keepers. And of Cane-Reed are our Hand-Canes and Angling-Rods or
Canes, made, also Slears for Weavers sundry sorts of Pipes, etc. as also
certain divisions in Ships to divide and preserve Oranges and Lemons; and in
China to beat Offenders on their Thighs. These Reeds belong to the terraqueons
Plants, being nourished with a mixture of Earth and Water, by the smoothness of
the Bark or Cutis (it being the smoothest of all others) and by the concavity
of the Bo^y they seem to draw their vegetative nourishment from Water.

Paper-Reed yields out of its Roots a nutritive pleasant Juice to the People of
Egypt. It Is judged by some Expositors, that this plant is the same Reed
mentioned in the 2d Chap. of Exodus called there Flags, whereof the Mother of
Moses made that Basket, which was daubed with that Country Slime or Mud, called
Bitumen Judaicum, wherein Moses was found by Pharoah's Daughter.

But certain it is, that in preceding times, Paper was made of Papyri, these
Sedgy Reeds in Egypt, which was a rarity of Art and Nature mixed. They divided
^t into thin flakes (into which it naturally separates) then spread it on a
Table, moistening with the gluti^ous Waters of the Nile, then it was
compressed, dried, and polished in the Sun: By means of which inven^ion. (Books
being easier to be transcribed and reser^ed than formerly) P^olomy Philadelphus
made his ^amous Library at Alexandria; and hearing how Attalus King of
Pergam^^, by the benefit of this Ae^ytian Paper, strived to excel him in
Manuscriptal Magnisicence, prohibited the carrying of it out of Egypt:
Hereupon Attalus invented the use of Parchment, made of the Skins of Calves and
Sheep, from the Materials called Membranae, and from the place where it was
invented Pergamena, and in short time then did Egyptian Paper grow out of use,
and our Paper made of Rags (of which see more under Flax) succeeded, the
Authors of which excellent Invention our Ancestors have forgot to commit to
Memory; great pity it is, so useful a Child cannot so much as name its Father.

Before Paper or Parchraent, the Ancients writ first on the inward side of the
Bark of a Tree, in Lat. Liber, whence a Book is Liber. Secondly, on Tables
famed out of the main Body of a Tree, in Lat. Caudex, which gave the Latins
occasion to call a Book Codex. Thirdly, they used to cover their Tables with
Flux, and writ^ thereon from whence a Letter-Carrier was named Tabellarius; the
Pen they wrote with Iron, sharp pointed, thence called Stylus, Style now
(thence derived) the peculiar kind of Phrase which any Man uses, as Negligens
Stylus in Qu^n^ilian, and Exercitatu Stylus in Cicero. It Is recorded also, they
use^ sometimes to write in Leaves, and that the Sibyl's Oracles being so
written, were thence named Sibyllae folia, and from thence we call a Leaf of
Paper.

The Sugar-Reed, is Sweet Cane, of which see before; Sugar is the Essential
Salt of this sweet Reed, which is purified by Dissolution, Filtration and
Evaporation, then put up into Casks, or Chests, thence called Cassonnad or
Castonnade. It differs in color, as red, brown, or white, according as it has
been more or less purified; if refined or made whiter, it is cast into Moulds
of a Pyramidal form, which we call Loaves.

Sugar Candy is only Sugar Crystallized; it is made by boiling Sugar in Water
to a very high Syrup, then poured into pots, where Sticks are laid across, so
let stand some days, and the Sugar Candy clings fast to those Sticks. The
sweetness of Sugar does proceed from a natural mixture of the Essential acid
Salt, and an Oil, for neither of these two substances, if separated, will prove
at all sweet: Hence it is so good in infirmities of the Breast and Lungs, by
the one it attenuates and cuts Phlegm, by the other it mollifies and smooths
the passages, and sharpness of Humors; so it is time to leave it, for the
general uses in the Shops.

Rose. Cant. 2. 1. Isai. 35. 1.
N. K. D. P. Rosa. (...). The yellow threads in the middle of the Rose, are
called Anthera; the white which you cut off, when you make the Conserve,
Vnguis. The Family of the Roses, are as numerous a Tribe, as any one Flower, I
think, whatsoever, and the diverse and excellent kinds of them, are one of the
chiefest Ornaments almost in every Garden: there are manured, and wild,
differing in Leaves and Color: The variety of the Garden or Manured are w^ll
known, especially to the curious Florist, that delights in the propagation of
them.

I find eleven sorts of Red Roses, described by one Ingenious Florist. And
seven of the Damask, or palercoloured Roses. Three sorts of the Yellow Roses;
and, if I mistake not, nine of the White ones.

I shall insist on the Red Roses, called Rosa rubra, and on the Dama^k Roses,
called Rosa Damascena vel pallida, and on the White, called Rosa alba, and that
in the general, an^ not on the different Species of them; for I am no true
Florist, nor am I writing a Book of Flowers.

Roses are propagated either by inoculation, and Kircker (the learned Pliny of
his time) who reproved the (...) of Weckerus and Alexius (as by changing the
colors of Flowers by steeping Roots in Juices whose colors were desired, yet)
tells us confidently of things much like Paradoxes, incredulous and gainsaid by
experience, as a White Rose grafted in a Red, will bring a Rosa Mundi, White
and Red: also by Suckers; but the surest way is by Layers, first pricking about
a Joint (of a Branch that will bend) with an Awl, then p^ess it down and cover
it with Earth. do this in the Spring, cover them with well rotted Dung, which
will accelerate the sprouting of the Roots, if watered now and then, in dry
weather, at Autumn cut off your Layer, next the Mather-Tree, and you have a
natural Tree worth ten Budded or Grafted ones. The Branches laid will bring
Flowers, as well as the erected Tree: The sheering off the Buds, at first will
retard the blowing of Roses, so you may have them* when other Flowers are gone:
But sheer the whole, or else any part left unsheer'd, will suck the Nutritive
Sap, that should exert new Buds.

After your Roses have done bearing, sheer them close to the old Wood, and
toward Spring, cut each Branch with a knife close to a Leaf, or Buds, taking
the decayed parts away, not keepi^g them much above a yard high; except the
Musk-Rose, which loves to grow high. Damask-Roses have not been known in
England above 150 years.

Virtues and Uses.
As these perfuming Flowers differ in the kinds so they do in their qualities
also; thence Astrologers give the Red Rose to the friendly Planet Jupiter,
Damask to Venus, and the White to the Moon. Red Roses are bitter and
astringent, they stop Fluxes, and yield a good cooling Cordial. Damask, are
bitter, Mucilaginous and Astringent in Sapor, therefore are Purgarive. Sir J. F.

The strong smell of Roses shows an Acrimony in them, which helps the bitter
Mucilage in purging; Red-Roses have the same Acrimony, yet for want of
Mucilage* and a higher degree of Bitterness, the binding quality prevails: And
it is plain it is so, for the bitter Juice in the Roses, whilst fresh, purges,
but that heat which caused the Bitterness, being vanished by drying of them,
their binding quality is advanced, from whence it is evident how much the
Virtue of Herbs depends on diverse different Principles of Plants, and the
Absence of one, or a difference in degree, alters the Virtue considerably; and
therefore all Compositions alter the Nature of the Simples much.

All this demonstrates, that Roses are (as the old Authors taught) partly
earthy, other parts moist and Aqueous, and the rest Airy, and Aromatical, yet
all of them are cold, as says Mesue in the first. And from the preceding
Discourse, it appears, how the Red buds do both cool and bind more than the
full blown: And how the Red-Roses make the best cooling Cordials, refreshing
the Animal and Vital Spirits; either in Conserve, Water, Syrup or Powder, they
do strengthen and bind, used in all Fluxes of Blood* and humoral Defluxions,
Vomitings, Inflammations of the Mouth, etc. The Astringency is least in
Damask-Roses, for the Reasons aforesaid; the Juice, the Infusion, or Decoction
of a handful of the Damaskleaves, in Whey, or the Syruy, do purge Phlegm and
Choler.

One Ounce of the Syrup made with Agarick, will operate more effectually than
two or three Ounces of the simple Syrup; it may be taken in Whey. The
White-Roses, are thought to be as cooling and binding as the Red, but they are
never used, only the distilled Water, is vulgarly used to sore Eyes, though the
Red is as good, if not better. The Anohera, or Threads, do greatly bind. In the
Red-Roses, there is a better proportioned mixture of their Salt or Sulphur, so
more Cephalic and Stomachal. In the paler Roses, the Sulpher and Sult, are
over balanced by their moisture, or abounding Mercury, which gives them a more
fragrant Smell and Laxity, and the Leaves of these are dried with some
difficulty.

Nature seems to have bestowed no greater Care on any Flower, the Vegetable
Family supplies us with, then the Rose, which one calls the Queen of Flowers,
for the beauty and pleasingness of the Color and Smell; yet Cardinal Caraffa,
one of great fame, as Scheneki^s tells us, abhorred the smell of Roses so much,
that he stirred not out of doors in Rose-time, and examined all Passengers that
came into his House. Such power there is in Smells, that the Ancients ascribed
a Divinity to them; and because good Odours cheer the Spirits, and Animal
Functions; hence they were used in Temples, both amongst Jews, Gentiles, and
Christians: Homer describes his Juno by the sweetness of her Smell, and so does
Virgil his Venus; Ambrosiaeque come divinum vertice odorem spiravere; And so
does Ovid, Mansit Odor, possis scire fuisse

The Ancients in their Drinking-matches, used to wear Rose-Garlands, and to lie
on Beds of Rose* leaves for Refrigeration, Mitte Sectari Rosa quo locoru^ ser a
moretur, Horat. But there may be some manifest Causes why the Smell of Roses
may be offensive; Some Brains are extraordinary cold, some dry, whose olfactive
passages are wider than usually; to such the smell of Roses may be hurtful,
because a Rose has but a weak heat, rather refrigevative, (as Dioscorides
thinks) which may comfort the hot, but not the cold Brain. In a dry Brain, and
wide passages, the Odor does too suddenly affect it, and so disturb it by a
king or otherwise; but Histerical Women, feig^t, and are disturbed at them, and
other sweet Odours, because the Matrix delights in such Smells, and does rise
toward them, to the danger of Suffocation; whereas it is suppressed by strong
and unpleasant Odours.

But the Rose deserves also the prime place in the Family of Flowers, not only
for its beauty, form, and odoriferous Scents, but because it is the Honor and
Ornament of our English Scepter, as appears in the uniting of the two Royal
Houses of York and Lancaster, and claims the chiefest places in Crowns and
Garlands: And the Turks have that Estimation for Roses, that they frown to see
the Leaves of them fall to the Ground, because one among them dreamed, the
first Rose sprang from the Blood of Venus; and other Mahomet ans say it arose
from the Sweat of Mahomet. But that which adds to its deserts and preference,
among Flowers, is because it supplies Physic and Pharmacy with good Employment
and Medicines: For one exact Author, that has examined all ancient and modern
Physicians, reckons up 37 several Operations, single or compound, which this
noble Flower lends to their Art; therefore I wonder the Greeks should give the
Name of Flower ((...) in their Language) to the Rosemary Flower by Antonomasia,
a Rhetorical Speech, (putting one Name for another) and as it were by
Excellency, since this Flower does not furnish us with so great a Harvest of
Remedies, as now you will find the Rose does.

In the Shops.
1. Dried Roses, Red, and Damask. 2. Lignum Rhodium. 3. distilled Water of all
three sorts. 4. Syrup of Roses Solutive. 5. Syrup of Roses with Agarick. 6.
Syrup of Roses with Hellebore. 7. Syrup of Roses with Senna. 8. Syrup of the
Juice of Roses. 9. Syrup of dry Roses. 10. Honey of Roses foliated. 11. Honey
of Roses colated. 12. Honey of Roses solutive. 13. Honey of Roses common. 14.
Conserve of Red-Roses. 15. Conserve of Damask-Roses. 16. Julap Alexandrin. 17.
Julap. Rosatum. 18. Vinegar of Roses. 19. Electuary of the Juice of Roses. 20.
Species Elect. Rosat. Noveilae. 21. Diarrhodon Abbatis. 22. Sugar of Roses. 23.
Aloes Rosated. 24. Aromaticum Rosatum. 25. Spirit of Roses. 26. Oil of Roses
Chym. 27. Oil of Roses Omphacine. 28. Oil of Roses Complete. 29. Ointment of
Roses. 30. Ol. Lign. Rhodii.
These are all appointed by the Honorable and most Learned College of
Physicians, in their Pharmacopaea Londinensis, or London Dispensatory of the
last Edition, which are denominated from the chiefest Ingredient in them,
Roses: Besides which there are several other Preparations of them in other old
Dispensatories, and Chemical Authors, as Essence of Roses, etc. Tincture of
Roses.

The Uses of the Water, Syrup, Conserve, Sugar, Honey, and Oil of Roses, are
not only well known by every Practitioner, but also to all Understanding
Gentlewomen, and ordinary People; And for the rest, I Will leave them to the
Investigation of Tyro. And though the Number, at the first sight, may seem to
be almost enough to fill a Country Apothecary's Shop, yet it must must not be
thought, that all these Preparations are kept ready in every Shop, but such as
are most commonly used, and prescribed by Physicians on the place. I shall only
observe, that whereas Conserve, and Sugar of Roses, of old, were celebrated
Remedies in Consumptions, insomuch as some emaciated and ptisical Bodies, have
been said to have been restored, or long preserved by the Use of them; so still
in these days does the Conserve (especially if three or four Year old) keep its
famous Reputation among Practitioners, as well as good Women, and others, being
the Basis of many Prescriptions, and Balsamic Eiectuarys, used in Consumptions
and other Diseases.

But the Apothecary, and others ought (that these Cordial Flowers may the
better yield those virtuous Advantages, which Nature has placed in them) to be
careful and circumspect, as to the time, in which Roses are to be gathered;
which seems to be most proper before Sunrising, or a little after break of
Day, when they yet retain some small remains of the Balsamic Moisture, which
the cool of the Night, did as it were gather and concentrate, both without and
within these Flowers; but be sure not after a rainy Day, especially when you
intend them for Conserve, or to dry them: Nor ought they to be gathered long
after the Rising of the Sun, because that Universal Planet, seems greedily to
suck the Balsam and Nectar of all the Flowers, which are of an aetherial and
delicate Substance, as Roses are, above all others.

Rue. Luke 11. 24.
N. K. D. P. Ruta. (...). Garden Rue, called Ruta Hortensis, vainly called by
Rusticks Herb of Grace, needs no Description. Wild Rue, or Ruta Sylvestris, is
much less every way; there are other Herbs called also Rue, as Goats-Rue
Galega; Meadow-Rue called Thalictrum; Wall-Rue Ruta Muraria, which is Adianthum
album, or White maidenhair, called also Salbiae Vitae; this fast grows in the
Garden-walls of the old Abbey de la Cruce, near Leek in this County, where I
have often seen it.

Garden Rue prospers best in stony Soil, or where Ashes are the Manure, for its
not pleased with Dung, and requires the Sun; it is propagated by Seeds,
Cuttings, and easily by Slips. It is a great enemy to the Toad as it is to
Poison, and old Pliny says it thrives best near the Fig Tree, which does
meliorate it for Medicine.

Virtues and Uses.
This excellent Balsamic, Solar, Vegetable, is hot and dry in the 3o. under
the Sign Leo, the Sun's House; it is of subtle parts, strongly discussing Wind,
cutteth and digesteth, so hot in Taste, and acrid, that it will almost blister
the Lips upon chewing it, and scent a large Room with its strong rank Smell.

Mithrilates King of Pontus in Asia, (who invented Mithridate) who lived in
Pompey's days, is recorded to admire the Leaves of Rue, being mixed with Figs,
Walnuts, and a little Salt, as an incomparable Antidote; this Learned Prince
did particularly apply his Mind to the knowledge of things to resist Poison,
and took the aforesaid Mixture, or a dose of his Mithridate, every Morning
fasting, insomuch that when he was over come by Pompey, lest he should fall
into his hands, he endeavored to Poison himself, but his Constitution being
rendered Poyson-proof, he commanded a Slave to run him through; but his Receipts
were found by Pompey, in his Coffers; and Damocrates, Physician to Mithridates,
writ poetically on them, as you may see, Galen, lib. 2. de Antidot. More
concerning this famous Prince you may read in Plutarch, Appian, and others.

We account Rue also to be Cephalic, respecting the Genus Nervosum, and the
Womb. It is an Ingredient in Plague-Waters; I have found it excellent in
Clysters in the dolorous Chollick, and very often have experienced its Goodness
to destroy Worms in Children, and have seen some strong Bodies eat it with
Bread and Butter, for to kill the Maw-worms as they call them, and against Wind
and Chollick.

I have given some drops of the Juice fasting to Infants and other Children,
which have cured and prevented Convulsion Fits, and sometimes the Powder of the
Leaves dried, but not too near the fire, but more often I have prevented and
cured convulsive and other peculiar nervous and histerical Maladies, by a
Preparation of it advanced by the Noble Chimia. And at the writing hereof have
cured a Neighbor's little Son, whose Fits were Epileptical, and very terrible
to behold, having but two Fits after the first Dose of this Medicine; And that
after other successless Medicines.

The Learned Sir J. F. gives us the following, as Sir Theodor Mayhern's
Receipt, with which he cured Convulsions; Give half a Spoonful of the Powdered
Leaves of Rue, for nine days, in drink fasting, and at Night 24 Grains of the
same: Take White-Henbane-seeds two Ounces, Sugar half an Ounce, make it into
Powder, take twenty Grains of it in a Spoonful of the Syrup of House-leek for
forty days, especially at the Full and New Mood.

Bath the Feet in the following Decoction, and wash the Temples and Forehead:
Take Rue and Henbane-roots each a handful, boil them in Springwater for a
quarter of an hour, and so make a Bath: Take White Wind one pound two ounces,
Juice of Rue, inward Bark of Elder, and the Leaves, of each two Ounces; boil
them in the Wine to half the quantity, then take two or three Spoonfuls in the
Morning fasting: The whole Virtue of these Medicines lies in Narcotick Faculty,
and the Rue. These Medicines being easily made, I have inserted them here for
the good of the plainest Reader.

Rue is externally used also with good Success. Take and beat the White of an
Egg to Oil, Leaves of Rue beaten to a Conserve, and mix them well, and apply
them on a Pledget of Lint or Flax, to any Bruise in or about the Eye, is an
excellent Pultiss, and as it is used internally in all Pestilential Fevors, and
malign Affects, both to preserve and cure, so is it successively used in
venomous Bites, Carbuncles, and has been applied to the Wrists, with Bay Salt
in Agues, and to the Feet, with Rhadishes, Salt, Blacksoap and Vinegar, beat up
to a Cataplasm in the highest Fevours, for Revulsion sake.

Wild-Rue, called also Harmel, is hotter, causes Blisters, and is not to be
used in Meat or Medicines. Goats-Rue is hot, and Alexipharmick also. Lemnius
instit. cap. 58. admires Rue, and commends it to have an excellent Virtue, to
expel vain Imaginations, Devils, and to ease afflicted Souls; this sure he
fancies it might do by Corroborating, and Rectifying the Aberration of the
Animal Economy, and Functions of the Brain.

In the Shops. The simple distilled Water: The Seeds of Rue: The Conserve of
the Leaves: The Ointment of Rue, and Oil of Rue.

Dr. Willis in his Chapter of Convulsions in adult Persons, recommends the
Conserve of the Leaves fresh made, with equal parts of Sugar, for the poorer
sort of People, and orders the quantity of a Nutmeg to be taken twice a day,
drinking after it a draught of the Decoction of the Seeds and Roots of Burdock,
made in Whey, prepared with Whitewine.

The Oil of Rue kills Worms, being used to the Belly, expels Wind, good in
Palsies, withered Limbs, Cramps, cold Aches, and is used with good Success in
Clisters in the Chollick. vid. pulv. Anticolicus Batean.

Rush. Rushes. Job 8. 11. Is. 9. 14. and 19. 15. and 37. 7.
N. K. D. P. Iuncus. (...). The Holy Ghost mentions it as a Vegitable in but
two of the quoted Texts; and in the other it is used Metaphorically, by which
the least of the Wicked Tribe are threatened to be cut off, and extirpated. See
Bullrushes.

This disregarded Vegetable is well known in all its kinds. The common hard
Rush is called Juncus acutus vulgaris: The common soft Rush is Juncus taenis
panicula sparsa major. The flowering Rush is Juncus floridus seu Gladiolus
Palustris. Moss- Rush is Juncus acutus Cambro-Britannicus, called Goose-Corns,
growing in Mountainous and Moorish places, as in the Moorlands and Wales.

But we have a more Medicinal Rush, called Scaenanthus, Squinanthus, or Juncus
Odoratus, Scaenath or Camels-hay, which grows naturally in Arabia, Syria, and
in Eastern Regions; and it is thence brought to our Druggists: If any out of
Curiosity have with difficulty raised it by the help of their hot
Conservatories here, yet I believe, it seldom or never lasts, or comes to
flower.

Virtues and Uses.
Rushes are of an earthy and aqueous Essence, as the ^ogs and moist places they
grow in seems to indicate, tasting rough and raw, as they smell, belonging,
it is like, to that unfortunate Planet Saturn. They may bind and be soporiferous
as Bull-rushes, but are more useful to the Milk-maids, Basket, and Mat-makers,
than to the Materia Medica: They serve the Tallow-chandlers, especially the
Juncus laevis Vulgaris, called Candle-Rush, or common soft Rush, for
Watch-Lights; also are used very beneficially to cover Cabbins, Sheds, and
Thatch with, and when dried, are platted for diverse Uses, Frails, Matting to
face Walls, Benches; and a Rarity not far off me at Park-hall, is a Rope that
passes between the runners of the Oat-mill, made only of the Peelings or Rinds
of Candle-Rushes, which does not only last longer than one of Hemp, bur will
not stretch as Hempen ones do, which is a great convenience in the working of
such kind of Mills. Bull-Rushes make Bosses and Bed-mats best. And thus we see,
the meanest of Vegetables may be useful one way or other to Mankind; For the
Great Creator made not one thing in vain.

Sweet Rush, Camels-hair, or Scaenanth, is meanly hot, somewhat Astrictive and
Aromatic, smelling like a Rose, by its thin parts discusseth, opens
Obstructions in Women, Liver, Spleen, and discusseth inflations of the Stomach;
it is useful in the pain of the Reins, Bladder and Womb, in pissing and
spitting of Blood. Outwardly it corrects Ulcers of the Mouth, and Tumors of the
Uvula, and strengthens the Stomach, Womb and Head: It is seldom used by
Physicians in their ordinary Prescriptions, but is to be found in several
Compositions.

In the Shops. Scaenanth. It is an Ingredient in Treacle, Mithridate,
Emplast^^m, Histericum, etc.

Rye. Exodus 9. 32. Isa. 28. 25.
N. K. D. P. Spelta. Zea. Mun. and Tr. Vulg. Secale Siligo Veterum. Muncorne,
is called Farrago. Rye is known in all the Christian World, and is of diverse
sorts, yet not so many as Wheat; besides the more common kinds, there is the
Hybernum vel majus.

It grows so plentifully in Denmark, Germany, and especially in Poland, whence
it is sent down the Weysel to Dantzick, and thence transported to other
Countries; nay England it self has been often relieved by it in times of
Dearth and Scarcity.

Virtues and Uses.
Rye is more forcible in heating than Wheat, because through its Clamminess and
Moistness it is less easy for Digestion, yet yields good Nourishment to
Rusti^k Bodies; Its general Use is to make Bread, alone, or mixed with Wheat,
(so called Muncorn, or Masiline, by some) with which it is often Sown, as well
as alone; it makes Bread moist, and gives it a pleasant Taste to most Appetites.

Through its clammy M^silage* Rye bread is not good in obstructed Bodies,
Hypochondriack Cases, Melancholy, Dropsy, and the Scurvy, arising from the
thick Blood; bad for those that are apt to the Grief called vulgarly
Heart-burning. It is more Nutritive than that made of Barley, more solid, course
and dispeptick than that of Wheat.

The Leaven of Rye is best for Vesicatories, the Meal being more moistning*
than Wheat-meal in Pultisses, it digests, ripens, breaks, and draws all
Apostems and Biles better than Wheat.

Rye delights in d^y sandy warm Land, usually termed Rye-land, it is quickly
up, sooner in the Ear, (usually in April) and sooner ripe than other Grain,
being Sown as Wheat in Autumn, and some in March; but if I mistake Johannes de
Monte will correct me, a most Loyal Skilful Husbandman.

Saffron. Can. 4. 14.
N. K. D. P. Crocus. (...) Zahafaran. Arab. True Saffron is called Crocus
verus, sive Sati^us Autumnalis; It is the Spica Cilissa Poetarum, Ovid.

This most excellent Vegetable has many kindred, differing in their*
Praenomen, Nature, Figure, Color and Places, many of which are propagated in
the Gardens of curious Flowerists, and other Gardens for their rarity; being*
wild and bastard Saffrons, as the Crocus Vernus, or Spring Saffron, of which is
many sorts, The Colchicums, or Meadow* Saffron; The wild bastard Saffron,
called Attractilis, or Distaff-Thistle: Carthamus sive Cnicus, is also a
bastard Saffron, manured in Spain, Italy, and other places, called with us
Spanish Saffron. Crocus Indicus, growing naturally in the Eastern Regions, is
Curcuma, or. Turmerick in the Shops.

Our true English Saffron is well known, and is nothing but the small strings
or threads, (like Anther^e) which grows in a fiery colored Tuft in the middle
of the Flower, being two or Chi^es which grow upright, and must be gathered
early in the Morning, else it returns into the body of the Flower again.

The gathering of it in Cambridge shire, Suffolk, Essex, and at Saffron-Walden,
(taking its name from this Vegetable) imploys many hands; it is then carefully
dried, which may be on a small Kiln made of Clay, with a very little fire,
three pounds thereof moist, usually making one of dry.

It is propagated by the Roots, which are bulbous, and do multiply yearly in
the Ground, and at three Years end many Roots are obtained, and them usually
Transplanted about Midsummer, being set by a Line in Trenches, two or three
Inches deep, and as far asunder; but the Bed between the Trenches is five or
six Inches broad, that it may be the better weeded with a Haw.

It flowers in September, and remains green all the Winter; the Management of
one Acre may cost about 4 l. which may bring from seven to fifteen pound of
Saffron; and it has been sold from 20 s. a Pound to 5 l. a pound weight, such
Improvement and Advantage is made thereof. It is our Negligence that it is no
more propagated (being a Plant very suitable to our Climate and Soil,
delighting in good, dry, sound Land, well Tilled) amongst us; so that we might
not be obliged to Spain, or any other foreign Place for it, but rather furnish
them out of our own Stores.

Virtues and Uses.
Saffron is a Solar Herb under the Sign Leo, thence Astrologers plead for its
Cordial Virtue. It is said to be hot in the 2o. and dry in the 1o. but the hot
quality does so over* rule in the best Saffron, that in the whole Essence of
it, I judge it to be hotter. Our own English Saffron is esteemed the best in
the World; it expels Venom from the Heart, strengthens the Stomach, and
furthers Digestion, quickneth the Senses, concocteth raw Humors in the Chest,
and opens the Lungs; proper in Malignant Cases, Feigntings, Histerical Fits,
and expels the Months and Child; It often cures the Jaundice, and excellent
in Consumptions and Asthma, being chiefly Cardiack and Pulmonick.

It will effectually do the Heart more good, (says a late ingenious Author)
then a thousand precious, or not precious Stones, whither they come from the
Indies, or are trod under our Feet. The Stones are Cordials accidentally, not
essentially; They serve as natural and good Alkalies to absord that Acidity in
the Body, which sometimes causes grievous Pains and Oppressions. But Saffron
is intrinsically, and in its proper Nature an admirable Cordial, of the first
rank; and it is pity the Turks and Barbarians should esteem it better than us,
who are beholding to Providence for the best in the World.

Nay, Dodon^us esteemed it such a Cordial Virtue, as too opine; it can bring
back Consumptive People, for several days to Sense and Life again, when they
are just departing, and in their last Agony; if ten Grains or a Scruple be
given in Wine: Yet taken immoderately it is injurious to the Head, and perverts
Functions of the Brain; It will so dissipate the Spirits, ut in magna
quantitate sumptus mortem infer valeat, That it will kill, like a Poison,
when used beyond measure.

Some say two drams taken, brings death, and the common People think a small
Sprig of Saffron will do the same, if it should go to the Heart, which is true
enough in a sly Sense; for when that which is impossible is done, when a Sprig
has passed through the Concoction of the Stomach, through the small passages
of the Vena Lacte^^, and the Ductus Thoracicus into the Veins, and has slipped
through such Valleys, as will only receive a certain sort of Liquor, when all
this is done, it will be a Poison sure enough as also when the Sky falls we
shall catch Larks.

Many of the best and most serviceable things in the Creation, for want of a
due Disquisition into the Intrinsic Nature, and regular Use of them, become
oftentimes great Enemies, and most disserviceable to us purblind Mortals; and
this in the Medicinal Province occurs often. Thus Saffron, by the too frequent
and lavish Use thereof in the Smallpox, has posted several to their long
homes; for by its expulsive force, and strong Cordial Energy, it is as a pair
of Bellows, or Fuel to the Inslammatory Particles, which molest the Blood, in
the beginning of this destroying Disease: And thereby the Fevourish Ebullition
is exalted too high, even sometimes to a Frenzy; and Nature hurried to a
violent Expulsion of the Morbifick Matter, which she is as it were suffocated
with, having not time to perform a due Separation;

Or if the Patient should bear through it with Head and Shoulders, as we use to
say; yet a cruel, indistinct, confluent, Pox, with most dangerous Symptoms,
does besure consequently to harrass and torture the Body, and Taint the Blood
of the Patient. And this, as I have often observed, is the Effects and Product,
not only of Saffron as it is vulgarly used, but also Methridate, dioscordium,
Treaclewater, and other hot Cordials.

Indeed the whole World is beholden in his rebus, and ought never to forget the
Industry and practical Discoveries of the Worthy and Learned Dr. Sy^enham, who
did make it a great part of his Study and Practice to conquer this grievous
Disease; who says, That the longer Nature is in working and perfecting
Separation, so the Ebullition be not quite dulled and impeded, so much more
certainly and universally the Separation i^ performed; for of a forced
Expuision, by a hot Regimen* or by hot Cordials comes no good, as from
overhasty Fruit no true nor certain advantage;

And I shall only to confirm his Sentiments. say, That I have, (in my poor
Practice) in some Years past, more especially in the late Epidemical Year 87.
found wonderful good Success in the Smallpox, by advising the People to a cold
Regimen, and not to use Saffron, and other hot Cordials, as they are wont
extravagantly to do.

The Limners, Confectioners, etc. use Saffron to Color with.

In the Shops. Saffron, Spirit and Tincture of the same. The Powder called
Diacrocuma. Oxycroceum Plaster, Carthamus Seeds. Electuarium Diacarthamum* but
in the last Edition the College say f. Tabell. oleum Crocinum Hermodactils.

The Spirit and Tincture are great Cordials, a small Spoonful is a Dose;
Diacrocuma is excellent in cold Distempers of the Stomach, Liver and Spleen,
Dropsies, Jaundies, and helps Digestion, Green sickness, and is Diuretic; it
is also made into Electuar. Carthamus Seeds brought over Sea, the Kernel or
middle parts of the Seed have a purgative Virtue, and they are ranked by
Authors in the Phlegmag^gue Class of Purgers.

The Electuary Diacarthamum purges strongly Choler and Phlegm; excellent in
the Gout, and kills Worms.

Hermodaclils are a hard, white, s^at, and solid Root, of Meadow-Saffron,
rather from Colchis, than of our own Country; though the true Hermodactils is
either the iris tuberosa of Nath. and Lobel. or the Syrian Meadow Saffron. They
are hot and dry in the 2o. offend the Stomach, yet do very bravely draw tough
Phlegm, and clammy Humors from the Joints; and therefore, according to Paulus,
it is dedicated to gouty Maladies.

The Oil Crocinum, or of Saffron, warms, molisies, gives ease to, and greatly
strengthens the Nerves: The Use of Oxycroceum is very well known to the meanest
sort of People.

There is the Extract of Saffron kept in some Shops, for the Use of some
Physicians, as there is Syrup de croco Batean.

In the Smallpox, a Linen Rag boiled with half a dram of Saffron in the Water
of Rue, then dried and worn under the Chin* during the Distemper, was used by
Dr. Bates, in Pharm: But let every one do as they list, I know what I think.

Shittah-Tree. Shittim-wood. Ex. 25. 5, 23. and 26. 15, 37. and 27. 1, 16. and
30. 1, 5. and 35. 24. and 36. 31, 36. and 37. 1, 25. and 38. 1. 6. Deuteronomy. 10. 3.
Isa. 41. 19.
N. K. D. P. Cedrus Lectissima Jun. and Tr. It is a certain place, as you may
find in Jos. 2. 5. as well mentioned as a Vegetable, and in Joel 3. 18. it is
called the Valley of Shittim, and I supposed is used metaphorically for the
Church, or Regions, which God would pour down his Blessings upon in that place.
And no doubt it was a fertile place, (for Israel abode there, as in Number. 25.
1.) which are agreed to be Shittah-tree, or Wood, by most Expositors. And Jun.
and Trem. call it the Valley Cedrorum Lectiss^marum.

This most excellent Wood, was called for by God, (among other precious things)
to be brought him as an Offering, it made Tables and Pillars, and other things
about the Tabernacle; to conclude, a late Naturalest says, Choose your Ground
and Place proportionable, to the particular Minerva of the native Place of the
Exotic Seed or Vegetable you Transplant, if so, the Taurick Cedar, no doubt,
would grow here if planted against Walls, etc.

Spicknard. Can 1. 12. and 4. 13, 14. Mar. 4. 3. Jo. 12. 3.
N. K. D. P. Nardus Jun. and Tr. vulg. Spica Nardj. (...). The Nards are the
French, Mountain, and others, some whereof are nursed in some of our curious
Gardens.

Spicknard is a Root, shooting spiky, hairy stalks, of a yellowish Color,
light, and of a pleasant Smell. It grows naturally in the East Indies, and
brought from Germany and other Countries; it is of two sorts Spica Indica, or
Indian Spicknard, being the chiefest in use: And Spita Cel^ica, or
Celtick-Nard, from (...) Cel^ica* a Name formerly of a Province in Spain, (so
named from the River Boe^is running through it, and Celti^^ the ancient
Inhabibitants thereof, now called Extremadura) which Country formerly did, and
now still does yield much of this Vegetable.

These Nards are called Spica, from their likeness to Spike, or a larger sort
of Lavender, growing in Germany, called the Male, and our Lavender is is the
Female; and thence called Pseudonardus, and Lavendula a Lavo, because of a
perfuming Scent* it was used in Baths and Washes for the Body and Hands.

Virtues and Uses.
Nardus Celtica, or Celtick* Nard, is hot and dry, bitter, Aromatic, and
Astringent; it is weaker than the Indian Nard, which is some what stronger, in
the same quality, and more efficacious in its Virtues; they are Stomachical,
discuss Wind, dry up Defluxions, stop Fluxes of the Intestines and Matrix, used
in the Stone, being Diuretic, and much used in Antidotes.

In the Shops. Indian Nard, vulgarly Spicknard, and Celtick-Nard. Oil of Nard
simple, Oleum Nardinum, and the compound Oil, which is made as the former, with
the Addition of some Aromaticks; These are externally prescribed to heat, and
digests, resists cold and windy Distempers in any part of the Body, so may help
(anointed on the Backbone) Palsies, Tremblings, Vomitings, Rickets;
Obstructions of the Hypochondries, Barrenness and Abortion.

Sycomore-Trees. Sicamine-Trees. 1 K. 10. 27. 1 Chr. 27. 28. 2 Chapter 1. 15. and
9. 27. Ps. 78. 47. Is. 9. 10. Luke 17. 6. and 19. 4.
N. K. D. P. Sycomorus, Sycaminus. It Is in a former Translation called, in Luke
17. 6. a Mulberry-tree, but in this last a Sycamine-tree. Sycomore with us,
says Mr. Evelyn, is falsely so called, being our Acer majus, greater Maple. And
the true Sycomore, is ficus Pharaonis, or Egyptia, Pharaoh's Fig Tree, or Fig
tree of Egypt; called also from its similitude in Leaves and Fruit, Morosycus
or Mulberry Fig Trees.

There is another sort of them, called Sycomorus Silvestris, or ficus Cipria,
Sycomore of Cyprus, or Cyprus Fig Tree; the Fruit being smaller, but sweet as
Figs, growing in Cyprus, Caria, Rhodes, and in those parts. These Trees
fructify three or four times in a Year, and a kind of Bread has been made of
the Fruit, and they yield a milky Juice, potable, as Betula, or Birch-Tree.

The Sycomore with us, being it seems related to the Maple, leaves an imperfect
Fruit, called Pods, or Cat-keys, from which it is propagated, being Sown when
Ripe, and falling, coming up plentifully the next Spring: Succors also, and
Sets from the Tree will grow, being planted in moist Ground, not too dry, or
watered at the first, delighting rather in light, than dry Land.

Virtues and Uses.
Our Sycomores are raised more for Ornament, (they affording a curious dark and
pleasant Shadow) and for their speedy growth, than for any Medical Property;
yet Astrologers record it as one of Venus her Trees, it is like to make her a
shady Walk to cool her Beauty, and prevent Sun* burning.

The Bark is bitterish, rough, and the Leaves also are Mucilaginous; it is some
what Astringent like Maple, says Sir I. F. I know no Medicinal Uses of it, but
being Tapt, it will yield a sweetish Juice like the Birch-tree, and not much
unlike it in Taste, as I have tried: And it would be no great labor, nor cost,
to prepare a small quantity of it as they do Birch Wine, (for a Trial) which is
now so frequently made, (in this Northern part of Staffordshire, Cheshire, and
many other places where Birch-Trees grow plentifully) and that so highly,
vinous and spirituous, that it has past for a sort of foreign Wine.

The Timber of Sycomore, is light, tough, not much inferior to Ash, yields
good Fuel, and sit for several Mechanic Uses, as the Joyners, Turners,
Trencher-makers, and others, can best tell. The Keys and Leaves are easily
turned, when fallen, into Mucilages and Sliminess; so prejudice the curious
Walks, by which they grow, as I have heard Gardners and others complain: And to
walk or sit, especially Sleep under the shade of this Tree, was by the Ancients
accounted unwholesome; but now the common Use of it has exploded that conceit.

St. Hierom affirms, He saw the Sycomore that the Dwarf, Zacheus, climbed up
in, to behold the press and crowd of People; I could wish he had given us a
Description of it, for the Encouragement of my Reader to try Sycomore Juice,
where Birch cannot be had, I shall set down the Receipt of

Birch-Wine.
As it is prepared by some, particularly by a good Family in the More-lands,
where it was good, and stronger than any I ever drank, for I meet with it very
often abroad.

Take of the Birch Liquor, thirteen Gallons to the Dozen, boil away the odd
Gallon, then put in of clear fine white Sugar two Pound, for every Gallon, that
is twenty four Pound, and boil it again so long, is to fetch out the scum and
filth of the Liquor and Sugar: Let it then stand a while, and scum* it, ^f need
be; so put it together, in any cool place, ^n one Vessel, and when cold, put a
little Barm to (...), but not too much, and let it be a Week in working,
stirring once every day; and then Tun it, and (...) it stand to work at the
Bung-hole, if it will, if not, stop it up close: And after a quarter of a Year,
or more, draw it out into Bottles, Cork'd well up.

Observe, That you draw your Liquor from the Tree, in the latter end of
February, or about the Vernal Equinox, when the Sap ascends, before the Spring
of the Leaf, though I have known it done ^n April. It runs most freely when the
Wind is South or West, or the Sun shine warm; but not so if the Weather be very
cold, or in the Night time. Some have reported, a Birch-Tree will yield in
twelve or fourteen days, its own weight in Liquor; I shall not affirm, nor deny
it, but it is most evident a few Trees will yield a vast quantity in a few days;
I have seen above twelve Bottles hang at one Tree.

Observe, 2ly. That a wet Season is bad to gather it in, for the least
Rainwater in your Liquor and Bottles, weakens and spoils the Liquor.

Observe, 3ly. That a new Barrel is best, but howsoever, burn a Match or two of
Brimstone within your Vessel before you Tun it, which is a Secret.

Tares. Matthew. 13. 25. etc. [See Fitches and Pulse.]
N. Vicia Sylvestris, sive Cracca: Some are Sown, though not usually, in most
places of England, and benefit the Land as other Pulses, and are rather to be
preferred for Fodder, than any other Use they can be put unto: Others are wild,
and do no good, but spoil the Corn they spring in, yet feed and advance Cattle
well, says one, that are almost starved, and are frequently found in Pastures
and Meadows; These wild sorts are called by some Tar-grass.

La Romain, or French Tares or Fitches, is annually Sown in France, and other
places, very quick of growth, excellent Food for Cattle, especially for Horses,
eating it in the former part of the Summer, it may be let grow for Hay.

Teyl-Tree. Isa. 6. 13.
N. K. D. P. Quercus. Jun. and Tr. vulg. Tilia. (...). Lime-tree, Line-tree, or
Tela Hysp* Linden-tree.

This proud Vegetable is distinguished by Tilia mas, sive Sterilis, or the
Male, and Tilia Femina sive Major, or the Female Line-tree. The Male, some say,
is a finer sort of Elm, never producing any Flowers nor Berries, and has much
smaller Leaves; the Female is divided into a Major and Minor; the greater is a
large spreading stately Tree, it has a dark-colour'd Bark, fair broad Leaves,
greener than Elm-leaves, producing white Flowers and Berries, containing black
round Seed.

The lesser Female Lime-tree, being smaller leaved, is in some Countries called
Bast, because Ropes are made of the Bark thereof; this grows wild in the Woods
and Hedges, in Essex and Lincolnshire, and almost equals those brought out of
Holland, where there are Nurseries to raise them straight and comely.

The Line-tree being the greater Female, delights in a good rich Soil, and
thrives not in hungry cold Land; with us in England it is propagated by
Suckers, as the Elm, and branches, or from its Berries which drop from it in
Autumn: It spreads incredibly in a rich Soil, perfuming the Air, with fragr^nt
odoriferous Blossoms, very pleasant in Walks, and next great Avenues, giving a
large delectable Shadow, and now much raised of late Years.

These Trees adorn the Highways in Holland, also in Spain and other places;
There grow many of them in St. James's Park, and in that at Hampton Court, and
are to be found in most Counties of this Land, about Gentlemen's Houses, or
elsewhere; for about May the Apothecaries look after the Flowers of them.

Virtues and Uses.
This graceful Tree belongs also to Venus, for to walk under; It is some what
hot and dry, yielding an acrimonious bitterish Taste, both in its Flowers and
Bark, which is Mucilaginous; the whole of the Tree being some what Astringent.

The Leaves and Bark do dry and repel, boiled for Mouth-waters; It cures
Blisters, Ulcers, and sore Mouths in Children and others: And boiled in Water,
especially the Bark, to Mucilage, is excellent in Burnings, Scaldings, and hot
Wounds, if Clothes wet therein be applied, and is a great comfort to a scalded
Member, if the part be bathed therewith: Also in tumefied Legs and Feet from an
inward Cause. The Berries reduced to Powder, stops Dysenteries very strangly,
and are greatly extolled in the H^morrahgy of the Nose.

Of the filacious matter of the Bark, it is said, Cables and other Ropes are
made; the Timber is lighter, and to be preferred before Willow, having a better
Substance in it, (hence the Remnant of God's faithful People are likened unto
it) and excellent long Poles and Ladders have been made thereof, of very great
length, (for if they be suffered to mount, (without Topping their Heads, about
three Yards high, as is usual, and Set at six Yards, or twenty Foot distance)
they become straight, tall and uniform both in height and breadth in a short
time, beyond all other Trees.) Also the Wood serves best for Shoe-makers Boards
to cut their Leather on. And Sculptors and Carvers do more plainly Cut and
Engrave all their Pictures and Figures in this Wood, for it is light, fast, and
tenacious, cutting easily, and lasting very long, not being obnoxious to Worms.

And for its Lightness, Solidity and Fineness, it has (and still is for ought
I know to the contrary) been dignified by the Hands of the Right Honorable the
White-staff Officers in His Majesty's Courts. And a Nest of Draw-boxes for an
Apothecary have been made of it. To conclude, take the Praises of the famous
Cowley of it, being thus translated;

The stately Lime, smooth, gentle* straight and fair (With which no other
Drya^s may compare) With verdant Locks, and fragrant Blossoms deck'^, Does a
large even, odorate Shade project. In the Shops. The dry Flowers. The Conserve
^lorum Til^ae, and the Water distilled from the Flowers.

The Flowers of this Tree are only used in Physic, in the Shops, being a
Cordial, and Cephalic, often used in the Falling Sickness, Convulsions,
Apoplexies, Megrim, and other affects of the Head and Nerves, are more Cordial,
and not so hot, as Lillies of the Valley Flowers; and the Conserve of them may
be used, especially in hot Constitutions, instead thereof.

The Water called Aq. ^lorum Tiliae, is prescribed in Cordials, good against
Trembling and Palpitation of the Heart, in Histerical Cases, and does raresie
concreted Blood from Contusions. For these Flowers are Balsamical, perfuming
the Air in June and July, and their odoriferous Blossoms do entertain a
mellifluous Army of Bees, says an ingenious Author, from the Top of the
Morning, till the cool and dark Evening compels their return. And Schroder
says, the burnt Coals quenched (or sprinkled) in Vinegar, dissolves clotted
Blood; and the Juice or Liquor flowing out of this Tree, being out, is good to
prevent the falling of the Hair. And Gunpowder is made in some Countries of the
Coals thereof.

Thistle. Thistles. Genesis 3. 18. 2 King. 14. 19. Job 31. 40. Hos. 10. 8. Mat. 7.
16.
N. K. D. P. Carduus. Spina. Tribulus. Jun. and Tr. Vulg. Carduus. (...).
Thistles are a large Generation, distinguished by different Praenomens, and
manner of Vegitation, or growth and figure.

A sow-thistle is called Sonchus: The white Cotton Thistle is Acanthium Album;
Bears-breech is a Thistle also, called Branca Vrsina: The soft Thistle Cirsium:
The Globe-thistle is Carduus Globosus: The Fullers or Cloathiers Thistle or
Teazle, called Carduus Fullonum: Star-Thistle, is Carduus Stellatus: The
Cam^leon Thistle; these are the chief which have many related to them, being of
little use as yet, especially in Physic, because the chiefest sort mentioned
in our Dispensatories, and that I shall chiefly insist on, are three as
follows.

Carduus Benedictus, or Blessed Thistle: Carduus Lacteus sive Mariae, Ladies
Thistle: Carline Thistle, called Carlia, or Carolina, by Charlemain the first
Emperor, whose Army was by this Root, delivered, and preserved from the Plague.

I forgot to Name before the remarkable Thistle called Carduus Pa^ustris, or
Marsh-thistle, which grows as tall as a Man: The Carline and Blessed Thistles
are seldom or never found in England, except manured in our Gardens; and the
Carline is the white Cham^leon: Carduus Vulgarius and Lanceolatus is well known.

Virtues and Uses.
Carduus Benedictus, (as most of the Thistles are) is under the Influences of
Mars and his Sign Aries: It is hot and dry in the 2o. of a smoaky bitterish
Taste, and Mucilaginous, by which nauseating the Stomach, it procures Vomiting:
The Vulgar do know this Carduus so well, by their frequent Carduus Possets they
boil to vomit and sweat them, being the only popular Pharmacon or Panacaea in
many parts of England, that I shall only say it is Alexipharmick, Diuretic,
cleansing and opening, and so good it is, that it is pity the Use of it is so
much laid aside by Practitioners, being formerly estimated as one of the best
Vegetables in the Febrisugous Glass.

But now Jesuits Bark, the Pulvis Patrum forsooth, a thing not so safe,
especially as it is promiscuously and rashly used, as the Only Catholicon in
most Diseases) has josled it out of Doors, and other ancient Antifebrisicks;
for all useful and famous Remedies, have had in all times, and still will have
a natural Succession in point of Estimation and Use: And I am very apt to opine
with another Ingenious Author, that this Bark, as excellent a Remedy as it is
in some Cases, may not flourish the Age of a Man in that height of Reputation
it has now manifestly gained, for a Cure done by the Bark, does Contraindicate
all Evacuations for a considerable time; It locks up and blunts the Morbi^ick
weapons of a Disease, and forces a stop to the nimble Circulation of the Blood
and Animal Juices* making a perfect Damm and Blockade in the Brain: And where
Nature is so irregularly imposed on, a mere Sciolist in these matters, will
conclude the Consequences to be dangerous, and oftentimes Mortal. A methodical
Management of Diseases, by thoroughly Eradicating the efficient Cause, is like a
Man, and like a Physician that understands his business.

Ladies Thistle is hot and dry in the 2o. under Jupiter, a Friend to the Liver
and Blood; the Prickles cut off, they were formerly used to be boiled in the
Spring, and eaten with other Herbs; but as the World decays, so does the Use of
good old things, and others more delicate, and less virtuous, brought in vogue.

The Carline is said to be hot and dry in the Third. The Roots are chiefly
used, having a bitterish Acrimony, something Aromatic, but no pleasing Smell,
are Alexipharmick, and Diaphoretick, open the Liver and Spleen, and urinary
Passages, and does not nau^eat the Stomach so much as the former: for there is
a bitter Smoakiness in all the Thistles, which inwardly makes them Nauseous and
Purgative, and outwardly discussing and clea^ (...) says the observing
Physician, Sir J. F.

In the Shops. Seeds of Carduus Benedictus, the dry Flerb, and also Ladies
Thistle dried; the distilled Waters of both, being two of the Antipleuretical
Waters: Sal Cardui Benedicti, being the sixth Salt of the Ashes, an excellent
Medicine in Intermitting Fevers, and procures Sweat.

Star-Thistle, the old Herbals say, is admirable in the Stone and Strangury,
and in Pharm. Bat. you have the following Powder, kept as a great Secret. Sir
Theod. Mayhern (who got the greatest Estate, it is thought, that was ever got
by Physic) was it seems the first Author, (though I have not yet searched for
it, in the late Pharmacop. Mayherniae) of this plain, (thence the more despised
by some) yet proper and suitable Powder. ^. dry Leaves of Star* Carduus, or
Star-thistle i. Roots and Seeds of Parsley each iii. dried a part and powdered,
then mixed into a fine Powder, a Dose is two Scruples in White* wine or Broth,
in ^its of the Stone and Gravel, and taken to prevent, etc.

Thorns. Genesis 3. 18. Exodus 22. 6. Number. 33. 55. Jos. 23. 13. Jud. 2. 3. and 8.
7. 2 Samuel 23. 6. 2 Chr. 33. 11. Job 5. 5. and 41. 2. Ps. 58. 9. and 118. 12.
Prove. 15. 9. and 22. 5. and 24. 31. and 41. 2. Eccl. 7. 6. Can. 2. 6. Is. 5. 6.
and 7. 19, 25. and 9. 18. and 10. 17. and 32. 13. and 33. 12. and 34. 13. and
55. 13. Ezekiel. 2. 6. and 28. 24 Hos. 10. 8. Mic. 7. 4. Nah. 1. 10. Mat. 7. 16.
and 13. 22. and 27. 29. 2 Cor. 12. 7. Heb. 6. 8.
N. K. D. P. Spina. Vepres* Virgultum. Jun. and Tr. Vulg. Spina. As the Spinous
Tribe of Herbs are many, so this of Shrubs and Bushes is very Numerous, as
Thorns, Brambles, Briars; which see before, Furze.

Haw-thorne or White-thorne, is called Spina acuta alba, or better,
Oxyacantaeus. The Blackthorne or Sloe-bush, is Prunus Sylvestris, or Spinus.
The Barberry-bush is Oxyacantha or Berberis, or uva Crespina. Ever green Thorn
is Pyracantha: Christ-Thorne, or Jews-Thorne, is Paliurus or Spina Judaica:
Buck-Thorne, or Purging-Thorne, is Spina Cervina, or Rhamnus: These are the
chief which grow wild, or propagated in some Gardens.

The Exotic Thorns Acacia (quasi acuta) Egyptia, or Egyptian Thorn, of which
the Acaeia in the Shops; but the Acacia Germanica is much used instead of it.

Goats-Thorne, Spina herci, or Tragagantha, from whence Gum-Tragacanth or
Dragon flows.

And Acacia Pontica, which yields us a sort of Arabic Gum, as the Egyptian*
Thorn also does; these are all Siliquous Plants, and described in the
Leguminous Class.

Virtues and Uses.
Mars, no doubt, has listed this armed and wounding Shrub, Haw-Thorne, for one
of his Soldiers: The Haws are a pulpy and mucilaginous Fruit, (only used in
Physic) are very Astringent, as is the whole Bush. The Haws and included
Stones are cried up in the Stone and Gravel, being dried and powdered, the
Stones become provokers of Vrin, being joined with the Acid Humors in our
Bodies, half an Ounce may be added to the Powder of Star-Thistle. The Powder
also of the Fruit, stop Laskes, Uterine Fluxes, and others.

This Shrub is not so much used in the Medicinal Art, as it is beneficial to
the Husbandmen, being esteemed the best for Fencing; it is raised by Seeds, or
young Plants, or Suckers, called Quick-S^tts in some Countries I know; this is
the speediest way, though the Seeds, if the place will admit it, is less
charge, requiring two Springs ere they come up, then after two or three Years;
do flourish to Admiration: The Pyracantha has the same Virtues, and yields a
strong and firm prickly Fence, and ever green Leaves; It is raised by the
bright Caralline Berries, which are found most part of the Winter on the Tree,
or by Suckers, or Slips: These Vegetables also yield delight and pleasure, as
well as Service to Men; for some make them into delightful Walks, and shear
them into Globes, and various forms, resembling Animals and Castles, and other
shapes, formed Art Topiaria, as it is to be seen at Brewood-Hall in this
County.

The Black-thorne is binding also, especially the Sloe-Plum, or Bullice, which
are frequently eaten about October when frosted; this Tree in its Bark and
Leaves is very rough, and somewhat bitterish in the Mouth, whence the Binding
quality, but the Fruit (which is but a wlid Plum) is austere and acid, (as all
unripe Plums are) and stop and bind the Belly more than Haws: This yields also
good Fencing Branches, and is raised as the White-Thorne.

Barberries and its Leaves are cold and dry as well as Sloes, the Berries being
Acid and Astringent: The Leaves season Meat, as Sorrel, being made into Sauce,
and helps hot Stomachs, and would be good Sauce for Jaundic'd people
Barberry-ba^k, a thing well known, being used much to cure the Jaundice, by the
Vulgar, is bitter, slimy and acrid, with a Purgency, by which it purges
Choler; if the Bark be steeped in Beer, and Sir J. F. says he tried it in a
Chollerick Person; And I know it usually opens the Body of those Country People
that take it for the Jaundice, and renders them Laxative: The Roots also are
excellent in the same case.

Jews-Thorne or Christs-Thorne, supposed to be that wherewith he was Crowned,
being now propagated with us, has the same Virtues as White-thorne; This is the
Rhamnus Tertius of Dioscorid.

It has been observed that Pears have been grafted on White thorn Stocks, and
have eaten not the harder; but let such as do so for want of Pearstocks, graft
very low, for otherwise the Thorn not growing proportionable to the Graft,
will cause the Graft to decay, being never able to grow thereon unto the
bigness usual in Pear Trees; There are almost infinite stories of strange
Conjunctions, as all Roses continue well and cement naturally upon Briars, as
one the Eglantine or Sweet-briar, and Dog-rose: Cherries on Plum-stocks, which
is Sir Hugh Platt's way, and Corins upon Gooseberries, as says Mr. Sharrock.

But there are some Stories of Conjunctions, which urge earnestly for credit,
some of Incision made upon Animal Bodies: The Lord of Pieresch had a Present
made him of a Plum-tree Branch, which bore Blossoms and Leaves, which sprung
from a Thorn, that grew in the Breast of a Shepherd, having got it by falling
on a Plumtree: Raw-silk has grown out on the Eye brow of a Lady, as Borellus
tells us, Observe. 10. Cent. 1. being drawn through the Flesh to stirch up the
lips of a Wound, and grow'd so fast as to be frequently ^ut. But enough of
this, if not too much.

In the Shops. Rob, (and Syrup) Prunellorum Sylvestrium of Sloes, in the form
of a Quiddeny, or Marmalade, but if it be inspissated highly, or more solidly
thickon'd, it is in Germany, and other places, Acacia Germanica, which is also
kept in Shops, and is a Sucoedaneum, to the true Acacia of the Ancients, which
is Acacia vera, and is a product of the Exotic Thorns, being an Ingredient
into Mithridate and Treacle: These are all Astringent greatly.

Rob, Syrup, and Troches of Barberries, which bind not so strongly as the
former, but are more pleasant, but the Conserve of Barberries is most in use,
which cools hot Stomachs, used in Fevours, Vomitings, Diarrhea's; and causes
an Appetite. These Robs, Syrups, Juices and Conserves, are not to be given to
costive Bodies.

Syrup of Purging Thorn, or Buck-thorne, called Sir. de Spina Cervina, or de
Rhamno Solutivo, or by Sir T. M. Syrupus Domesticus, or House-Wife's Syrup,
intimating its Usefulness and Harmlessness. This Syrup ought to be made in B.
M. as Sir J. F. well observos, (though too often otherwise) so you extract the
Virtue and Color in the Skin, gives it a Red Color, and purges very strongly
from one Spoonful to four. It gripes least if made of ripe Berries; The new
Syrup does purge very violent, and to be used with Caution, but it abates of
its strength after two or three Months. The Berries may be taken from Fifteen
to Thirty to purge; I knew a Country Fellow once swallowed Sixty, that purged
him so much as to weaken him, and was forced to use means to stop it: If they
be dried and powdered, it may be given from j. to ij. if in Decoction from
forty to sixty. Extract. Rhamui S. Closs. doss. gr. viij. in Jusculo.

Half an Ounce of the Syrup Acuates a purging Potion bravely, it is not to be
given in tender delicate Bodies, though the Berries are sweet at first, yet
presently after are bitter, rough, and Mucilaginous, counted hot and dry in the
20. are ripe in September. If any one is minded to take the Berries, they are
best boiled in fat Broth, with a little Salt. The Juice of the ripe Berries
boiled in Allom-water, colors a deep Green; the unripe, Yellow.

The Bark of this Thorn tastes much like the Berries, and may be put into
Diet-drinks, with Roots of Dwarf-Elder, and Orris, to purge, to which add
Daucus, Juniper Berries, and Wormwood, excellent for Hydropical Persons, as is
the Syrup: It is not found to grow in every County, so that the Apothecaries
are at some trouble to get the Berries.

Tree of Life. Genesis 2. 9. Prove. 3. 18. and 11. 30* and 13. 12. and 15. 4. Rev.
2. 7.
N. K. D. P. Abor vitae, Scientiae. Jun. and Tr. Thya Theophrast. vulg. Arbor
vitae. This is an Exotic Plant, Solar and Aromatical in the hottest Countries,
where it is a large Tree. It is now propagated with us by some curious
Botanists, and is increased by Layers and Slips, for its pleasant green Leaf,
being an ever Green, though the cold Winter make it dark and brown; I hear it
grows in Mr. Dent's Garden, an Apothecary in Cambridge: And there are six of
them in Trentham Gardens, (cut and pruned about the height of a Man) the Seat
of the Right Worshipful and Honorable Gen^. Sir I. Leveson Gower, one of our
well-deserving Burgesses in Parliament.

Virtues and Uses.
I shall not enter into a Disquisition, whether this be the Forbidden Tree, for
Expositors differ; old Authors say it is much like the Wild Cypress Tree, but is
more Oleous, Gumous, and Odoriferous, which demonstrates its Tenuity of parts.
It is, no doubt, hot and dry; Gerard says it is agreeable to the Nature of Man,
and an excellent Cordial, and of a pleasant Smell: Park. says it is Thoracical,
and our late and more Authentic Willis makes it Cephalical, and was used to
prescribe it to the Poorer sort in Convulsions, ordering the Leaves and Sugar,
each equal parts to be beaten to a Conserve, Dose ss. ad j. bis in die, with a
draught after it, as you may see under Rue.

Wisdom and Righteousness are compared to it, in some of the quoted places of
Scripture; And no doubt of greater Virtues, than as yet Experience has taught
us: For I found it bitterish, rough, acrid, Aromatical in Taste, much like the
Balsamum Gileadense, staying long upon the Tongue. It must needs be a great
Diuretic, and highly Balsamical, as the Balm of Gilead is.

Vine. Genesis 40. 9. and 49. 11. Deuteronomy. 32. 32. and 8. 8. Jud. 9. 12. 1 King. 4.
25. 2 King. 4. 39. and 18. 31. and 25. 12. 2 Chr. 26. 10. Job 15. 33. Psalm. 80.
8. and 128. 3. Can. 6. 11. and 7. 12. Isa. 5. 2. and 16. 18. and 24. 7. and 32.
12. and 61. 5. Ezekiel. 5. 2. and 17. 6, 8. and 19. 10. Hos. 10. 1. and 14. 17.
Joel 1. 7, 11. Mic. 4. 4. Nah. 2. 2. Zec. 3. 10. Mal. 3. 11. Matthew. 26. 29.
Joh. 15. 1. Jam. 3. 12. Rev. 14. 18.
N. K. D. P. Vitis. (...). Vulg. The Manured Vine is Vitis Vinefera. The Wild
Vine is Vitis Sylvestris: vel Labrusca, the Fruit, or a Grape is Racemus or
Vva: The Seeds Ar^lli: The Leaf Pam^inus: The dried Grapes, or Raisins of the
Sun, Passul^^ Solis, of which see before. The Stalk is Scapus Vvarum: The
Limpid Juice or Tears, which issue when Tapt in the Spring, are called Lacrym^e
Vitis: The Branches Sarmenta: The new pressed Juice, Mustum: Juice of unripe
Grapes, Omphacium.

I shall not stand particularly to denote the Names, the different sorts,
description and places of Vines, Grapes and Wines, there being variety both of
the Manured and Wild kinds, which produce Fruit and Wines, distinguished and
altered by their Names, Qualities, Properties, Color and Gust, according as
the Soil and Climate differ; for among all the Vegetables, that yield any
Liquor and Fruit for the Use of Man, the Vine claims the Precedence, being
esteemed by Ancient Philosophers, the King of this Vegetable Kingdom, as Man is
of the Animal, and Gold of the Mineral: And there are very few Countries in the
World, that do not enjoy the delicious Fruits of this most excellent Plant.

Vines are propagated by Stems, Cuttings, or Slips, and it is esteemed a great
defficiency, that they are no more propagated in this Island than they are;
many opine they would do well, if planted in Vineyards, as they do in France;
and some tell us of Vineyards in Norfolk, at Ely, and in Gloucester-shire,
heretofore: And Mr. Hartlib tells us of One at Great Chart, in the Wild of
Kent, that made six or eight H^gs-heads of Wine yearly.

No doubt our Grapes will afford good Wine, if they can be brought to such
Maturity, as some Years they do on House sides. But those annual Casualties,
and Inconveniences, that attend the Situation of a Vineyard, arising from the
Sun, Wind and Weather, are the Impediments and Discouragements; for any Wind in
the Summer Refrigerates, and prevents the Ripeness of the Grapes, which are
perfected by the Sunbeams, and accelerated by the warmth, richness, and
lightness of the Soil. But seeing we have not Convenience for, or will not have
Vineyards; it may prove a very considerable Advantage, says Mr. I. W. to Plant
Vines on the South East and West sides of our Houses, Barns and Walls, and by
good Culture and Pruning, they will yield a very considerable Increase: A well
Pruned Vine has produced several Bushels of Grapes, when the same neglected
has yielded very few.

The choice of Grapes is also very necessary; Mr. Hartlib commends the
Parsly-grape, the Rhenish-grape, the Paris-grape, and the small Muscadel, as
most suitable to our Climate; but the Curran-grape, or Cluster-grape, is both
the earliest and sweetest of Grapes, although the Clusters are but small: And
if we cannot make so good Wine as the Foreign is, yet it may be converted to
Vinegar, and prove of great Advantage. But Colonel Blunt and many others have
had good Vineyards here, of about two or three Acres of Ground, and sold many
Hogs-heads to the Vintners.

If all Gentlemen would have but as much Wine, as they might make off their own
Ground, to serve their Houses, they would not be so much beholding to France,
and other places as they are, and have so little thanks for it. And in making
the Wine, remember to pull out all the hard and unripe Grapes, and the green
Stalks of the Vine, before you press your Grapes, for it is that makes their
Wine so rough and unwholsom, and often sowers so soon; for here has been as
good Wine drank in England, of English Fruit, as ever came out of France, both
for small Wine like Champeigne, and a high Wine like Burgundy. Sir H.
Littleton, at Over-Arly, has made Wine so good, not to be distingush'd from the
best French-wines.

Virtues and Uses.
Astrologers give this useful and noble Plant to the Sun, and no doubt it has
great Influence over it, as appears by the gradual Exaltation, and
Depauperation of its Spirituous Juice, according to the degrees of Heat and
Cold, in all Countries its propagated and grows in. The Leaves and Tendrils are
acid and rough, do cool and bind, excellent in Lotions for hot Ulcers in the
Mouth, and in Drinks, and cooling Broths, against heat of the Stomach, Fluxes,
Vomitings, Bleedings: The Tears boiled with Sugar into a Syrup, is a Medicine
that an Eminent Midwife of this County gave to her Breeding Women, to stay
their Longings and Vomitings. The Tears also have Virtue to expel the Stone and
Gravel, and is a Cosinetick.

Sour Grapes, unripe, are cold and moist, acid, austere and rough; sweet and
ripe Grapes hot and moist; The Stones are drier and binding. My Lord Bacon
says Grapes will continue fresh and moist all the Winter long, if you hang
them Cluster by Cluster in the Roof of a warm Room, especially if when you
gather the Cluster, you take off with the Cluster some of the Stock. The
Cineres Clavellati, or Vine Ashes, i. e. of the Branches, Tendrils, and winding
Shoots burnt, are used in Lixiviums in the Stone and Dropsy, and to prepare
Caustic Medicines; also excellent to whiten black Teeth if rubbed therewith:
Its Virtues arise from the sixth Salt.

Wine Vinum, is made out of the sweet subacid Juice of the Ripe Grape, exalted
by Fermentation; the Acid is evident to sense, and an Oil produces the
Sweetness. The brisk Effervescence of Wines (which work without any additional
Ferments) owe their fermentative Motion, to the quick and inbred struglings of
their Native Acid and Sulphur: The Superfluity of which two Principles
complicated with a Volatile Salt, together with other Heterogeneous things, as
Scum, different sort of Fruit, etc. are by the Internal Agitation of all the
parts rejected and precipitated into that Form or Faces we call Tartar, or
Argal: The remaining essential Principles from a genuine Wresiling, compose an
equal Temper, and generous potable Liquor, sc. Wine.

The like may be said of all other fermentative Liquors, such as Ale,
Metheglin, R. Cider, Sugars dissolved in Waters, but some of those will not
easily Ferment per se, but require an additional Ferment, to excite their
implanted Acidum, and Sulphur, into that brisk Motion, which we call Working or
Fermentation.

Must is the pressed Juice, or a sweet Liquor, that sends no Vapors to the
Head to intoxicate, though one drinks never so much, it being fermented, it is
Wine: In the making of Whitewine, the Must of White Grapes is left to Ferment
all alone; but Claret must Ferment with the Faeces of the Grapes, whence it
comes to pass, that the Red is loaded with more Tartar than the White, and
remains longer in the Body after it is drank. Muscat and Spanish Wines, do not
endure such a Fermentation, until good part of the Phlegm is evaporated, either
by the heat of the Sun, or by Fire; and thence they become so glutinous, as
they are almost like a Syrup.

If the Effervescence of Wine proves too strong, by the additions of any
extraneous thing, as Mercury Sublimate, Suet, or any Exotic Sulphur, or
Re-imbition of its own Tartar; such a mighty fermentative Motion is called,
Fretting of Wines, which if not appeased, the Crasis of the Wine is in danger
of being perverted; and the Remedy is Racking it off, which precipitates the
asoresaid Tartarous Faeces, or extraneous Bodies, or those strong Frettings
often too much contracted and exalted by Carriage, are allayed by the Affusion
of plenty of Milk, Isinglass, or Starch: So on the contrary too depauperated or
flat Wines, from the depressed state of the Principles, are recovered by a
little Fermenting Wine, working upon its Lees, or by a well impregnated Tartar,
strong Lee, or fermental Syrup, composed of generous Wine, Sugar, and some
Aromaticks, as the Experienced Vintner thinks best: These Additaments, I say,
bring on a fresh Fermentation, and excite the native Acid and Sulphur into a
brisk and spirituous Effervescency.

But having a little Philosophically digressed, to demonstrate by what
Principles Wines and Spirits are made, exalted depressed and flatted, instead
of telling the Virtues, and what Wine is most proper for each Constitution;
(for Wine-drinkers can best inform themselves of that.)

I shall only say White-wines is best before Meals, for after it will be apt to
cause Oppilations and Stoppages. Claret nourishes and warmeth, and is the best
Stomach Wine, and is wholsomer with Meat, and for those that are Phlegmatic;
but for Men apt to Feed, White is the best: Sacks and Muscadines, and such
Cordial sweet Wines, do comfort a cold weak Stomach, and help Digestion.
Red-Wine is used only to stop Fluxes and Lasks, for it breeds the Stone and ill
Blood: Austere harsh Wine nourishes little, is not good for emaciated lean
Bodies: New Wines fwell and surfeit the Body.

In a word, Wines are best for cold and moist Constitutions for People in
Years, being prejudicial to Children and Youth, and to all Constitutions if
taken immoderately for then a Relaxation of the Nerves, Tremors, Palsies, Gout,
and other Maladies, which have their Origin from the Genus Nervosum, are the
products of it: Also it is a Procatarctick of the Scurvy, exalting the Sulphur
and Volatile Salts of the Blood, to febrile Ebullitions in some Bodies, and in
others over Topping, depressing and fixing them, by the previlency of the
innate Acid, preternaturally advanced, which begets Obstructions, etc.
especially daily loading the Stomach with Sack, proves much sooner fatal than a
longer and larger Use of French Wines.

For Sack contains much Oil and little Spirit, and French Wines the contrary;
hence our great Sack-drinkers are seldom long lived, for the warm Oil,
continuing some time upon their Stomachs, the preternatural Heat does by
degrees burn and prey upon their Vitals, whereas the Spirits in French Wines do
hastily pass off into the Blood, and a great part of them is soon evacuated by
Urine; the burning force of the remainder, in a short space equally distributed
through the body, and consequently is the less pernicious: The Truth of this
Discourse, observing Practitioners in Physic can attest, meeting often with
Patients who too often prove the same.

In the Shops. As there are several sorts of simple Wines, so there are many
Compound Wines, taking their Names either from some of the Ingredients, from
the Disease they are appropriated to, or from their chief Operation and
Virtues, and these many times are variously prescribed by the Physician,
answerable to the Indications of the Disease, or else are kept as standing
Nostrums and Arcana's in the Shops. Paracelsus called Wine, the Blood of the
Earth; The Juice of the Prince of all Vegetables: The Sovereign Cordial, and
dignified by others with the Title of Janus's Plant, and the great Lunaria of
Raymundus Lullius, as it is supposed.

Spirit of Wine is the greatest and most useful Preparations in the Shops, it
is sweet, very hot and purgent, the Oil gives its Sweetness, and a Volatile
Salt its hot Purgency.

The famous Willis in his Pharmaceutice Rat. Cap-Diureticor. shows how he
separated the Oil or Sulphurous parts by Distillation from Spirit of Wine, by
the Admixtion of a strong Spirit of Vitriol; This then more over-proves a
Sulphur or Oil in Wines; And the feculent Tartar proves the Acidum.

And Sir I. F. says the Sulphur, Acidum, and Volatile Salt, united in Spirit
of Wine, are much of the nature of a dissolved Raisin; and by reason of its
Raisinous Composition is agreeable to the Red part of the Blood, and is a
familiar Specisick, to supply its defect, and excite its brisk Motion, whereby
its cordial, refreshing, supplying new Spirits by its similitude of Texture.

But every Chemical Laboratory, or true Shop of a good and expert Apothecary
ought to be furnished with store of very subtle and more highly exalted Sp.
Vini, called Alcohol Vini, which is nothing else but the above said Spirit,
most pure and highly rectified and divested of all Phlegm. This is that most
subtle and incorruptible Essence, by Chemical Authors, couched under so many
lofty Titles, and strange mistical Names, as Burning Water, Heavenly Sulphur,
Bezoartick Sulphur, Celestial Menstruum, the Philosophers Key, the Volatile
Balsom of the Catholic Liquor; an Etherial Body consisting of Fire and Water;
the Quintessence of Wine, and Pyroenus, or burning Wine, by Dr. Bates: And
these Names show it was a great Polychrestick, and much prized: Brandy, that is
true, is a Spirit of Wine loaded with Phlegm, (as Spirit of Wine is now, by the
best Chemical Operators drawn from Brandy) that does rise first in the
Distillation, carrying Phlegm good store with it. If it take Fire with a few
Grains of Gunpowder in a Spoon, and consume even to the Flagration and
Explosion of the Gunpowder, it comes near a Spirit of Wine, (which should do
so, if well rectified) but the more moisture is left when your flame goes out,
the more Weak and Phlegmatic is your Brandy.

It is the best Succedaneum to Sp. of Wine, and too often is used in its stead,
by the Pharmacal Artist; it is the best of all the hot Waters, that are
vulgarly sold in the Shops, if moderately taken, and is like a Sword or Dagger,
often fatal in the hands of a Fool, and all intemperate Men; for it ought (as
also all other Strong Water and Spirits) to be used by the most Sober and
Understanding Men, with great Caution and Circumspection; every Month produces
sad and fatal Instances of its daggering force, suffocating some, as suddenly
as a Halter, and consuming others in scorching fevourish Flames, whilst others
are Calcining (as it were) by degrees to Ashes; The natural Tone of the Stomach
being by a frequent Use of it depraved and perverted, and the Liver and Viscera
so parboiled, that no other strong Liquor, or rich Cordial, whatsoever can warm
the Stomach and Spirits of such Men: And of such mortiferous and deplorable
Effects, occasioned by this excellent, yet dangerous Liquor; I could produce
several Observations, and some within Memory, but respects to the Persons, and
their Friends, does stop my Pen; yet I hope this Hint will not altogether be
disregarded by some, nor unwelcom to the Public.

Tartar (another product of Wine) is found sticking to Casks, like a very hard
Stone, sometimes white and sometimes red as the Wine is it comes from, and is
the Lees of Wine indurated, as the Lees is but a liquesied Tartar: When Must
is newly drawn from the Grape it is a true Chaos, in the Fermentation, the
aqueous, earthy, and other adventitious Impurities and saline parts of it are
precipitated into Tartar, which is an essential, permanent and incorruptible
Salt in its self, being of very rare and remarkable Virtues and Uses, arising
from its Acid Salt and Sulphur, or Oil, which it possesses abundantly: The
whitest Tartar is the best, the red being serviceable to Goldsmiths, Dyers,
etc. The Liquid Lees of Wine are calcined to Ashes, and called also Cineres
Clavellati, in English gravelled Ashes.

Crystals, or Crem of Tartar, (ought to be made from the best white Tartar,
compacted, chrystalline, and weighty, which comes from Germany) is Tartar
purified by Decoction, Filtration and Evaporation, and then coagulated in form
of Crystals. But our common Cream of Tartar is adulterated and sophisticated,
by a false crew of Chemical Distillers, with Allom, which is quite contrary in
its Virtues to it; Of this you may see more in Riverius, prax. Med. lib. 11.
cap. 3. Therefore I do always use the best Crude Tartar, except I know the Shop
I prescribe to, do prepare the Crem faithfully, or buy it at the Apothecary's
Laboratory, truly prepared (unless we'll suspect the Public Faith) where they
may have it at about 3 s. the pound, but the Druggists (who generally buy them
of those accursed and cheating Pseudo-Chymists, and counterfeiting Distillers)
sell them at 16 d. the pound and under; and the Crude Tartar for 6 d.: so it
appears, the Allom which shoots all into Crystals, yields the ill gotten Game,
to that wicked distilling Tribe.

Salt of Tartar, and of other Preparations made from this Polychrestick
Vegetable the Vine, I may have occasion to speak of hereafter; but the Spirit
of Wine Tartarised is the Alcohol acuated, with some Portion of its own Salt of
Tartar, by Digestion and distillation, (not by a bare Infusion or Dissolution,
as some ignorant Apoth. do think) and is above all others the most excellent
Menstruum for the Extraction of Tinctures, out of Animals, Vegetables, and
Minerals, and to prepare Extracts, whether from Catharticks or Alteratives.

But a little to digress: The Separation of the Spirits and parts of Wine in
our Bodies, much resemble Distillation: The Volatile parts by the heat of the
Viscera, and Agitation of the Spirits, ascend to the Brain and Heart, which
invigorates and accelerates their Motion, elixirating the Animal Spirits, even
to a certain Gaiety and Floridness of Mind, which helps us to many fresh,
nimble and excellent Thoughts, and consequently we do vent many eloquent and
ingenious, and sententious Expressions, as being in the height of Mirth and
Joy. But tho the Functions and Faculties of the Body and Soul, are exhilarated
by Wine (and other Liquors) moderately taken; so on the contrary if
immoderately followed, the Tartarous parts of the Wine, after the Assention of
the Volatile, do fix Humors about the Hypochondriack Regions, and beget
Melancholy, as some to pass away their Melancholy Dumps, have been debauched
with Wine and other Liquors, but afterward it evidently appears to others, as
well as themselves to be augmented: But in those who excessively drink Wine to
a high degree, in a short space of time, that play the Good Fellow, as they
call it, for a Night; the largest Portion of the Spirituous Particles
abundantly ascend and circulate in the small Cavities of the Brain, with so
great Celerity, that all the Animal Functions are confounded; then Objects
appear double, and of various Colors and the Walls of the Room seem to look
after another Situation and Form. And I think this is that called Drunkenness;
and then it is time to fall a sleep, though such long and profound sleeps follow
not upon drinking of Wine, as they do of Ale and other Liquors, because the
Spirit of such Liquors (is not so Volatile, but) carries a more viscous Phlegm
into the Brain, requiring a longer time to pass through the Pores, and in the
disingaging it self.

But in a word, I conceive Brandy, especially the ordinary, and other
Phlegmatic Spirits, will do a great deal more hurt, and inflame more than duly
rectified Spirit of Wine; because our Vitals greedily embracing the noble
Spirit in the Brandy, draws into its curious Recesses upon the Wings thereof:
Foulness and Lavid Phlegm, wherewith Brandy abounds, which grates afterward
and disturbs the Vitals.

Wheat. Ex. 9. 23. and 29. 2. Number. 18. 12. Deuteronomy. 8. 8. and 32. 14. Jud. 6. 11.
2 Samuel 17. 28. Chr. 27. 5. Ezr. 6. 9. Job 31. 40. Ps. 81. 16. Is. 28. 25. Jer.
31. 12. Joel 2. 24. Mat. 3. 12. Luke 22. 31. Act. 27. 38. 1 Cor. 15. 37. Rev.
6. 6.
N. K. D. P. Triticum. Firumentum. Jun. and Tr. Vulg. Triticum: (...). Wheat is
propagated for the Sustenance of Man in most inhabited places of the World, and
does differ in its growth, form, and names, according to different Soyls and
^lymes: Indian Wheat is called Maiz: Buck, or French Wheat, manured in these
Northern-parts, and here in the Morelands, is O^ymum Cereale sive Tragopyrum.
The Dutch Names are Bock-weydt, and Buckenweydt, double Eared Wheat is Triticum
Multiplex: Poland Wheat is Triticum Polonicum: Wheat-Barly, or bare Barley is
Tritico-speltum.

But our English Husbandmen do (in the several Countries) propagate several
sorts, as White-wheat, as well the Spike, as the Grain is white, called
Triticum spica mutica album siligo. (...) gr^^. Red-Wheat, called Kentish Wheat
in some places, is spica mutica Rubrum, of which Mr. Ray makes three sorts;
Gray-Wheat, Duck-bill, or Gray-pollard, is the Triticum aristis Circumvallatum
glumis hirsutis, with other sorts, best known to the Husbandman.

The best Wheat is reckoned to grow in the Vales of Eveshain and White-horse;
but I think there is as good in some places in other Counties, as Rive^wheat,
Flaxen-wheat, Bearded-wheat, which suffers not by Mildew, because the Beard
thereof is a defense to preserve it from Deu^. Many of the several names of
Wheat, may probable be the same sorts, as Countries differ in Names. As to the
Sowing of this Grain, and differences of their Culture, I shall leave to the
expert Husbandman.

Virtues and Uses.
I need not spend time to set out the Uses and Virtues of this common and
useful Vegetable, which is the wholsomest Grain in Europe, and the most general
Grain used here in England for Bread, the Staff of Man's Life; although it be
not unfit for the most of the Uses the other Grains are fit for.

Astrological Practitioners differ about it, some give it to Venus, others with
more Reason to the Sun. It is hot in the 1o. degrees. not manifestly drying nor
moistning, says Galen; it tastes sweet and slimy, and when brought into Meal
its Principles are unaltered: But Leaven is Salt and Sower, by the addition of
Salt and long keeping, and by the Fermentation of the Oil and Acid, (the
Principles in Meal of Barley as well as Wheat) the sliminess, which is a more
fixed Oil, is attenuated, the Oil rarefied, and the Acid set at liberty, and so
are dissolved in the Mashing Vate, or huff and swell the Dough in the making of
Bread; for contraries work one with another, and cause a heat, which makes the
mixture swell and ferment, when put into fresh Dough, or in Liquor, (stopped
close up in a Barrel before Fermentation ceases (or too new in Bottles) it will
burst the Vessel in pieces, and make a way out.

Hence it appears, how Bread being fermented and baked, becomes the chiefest of
Nourishment, and virtuous and wholesome; but Grain or the Flower thereof eaten,
crude and raw, procures Diseases; for Fermentation is but, as it were, Natures
violent Decoction, in order to Separation, and ripening things for the use and
benefit of us weak unleavened mutable Mortals, who shall never be perfect nor
ripe in this Life. A little Leaven leaveneth the whole Lump, but Tares and
Darnel choke and vitiate the best and most perfect Grain.

Wheat Flour draws (mixed with a little Honey) and heals any Bile or
swelling: The Oil pressed from Wheat, between two hot Iron Plates, kills
Tetters and Ring-worms, and beautifies the Skin; the Flower in Small-beer, is
good to stop over-flowings of the Blood, and other Hemorrhages and Fluxes.
Leaven draws greatly.

Bran, being the outward Coat or Skin, of this most useful Grain, is more
cooling and drying, good in Decoctions, Baths and Pultisies, in hot Swellings,
Ruptures, swollen Breasts, and steeped in Vinegar, excellent to rub off
Morphew, Scurf, and in the Leprosy; a little thereof boiled in our ordinary
Beer, makes it mantle or flower in the Cup, when it is poured out, smiles at
you, as it is vulgarly termed: And the best Beer to keep (so called from the
French word Boire, and has been celebrated by the name of La bonne Biere
d'Angleterre, in France, Belgium, Germany;) being that we call March and
October Beer) was formerly brewed with a 4th part of Wheat added to the Malt,
which shows what a rich Spirit this most nourishing Grain is endowed with,
especially when so much remains in the courser part of it, Bran.

Poland is said to have so abounded with Wheat, that the Land, by one ploughing
bears three Years together, in the Province of Podolia, the Countryman shaking
out a little of the Corn as he Reaps it upon the Earth, at the end of the first
and second Years: Certainly it was very plentiful in England also, A. D. 1287.
when it was sold at sixteen pence and twelve pence the Quarter, as Stow tells
us. Starch is made of musty and unwholsom Wheat.

Triticum Multiplex, or double-ear'd Wheat, has been manured here at
Rowley-Regis in this County; and the French or Buck Wheat, (not that it is like
Wheat in the growth or Grain, but rather called so, because it serves the
meaner sort of People to make Bread, in those parts where it is sown, as it is
in the barren Land of this County, being sown alone, or with Barley) is sweetish
as Sugar, and vended in the Markets, at about eighteen pence a Measure; they
make Cakes of it in these parts, as they do Oat-cakes, and call it Crumpit; or
if they mix it with Barley and Rye, they can the better make Loaves of it to
Bake. In Germany and Italy the ordinary People feed in diverse places only upon
this, and yet are strong and hardy, though it yields not so much Nourishment as
Wheat, Rye, or Barley, but it digests easily, and fattens quickly, especially
Cattle and Poultry, which will suffocate with their own Fat, if not speedily
killed.

In the Shops. Emplastrum e Crusia Panis; or the Plaster of the Crust of
Bread. It strengthens the Brain in Head Plasters, stops Vomitings,
Loosenesses, and excellent in Ruptures, and any case that requires Binding.

Every Petticoat Docteress can make a Pultiss of White-bread Crumbs, Mallows and
Milk boiled, to give ease and mollify any painful Swelling. Also most know how
to boil the Flower of Wheat, tied hard up in a Linen Cloth in Water, then to
make Paps or Stirpudding with that Flower, to stop Loosenesses, spitting of
Blood, and other Fluxes, if so ordered; binds strongly. And I advise the
Midwives and good Women to Bake, (or set it in a warm Oven after the Batch is
drawn) the Flower in a Steanpot, before they mix it with Milk for Infants, for
the crude, slimy, moist quality of the raw Flower, gives Gripes greatly to
Children, and is not wholesome for them. Bran is good in Clisters in erosions
and gripings of the Bowels: Thus this most Nutritious Vegetable, heals, as well
as nourishes us, for God in the Work of Creation, did in a manner open and
explicate Himself as in a Book, in which he has left his Picture drawn in most
beautiful and visible Characters, as if God had lodged and placed Himself
amongst the Beings or Created Substances, that* they may the better partake of
his Goodness.

Willow. Lev. 23. 40. Job 40. 22. Ps. 137. 2. Is. 15. 7. and 44. 4. Ezekiel. 17. 5.
N. K. D. P. Salix. (...). Salix a Salio, quod celeriter saliat. i. e.
Velociter crescat. This is one of the Vimineous Family belonging to the
Aquatical Class of Vegetables, as Sally, Osier, Withy; These are divided and
reckoned by about half a Score different Names, as

The common White Willow is Salix Vulgaris; The Red Willow is Vulgaris Rubens;
Sallow, is Salix Latifolia; Dwarf Willow is Salix Pumila Angustifolia; The
Osier is Salix Folio Longissimo; Sweet Willow is Salix Odorata, having a
fragrant Smell; Bay-leav'd Willow is Salix Folio Laureo, sive Aemydalino, and
Smells like Laurel. Sweet Willow comes near to Sweet Gaul, or Dutch Myrtle:
These Aquatick Trees, are well known to the Country Planter and Botanists,
delighting in moist places, and by Watercourse, as the Prophet Isa. has it.

The Withy is a large Tree, growing best on high Banks, because the Roots are
extended deeper than either Sally or Willows: Sallies grow the faster, if
planted within the reach of the Water: Osiers are smaller, shorter lived,
require constant moisture. These Trees are raised by the Poles, Branches and
Twigs, thrust down and set in the Ground, as Poplar is.

Mr. Ray says, That Misletoe, will grow on Willow, Nut, Elm, Lyme-Tree, and
others* besides those, it is commonly found on, as the Crab, Apple, Hawthorne,
and sometimes on Oak; it may be tried* (as the very Ingenious and Worthy
Person. Mr. George Pla^ston informed me, at Trentham). whilst I was writing on
this Subject, the Willow, by rubbing well the Bark of a Bough, with a course
Cloth, or Hair-cloth, then bruising and rubbing the Berries of Misletoe on the
place; for so a Neighbor of his in Shrop shire, has often made it to grow: It
may do well to be tried on Oak, which renders Misletoe so famous and virtuous.

Virtues and Uses.
If I forget not, the Astrologers place it under the Moon, who is cold and
moist, but the Leaves Flowers, Juice, Bark and Catkins, are reckoned cold and
dry in the 2o. and very Astringent, they are all rough and bitterish in Taste,
very seldom used in Medicines, but old Herbals say it stops spitting of Blood,
and other Fluxes.

The green Boughs may with great benefit be brought into the Chambers of
Fevourish and Aguish Patients, whereby the hot Air is fanned, and they cooled
thereby. Pliny says, that certain Matrons among the Athenians, desirous to
live chaste, did take the Salix Marina, Leaves, or Vitex, sive Agnus Castus, or
the Chaste-Tree, to Bed with them.

Willow comes near it in that Property, and hence that Custom arose, that He
which is deprived of his Love must wear a Willow-Garland, which Custom still
continues in some places; though now it is adorned with variety of Flowers and
Ribands about the Garland, perhaps of a quite contrary Nature to the
Chaste-Tree or Willow; the Ends and Uses of which were honest and
well-design'd: But such is the depravedness of our Natures, that we forsake
good Customs, and strike in with others, (more beautiful to the Eye) though
more pernicious and opposite to the first designed Ends.

Not that I would be thought to magnify this Terraqueous Plant, as a certain
and infallible Rod, to whip away all unchaste and wanton Inclinations, by
wasting* depraving, or extinguishing the primordial seminal Substance, or (to
speak like a Paracelsian) the Microcosmical Archeus; but hereby you may know I
do (though our Shops afford no Preparations of it) look upon the Decoction or
Infusion of Willow-leaves, as also the Troches of Agnus Cast^s, as they are set
down by the Honorable College of Physicians in their London Dispensatory, to
be excellent in the Gondrrh^a simplex vel v^rulens, and other Fluxes seasonably
used, and good Companions for such as resolve on a single Life: Dose of the
Troches may be from one Scruple to two, daily, in Conserve of Roses, drinking
after it a draught of the Infusion or Decoction of Willowleaves in small Ale.

These Aquatick Trees yield a clean and white Wood, fit for many Uses, like
unto Poplar; also the Gardiners have Poles, Binders, etc. from them: They may
be Set in February, and so on till they Bud. The Osier is much used, and
greatly serviceable to Basket-makers, Fishermen, and others. No Tree more
profitable than some of the Aquaticks, (according to the nature of the place)
being planted on the margin of Rivers, borders of Meadows, and wet Lands,
yielding a considerable Head, and and ready for to be cropped in a few Years for
Fuel, and the Wood makes good Char-Coal: Mr. Evelin does tell us that a
Gentleman Topped no less than Two Thousand yearly, all of his own Planting.

To conclude, the Ancient Britains had these flexible Trees in great
Estimation, for they made made* slight Boats of them, whereof thus the Poet:

Primum cana Salix, madefacto vimine Parvam Texitur in puppim, etc. Thus
rendered to my hand;

The moistened Osier of the hoary Willow
Is woven first into a little Boat,
Then clothed in Bullocks Hides, upon the Billow
Of a proud River, lightly does it float.
And how much smallest Twigs of it are in Request with our Fisher men,
belonging to our Inland Rivers, to make their Willns and Pocheons; I need not
stand to demonstrate, only I observe the weakest Twig as well as the stronger
Angling-Rod, makes good the old Phrase, Fallere* piscem vimine.

Worm Wood. Deuteronomy. 29. 18. Ps. 5. 4. Jer. 9. 15* and 23. 15. Lam. 3. 15. Am. 5.
7. Rev. 8. 11.
N. K D. P. Absinthium. Gr. and Lat. There is a Confusion in Ancient Herbals,
about Wormwood, Southernwood, Lavender, etc. but I shall only speak to the
Three most common sorts.

Common Wormwood, is called Absinthium commune: Roman Wormwood, is called
Absinthium Romanum: Sea Wormwood, is called Seriphium, also Santonicum by some,
which naturally grows on the Sea coasts; These are propagated by Seed, Stems,
and Slips, in many Physic Gardens, and others. Santonicum seu Sementina, is
Holy Wormwood, an Exotic Plant, which yields the Wormseed in the Shops:
Schroder says it is brought from Alexandria, and some Wormseed is gathered from
the Sea Wormwood also; and why not the Seeds of our own Wormwood the best for
our Childrens Bodies, which may be gathered in August: The best time for the
Alesellers to gather the Herd to dry, for to make Wormwood-drink and Purl in
the ensuing Winter.

Virtues and Uses.
All the Astrological Artists have listed Wormwood under the Valiant Mars, to
whom a Pint of Purl would be welcome (if Incampt) in Winter. It is said to be
hot in the 2o. and dry in the 3o. degrees.

Our ancient Phytologists, and most of our modern little Herbarists, have, with
the bare beholding the outward Elegancies of Plants, given us a confused heap
of Internal Properties and pretended Virtues of them, before they had
distinguished and laid down their Essential Principles, and constituent Parts,
by an Investigation of them, built on Experiment and the common Notions of
Sense, which ^re prolifick, but Fancy and Imagination are barren: Thus
abundance of Faculties and Virtues, (omitting the hurtful Properties) have been
attributed in our common Herbals unto this Plant, and most other common Herbs,
yea many more than are true, for such Medicinal Faculties, as they are cried up
to have and exert, are not the genuine Effects, nor Rational Productions of the
Essential Principles of the Extolled Plant.

And now drawing near to a Conclusion of this Herbal, I desire any Reader, who
expected more Virtues, as is usual to be ascribed to each Plant, to take the
Substance of the above said lines, for the reason their Expectations are not
answered; omitting therefore the false crowd of Virtues commonly given to
Wormwood; I shall only give you those that are rationally founded on its
Principles, and the Testimony of our Senses and Experience, as I have
endeavored all along in this Work.

Ever since I tasted the Roots of wormwood, according to Dr. Grew, I found a
Transition and descent of the Heat, from the tip of my Tongue to the Throat,
Gullet, and seemingly to the Stomach it self, without swallowing any Juice, and
this done several times; they are not bitter, but hot and sweet, (as those
Plants are which have bitter Stalks and Leaves, (i. e. the Leaves of all sweet
Roots are bitter) and some what of an odorous Balsami^k Gust, for that exact
Person says there is a Turpentine in them. Now these Tastes of it discover in
it an Acid Salt, smoothed by a light proportion of Sulphur. And so its Virtues
are to provoke Urine, discuss Wind, and to fortify the Stomach; it justly
deserving (as I have often of late experien'd it) to be ranked with the most
excellent Stomachicks* (as the said Doctor opined) offended not the Head and
Eyes, as the Leaves and Wormwood-drink do.

By the bitter and acrid Taste of the Leaves, (arising from a Sulph^r, well
impregnated with an Alkaline Salt, shackled with Earth) it clea^seth and
strengthens both the Retentive and Expulsive Faculty of the Stomach* (having
an Astringenoy in i^* as all strong bitters have, says the Doctor) resisting
Surfeiting and Putrefaction* and assisting D^g^^^ion, opening Obstructions, and
provoking Urine* therefore so good in Dropsies, Jaundice, Virgi^^ Dis^as^*
Vomitings, Chollick, cleansing the ^^ins and Bla^der, kills Worms, and is good
in long Tertia^s, by rectifying the Acidities in the C^olleri^k* Blood, says
(...) ^. ^. But it offends the Head and Eyes, pro^^^^g Headache, Drowsiness, not
to be used in Cephalic Distempers; wherefore, as also because of the nauseous
Taste and strong Hogo, which cannot be endured by some Persons in their Nose and
Palate; I am wont to use the Roman wood, and the Roots (as I told you above) of
the common sort, being more pleasant, less earthy and crude in Infusions,
Decoctions, and Conserve, bitter Draughts, etc.

Outwardly, Wormwood-leaves discuss Tumors and Wind, particularly in the
Squinsie and swelling of the Throat and Almonds: It is good by beating the
Leaves up to a Pultiss, with Hog's Grease, and so applied warm.

Riverius in his Cap. de dolor ventriculi and de inapetentia, as also in his
Observations, made his bitter Draughts only with Wormwood, Centaury and
Agrimony, (from whom, no doubt, our common bitter Draughts had their rise)
which deserves equal Praise and Commendation, with the now more compounded
bitter Draughts, that Ladies and Practitioners do abound with: And if my good
Word for Riverius's Drink does dissatisfie any, that fondly over dotes on their
refined and exalted Panacea, or more compounded Draughts, or is matter of
Derision to those, who please their Fancies in the large Prescription of a
jumbled. Nostrum, pertaking more of Art than Goodness; it shall not trouble me.

Not that I hereby explode all Compositions, as fallacious and unnecessary to
use, but would insinuate that plain and less compounded Medicaments, have of
old, and still will prove, singularly good in the (...) of diverse Maladies; and
therefore those cast by (...) Lot, in the midst of a poor Rural Practice, may
(leaving others to their fanciful Inventions) help their poor Patients in most
Diseases, more suddenly, safely, and less costly, which will make ^^ pleasant,

In the Shops. The dry Herb. 2ly, The simple Water. 3ly, The Syrup of Wormwood
simple. 4ly, The Compound Syrup. 5ly, The Water and Spirit the less Compound.
6ly, The Water and Spirit the greater Composition. 7ly, The Conserve of the
Leaves, both of common Wormwood, and Roman. 8ly, The Inspissated Juice, or the
Extract. 9ly, The fixed Lixivial Salt. 10ly, Troches of Wormwood. 11. The Oil
of Wormwood, by Infusion and Decoction. 12. The Chemical Oil. 13. Wormseed. 14.
The Ashes, of which see Willis in Cap. de Anasarca. 15. Vinum Absinthites, or
Wormwood Wine, by Infusion in White Wind, or Rhenish.

The Oil of Wormwood by Decoction, Oil of Quinces, and Oil of Mastich, are
reckoned by Authors the three Stomach Oils, for outward Use, to strengthen the
Stomach in Vomitings, etc. Two or three drops of the Chemical Oil, is
convenient in a Dose of Stomach Pills, in crapulent Cases, and after a drunken
Debauch, to prevent Surfeiting, by cleansing the Stomach of filth and Ill
Humors.

Salt of Wormwood; a thing in general Vogue and Use, as being more Excellent in
all the aforesaid Cases, that the Wormwoods are appropriated to, for it is more
digestive, aperient, and diueretick; and is used much in Intermitting Fevours
and Agues. As for the decision of that point, which some have long differed in
Judgment about Sc. Whether there is any Difference or not, between the several
Lixivial Salts of Plants. The great Vegetable Anatomist D. G. affirms there is,
though many Learned Men have thought otherwise, for proof whereof take his own
Words, in Lect. 4o. Cap. 2.

Either there is a difference, or not; if not, it should be proved; and if
there is, it should then be justly stated, what that difference is, for the
doing of which I chose this Method. I took an equal quantity of the whitest and
purest Salts of diverse Plants, all made by an equal degree of Calcination; and
dissolved them all severally in an equal quantity of Water: And pouring
likewise an equal quantity, as about ten or twelve drops of each into a Spoon,
I tasted them severally; whereby it was evident, that they were not all of one
Taste, but of very different ones, both as to strength and kind; and therefore
different in nature also. The Salts I made trial of were those of Sorrel,
Anise, Wormwood, Mallow, Ash, Tartar, and others: And upon half a dram of each
I poured ijss of Water. The Solutions are here present to be tasted; by which
the differences will easily be observed, and particularly that of the Salt of
Wormwood, or Scurvy Grass, is almost as strong again as the Salt of Anise, or
Sorrel: And that the Salt of Ash is above twice as strong, and that of Tartar
above thrice as strong as that of Sorrel, and almost thrice as strong as that
of Wormwood or Sourvy-grass. So that He, who shall give half a Scruple, suppose
of Salt of Tartar, instead of half a Scruple of Salt of Wormwood, or other like
Salt, he may as as well give a Scruple of Rosin of Jalap, for a Scruple of the
Powder, or almost three drams of Rhubarb, or other like Purge instead of one.
And the like is to be said of other Lixivial Salts in their degrees. Moreover
He demonstrates a facile Method of producing an Essential Salt, (or Vegetable
Nitre of Plants) as also a Marin^ Salt, out of the Lixivial Salt of a Plant,
being different Productions of the same.

Wormwood-Beer, and Drink boiled with Broom, Centaury, Sage, Linge, and other
Plants, instead of Hops; I have often recommended in the preceding Tract: But
to answer the great Objection, That these Herbs will make it too bitter; you
must learn to know the Quality of the Plant, or Plants you use, as to Taste and
Virtues; for instance, one handful of Wormwood goes farther than three or four
of other Herbs, especially in August or September, when it is fully ripe and
seeded; for therein consists the most active Oil, Principles and Virtues of it.
Now to abate the sweetness of the Malt, being the Design; take such a small
quantity, as will only mitigate that, and not let the bitterness prevail, and
so by often trial you may adjust some certain handfuls or weight to be your
standing Rule in Brewing, with any Herbs; but these things, especially in some
great Towns, where there are various sorts of Vegetable Ales, are well known,
and not so much as thought on by our Ale-dames in others: It is to no purpose
for me to direct in what Constitutions and Habits of Body, the several potable
Liquors that now are, and may be Brewed, are proper and salutiserous; guessing
if I should, that few Men, nay nor Women neither, would take their Measures and
Customs in Drinking, from what I could say: for the general part of Mankind,
not only in these Northern, but also in other parts of the World, are such
Slaves to their Palats and Pots, that instead of using these Liquors, which God
has liberally given us for the Health and Nourishment of our crazy Bodies, we
make them the Causes of most Distempers and Diseases: And that by a modish and
sociable manner of Drinking, too much known and followed, and soon learnt in
these days.

For he transacts no weighty Affair thoroughly, nor is regarded, but despised by
Men, that cannot, nor will not be subject to the Drinking Humors, especially
of the great ones: Insomuch it is one of the most difficult things in this
World, for a Man to drive a Trade, and reap a Livelihood, especially by a
popular Employment, and keep a safe Conscience withal.

Nor must we expect, that these Plants contained in the Sacred Word of God,
will be any Blessings unto us, whether Patient or Physician, if we do not
follow the Holy Rules, and Practice according to the Word, that has prescribed
them: To which Eternal Word alone, which did perfect All things by once
Speaking, be dedicated all Honor and Contemplation, and given all practical
Obedience, sincere and pure Devotion, for ever and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
An Alphabetical TABLE, Showing what Plants, (besides those mentioned in the
Sacred BIBLE) as also some of the Diseases, Medicines, and other Matters that
are contained and chiefly discoursed of in this Book.
A.
A Bele-tree: read under Poplar. Advice to patients, r. Lillies. After birth,
r. Juniper, Calamint, Afterpains, r. Bay Tree. Akerns, r. Oak. Ale, r. Barley.
Almond Cawdle, r. Cinnamon. Antictericum Gesneri, r. Nettles. Archangel, r.
Nettles. Ark, r Gophir Wood. Aspe-tree, r. Poplar. Asthma, r. Onions, Saffron.
B.
Balsom of Angelica, r. Sweet-Cane. Balaustius, read under Pomgranat.
Barberries, r. Thorns. Bast-ropes, r. Teyl-tree. Beer, r. Barley. B^rch, r.
Mallows. Birch-wine, r. Sycomoretree. Bitter-Apple, r. Gourds. Biting of Mad
dogs, r. Flags. Blood stop, r. Ash, Nettles. Blackberry-wine, r. Bramble. Bran,
r. Wheat. Brandy, r. Vine. Breath short, r. Onion. Broom, r. Pine, Wormwood.
Bruises, r. Rue. Burns, r. Thorne-Apples, Onions. Buckthorne, r. Thorns.
Bowls Secret, r. Hemlock.
C.
Calamint, r. under Mint. Candle-rush, r. Rush. Camels-hair, r. Rush.
Carthamus, r. Saffron. Chincough, r. Garlic. Chives, r. Leeks. Chollick, r.
Oak, Rue, Bay. Christ-thorne, r. Thorns. Chermes, r. Oak. Cicutaria vulgar, r.
Hemlock. Cider, r. Apples. Cicers, r. Pulse. Coconuts, r. Nuts. Colds in
Infants, r. Nuts. Coloquintida, r. Gourds. Consumption, r. Tar-pills, Mint.
Cough, r. Onions. Conjunction of Plants, r. Thorns, Ash. Cooked Dish, r.
Mallows. Cork-Oak, r. Oak. Convulsions, r. Rue, Teyl-Tree. Corans, r. Raisins.
Crem of Tartar, r. Vine. Cosmetick ball. r. Almond. Charity in Drs. r. Briar.
Celsus's Council, r. Hysop.
D.
Damask Powder, r. Flags. Date, r. under Palms. Dead Child, r. Calamint.
Deaths, r. Mandrakes. Ducks-meat, r. Lentils. Drunkenness, r. Wine.
E.
Earth-Nuts, read under Nuts. Elaterium, r. Cucumers. Electuary in Coughs and
in Consumption, r. Anise. -- in Palsy, r. Mustard. Embalming, r. Cedar.
Extract Coloquint. r. Gourds. Ever-greens, r. Myrtle. Elm large, r. Elm. Eyes
sore, r. Hemlock.
F.
Fasters, r. Bull-rush. Fermentation, r. Wheat, Barley and Wine. Fevers, read
Rue. Filbeard, r. Hasel-tree. Fistick Nuts, r. Nuts. Fodder, r. Poplar, Elm,
French-Mallows, r. Mallows. French-Wheat, r. Wheat.
G.
Gauls, r. under Oak. Gonorrhea, r. Willow. Gout, r. Garlic, Hemlock.
Goats-Rue, r. Rue. Gratiola, r. Hysop. (...)-boards, r. Elm. Gum Tragacant. r.
thorns. Gum Arabic, r. Thorns.
H.
H^^r-falling, read under Teyl tree. Hair Powder, r. Flags. Heath, r. Pine.
Hermodactils, r. Saffron. H^morr^ages, r. Ash, N^ttles, Wheat. Hemorrhoids, r.
Leeks. Hedge-Mustard, r. Mustard. Hedge-Hysop, r. Hysop. Hipps. r. Briar.
Histerical, r. Teyl-tree. Hops, r. Barley, Pine. Hoarsness, r. Hedge-Mustard.
Hydrocele, r. Beans.
I.
Jaundice, r. under Nettles. Jesuits-Bark, r. Thistles. Indian Nut, r. Nuts.
Ink, r. Pomgranate.
L.
Lamp-black, r. Pine. Laurel, r. Bay Tree. Lilly of the Valley, r. Lillies.
Lin^ri^, r. Flax. Linnen-cloath, r. F^ax.
M.
Mayhern's Receipt, read under Rue Thistle. Mace, r. Nuts. Mad-dogs, r Nettles,
Flags. Dredge-Malt, r. Beans. Malaga-Raisins, r. Raisins. Marshmallows, r.
Mallows. Mast, r. Oak. Man's Hieroglyfick, read Palm. Mat-reed, r. Reeds.
Mithridates King, r. Rue. Midwifes, r. Lillies. Misletoe, r. Oak, Willow. Moses
basket, r. Reeds. Mouth-water, r. Teyltree, Briar. Mum, r. Fir. Mushroms, r.
Poplar. Musk-Melons, r. Melons. Mustard-Ale, r. Mustard. Melancholy, r. Wine.
N.
Nettle-Pottage, r. Nettles. Nervous Cases, r. Teyltree, Rue, and Calamus.
O.
Ol. Lign. Heraclei, read under Hasel, Box. Ol. Paraliticum, r. Mustard. Oil
how made, r. Oyltree, Olives. Ointment of Thorne-Apples, r. Apples. Ornus, r.
Ash. Orris, r. Flags.
P.
Palate Mouth, read Pomgranate. Paper-Reeds, r. Reeds. Paper, made, r. Flax.
Parchment, r. Reeds. Palsies, r. Spicknard, Mustard, etc. Pill. a nostrum, r.
Ash. Piles, r. Garlic. Plaster, in Fevours, read Poplar. Polypody, r. Oak.
Powder for Hair, r. Flags. Powder in the Stones, r. Thistles. Powder for
Uvulla, read Pomgranates. Precious Stones, r. Saffron. Priapism, r. Lentils,
Hemlock. Piracantha, r. Thorns. Pilex duobus, r. Gourds. Ptisan. r. Barley.
R.
Rachel* r under Mandrakes Rasp-Berry-Wine, read Brambles. Ramsons, r. Garlic.
Reasons, not bearing fruit, r. Pomgranate. Ricket-wood, r. Ash. Rickets, r.
Raisins. Rye bread, r. Rye. Ring worms, r. Poplar. Ropes, r. Rushes. Roses to
gather, r. Roses. Rouncival Pease, r. Pulse.
S.
Sack, read under Vine. Sallad-Oyl, r. Olive. Scarlet Oak, r. Oak. Scaenanth,
r. Rush. Scurvy, r. Pomgrantes, Fir, Cucumers, Sesamum, r. Pulse. Silkworms,
r. Mulberries. Silk-trade, id. Salt of Wormwood, r. Wormwood. Simple Medicines,
r. wormwood, Briar. Sciatica, r. Elm. Sloe-bush, r. Thorns. Smells, r. Roses.
Smallpox, r. Saffron Sorbus Pyriformis, r. Ash. Spirit of Pease, r. Pulse. --
of Poppies, r. Pulse. -- of Wine, r. Vine. Squills, r. Onions. Spurg-La^ril, r.
Bay tree. Sugar, r. Sweet Cane. Sugar candy, r. Reeds. Stone, r. mallows,
almonds. Sweet-Briar, r. Briars. Sweet Gaul, r. Myrtle. Syrup of Garlic, r.
Onions, and Garlic. Sach^rum dealt^. r. Mallows. Syrup of Buckthorne, r.
Thorns.
T.
Tar-made, r. under Pine. Tar-pills, r. Pine. Tartar, r. Vine. Taste, of
Medicines, read Raisins. Teeth loose, r. Pomgranate. Thorne-Apples, r. Apples.
Throat sore, r. Anise. Treacle Mustard, r. Mustard. Trees setting, r. Oak, etc.
Troch, Alhandle, r. gourds
V.
Vinegar, r. Rais^s. Vesicatories, r. Rye.
W.
Walnuts, r. Hasel. Water-L^llies, r. Lillies. Warts, r. Poplar. Wine of
Raisins, r. Raisins. Women's hard Breasts, r. Mint. Worms, r. Rue, Garlic,
Wormwood, raisins, etc. Wormwood-beer, read Wormwood. Writing-books, r. Reeds.
With many others, which the Reader may add with his Pen; and is desired to
mend all Faults of the Press and Pen, the Author being very far distant.

Books newly Printed for T. Salusbury, at the King's-Arms next St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street.
THE Parsons Vade Mecum: or, A Treatise containing Choice Observations about
the Accounts of the Year, Moveable ^easts, Ember Weeks, Ecclesiastical
Censures, the memorable Things in the Three first Centuries, and some after
Ages, Archbishops and Bishoprics, their Election, Consecration, Installment,
etc. Patronage, Institution, Induction, Non-residence, Dispensations,
Pluralities, Deprivation Dilapidation, Privileges of Clergymen, Tithes and
Simony; very fit for all Clergymen and Gentlemen; in 12's bound, price 1 s.

2. The Measurers Guide, or the whole Art of Measuring made short, plain and
easy, showing how to measure any plain Superficies, all sorts of Regular
Solids, Artificers Works, viz. Carpenters, Joyners, Plaisterers, Painters,
Paviers, Glaziers, Bricklayers, Tylers, etc. With the Art of Gauging of
singular Use to all Gentlemen Artificers and others. By J. Barker, in 12's
bound, price 1 s.

3. Taxilla, or Love preferred before Duty; A Novel. By D. W. Gent. 12's bound,
price 1 s.

4. Tryon's New Art of Brewing, Beer, Ale, and other sorts of Liquors, so as to
render them more Healthful to the Body, and agreeable to Nature, with less
Trouble and Charge than generally practiced; With the Art of making Malt. The
third Edition, 12's bound, price 1 s.

5. -- Wisdom Dictates, or Rules Physical and Moral, for preserving the Health
of the Body and the Peace of the Mind; fit to be regarded by all that would
enjoy the Blessings of this World: To which is added, a Bill of Fare of 75
Noble Dishes of excellent Food, without either Fish or Flesh, 12's bound, price
1 s.

6. A New Art of making above Twenty sorts of English Wines, Brandy, and other
Spirits, more pleasant and agreeable than those of France; Illustrated by the
Doctrine of Fermentation and Distillation, by Curious Examples on the Growth
and Product of this Island, 12's bound, price 1 s. 6 d.

7. Chymicus Rationalis, or the Fundamental Grounds of the Chemical Art,
rationally stated, and demonstrated by various Examples in Distillation,
Rectification and Exaltation of Wines, Spirits, Tinctures, Oils, Salts, Powders
and Oleosmus, in such a Method, as to retain the Specific Virtues of Concreets
in the greatest power and force, 8vo. bound, 2 s.

8. Jacob Behmens Theosophick Philosophy, unfolded in diverse Considerations and
Demonstrations; showing the Verity and Utility of the several Doctrines
contained in the Writings of that Author; With an Abridgment of his Works. By
E. Tailor. 4to. bound, price 6 s.

9. Arithmetical Rules Digested and Contracted, made plain and easy for the
help and benefit of the Memory; very Necessary for all Gentlemen and Tradesmen,
as for Youth and Apprentices in Merchantile Affairs: Twelves bound, price 1 s.

10. The Safety of France to Monsieur the Dauphin, or the Secret History of the
French King, proving that there is no other way to secure France from
approaching Ruin, but by Deposing his Father for a Tyrant, and Destroyer of his
People. Done out of French. 12's bound, price 1 s.

11. The History of the late great Revolution in England and Scotland, with the
Causes and Means by which it was accomplished; with a particular Account of the
Extraordinary Occurrences which happened thereupon, as likewise the Settlement of
both the Kingdoms under their most Serene Majesty's King William and Queen
Mary, with a List of the Convention. Octavo, bound, price 5 s.

12. Remarks on the Dream of the late Abdicated Queen of England, and upon that
of Madam the Duchess of Lavaleer, late Mistress to the French King, wherein is
plainly showed the late Successes of King William in Ireland, as likewise his
future Successes in France, with the miserable End of the French King,
Translated out of French. 4to. price 6 d.

13. A Collection of the Famous Mr. George Whithers Wonderful Prophesies,
relating to the English Nation and Government, many of which not yet fulfilled.
4to. price 6 d.

14. Ecclesia Reviviscens, A Poem, or a short Account of the Rise, Progress and
Present State of the New Reformation of Manners. By a late Gentleman of the
Temple. 4to. price 6 d.

15. Gilbert Rule's President of the Scots Assemblies, his Vindication of the
Church of Scotland from the Aspertions and Calumnies of the Jacobites and
Grumbletonians. 4to. price 6 d.

16. Miscellany Poems, viz. Remarks on the Death of King Charles, and the
Succession of King James the Second, upon Faith, upon Patience, upon Ambition,
to the University of Oxford: The Soul to a Good Conscience, the Soul to a Bad
Conscience. by J. Whitehall* 4to. price 6 d.


