THE GREAT Gospel SUMONDS TO CLOSE WITH CHRIST, Under the Pain of the Highest
Rebellion against the GOD of Heaven; being the Substance of a PREFACE and
SERMON at Hemphlar-bank in the Parish of Lanrick Feb. 20. 1676.

By Mr. John Welsh late Minister of the Gospel in Iron-Gray.

But He was Wounded for our Transgressions, He was Bruised for our Iniquities:
The Chastisemens of our Peace was upon Him, and with His Stripes we are Healed.

THE PREFACE
The 24 Psalm from the 9 Verse being Sung.
IF it be asked at us, as some will be ready to ask, by what Authority do ye
these things? Who gave you this Authority? Ye have no Warrant neither from the
King nor the Rulers for what ye have done: Wa, they have straightly charged us to
speak no more in this Name. We Answer, we do it by the Authority of JESUS
CHRIST, The Great Shepherd of the Flock, He has commanded us to Preach in
Season and out of Season; He has given us Commandment to go and Preach and
Baptize all Nations; and therefore they have forbidden us that are in Power:
But we must Answer as the Apostle did, Is it fit in the Sight of GOD to Obey
you or GOD, judge ye: He who is The King of kings, it is by Virtue of His
Orders, Who is the Mighty GOD, The Judge of the whole World, before Whom we
must all appear, He has commanded, and it is by Virtue of His Command that we
come to Preach, and it is by Virtue of His Command that ye come to Hear, and we
will rather bide the Glooms of our Rulers, or we bide the Glooms of our GOD; We
will rather take His Approbation, Well done thou Good and Faithful Servant,
than we will study to be called Unloyal, and yet we are very Loyal, Loyal we
are, and Loyal we are commanded to be, but in Subordination to GOD, we must
first Fear GOD and then Honor the King; but when the Command of the King
justels with the Command of, GOD, then we are at a Point what is our present
Duty: O for a blyth Meeting, and for the shining of his Presence this Day: For
we may put it as a great Question if ever we will all Meet again; Yea we may
put it out of question that we will never all Meet again in this side of Time:
And it is like that there are some here that shall Curse the day that ever they
were brought into the World. And O sirs! It is a sad thing that there should be
such Grounds of Suspicion of this amongst you, that he lived where there was so
much of a Powerful Preached Gospel, and under Lively Ordinances: But there is
very much of this, and many stood in the Cross Way when his People fled before
his Enemies; If GOD be GOD they shall rue it: But we could wish that such
rewing might be in Time, and that they might prevent their utter Destruction:
But we are afraid many an one rue it when it is too late. It is a sore Matter
that Men should be found not to Venture as far for JESUS CHRIST in his Service,
as they will Venture in the Service of a Mortal Man: Some has even Ventured
very far in their Service that has gotten but little Thanks for it; Many has
gotten sore Wounds, and gotten small Reward. But our LORD will not do so: There
is never one can come and say to Him, I have gotten this Wound in your Service:
There is never one that can come and say to Him, I have gotten this broken Head
or this Wound in your Service, but they will be well Rewarded: None can say I
have been Fined or Confyned, or I have been put out of House and Hold in your
Service; Well says the LORD, Enter ye into your Masters Joy. There is none of
you that has lost a Cot-house for Him, but ye shall get a Kingdom, and then
what will ye be behind: Therefore there is two Words that I shall tell you of
that are here that are his People. First, Have Courage and syd with his
Ordinances and his Cause and Interest: Continue waiting upon their
Opportunities, and you may blame your selves and ye want them, for the matter
is not without hope: No, no; Our LORD JESUS CHRIST He will keep the Fields yet,
and His Enemies shall be made His Footstool: Therefore sirs, wait on the LORD,
as it is in the hinderend of the 27 Psalm, that Psalm that ye were singing;
Wait on the LORD and be of good Courage, and He shall strengthen thine Heart:
Wait I say upon the LORD: Christians tyne not your Strength, for I assure you
there is very many Great and Sweet Encouragements that your Labor shall not be
forgotten, ye shall be well Rewarded, for all your Sufferings are written in a
Book. There is a Book, and the King will call for that Book, that it may be
read, and will say, What shall be done to the Man that the King delighted to
Honor? What shall be done to this Man that has Suffered, and has gotten no
Reward, he shall be exalted and set above the rest, and Honor and Respect shall
be put upon him; Honor and Respect shall be put upon them that have had their
Heads and their Hands put up upon Ports, and these that has had their Bodies
burnt; and the LORD will fetch them in, and say, Thus shall it be done to the
Man that the King delights to Honor. Wait on a while poor silly doubting
troubled Soul, that's fleit for going wrong about thy own particular Case, Wait
on the LORD; He will satisfy poor Folk who sits on the Throne of Grace: Wait
upon Him, till he prepare his Answer to the question: Wait upon him ye that are
Sad and Weary, and Crying, Oh for my Mother, and for my Mothers Case! as it is
in the Lamentation, What will be done for Her in the day that She is spoken
for? for there is few or none to do for her or to speak for her, or to take her
by the hand to lead her forth. Many Ministers has left her, and many Professors
has left her: What will we do for Breasts to her? What loss of Ministers has
She had? and what great loss of Children has befallen Her? That is Sad says
some: How dow we Wait? for his Work in particular is even sore Distressed; If it
were not so, there would be some hope that we would have a Glorious and
Beautiful Upshot. Its twice there in the last Verse of the 27 Psalm, Wait ye;
and he strengthens his Argument (says he) I say upon the LORD. Its many of your
Unbeliefs that makes you have no Patience to Ware upon the LORD as he has
Commanded. Says many we may Wait long till our Eyes go Blind or we see
Ministers sent to Preach the Gospel; Wait upon the LORD, and be of good Cheer:
Wait I say (says he) upon Him: For why? The LORD will not forsake his People;
He will once have about with his Enemies, have about of his enemies, He will
have about with them; He will once make them hing their Heads, and think Shame
of Themselves for what they have done. It may be that there is many here that
desires never to see that Day; It is like and it is like also, that there is
some here may see that Day, that if the Question were speired would Answer, Lo
this is our God and we have Waited for Him, and we will be Glad and Rejoice in
His Salvation: But there is even some Folk that has been Stout in Wronging
CHRIST and his People. I say who knows how soon they may be put quite out of
Countenance with GOD's Appearing; They will be saying in that Day, When saw we
Thee Hungry and Fed Thee not? When saw we Thee in Prison, and Visited Thee not?
They would fain deny every Ill Turn that they have done to his People; but it
will not be with them.

Sirs, I do not Grudge much that I see not many of these Folk that they call
Gentiles here; I shall never Repine at that which CHRIST Rejoices in, I Thank
Thee, O Father, who has Revealed these Things unto Babes. What is come of them
all? There is never one of the Lords and Lairds and Great Men for Him: There is
few of the Great Men (as ye call them) for Him: We hear little tell of their
Religion that was the Carriers on of Religion, where are they all now? We man
even tell them, that there are a whein poor People in the Land that are
sticking to Him; The poor of the People shall Trust in Him, and there were no
more. And it is a great Mercy, GOD has taken a Sacrifice, and a Noble Sacrifice
at the very first beginning: He took a Nobleman at the beginning, that Worthy
Great-man the Merquess of Argyle; and he got a Minister too, to Seal his
Covenant; and a very Worthy-man he got, a Gentleman, a very Eminent
Considerable Gentleman Wariston, that Worthy Gentleman he Dyed for the
Covenant: He has taken one of all Ranks to Seal the Covenant and his Truths;
and then after that, he took the Commons, he took many of them that were Poor
Men, that he brought out and honored them with Scaffolds, and gave Testimony
for the Cause and Covenant of GOD: and ever since that Day, there is ay some
Body that follows him, and ay (...) Body that GOD takes Testimony from, some
with Fyning, and some with Confyning, and some with imprisonment. Ye that is
Young Ones, it may be, ye will speir the Question, Wherefore was it that all
that was? and how came it that their Preachings was upon Hill-sides, and that
Persecution was? It may be the Days is coming it will be told: And we tell you
it the Day from this Hill-side, it will be told, and the Young Ones will speir,
how could that be? (co the Bairns) Was that in Covenanted-Scotland? What was
the Cause of this? There bude to be some Abominable Provoking Cause of this:
And it will be Answered, It was even the Sins of his People that had provoked
him; he gave them up to their Enemies, and they shut out all the
Godly-Ministers, and they sent in upon them a whein Wicked, Ungodly,
Unconscionable Perjured Men to fill up their Room, and the Godly were put to
the Wilderness. Well, when the Time of Delivery comes, think ye not but it will
be a fell Story to tell the Bairns off. O when our Stories is read, there will
be uncouth Things in it to be read; and the very worst of Men, how ready soever
they be now to Persecute, shall be made to dry their Shame; Their Shame shall
be from Generation to Generation, and their Posterity shall think. Shame to say
that such a Man was my Qurcher, or such a Man was my Grandfather. And it may
be many of you no see that Day: We cannot tell, it may be so and other ways too
GOD has done as great Things for us: And I assure you it may fall out so, that
the LORD give his Enemies a dead stroke. Ay says Enemies, we never knew that
GOD would have done such a Thing. They say among the Heathen, the LORD has done
Great Things for them: Ay says the People of GOD, ye see he has done Great
Things for us whereof we are Glad. They had never mind of a Sorrowful Day then
that they had, they were all forgotten.

Now we shall not detain you any longer: Let us go and call upon the LORD, that
he would give us a Word (...) Time, and a Blessing. Let us Pray.

FOLLOWS THE SERMON, Ye will find it written in the 53. of Isaiah at the 5.
Verse.
But He was wounded for our Transgressions; He was bruised for our Iniquities;
the chastisement of our Peace was upon Him, and with His Stripes we are Healed
etc.
I Find the most part of you a Company of Stupid Hearers: Our LORD may have
Designs that we know not off; But for us, for ought we see, we may say, Why is
this? Was it to go and Offer CHRIST to a Company of Careless Persons that Cares
not for Him, and that are not affected with the Offer; But His Thoughts are not
like our Thoughts: He knows what his Design in this is.

Well we have pitched upon this Scripture, as thinking that if any thing may
readily affect your Hearts, and melt your stony Hearts within you, we may have
some Purposes to speak off that which may do it. O that GOD would help us, and
that his Right Hand might be Revealed in this Preached Gospel.

Then the Words that we have read, take them up in these four or five
Particulars: For the whole Story is of CHRIST and his Sufferings, and of a
Covenant of Redemption between the Father and the Son, as ye may gather almost
from every word of the Chapter, and the Persons for whom he Suffered, and what
Case they were in; how little they could do for the getting of his Love
manifested to them. So we have somewhat spoken of CHRIST, He was Wounded, He
was Bruised, He Suffered. Secondly, Ye have somewhat spoken of the Elect for
whom CHRIST was Wounded and Bruised: What were they? They were Transgressors,
they were Sinners, they were Men that were full of Diseases, and Putrefying
Sores. Thirdly, Ye have the Benefits, what they were that resulted to these
Elect Sinners by his Sufferings: There is two of them, they are mentioned in
the words read; they are there mentioned Peace and Healing, Two Great Benefits.
Fourthly, Ye have how this comes to pass; What made CHRIST to be Wounded? How
came He to be Wounded? It was for Sinners, it was for a number of
Transgressors, and that points at that which was the Eternal Transaction
between the Father and the Son, when they closed the Transaction concerning the
Salvation of Sinners. The Father requires the Son to Die: Says the Son, I
undertake it: Therefore the Father keeps Him at his Undertakings, He will have
the Son who entered Surety be as good as his Word, and He will have Him pay the
Ransom, and He will pass it. He was Bruised for our Transgressions, that we
might have Peace: He was Wounded for us, and therefore by his stripes we might
be made Whole. But take the Words more particularly, There is Two Kinds of
Persons spoken of here, and there is somewhat spoken of the Two Kinds of
Persons. The First Person spoken of is He, What He? The LORD JESUS CHRIST the
Fathers only begotten Son, He who counted it no Robery to make Himself Equal
with GOD: He who was filled with all the Fullness of the Godhead: He that from
all Eternity rested in the Bosom of the Father, it was He. The Second Person
spoken of is, Us, and We: Our Transgressions, and our Iniquities, we are
healed. Who is this Us and We that is here spoken of? Its not all the World;
but it is only them that CHRIST has purchased out of the World: It is not all
Sinners, but us and we that is Poor Elected Persons that the LORD has given Him
of the Father to Seek and to Save, and that He has Undertaken to Save. Then,
What were his Sufferings? and that is the Third-Thing, What were the Sufferings
of our LORD JEVS CHRIST that He Undertakes? There is three words to express
this: He was Wounded, that is one; He was Bruised, that is another of them; and
He was Smitten, that's another word in the general. We see then from the whole
Scope of the Sufferings of our LORD JESUS CHRIST that they were Very Great, and
that there was no Worth in Poor Elect Sinners for whom he Suffered. What were
they? They were such as were Workers of Iniquity, such as was very great
Transgressors, such as was Rank Enemies to GOD, such as were Wounders of him,
and that there was no Gross Evil but they had the same Temptations too, that
the rest of the World followed. Those that had given him many a Wound; and
there was nothing of odds between them and the rest of the Wicked World. And
then ye have what the Benefits were that he Purchased unto his People, and
there is Two of them, Peace, and Healing, Peace points at our Justification,
and Healing points at our Sanctification And then Lastly, How comes this that
CHRIST should suffer for me? How comes this to pass? What could move JESUS
CHRIST to be wounded? What moved him to undergo such Great Sufferings and Sharp
for Sinners? And this comes to be Answered by Virtue of the Covenant that past
between Him and the Father, for the satisfying of the Divine Justice of GOD,
that Poor Sinners might not be destitute: Divine Justice must be satisfied; and
this Divine Justice is satisfied by his wounds and by his Chastisements, and
Stripes. So he satisfies for these things that Justice calls for from them, and
so Judgment and Mercy is made to kiss one another.

Now I come to speak to some few Doctrines, for we have here the Sum of the
whole Gospel: Therefore we wad have you thus taking notice, First, We have Man's
Misery. Secondly, Ye have the Redeemer set out there. Thirdly, Ye have a peace
of Man's Redemption out of Misery. Fourthly, Ye have the Benefits and Purchase
set out. Lastly, Ye have the Grounds of all this, the Covenant of Grace.

Now then I have five Points of Doctrine to speak a word shortly to from this
that we have read, and we shall labor to keep with your ordinary time.

The first thing then is this, That by Nature Elect Sinners als well as others,
are in a very sad and lost Estate: Its not only the World that is here called
their Transgressors and Enemies; but it is even those that the LORD has Chosen
out of the World to save: I say that even the Elect People of GOD are by Nature
lying in a very deplorable Condition: Wherein stands the Sadness of their Case?
But we have often had occasion to speak to it, and therefore we shall be but very
short on it; yet there is Three Things: There is First, Mickle Corrupon of the
whole Nature; and there is our Actual Transgressions, whereby we are Defiled,
Enemies to GOD, liable to his Curse and Wrath to all Eternity: This is the Case
of all the Elect, Men and Women. There is no Ground then wherefore a Sinner,
that GOD has showed Mercy upon has to boast of, if he look to the Rock from
whence they are hewn. We will find it just our State that is the State of the
Wicked World, that gets Hell to their hinderend: It is free Grace only that has
made the Change; for in our selves there is no difference. Ille tell you Sirs,
we shall leave the Application for the most part of all their to the close.
Therefore the Second Point of Doctrine that I shall speak to is this, That Our
LORD JESUS CHRIST the Son of GOD, the Second Person of the Trinity, He, for the
Salvation of Lost Sinners undertook many a Great Suffering: All their
Expressions holds out this, and we may safely found a Doctrine upon this word.
Look to the whole Chapter and ye will see it clear for whom it is that he
suffered, even the Elect World, CHRIST (ye see) suffered for them that gave him
no Thanks; He suffered for them that helped on his Sufferings; he was despised,
and counted smitten of GOD by them that thought nothing of him; they saw no
Beauty nor Comeliness in him; it was even for them that he suffered. I shall
speak more particularly to this Doctrine in their Things, First, I shall show
what Great Sufferings our LORD underwent for to bring healing and peace unto
Sinners. Secondly, For whom it was he underwent these Sufferings. Did our LORD
undergo such Sufferings for Sinners? To fall upon this were a very great head
to speak to, to tell you what he suffered in his Conception, and to tell you
what he suffered when he was brought forth into the World in his Childhood, to
tell you what he suffered before he entered upon his Public Ministry, and to
tell you what he suffered when he was taken and araigned, and brought before
the Judgment Seat of Herod and Pilat, and Condemned; and to tell you what he
suffered upon his Rody, and what he suffered upon his Soul: I say it would take
very much Time, and we would but spill it in the speaking too. And therefore I
Recommend unto you the last Chapter of Matthew, and the last Chapter of Luke,
and the last Chapter of John, and unto that which is here recorded of him by
the Prophet Isaiah; ay but I shall tell you of some Things wherein his
Sufferings appears to be very great, and we may judge by their Things. (I pray
you Sirs take heed) First, Consider what was the Debt that he undertook to pay,
it was not the Debt of one or two, but even of the whole Elect, Men and Women,
many Thousands Millions of them, many Thousands of them that cannot be counted,
it was that which he suffered that they should have suffered throw Eternity.
Secondly, He suffered Great Things: Wherefore? It was to satisfy the Divine
Justice of GOD; The Divine Justice of GOD was put in Arms, and set against the
Son for the Revenging of a broken Law, and a broken Covenant; and the Son of
GOD had the Divine Justice of GOD to satisfy for the Original and Actual
Transgressions of the Elect, and for all the Breaches of the Commands of GOD,
for that Man's breaking of this Command, and for this Man's breaking of that
Command, and every Man's Sins that is more than the Hairs of his Head for number.
Thirdly, Look to this and ye will see that it bud to be Great Sufferings he
underwent; because his Sufferings was as much to manifest a just GOD, as the
Creation of a World did to manifost a Powerful GOD, and an Almighty GOD: So
that his Sufferings does as much to manifest a Powerful and Omnipotent and
Just GOD. Fourthly, Will ye consider that these Sufferings behoved to be very
Great Sufrings; For they were such as put the Son of GOD so sore to it, that it
put him to a Strait, as it were, it put him to a Stress like a Man indeed that
was charged for a Great Sum; it put him to a Stress, and to Pray; and so our
LORD was put to such a Stress that he cries, now is my Soul troubled, and what
shall I do? And he was put to pray to the Father. And then, Fifthly, Consider
this, How hard the Sufferings was that he undertook in particular, and ye will
see that they were very many and great; Look to his Sufferings in his
Incarnation, ye see he had not a Chamber to be brought forth in, he bud to be
brought forth in a Stable; and he had not a Creedell, but a Horse Mainger: And
look to his Sufferings throw all his Lifetime, how many times he lay thereout
at the back of a Bush, and had but a Stone to lay his Head on; and how many
times he was Hungry and Weary; and look to his Sorrow, what Grief of Mind he
had, to see People crying out against him, just in the midest of his
Sufferings; and to see Peter deny him even when he was Suffering for him; and
look what he suffered in the Garden, when he drank that Cup that made him sweat
great Drops of Blood that came trinkling out of Him; and He had not only
outward Sufferings but inward also, He was bearing the Wrath of GOD upon his
Soul, that made Blood and Sweat come out of him, that made him to Faint that He
dought not carry his own Cross, but he bud to get help: and then look to his
Sufferings what a Shameful Death he was put to, what a Painful Death, and
what Travel of Soul he was put to, not only Travel in Body, but Travel in Soul,
that made him cry out with Strong Cries and Tears unto Him that heard him, and
he was made to Cry, My GOD, my GOD, Why have Thou forsaken Me? Now for whom was
it that he suffered all this? Ye will see that and ye would look unto this same
Chapter, and ye will read them for whom he suffered, it was even for many that
had pierced and crucified him; for they shall look on Him whom they have
pierced, Zech. 12.10. John 19.37. It was for them that gave him no Thanks for
his Sufferings; He suffered for them that said, it is well wared on him; He
suffered for them that looked upon him as Despised and Rejected of Men; He was
a Man of Sorrow, and acquainted with Grief, Isaiah 53.3. For whom suffered he?
Even for them that had Denied him; and as the Disciples turned their Back upon
him, and killed him for them that Esteemed Him not, Smitten and Wounded: It was
even for them he suffered that were like Sheep going astray, it was for Sinners
and Transgressors that he suffered all this; it was for a Company of Poor Men
and Women that gave him no Thanks for his Sufferings, for they were so far from
giving him Thanks, that they helped on his Sufferings, and some of them Denied
him to the adding to these Sufferings, Thirdly, Why was it that he suffered? We
have spoken to that already, we shall only say but a word to it: First, It is
to tell you how holy a GOD he is, and how just a GOD he is, how faithful he is
in the Execution of his Threatenings, that he will not pass by one Sin
unpunished, that speaks out that he is Faithful, and that he would have his
Threatenings faithfully Executed, in that day thou eats thou shall surely die
the death, Gen 2.17. He will have them fullfilled either in the Principal or in
the Cautioner.

Now for the Use of this, I shall leave it, because I would sain gain time.
There is another Observation, and it is this, What are the Benefits that
Redounds to us by His Sufferings? What are the Benefits, There is Two mentioned
here, Peace with GOD, and Healing to our Souls. What gets Sinners by his
Sufferings? What get they? They get the Feid taken away that is between GOD and
them, and they get healing to their Transgressions: They are not done away and
his Blood purge them not away; we may be purged from all our Sins by his Blood:
They must have Clean Water to Sprinkle them, and to Cleanse them from all their
Transgressions. He gives them Peace with GOD throw his Suffering, and Peace in
their own Conscience, everlasting Peace in their own Consciences; a Peace that
passes all Natural Understanding; There Peaces redounds to his People by his
Sufferings.

And then Fourthly, We have how his Sufferings comes to be brought about. How
came it that the Justice of GOD falls upon him? and this leads us unto the
Great Contrivance of the Covenant of Redemption, wherein this Matter was
Contrived in the Counsel of GOD from all Eternity: In that he was to have a
considerable part of Lost Men and Women, and that he was to satisfy for them
for a broken Covenant, and was to keep them from the Wrath of GOD, that was to
come upon them by right for the breaking of his Law, and this was done by his
Sufferings in their Nature for them.

Now Sirs, I desire this of you (that ye may be) now when I have brought
Matters to this pass, and given a touch of these Things; Then in order to the
Application, Rouse up your selves to be suitably affected with what I have to
speak from their Truths by way of Application: And there is their Three Uses that
I would make of it.

And the First Use, is an Use of Exhortation; We would Exhort you to be taken
up with wondering, what Man or Woman is there among you that can hear their
Things spoken of, and no wonder at it? That CHRIST should have suffered all
this for the like of you and me; That He that is the Son of GOD should have
quat Heaven, and that the Son of GOD should have become Man, that He should
have been put so sore to it, as to Die for Sinners. We cannot tell what calls
for wondering, and this calls not for wondering from us; O the height! O the
breadth! O the length! O the depth of this Mystery! That the Son of GOD should
have been put so sore to it as to die for Sinners; and not only to die, but to
drink the Cup of the Fathers Wrath: Who can hear this declared, and no wonder
at the hearing of it; O wonder, O wonder at it Sirs! wonder at the hearing of it

And Secondly, I shall say this from it by way (...) ^xhortation, Is it so,
That our LORD JESUS CHRIST was put to so Great Sufferings? Wa then I would
Exhort you to look how ye should look upon Sin, if sin should not be very
Detestable to you, and very abominable, if ye should not be at very much Pains
to forsake Sin that brought our Blessed LORD JESUS CHRIST to undergo such Great
Sufferings, which would have brought you to such sad Condemnation, and ly under
the Wrath of GOD Eternally, and Eternally: And therefore Sinners, we think and
there were no more to be a Motive to press you to forsake your Sins, and to
hate every False Way, and to hate the very least Word and Thought of it, that
this might be a Motive that it brought out LORD JESUS CHRIST to undergo such
Great Sufferings. Sirs, Love to Him will call for this, call ye that Love the
LORD hate Evil, Psalms 97.10.

But then there is another Use that I would make of Exhortation Was our LORD
JESUS CHRIST brought to so many and Great Sufferings? and has be undergone them
so cheerfully? Yea He has undergone it: And is He satisfied to see the Travel
of his Soul? O Sirs! Do not yet then do what ye can do to Disappoint him, while
he is making offer of his Blood to Wash you: Do not that which will make him
rue that he shed his Blood for the like of you: For when it is so, that ye do
nor give him a suitable Meeting, ye give him just ground to rue; for ye have
done what in you lies to make his Sufferings of none Effect.

But the Use that I shall mainly insist on at this time, is another of
Exhortation, and that is, Our LORD JEVSVS CHRIST is doing now, as he did after
his Resurrection, when he came out of the Grave, when his Disciples gathered
together in a Chamber for fear of the Jews, he came in there among them, and
says, Peace be unto you, in that 20 of John 21 verse, in the beginning of that
Chapter there was some word of his Resurrection: Now there was some of them
that affirmed that he was risen, yet still they thought it was but a Notion and
a Mistake; although there was Angels come down from Heaven, and gave Testimony
that He was risen, yet some of them could not believe that; but when he comes
in among them, What says he to Thomas? even that which he says to us the day,
He holds out his Hands and the Hole that is in his Side, he shows forth his
Hands, and his Side, and says, Be not Faithless but Believe, and that is the
thing, reach hither your Hands into the Hole of my Side, and be not Faithless,
but Believe; and that is the thing that I am come here for the day as a
Messenger of the Living GOD, to let you see this Day the Wonderful
Condescending Love of CHRIST, and to say unto you, Reach hither the Hand of
your Faith, and take a look of this Bloody Savior who was Crucified, come put
in your Fingers, put in your Hand in the Hole of that Bloody Side of his, and
be not Faithless, but Believe: That is the Great Thing that CHRIST calls for,
that is the Great End wherefore he would have his Sufferings told us;
Wherefore? That it might bring his People to a close with Him, to give Him
Credit, and to Believe in Him: Therefore now we come here, and that which we
say to you, we bid you reach hither your hand, and be not Faithless, but
Believe; that is the Great End wherefore he would have his Sufferings told, to
close with this Suffering LORD JESUS CHRIST: Come to him, and be no more
Faithless, but Believe, and say with that Man Thomas, my Lord, and my God.
Whenever that was presented to him, he could no longer stand out: And this
Argument prevail not with you, I wonder what will prevail with you when the
Sufferings of CHRIST is laid out unto you: Therefore says Thomas, my Lord and
my God; I can stand no longer, for now I have seen the Wonderful Love of GOD;
now I see the Wonderful Love of CHRIST, which made him undergo all these Great
Sufferings; now I have seen the wonderful excellency of a Savior. Now
therefore, Sirs, ye man give me leave to insist here a little, for this is the
Great Scope wherefore CHRIST keeps up a Preached Gospel, that ye might believe,
that ye may be saved, and brought to a Closing with JESUS CHRIST: Therefore, In
the First Place, I do here summond you of all Ranks of Persons unto a scrious
Frame, and unto a Composure of Spirit suitable unto the Message that I am to
Declare unto you; I summond you Men and Women, and I come now to you, and I
present before you, a Bloody CHRIST, a Suffering Savior; I come to you as he
did to his Disciples: I say unto you as he said to his Disciples, Reach forth
your hands unto a Bloody Savior, take a look of him beleevingly; Look unto
him, and Close with him: Look to him who has said, Look unto Metal ye Ends of
the Earth, and be saved, Isaiah 45.22. O Sirs! Come and take a Look of this
suffering CHRIST, take a Look of him: Therefore I shall First tell what sort of
Persons I summond; I summond you Old Persons that has even had a Profession all
your Time, and yet never Closed with him, ye that has even made a fashon of
closing with JESUS CHRIST, and yet to this Day has never done it; I summond
them at this Day at this present Time that they come and take a Look of this
suffering JESUS CHRIST, that they stretch out the hand of their Faith and close
with him, and that they come and say, my Lord and my God.

Secondly, I summond them that is without that has never yet been hankering
about to do it, and them that has made many Mints, but never came cleanly off
in the doing of it; I summond you to come hither, and stretch out your hands,
and be not Faithless, but Believe. I summond you Whoremongers, Adulterers,
Drunkards, or whateve ye be, as ye heard in the Forenoon; come to him, O
sinners! come hither and reach hither your hands, and be not Faithless, but
Believe, and close with this suffering JESUS CHRIST; Will ye let him go away
and not take the Offer off his hand? and he no get meikle Thanks for his Offer;
Shall he have that to say, that ye would not take the Offer, and that ye would
not give him meikle Thanks for his sufferings? Will you not take the Benefits
that he offers to you by his sufferings? I come here in his Name, and offers
you Peace, Will ye not take it? I offer you healing in his Name, Will you not
take it off his hand?

Now therefore there is Three Things that I shall shortly speak to in this
Exhortation, and I shall labor to contain my self in als little bounds as I
can in Prosecuting of it. First, I shall speak a word to this, after what
manner we would have you closing with a suffering Christ, Secondly, Upon what
Terms we would have you closing with a suffering Christ. Thirdly, From what
Motives we press you to close with a suffering Christ. Fourthly, We shall
labor to satisfy the Objection of them that would go about this Work of
closing with Christ. And then in the last Place, We shall require your Answer
as to the Embracing of Jesus Christ.

And for the First Thing that we are to speak to was, What way we are to close
with a suffering Christ: And there is Three Things in this closing with Him.
First, And ye wad close with a suffering Christ. Ye must do it Timously, and ye
must close with him Instantly, at this very Time ye must close with him: ye
must not stand to consider, and advise what he has done for you, and what he
has suffered for you, and how that is that ye are made Partakers of his
Benefits that he has purchased by his sufferings. Secondly, Ye must Clos^ with
Him Deliberatly als well as Instantly; Ye may nor do it at Fits, a Brash at it
will not do the Turn: But it must be a Resolved Business upon serious
Deliberation; Ye must both do it Instantly and Advisedly: I give you this
Reason for it, because I know, and ye come to Restrict your Closing with Him,
and do it not Resolutly and Deliberatly ye are fair to fall back again, and to
turn your Backs upon Him when ye meet with the Cross: Therefore it must be a
thing done Deliberatly. And Thirdly, As ye must Close with Him Deliberatly, so
ye must not take CHRIST by Halfs, ye must take All CHRIST as He makes offer of
Himself to be a King, and to be a Priest, and to be a Prophet, and ye must take
him for Justification, and for Sanctification; Ye must take him for a
Physician, and for an Husband, to be a Guide, to be a Savior and to be a
Redeemer, to be all things that ye stand in need of, that is the Third Thing,
ye must Close Deliberatly. And then Fourthly, Ye must Close with Him
Cheerfully, and ye must close with Whole CHRIST, with your whole Soul; the
whole Soul must give its Consent: Ye must not close with him with your
Consciences only, and with your Affections only; but ye must close with him
with your whole Soul: O what Great Advantage will ye have in closing with him
Presently.

And then the next Thing that I Proposed was, The Terms upon which ye are
called to close with Him; And for the Terms, I shall give you their two or Three
Words that holds out the Terms. First, Ye will see it in the 55. of Isaiah at
the 7 Verse. Let the Wicked forsake his Way, and the Unrighteous Man his
Thoughts, and let him Return to the LORD, and he will have Mercy, upon him, and
to our GOD, for He will abundantly pardon: And ye will see another of them in
the 3d of Hosea at the 3d Verse. There is one of the Terms that we are called
upon, Thou shall abide for me for many days: Thou shall not play the Harlot,
and thou shall not be for another, so also will I be for thee. Ye must abide
for Him for many Days; Ye must not turn to other Lovers: Ye may not be like a
Whorish-woman that compasses Strangers: But ye must say, ye are Wedded to Him
as your Husband, and ye must Prefer Him above all others. Ye may not turn to
others, (says he) Ye must abide for me for many days. And then Thirdly, This is
the Terms, Ye must close with his Cross; and ye would close with him, ye must
take Him and his Cross. O Sirs! Ye must take Him and his Cross, and any or you
Resolve to close with Him, ye must also Resolve to take Him with his Cross, and
to follow him whithersoever he goes, and to sell all that ye may follow him.
And that is the Terms in the 45 Psalm at the 10 Verse. Hearken, O Daughter, and
Consider, and Incline thine Ear; forget also thy own People, and thy Fathers
House, so shall the King greatly desire thy Beauty.

Now the next Thing that I am to speak to, is the Motives upon which we would
have you pressed to close with Him: Now Sirs, May not this be a Reason for to
move you to close with him, the Great Benefits that he has purchased to them
that will close with him, both Peace and Healing, and this prevail not with
you, we wat not what will prevail with you, O Sirs, Shall we go away and leave
you this Day? Dear Friends, we dow not leave you until we press you with their
Motives to close with JESUS CHRIST; We would fain deal with you to close with
him, ye shall both get Peace and Healing in Time, and Peace after Time: Ye
shall get Peace with GOD, and Peace with your own Consciences; Ye shall get
Peace to your own Souls; Ye shall get Perfect Peace; That Man shall be kept
in perfect Peace whose Mind is stayed upon Him, Why? Because He has purchased
that to them that will close with him; Ye shall get Peace and Healing: Poor
Backsliden Sinners, that thinks shame of your Back slidings: Hard hearted
Sinners, that thinks shame of your hard heartedness, will you come to him, and
close with JESUS CHRIST, and take his Purchase that he has purchased with their
Wounds, and ye would come and close with him ye shall get healing.

And then I come to some Motives out of the Text, And First, I ache this for a
Motive, therefore sirs, under the Pain of Rebellion as ye would not be found
Traitors and Rebels to the Great GOD of Heaven, ye must close with him. This is
his Command that ye Believe on the only Begotten Son of GOD: Therefore he
Coimmands, and we Command and Charge you in his Name, under the Pain of Eternal
Damnation; We Command you under the Pain of Rebellion, under the Pain of being
found Disobeyers of the Gospel, and under the Pain of all the Punishments that
shall come upon you to close with JESUS CHRIST. And Thirdly, Close with him,
because he is a GOD that is greatly satisfied to have his Benefits that he has
purchased applied to Sinners to have them making Application of them by closing
with him, and ye would give him Satisfaction for his Benefits, and as ye would
be careful to satisfy him for them that is making Offer of them, this is the
Way to satisfy him, to close with him. And then Fourthly. Ye have many Calls
to call you: I tell you sirs, Ye are called by your frequent Sick-beds,
Sickness in your Persons, and Sickness in your Families, all these things is
calling you: The Mercies of GOD is calling you; The Judgments of GOD is
calling you; and ye have the Torments of Hell calling you; Ye have your
Unbelieving Sinful Hearts calling you, your Backsliden Hearts calling you.
What then Sirs? Will ye not give (...) your Lust and close with him, and
embrace him? Ye have the Angels calling you; Its said that the Angels they
rejoice at the Conversion of one Soul: And ye have the Devil by all his
Temptations calling you; so ye have many Calls to close with this Suffering
LORD JESUS CHRIST. Fifthly, Close with him. Why? Because he takes it as a great
Proof of your Sincerity, even when once ye begin to say, My Lord and my God:
Therefore close with him; and then I would have you closing with him, as ye
would not be found Guilty of Trampling Under foot the Blood of the Covenant,
and counting it an Unholy Thing; Even that Blood by which Sinners are to be
saved.

But now I come to the Last Thing that I proposed, and that is, To speir what
ye have to say to it; What say ye to it? Have ye any thing to say against what
we have been speaking to you? Have ye any thing to say against what He
suffered? Of against what he did after He suffered? When he said Thrust in your
hands in my Side, and be not Faithless but Believing? Or will ye be like Thomas
after he had gart him see him, he cries, My Lord and my God. Well Sirs, What
will ye all do? Tell me what ye think of all that has been said of a Suffering
CHRIST this Day? What Effect has it now upon you? And what Effect shall it have
afterward? Will ye leave this Place without Closing with JESUS CHRIST: What
say ye to it? What say ye? Have ye any Objections? Yes says some, I have Three
Objections. What is these Objections that hinders me. I have many Doubts in my
Bosom, that I dar not presume. Wherefore dar ye not? I have been such a Great
Sinner. I tell you then Sinners in the Name of the LORD, ye that have these
Fears and Doubts, come away, and let not that hinder you; but let it put you to
make the more use of the Master; Come away to Him, Though your Sins were as
Scarlet and as Crimson, ye shall be made White as Snow; in that first of
Isaiah, 18. verse. Therefore let none speak that He is Unwilling, He is not
Unwilling to help any of the Elect for whom he suffered so many things: I say
never think that ye have that of your selves, and that it belongs to Free Will
(as the Blasphemous Quakers says) ye have GODs Command for it, and ye have GODs
Warrant for it, and ye have GODs Intimation, and these are his Revealed Duties
that he bids you do. But what will ye say further: What shall I do? Let me see
what I shall do. Be serious in going about that which you have Revealed in the
Word of GOD to be your Duty, and that is all that the Gospel calls for, and
that you close with JESUS CHRIST. Secondly, Say ye, I would fain close with
him, but I fear I break to Him again; this ye had spoken to in the forenoon. I
have closed with him, but I have broken again, and I never engage in that Duty,
but I break in some thing; I never put my hand to that, but I am crossed in it.
I like you all that berter of that, that it is so; Resolve in Christ's strength,
and he will keep you, and all the Devils in Hell shall not get you to break it.
O! but say ye, I have been trysted to make many Promises, and I have broken
them all, and I fear that I do so again. I say, ye must Resolve again in
Christ's strength; and the hand of Zerubabel that has laid the foundation, he
shall finish it. Go not from this Place till you close with him; We dow not
leave you till ye give your Consent: Turn again unto Me, says the LORD, and I
will Heal your Backslidings. Well Sirs, What have ye more for your
Discouragements? Will ye come and Close with him; He has sent me this Day to
bid you come and Close with Him, He who has stopped so low as to make Offer of
Himself to Sinners, and has undergone such Great Sufferings: It shall be
counted the Greatest Rebellion against The GOD that made you that can be done,
when he has done all this to purchase Salvation, and has brought it to your
hands. (I pray you Sirs, sit down there, or I will speak no more) and ye would
not take it.

But there is a second Objection: Says some, I cannot close with him; ye bid us
close with him, ^ut we cannot it is als far from us as to touch these Skies, we
call do nothing in it Wa, What says the LORD to that Poor Man that had the
wothered hand? He bids him stretch it out, I cannot wad he say; but yet what
says the LORD to him? Stretch out thy hand. And we bid you in his Name make a
Mint, and show your Goodwill; and he will help you to do it, and ye would but
make a Mint at it, and ye would but say LORD* I believe with the Faith that I
have, and as I can, I believe, LORD, help my unbelief. Its a strange matter
Sirs, ye will not try: The Man might have said What needs me stretch but my
wothered hand? I ken that I cannot stretch it out: But yet CHRIST bids him
stretch it out as he can, and he makes his Mint Effectual. Ye that says ye
cannot do so meikle as to make a Mint, make the Mint, and GOD will make these
Mints Effectual. Ye that says ye cannot do so meikle as to make a Mint, make
the Mint, and GOD will make these Mints Effectual, and ye may find him: And
therefore, and ye dar not, or think ye cannot get Grips of Him, yet will ye
give Him a Look, Look unto Me all ye Ends of the Earth, and be saved, Isaiah
45.22. For I am GOD, and there is none else. This is all that he requires, that
ye would give him a Look.

Well, What have ye to say in the Third Place. I will not close with him, that
is the Truth of the Matter; I will not part with the World; I will not Serve
Him; I will not Obey his Commands; I am not Resolved upon that yet; I will not
leave the World that I have had so meikle Advantage in; no, no, I will not
close with him, let you say what you will. Woes me, that is a sore Matter, will
ye not have him? Let Ministers say what they will, will ye not have him? What Is
the Reason or that? Have ye any thing to say against him? He is able to declare
of himelf that it is not his fauit that makes you Unwilling. O say ye. He is a
hard Master, there is no Living with Him, I will not get my Idols entertained
in his Service; He is an uncouth hard Master* there is no Living with Him, and
I dow not part with my Idols my Lusts, and with my Sin; and ye would have the
plain truth of it, I think there is neither Man nor Wife that ever has a blyth
day in his Service, and therefore I must take my hazard, whatever come on the
back of it, I must Sin, and I must take mine Advantage in these things. Well
Sirs, I say there is meikle more Advantage to be had in closing with CHRIST,
and I shall say but Two Things to this: First, He will get better nor ever
stood on your feet to serve him, and them that will be blyth of him, and that
will be both seen and heard. Secondly, I tell you that he is a very Good
Master; but the Reason why ye do not believe, ye know not the heartsom hours in
secret the People of GOD has with him. Ye do not believe, but because ye heard
their things spoken to already: I shall forbear, and speak only to a word, and
so I have done.

Sirs, I think that we have met with a strange piece of Providence, I cannot
tell what it means, for we designed to have spoken the LORDs Word else where
this Day; but we have beyond our Expectation been brought here again, and I
would fain think that the LORD had done it, for some Design that he had for
catching of some Sou^s to himself, or at least it is to make many inexcusable
in the Great Day: Well its by chance that we are brought here, I say this Day;
and I have been presenting unto you, a bloody, wounded, and bruised CHRIST. O
he is all Crushed with the Wrath of GOD: He was forced to cry, What shall I do?
My Soul is Sorrowful even unto Death, and what shall I do? This Wounded CHRIST
He has purchased Sarvation unto Sinners, and has sent us here this Day as his
Ambassadors to make Offer of him, and we have been telling you of the Terms.
Have we prevailed with you Sirs? What say ye to it? We are come in his Name and
we may not leave you like a Knotless-threed; but as I am an Ambassador and
Messenger of the Great King, and therefore I dar not leave you: Here is my
Warrant, we are his Messengers, and here is my Blaze upon my Breast; We are his
Messengers, we come forth in the Kings Great Name; He who is KING of kings that
made Heaven and Earth; and He by whom they shall be judged one Day: It is in
his Name that we come forth; And I Summond and Charge you all, as ye will
Answer before The Great GOD, and as ye would be found of Him in Peace, and as
ye would one Day look him in the Face, and no cry Hills and Mountains fall upon
you to close with him. We Charge you by the Love of JESUS CHRIST that put him
to suffer all these Things. Secondly, We Charge you by the Torments of Hell
that surely shall follow upon Disobeyers. We Charge you under the pain of
suffering the Wrath of the Everlasting GOD, We Charge and Obtest you by the
Love of Him who was Dead and is now Alive, and Lives for evermore We Charge you
by Him who has the Keys of Hell and Death, and the Keys of Heaven. We Charge
you that ye come and tell us, what ye Resolve to do; or are ye Resolved to live
as ye have done? Are ye Prayerless, Godless Livers? Will ye leave off that? Are
ye Drunkards? Will ye leave off that? Will ye yet Drink more? What Resolve ye
to do? Are ye Swearers? Will ye yet swear more? Are ye Repenting? Or Resolve ye
to live a while longer in your Sins? Will ye continue in these things, and keep
your Idols, and your Corruptions? Are ye Resolved upon that, or upon the other
hand? Will ye come this Day and make a Resignation of all your Select unto the
LORD, and close with this Suffering CHRIST, before his Wrath come upon you.
Have ye drawn buck will ye draw back more? Or will ye come to Him? We say Sirs,
for our part, we are but Men, and it may be some of you (...) seen our
Infirmities: But we come this Day in Christ's stoom; We are come here in his
Name at this Time, and by his Orders and Authority: We Charge you to come and
Close with JESUS CHRIST upon his own Terms. What say ye to (...)* We Charge
your Consciences that ye come and Close with (...) We Charge you under the Pain
of Death. We Charge you under the Pain of the Highest Rebellion. We Charge you
under the Pain of the Just Vengeance of GOD. We Charge you under the Pain of
the Indignation of that Wrath that shall come upon Rebels to Close with this
Bloody Savior JESUS CHRIST. What say ye to it? We Charge you to it: We Offer
Him to you: We lay the Offer to every Man's Door, and to every Man's Conscience,
and we Command and Charge you to come and Close with Him: And we desire the
LORD GOD of Heaven that he would confirm this Argument; And if ye will not
close with him, he will make every Man's Conscience stand as a Thousand
Witnesses against him in the Great Day that Neglects this Offer, that Despises
and makes Light of it. Now what say ye to it. Men and Women that has had many
Preachings preached to you? We think its very like and GOD had sent this
Preaching to some Places of the Land where there is not so great a Profession
of Religion, we would not have gotten heard what we had been saying, there
would have been such a din amongst them. O that Grosness of the Hearts of
Siners that makes Light of this Great Offer! What say ye to it? We entreat you,
we beseech you to give an Answeer. Say to it; We must have an Answer, and we
desire not to take a Denial: No, no, that's no the Answer that ye will not do
it. We man have another Answer from you: For we are sent to be Peremptor with
you this Day; And we Charge you to come and take Him, and close with Him this
Day; For ye cannot tell if ever ye shall have the Offer again after this Day
the 20. day of February. We say we cannot tell if ever we shall have the
Opportunity to speak to you again after this Day. What think ye Sirs, that it
is for naught that we come out to Preach when we are in such hazard, and when
we are looked on as Traitors and Rebels in every one of their Meetings; its not
a small Business this: Therefore GOD calls us to be Serious, and no to Trifle
it, till we get our Business done. And therefore Men and Women will you come
and close with him. Dear Friends, will ye say to it: Dear Beloved Friends, will
you let Christ's Death and Pains he underwent in his Sufferings per^wade you to
take Christ's Offer: For we wound fain have you to close with him, for your own
Life and Salvation; we pr^^s it upon you, and as he is offered, so take him. Ye
man prom^^e this, say to it. What say ye to it? Say to it, Dear Friends, give
your Answer; say to it. What say ye to it? Say to him, we seek not your Answer.
Say to him, say something to the LORD: For as the LORD lives ye man say
something, yea, or nay. What say ye to him? Close with him, or as the LORD
lives (I say) ye shall Curse the Time that ye came here to all Eternity, for
Refusing CHRIST this Day in his Offer: Therefore speak to GOD this Day as ye
would not have him to speak in Wrath to you Sirs, say that ye will be the LORDs
Say, that ye will enter into as Everlasting Covenant with Him never to be
forgotten; or as the LORD Lives, these Stocks, and this Water, and that Brae,
and the Earth that ye sit on shall he a Witness against you, and this Tent and
I, and these Clouds that is above your Heads shall be a Witness against you
Eternally. Therefore now Sirs, come, and take the Of fer, and tell GOD that
from this Day forward ye Resolve to be for Him. Say to it: What say ye? Think
ye that it is for naught that we come out upon such a Business, and spend, the
Lives in the Discharging of our Commission. We are Discharged to come here; but
it is for your Immortal Souls that we are come here: Therefore in the Name of
The LORD JESUS CHRIST, We Charge you, let it be your Work to close with him.
Say Sirs; What say ye to it? Say Old-men, and Young Men, with ye close with him
Say Young-bairns, the Youngest of you all, will ye close with him? Say to it,
LORD, I would be content to close with him? I^ ye will not, then the Sun, Moon
and Stars shall be a Witness against you. Will ye speak to him: Will ye cast
away your Idols, and say, What have I to do with Idols any more? Will ye say so
Sirs. Now I betake my self to him, he shall be my GOD, and I resolve that it
shall be so that he shall be my GOD and my King: Say so Sirs. Will ye say
Old-men and Young Men? Will ye say Old-women and Young-women? Say to it: Answer
GOD who is biding you close with him: Say with Good David, Thou art my GOD and
my King; for Thou have Established my Throne, and put a Crown upon my Head; and
He has made with me an Everlasting Covenant well ordered in all things and
sure: He found him to be a Savior when he was quite lost. Well them, will ye
say to it Sirs, we are but Fool Creatures, Poor Sinful Men like your selves,
and it may be sometimes ye have seen our Weakness: But we say we are come here
this Day not in our own Strength: But we tell you we are come here Clothed
with His Authority at this Time: We are not come here this Day in our own Name,
but in the Name and Authority of our Master, as we are Ambassadors of JESUS
CHRIST, we beseech you to close with Him: We would fain fall down upon our
Knees and that would prevail with you to gar you say the thing: We would fall
down upon our bare Knees before you. O Sirs, say to it: What should you say?
Say even that Word which Thomas said, My Lord and my God; and say with David, O
my Soul, though est said unto the Lord that thou art my God: But I said
moreover the Lord shall be my God. Say with the Church in that 50 of Jeremiah
and 5. verse What is that, Come say they, let us enter our selves into an
Everlasting Covenant with GOD which shall never be forgotten. Well Sirs, I say
this Day ye must either enter into an Everlasting Covenant with Him never to be
forgotten. We man even leave you Sirs, and we dow not think of leaving till ye
come to a close with Him; Is there any here that will not Close with Him? We
fear that this be the Ill Turn that we were speaking of in the Morning; Without
question the Word will be the Savor of Death unto Death to some, als well as
it will be the Savor of Life unto Life unto others. Well Sirs, take heed what
ye are Doing, go to Him, and Close with Him. We would fain have you Closing
with Him: I would think it Heartsom if there were many of you going alone, and
trying how it is with you every one of you; Try your selves about it, and the
LORD persuade you so to do; To Him be Praise.


