AN ANSWER TO A LATE PAPER, ENTITLED, A True Copy of a Paper Written By Capt.
THO. WALCOT In Newgate after his CONDEMNATION, and Delivered to his Son
immediately before his EXECUTION; being also his Last Speech at the Place of
Execution.
By ROBERT WEST.
AS I will always be tender of any man's Life, so I would be of his Fame after
his Death; but the Duty I owe to my self, and to truth, obliges me to give an
Answer to part of this Pamphlet. Though through God's and the King's Mercy I am
not at the apparent point of Death, yet I will declare the truth as sincerely
as if I were so: for I hope I am much more convinced of the Horridness of my
Crime, and have more truly Repented of it than Capt. Walcot seems by this Paper
to have done; for notwithstanding his large Profession of his Faith there, He
has not stuck to insert as many falsehoods in this last Paper, as any man that
suffered in the Popish Plot is charged to have done in his Last Speech.

In October last Capt. Walcot acquainted me that there was a Design to
Assassinate the King and Duke in their return that Month from Newmarket; and
that if that were not effected, an Insurrection was intended on the Nineteenth
of Nov. following, which was the first knowledge I had of any Real Plot
whatsoever carrying on against the King. He told me indeed though he thought an
Assassination Lawful, he looked upon it as an ungenerous thing, and therefore
would not engage Personally in it; but he told me he would be concerned in the
Insurrection, and expected to be a Coll. of Horse, and would have had me taken
a Command under Him, which I refused; and he desired me to buy Him a Tuck and
lend him my silk Armor, which I agreed to do. To this he gave no Answer at his
Trial, nor gives any in this Paper: so that he tacitly Confesses it true,
which I think is a clear Evidence that he first drew me into Plots, and I did
not draw him into any.

The Assassination not taking effect in October, and the intended Insurrection
being diverted, I had several discourses with Ferguson, who as Capt. Walcot
told me, had the chief management of it, concerning an intended Assassination
after the several manners I mentioned in my Evidence at Capt. Walcots Trial; at
some of which I think Capt. Walcot was present, and I am sure he was made privy
to them all by me (he coming often to my Chamber) and by Ferguson with whom he
was very intimate. He always approved of it, but, to do him right here as I did
at his Trial, he still refused to engage Personally in it for the same reason
of it is being dishonorable. About the Nineteenth or Twentieth of Nov. he and
Ferguson went with the late E. of Shaftsbury into Holland, and returned to
London about Ash Wednesday last. In their absence some discourses were had
concerning an Assassination and an Insurrection, but no resolutions were taken
by us till their return. Then Ferguson undertook the management of an
Assassination, and to procure money to carry it on, and at one meeting told us
he had engaged Capt. Walcot to Act in it, and that the Capt. would meet us for
the Future, which he did several times as often as his Gout would let him;
particularly he met us twice or thrice about a fortnight before the Kings last
return from Newmarket, and then declared he would be one to fight the Guards,
but would not set upon the Coach; not out of any scruple of Conscience, (as he
falsely insinuates in his Paper, we alleged he did,) but out of a scruple of
honor; saying it was base to set upon a naked man, but to fight armed men had
darger and some bravery in it. After news of the fire at Newmar^et he met us
twice more to consider whether the attempt might be made notwithstanding the
King's sudden return; at both, which times he continued to express his
resolution, to be one to fight the Guards. I consess he said it might bring a
reproach upon his Children, and therefore de^red to have his name concealed,
and did urge, the D. of Monmuth might revenge the Kings Death for his own
Vindication; but that objection was taken off by resolving to kill the Duke of
Monmuth, if he did offer to punish the Acters, and Fer^uson, not my self,
undertook the Duke should not. All the injury I did Capt. Walcot in my Evidence
was the omission of an expression of his when he declared he would fight the
Guards, which in that multitude of particulars I then delivered, slipped my
memory, viz. that he looked upon the Action to be so lawful and Justifiable
that he could die in it with a safe Conscience: so far was he from making any
scruple of Conscience to Act in it.

He owns being at some meetings where discourses were held concerning asserting
our Liberties and Properties, yet mentions not what those discourses were, but
would insinuate they were to some other purpose, and calls it his misfortune
and unhappiness that he was present at them. Those discourses were only about
an Assassination and an Insurrection, and the misfortune was of his own
choosing: for if he did not come over from Ireland principally for such
purposes, I am sure he told me he staid in England for them, and 'twas only his
Gout hindered him from the unhappiness (as he calls it) of being at every
Meeting.

It Is very true I went several times to visit him after his return from Holland
when he had the Gout, but went alone but twice or thrice, and one of those
times he was got abroad. I usually gave him an account of what passed at the
Meetings when he was absent, but I did not urge an Assassination at the
Playhouse as he falsely suggests; For after his and Ferguson's return from
Holland, it was agreed to lay aside all Attempts any where but in the return
from Newmarket, and all the debates were about mangaging that. What I talked to
him about the Playhouse, was before his voyage into Holland; and though I
believe I did use that expression to him, and afterward to Rumbold, [that at
the Play house they would die in their Calling] I only repeated it after
Ferguson who was the first Author of that saying. The Arms he mentioned to be
bought by me, were agreed to be bought at a full Meeting, but not till Easter
and after the Kings return from Newmarket; and Capt. Walcot was present at that
Meeting, and joined in the directions about the nature and sizes of those Arms.
The Arms were Blunderbusses, Carbines, and Horse-Pistolls, which certainly were
very improper, to be used at a Playhouse, and the King was then going to
reside at Windsor and Winchester for all the Summer, as was reported; and
therefore no man in his senses can believe I bought them for that purpose, or
could design the effecting it at a Playhouse, but must look upon that as a
malicious charge upon me, and his pretense to forgive us only a piece of
Hypocritical and customary Cant. There was then some proposal by Ferguson to
see for an opportunity of an Assassination between Windsor and Hampton Court;
but all thoughts of that and of the Playhouse which was then also named, were
soon laid aside, and a General Insurrection became the thing only intended.
It Is true he never saw the Arms because they were never fetched from the
Gunsmith till after the Discovery, but he was very Intimate and familiar with
Rumbold who was to be the principal Acter in the Assassination, and was at most
of the meetings, and parti^ularly at that when the Arms were agreed to be
bought. The men to commit the Assassination were all provided by Ferguson,
Rumbold and Goodenough, as Capt. Walcot very well knew, and not one to be
procured by Coll. Rumsey or my self. He thought not fit to urge any thing of
this at his Trial, because he knew he could be so easily answered.

As to the Combination he charges me and Coll. Rumsey with to swear his
agreement to fight the Guards, nothing can be more improbable. We parted at his
Lodgings to several pla^es unknown to each other, and after we were in custody
were kept close Prisoners without the possibility of sending a Note to, or
receiving one from each other or any body else, and we saw not each other till
we were called to give Evidence, and I had delivered my Evidence to the King
(and so I believe Coll. Rumsey had his) before Capt. Walcot was taken. Neither
was there any necessity to contrive such a Charge against him, for his being at
any meetings and debates which he confesses, was sufficient to make him Guilty
of High Treason Had he not been conscious how fully we could charge him, he
would not have directed his Son to tamper with Coll Rumsey and me to mince our
Evidence against him, as appeared by a Note produced at his Trial. I am not
concerned at the sly denunciation of judgments upon us, which is an usual thing
with Men of his persuasion (and it may be he recommended us to the revenge of
his Sons or some of his friends) but wish he were no more guilty of
prevaricating with God, than I am of Perjury in my Evidence. He has not
thought fit to express in this Paper any sense of his Guilt or Repentance for
it, but rather seems to retain his Old Opinion of it is being a lawful thing. He
only blames his own Credulity, and advises his friends only against trusting
men, not against his crime, and in effect repeats what he said to us at our
parting after the discovery, viz, that he believed God would yet deliver the
Nation, but he did not like the present Instruments who have undertaken it.

If it shall please the King to spare my Life for my Confession and Repentance,
it is a great happiness I can have it for doing no more than my Duty. By his
Letter to the Secretary of State produced at his Trial, it appeared he would
gladly have saved his own so, and desired to have made the D. of M. and other
Persons of Quality's blood (to use his own Phrase) the Price of his own Life:
which is a full Answer to that Popular Objection he makes against our Evidence.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Walter Davis. 1683.


