A VINDICATION Of the present Great Revolution IN ENGLAND; IN FIVE LETTERS
Passed betwixt James Welwood, M. D. and Mr. John March, Vicar of Newcastle upon
Tyne. Occasioned by a SERMON Preached by him on January 30. 1688/9. before the
Mayor and Aldermen, for Passive Obedience and Non-Resistance.

Licensed, April 8. 1689.

London Printed, and sold by R. Tailor near Stationers' Hall, 1689.

THE PREFACE.
READER,
NOthing can excuse me, even to my self, for thus appearing in Print, but the
occasion of it, backed with a Command I could not disobey. Not many Months ago
the posture of Affairs in Europe threatened no less than the utter extirpation
of the Reformed Religion, and Re-establishment of a Yoke, so happily thrown
off, the Age before. The French King, more from the weakness of his
Contemporary Princes, and a fatal Friendship packs up with the Two last Kings
of England, than either by his own Strength or Money, had rendered himself so
formidable abroad* and absolute at home, as enabled him to fall on his
Protestant Subjects, in a Path untrodden by the worst of the Primitive
Persecutors themselves, seeing in this, even the favor of Dying was denied
them: And neither the mighty Services they had done that King in preserving the
Crown upon his Head in his Minority, nor the solemnest Sanctions ratified by
Oath* could secure these poor Victims from the Villainy and Cruelty of Popish
Counsels. The on-looking Protestant States stood amazed at this Tragic Scene;
and all the Assistance they were able to give their distressed Brethren, was that
of Prayers and Tears; they themselves expecting to appear next upon the
mournful Theater. The Accession of a Popish Prince to the Throne, the barefaced
Invasions of Liberty and Property, the palpable Encroachments on Laws and
Fundamental Constitutions, with that (...) of Popish Confidence, a Prince of
Wales, were Events too great and important, not to awaken England out of a
Lethargy, the reiterated Promises of preserving the Protestant Religion as by
Law established, had cast her into. And as some Diseases are not known till
past cure, all the effect of her awakening was to see her Case desperate and
her Ruin inevitable. Things were in this deplorable State, when his present
Majesty, led by the Hand of Heaven, and swayed by the glorious Motives of
Honor and Religion, to save us from the precipice of Ruin, ventured on an
Enterprise unexampl'd in the Records of Time. This stupendous Attempt
including in its Womb the Fate of this, and all other Reformed Churches of
Christendom, was seconded with the Prayers, and alternate Hopes and Fears of
all good Men, who justly considered the then Prince of Orange's Interest, with
that of our Religion, Lives and Liberties, were embarkt in one and the same
Bottom.

The Almighty was pleased beyond the ordinary Tracts of Providence, to meet the
Nations pressing Misery, and to bring our Deliverer to the Capital City, there
to be addressed with the just thanks of a People he had saved from Destruction,
and the humble offer of the Government Military and Civil, for that Iuncture.
It was at this very time, that I had the unhappiness to be hearer of a Sermon
preached by Mr. March; in which his now Majesty's Glorious Enterprise and the
Concurrence and Actings of the Nobility and Gentry of England were scandalized
with the name of Rebellion* and the now Lord Bishop of Salisbury, treated in
the rudest manner, for a Papen said to be his, viz. An Enquiry into the
Measures of Obedience, etc. which Mr. Vicar undertook in his Sermon to refute.
To hear such a Discourse, so timed, and to find its approbation echoed by the
Gentleman's Admirers, was a thing very unpleasant to me; to see a Prince
condemned in the Pulpit by the very Men he came to save, and the People cajoled
by Plausible Insinuations into a bad Opinion of so great a Deliverance, were
too pressing Motives to break Silence. And if I may add one particular Swasive
to these of a more public Nature, the friendship betwixt the Learned Doctor
Thomas Burnet, Physician, and me, and the Obligations I have to him, could not
permit me without a breach of Gratitude, to bear his Brother, My Lord Bishop of
Salisbury, (the honor of our Country) so scurrilously treated, without taking
some notice of it. These were the Inducements that extorted my First Letter,
and that occasioned the rest.

And what Consequents these Lines have produced, if thou be acquainted in the
Country where they were writ, thou can not but know, and if a Stranger, tho I
should tell thee, thou can scarce believe. I designed an Answer to his
Sermon, if I had been allowed a Copy, which to oblige Mr. Vicar to send me, I
wrote the First; so that the many Digressions in the other two, will, I hope,
meet with thy favorable Construction, since I was necessitated to them by
tracing of his. I have done when I have told thee, Thou can not be more a
loser in reading this, than I in writing, and exposing it to the Censure of the
World, contrary to my Inclination, and perhaps to my Interest.

J. W.
London, April 1. 1689.
To the REVEREND Mr. John March, Vicar of NEWCASTLE. Newcastle, Feb. 1. 1688/9.
LEST your narrow Acquaintance in the World, and the Retirement your Humor
obliges you to, should occasion your Ignorance of the Sentiments the most
thinking part of your Hearers have of your other days Sermon, I have given my
self the trouble to write these few Animadversions upon it, which be pleased to
take in good part, as coming from a Person, who as he scorns to flatter you, so
he hates to treat you any otherwise, but as a Gown-man, and a Gentleman.

The first thing which occurs to me in your Discourse, is of such a nature as
the Learned World, and Men of Breeding, have ever disdained; I mean your
unmannerly way of treating a Gentleman, whose Reputation is incapable of being
in the least tainted by any such waspish Expressions as yours. Dr. Burnet has
made a Figure in the World of no contemptible Magnitude, and such an one as
obliges the Roman Catholics themselves (whom none ever more disobliged,) to
treat him in their Writings, with the just Character a Person of his vast
Learning deserves. If in France, amidst the heat of Persecution against those
of his own Religion; if in Italy, yea, in Rome it self, Dr. Burnet has been
carrest by all the Learned of the Romish Persuasion, notwithstanding his
immortal Writings against them, could it be dreamed, that in so Noble and
Ancient a Corporation as this of Newcastle, and in presence of so many Worthy
Gentlemen, the Magistrates thereof, any of the Black-Robe would venture to
treat this Dr. Burnet with the scurrilous and indecent Epithets of [ a Man that
has made a great bustle in the World, an Apostate from the Church of England, a
seditious Inquirer, a scandalous Pamphleteer, and the like,] and to repeat such
Expressions seventen times in less than three quarters of an hour? Was this due
from a Minister of the Church of England to the Learned Dr. Burnet, who to his
Immortal Glory has vindicated the Reformation of that Church from the
Aspersions of its Enemies, by a History admired by all the World, and done
already into several Foreign Languages? I might say more to oblige you to a
blush, but sure I am, its punishment enough in it self that you did so.

The next thing I take notice of in your Sermon is your Endeavors to prove
Passive Obedience and Non-Resistance, a Principle founded on the Word of God,
and asserted by all the Protestants in the World. Pray Sir, what new thing have
you discovered from the Sacred Text, but what has been a thousand times said,
and as many times convincingly answered, and particularly by the great Grotius,
a Man not much inferior to you in Learning and Judgment. I confess it is a
matter of no great difficulty to talk bigly of Arguments for any Opinion, in a
place where there is none to answer. But as to your asserting, That to resist
Magistrates in any case, is disallowed by all the Protestants in the World, I
would have you to talk this in some place where Protestant Books are forbid,
but not where we have the Greatest and Learned of that Religion expressly
allowing of it in many cases, as among many others, Calvin, Beza, Du Plessis,
Luther, Melancton, Zuinglius, Dumoulin, etc. And to evince that their Practice
goes equal pace with their Opinion, I must tell you, That you cannot instance
me any Protestant Church in Europe (England alone excepted,) that was not
necessitated to wrestle through its Reformation from Popery and Slavery, by
resisting the Power that would have perpetuated both. None acquainted with
Modern History, but knows, That France, Germany, Switzerland, the Grisons, the
Low Countries, Swedland, Scotland, Denmark, and Poland, forced their way to
Reformation by Resistance, and the most of them through Rivers of Blood. I confess
it could have been wished, That calmer Methods had been used, but the then
Juncture of Affairs in Europe, and concurring Providence of God, seemed not
then to allow them. I know that many Divines of late, among others the
Excellent Claud has thought fit to lay the grounds of all these Wars (in the
preceding Age) upon the account of Civil Interest, viz. Oppression, and breach
of Laws* and if it be so, it meets too patly with our case in England: So that
if we be not allowed to vindicate our Religion, at least we may vindicate our
Civil Liberties, by resisting a Power that would trample upon them. And I here
positively challenge you to instance one Protestant Writer of any Fame that
disapproves the grounds of the Civil Wars of France, Low Countries,
Switzerland, and Germany, because they were either upon a Civil or a Religious
Account. And upon the other hand, among a great many in better Libraries, I Will
produce you out of that small one I have in this place, ten or twelve expressly
proving the lawfulness of these Wars upon both these grounds, and yet in them
all there were the very same Steps made that appear in the great Revolution of
England, at this day. And that this was the Unanimous Sentiment of this very
Nation England in the last Age, appears by its mighty protection of, and
influence upon the Reformations abroad, under the happy Conduct of the Glorious
Queen Elizabeth; so that in disapproving of Resistance upon the account of
Religion and Liberties, you throw a black Aspersion upon the Sacred Ashes of a
Princess, who at the expense of a vast Treasure and many Lives, assisted
afflicted Subjects against their Tyranizing Princes: And who knows but the
Almighty God may raise up in our Age another Princess to act over again the
part of her Triumphant Predecessor, and make her a glorious Instrument to
perfect that Reformation which the other did so happily begin?

I might enlarge upon a great many things in your Sermon, which this short
Letter cannot allow of; but I admire what bad Genius prompted you to style
Self-Defence, even in a general Notion, an old Fanatic Principle. Were the
Authors of the Roman Tables, their Codex, Pandects, and Institutions, and all
the Famous Lawyers that commented upon them Fanatics? Is not Moderamen
inculpatae turelae, looked upon by them and by all Mankind, as an indeleble
Impression fixed upon our Nature by the Hand of our Maker? If you had been at
the pains to distinguish betwixt the Kinds of this Self-Defence, and wherein it
was allowed and wherein not; you might have informed the Judgments of your
Hearers; but to give it such a Name without any distinction, I Will be bold to
say, you are the first that did it in a Pulpit.

There is but one thing more that I shall at present take notice of in your
Discourse; and really I cannot do it without horror! Your saying, That whoever
meddled with the Kings Forts, Castles, Militia, and Revenue, were in the sense
of your Text, guilty of Damnation. Pray Sir, do you consider upon whom you pass
this uncharitable Censure? Is it not upon a Prince, that to rescue us from
Popery and Slavery has ventured his All, and who seems to have been given us of
Heaven, a Restorer of our Breaches? Does not this your Thunder fall upon a
mighty Protestant State, who gave him the means to accomplish this glorious
Enterprise? In this you cast a Blot upon all the Protestant Princes in Europe,
who have concurred with him in it, as the last cast of the Dye for our
Religion. In short, you throw an indeleble Blot upon the most considerable
Nobility and Gentry of the Nation that assisted him in this great Action: And
above all your Censure lies heavy upon the present Convention, who have
committed unanimously the Government into the Princes Hands for this Juncture:
And allow me to say, That a greater Scandalum Magnatum was never tried at a
Bar, than this of yours.

In fine, Let any one of sound Judgment consider, if this Discourse of yours be
well Timed, and if it had not been more Prudence to have locked up such Notions
in your own Breast, than by giving them vent in a Pulpit, expose a Noble
Corporation to the Misapprehensions of those at the Helm upon your account, and
amuse the People with bad impressions of a stupendous Deliverance, scarcely
equaled in History.

Sir, I have transgrest the Limits of a Letter, but if you will allow me the
Favor of a Copy of your Sermon, you shall have an Answer of it at full length,
by

SIR, Your Humble Servant JAMES WELWOOD.
Let me know if I may expect your Answer, or a Copy of your Sermon.



To Mr JAMES WELWOOD. Newcastle, February 11th. 1688/9.
It Is certain I never knew till this Morning that you had given your self the
trouble, and my meanness the honor and satisfaction of a Letter, and to make
the earliest acknowledgments I could, of so particular a favor, I set my self
to the Writing an Answer as soon as I had leave from the Company, your Messenger
found me engaged in: You are pleased in the first place to accuse me of
treating Dr. Burnet in a very rude manner, to which accusation I return you
this Answer,

First, That I knew not that Doctor Burnet was the Author of that Pamphlet.

Secondly, I have been Informed that he disowns it.

Thirdly, I am willing to believe this Information for the Doctors honor,
because it is well known he has in his Learned Writings, stiffly asserted the
Doctrine of Passive Obedience, insomuch that some have been pleased to tell the
World in Print, that he has asserted it even to a fault.

Fourthly, If Doctor Burnet be the Author of the said Pamphlet, I have not
treated him so ill as he has done a Crowned Head, and his own Sovereign
Prince, and this I hope will pass for a just Apology with a Person of your
Loyalty.

In the second place, you quarrel with those Epithets I bestowed on the
Anonymus Author of the said Pamphlet, but it had been a more substantial
Vindication of his Innocence to have refuted the reasons on which the
imputation was grounded.

In the third place, You take notice that I affirmed in my Sermon, that the
Doctrine of Passive Obedience, etc. was a Principle asserted by all the
Protestants in the World, but as to this part of my Sermon, either your great
memory, or great understanding failed you* for that which I asserted was this,
That all the Protestant Churches own the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament to be a perfect Rule of Faith and Manners, and for a proof of this, I
do now refer you, as I did then, to the Corpus Confessionum, and thus you have
spent a third part of your Letter in chasing your own shadow; if my Sermon had
concerned me in the Controversy, I would also make it appear that you injure
some of those great names you mention in your Letter, such as Luther, Calvin,
Melancton and others, by making them Patrons of Resistance, which is but
another name for Rebellion. But Doctor Burnet was better informed by a Learned
Divine of Franckford, as you may see in his Travels, where you find the
Government of the Empire differs from this of England, so far that what would
be unlawful Resistance here, would be but a just and legal defense there, but
my Sermon is not concerned in this matter, and therefore I shall wave it.

In the fourth place* you say that I asserted Passive Obedience and
Non-resistance of the higher Powers, as a Principle founded in the Word of God,
this I confess I must own, and it is not only my private opinion, but also the
Doctrine of our Church, as you may see in her excellent Homilies against
Rebellion. When you shall give your self the trouble to prove these Texts are
misapplied by our Church, you shall hear farther from me, and I assure you, I
urged no other Texts than what you will find there, and this will save me the
labor of copying out that part of my Sermon.

In the fifth place, you admire what bad Genius prompted me, to style self
defense even in the general notion of it an old Phanatick Principle, Sir I find
you are very subject to make misrepresentations, I was not obliged by my Text
to treat of self defense in the general notions of it, and I do assure you it is
lawful to defend our selves against Robbers and private Aggressors, as it would
have been for the late Archbishop of St. Andrews against Balfour and his other
barbarous Assassines. This I easily grant you, but I inveighed in my Sermon as
the Text did warrant me against such as resisted the Higher Powers, and to tell
you the truth, the bad Genius that prompted me to style such resistance* an old
Fanatic Principle came out of Scotland, for I have in my little Library,
Buchanan, Douglas, Rutherford, Nephthali* and other Scotch Fanatics, who
maintained Rebellion under the disguise of such self defense, and because you
pretend to great skill in the Civil Law, I must tell you I have in my little
Library the Roman Tables, the Codex, Pandects, Institutes, and several Famous
Civilians that have commented upon them, and I do not find that they allow self
defense against the Higher Powers. I desire you therefore to tell me whether
the Lex Regia, or what part of the Codex, Pandects, etc. does allow self
defense against the Higher Powers; and I would also know whether St. Paul did
not understand the Roman Tables, and the Constitution of that Oecomenical
Empire, and whether he chose rather to Preach, as I did the Doctrine of
Non-resistance, than that of Self-defence: I hope you will not say as a
wretched Socinian once did, Paulo majora canamus. Whereas you add I should have
given some distinctions of the several kinds of self defense, I think with
Submission, the Text made it needless to distinguish, seeing there is express
mention of Resisting the Higher Powers, which, had your zeal given you leave to
have attended to, I Am so charitable as to believe you would have reserved your
complaint for a fitter occasion.

In the sixth place, you tell me you cannot recount without horror the passage
of my Sermon, Whosoever medleth with the Kings Forts, Militia, etc. were guilty
of Damnation, the passage fairly represented was thus, Our Savior commands
Subjects to render unto Caesar the things that* are Caesar's* now since by the
undoubted Laws of the Land, all Forts, Customs, Militia, etc. are the things
that belong to our English Caesar, our Savior were he now upon Earth, would
command the Subjects of this Kingdom at this time to render those things unto
Caesar, and not to seize them, etc. Is this such terrible Doctrine that you
could not mention it without horror? but in England we bring solid Arguments,
not puerile Exclamations to prove a Doctrine to be false. If then it be a sin
for Subjects to seize the Kings Revenues, etc. as I shall presume it to be,
till I see the contrary proved, it will no doubt without repentance expose the
sinner to Damnation, unless you believe it to be but a venial sin; you seem a
little malicious, when you make me reflect upon the Prince of Orange, but you
cannot but know, that I am discoursing of the duty of Subjects, and I hope you
do not believe the Prince to be one. As therefore I had no occasion to mention
him, so I can assure you he was far from my thoughts. You show little skill in
our Laws, when you call Preaching up Passive Obedience (which your Friend
Doctor Burnet will inform you is the avowed Doctrine of our Church) Scandalum
Magnatum* your rash censure sounds more like a Scandalum Ecclesiae, you are
mightily concerned for the Protestant States and Princes of Europe, but I know
no injury done them by my Sermon, I am confident there is not a Protestant
Prince, who understands his own Interest that will be offended at the Doctrine
of Passive Obedience, you are much more guilty of casting an indeleble blot
upon the Noble Progenitors of the Prince of Orange, the High and Mighty States
of Holland, etc. who will have a Reformation introduced amongst them by a
Rebellion? I am not at leisure to vindicate all the Protestant Countries, but
it will be a sufficient answer to your bold challenge, to inform you that the
States of Holland give another account of their revolt from the King of Spain,
assuring us that the constitution of the Government of the Netherlands, was
such as allowed them to defend themselves against the Encroachments of their
Prince, but the Constitution of the English Monarchy is different, for the 12
and 13 Statutes Car. 2. forbid the Subjects to Levy any War offensive or
defensive.

In the close, you question my prudence in timing my discourse no better, this
perhaps may be a complement in Scotland, and therefore let it pass, but Sir I
must tell you I have always Preached this Doctrine on January the 30th, ever
since I came to Town, and formerly it has not been thought improper for that
sad occasion, but received with good approbation: If the times be changed,
Truth is not, and English Ministers of all Men ought not to be time servers; In
that Sermon I followed the dictates of my own Conscience, and though I have
read as much Politics as my Neighbors, yet I have always thought, and do
still think, that honesty is the best Policy: You desire a Copy of my Sermon,
and with great modesty threaten me with a full Answer, but, Sir, from the
little Specimen you have given me of your skill in Divinity, I find you are one
of another Profession, and therefore I question whether it will quit cost to
trouble you, but since you tell me that Doctor Burnet is the Author of that
Pamphlet, I took notice of in my Sermon, and I hear that you have some
acquaintance with that great Man, to show my just veneration for that Learning
he is master of, I shall not refuse to send him a copy of it, in case you can
prevail with him to vindicate those positions he lays down there, I do assure
you I should be very well content to be honestly rid of an error, I can promise
my self no great advantage by. If you are in love with scribbling, and think fit
to communicate your thoughts, concerning those two points which are more
agreeable to your Profession, viz. An succus Pancreaticus sit causa principalis
morborum, and an clarissimus Harveius fuerit primus inventor circulationis
sanguinis, both of which I deny, though affirmed by several of your Learned
tribe, I may possible gain more by your Learning in Physic, than I have by
your skill in Divinity. Be pleased to take in good part this hasty scrible, and
pardon the faults thereof, by which you will oblige,

SIR, Your humble Servant John March.

To the Reverend Mr. JOHN MARCH Vicar of Newcastle. Newcastle, February 13th.
1688/9.
SIR,
I Expected the Copy of your Sermon, but I have received a Letter, and that of
such a strain as bespeaks you no Apathist. I take no notice of your direction,
but to tell you, that if you had taken the degree of Doctor in any University
of England, you would have found the good manners in any civilized Nation of
Europe, to be designed as such, and albeit no Man has a greater Veneration for
the two great Luminaries of Oxford and Cambridge then I, yet the University
where I commenced Doctor, would take it ill to be placed in a much lower
degree. Letting this pass among a great many expressions, that smells of a
redundancy of Choler, be pleased to take this Answer to your Letter, as it lies
divided in your Numerical Paragraphs.

First, You are pleased to say, you knew not that Doctor Burnet was the Author
of that Pamphlet, the inquiry into the measures of Obedience; and though you
had, yet you have not treated him so ill, as he has treated his Sovereign
Prince. To which I answer, that whether it be his or not, it matters not in
this case, since common fame makes it so, and every body in this place believes
it; And that you likewise thought so, would appear from that expression in your
Sermon; yea, Doctor Burnet himself cannot instance above three hundred Martyrs
in Q. Mary's days, the word [ himself] being emphatick enough to oblige your
Hearers to believe you took him for the Author of that Pamphlet, as you call
it: That you designed that great Man in your kind Epithets, and the Person
unknown, appears plainly by your calling the inquirer a Man that has made a
great bustle in the World, giving so scurril a term to the Doctors justly
acquired fame: And if it was not he, pray be pleased to condescend whom else
you meant.

And I must tell you, this is not the first time you have spoken unkindly of
him. When you talk of the Doctor his ill treating of his Sovereign Prince, I
doubt not but you incline that others should share in this imputation, since
the Nobility and Gentry of the Nation, have treated the King worse by their
actions, in your sense, than ever Dr. Burnet himself was capable to do by his
Pen. And I assure my self, that as Conscience and Love to Religion, obliged
these Noble Patriots to what they have acted, so the same Principle did actuate
the Doctor to what he has wrote.

Secondly, You quarrel me for minding you of the scurrilous Epithets you gave
the Inquirer, and tell me, I ought rather to have refuted the Reasons against
him. The truth is, I was in the wrong to quarrel with such Epithets, since they
seem to be congeneal with your Nature; But as to the Refuting of your Reasons,
as my Memory is not the worst, so I confess it is none of the best, which makes
me loath to trust it with any Methodick Systeme of the slender arguments you
used, so as to satisfy my self in a Categorick Answer to them; But if you had
wished for a Refutation, you might have occasioned it, by a Copy of them; And
if I had not at least endeavored to Answer them, I would have been to blame
for breach of promise.

Thirdly, You tax me with a mistake in saying, that you maintained Passive
Obedience to be the Sentiment of all the Protestants in Europe, To this I
answer, that if I had not evinced to you, that it was not their opinion,
perhaps your charity would have permitted me to lie under that mistake still:
And if it be a mistake, I am not in it alone, for a great many of your Hearers
persuade themselves you said so. But I cannot but take notice, how unwilling
you are, that the Protestants abroad should share in your darling Tenet of
Passive Obedience, and your unkindness to them herein supprises me the less,
seeing it is not the first time you have unchurch'd them, upon the account they
were not so constitute as the Church of England. But the value I have of them,
from a more intimate acquaintance, than your narrow Theater could allow you,
obliges me to do that Justice to the Protestants abroad as to affirm, That
notwithstanding all the Resistance they made to their Tyrannizing Princes, they
are as much for Passive Obedience in its true and rational sense, as the Church
of England it self, that is, where the Commands of the Sovereign are
incompatible with their duty, they hold themselves obliged to suffer for their
disobedience, rather than to sin. In all their Confessions of Faith, they own
Magistracy as the Ordinance of God, and disapprove opposition to it in
execution of Law; But they never so far divested themselves of Reason, as to
yield up their Throats to be cut by their Princes turned absolute Tyrants, when
it was in their power to vindicate their Religion and Liberties by their Sword.
That England concurred with them in this opinion appears (as I told you in my
Letter) by the mighty protection they vouchsaft them in this their Resistance.
Moreover, which I forgot to tell you, in all the Convocations of the Clergy of
England at that time, there were vast sums given to carry it on, and the
preamble of every Act does fairly insinuate the lawfulness of that resistance
made by the Protestants abroad against their Princes; so that resistance was
not only allowed by the Nation, but likewise by the Church of England in a full
Convocation of its Fathers. And if the Church of England assisted so generously
in the support of the Protestants abroad, at a time when their Religion was
Heresy by the Laws of their Country; How much rather would these excellent
Fathers of the Church have done it, if their Religion had been settled by
positive and fundamental Laws, as it was after by several Edicts and Treaties.
What you say of the difference of the Government of the Empire and that of
England I know, but let me tell you, as the Golden Bull is the great Barrer
against Slavery there, the same is the Coronation Oath here, and consequently
if the Germans may lawfully resist the Emperor, or the Rex Romanorum upon
breach of that Bull, the same may the Representatives and Nobility of England
do upon palpable breaches of the Coronation Oath, for as the Golden Bull is the
great security of the German aggregate Body against the encroachments of the
Emperor, the same is the Coronation Oath in England against the encroachments
of the King.

Fourthly, You tell me, you hold Passive Obedience to be founded on the word of
God, and maintained by the Church of England, and contained in her Homilies. To
this I Answer, 1. Tell me what opinion was ever broached in the Church, without
a pretense of Scripture to back it? And what gloss can you put upon any Text of
Holy Writ to prove your position, but what has been a thousand times said and
as many times refell'd. Yet if you had allowed me a Copy of your Sermon, I
would have endeavored to clear the sense of the Texts you make use of (which I
do not exactly remember) so as to make nothing for your purpose; And in your
doing the one, and I the other, neither of us would have reason to value our
selves upon that score, since I fear none of us could outdo, what has been
again and again done already on that Subject: In the mean time let me tell you,
that the simple stating of the Question, solves all the Arguments you can bring
from Scripture, as I shall make appear in one word anon. 2. As to Passive
Obedience its being the Doctrine of the Church of England, I have told you
already that the Fathers of the Church of England contradicted it in Queen
Elizabeth's Reign. And where can we find more authentic records of their
Opinion and Doctrine, than in the Printed Manifesto's, and Acts made in
Convocation. As to the 39 Articles, which is in place of a Confession of Faith,
and the Homilies wherein you say that Doctrine is maintained, I Will make bold to
say, that Passive Obedience in the narrow sense you take it, was not so much as
thought on at the time of their Publishing: And albeit you should find a way to
make them seem to speak for you, the simple right stating of the^ question
answers them sufficiently. It would seem to me, that the Mitred Clergy, and
particularly that excellent Prelate My Lord Bishop of London, should be at
least as well acquainted with the Doctrine of the Church of England, as any
private Minister in a corner of the Nation, and how far they have refell'd your
fond Principle, appears with a Witness in their committing the Government to
the Prince in this juncture, and a great many other public actings. If your
Passive Obedience be the Principle of the Church of England, how few Church of
England-men are there in both Houses of Convention at present, since they act
so diametrically opposite to it? And yet I persuade my self these Worthy
Patriots would take it ill to be called of any other Church. 3. To refell your
Tenet of Passive Obedience in one word, I need no more, but to state the case
fair, and without equivocation thus. Whatever can be said from Scripture or the
acknowledgment of Protestant Churches, Centers all in this, viz. That it is
unlawful to resist the Magistrate while he is lawfully such, because he is Gods
Vicegerent within his own Iurisdistion; But when by his maleversations he
divests himself of that Office, and assumes a contradictory Character, by
trampling upon Laws, and endeavoring to subvert the fundamental constitutions
of the State, contrary to his Coronation Oath, in this case, in my humble
opinion, He is no more justly a Magistrate nor the object of our Obedience, and
sua culpa amittit Imperium; Upon which the Primores Regni and the
Representatives of the People, may lawfully fill up the Throne vacated by such
palpable encroachments. This being the State of the case, all the Texts of
Scripture you can produce for Obedience to Magistrates, are to be natively
understood and in a Logical propriety of predication asserted, of Obedience to
Magistrates when they are justly and lawfully such, but the Relatives do not
meet, when the Magistrate by his own fault becomes dispossessed of the Office.
There is one thing more I would have you to take notice of to clear this head;
and it is this. There is a great difference betwixt resisting the Magistrate
when he tramples upon the Religion and Liberty of any part of his Subjects, in
the execution of the Laws made against them, and his doing of it, in
contradiction to Fundamental Laws already made in their Favors. As for
example, albeit I should acknowledge that in Nero's time it had been unlawful
for the Christians to resist him, because Christianity was at that time
contradictory to the Laws of the Empire; Yet I cannot persuade my self, but in
case the Laws at that time, had not only established the Christian Religion as
the Religion of the Empire, but had expressly disallowed any other, under the
severest penalties, if the Roman Senate, and the whole almost of the People had
been Christians, I cannot persuade my self, I say, but they might have lawfully
resisted Nero; Neither have we the least tract in the History of that age, that
the Christians disallowed the Senate of Romes declaring that Monster, an Enemy
of Mankind and of the Roman Empire. I would fain know, can Magistracy lodged in
any particular Person at this day, pretend to any more Divine Right, then the
Patris-familial Power; And yet by the Concession of Lawyers notwithstanding, I
owe entire Obedience to my Father in this, if my Father divesting himself of
all paternal affection should conspire my death, and endeavor my destruction,
in this Hypothesis, the Lawyers say, ei debetur Reverentia, sed non Obedientia.
And pray what seems more inconsequential to reason, and the Economy of the
World, yea, to the Goodness and Wisdom of Almighty God, than that some Millions
of People should be so despotically subjected to the Power of one Man, of the
same infirmities with themselves, as in case he should command all their
Throats to be cut at once, they are obliged under the pain of no less than
Damnation, by a thing called Passive Obedience, to submit their Necks tamely to
the blow, since in no case you say they may resist. And to use the words of a
Worthy Gentleman in the late Parliament, that one Man should die for the whole
People, we have heard, but that the whole People should perish for the pleasure
of one Man, is an unaccountable piece of folly. I have read some Champions of
Regal Prerogative, and among others, the Learned Barclay (who though a
Scotch-man, yet as bitter an Anti-fanatick as your self) and they all agree,
that at least in these three cases, the Subjects may not only resist, but wage
War against their Prince. 1. They say, it may be done so as to Dethrone him, Si
imperium abdicavit aut habet pro derelicto: And this to be Parallel with our
case in England, the Votes of both Houses of Convention declare. 2. They say,
he forfeits the Crown, if he either alienate it or subject it to the Power of
another. And how far a Prince bigoted in the Romish Religion may stretch his
Zeal, England found by sad experience in King John's days; And you that are so
well acquainted with Law, cannot be ignorant of that Maxim, quod semel datur
Deo and Ecclesiae non auferendum: and so sweet a morsel given to Pope Innocent
III. may be challenged by Innocent XI. conform to that Maxim of the Court of
Rome. And how far he that endeavors to subject a Protestant State to the Sea
of Rome in Spirituals, may fall under this Category, I leave it to them to
judge, who are acquainted with the Policies and necessary encroachments of the
Court of Rome, even in Temporals. 3. These Lawyers acknowledge, That a Prince
forfeits the Crown, Si hostili animo in populi exitium feratur. And how far a
Prince may be guilty of this, when he endeavors to bring in a Religion
inconsistent with the Peoples eternal Happiness, I leave it to you the
Gentlemen of the Black Robe, who know best how preferable the Safety and Health
of the Soul is to that of the Body, or to the Goods of Fortune. And thus Sir, I
presume I have cleared the Controversy betwixt us, by a fair stating the
Question, and these necessary Glosses upon it.

Fifthly, You are offended at my Saying; What bad Genius prompted you to call
Self-Defence an Old Fanatic Principle, and you tell me, You was not obliged
from your Text to distinguish betwixt the Kinds of it. I refer it to any
rational Man, if it was not absolutely needful to distinguish the Kinds of it,
since many things may be said of the Species, that in propriety of Speech
cannot be said of the Genus and vice versa, many things agree to the Genus that
cannot be said properly of the Species. As for Example, Would it be proper for
me to say in general, The Sea ebbs and flows ten or twelve times in the natural
Day, without telling what Sea I mean, because forsooth the Euripus does so? And
consequently it is as improper to say in general, Self-Defence is an old
Fanatic Principle, without distinguishing what kind of it deserves that Name.
But I Am willing your Zeal in the Delivery should excuse this mistake. You skip
strangely out of the Road to meet the Murderers of the Archbishop of St.
Andrews, and lose your Pains; for I abhor the Action as much as you. As to your
saying, That Self-Defence came out of Scotland, I hope their Neighbor Nation
of England has sufficiently vindicated them in it, by so fairly following their
Copy in this Juncture. You add, That you have many Civil Law Books, and none of
them allows Self-Defence. I find having of Books without reading them does no
great Feats. That they disallow Resistance to Magistrates acting as such, I
acknowledge. But that there are not a great many Senatus-consulta, Plebiscita,
Responsa Iurisprudentium, etc. through the whole Tract of the Corpus Iuris,
fixing Boundaries to the Magistrates Power, against the breaches of which, they
often made Resistance worthy of the Roman Name, none can be ignorant, who know
any thing of that Law. Must I tell you, That in all the Changes of the Roman
Government to that of Emperor exclusive, there was still a Tribunitia potestas
lodged among the Plebeians, of mere design to set Bounds to the Supreme
Magistrates? Hence it was, That after the Government became Imperial and more
Despotick, the Emperors were obliged in Policy to unite the Tribunitial Power
to the perpetual Dictatorship and Imperial Dignity. Was there ever a People in
the World more jealous of Liberty and impatient of Slavery, as the Romans?
Witness the dethroning of Tarquin, the Plebeians Insurrection against the
Patritii, the bloody Wars of Sylla and Marius, Caesar and Pompey, the
unparalled Battle of Munda, etc. Yea, after that Rome had submitted its Neck
to the Imperial Yoke, there still was left them considerable Vestiges of the
Peoples and Senates Power, which in many Emergents they were obliged to make
use of; and must I mind you of the famous Saying of one of the greatest of the
Emperors, in giving the Praetor the Sword, Pro me si mereor in me, mentioned
with mighty Applause by Pliny the Younger, in his Panegyric?

Sixthly, You are displeased at my Saying, I could not recount without horror
your affirming, That whoever meddled with the Kings Forts, Revenue, etc. were
guilty of Damnation, And yet with the same breath you say it over again, in
expressing your self in your Letter thus: [ If it be a Sin for Subjects to
seize the Kings Revenues, etc. ( as I shall presume it to be, till the contrary
be proved) it will no doubt without Repentance, expose the Sinner to
Damnation.] In truth, I must acknowledge my Judgment fails me in making any
material Difference betwixt what I said, was expressed in your Sermon, and what
you say your self in your Letter, for still in both, meddling with the Kings
Forts, etc. is a sin exposes to Damnation. Then you tell me, You had no design
against the Prince of Orange in your Discourse; and in my taxing you with a
Scandalum Magnatum, you accuse me of a Scandalum Ecclesiae. To this I answer,
First, What can reflect more upon the Illustrious Prince of Orange, than that
the meddling with the Kings Forts, etc. exposes to Damnation. Since albeit his
Highness be a Sovereign Prince, and no Subject of England; yet in heading and
assisting these Subjects that seizes the Kings Forts, etc. he must necessarily
incur the Guilt of a mighty Sin in your sense: For he that so far assists
another in a sinful Act as without his assistance, it could not have been
acted, is certainly guilty before God of the sinful Act it self. So, if the
Nobility and Gentry of England seized the Kings Forts, etc. and thereby in your
sense exposed themselves to Damnation, it follows necessarily, that the Prince
of Orange who so far assisted them as to render them capable to do it, must in
the same sense of yours share in the Guilt of so doing. And that this Darling
Prince of all the Protestants of Europe, is none of yours, appears too clearly,
by your refusing either to preach your self or allowing others to do it, and by
your Curats leaving out the Prayer for him on this happy day of Commemoration
of that mighty Deliverance, whereof God has made him the glorious Instrument.
Secondly, It Scandalum Magnatum be not properly in its self a Reflection upon
the Honor of a Peer of England, I am mistaken, and am willing to be corrected
by those who have had more occasion to know the Laws of England than I have
had; And if it be so, What greater blemish to their Honor and blot upon their
Scutcheon can there be, than to be accused of Rebellion, which you say is the
same with Resistance, and of Actions that necessarily without Repentance,
expose them to Damnation. Thirdly, I knew not before that the giving a Check to
a private Minister of England enveighing against the Nobility of England, was a
Scandalum Ecclesiae; neither did I dream that your single Opinion was to be
estimate, that of a whole Church. The Roman Catholics on this side the Alps,
scorn to lodge the Infallibility in one single Person; and that a private
Protestant Minister here, should so far fix it upon himself, as the least
Reflection upon him, must be estimate a Scandal done to the whole Church, is a
thing very new to me. In the end of this Paragraph, you would fain fix upon me
the putting a blot upon the Predecessors of the Prince of Orange: A strange
Inference indeed from any thing in my Letter. The Revolt of the States of
Holland under the blessed Conduct of that Illustrious Hero William of Nassaw,
was in my sense no Rebellion, but a just Vindication of Religion and Civil
Liberties, while in your sense it must merit no better Name than Rebellion,
since Rebellion and Resistance in your Opinion are convertible Terms. And if
you will turn over the Authors that have written in favor of that Revolt, and
the most exact model of the present Government of the States, I know, called
Commentariolus de Statu Belgii, thought to be Grotius's, you will find a very
near Parallel betwixt the Coronation Oath of England and that of the House of
Burgundy, and their Privileges to have been little or nothing above ours.

In the last Paragraph, You are angry at my blaming you for wrong timing your
Sermon, and tell me, You use always to preach such Doctrine upon the 30 th. of
January, and if Times be changed, Truth is not. In answer to this, I refer you
to what I wrote in my Letter upon this Head: Only this I must say; I find it is
hard to eradicate a bad Custom. You mind me of the Fate of those that have been
Seasick, even when the Storm is past, and themselves on firm ground, their
Giddiness continues. You have been so used to thunder out your little Bolts
against the poor Dissenters, and to cry up Passive Obedience in order to their
Ruin, when the edge of the Laws were pointed against them; That now when the
Horizon begins to clear up, and the Cheat of setting Protestants by the Ears
discovered, you cannot wean your self from the old beloved way of railing.
About the middle of this Paragraph, You seem to scorn me for an Antagonist,
because of my being of another Profession, and my small skill in Divinity: And
are pleased to promise Dr. Burnet a Copy of your Sermon; if so be, I can
prevail with him to vindicate these Positions contained in the Inquiry you
would refute. * To this I answer, First, I cannot but commend you in desiring
such an Antagonist as Dr. Burnet; it were honor enough for you to be overcome
by so great a hand: But forgive me to tell you, I am not so far as yet berest
of Common Sense, (although I had the honor to have such Power with him) as to
desire him to stoop to so unequal a Combat. Secondly, As to my want of Skill in
Divinity, I am not so impudent as to deny it: But I hope no body will blame me
to love the light of the Sun, tho I cannot attain the Eagles Fortune to look
that bright Planet in the Face. I am heartily sorry, That that Noble Study
should be monopolized to the Clergy; for I was still in the mistake, That our
Religion allowed us a share in it, pro nostro modulo, and was so foolish as to
think, That a Physician whose proper Study is the search of Nature, might very
lawfully employ some part of his Hours in that sacred Science whose immediate
Subject is the God of Nature. I am happy in this, That neither in my other
Letter nor in this, I have had any occasion of demonstrating my Skill in
Divinity, or the want of it: And if you will not be angry, I Will tell you, You
seem to me to do with your vast Treasure of Divinity, as some sordid Misers
with their Money; they hoard it up so close in their Cabinets, as it is
impossible for others to say certainly they have any. Thirdly, As to my want of
Judgment, Memory, Skill in Divinity, and a great many other such Expressions
all along your Letter, which I here take notice of once for all; I would have
thought that a Man of your great Parts and Character, would have rather in your
Christian Charity have pitied me, than upbraid me with a defect of Nature; For
those who know us both, may tell you, That if my Spirit had not been so utterly
incapable of Letters, I might have attained to some small Scantlings of
Knowledge: My Education both at home and abroad, and the Charges of it being at
least nothing inferior to yours. I am glad to find your Paroxism over in the
end of your Letter, and you inclinable to a little Sport in proposing to me Two
Questions in Physic; I might laugh them over if your Skill in Physic were not
greater than mine in Divinity: And to show my self all Obedience, I answer to
the first, That under your Correction a redundancy in Choler, with a little
mixture of adust Melancholy, has produced more Tragedies in the Body of Man,
than the Juice of the Pancreas is capable to do; and these Affections seldom
hit the Body without allowing a large share to the Mind. As to the second
Question, I was almost going to complement you, by giving the credit of the
Discovery of the Circulation of the Blood to a Clergyman, the great Padro
Paulo as Bishop Bedel insinuates; but I am as loath to part with the Honor of
that Discovery from my own Profession, as you are to allow mine that of knowing
Divinity. And if I should affirm, That the 12 th. Chapter of Ecclesiastes
contains a true Systeme of the Circulation of the Blood, you might have a large
Field to show your Skill of Physic and Divinity at once, by demonstrating the
contrary.

Now I hope my Obedience to you will oblige you to a jus talionis, and instead
of two Questions, I Will presume but to propose one, Viz. Whether or not he that
pays the stipend should jure Divino, present to the Church? This is a Question
may concern you, and I am positively for the affirmative, till you convince me
of the contrary.

P. S. I must add one thing more: How kindly would your Principle of Passive
Obedience and Non-Resistance relish with the poor Protestants of Ireland at
this day? And indeed if they be all of your Opinion, we are like to have many
thousands of Martyrs, if the goodness of God, and the Princes Conduct prevent
it not.

Thus Sir, I have answered your Letter in a Strain somewhat different from
yours; for your Heat and Bitterness shall not Authorize mine. If you have any
further Commands for me, you shall find me ready to serve you, being that I am


SIR, Your humble Servant, JAMES WELWOOD.

To Doctor WELWOOD. Newcastle, Feb. 19. 1688/9.
Good Doctor,
YOU were it seems in some danger of losing the honor of being an Apathist,
because you found not in the Superscription of my Letter, the glorious Title of
Dr. Medicinae; but if you will be at the charge of consulting the Heralds
Office, you may soon satisfy your self, That tho perhaps you may have
commenced Doctor in some Foreign Academy, yet you have no claim to the
Privileges of the same degree in England, till you are admitted ad cundem in
one of our Famous Universities; if this Apology will not allay the effervence
of your Choler, I have nothing to plead besides the Ignorance of your Quality.
You are in a much greater ferment, by reason of that rude Answer you say I sent
you; but others that saw it, thought it more modest than you deserved,
considering these Provocations you had given me, a Person that never injured
you in my life. But I fancy you expected from me some such mighty Complements
as Dr. Burnet met with in his Travels, for charging me with false Doctrine,
waspish Expressions, want of Breeding, scurrilous and indecent Epithets, black
Aspersions, bad Genius, horrible Positions, Scandalum Magnatum, want of
Prudence, Choler, narrow Theater, having Books and not reading them: For these
and many more are the Flowers and Embellishments of your Style; and yet good
Man, you are not capable of any Impressions of Heat and Bitterness, but more
cool than the Alps, and a greater Adeptus in Stoicism, than Old Zeno was, who
yet, say some, did at last swing himself out of the World in a pleasant
Paroxism of Apathy. But in lieu of your charging me with Choleric Strains, I
shall return you two known Sayings, Turpe est Doctori cum culpa redarguit
ipsum, Et, Medice cura teipsum. Before I come to examine what you may think
material in your second Letter, I shall premise something concerning the
Doctrine of the Church of England, which I think may be better gathered out of
her own Authentic Monuments, than out of your Countrymen barely; and this
will bring us to the truest State of the Controversy. In order thereunto I
shall begin with the necessary Doctrine and Erudition of a Christian Man, set
forth by the Authority of Henry the Eighth, and composed by Cranmer, Ridley,
Redman, and other glorious Martyrs. On the fifth Commandment they deliver
themselves thus, Subjects be bound not to withdraw their Fealty, Truth, Love
and Obedience toward their Prince, for any Cause, whatsoever it be, neither
for any Cause they may conspire against his Person, nor do any thing toward
the hindrance nor hurt thereof, nor of his Estate; and they prove this from
Romans 13. Whosoever resists the Powers, resists the Ordinance of God, and
they that resist them get to themselves Damnation. And upon the sixth
Commandment, No Subjects may draw their Swords against their Prince for
whatsoever Cause it be; and tho Princes which be the Supreme Heads of their
Realms, do otherwise than they ought to do, yet God has assigned no Judges
over them in this World, but will have the Judgment of them reserved to
himself, and will punish them when he sees it time. In the Second Part of the
Sermon of Obedience in the Book of Homilies, our Church declares, That it is
not lawful for Inferiors and Subjects in any case to resist and stand against
the higher Powers: For St. Paul's Words are plain, Whosoever withstandeth shall
get to themselves Damnation. In the Second Part of the Homily against
Rebellion, we have these Words, David was fain to save his Life not by
Rebellion or any Resistance, but by flight and hiding himself from the Kings
sight; Shall we not rise and rebel against our known mortal and deadly Enemy
that seeks our Lives? No, says godly David, What shall we do then to a Saul an
evil, unkind Prince, an Enemy to us, hated of God, hurtful and pernicious to
the Commonwealth? Lay no violent hand upon him (says good David,) but let him
live until God appoint or work his end. It is most plain from these Passages,
That the Church of England forbids all Resistance of the Higher Powers in all
Causes whatsoever. And tho you and your Countryman Barclay, were pleased to
trouble the World with nice Distinctions, our Church thinks it more advisable
to follow St. Paul's Example, and use none at all.

Having premised thus much to state the Controversy aright, I shall now
examine your Letter.

First, You will have Dr. Burnet the Author of that Pamphlet whether I will or
no, and bring such silly Arguments to prove it, as are not worth the
mentioning: But since you will have it so, I wish you had taken more pains to
vindicate his Reputation, seeing he has subscribed the Homilies and asserted
Passive Obedience to the height; but this was too hot for your Fingers, and
therefore you thought fit to drop it.

Secondly, In your Second Paragraph I find nothing material, for having
referred you to the Homilies of our Church for Scripture Proofs of Passive
Obedience; you are it seems afraid to look into that excellent Book, lest you
should be found guilty of a Scandalum Ecclesiae; and in truth, I must commend
your Wisdom, for its much safer writing against a private Minister, than
against so glorious a Church; but believe it, you must not expect to go
Scot-free, since I have now proved the Doctrine of Passive Obedience in my
narrow sense, (as you call it very improperly, seeing it is the largest sense
any takes it in,) to be the Doctrine of the Church of England.

Thirdly, You say that I am unwilling the Protestants abroad should share with
the Church of England in her darling Doctrine of Passive Obedience, which is a
Story as true as many you use to tell in the Coffee-house; for if you look into
the third Paragraph of my former Letter, you will find me reproving your Learned
Ignorance for abusing several of those great Names you mention, such as Luther,
Melancthon, Calvin, Grotius, and others, whom you represent as Patrons of
Resistance, which is but another name for Rebellion. You are now forced to own,
That the Government of the Empire differs so far from ours in England, that
what would be unlawful Resistance here, would be but a legal Defense there; and
this alone is sufficient to vindicate most of those Foreign Divines you
mention. But because you are very hard to please, I shall add further out of
Sleidans Comment. Lib. XVII. where he tells us, That the Elector of Saxony who
was the chief Person engaged in the German Wars against Charles the Fifth, did
openly declare, That if the said Charles was owned to be a proper Sovereign
with respect to the Princes of the Empire, it must then be granted, That it was
not lawful to wage War with him. I hope you will not be so injurious to the
Prince of Orange as to affirm, That he is no Sovereign Prince, because he is
proclaimed King of England. Luther indeed at first was ignorant (as you were)
of the Constitution of the Empire, and therefore was altogether for resisting
Charles the Fifth, but afterward he was better informed by Learned Lawyers, as
Sleidan and Melchar Adam Report. Melancthon, you will find Orthodox in this
matter, if you consult his Loc. Com. de Vindicat. Magistrate. Indeed some have
thought Calvin (as you do) a favourer of resisting Sovereign Princes, because
Lib. 4. Institut. he has this Passage, Si qui nunc sint populares Magistratus,
ad moderandum Regum libidinem constituti, quales olim erant qui Lacaedemoniis
Regibus oppositi erant Ephori. If (says he,) there be any such Magistrates as
the Ephori were among the Lacaedemonians, they may oppose and resist Kings, but
in other cases he denies it. Now because you are ignorant of the Power of the
Ephori among the Spartans, and that their two Kings were not proper Sovereigns;
but the one Admiral by Sea, and the other Generalissimo of Land Forces: I shall
for your better instruction remit you to Arist. Polit. Lib. 2. Plutarch in
Pausan, or Keckerman de Repub. Spart. a Book perhaps more easy to be got in
Scotland. You are pleased to triumph, because Grotius, as you say, is of your
Opinion, and tell me, He is not inferior to me either for Learning or
Judgment; It Is well that you can speak a little truth at any time, but whether
it be your gross Ignorance or the liberty Travelers use to take, its very
seldom that you speak all the Truth; for the Learned Grotius, though in his
Book de Iure Belli and pacis, and in another written in his Younger Time, he
did drop some unmeet Expressions and unfound Arguments; yet when he had weighed
Matters better, he retracted his former Opinions, and in his last Works is as
much for Non-Resistance, as I was in my Sermon. For proof of this Vid. Anot. on
Romans 13. Mat. 26.52. Vot. pro pace; where he approves of the Proceedings of the
University of Oxford about Paraeus on the Romans, and allows of this their
Determination, viz. That Subjects ought by no means to resist their King by
force, nor ought they to take either offensive or defensive Arms against the
King, for the cause of Religion or any other thing whatsoever. But you (no
doubt) will despise the Determination of our famous University, though
applauded by your own Grotius, and imitate your Countryman Gillispie, who in
scorn called Prayers and Tears Oxford Divinity. By these few instances, it will
I hope, be evident to all unprejudiced Persons, how much you have abused these
great Names, Luther, Melancthon, Calvin and Grotius.

Fourthly, In the next place, you have the confidence to tell me, That the
Church of England is for the Principle of Resistance, and that the Homilies
cannot be for Passive Obedience. Now this is not only to contradict me, but
also to contradict your self, having in your former Paragraph called it the
darling Doctrine of our Church. You might have received full satisfaction in
this matter, had you according to my Advice consulted the Book of Homilies; but
instead of doing this, and to have an opportunity to show your great Talent of
wrangling, you labor to evince your impudent Assertion by these impertinent
Arguments.

First, Because Queen Elizabeth protected the Hollanders in the Revolt from
Spain; but this I have answered in my former Letter, and obliged you to
acknowledge, That the Government of the Netherlands was vastly different from
this of England; so that theirs was not properly Resistance, but a warrantable
Defense: This I say, you were told before, and owned the matter, and yet think
fit to serve up your twice sodden Coleworts, that you may seem to say something.

Secondly, You tell me as a great Secret, That the Convocation of the Clergy of
England gave vast Sums toward the Protection of the Hollanders; and the
Preamble of every Act insinuates the lawfulness of their Resisting the King of
Spain. This is a Secret with a Witness; for I dare be bold to say, That the
Learned Lawyer in England never heard of an Act of Parliament for Money, made
by a Convocation: But suppose the Bishops or any of the Clergy did contribute
such vast Sums, it will not prove, That our Church did not own Passive
Obedience in Queen Elizabeth's time, as you assert; But pray Sir, were not the
Homilies in her time? And that the Fathers of our Church did then take them in
the same sense as I did in my Sermon, will appear beyond all contradiction from
the Testimonies of Bishop Bilson and Jewel. I begin with Bishop Bilson, who
speaks thus in his Book of Christian Subjection: Deliverance, if you would have
it, obtain it by Prayer, and expect it in Peace: These be the Weapons for
Christians; the Subjects have no Refuge against their Sovereign, but only to
God by Prayer and Patience. Bishop Jewel in his Defense of the Apology, speaks
thus, We teach the People as St. Paul does, to be subject to the Higher Powers,
not only for fear, but also for Conscience sake; We teach 'em, That whosoever
strikes with the Sword by private Authority, shall perish with the Sword. If
the Prince happen to be wicked, or cruel, or burdensome, we teach 'em to say
with St. Ambrose, Tears and Prayers be our Weapons.

This I hope will be sufficient to evince, That Passive Obedience was owned by
our Church in the Days of Queen Elizabeth of Blessed Memory, and that in the
same sense, I did assert in my Sermon.

Fifthly, In the next place, you attempt to prove the lawfulness of Resisting
the Kings of England from the Coronation Oath, which you say, is of the same
import with the Bulla Aurea in Germany; but for this we have no other proof
than your own ipse dixit, as if the Soul of Pythagoras by a Metempsychosis, had
at last taken up its Lodging in a Scots Tenement: But I assure you Sir, your
bare word is of no such Authority with me. Besides, I have already proved, That
the Emperor by reason of the Bulla Aurea, is no proper Sovereign. And if you
should say, the Prince of Orange is no proper Sovereign now that he is
proclaimed King of England, it would be as bad or worse than to drink a Health
to the Success of King James's Forces against all Invaders whatsoever, at that
very time when the Prince of Orange was coming over to rescue the Nation from
Popery and Slavery; and yet this you merrily did in a certain House at the
lower end of Westgate; so that for all your pretended Zeal, you are a sneaking
Proteus; and it would be as easy to shape a Coat for the Moon as for your
Latitudinarian Conscience. But I must instruct you, That the King of England is
a Sovereign Prince before his Coronation; nor is his Oath necessary to make him
so, seeing Henry the Sixth Reigned diverse Years in England before he was
Crowned, and yet was owned by his Parliaments for their dread Sovereign: Nay
further, our Chronicles inform us, That some of our Kings were never Crowned;
and besides all this, I desire you and those of your Cabal, to show any thing
in the Coronation Oath that allows Subjects to take up Arms against their
Prince.

In the next place, you pretend to give such an exact State of the
Controversy, as you say, will in one word, refute the Tenet of Passive
Obedience; and in order hereunto, you offer four Cases out of Barclay and
others, in which as you tell me, They all agree, that it is lawful for Subjects,
to resist and wage War against their Sovereign Princes. Had you read your
Countryman Barclay, as you pretend, you would have found that he allows only
two Cases in which a Prince may be divested of his Royal Dignity; and when you
come to propose these four Cases, you mention only three: Such is the great
Excellence of your Memory, notwithstanding that according to the Proverb, Some
stand in need of a very good one.

First, Your first Case is, When a Prince does voluntarily and freely
relinquish his Crown and Dignity, as did Charles the Fifth, Christiana of
Sweden, and to name no more, nine Saxon Kings mentioned in Fuller's Church
History. Now in this Case the Prince who voluntarily resigns the Crown, becomes
for the future a private Person; and should he afterward by force, endeavor
to recover his Dignity, which by his own consent is vested in the next Heir, he
may no doubt be resisted: But sure this is not resisting a King or the Higher
Powers, but a private Person in defense of a lawful King, and so is nothing to
your purpose; and pray look your Barclay again, and see if this Case (as you
say) is there.

Secondly, If a Prince alienates his Crown and Subjects to another, you say, he
may be resisted; this without any harm may be granted too: For as I own no
Allegiance to a Foreign Prince, so my own Prince has voluntarily divested
himself, and thrust himself into a private Capacity; and in this case we do not
resist the Higher Powers, but a private Person. And this instance does also
fall short of the mark.

Thirdly, The third Case is more pertinent, for you say a King may be deposed
or resisted, Si hostili animo in populi exitium feratur. This you have
transcribed from Grotius, and the meaning of it is this, Whether a Sovereign
Prince may be resisted in case he undertakes to destroy his whole Kingdom, or
any considerable part thereof. If we may take your honest word, Grotius, and
all that you have read, resolve this Point in the Affirmative: To which I
answer, First, That Grotius with due submission to your vast reading, did as I
showed above, retract in his riper Years this dangerous Opinion, which Erasmus
in Luke 22. styles a most pernicious Heresy. Secondly, Bishop Tailor calls it
deservedly a Wild Tenet; and Grotius as well as he, acknowledges it can scarce
seem possible to happen. It is certain, that we have not one single instance of
it in the whole Race of our British Kings. Thirdly, More sober Casuists condemn
the starting such speculative Cases, as Princes cutting the Throats of their
Subjects, because they have been found the Incentives of Rebellion. They were
such Fears and Out-crys as these, that brought King Charles the Martyr to the
Block, and have stained your Scotch Chronicles with the Murders of above sixty
Sovereign Princes; So that King William and Queen Mary will have cause to thank
you for giving such early Demonstrations of your Loyalty; in the very beginning
of their Reign, teaching their Subjects in how many cases they may resist, when
the Laws of the Land say expressly, That it is unlawful to take up Arms against
the King upon any pretense whatsoever.

Fourthly, Put the case that Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius or Nero be the King,
and your Countryman Barclay instances such Monsters as these, as being the
greatest he could find in all History, you and he both affirm they may be
lawfully resisted; it is not for me to oppose such Learned Gentlemen, but I
will assure you once more, Grotius is against you, and I hope he is not very
much inferior to your Doctorship in Learning and Judgment: And must I tell you
again what I told you from the Pulpit, viz. That those Prohibitions against
Resistance, which are given in the New Testament by our Savior, St. Paul and
St. Peter, were remarkably given at such a time, when these greatest Monsters
of Cruelty sat on the Throne; and pray ask my Parishioners whether they do not
believe our Savior, St. Paul and St. Peter to be as good Casuists as your
Doctorship and Countryman Barclay. Having thus destroyed the very Foundations,
your State of the Controversy stood on, your slender superstructure and
puerile flourishes will tumble with them.

In the next place, you still seem very angry because I did not distinguish the
several kinds of Resistance, I have told you already that it is lawful to resist
private Persons that offer violence to us, as your Countryman Balfour, or any
Scotch Doctor, if you should offer to pull me by the nose, but it is not lawful
to resist public Authority of the Higher Powers. Now since the Text confined
my discourse to the resistance which relates to the Higher Powers, I had no
leisure to consult Duns Scotus, or your Countryman Barclay, that I might puzzle
the Cause, and perplex the Auditory with impertinent distinctions. But how
comes your great confidence did not quarrel with St. Paul? For he uses no more
distinctions at all, than I did. If they had been needful and it had been
lawful to resist the Higher Powers, upon any pretense whatsoever, St. Paul who
needed not your directions to State Controversies, would doubtless have brought
his distinctions along with him, seeing therefore he uses none, I Am not to
blame for following his Example, for it is a known Maxim Nefas est distinguere
ubi Lex non distinguit. But had you not made this Cavil, you had lost an
opportunity of telling a pleasant Story about the Euripus, which you say ebbs
and flows ten or twelve times every day. What happy Men are you Travelers?
Alas I could never have discovered these wonderful motions in my narrow
Theater, as you call it; simple Man as I was, I thought it had only flowed
twice in a day as our River Tyne does, being deceived by the Learned Gassendus
and Petrus Gellius, who was told of no more by those Millers who resorted daily
to that Sea.

In the next place, I expected, not without trembling, a long account of the
Lex Regia, and numerous citations out of the Corpus Iuris; For really, Learned
Dr. when you told me that the Roman Tables, the Codex, and Pandects, the
Institutes, nay even no fewer than all the famous Civilians were for resisting
the Higher Powers, you put me into such a bold fright, that I was resolved to
have sworn the Peace against you, had not Horace revived me with a pair of
Verses, Quid tanto feret his promissor hiatu? parturiunt montes, nascitur
ridiculus mus, which I shall crave leave to put in English meeter for the
benefit of those you exposed my Letters and your self to, What will this mighty
boaster say
That can be worth a Louse?
When even Mountains do bring forth
The birth's some silly Mouse.


For I do not find in your second Letter one single testimony out of any of
those Books, but notwithstanding all your noise before, you are now as silent
as the Moon in the Eclipse. What a powerful Argument for resistance is Trajans
complement to the People? It might indeed do well enough in Plinys Panegyric,
but it will never pass muster in Polemicks.

Your two last Paragraphs are such an Augean stable of unkind falsities as will
tire even Hercules himself to cleanse, and because they contain no matter of
argument, but are only a bundle of malicious reflections, I shall vouchsafe
them no other answer, than, Get thee behind me Satan.

I come now to the close of your tedious Letter, and since you admonish me,
that I ought of Christian Charity to pity your ignorance, I shall be more
favorable to you than you have been to several of the Clergy of this Town.
However you must allow me to wonder a while, that you who were so brisk in
citing Luther, Melancthon, Calvin, and others, that you are unacquainted with;
yea were also so courageous, as to appeal to the Roman Tables, Codex, the
Pandects, Institutes, and all the famous Civilians, notwithstanding you are so
great a stranger to them; you should lose all your confidence when you come to
questions relating to your own Profession: I shall be more civil than to
inquire into the cause of this unusual modesty. But had the old Philosopher
been alive, he would have certainly got a perfect cure for his adust
Melancholy, if not have burst his spleen, to see a Learned Animal once more
nibling at the Thistles; For all your answer to my first question is this, viz.
That a redundancy of Choler with a little mixture of adust Melancholy is the
principal cause of Distempers; but had you said a redundancy in Choler
incorporating with the juice of the Pancreas, and vitiating the ferment of the
Stomach, you would have had the renowned Silvius, his ingenious Scholar
Regenerus de Graaf, and other great Physicians for your Seconds. Your answer to
the other Question is, That Harvey, and not Father Paul was the discoverer of
the Circulation of the blood; and this you affirm, for no Authority you do, or
can produce, but merely out of spite to the honor of the Clergy. But Sir,
it is well known, that Father Paul was a student at Padua, at the same time that
Harvey was there, and discovered to Aquapendens the Valves of the Veins, which
discovery that great Anatomist appropriated to himself, and so Harvey is
thought by some of the Learned Tribe to have also abused that Father. But to
deal more generously with you, than you will with the Clergy, this Laurel I
will stick in the bosom of Aesculapius, But then you must allow me to pass by
Harvey, as well as Padre Paulo, and give it to Andreas Cisalpinus; and if ever
you happen to travel as far as Pisa, where he was Professor Medicinae, or go to
Oxford, that you may be admitted ad eundem, enquire for Andreae Cisalpini,
Quest. Med. 4. edit Ven. Anno 1593, and if you do not find as perfect a
Discovery of the Circulation of the Blood, as is any where to be met with in
Harvey, I Will be bound to answer another of your impertinent Letters as long as
this, and certainly I cannot do greater Penance for my Confidence. As to your
Question, Whether he that pays the stipend ought not Iure Divino, present to
the Church: I Am positively for the negative; for the incomparable Stillingfleet
after a most diligent search, declares in his Mischiefs of Separation, That he
could not find a vola or vestigium of a jus divinum for it in all the Bible;
and if you will not believe him, try what you can do. I will add further, That
there is a Ruled Case in our Law Books, called the Case of the Vicar of
Hallifax, where it is determined, That every Vicar has the right of nominating
his own Curate, tho the Inhabitants of the Parish pay the stipend; and if you
dare to say, The Law of the Land is contrary to the Law of God, I shall leave
you to be chastised by the Gentleman of the Long Robe. And now Sir, that I have
undergone all this Drudgery, if for the future you trouble me with your
Choleric Impertinences, I shall commit them to the Flames, and sic extinguere
ignibus ignes; but if you are willing to be civil and peaceable, I shall remain,

SIR, Your Humble Servant, JOHN MARCH.
Feb. 19. 1688/9.
For the Reverend Mr. JOHN MARCH, Vicar of Newcastle. Newcastle, March 3.
1688/9.
SIR,
AFTER your so unusual method of exposing your Second Letter at your Stationers
Shop, and thereby to most of the Town, I might have expected it my self,
especially considering my so often sending for it; but your delaying it from
day to day, and at last absolute Refusal, put me upon the necessity of getting
a Copy of it another way. I cannot much blame you for this Conduct; the writing
and dispersing such a Letter required indeed the Denial of it, to the Person
for whom it was designed. I find you are liable to the fate of him, of whom it
was said, If he had held his Peace, he might have been thought a Philosopher;
and I was nothing unwilling you should continue such in the Opinion of the
Mobile. I might well spare my self the trouble of a Rejoinder, there being
nothing in your Letter that requires one; for they must have clearer Eyes than
mine, that can discover any thing material or to the purpose in it; but instead
thereof, a continued shuffling and waving of the Question, mixed with so mean
Sarcasms, that for your own Honor I could have wished you had omitted them: So
that to give you an Answer I am at a great loss, being unacquainted with
Billingsgate Oratory, and obliged at every turn to repeat my own words in my
former Letters; which you have been pleased to wrest so far, as I cannot say,
you have given a fair repetition of one single Sentence of mine all along
yours. But to evince to the unbiased and knowing Persons of the place, That
you are not infallible, as your admiring Mobile would have you; I have put my
self upon a nauseating Task of writing you these few Lines, in answer to so
indigested and immethodick a Letter.

You begin it with bantering my taking notice of the Direction of your first,
and tell me, That the Heralds Office will inform me, that a Doctor of a
Foreign University has no Privilege in England. I pretend to no great
Privileges any where; but I had reason to expect a designation you refuse not
to some who scarce ever saw an University. Neither have I lived so obscure, or
been so little employed, as not to be known for what I am, by most of the
Gentry and People of Quality in the place; and you notably contradict your self
in saying, You was ignorant of my Quality, since you name expressly my
Profession in your first Letter. But we shall not fall out upon that Head,
since the Heralds Office is not like to be much troubled with either of our
Escutcheons. Next you would fix upon me a great ferment of Choler and Rudeness
in many of my Expressions you enumerate, and tell me, I deserved not so modest
an Answer as you vouchsafed me, considering the Provocations I gave you, a
Person that never disobliged me. I submit both my first and second to any
neutral Person, who perhaps will allow them a better Construction; and if any
thing of Heat has slipped from my Pen, I hope the occasion of it will do more
than procure me a pardon. It Is true, you never disobliged me; but no Personal
Injury could have affected me more, than the hearing a glorious and
unparalled Deliverance branded in the Pulpit, with the infamous Names of
Rebellion, Damnation, and the like, and the being a Witness to a Series of
Actings consequential to such Expressions. You seemed to me in inveighing
against a Revolution wherein the Finger of God was so visible, to act much in
parallel with those of old, who dared to attribute the stupendous Effects of
Omnipotence to a baser Influence: And for me to have been an Apathist on such
an occasion, would have been but another name for Stupidity. In your accusing
me of Passion, you must needs have a fling at poor Zeno, and Two thousand Years
rest in his Grave, must not shelter him from your accusation of a felo de se,
albeit, his manner of Death is not agreed upon by Authors, whereof not a few
allow him a natural one.

Before you come to answer my Letter, you will needs premise something
concerning the Doctrine of the Church of England; and this you say, will bring
us to the true State of the Question: Whereupon you are at the pains to cite
several Passages out of the Book of Homilies against Resistance and for Passive
Obedience, and then you subsume, Having premised thus much to state the
Question, you come to examine my Letter. Sir, I thought every Schoolboy knew
better what it was to state a Question, than to cite Authorities to prove the
thing questioned; and what gentiel Name to give your thus stating it, I am at a
loss. The stating of a Question is properly the removing all Equivocation of
Terms or Amphibologies of Speech (as the Schools speak,) whereby both the
Opponent and Defendant may agree in the same sense and meaning of the words.
And pray Sir, how came you to imagine, That the Authorities produced, removed
any Difficulty arising from a wrong understanding of the words Passive
Obedience and Resistance, etc. that are the Subjects of our Debate? If you had
been at pains to cast your Eyes upon my Letter so as to read it, I presume you
would have found me stating the Question betwixt us, thus upon the matter, viz.
That to resist the Magistrate, when he is lawfully such, and acting in
execution of Laws, is one thing; but to resist the same Person, when he divests
himself of that Sacred Character by trampling on Fundamental Laws, is quite
another: The first is certainly unlawful, but not the second. And to elucidate
this, I told you, there was a great Difference betwixt a Princes trampling upon
a part of his Subjects in execution of Laws made against them, and his doing of
the same in downright contradiction of Fundamental Laws made in their Favors:
And albeit, in the first case it were disallowable to Resist, yet in the
second, reason and common sense, in my Opinion, does warrant it. And upon my
thus stating of the Question, I did then, as now once for all, tell you, That
all places of the Homilies, yea, of Holy Scripture it self, disproving
Resistance of Magistrates, are to be understood in a natural sense, and with
Analogy of Reason, to be meant of Magistrates when lawfully such, and acting
conform to Laws, and not of Princes divesting themselves of that Office by
their own Faults and Mismanagement. And in my giving so necessary and natural a
Gloss upon the Homilies, I do but Justice to those worthy Reformers that
compiled them; whereas on the contrary; you by endeavoring to wrest their
Words to your notion of Passive Obedience, derogate from the Reason and
Learning of those Excellent Men* And thus you have lost your pains and time in
citing them.

At length you come to examine my Letter, and in the first place you tell me, I
will have Dr. Burnet to be Author of that Pamphlet whether you will or not; and
in so doing, you say, I derogate from his Credit, since he subscribed the Book
of Homilies, and has asserted Passive Obedience. A strange shuffle indeed, and
of a piece with the rest of your Letter. I never so much as insinuated any such
thing; and whether it be his or not, I know not: But sure I am, all your
Hearers thought, and I have evinced it, as much as the matter can bear, That in
the scurrilous Epithets you gave the Author of that Pamphet as you call it, you
designed Dr. Burnet; and this you wisely pass over without an Answer. I was
willing to think you were now ashamed of these Expressions; but the whole Tenor
of your Letter forbids me to think, that blushing is your greatest fault. It
were a piece of odd presumption, to suppose that Great Man needed any Man's
Vindication, especially mine: And sure I am, in his subscribing the Homilies,
and asserting Passive Obedience, he sufficiently understood the sense of the
Words; and his Reason and Learning is too great to have been cheated into your
Notion of them. But you know the Sun loses none of his Rays by being barkt at.

In your second Paragraph, I find nothing but a Repetition of the Homilies yet
once more to prove Passive Obedience, a Principle of the Church of Englands;
and this requires no other Answer, but what I have already given you in stating
the Question, and clearing the sense of the Words.

You begin your third Paragraph with another shuffle, in making me call Passive
Obedience the darling Principle of the Church of England, than which nothing
was farther from my thoughts; and to call it yours, meaning Mr. Vicars, was not
in my Opinion, to father it upon the Church of England. Then you tell me, I am
forced to own, That the Government of the Empire is so far different from that
of England, that what would be Rebellion here, would be but a legal Defense
there. This requires indeed, a considerable Talent of Confidence; for I
acknowledge no such thing: Yea, upon the contrary I asserted, That the Bulla
Aurea of the Empire, and the Coronation Oath in England, were so* far parallel,
that they were both Barriers against the Encroachments of the Sovereign. One
would have thought, that instead of mis-citing my Expressions, a Man of your
Character would rather have endeavored to give a fair Answer, by evincing,
That the Bulla Aurea warrants Resistance, and the Coronation Oath disallows it.
You are as unjust to Sleidan as to me; for the Duke of Saxony is mentioned by
him, to use no such Expressions as these you mentioned; but instead of saying,
The Emperor was not a proper Sovereign; his words are, He is not an absolute
and despotick Monarch, and so may be resisted. When you aver, That Luther at
first understood not the Government of the Empire when he was for Resistance, I
cannot but regret his misfortune in the want of your acquaintance, seeing he
might have been better instructed by you at Newcastle, than either by his
Reading, or Converse with the Greatest Men upon the place: And I have as little
reason to believe his Ignorance on that Head, as his recanting his Opinion; for
both are equally true. As to what you say of Calvin and Melancthon's being for
Passive Obedience, if I had their Works besides me (as I have not,) I could
evince the contrary from their Writings. But who knows not that the first did
vindicate the Genevans their throwing off the Jurisdiction both of the Bishop
of Geneva and Duke of Savoy, whereof one of them behooved to be their Sovereign;
and the last did allow of the Famous Smalcalde League, against Charles V. Next
you are so kind as to instruct me a little of the power of the Ephori, whereof
you suppose I am utterly ignorant; I cannot in good manners but thank you for
this condescendance; And yet it is somewhat strange, how you come to have so
intuitive acknowledge of me, as without search, to find me ignorant of what
every School Boy may know. I never dreamed, that Keckerman, Aristotle, or
Plutarchs works were so rare in Scotland as you insinuate; perhaps the Books we
have under these Names, are spurious, and you by a vast charge of enquiry, have
found out the Genuine ones, that have not yet come our length; I am hopeful
your charity will oblige you to bestow one true Copy of these great Men's Works,
upon a whole Nation you have so great a kindness for. And yet Sir, if what we
have of Plutarch be true, you are as ignorant of the Spartan Kings, as I of the
Ephori, for if you will consult his Lives of Agesilaus, Agis and Lysander, you
may find, that albeit Lycurgus found the Government lodged in two Kings, and
left it so, yet both before his time and afterward, the Spartans were ruled
but by one King, and particularly from Archidamus to Agis the last of the
Heraclidae, including six Kings one after another.

Thereafter, you are pleased very obligingly to accuse me of a downright Lie,
in saying, Grotius allows of Resistance, and yet with the same breath, you
confess he dropped in his younger years some unmeet expressions, and unsound
arguments in his Book de Iure Belli and Pacis, which afterward you confidently
affirm he retracted. I can hardly be persuaded to take with a Lie, in saying,
Grotius allows of Resistance, since in my second Letter, I gave you his own
words for it, and you your self acknowledge he did so; But I am fully convinced
you are guilty of a thing called a mistake, in saying, he retracted his
Opinion, for Bleaw's Edition of that Book, with the addition of Notes written
by himself a little before his death ( as the very title bears) not only
repeats all he had formerly said upon that Head, but confirms it with new
Additions; to which I refer you. Your Reflection upon Gillespy, I am willing to
impute to your love to his Country, and yet I persuade my self, it will meet
with no better name among the most of Men, than that of a groundless calumny.

In your fourth Paragraph, you would fain fix upon me a contradiction in first
asserting Passive Obedience, to be the darling Principle of the Church of
England, and then denying it. Certainly, this is to try how far you can push
forward an untruth without lying, I did indeed call Passive Obedience your
darling, meaning Mr. John Marches, but that it is the Principle of the Church of
England, I have evinced the contrary. The next time I have occasion to name any
thing that belongs to you, I find I must play the Quaker, and use the word
Thine; otherwise you will Father it upon the whole Church. Next with the same
ingenuity, you say, I confessed the Government of Holland to be so far
different from that of England, that what were Lawful Resistance there, would
be Rebellion here. I need not tell you I said no such thing; upon the contrary,
I told you that the Coronation Oath in England, ran parallel with that of the
Family of Burgundy, in whose right Philip of Spain was Lord of Belgium: And
this you skip over as all the rest that is material. You use your old way of
shuffling, in fixing on me the mentioning only the Hollanders, in the
Protection given by Queen Elizabeth; Whereas I named the Protestants abroad in
general, whereof these of the Low Countries were but a part; yet by this little
trick of skill, you wisely pass over the assistance that Great Princess gave
the Protestants of France, who never could lay claim to any such privileges,
as either the Low Countries or England justly pretend to, that Government being
as absolute as any in Christendom, ever since Lewis XI. Notwithstanding of
which, She protected them at a vast charge, in the Reigns of Charles IX. and
Henry III. Yea, it was not only in Q. Elizabeth's time, that England assisted
the Protestant Subjects of France against their incroaching Princes; but in
King Charles I. Reign, the Expedition of Rochel was carried on by King and
Parliament, and cordially agreed to by the Fathers of the Church. What a poor
shift are you forced to use, to evite my argument from the concurrence of the
Clergy in Convocation, when you play upon the word Act of Parliament, as if I
had named the act of Convocation thus, which I did not. All the World knows
they gave considerable sums for managing that assistance given by the Queen,
and thereby allowed of the action it self. Your Citations of Bilson and Jewel
are to no purpose, the stating of the Question clears sufficiently their
meaning.

You begin your Rhapsody of a fifth Paragraph, with a snarl at my saying, there
was a Parallel betwixt the Coronation Oath of England, and the Golden Bull of
the Empire, and yet you are not able to evince the discrepancy betwixt them. If
you cast your eyes upon that Bull, you may find that by it, the Emperor is to
swear observance of the Laws and Liberties of the Empire, and so does the King
of England swear at his Coronation, the observance of the Laws and Liberties of
England: And I would have you to take notice, that neither in the Golden Bull,
nor our Coronation Oath, there is any irritant clause, expressing power to
resist in case of violation of either, for the nature of the Contract warrants
it, without the necessity of any such express clause. As to that Calumny, of my
drinking to the success of King James's Arms against all Invaders, I Will give
you this advice; The first time you Preach upon the ninth Commandment, allow
your self a Reflection upon that place of Scripture, Romans 2.22, 23. Thou that
say, a Man should not commit adultery, do thou commit adultery? Thou that
abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacriledg? Thou that make thy boast of the
Law, through breaking of the Law dishonourest thou God? You have been so
unhappy in this Calumny, that it is the only one, neither my Friends nor Enemies
will believe, and even in laying the Scheme of it, you show your good nature,
in insinuating His present Majesty came to England as an Invader, whereas none
but such as you, denied him the quality of a Deliverer. What a needless puther
do you make about the Coronation Oath, because forsooth, the King of England is
a Sovereign before his Coronation? This every body knows, and yet I would have
you likewise to know, that a Princes acceptance and exercise of the Regal Power
before Coronation, is in it self an Homologation of the Coronation Oath, and he
becomes virtually obliged by it, as a necessary condition of the Original
Contract, betwixt him and his Subjects: And in case a King should contradict
the whole tenor of that Oath by Maladministration, it were no rational
excuse, to allege, he had not actually taken the Coronation Oath, seeing it is
presumed in Law, he knew the terms on which he attained that dignity. In the
end of this Paragraph, you desire me to show you any thing in the Coronation
Oath that allows Subjects to take up Arms against their Prince. I have told you
before that it is not Lawful for Subjects to rise up against their Princes,
acting as lawful Magistrates, and there is no necessity of an express clause in
the Coronation Oath, to warrant Resistance in case of a Princes overturning all
Laws; Because the Nature of the thing inforces it. And moreover you will find
no such express clause in the Golden Bull, nor in the Plan of the Government of
the Netherlands, nor of any Monarchick Government in Europe, Poland alone
excepted: So that if the nature of the Government, do not allow Resistance
without any such express clause, you will be as little able to vindicate the
Hollanders and the Princes of the Empire, from the imputation of Rebellion, as
I, the Subjects of England.

In the beginning of your sixth Paragraph, you are heavy upon the poor
Transcriber of my Letter, for the mistake of the Figure 4 instead of 3, and I
am displeased at him too, for angering you. Then after your usual manner of
calling me a liar, for what reason I know not, you come to answer my three
cases, which I cited both out of Grotius and Barclay with your good leave. And
the first case you would answer is none of mine; for instead of saying, a
Prince may be Dethroned, when he voluntarily and freely relinquishes his Crown,
as you would have me to say; My words out of Grotius were these, si imperium
abdicavit vel habet pro derelicto, which are as far distant from yours as East
and West: And the case (as you word it) will not admit of sense, for he that
Dethrones himself by a voluntary Renunciation as Charles V. needs not to be
Dethroned by others: An office may be truly and properly abdicate, when there
is no solemn formal Renouncing it, and to evince this I Will give you but two
instances of Offices, that have a near analogy with Monarchy. If a General in
the Field of Battle, would either absent himself, or by a supine negligence,
refuse to give the word of Command, or lead on the Army; In this case, there is
no formal Resignation of his Office: And yet how unreasonable were it to debar
the Soldiers from making choice of another General in so urgent a juncture.
Secondly, What office seems more despotick, than that of a Master of a Ship?
Now in case, amidst an imminent hazard of death, the Master cannot be prevailed
with to use his skill, to prevent Shipwreck, and yet will not voluntarily
Resign his place to another: Who can justly blame the Seamen to appoint one in
his place to direct them to a safe Harbor? And how near a Parallel there is
betwixt these two examples, and our late juncture in England, the Votes of both
Houses have evinced in the word Abdicated. The second case wherein you
acknowledge Resistance is lawful, is this, if the Prince either alienate his
Kingdom or subject it to another. But the reason you give for it, is wide from
the purpose; For a Prince may Subject his Crown to another, and yet not [
thrust himself into a private capacity] as you call it. When King John
subjected his Crown to the Pope, he ceased not thereby to be King of England,
and the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily are true Monarchies in the Family of
Spain, and yet Feudatory and Subject to the Pope. One would have thought, that
you might have taken some notice of what I said upon this case, in relation to
the Native encroachments of the Sea and Court of Rome, and how far a subjection
in Spirituals may usher in, a dependence even in Temporals; But your self
denial, will not allow you to be thought too knowing, in what relates to your
own Profession. When you come to my third Case, tho you at first confess it a
pertinent Case, yet you bring four pretty Answers against it. The case being
thus, a King may be Dethroned, si in populi exitium feratur, you answer, 1.
Grotius retracted this opinion; how true this is, I refer you to that Edition
of his Works I formerly mentioned, wherein, instead of retracting this Case, he
confirms it by his Notes upon it; you are as far in the wrong to Erasmus, as to
Grotius, for having looked upon the place cited, there is not one word there
relating to this case, 2ly. you tell me B. Tailor calls it, a wild Case, which
is nothing to the purpose, for none but wild Men, can be capable of it; then
you say, Grotius calls it a Case that scarce seems possible to happen. That
there have been such Monsters in the World, appears by Nero's Firing the City
of Rome, and Caligula's wishing the Roman People had but one single Neck; yea
in the late Age, have we not seen a Northern Prince invite his whole Nobles
aboard his Ship, and order them all to be murdered before his Eyes. It Is true,
we have been blessed with a better Race of Kings in England, than to find any
such Monsters in our Annals. But how proper it was for a Divine to take notice
of what I told you upon this Head, How far a Prince may fall under this
Category, who endeavors to introduce a Religion inconsistent with his Peoples
Eternal Happiness, I am willing ( as well as you,) to appeal to your
Parishioners. Thirdly, In answer to this Case, you tell me, More sober Casuists
condemn the starting of such Speculative Cases, and would fix upon me ill
Service done to their Majesty's, in teaching their Subjects in what Cases they
may Resist. For the first part of this Answer, you are pleased to instance no
particular Casuist; and I presume you are not able to do it, unless you wrest
their words as much as you use to do mine, that is, make them say what you
please. But when you so positively assert that in no case a Prince may be
Resisted, give me leave to think, I refel sufficiently your assertion, by
instancing a case wherein you acknowledge you self Resistance is warrantable,
tho that case be very rare. As to the second part of your answer, I hope I
shall be found to do no bad service to their Majesty's, in vindicating a
Revolution wherein they have acted so glorious a part, from the aspersions you
have cast upon it; And they have given the World so many and great
demonstrations of a Sublim Virtue, and of their abhorrence of Arbitrary Power,
as none but such as refuse to pray for them, will dare to imagine, they can
possibly fall under any of the Cases I have mentioned; And I heartily agree
with you, so far in point of Resistance, that I firmly believe, he who Resists
such two darling Princes, falls under the inevitable hazard of Damnation in the
sense of your Text, unless he repent.

Among a great deal of Rubbish of gentle Expressions, I find nothing in your
Fourth answer, merits any notice, but one thing that has been canted a
thousands times over by your sort of Men; Viz, that the Precepts for Obedience
given by our Savior, Saint Peter and Saint Paul, were given at a time when the
greatest Monsters of Cruelty were upon the Throne, for so your express words
are. Sir, even in this matter of Fact, you commit a gross mistake, for tho
probably the two Apostles named, wrote their Epistles in the Reigns of
Caligula, Domitian and Nero, yet every Body knows, that our Savior's
preaching, was from the fifteenth till the eighteenth of Tiberius inclusive,
who was none of the worst of Princes, especially before that time of his Reign.
But as to that of the Apostles commanding subjection at a time when Monsters
were upon the Throne to answer this, I shall take occasion to give you my gloss
upon that Text, Romans 13.1.2. which has occasioned all our debate; and in so
doing, perhaps I obviate all you have preached from it for Passive obedience
and non-resistance. The subjection there commanded to be given to the Higher
Powers, is in a proper sense, ( a standing in order under them) as on the
contrary, the Resistance prohibit is ( a Contraordinatness to them) and so the
very Etymology of the Greek words bears. This being the genuine Critic of the
words, the meaning of them does fairly resolve into these two Corollaries.
First, That the Gospel destroys not Magistracy, nor exempts Christians from the
Economy of Subjection, as some Heretics at that time vainly imagined; to
which fond opinion it is very probable, the Apostle had an eye, as many learned
Men have thought, particularly Gerhardus de Magist. polit. n. 34.38. Secondly,
That Christianity exempts not the Professors of it from subjection to Heathen
Magistrates, as some Christians of that Age did maintain, having imbibed that
principle, from the Gaulonites among the Jews, who held subjection to the
Romans or any other Strangers, unlawful; and that likewise this heresy or
error was in the Apostles view* the same learned Author and a great many others
do agree. Now Resistance of open and notorious Violations of Magistracy (in
which case only I say Resistance is lawful) contradicts not the subjection
enjoined in the Text, being thus explained: That subjection, being nothing
more, but an acknowledgment of Magistrates, as a Lawful Power ordained of God
for the good of Mankind. And that even at that time, this was the Christians
sense of this precept, would appear by what I told you of the Senats declaring
Nero an Enemy of Mankind, and adjudging him to Death, approved by the
Christians of old, and by the best of Lawyers and Casuists of late; as for
instance, Bodinus de Republica. Lib. 2. Cap. 5. And further, That the
Subjection here required, is not to Princes abusing their Power by trampling
upon all that is Sacred, (as you would have it in naming of Nero,) is evincible
from these Reasons: First, Such Princes are not the Ordinance of God, the
Relative of Subjection, being they act in opposition to God. Secondly, they are
not a terror to evil doers; nor Ministers of God for our Good, except in the
sense that afflictions and plagues are, and so they are defective in the
necessary Qualities of these higher powers to whom Subjection is enjoined in
the Text.

In your seventh paragraph after some expressions becoming the gravity of a
Divine, you will needs vindicate once more, your not making any distinction,
when you termed self defense an old Phanatick principle, and the reason you
give, is, because the Apostle made none in your Text. By the same reason, you
would make but a sorry comment upon many places of Scripture: to instance one
for all, our Savior commands us to swear not at all; Now would it be here
impertinent to distinguish betwixt the kinds of Oaths, in order to explain,
what Oaths are lawful and what not, because our Savior made no distinction.
You have unluckily stumbled upon the Euripus, in contradicting me for saying,
that it flowed and ebbed ten or twelve times in the natural day, and you very
confidently allow it no frequenter tides then the River Tyne. This in any
other, would be called an unaccountable mistake; the fewest motions any Author
allows it, being five Tides in the four and twenty hours. And that my account
is true, I refer you to Sir George Wheelers Travels, where that ingenious
Gentleman gives you an exact Scheme of the ebbing and flowing of this Straight,
as he had it upon the place, from Father Babin and the Millers thereabouts.
When upon this score, you satyrically envy the happiness of Travelers, I think
such men as you, are much more happy then they, if Claudians description of the
happy man of Verona be good: For it seems, he took Benacus lake for the Ocean,
and you take measures of all the Seas of the World, by the River of Tyne. Next
you tell me you expected from me a great many Citations out of the Roman Law,
for resistance of higher powers, and because of your dissapointment you charm
me with four Heroic Lines. Sir, I did indeed tell you, the Roman Laws fixed a
great many boundaries to the Magistrates power, and that the Tribunitial Office
was lodged in the Plebeians for that very cause; I also told you the Romans
were of all People the most impatient of Slavery, and gave you a hint, why
after the Government of Rome became more despotick, the Emperors were obliged
to confound the Tribunitial power with the Imperial dignity; and all this you
wisely pass over. It were to transcribe too great a part of the civil Roman
Law, to instance all the Laws and Sentences against Arbitrary Government; But
let these two suffice at present: The first is of Theodosius the younger. Cod.
Justin. lib. 1. tit. 24. Princeps tenetur. The Prince is bound to the Laws, on
the Authority whereof his Authority depends, and to the Laws he ought to
submit. The second is of Constantinus Leo in Bizantin. pro communi. The end of
a King is the general good, which he not performing, he is but the counterfeit
of a King. These two I rather instance, because the first is a more ample
commentary upon Trajans expression to the Praetor, than I can my self agree to;
And the second a clear cofirmation of what I said, in stating of the question,
that Princes divest themselves of that sacred Character by their trampling upon
Laws. As to your Rhyming, albeit you have aped Cleveland in a great many
expressions of kindness to my Country, and have coppied verbatim out of one of
his Letters, that raillery of the Mares eating Thiftles; yet you come not
altogether up to the Style of that ingenious Poet in your lofty Verses.

In the end of this Paragraph, you tell me, that my two last Paragraphs are
such an Augean Stable of unkind falsities as will tire Hercules to clear; and
because they contain no Argument, you vouchsafe them no other answer, but get
thee behind me Satan. I acknowledge that in these Paragraphs I take notice of
more than one single Augean Stable; but you know with whose furniture
Replenished. And pray Sir, is it a falsity, that you entailed no less then
damnation upon these that meddled with the Kings Forts, Army, Revenue etc.
Seeing not only in that Sermon, but in your first Letter you repeat it in
express words. Was there no matter of Argument in what I told you, of your rash
Censures being levelled no lower than a Crowned Head? Was it not proper for you
to answer what I said in relation to you charging me with Scandalum Ecclesiae,
for checking your inveighing against the Nobility of England? Is it a falsity,
that you neither preached your self, not would allow your Pulpit to others, on
the Thanksgiving day appointed for the late mighty Deliverance? When you cannot
but know, that all honest Men of the Place exclaimed against you for it; And
you know best what it meant, instead of a Sermon on that day, to have read in
one of the Churches, the Homily against Rebellion. I am loath to rake up any
more of the dung of this your Augean Stable, since the naming of Particulars,
might occasion such Consequences as I do not wish you: And my silence herein
should oblige you to a blush for your manner of treating me. But when you call
all these things falsities, you put me in mind of the Nature or rather Epologue
of that Animal, who darkning his own Sight by shutting his head into a hole,
fancies himself invisible to others. Above all things, I cannot dream how you
came by the Office of an Exorcist. I took it for one of the Orders of the
Romish, and not of the Reformed Church; but I confess I Am obliged to you for a
great many things, I never knew before.

Now because your heavy charge of Rebellion was so clearly levelled against the
Nobility and Gentry of England, for their meddling with the late King's Forts,
Castles, etc. And by there Resisting his Forces, which more then once you say,
is but an other name for Rebellion: It were easy to demonstrate that the
Nobles and People of England, have not only done so before, in former ages, but
deposed their Tyranizing Princes, and altered the direct and Lineal Succession
of the Crown, tho they justly adhered to the Royal Blood: I shall only give you
one instance of each of these. As to their Resistance and meddling with Forts,
etc. We have the famous instance in King Henry the III. from whom the Magna
Charta was obtained by the Nobles and People of England, by the edge of their
Swords. Of the second, Richard II. was a memorable Example, where neither the
fresh remembrance of his excellent Father, nor his own promises of amendment,
could save him from having fourteen Articles of Maleversation exhibited against
him, and then deposed. Of the altering the direct Lineal Succession, we have a
paramount instance in Cook 4. inst. p. 36.39. where notwithstanding John de
Beaufort, Son to John of Gaunt, was in his Legitimation formally and expressly
excluded from the Crown of England, yet the Parliament entailed the Crown upon
Henry VII. heir of Line, to this John of Beaufort, and to the heirs of King
Henry's Body, and that even before his Marriage with Princess Elizabeth of the
Family of York, who in Cook's opinion had the nearest right to the Crown in her
own Person.

As to your last Paragraph, I deserved to be laughed at, if I had troubled my
self with a formal answer to your Physical questions, as you call them. Yet
methinks I should have had more thanks for giving you a hint of your Distemper
without a Fee, then to have my words repeated otherwise then I wrote them: For
I spoke nothing of the principal Cause of diseases, but told you that a
Redundancy of Choler with a little of adust Melancholy, produces more
Tragedies in the Body of Man, then the Juice of the Pancreas is capable to do:
and perhaps you find it so, to your own cost. Let us not quarrel for the honor
of the discovery of the Circulation of the Blood. If you be pleased to compare
Andreas Cisalpinus and Harvey together, I hope you will alter your opinion, and
if you send to me for the former, it may ease you of a Pisa or Oxford journey.
Before I leave this, I cannot but admire your skill in the Belles Letters, for
I have often read, that Laurels were wreathed about the Victors head, but that
they were stuck in their bosoms, I owe it to your discovery. I expected you
would rather have bestowed it on Solomon then on Cisalpinus, which I gave you a
fair opportunity to do; but when any thing of Divinity comes in the Play, you
are as silent as the Moon in an Eclipse, to use your own words, tho I knew not
before, she was more silent at time then any other, and would be gladly
informed what Language, at other times she Speaks. As to our Law Question, I am
not much concerned on either side, being in no great hazard of being either a
Vicar or his Curat. You know the reason why I proposed it, and you may do in
it, as your Christian Wisdom shall dictate to you. But what a wretched notion
have you of the term Iure Divino, when you confound it with ( not being
contrary to the Law of God*) And that you fall not into so gross a mistake a
second time, I refer you to the excellent and learned Author you named, his
Irenicon, where you may learn a better definition of it. After so Learned an
Answer to my Letter, I expected one to my Postscript, and thought, you might
perhaps teach the World some middle way betwixt the poor Protestants of
Ireland's Resisting King James, and their tamely yielding up their Throats to
be cut, but this so seasonable a Secret you keep to your self.

Thus I have done with you and your Letter, and never any of Loyolla's Sect
enjoined a more nauseous Penance on their Votaries, then I on my self in giving
you an Answer. Take it as the last you shall be troubled with, from,

SIR, Your humble Servant, James Welwood.

ERRATA.
Page 11. Line 14. for in this, read in Thesi. p. 16. l. 27. for Barley, r.
Barclay. p. 22. l. 27. for bold fright, r. bodily fright.


