POPERY ANATOMIZED, OR A LEARNED, PIOUS, AND ELABORAT Treatise; wherein many of
the greatest and weightiest points of Controversy, between us and Papists, are
handled; and the truth of our Doctrine clearly proved: And the falsehood of
their Religion and Doctrine anatomized, and laid open, and most evidently
convicted and confuted by Scripture, Fathers, and also by some of their own
Popes, Doctors, Cardinals, and of their own Writers. In answer to M. Gilbert
Brown, Priest.

By that learned, singularly pious, and eminently faithful servant of Jesus
Christ M. John Welsch, Minister of the Gospel first at Kirkubright, next at Air
in Scotland, and last at S. John d'Angely in France.

The second Edition, revised, corrected, and divided into Sections.

To which is annexed, A Discovery of the bloody, rebellious, and treasonable
principles and practices of Papists, in dissolving Oaths, committing Treasons,
raising Wars and Commotions, and using imparalleled cruelties toward
Protestants.

By MATTHEW CRAFORD.

GLASGOW, By ROBERT SANDERS, Printer to the City and University, 1^72.

In hanc pij and docti Auctoris Diatriben, and pij and docti viri M. Matthew.
Crafordij additamentum decastichon Latino-Scoticum.
ROmulidum qui sacra oupis cognoscere sacra,
Et fugere, haec sancti perlege scripta viri.
Perspicue and solid Babylonia scita refedit,
Queis miseras animas turba dolosa capit.
Quae nunc; heu! passim, nullo prohibente vagatur,
Pro sapidis dapibus toxica tetra ferens.
Non minimas CRAFORDI etiam vir docte mereris
Grates, addideris quod bona multa libro.
Vulnera quo capiat meretrix Romana, nefandi
Propinans stupri pocula plena sui.
The same in English.

WHo cursed Rome and Romish rites would know,
And them eschew, this Book will clearly show,
It Babels doctrine truly does declare,
Wherewith poor souls false Papists do ensnare:
Who now, alace! run freely as they will,
For wholesome food with poison them to kill.
Great thanks also should learned CRAFORD get,
For these good things he to the Book has set;
Which may help much to give Romes Whoor a wound,
Whose whoordoms so does in the Land abound.
J. A.

THE PREFACE TO THE LOVERS OF THE REformed Religion in Britain and Ireland.
DEARLY BELOVED IN THE LORD,
The name and memory of that Apostolic and singularly godly and faithful
servant of JESUS CHRIST M. John Welsch (who now is attending his Masters work
in the Upper-House without wearying, night and day) is so precious in the
Church of CHRIST, that the revising and republishing of any of his works (who
praise him in the gate) will, I hope, be very acceptable to all the learned and
godly, especially this subsequent Treatise, wherein many of the greatest and
weightiest points of Controversy betwixt us and Papists, are learnedly and
solidly debated, and the truth of our Doctrine evidently demonstrated; and the
error, superstition, and idolatry of the Church of Rome excellently anatomized
and solidly refuted; especially in such a time as this, when Popery so much
every where prevails, and the Pope and his Agents are most active and
diligent, using all-means to get their deadly wound cured, sending over to
these Nations daily swarms of Priests and Jesuits, with books, beads, medals,
and the like Romish trash, thereby to seduce the poor people, who are in great
hazard, partly through their ignorance of the Controversies betwixt us and
Papists, partly through the lamentable decay of zeal against Antichrist, and
love to the truth; partly through the sad divisions and distractions that are
among our selves, whereby the poor people are sorely brangled and tempted to
Scepteiism, and is made use of by Priests and Jesuits, as a strong motive to
persuade them to Popery, although there be far greater divisions among Papists,
then among us, as I have elsewhere demonstrated.

We shall not detain you long in the entry, but only speak a little of the
Author, and of this Treatise, and the causes that moved the reviving and
republishing thereof at this time.

The now triumphing and glorified Author needs none of our commendation, he
being among the spirits of just men before the throne, and his memory being
deservedly very precious in the Church of Christ: But because the lives of
godly men are useful for imitation, we shall give a short description of his
life. He was descended of an ancient and respective family, being a son of an
ancient house of the name of Welsch in Nithsdale. He was born a little after
that blessed work of Reformation began in Scotland: and being trained up at
Schools, he profited very much, so that he was excellently accomplished in all
kind of literature, and eminent for piety and zeal for the Kingdom of Christ:
And being called to the Ministry of the Gospel about the year 1588. at the
town of Kirkubright, he was most diligent and laborious in preaching,
catechizing, visiting the sick, and disputing and convincing of Papists, which
that Country abounded with. And his labors were singularly blessed of God; for
many were brought by his Ministry, to see the error, superstition and idolatry
of Popery, and to embrace the truth: and many were really converted to God, and
others were edified and built up, confirmed, comforted, and strenthened; so
that he, as a shining and burning light, did inlighten that whole Country, who
at that time was in many places destitut of Pastors. After he had remained
there several years, the General Assembly thought fit to transport him to Air,
as a Town of greater note, and more populous, where he was most assiduous and
diligent in the work of the Ministry: for he preached not only twice on the
Lords day, but also twice on every day of the week, from nine to ten in the
morning, and from four to five at night, where the Lord wonderfully blessed his
labors; for both in Air, and in the Country about, many were converted by him:
some of whom were as eminent and lively Christians, as readily have been known
of latter times. After he had continued in the work of the Ministry several
years at Air, he was commissioned by the Presbytery, with some other of his
brethren, to keep the Assembly indicted at Aberdene, anno 1605. for which he,
with M. John Forbes, M. Andrew Duncan, M. John Sharp, M. Robert Dury, and M.
Alexander Strachan, were arraigned, imprisoned, and at length banished, anno
1606. whereupon he went to France, and in a very short time learned the French
tongue, and acquired such a facility therein, as was thought strange by these
who knew it. He was called to the Ministry in S. John d' Angely, a Protestant
town in France, where his Ministry was much blessed with success. But the
Civil Wars arising while he was there, that City was besieged on the
Protestant interest. M. Welsch did much encourage the people, and told them
that their adversaries should not prevail. But in process of time, the town was
sore straightened, and ready to be taken, the enemy having raised a battery, and
by a close approach, had made a great breach in the wall. M. Welsch hearing
thereof (lest the people should be discouraged and faint) went himself with the
Canonier up the walls, and desired he should charge such a piece of Canon, and
shoot, for GOD should direct that shot, and cause it to prosper; which
accordingly did, to the astonishment of on-lookers, dismount that battery: and
the Lord so ordered things after, that the King did parley on favorable terms
with the City, and did only himself with his Court come in, without doing any
violence.

Upon the LORDS day thereafter, some of the godly in that place, fearing M.
Welsch his hazard, did seriously deal with him, that he would forbear to go
forth and preach, the Court being there: But he would by no means be hindered,
showing them he would adventure to preach the Word to his people, and trust the
Lord with what concerned himself: Therefore he went forth and preached, having
a very great Auditory, both of friends, and others, who came upon the fame of
such a man. But in time of Sermon, a great man of the Court, with some of the
Kings own guard, was sent to bring him forthwith before the King: and whilst he
was entering the Church, which had some difficulty, by reason of the multitude,
M. Welsch did turn himself toward that entry, and desired the people to give
way to one of the great Peers of France that was coming in. But after whilst he
was coming near the Pulpit to execute his Commission, he did with great
authority speak to him before all the people; and in the Name of his Master
JESUS CHRIST, charged him, that he would not disturb the worship of GOD.
Wherewith he was so affrighted, that he fell a shaking, yea was forced to
crutch down, and make no further trouble. Sermon being ended, M. Welsch with
much submission, went to the King, who was then greatly incensed, and with a
threatening countenance, asked, What he was? And how he durst preach Heresy so
near his person, and with such contumacy carry himself? To which with due
reverence, bowing himself, he did answer: I am, Sir, the servant and Minister
of JESUS CHRIST, whose truth I preached this day: which if your Majesty rightly
knew, ye would have judged it your duty to have come your self and heard. And
for my doctrine, I did this day preach these three truths to your people.
First, that man is fallen, and by nature in a lost condition; yea, by his own
power and abilities, is not able to help himself from that estat. Secondly,
that there is no salvation, or deliverance from wrath, by our own merits; but
by JESUS CHRIST, and his merit alone. Thirdly, I did also preach this day, the
just liberties of the Kingdom of France, that your Majesty owes obedience to
Christ only, who is the Head of the Church: and that the Pope, as he is an
enemy to Christ and his truth, so also to the Kings of the earth, whom he
keeps under slavery to his usurped power. Whereat the King for a time keeping
silence, with great astonishment turned to some about him, and said, Surely,
this is a man of GOD. Yea, after did commune with him, and with great respect
dismissed him. The next year, the differences betwixt the King and Protestants
growing greater, the City was again besieged. M. Welsch entreated the Citizens
to make peace with the King; for God had a controversy with them, for their
unthankfulness, and not walking answerably to the Gospel, therefore he was not
with them as formerly, but had given them up to their enemies: and if they
stood out, their City should be taken. But the City not hearkening to him, was
taken, and in part sacked. At which time the King passed a solemn order, that
none should in the least wrong M. Welsch, nor any thing that belonged to him,
under highest pains: and said to him, as Nebuzaradan to Jeremiah, All the land
is before thee, whither it seems good and convenient for thee to go, thither
go. But M. Welsch being grown exceedingly infirm in his body, and the
Physicians advising that only his native air could help him, choised to go over
to England, whereupon the King granted him a safe conduct. So he came over to
London, where he remained a certain space; but not being permitted to return to
Scotland, his sickness increased, and he died. During the time of his sickness,
he was so filled and overcome with the sensible enjoyment of GOD, that he was
sometimes overheard in prayer, to have these words, LORD, hold thy hand, it is
enough; thy servant it a clay vessel, and can hold no more.

He was a man, for piety, converse, and communion with GOD, most singular and
rare. M. Rutherfurd in his Epistle prefixed to his Survey of Antinomianism,
shows that from the witnesses of his life, he had this account, that of every
twenty-four hours, he gave usually eight to prayer, if other necessary and
urgent duties did not hinder; Yea, he spent many days and nights which he set
apart, in fasting and prayer, for the condition of the Church, and the
sufferings of the Reformed Churches abroad. He used even in the coldest winter
nights, to rise for prayer (as the Author of the fulfilling of the Scripture
testifies) and often times his wife has risen to seek after him, where he has
been found lying on the ground, weeping, and wrestling with the LORD; yea, some
times would have been much of the night alone, in the Church of Air, on that
account. One time especially, his wife finding him overcharged with grief, he
told her, he had that to press him which she had not, the souls of three
thousand people to answer for, whilst he knew not how it was with many of them.
And at another time whilst she found him alone, his spirit almost overcharged
with anguish and grief, upon her serious enquiry, said, That the times which
were to come on Scotland were heavy and sad, though she should not see them,
and this for the contempt of the Gospel.

While he was in France, a Friar traveling through the Country came to his
house, and M. Welsch being very hospital, permitted him to stay all night. The
Friars bed being not far from M. Welsch his chamber, heard a noise, with many
deep sighs and groans all night, which he supposed to have been an evil spirit,
and therefore arose early in the morning, and would needs be gone: a Scots
Gentleman being in the house, and seeing the Friar troubled, enquired what the
matter meant that he would be gone so soon? He answered, he would not stay in a
Huguenots house any longer, for they had converse with evil spirits. The
Gentleman understanding the matter, told him, that it was M. Welsch, whose
ordinary it was to pray all night, and desired him to stay the next night, and
he should see the truth thereof: which accordingly he did, and was so much
astonished at M. Welsch his piety, that he forsook Popery, and embraced the
Reformed Religion.

As he conversed with GOD, and dwelt in the Mount by prayer and wrestling with
GOD, night and day (for he used to say, He wondered how a Christian could ly in
bed all night without rising to spend some of the night in prayer and praise)
so he was admitted to very intimat nearness with him: and to speak with
reverence, put upon his secrets, so that he had very many things revealed to
him, both concerning the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, and concerning
particular places and persons; several instances thereof are recorded.

I. In his letter to my Lady Fleeming, he fore-telleth the judgment coming on
Scotland: for he thus speaks: Alace, for the Kingdom of Scotland: my
testimony does not differ from that of many before this time, who said, that
the judgment of Scotland should be blood. This Kingdom shall be drowned in
blood: A forbished and glistering sword is dight, and already drawn out of the
sheath, which shall not return until it be made drunk with the blood of the men
within this Land. First, the heavy intestin sword, and then the fury of a
stranger. O doleful Scotland! well were he that were removed far from thee,
that his eyes might not see, ^^r his ears hear all the evils that are to come
upon thee. Neither the strong man by his strength, nor the rich man by his
riches, nor the Noble by his blood, shall be delivered from the judgment. There
is a great sacrifice to be made in Bozra, in thee, O Scotland! of the blood of
all sorts in the Land. Ephraim shall consume Manasse, and Manasse Ephraim.
Brother against brother, and every man in the judgment of the LORD, shall be
armed to thrust his sword in the side of his neighbor, and all for the contempt
of the most glorious Gospel, and that blood which was offered to thee, O
Scotland! in so plentiful a manner, that the like thereof has not been offered
to any Nation; therefore thy judgment shall be the greater. The fulfilling
whereof (at least in part) has since been very sensible, and is known by many
alive, who had that letter long before the late troubles did begin.

II. On a certain night being under an extraordinary pressure of spirit to go
and power forth his heart to GOD, he left his wife in bed, and going out to a
garden, spent most of the night in that exercise; but his wife weary, at last
went to seek for him: but missing him in his ordinary place, went into other
gardens, by such passages as she knew; at last she heard a voice, and drawing
near to it, could but hear him speak a few words, but with great force and
fervency, mixed and accompanied with floods of tears, which were these, O GOD,
will thou not give me Scotland? O GOD, will thou not give me Scotland. She
being weary and afraid to interrupt him, went home, and heard not the close. At
last he came home, and reentering to his bed, his wife began to reprove his
unmercifulness to his own body, then asked him, what was he saying? for she
told she heard him. Well, said he, ye had better have been in your bed; but
since ye heard, I tell you, I have endured a great fight for Scotland this
night, and hardly could I get a remnant reserved, yet he will be gracious.

III. After this he arose another night, but went not out of doors: but in a
chamber he traveled and groaned so, as his wife impatient did rise several
times calling him to bed: but he waited his time. And when he came, she began a
modest expostulation with him for tarrying. Hold thy peace (said he) it will be
well with us; but I shall never preach another preaching in Air. And having
fallen asleep, before he awaked, the messenger was come, who by command carried
him prisoner to the Castle of Edinburgh.

IV. When he was prisoner in the Castle of Edinburgh, for holding the Assembly
of Aberdene. The Lord Ochiltrie being at that time Captain of the Castle,
caused M. Welsch to sup with him one night in the Castle (being related to him,
for M. Welsch mother in law, M. Knoxs wife was his sister) where were also
several other Gentlemen, and among them a Popish youth sat toward the lower
end of the table. M. Welsch being by the Captain set at the upper end,
entertained the company with grave and edifying discourse, which all delighted
to hear, save the young Papist, who with laughter and derision labored to
silence him, which was little regarded by M. Welsch. But after supper while the
guests sat a little, this youth stood up at the lower end of the table, and
while M. Welsch proceeded from grave to gracious entertainment of them at
table, the youth came to that hight of insolency, as with the finger to point
at him, and with the face to make flouting grimaces, whereby he grieved the
holy man, so as on a sudden he was forced to a silence.

The whole company who heard him with delight, were silent with him. Within a
little, M. Welsch, as moved by the Spirit of GOD, broke forth into these words:
Gentlemen, the Spirit of GOD is provoked against us, and I shall entreat you
not to be afraid to see what GOD shall do among you before you rise from the
table; for he will smite some one of you with death before you go home. All
were silently astonished, waiting to see the issue with fear: and while every
man feared himself, except the insolent youth, he fell down dead suddenly at
the foot of the table, to show the power of GODS jealousy against the mockers
of his Spirit, and the offers of his grace.

V. One day while M. Welsch looked out at his chamber window in the Castle, he
happened to see the Captain, and called unto him saying, God save you, my Lord.
The Captain acknowledging his neglect, and asking for M. Welsch welfare,
desired to know how he might serve him. In nothing (said M. Welsch) if you be
well, except you would carry my petition to his Majesty, entreating for liberty
to preach the Gospel. I willingly will (said the Captain) therefore send it to
me. Nay, said M. Welsch, I am your kinsman; I love you so well, as to warn you
not to take it in charge, except you resolve to deal truly in delivering it,
and getting me an answer. I shall bear the blame, said the Captain, if I do it
not. I beseech you, my Lord, said the other, under-take it not, except you mind
to do it; for the hazard is great. Well, Ochiltry takes it, but not coming in
an opportune season (for he came when the King was passionatly moved on another
occasion) he thought not fit then to give it: and as at that time he deferred,
so thereafter he neglected, and at last quite forgot to deliver it at all. For
which his heart smiting him, he durst hardly be seen of M. Welsch for three
months. Yet conscience forgetting as well as he, he came to the same place
where M. Welsch at first called him: and now M. Welsch asked how he did, and
what was become of his petition? The Captain surprised, answered, I delivered
it to his Majesty, but he was in a passion, and it seems it has fallen by, for
I have not gotten an answer. Nay, my Lord, said M. Welsch, you should not lie
to God and to me; I know you delivered it not: I am sorry, My Lord, for your
lot. I warned you not to be false to God; and now I tell you, God shall take
your estat and honors in Scotland, and shall give them to your neighbor, and
this in your own time. This troubled the Lord Ochiltrie, and came truly to
pass: for he being the eldest son of the good Lord Ochiltrie, a Reformer, was
forced in his own time to quite all, and give both estat and honors to James
the son of Captain James the second brother, who was the last of that house.

VI. While he was Minister at Air, the plague was sore in the Country, but no
infection was in the Town: but it came to pass that two men coming with packs
of cloth to the Town from a neighboring place, where there was yet no suspicion
thereof. The sentry on the Bridge held them out, notwithstanding they had a
pass while the Magistrate came; who though he could not disprove their pass, yet
would not permit them to enter the Town, till he sent for M. Welsch. So the
Bailly bids them disburden their beasts, till he considered what was to be
done. A little after, M. Welsch coming, the Bailly says to him, Sir, here are
men come from such a place, we have heard of no plague there; besides they have
a pass from known men: What shall we do? M. Welsch made no answer, but
uncovering his head, stood in the midst of the company that followed him, and
having his eyes directed to heaven (yet speaking nothing) near half a quarter
of an hour; at last said, Bailly, cause these men put on their packs again, and
be gone: for if GOD be in heaven, the plague of GOD is in these packs. These
men returned, and opened their packs at Cumnock, and it was observed that such
contagion was therein, that all the people of that Village died; there was not
a man left to bury the dead.

VII. While he was in prison, John Stewart an eminent Christian woe lived at
Air, being come to visit him, found him in a more then ordinary way troubled,
and sad; and upon his enquiry thereanent, he says, John, ye should not be
here, go home to Air, for the plague of GOD is broken up in that place, and
cause Hew Kennedy, Provest of that Town (who was also a very singular
Christian) convean the people to the streets, and pray together, and the Lord
shall hear Hew Kennedy, and remove the stroke. This at first did something
astonish the said John, and put him to question its truth, having so lately
come out of that place; but at his return found it so, and accordingly in every
thing it fell out as the man of GOD had showed. These instances are recorded in
the fulfilling of the Scriptures, to which I add one no less true then the
rest, it is this.

VIII. While M. VVelsch was Minister at Air, there was much profanation of the
LORDS Day committed, by reason of great confluence of people (at a Gentle-mans
house about eight miles distance from Air) to the football, and other games and
pastimes, whereupon M. VVelsch did several times write to the Gentleman,
desiring him to suppress the profanation of the LORDS Day at his house; but he
not loving to be called a Puritan, slighted it: wherefore M. VVelsch came on a
day to his gate, and called for the Gentleman, who coming to him, he told him
that he had a message from GOD to him, to show him, that because he slighted
the advice given him from the LORD, and would not restrain the profanation of
the LORDS Day committed in his bounds, therefore the LORD would cast him out of
his house and estat, and none of his posterity should ever enjoy it. Which came
to pass; for although the Gentleman was in a very good external condition at
that time, yet from that day forward all things crossed him, while at length he
was necessitat to sell his estat: and while he was giving the buyer possession
thereof, he told before his wife and children, with tears, that he had found M.
VVelsch a true Prophet. This was related by the Gentle-mans own son, a godly
and reverent Minister, who was present when his father told it with tears.

He longed much to be in heaven, and to be rid of a body of death, as
witnesses among others, these expressions in that forecited letter: My desire
to remain here is not great, knowing that so long as I am in this house of
clay, I am absent from the LORD: and if it were dissolved, I look for a
building not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. In this I groan, desiring
to be clothed upon with my house which is in heaven: If so be that being
clothed, I shall not be found naked. For I that am within this tabernacle, do
often times groan, and sigh within my self, being often times burdened; not that I
would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of
life. I long to eat the fruit of that tree which is planted in the midst of the
Paradise of GOD; and to drink of the pure river clear as crystal that runs
through the streets of that new Jerusalem. I know that my Redeemer lives, and
that he shall stand at the last day on the earth: and that after my skin worms
destroy my body, yet in my flesh shall I see GOD; whom I shall see for my self,
and not another for me. And mine eyes shall behold him, though my reins be
consumed within me. I long to be refreshed with the souls of them that are
under the altar, who were slain for the Word of GOD, and the testimony they
held: And to have these long white robes given me, that I may walk in white
with these glorious Saints, who have washed their garments, and made them white
in the blood of the Lamb. Why should I think it a strange thing to be removed
from this place to that wherein is my hope, my joy, my crown, my eldest
brother, my Head, my Father, my Comforter, and all the glorified Saints; and
where the song of Moses and the Lamb is sung joyfully. Where we shall not be
compelled to sit by the rivers of Babylon, nor to hing up our harps on willow
trees; but shall take them, and sing the new Halelujah, Blessing, honor, glory
and power to him that sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb for ever. What
is under this old vault of the heavens, and in this old worn earth, which is
under the bondage of corruption, groaning and traveling in pain; and as it
were, still shooting out the head, looking, waiting and longing for the
redemption of the sons of GOD? What is there, I say, that should make me
remain here? I expect that new heaven, and that new earth, where righteousness
dwells, wherein I shall rest for evermore. I look to get entry at the new
Jerusalem: at one of these twelve gates, whereupon are written the names of the
twelve Tribes of the children of Israel. I know CHRIST JESUS has prepared rowm
for me: why may I not then with boldness in his blood, step in unto that glory,
where my Head and LORD has gone before me. JESUS CHRIST is the door and the
Porter, who then shall hold me out? Will he let them perish for whom he has
died? Will he let that poor sheep be plucked out of his hand, for whom he has
laid down his life? Who shall condemn the man whom GOD has justified? Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of the man for whom CHRIST has died, or
rather risen again? I know I have grievously transgressed; but where sin
abounds; grace superaboundeth. I know my sins are red as scarlet and crimson,
yet the red blood of CHRIST my LORD, can make me as white as snow, as wool.
Whom have I in heaven but him? Or whom desire I in earth beside him? O thou
the fairest among the children of men, the light of the Gentiles, the glory of
the Jews, the life of the dead, the joy of Angels and Saints. My soul pants
to be with thee. I will put my spirit into thy hands, and thou will n^^ put it
out of thy presence. I will come unto thee; for thou casts none away that comes
unto thee. O thou the only delight of mankind! Thou came to seek and save
that which is lost. Thou seeking me, have found me: and now being found by
thee, I hope, O LORD, thou will not let me perish. I desire to be with thee,
and do long for the fruition of thy blessed presence, and joy of thy
countenance. Thou the only good Shepherd, art full of grace and truth:
therefore I trust thou will not thrust me out of the door of thy presence and
grace. The Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth by thee. Who shall
separat me from thy love? Shall tribulation or distress, or persecution, or
famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? Nay: in all these things I am more
then a conqueror, through thy Majesty that has loved me. For I am persuaded,
that neither death nor life, Principalities nor Powers, nor hight nor depth,
nor things present, nor things to come, nor any other creature, is able to
separat me from the love of thy Majesty, w ich is in CHRIST JESUS my LORD. I
refuse not to die with thee, that I may live with thee. I refuse not to suffer
with thee, that I may rejoice with thee. Shall not all things be pleasant to me,
which may be my last step, by which or upon which, I may come unto thee. When
shall I be satiat with thy face? When shall I be drunk with thy pleasures? Come,
LORD JESUS, and tarry not. The Spirit says, Come: the Bride says, Come. Even
so, LORD JESUS, come quickly, and tarry not. Why should the multitude of mine
iniquities, or the greatness of them affright me? Why should I faint in this
mine adversity to be with thee? The greater sinner I have been, the greater
glory will thy grace be to me unto all eternity. Oh! unspeakable joy! endless,
infinite and bottomless compassion! O Ocean of never-fading pleasure! O love of
loves! O the hight and depth, and breadth, and length of that love of thine
that passes knowledge! O uncreated Love! Beginning without beginning, and
ending without end! Thou art my glory, my joy, and my gain, and my crown. Thou
have set me under thy shadow with great delight, and thy fruit is sweet unto my
taste. Thou have brought me into thy banqueting house, and placed me in thine
orchard. Stay me with thy flagons, and comfort me with thine apples: for I am
sick, and my soul is wounded with thy love. Behold, thou art fair, my Love:
Behold, thou art fair, thou have doves eyes. Behold, thou art fair, my Love;
yea pleasant also: our bed is green. The beams of our house are Cedars, and our
rasters are of firr. How fair and how pleasant art thou! O Love for delights!
my heart is ravished with thee. O when shall I see thy face? How long will thou
delay to be to me as a Roe, or a young Heart, leaping upon the mountains, and
skipping upon the hills. As a bundle of myrrh be thou to me, and ly all night
between my breasts. Because of the savor of thy good ointments, thy name is as
ointment powered out; therefore desire I to go out of the desert, and through to
the place where thou sit at thy repose, and where thou makes thy flocks to
rest at noon. When shall I be filled with thy love? Certainly, if a man knew how
precious it were, he would count all things dross and dung to gain it. I would
long for that scaffold, or that ax, or that cord, that might be to me that last
step of this my wearisom journey to go to thee my LORD. Thou who know the
meaning of the spirit, give answer to the speaking, sighing, and groaning of
the spirit. Thou who have inflamed my heart to speak to thee in this silent,
yet love-language of ardent and fervent desires, speak again unto my heart, and
answer my desirs, which thou have made me speak to thee. O Death! where is thy
sting? O grave! where is thy victory? The sting of Death is sin, and the
strength of sin is the Law: but thanks be to GOD that gives me the victory
through JESUS CHRIST. What can be troublesome to me, since my LORD looks upon
me with so amiable a countenance? And how greatly do I long for these
embracements of my LORD? O that he would kiss me with the kisses of his mouth:
for his love is better then wine. O that my soul were the throne wherein he
might dwell eternally. O that my heart were the Temple wherein he might be
magnified, and dwell for ever, etc.

If there were no more but these heavenly breathings of soul, they do speak
forth what earnest desires and groanings this holy Man had for the full
enjoyments of GOD, and what full assurance of faith he enjoyed.

As he was extraordinary in prayer, so he was marvellously diligent in the rest
of his Masters Work: For (as I was assured by an old reverend and godly
Minister, who knew the truth thereof) he preached twice every week day, from
nine to ten in the morning, and from four to five at night, beside his work on
the LORDS Day, and catechizing and visiting of families, and of the sick.

In his preaching he had a deep impression of the great and dreadful Majesty of
GOD upon his spirit, that made him speak with great boldness and authority. The
learned and godly M. Boyd of Trochrig relates, in his Commentary upon the
Ephesians chap 6. verse. 19.20. praelect. 91. page 1101. how that M. Welsch
being called to preach before the University of Saumur, one of the most learned
Auditories in France, although he was a stranger, and was to preach in a
strange tongue, and to strangers, yet did preach with such boldness and
authority, as if he had been before the meanest Congregation: whereat Trochrig
being astonished, could not but (on his acquaintance with him) question him
thereanent, whence he had such confidence, and was so little moved whilst he
preached before strangers, so grave and judicious an Auditory, and in a strange
tongue? To whom (Ex intimo animi sensu respondit, vultu velut ad condolentiam
and compassionem, non ad contemptum vel dedignationem composito. Vah! Ego ne
hominum quorumvis faciem aut curem aut metuam; qui memini and reputo apud me,
me coram S. Sancta and gloriosa illa majestate consistere, cujus verbum in
ipsius conspectu servis and creaturis ejus annuncio? Creed mihi quum ea me
subit cogitatio, vultus hominum quorumcunque curare aut magni facere non
possum, etiamsi vellem vel maxim.) he answered in a humble way, as one
humbled, and not lifted up: O do I either care for or fear the face of any man,
who remembers and considers that I am standing before that holy and glorious
Majesty, whose word I preach in his sight to his servants and creatures?
Believe me, when the impression of that is upon my spirit, I cannot (although I
most willingly would) care for, or esteem the countenance of men.

He was most zealous and tender of all the truths of GOD, and studied to the
utmost of his power, to advance the Kingdom and interest of CHRIST; not
esteeming his life dear to him for the cause of CHRIST; yea, accounting it his
greatest honor to suffer for him and his truth; witness these words of his in
the forecited letter. Who am I that he should first have called me, and then
constitut me a Minister of glad tidings of the Gospel of salvation these
sixteen years already, and now last of all to be a sufferer for his cause and
Kingdom? etc.

He shined most brightly as a star of the first magnitude in Kirkubright and
Air the space of sixteen years, and in France about twelve or thirteen years;
how long he lived after he came to England, I cannot learn: but I suppose it
was not very long: For the sad case of the Churches of France, Bohemia and
Germany, brake his heart. His wife was a very eminently godly woman, the
daughter of John Knox, our famous Reformer. He had two sons that came to
maturity, one whereof was a Doctor of Physic, the other, to wit, M. Josias,
was a very faithful and eminent Minister of the Gospel.

There are several of his Sermons in manuscripts in the hands of many: It is a
great loss that these candles should be hid under bushels, and not set on
candlesticks.

As concerning this Treatise, it is both learned, solid, clear, and easy to be
understood by very ordinary capacities: and the greatest and weightiest points
of Controversy are handled therein (as concerning the Church, the Mass,
Antichrist, Justification by Faith, the merit of works, the Judge of
Controversies, and several other very weighty points of Controversy) so
learnedly, solidly, and convincingly, that now for the space of seventy years,
none ever did attempt to make a reply thereto.

We need not detain you longer in showing reasons that moved us to republish
this Treatise at this time: for the great increase of Popery, and ignorance of
the people of this Country, is reason sufficient for publishing Treatises of
this kind; especially such an one as this, which is preferable to other
Treatises of this nature, on several accounts. First, it handles both
convincingly, clearly, and yet briefly, the most weighty points of Controversy
betwixt us and Papists; whereas other Treatises generally, either handle only
some one or two heads, or else they are so voluminous, that common people
neither can have money to buy, or time to read them. 2. The Author spent much
time in praying for a blessing on this work, and therefore we may expect a
blessing on it. 3. The whole Treatise savors of much piety and zeal, especially
the Epistle to the Reader: where is laid out to our serious consideration, GODS
goodness to us on the one hand, and our unanswerableness to him on the other,
with the Authors fears, lest the Gospel be removed from us, if we do not
repent, and reform. The consideration whereof will undoubtedly have great
influence on a gracious soul, to stir him up to mourn and lament for the sins
of the Land, and deal seriously for the LORDS abiding with us. I know not any
thing more useful (through GODS blessing) for stirring us up and awaking us out
of our security, in this secure and stupid generation, then the serious
consideration of the things held out in that Epistle. Was our provocations so
great seventy years ago, that the godly and learned Author expected nothing but
the removeal of our candlestick, except we did repent? And what can be expected
now, but the pouring forth of wrath to the utmost on us, except speedy and
serious repentance prevent it, seeing GOD out of his infinite long-suffering and
patience, has continued the Gospel with us to this day, and we have multiplied
our provocations above the iniquities of our Fathers, as if they had been small
things? We have exceedingly surmounted them, notwithstanding that our light
has been greater, and our mercies mo then theirs were. O if the consideration
of these things would lead us to repentance!

That the reading of this Treatise might be less tedious, and you may more
easily take it up, I have divided the same in Sections, annexing a title to
each Section. And because the Section concerning the Mass, did agree to be
placed after the Section concerning Transubstantiation, we have transposed it,
and placed it there. I intended to have annexed thereto, An answer to H. T. his
Manual of Controversies, printed anno 1671. and sent into the Country for
seducing of poor souls: but because it would have caused the Book to swel to a
Volume. I forbear, intending (if the LORD will) to publish it shortly: and in
the mean time I have annexed, A Discovery of the bloody and treasonable
principles and practices of Papists; that all may see that not only Papists are
Heretics and Idolaters; but also bloody Traitors and incendiaries, unworthy to
live in any Christian Kingdom or Commonwealth.

As it was the design of the blessed Author in writing and publishing this
Treatise at first, to confirm the weak, establish the wavering, convince and
stop the mouth of gainsayers, and to discover and lay open the errors,
idolatries and abominations of that Whoor of Rome, that the poor people may be
made to flee from Babylon, lest being partakers of her sins, they be made also
partakers of her plagues, which are no less then to have their portion in that
Lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. So it is
our design in republishing the same: For what man is he that does believe that
Popery is the most abominable Idolatry imaginable; to wit, to worship the
handiwork of the Baker, and wood and stone, etc. and considers what severe
threatenings he has denounced against Idolatry; namely, That they shall be shut
out of that New Jerusalem, Rev. 22.15. and shall drink of the wine of the wrath
of GOD, and shall be tormented day and night before the holy Angels, and before
the Lamb; and the smoke of their torment shall ascend for evermore, and they
shall have no rest, Rev. 14.9. And that he is a jealous GOD, visiting, not only
this iniquity of Idolatry upon themselves, but likewise upon their children to
the third and fourth generation; and is not much troubled to hear and see so
many souls seduced and led aside thereto, and does not judge it of his
concernment to lay out himself to the utmost, for discovering the snare and pit
that is laid for entraping and ruining eternally of poor souls? Therefore we
hope as our endeavors shall be peace to us, so we hope it shall be acceptable to
all the lovers of truth.

That this prayerful Treatise of that great wrestler with GOD, may be blessed,
for convincing of gainsayers, informing, establishing and confirming the LORDS
people in the truth, and for stirring up, and awaking zeal, love and repentance
in the godly, shall be the earnest prayer of

Your servant for CHRIST'S sake, MATT. CRAFORD.

TO THE RIGHT EXCELLENT AND MIGHTY PRINCE, JAMES THE VI. KING OF SCOTLAND, etc.
Grace and Peace be multiplied.
I Hope it shall not be accounted presumption (most Noble Prince) to offer to
your Majesty, the first fruits of these my simple and rude labors, seeing the
cause is JESUS CHRIST'S, that KING of Kings, and LORD of glory, which is here
defended, even the everlasting truth of GOD, against the venomous stings of one
of the Locusts, Rev. 9.3. of that Antichristian Kingdom. The right whereof does
most justly belong to your Majesty, both in respect of these rare and singular
gifts of knowledge and understanding, which the LORD has vouchsafed upon your
Majesty, in such a plentiful measure, that your subjects do acknowledge it at
home, and strangers do admire it, and commend it abroad: Whereby you are not
only able to render a reason of that Faith which is in you, 1. Pet. 3.15. but
also able to stop the mouth of the adversary, Tit. 1.9. and convict the
gain-sayer whatsoever, by that word of truth, 2. Tim. 3.5. Wherewith your
Majesty has been brought up from your very infancy: So that all the wise men
of Babel (I mean the Clergy of that Roman Harlot) is not able to resist the
mouth and wisdom which the Lord has given to your Majesty. And also in respect
of that supereminent power (as the Apostle calls it, Romans 13.1.) whereby as you
are most able, so are you most obliged to maintain his truth, propagat his
Kingdom, and nowrish his own Spouse, which he has purchased to himself by his
own blood, Acts 20.28. by the breasts of your Majesty's government; as it was
promised of old, That his Spouse should suck the breast of Kings, Esa. 60.16.
So, who is more obliged, then ye, Sir? Who so sufficient and able every way to
maintain it, as ye, Sir? Your knowledge binds you: Your profession binds you:
Your sovereign authority, as ye are a King in Israel, binds you. For as the
wisest King that ever was, has said, and left it in writ: or rather that King
of Kings, in him, and by him, Princes reign by me, Prove. 8.15. Ye hold your
Kingdom of him, Sir, and must lay down your Crown at his feet, and must stand
up and give a reckoning of the government of his Kingdom, of the maintenance of
his Truth, and of the nowrishing his Spouse, in that day. Your knowledge, Sir,
is able to justify it, (...): your sovereign authority able to defend it,
(...). Ye have received that two-edged sword of Gods Spirit in your mouth, able
to wound, Heb. 4.12. yea to consume that man of sin, and son of perdition. Ye
have received that sword of justice and judgment, Romans 13.4. in your hands;
able to destroy betimes all the wicked of your Kingdom; and to root out from
the city of the Lord, all the workers of iniquity, Psalm. 101.8. Ye know, Sir,
the abomination of Babel, Rev. 17.4.5. that as it is said of the virtuous
woman, Many women have done virtuously, but thou surmounts them all, Prove.
31.26. So the contrary may be said of her; Many heretics have taught
erroneously, and worshipped and wrought abominably; but the whoor of Babel,
Rev. 17.1. the Church of Rome, in heresy, in abomination, in idolatry, has
surmounted them all, that ever went before her, or ever shall come after her.
Many beasts have spoken blasphemously, Rev. 13.1.3.6. but that second beast
that has two horns like the Lamb, Rev. 13. and 16.13.14. and 17.3.4.5.6. and
18.24. surmounteth them all in blasphemy, tyranny, cruelty, and abominable
idolatry, destroying and making merchandise of the souls of men and women.
Other heresies did but subvert some fundamental points of Religion, but the
Church of Rome has subverted them all almost. Of other heresies, some was but
against the Godhead of Christ, other some against his manhood, other some
against his offices and benefits, or some one head or other: But the doctrine
of the Church of Rome, is against them all. Injurious to his Godhead, in making
him, not only inferior to the Father, in teaching that he is not (...); but
also inferior to the very creatures, in praying to Mary to command her Son,
Jure Matris impera Redemptori: as I heard your Majesty most solidly prove, and
so worse then the Arrians. Injurious to his manhood, to all his offices, his
benefits, and all the means, inward and outward, of the knowing and applying of
him. And last of all, injurious to his sovereign glory, in communicating it to
stocks and stones, a piece of bread, bones and ashes, and the skurf skarf of
all things; as I hope, I have made manifest in this my Answer. So that most
justly it is called, The speech of the Dragon, and the doctrine of Devils, by
the Spirit of God, Rev. 13.11. 1. Tim. 4. And if the profession of such a
devilish doctrine be too great an evil, what would the practice thereof be? I
mean the idolatrous Mass, that abomination of desolation. The misery, alace!
were too great, to see the people of this Country scattered like sheep without
shepherds, Matthew. 9.36. dying that second and everlasting death, for want of
the bread of life, and Gospel of salvation. But this would be the misery of
miseries, if the golden cup of Babel, full of all abominations, Rev. 17.4.
should be set to their head again, to drink the deadly poison of their own
damnation. And certainly, if this famine of the Word of GOD, Amos 8.11.12.
whereby not only two or three Cities, as the same Prophet says, chapter 4.8. but
twenty or thirty Parishions in some places, should be compelled to go to one,
if they were desirous to drink the waters of life; this, I say, is a judgment
heavy enough. But what a judgment would this be, if they were compelled to
bide at home, and it were but in their own families, by that abominable Mass,
the round bread, the Gods of Babel? Surely a great many of the people of this
Country, do not halt now between these two thoughts, whither GOD be the LORD,
or Baal; 1. Kings 18.21. but have forsaken the LORD and his Gospel, and in
their heart desires the opportunity to say to their round bread, These are our
Gods who have redeemed us from Hell, and these will we worship; at least
secretly, till our strength grow, and our number increase. The rest of the
iniquities of this Land, were too great to provoke the LORD of Hosts, suppose
this impiety (which the LORD forbid, for his CHRIST'S sake) be not added unto
all the rest, and above all the rest. For what sin is comparable to Idolatry?
Or what iniquity has been ever so severely punished, as Idolatry? A sin that
is immediately against GOD, against CHRIST, against his Glory. A sin that made
24000. of the LORDS own chosen inheritance to fall in the wilderness, for the
golden Calf, and Baal-Peor, Exodus 32.28. Number. 25.9. A sin that provoked the
LORD in such a high measure, that it made him deliver his own people (whom he
had planted in that Land of Promise, and to whom he had sworn to be their GOD)
over in the hands of their enemies round about them, Judges 2.11.12.13.14.15.
so that whithersoever they went, the hand of the LORD was sore against them. A
sin that rent the Kingdom of David asunder, 1. Kings 11.5.11. and made ten
parts of it to be given to Jeroboam the son of Nebat, suppose the person was
called Jedidiah, the beloved of the LORD, 2. Sam. 12.25. And the promise was
made unto him, that his house and throne should stand for ever, 2. Sam. 7.13.
And finally, a sin that first moved the LORD to put away Israel from before his
face: and caused their land to vomit them out, without all hope ever to return
again: and then made his wrath so hot against Juda, 2. Chron. 36.16.17.18. 2.
Kings 25.10. till there was no remedy, but the Temple, the Kings House, and the
houses of all the Nobles, were burnt with fire: the Kings sons first slain
before his eyes, then his own eyes put out, himself bound with chains of steel,
and he and his people carried captives to Babel, where there they remained for
the space of seventy years. Are not these things fallen forth as examples to
us? And are they not written for our instruction, as the Apostle says, 1. Cor.
10.11. upon whom the ends of the world is fallen? And is not the abomination of
Babel, Rev. 17.4. their idolatrous Mass, as great abomination in the eyes of
the LORD, as Milcom the abomination of the Ammonits? 1. Kings 11.5. Is it less
Idolatry to worship a golden Calf, the Gods of Egypt, or a graven sheep
Ashtaroth, the Gods of the Sidonians, Exodus 32.4. 1. Kings 11.5. Judge. 2.13.
then to worship a bit of bread, made of wheat, ground in the mill, baken in the
oven, conjured and erected up by an idolatrous Priest, which is the God of
Babel, the Church of Rome? Is there any more Godhead in the one, then in the
other? Has their Idol of the Mass any more life, feeling or moving, then the
Idols of Egypt and Sidon had? And does not the Church of Rome give as great,
yea rather greater worship and Religion to their round bread, then Juda or
Israel gave to their golden Calf, or to Ashtaroth the graven sheep: for they
worship it as their Creator and Redeemer? And as the worship of the golden
Calf, is called the worship of Devils in Moses song, Deuteronomy. 32.17. so the
Idolatry of the Church of Rome, whereof their round bread in their Mass, is one
of the principal, is called, the worship of Devils, Rev. 9.20. by the voice
that came from the four horns of the golden Altar. For what Church or Kingdom
under heaven is there to be found, who in the time of the blast of the sixth
Trumpet, when that fearful Army of the Turks was loosed to overrun Christendom,
do worship Idols of gold, and silver, of brass, of wood, and of stone, but the
Church of Rome? And if the worship of GOD by Images, as Israel did in the
golden Calf, which is but the break of the second Command, be called the
worship of Devils; shall not the worship of a false Creator and Redeemer, as
they do in their Mass, which is not only the break of the first Command; but
also the treading under foot of the Son of GOD in the Gospel, be most justly
called, the worship of Devils? And is not the LORD as jealous of his glory now,
as he was then? And has he not sworn, that he will not give it to another?
Esai. 42.8. And has he not threatened as severe judgments against the Whoor of
Babel, and the worshippers of the Beast and his Image, and them that receive
his mark openly or privately, as ever he did against Juda, or Israel? Rev.
13.14.15.16. and 14.8.9.10.12. and 16.1.2.10.19. and 17.1.2. and
18.11.2.3.5.6.21. and 19.19.20.21. and 21.21. Did he not cause it to be
proclaimed, by an Angel with a loud voice, that the foundations of the earth
might hear it, and tremble, that they shall drink of the wine of the wrath of
GOD; yea, of that pure wine, powered out in the cup of his wrath, and they shall
be tormented day and night before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb: and the
smoke of their torment shall ascend for evermore, and they shall have no rest day
nor night, that worship the Beast and his Image? And heard not John, him that
sat upon the Throne, the Judge of the whole earth, say, That Idolaters shall
have their portion in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is
the second death? And seeing the knowledge of our Redemption surmounteth the
knowledge of our Creation: and the benefit of our Redemption exceeds (by many
degrees) the benefit of our Creation: shall not the worship of an Idol Redeemer,
and of a false Jesus, as they do in their Mass, surmount by many degrees, the
worship of an Idol Creator, as Juda and Israel did? For the greater the light
be, and the greater the mercy be that is bestowed upon any, their sin must be
the greater. And as the light of the Gospel is more glorious then the light of
the Law, 2. Cor. 3.6.7.8.9.10.11.12.13. so the Idolatry of these that are under
the Gospel, must be more abominable then the Idolatry of these that were under
the Law. Theirs was but the despising of Moses Law, Heb. 10.28. But this
Idolatry of their Mass, is the treading under foot of the blood of CHRIST, and
so worthy of sorer punishment, (as the Apostle says; Heb. 10.29.) And suppose
that the judgment were to fall but upon the committers of this sin only, it
were too great; but it would reach further to a whole Kingdom wherein it were
committed, if by repentance; and execution of Justice, it were not prevented.
For shall Abimelech King of Gerar, Genesis 20.9. fear the judgment of GOD upon his
whole Kingdom, for one adultery only intended, and that in ignorance? And what
may a whole Land then fear, for such abominable Idolatry in so clear a light of
the Gospel? And shall the ten Tribes fear the wrath of GOD, Josh. 22.21. to be
kindled against the whole Congregation of Israel, for the rebellion of the
other two Tribes, in setting up an altar to sacrifice upon, as they thought?
And what should we fear then against this whole Land, if there were altars
reared up, not to worship GOD on, but the Idol of Babel. And if Achans theft,
Josh. 7. suppose both the person and the sin was unknown; yea, suppose there
was no suspicion, neither of the one nor of the other, spoiled all Israel of
GODS presence, made them fall before their enemies, and made the LORD refuse to
be in the midst of them, unless the sin and person was tried and searched, and
the Anathema taken away? And would not Babels Idolatry be much more effectual
to spoil all the Land, if it were defiled therewith, of GODS presence; to make
us fall before our enemies, and to make the LORD to depart from us, suppose it
were but in one person, seeing the sin is more odious in the LORDS eyes, our
light greater, and we more obliged then they were? And suppose that this
abomination should be but in private families, yet it is a fretting canker, as
the Apostle says, 2. Tim. 2.17. that when it has infected a member of the
body, it will infect the rest, if it be not prevented by cutting off the
festered member. And the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 5.6. A little leaven leaveneth
the whole lump. And experience has taught, that by process of time, a little
leck has sunk a great ship: and one person infected with the pestilence, has
infected a whole Kingdom. The first Idolatry of the land of Canaan, began with
Teraphim Jehovae, silver sanctified to the LORD, to be an Image, Jud. 17.5.3.
but afterward it grew up to the worship of Baal and Ashtaroth, chapter 2.13. It was
in the beginning but in one only family, the family of Micah, chapter 17.1. but in
process of time, it passed from that family to the Tribe of Dan, chapter 18. and
from that Tribe to all the rest of the Tribes, chapter 2.13.14. till at the last
all Israel sinned, and did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD. So
there is no question, Sir, if your Majesty put not to your hand, as you have
begun to do, it will get foot in this Land, and it would pass from families to
Tribes, from private houses to Temples, from the worship of the round bread, to
the worship of stocks and stones: and so by one degree to another, till it have
made all guilty; what by infecting, what by communicating with their sins, and
then bring the fearful vengeance of GOD upon all. And suppose, Sir, that you
have not need to be taught of any; for that light and understanding wherewith
the LORD has anointed you, in so great a measure beyond many, does teach you
all things: and your Majesty has laid so sure foundation of maintenance, both
of Justice and Religion within your Land, and has begun so substantially to
prosecute the same (for the which, from our hearts we render glory and praise
to GOD.) So that all further exhortation of your Majesty, would seem to be
superfluous: Yet I must borrow leave at your Majesty, to be bold, with all
humbleness of mind, and reverence of heart, to GOD, and to your Majesty, to
beseech you, by the price of JESUS CHRIST your LORD, to stir up the bowels of
your compassion over this desolat Country: For upon whom are the eyes of all
Israel, 1. Kings 3.20. but upon you, Sir? And what King is there under Heaven,
under whose Government the Gospel has had so free a passage, and the Church of
GOD has had ^^ch^^^nrity and liberty, in such peace, for so long a (...) a
whole Kingdom, without Heresy or Schism, (...) under your Majesty's
Government? So that we were both ungrate to GOD, and to you, Sir, if with all
thanksgiving we did not acknowledge it. Take therefore for examples these
worthy Kings, who have received a good report in the Word of the LORD; and now
resting from their labors, have received that incorruptible Crown of glory. Put
on their affections, Sir, and follow their actions, that your report here, and
Crown hereafter, may be equal, or rather above theirs. Let your heart melt,
Sir, with good Josias, 2. Kings 22.19. not for our fathers transgressions, as
he did; but for our own sins, and the sins of this Land, Ezekiel. 9.4. For GOD
regarded not the time of their ignorance, Acts 17.30.31. Romans 2.16. when the
Gospel shined not; but now since that light is broken forth, he admonishes all
men to repent, because he has set a day (which cannot be far off) wherein he
will judge every one by the Man CHRIST JESUS, according to his Gospel. And if
that great Angel had not descended unto us, with that little Book open in his
right hand, Rev. 10.1.2. and the Land had not been once purged of Idolatry, we
should not have sinned; but now we have no cloak for our sin, John 15.21.24.
Stir up your anger with Moses; Sir, who suppose he was the meekest man upon the
face of the whole earth, Number. 12.3. yet when he saw the golden Calf, his anger
was kindled, Exodus 32.19. that he brake the Tables of stone, the LORDS own work
and writ, burnt the Calf in the fire, br^yed it in powder, scattered it on the
waters, and made the people to drink thereof. Follow the example of good
Jehosaphat, Sir, who fought the LORD his GOD, 2. Chron. 27.4.20. walked in his
precepts, lifted up his heart to the ways of the LORD, purged his land of
Idolatry: And first sent Levits with his own Princes to teach all the Cities
of his Kingdom the Law of the LORD: and after being admonished by the Prophet,
for helping of the wicked, and loving them who hated the LORD, (suppose he was
his neighbor King, joined in affinity with him) he so repented, that he went
from the one end of his Kingdom to the other; even from Beersheba to mount
Ephraim, and brought his people to the LORD their GOD, and established Religion
and Justice in all the Cities of his Kingdom; and therefore the LORD was with
him: he prospered, and had riches and honor in abundance. What joy of heart,
Sir, brought Ezechias to the hearts of all the godly, as well indwellers as
strangers, when he purged his land of Idolatry, 2. Chron. 29. and 30.31. brake
the brazen Serpent which the people had abused, opened the doors of the Temple
which were shut up, restored the worship of GOD, sent messengers with letters
throughout all Israel, to convert them to the LORD their GOD: restored the
Priests and Levites in their Ministry, as the LORD had commanded by his
Prophets: spoke to their hearts, strengthened them in their offices, provided
for their maintenance, that they might be encouraged in the Law of the LORD?
Follow these examples, Sir: send Pastors throughout all the borders of your
Kingdom, to teach your subjects the Law of their LORD, and the Gospel of their
salvation: establish Religion and Justice in all the Cities of your Kingdom.
Cause the waters of life to run from the heart of your Country unto the
borders thereof, that publicly and privately, the LORD may be but one, and his
Name one, and he may be a sovereign King in all your Land, as it was prophesied
and promised, Zech. 14.8.6. Establish Pastors in all your Kingdom: strengthen
them in their offices, and speak to their hearts. Provide for their
maintenance, that they be not distracted; but may be encouraged in the Law of
their GOD, and in the execution of their Ministry. And when it is reported to
your Majesty, or ye hear of any, be they many, or be they few; be they man, or
be they wife; be it publicly, or be it secretly, in any of the Cities or parts
in your Majesty's Kingdom, that they have gone out to entise others to
Idolatry, or have committed Idolatry themselves, ye try it, search it, and seek
it out most diligently, for so the LORD has most straightly commanded. And if it
be true and certain that such abomination is done in your Kingdom, Take evil
out of Israel, that he may have mercy on us, and multiply his blessings to us.
And then may ye, Sir, (having done all these things) take GOD to record, that
you are clean from the blood of all your people; because you have kept no mean
back from them which your calling craved; but has caused the whole counsel of
GOD to be showed to them: so that if they perish, their own blood may be upon
their own heads. And then shall foreign Nations and strangers say of you, Sir,
as Hiram, and the Queen of Sheba said of Solomon, 1. Kings 5.7. and 10.8.
Blessed be the LORD GOD who has set such a wise and understanding Prince over
Scotland, to build his Church, and to exercise Justice and judgment there: It
was for the love the LORD had to his Church there, that he set such a wise and
understanding Prince over them. Yea, the generations to come, Psalm. 78.4. shall
tell to their children, and their childrens children, the great work of the
LORD which he has done by you, Sir, in this Land. I have heard your Majesty
gravely protest, before GOD, in two General Assemblies, that it was one of your
Majesty's greatest desires; and ye were even, as it were, ambitious of that
work, to plant every Parochin within your Kingdom with a Pastor: that the
posterities to come, might say, King JAMES the sixth has done such a notable
work in his days. Confirm your self, Sir, in that purpose: For ye know, Sir,
who has said, I will honor them that honor me. There is no question, Sir, and
I speak with confidence, if ye honor him in this Kingdom, and be faithful to
him in the Government of it, he shall honor you; not only by making you to reign
in that everlasting Kingdom; but also by lifting you up to be Ruler over mo
Kingdoms here. The LORD anointed David King over all Israel, yet he gave not
the possession of it all at once after the death of Saul, but first proved him
with the Government of one Tribe seven years and an half: and then finding him
faithful over that, he placed him Ruler over all the rest, and established all
Israel in his hand. So there is no question, and I am sure of it, if ye honor
the LORD to the uttermost of your power, in the Government of this Kingdom, and
give him a proof of your fidelity therein: that as he has given you the
undoubted right by birth, to be a King over mo Kingdoms then this, so shall he
make you Ruler of them, and establish them in your hands. Only, Sir, Be ye
strong and courageous to do with all diligence, as the LORD has commanded you
in his Word, Josh. 1.6.7.8.9. and as ye see these faithful Kings have done
before you. Decline neither to the right hand, nor to the left; and then
assuredly I dare promise you, in the Name of the LORD, he shall not leave you,
nor forsake you all your days, and none shall be able to stand before your face.
And as he was with Josua and David, so shall he be with you. For the LORD is
true who has promised, and then shall thou prosper in all thy ways. And
consider upon the other part, who ever prospered unto the end, but these that
walked as the LORD had commanded. For true is that which the LORD spoke by his
Prophet to Asa; He is with you, while ye be with him; and if ye seek him, he
will be found; but if ye will forsake him, he will forsake you, 2. Chron.
1.4.2. Was the LORD any longer with Saul, Joash, Amatzia, Uzzia, all Kings of
Juda, then they were with him? No, no: but from time they forsook him, he
forsook them. Because Saul despised the word of the LORD, in sparing whom he
should not have spared, the LORD despised him from being King over Israel, and
the Spirit of the LORD forsook him, 1. Sam. 15.23. and 16.15. Because Joash
forsook the LORD, 2. Chron. 24.20. in permitting Idolatry, at the request of
his Princes, the LORD forsook him and his Kingdom, and delivered them into the
hands of their enemies. Because Amatzia did evil, and obeyed not the counsel of
the Prophet, 2. Chron. 5.16. when he admonished him, the LORD determined to
destroy him. Vzzia, all the days that he sought the LORD, the LORD prospered
him, 2. Chron. 26.5.16.18. but from time he lifted up himself, to corrupt
himself, and to trespass against the LORD his GOD, in passing the limits of his
calling, and invading the Priests office, he had no honor of the LORD, but was
smitten with leprosy. But let all these things be far from your Majesty, since
you see what every one of these have done to Kings, and Kingdoms before you:
let your heart be constant before the LORD your GOD, all the days of your
life, that priores and posteriores, 2. Chron. 25.26. be never registrat of your
Majesty, as it was of them; neither in the Books of the LORDS Commentary before
him, neither in the Chronicles of the Kings of Scotland; but that both your
former and latter may be that which is good and right in the eyes of the LORD.
That both the LORD may give this testimony to your own conscience, and to the
conscience of all his children, that he gave of David, I have found you a man
according to mine own heart, that will do all my will. And also, that it may be
written of your Majesty in the Chronicles of the Kings of Scotland, as it was
written of David, Ezechias, Josias, in the Chronicles of the Kings of Juda,
That King JAMES the sixth, his heart was perfect toward the LORD his GOD all
his days, and his Government was in such Peace and Justice, that after him
there was none like him of all the Kings of Scotland: Neither was there any
such before him, who did cleave unto the LORD his GOD, with all his heart, and
followed all his Commandments, and neither declined to the right hand, nor to
the left. Now the LORD grant to your Majesty, that ye may find this favor in
his eyes, for his CHRIST'S sake. I have now taken this boldness, to offer these
my labors unto your Majesty, as a testimony of my most humble and loyal heart
unto your Majesty, as GOD the searcher of the heart knows. Your Majesty did
exceedingly encourage me, to let it go forth unto the light; what by your
Majesty's most gracious acceptance of mine endeavor, and most favorable
censure, and approbation of my labors: what by your Majesty's humane counsel
and advise, confirmed by your Majesty's Privilege and authority to me to
publish the same. Such was Your Majesty's humanity to me, not only in these,
but in all your actions, both public and private, with all your subjects, of
whatsoever rank or degree. Ye show such humanity and affability, that that
saying of Trajanus the Emperor, That a Prince should behave himself so to his
subjects, as he would have them to do to him, if he were a private man, is
verified in you, Sir; wherein certainly ye need not to give place to any of
whatsoever rank: You express it so lively in all your actions, and I have found
it for my own part by experience. So that Your Majesty has often caused me to
remember that notable saying of Titus that Roman Emperor, A subject should
never go sad-hearted from the speech of his Prince. The which experience makes
me to conceive hope, that Your Majesty will pardon this my boldness, will
accept in good part this my small mite. I therefore most humbly desire Your
Majesty to accept it, as from Your Majesty's most humble obedient servant and
subject. For whose peace and prosperity, I am always earnest with the LORD. Now
the GOD of all Peace, even that KING of Kings, power all light and grace in all
abundance, more and more, upon Your Majesty; and so root and ground your heart
in JESUS CHRIST, that ye may honor him more and more in your life and calling
here, that ye may be honored of him again, both in this life, and in that day,
with immortal and everlasting glory. Amen.

From Air the 18. of November 1602. Your Majesty's most humble subject, M. JOHN
WELSCH.

UNTO THE GODLY AND CHRISTIAN READER IN THIS LAND, Grace, Mercy and Peace, from
GOD the Father, and JESUS CHRIST his Son, our LORD and only Savior. Amen.
WHen I think, Christian Reader, of the unsearchable mercies (for so I may call
them) which the LORD, according to his rich grace, whereby he has been
abundant toward us, (if ever toward any) has vouchsafed upon us; and of our
great ingratitude and manifold iniquities wherewith we have recompensed him
again; I cannot but tremble to think of these most fearful judgments of GOD,
which we have most justly deserved, and which cannot but most assuredly fall
upon us, unless with most speedy and earnest repentance, of all sorts, they be
prevented and averted. For unto what Kingdom or Nation under heaven, has GOD
been more liberal in communicating the insearchable riches of his dear Son in
his Gospel, Ephesians. 3 8. as unto us in this Nation? Nay, unto what one Kingdom
under heaven has God been so rich and superabundant in mercy, as unto this?
There are but few Kingdoms upon whom the Lord has caused the glorious light of
his Gospel to shine upon, a gross darkness covering the most part of the
Kingdoms of the earth: and yet Scotland has found this favor in the eyes of
the most high GOD. So that that may be most truly said of us, which is written
of the land of Zabulon and Nephthali, Matthew. 4.16. A people that sat in
darkness saw great light: and unto them which sat in the region of death,
light is risen up. Many Kingdoms upon whom this light is risen, are but in part
delivered from the bondage of that second beast, Rev. 13.11. and 17.4. and from
that abomination of Babel, a part worshipping the LORD, and a part worshipping
Baal, I mean the idol of the Mass, and their idols of stock and stone. But our
deliverance was full, from that bondage; for that was fulfilled in us which was
promised and prophesied of old, Zech. 14 9. That the LORD should be but one,
and his Name one. And in these Kingdoms where the LORD is but one, and his Name
one; that is, where he only is worshipped, some of them have embraced him, but
as a Prophet, to teach them, and as a Priest to satisfy for their sins, and to
interceed for them: but not as a sovereign King to rule them, and govern them
by that form of government, which he has prescribed in his Word, with his own
Laws, Offices, and Officers, retaining yet a part of that hierarchy of Babel,
with some of her Laws, Offices, and Officers. But the LORD was rich in mercy
toward us, in bestowing himself upon us, not only as a Prophet to teach us,
and as a Priest to satisfy for our sins, and to interceed for us, but also as
a sovereign King, to govern us with that self same form of government, which he
has commanded in his Word, and unto the which only he has annexed the
promises of his blessing and presence, with his own Laws, Offices, and
Officers. So that as the Prophet says, Zech. 14.9. He was not only one in us,
and his Name one: but also a sovereign King in our land.

O Scotland! what Nation was like unto thee, that had the Gospel so freely
preached, his Sacraments so purely ministered, his censures and all the
privileges of his Kingdom, in such liberty executed, as thou had? For what
one Nation under heaven, has God done so great things, as for thee? What one
Kingdom is to be found in the whole earth, where Idolatry was so fully rooted
out, wherein all the means of his glory, and all the privileges of his
Kingdom, was so fully restored to their own integrity and perfection, as they
were first instituted, wherein all these means of the Word, Sacraments, and
Discipline, has continued for so long a space in such peace, in such purity,
in such liberty, without heresy or schism, as in thee? O Scotland! So that thy
day has been like the day of Joshua, When the Sun stood in Gibeon, and the
Moon in Aialon, Josua 10.12. For I know not if ever Nation or Kingdom has had
so long a day of the Gospel, in such peace, purity, and liberty, as thou have
had? Or if ever Nation after us, shall have so long a day, after such a manner
again. And it seems to me, that as the LORD confirmed Ezechiah of his promise,
by causing, 2. Kings 20. the Sun to return back again miraculously, by the
degrees whereby it went down: So the LORD has confirmed his superabundant love
toward us, in causing the light of the Gospel to return again (as it were) often
times, and that most wonderfully and miraculously, by the degrees whereby our
iniquities in the righteous judgment of God, did hasten it to go down upon us.
Yea, the blessing of Abraham has come upon us. For he has blessed them that
blessed us, and has cursed them who has cursed us, he has striven against
them who has striven against us, and has made our oppressors to eat their own
flesh, and to drink their own blood: no instrument formed against thee, (O
Church of Scotland!) has ever prospered: and the tongue that has risen
against thee, the LORD has condemned, that all flesh might know that GOD was
thy Savior, and the strong GOD of Jacob thy avenger. And certainly, if ever
people might have been called Jephzibas, Esai 62.6. that is, the LORDS delight,
or their land, Beula; that is, married unto him; the Church and Kingdom of
Scotland might have been so called. For the LORD had delight in us, and our
land has a husband, even the LORD our Redeemer, he was an ornament unto us,
Esa. 60 19. he set his beauty on us; Ezech. 16.14. he crowned us with glory,
and a Diadem by the hand of our GOD, was set upon our heads, Esai 6.2. And true
is that of us, which our Savior spoke to his disciples, Luke 10.24. Many Kings
and Prophets has desired to see the things that we have seen, and hear the
things that we have heard, and have not seen them nor heard them. So who are so
ladened with mercy and kindness as we have been? for we have been made the head
and not the tail, Deuteronomy. 28.13. as the LORD promised. And surely if ever people
should have been Joshurim, Deuteronomy. 32.15. that is upright and straight in the
eyes of the LORD, we should have been so. No, who should have been so holy as
we? Who so strong in CHRIST, and rooted and grounded in him, as we? Coloss.
2.7. Who so rich in all grace, and fruitful in all good works, as we? For who
had so many and so glorious means, to have made us to have abounded in all
grace, as we had? What could the LORD have done more to us, then he has done,
Isai. 5.4. For we wanted no mean that ever the LORD commanded in his Word,
either to have bred grace in us, or to have preserved it and increased it? But
they to whom much is given, much shall be required at their hands again. For as
the LORD made us a spectacle of his mercy, wherein he did demonstrat the riches
of his free grace in CHRIST JESUS, unto all the Kingdoms of the earth, and
above them all: So it had been our part proportionably, to have met him with
thankfulness again: and to have been examples of all grace, godliness,
righteousness, and of all good works, unto all others, and above all others.
But, alace! sinful Nation, laden with iniquities, Esai 1.4. who is so sinful as
thou art? What Nation so polluted with all abomination and wickedness, as thou
art? Thy iniquities are mo then the sand of the sea, they are grown up so high,
that the top of them reach up to the very heavens, Hosea 9.7. and the cry of
them is like, yea beyond the cry of Sodom: there is such a burden of iniquity
upon this Land, that (considering all circumstances both of the means, and of
the time and space the LORD has given us to repent) I know not if ever Nation,
was so great in the eyes of the LORD as this Land is. For may not that which
the Prophet spoke of Juda. Ezechiel 22. be most justly said of thee? O
Scotland! For art thou not replenished with blood, from corner to corner, so
that blood touches blood? Are not thy Nobles in thee, every one ready to shed
blood? In thee the father and the mother are despised: in the midst of thee,
the widow and the fatherless are oppressed: In thee the very abominations of
the Gentiles are committed. The discovering of the Fathers shame, and adultery
with thy neighbors wife: thou art so laden with adulteries, incests, and
whoredooms, that the Land groans under thee: thou have profaned his Sabaths,
despised his Law, contemned his Gospel, withholden from him the fruits of his
Kingdom, and have trodden under foot the blood of CHRIST, and have grieved that
Spirit of grace. So that when I think of the number and greatness of our sins,
I cannot but wonder that the LORD should not have withdrawn his Kingdom long
since from us, and have given it unto others, that would have brought forth the
fruits thereof, Matthew. 21.41. Yea, I wonder, that he has not caused the Land
to vomit us out, for the abominations and sins wherewith we have defiled it, in
so great a light. And surely, when I think of the severity of the Justice of
GOD, in punishing other Nations and Kingdoms, for the contempt of his Gospel,
and the withholding of the fruits of his Kingdom from him, my soul trembles.
For wherefore did the LORD reject the natural branches, that chosen generation,
of whom the Fathers was, and of whom CHRIST was according to the flesh, Romans
11.2^. and 9.5. and gave them and their posterity over to the hardness of their
hearts this 1500. years and more, to be damned for ever and ever in that
everlasting darkness, and yet his wrath is not turned back: but because they
would not be gathered, and knew not in that their day, the things that belonged
to their peace, and would not render to him the fruits of his Kingdom in due
season? Matthew. 23.37. Luke 19.42.43. Mat. 21.41. And wherefore did the LORD
remove his Candlestick, Rev. 2.5. from a great many of the Churches, both of
the East, and of the West, which were planted by the Apostles, and were once
lanterns of light, and has given them over to strong delusions to believe
lies, 2. These. 2.10.12. the one to the impiety of Mahomet, and the savage
Tyrant of the Church: the other to the bondage of that second beast, and
fearful darkness of that bottomless pit. Rev. 13.11. and 9.1. But because they
received not the love of the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, as the
Apostle says? 2. These. 2.12. Now if GOD spared not them, but gave them over to
a most fearful bondage, both of soul and body, both spiritual and corporal,
temporal and eternal; how should we not fear, as great, or rather greater
judgments, seeing we had all these as examples before us, to have forewarned
us, and to have made us to fear? For we are not to think, as our Savior says
to the Galileans, that they were greater sinners then we; but unless we all
repent, we shall likewise perish, Luke 13.3. And as though all our former sins
were too light to pull down and to hasten the LORDS fearful departing from us,
this darkness of the bottomless pit, Rev. 9.1. which is spreading it self again
in this corner of the Country, and this abomination of desolation, the idol of
the Mass, which is set up in the private families of this Country, is added
unto all the rest, and above all the rest. So that it is to be feared, unless
it be prevented by a most speedy and earnest repentance of all sorts in this
Land, that as we have been lifted up to heaven through his Gospel, Matthew.
11.23. so shall we be thrown down in the bottomless gulf of the LORDS fearful
wrath and vengeance: and as we have been made a spectacle of his mercy unto all
Nations, and above all other; so we shall be made a most fearful spectacle of
his wrath unto all other Nations, and above all other. O therefore that the
LORD would power upon us that Spirit of grace and deprecation, that even from
the house of David to the house of Levi: Zech. 12.10.11.12. that is, from the
Kings house, to the Ministry, and from them to the people, from man to wife,
that we might all look up to him, whom we have pierced through with our
iniquities: and mourn upon him, as for our first or only begotten son: and that
we might mourn publicly and privately, together and a part, every Congregation
by themselves, and every family by themselves, and every person by himself. Oh,
that we had hearts to repent; at the least, in the evening of this our day,
before the Sun went down altogether upon us: and then there is no question the
LORD would not remove his Candlestick from us, Rev. 2.5. nor make his glory to
depart, 1. Sam. 4.22. but would continue his covenant with us and our
posterity, and would cover all our enemies faces with shame, as with a garment:
yea, he would scatter that darkness that is beginning to overspread this Land
again, and Dagon should fall before the ark of the Lord: 1. Sam. 5.3.4 and his
last fall should be worse then his first. Let me therefore be bold with you, to
beseech you, yea to charge you in the bowels of JESUS CHRIST, by the price of
his blood, and by his glorious appearing to judgment, as ye would have it
comfortable to you, and as ye would have his glory to remain with us and our
posterity: yea, as ye would not be arraigned guilty, in that great day of the
LORDS banishment, and removing of his glorious presence out of this Land. (For
if we repent not, the LORD, as he has begun to depart from a great part of
this Country, so shall he most assuredly depart from the rest of this Land.) I
say, Let me beseech you, that every one of you would try and search your sins,
by the light of his Spirit in his Word, both the sins of our persons and
callings, that we would humble our hearts for them, and power them out as water
in his bosom, mourning for them, and for the sins of the Land: Ezec. 9.4. and
that we would turn our feet to walk in all his precepts and commandments. And
let us who are the Watchmen over the house of Israel, begin first, Ezec. 3.2.
and 33. For the judgment of GOD will begin at his own house, and at the
Sanctuary. For if we that are the lights of our people be darkness, how great
must their darkness be? And if we that is the salt of the earth to season them
with grace, become unsavory, wherewith shall either they or we be seasoned?
Matthew. 5.14. and 6.23. And if that we that is the stomach and the heart; as it
were, become senseless, and dead; is it any wonder suppose all the rest of the
members be dead and senseless? Let us therefore first convert our selves, and
then let us with tears and mourning cry aloud to our Congregations, and spare
not. Let us lift up our voices as a Trumpet, that the deafest and deadest may
hear. Let us show them their sins and defections, that at the least, they
perish not for want of warning, and so their blood be craved at our hands,
Ezec. 3.3.4.5. Let us be instant in season, and out of season, to preach the
Word, improve, rebuke, exhort, with all doctrine and long-suffering, as we are
most gravely charged by the Spirit of GOD. Let us admonish every man, and
instruct every man publicly, and privately: that we may do our endeavor at the
least, to present every man perfect, Col. 1.28. as a pure Virgin to JESUS
CHRIST. And if they will not hear, let us say to the earth, Earth, earth, hear
the word of the LORD: let us rise up and contend with the mountains, and let us
make the hills to hear our voice, and take them as witnesses against them. And
then shall we have this comfort in the days of our afflictions, that we have
not kept back the word of the holy One. Job. 6.10. And then shall we be a sweet
smelling savor in CHRIST, as well in them that perish, as in them that are
saved. Let you that are the people walk worthy of that great salvation that is
brought unto you, and be fruitful in all good works, denying all ungodliness,
and worldly lusts: living godly, soberly, and righteously, waiting for that
blessed hope, and glorious appearing of that great GOD our Savior, the LORD
JESUS, 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. Heb. 2.3. Tit. 2.11.12. And you that are Princes of the
Land, and Magistrates of the Country, Remove iniquity from your tents, and let
not your families be houses of iniquity, Job 11.14. Mic. 26.10. Mat. 5.16.
Phil. 2.15. Shine before your tenants, servants, and house-holders, as lanterns
of light; for such Master, such servant. Be examples to them of godliness,
sobriety, and righteousness. Cleanse your hearts and hands from blood,
oppressions, whoredoms, adulteries. Be an eye to the blind, and a foot to the
lame, and a staff of comfort to the oppressed. Deal your bread to the hungry,
and hide not your eyes from your own flesh, Esai. 58.7. maintain the godly, and
be a terror to the wicked, Romans 13.3.4. That your faces may chase away
iniquity, and fin may hide its self from your presence. Take vengeance on all
evil doers, and spare not where the LORD bids strike. And because a great many
of you, through your most cruel and barbarous covetousness and sacrilege (the
like whereof I think has not been heard of, no not among the Turks, and
barbarous Americans, that they spoil their GOD, and let their worship decay for
want of maintenance, as ye do in Scotland:) are the causes of the everlasting
damnation of a great part of the poor people, for want of the preaching of the
Word of salvation unto them. For their blood are found under your wings: Jerem.
2.34. and their blood cry more strongly from the low hells, to the high heavens
against you, for wrath and vengeance, then ever Abels blood did against his
brother Cain, Genesis 4.10.

Now therefore at the last, repent you of it. Purge your hands of it; and at
the least vouchsafe so much upon every Church; as may sustain a Pastor to break
the bread of life unto them: and think the damnation of so many millions of
souls of your poor brethren, who might have been saved, for ought that ye know,
if they had had the Gospel of salvation preached unto them: too great
guiltiness, suppose ye had not blood upon blood. Otherwise, if ye will not, I
call heaven and earth to witness against you, Deuteronomy. 30.19. that the indignation
of the LORD shall root you and your posterity out of the land of the living: and
their blood that perish for want of teaching, shall be laid to your charge, and
ye shall be arraigned as murderers of their souls, in that great day. And not
only that curse shall fall upon you, which was commanded to be pronounced upon
Mount Hebal, Deuteronomy. 27.23.18. for causing the blind to go out of the way,
whereunto all the people should say, Amen: But also, that most fearful and
irrevocable sentence shall be pronounced, and executed upon you in that great
day, (by the Judge of the whole earth,) Depart from me ye cursed, in that
everlasting fire of hell, to be damned with the Devil and his Angels for
evermore. Matthew. 25.41. Lay it therefore to your hearts, and flatter not your
selves in a carnal and vain presumption. Be not cruel to your own souls, and to
the souls of the poor people any more: otherwise ye shall most assuredly drink
of the wine of the wrath of God, and be casten in the great wine-fat of his
wrath, where there ye shall be tormented day and night. Let every one of us
therefore in the conscience of so great and singular mercies, which the LORD
has vouchsafed upon us, in such a plentiful measure, Harden not our hearts
while it is called to day: but let us rent them, and turn them unto the LORD
our GOD; Heb. 4.7. Joel. 2.13. and let us not delay it, while he calls upon us
by his word, and spreads out his arms unto us. Otherwise, if we will not, but
despise the day of our salvation. then I protest unto you in the Name of the
great GOD, that he will hear the cry of our sins, and will abhor us greatly, as
he did Israel, that he shall forsake his glorious Tents and Tabernacles in this
land: and first give over his strength to captivity, and his glory to the
hands of our enemies, Psalm. 78.49.60.61. etc. And then accounting no more of
us, then of the mire in the street, he shall deliver us over, both old and
young. Pastor and people, to the sword of the enemy. For this, I dare say, if
he take his Kingdom from us, he shall not let Scotland be a free Kingdom, Matthew.
21.43. as it has been before. For true is he who has said it, The Nation and
Kingdom that will not serve thee, shall perish, and these Nations shall be
utterly destroyed, Esai. 60.12. And if he spare not his own strength and glory,
I mean his glorious Gospel, but deliver it over into captivity; into the hands
of his enemies, he shall have no compassion of us, but shall surrender us over to
the edge of the sword to be consumed thereby: and as the LORD has been more
abundant in his mercy toward us, then toward any others: so shall his wrath be
accordingly. For if other Kingdoms or Nations, yea if Tyrus or Sidon, Sodom or
Gomorrha: Matthew. 11.21.22. yea if the Turks or barbarous Americans had heard
the things that we have heard, they would have repented long since in sackcloth
and ashes: and therefore our condemnation shall be heavier, then any
condemnation under heaven. Now therefore if there be any consolation in CHRIST,
if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, Philip. 2.1. if any
love to his glory, to his blood, to his Gospel, and if there be any compassion
and mercy in your hearts, to this poor and sinful land, and his poor Church and
Kingdom therein: repent you of your sins, reconcile you to GOD, take hold of
his blood, wash you and cleanse you in it, until ye be white and bright in his
eyes. Rev. 7.14. Bring him into the chambers of your hearts, and make him to
dwell in you, Ephesians. 3.17. Galat. 6.14. that he may crucify your sins, and bury
them in the grave with him, Col 2.12.13. and may quicken and raise you up
together wi^h him: and may set you in those heavenly places with himself, Ephesians.
2 5 6. And then having rooted and grounded your hearts in him, Col. 2.7. and
having filled your souls with the abundance of his presence, bring him out
first to your families, and then to your tenants, servants, neighbors and
people. According to your callings instruct them, rebuke them, admonish them,
correct them, and reform them, and rest not till ye have set him up as a LORD,
and a King in their hearts; or at the least, till you have obtained this
assurance in your consciences that ye have been so faithful and sincere in your
callings, that if CHRIST be hid from any, to whom your callings or occasions
have reached, he is hid from such only as perish.

Now, oh! that the LORD would give us these hearts, and so purge us, that we
might be thus fruitful to the praise of his glory: then assuredly would he
repent him of all the evil that he has thought against us; then should he have
delight in us, and in our posterity: and then these Canaanites, (I mean the
relics of that cursed generation of Babel, the Church of Rome) which is yet
left unrooted out of this land, to try us and tempt us, if we will serve the
LORD our GOD, and to be pricks and thorns in our side, should not bring us in
bondage again, but should be made tributaries to JESUS CHRIST: yea, our latter
estat, should be more glorious then the former. Now let us find this favor in
thy eyes, O LORD, our Redeemer: and glorify thy great Name among us, by
converting our hearts, at the least the hearts of all thy children, in mercy
rather, then by confounding and consuming of us in thy wrath and indignation.
For wherefore should thy enemies say, Take up their GOD and their Gospel?
Wherefore should they, O LORD our GOD, blaspheme thy holy Name, when they shall
see thee angry with thy own inheritance, and redeemed ones? Oh! turn us unto
thee, and put us not away from thy face: and let not those that are thy
enemies, triumph over us. Purchase thy self an everlasting Name, through our
conversion and repentance, that the enemy and the avenger may be still: and
our hearts may be enlarged, and our mouths may be opened, to proclaim the
everlasting mercies, and to shout forth thy praises. Turn you unto him, you
that are his children, and delight in his Tents. You that love the beauty of
Sion, and the glorious presence of his Redeemer, fill your privy chambers with
strong cries and many tears. Cause heaven and earth to be filled with groans
and sighs of his own Spirit in you: and take a claught of that Prince of life,
ere he remove altogether: and before he have stolen himself far away, that he
cannot be found again. And wrestle with him, as Jacob did, and let him not
depart out of your hearts: entreat him, yea enforce him, as it were, by your
tears and sorrowful cries, not to leave his own Tents and Tabernacles in this
Land: not to give over his glorious Gospel, which is his strength and glory,
into captivity, in the hands of their enemies. Remember that he cannot abide
the intercession of his own Spirit in his own. He cannot hide his eyes from his
own flesh and blood: he can deny nothing to his own beloved Son, that makes
intercession for his Saints. Let us therefore step up to that Throne of grace
with all confidence: and assuredly, as he is true who has promised, we shall
find grace and mercy in the time of this our need: both comfort to our own
hearts, and it may be peace in our days, that our eyes shall not see the evils
that are to come: and at that bright appearing of our LORD of life, all tears
shall be wiped away from our eyes. We shall be clothed with those long white
robes, and shall be fed with the fatness of his house, and shall drink of the
rivers of his pleasures, which is at his right hand for evermore. For Sions
sake in this Land, Christian Reader, have I thus written unto thee: and for
Jerusalems cause, have I not kept silence at this time, that her glory and
wonted brightness may be renewed, and that the Church of Scotland which was the
beauty of Europe, and the praise of the whole earth, for her liberty, purity,
and discipline, might be established in the same; and her salvation and
righteousness, might break forth as a burning lamp, to all the Nations of the
earth: and that other Churches in other Kingdoms, which desired to see our
beauty and spiritual glory and accounted them blessed which might have had the
occasion to have dwelt in our Tents, to have seen and enjoyed the same: yea who
would have been content to have bought it with the price of their blood to
their posterity: that they, I say, may see the continuance thereof and may
rejoice. Turn thou, O LORD our GOD, our hearts unto thee, that thy glorious
presence may be continued with us for ever, for JESUS CHRIST his sake, our LORD
and Redeemer, to whom be all praise and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Now I come to this matter in hand: the occasion of it was this. There was one
who was sometimes an hearer of the word with me, who show me that he had been
in conference with a Papist, and he had brought him thus far, that if he would
show him of any that professed our Religion before Martin Luther, he would
renounce his Papistry, and therefore desired me to set them down in writ. The
which I did: and set it down in this form, as thou see it here. So this being
carried to M. Gilbert Brown, he writs an answer to it, and sent it to me. Unto
the which I have made this reply. Thou have them all three here: first, that
which I did write, then his answer to it, and then my reply to his answer.

Indeed it is true Christian Reader, that there was many things that did hinder
me and withdraw me from this resolution, either to make any answer to it at
all, or yet to let it go forth to the light. As first, that so many things have
been written already by the lights and lanterns of this age against that
ruinous Babel, that all further co^victions seemed to be superfluous. Next, the
conscience of my own tenuitie and weakness, together with a continual burden of
a fourfold teaching every week in my ordinary charge, beside others both private
and public duties, which not only my own people, but also this desolat
Country craved, whereby I was let to afford that time and study unto it, as
the gravity of such a matter required. And last of all, the consideration both
of the person and work of the adversary* that neither the one nor the other
would be accounted worthy of any answer at all himself being both rejected and
excommunicated, according to the express commandment of the holy Ghost, as an
Heretic, being perverted and damned in his own conscience, and delivered over
unto Satan, that he might learn, if it were possible, not to blaspheme the
everlasting truth of GOD any more, Tit. 3.10.11.12. 1. Cor. 5.5. 1. Tim. 1.20.
And also denounced his rebel, for his treasonable attempts, both against this
Church and Kingdom: his work also being so foolish in its self, as both I heard
his Majesty affirm, that he was a foolish reasoner in it: and also I hope, the
indifferent Reader shall see the same: his reasons and arguments being also so
often answered unto by the learned of our side, so that it seemed but actum
agere, to make any further answer thereunto: yet notwithstanding of all these
impediments, these motions and reasons prevailed with me at the last, both to
answer it, and also to let it go forth to the open view and sight of all men:
to wit, the conscience of that duty which I ow unto the truth of GOD, being so
highly blasphemed and evil spoken of: the unfeigned love of the salvation of my
Contrymen, who for the most part, are blinded with the smoke of the darkness
of that bottomless pit: the railing and thrasonical bragging of the adversary,
both by word and writ, that it would never be answered: and that the Ministry
would never suffer an answer to come to light, because they knew the answer to
be unworthy, and none other was able to answer to it: the most earnest pressing
of a great many of my brethren, who knew the lamentable estat of this blind
Country: the constant desire of all men in this Country to see the same:
together with his Majesty's most gracious acceptance of my endeavor, and most
favorable judgment of this my labor, and most humane counsel to publish the
same, which did not a little encourage me: and last of all, the express
commandment of the holy Ghost, Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he
seem wise in his own eyes: the which if it have place in any thing, it must
have place here, where not only this seeming wise in his own eyes, would
undoubtedly follow upon my silence, but also a seeming wise in the eyes of all
this part of the Country almost: both to the prejudice of the everlasting
truth of GOD, and also to the stumbling of the weak, the further obduring of
the obstinat, and the wounding of the hearts of the godly therein. Augustine.
lib. de Trinitate, cap. 3. and lib. cont. Mend. cap. 6. has a notable sentence
to this purpose. It is to be wished, says he, where heresy flowrishes, that
all these who have any gift of writing, that they all write, suppose they
should write not only of the self-same matters or questions, but also the
self-same things or arguments, suppose perchance in other words. For, says he,
it is expedient that Heretics understand that there are not only one or two,
but many in the camps of the Catholics, who dare with open face meet them. And
he says, There is another commodity that comes by the writing of many: to wit,
that by this means, the Catholics books themselves are more shortly and easily
brought unto the hands of all men, so that while as some fall upon one, and
some fall upon others, yet notwithstanding they are all instructed to use the
same weapons in their common dangers. The which how fitly it agrees unto this
purpose of mine, I leave it to the judgment of all men, who know the estat of
this blinded Country, wherein that darkness of the Antichristian Kingdom is so
far spread, the confident brags of the adversary are so universally credited,
the people scattered as sheep without shepherd^, Matthew. 9.36. lying wide open
to all the assaults of the Devil: and the deceits of these ravenous wolves, and
their hands so full of Papistical books, the deadly weapons of their own
destruction, without any one book, almost, for ought that I know, whereby
either these that are perverted, may be revoked from their errors, or these
that are assaulted, may be sustained from yielding to the adversary, or those
that are weak may be confirmed. Not unlike the miserable estate wherein the
Hebrews were brought unto, through the tyranny of the Philistims, wanting both
sword and spear in the time of their warfare, having no smiths in their whole
land, whereby they were compelled to go to their enemies to sharpen their
cowter and sock, and other instruments, 1. Sam. 13.19.20 22. Now as for the
work it self, I say nothing of it, but only recommend it to the blessing of GOD
in all your hearts and consciences. The which also has been my earnest desire
to GOD, from the first time that I put in hand to the pen, continually, that
his effectual presenc^ might be joined therewith, both to convict the contra^^
minded, and to confirm the godly. Read ye it theref^^^ with that affection of
heart wherewith it was written, an^ desire ye that blessing in the reading of
it, as I did in the writing of it: and then I hope through GODS blessing, ye
shall reap some profit by it. Now the GOD of all mercy, and the Father of all
light, illuminat all our eyes more and more, and cause the light of his
glorious Gospel to shine in our hearts, and bless all the means thereof, that
we may be the children of light here, and may be partakers of that everlasting
weight of glory hereafter in CHRIST JESUS. Amen. From Air the 18. December 1602.

Yours in the Lord, M. John Welsch, Preacher of Christ's Gospel.

AN INDEX OF THE SECTIONS of M. Welsch Treatise.
SEction I. The Introduction. page 1. Section II. Whither the Church of Rome be
a true Church? page 4 Section III. Concerning the infallibility of the Church,
and her immunity from error. page 12 Section IV. Whither the Church of Rome be
the only true Church, and the Reformed not true Churches? page 44 Section V.
Concerning the Judge of Controversies; namely, Whither God speaking in the
Scriptures be Judge of Controversies? page 71 Section VI. Concerning the
necessity of Baptism to Infants. page 85 Section VII. Whither a man by the help
of the grace of God, may perfectly keep the Commandments? page 93 Section VIII.
Whither a man by his free will may resist the will of God? page 104 Section IX.
Concerning transubstantiation, and Christ's real and substantial body and blood
in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. page 106 Section X. Concerning the
sacrifice of the Mass. page 131 Section XI. Concerning the degrees and means
whereby the sacrifice of the Mass crap in. page 170 Section XII. Of the
manifold abuses of the Mass. page 189 Section XIII. Concerning Confession and
Absolution by the Priest. page 219 Section XIV. Of Extreme-unction, whither it
be a Sacrament? page 2^1 Section XV. Concerning Imposition of hands, whither it
be a Sacrament? page 226 Section XVI. Concerning Marriage, whither it be a
Sacrament? page 231 Section XVII. Concerning the merit of Good Works. page 240
Section XVIII. Concerning works of Supererogation. page 246 Section XIX.
Concerning Christ's descending into Hell. page 253 Section XX. Concerning the
difference betwixt Popery and the Reformed Religion. page 258 Section XXI.
Concerning Justification by Faith. page 263 Section XXII. Concerning the
authority of the Fathers. page 270 Section XXIII. Concerning the visibility of
the Church, and which ^he visible Church may make defection? page 278 Section
XXIV. Where our Religion was before Luther? Or a Catalogue of them who
professed our Religion in the midst of Popery. page 314 Section XXV. That the
Reformed Churches have not renewed old condemned Heresies. page 328 Section
XXVI. That the Church of Rome renewed and maintains old condemned Heresies.
page 337 Section XXVII. Concerning Antichrist. page 343 Section XXVIII. That
the Pope is Antichrist. page 346
An Index of the Sections contained in M. Crafords Treatise.
SEction I. Showing that the principles of Papists are bloody, treasonable and
rebellious, against the person and authority of Princes, and peace of Kingdoms.
And the excuses of H. T. the Author of the Manual of Controversies are proved
to be frivolous. page 445 Section II. Showing that no Oath or Bond can oblige a
Papist, and that they hold it as a principle, that no faith is to be kept to
Heretics. page 457 Section III. Showing that the Pope, and Synagogue of Rome,
have been the grand Authors of Wars, and Combustions, and Confusions in the
Christian world both before and since the Reformation. page 465 Section IV.
That the continual practice of Papists ever since the Reformation, has been to
plot and practice bloody and treasonable Conspiracies, Affassinations and
Murders, both of Princes and People, who profe^ the Reformed Religion. page 474
Section V. Containing some instances in particular of the barbarous and
inhumane cruelty of Papists to Protestants, where they had the power over them.
page 490 The Conclusion. Holding forth the hazard that the Churches of Britain
and Ireland are in, of being ruined by Antichrist. page 5^8
A LEARNED, PIOUS, AND ELABORAT Treatise; wherein many of the greatest and
weightiest points of Controversy betwixt the Reformed Churches and Papists,
are solidly debated, and the truth of the doctrine of the Reformed Churches
(especially of the Churches of Scotland) evidently demonstrated, and the
falsehood and error of the Popish Religion and doctrine plainly discovered, and
solidly refuted by Scripture, Fathers, and also by some of their own Popes,
Doctors, Cardinals, and other Popish Writers. By way of Reply to one M. Gilbert
Brown Priest.
SECTION I. THE INTRODVCTION.
M. Gilbert Brown. An Answer to a certain Libel or Writing, sent by M. JOHN
WELSCH to a Catholic, as an Answer to an objection of the Roman Church, etc.
I received a little scrol which was sent to you by M. John Welsch Minister at
Kirkubright, in the which there is much promised, and little done. And because
it may appear to some to be something, I will, God willing, answer the same in
particular.

M. John Welsch his Reply.
AS to your judgment and censure of this my answer to your objection, wherein
ye think there is much promised and little done, I do not regard it: For so
long as your heart is bewitched with the pleasures of Babel, your light is but
darkness: so while the Lord anoint your eyes with that eye salve promised in
the Revelation 3. and purge your heart by faith, ye cannot discern of things
different, and give upright judgment. What I promised, I am now, by the grace
of God, ready to perform. And whether it was something or nothing, much or
little that I did, let work bear witness, and let them that love the truth
judge.

M. Gilbert Brown.
First, he tittles his libel, An answer to an objection of the Roman Church,
whereby they go about to deface the verity of that only true Religion which we
profess.

God forbid that we Catholics, whom he calls the Roman Church, seeing that we
are the only defenders of the truth, as our predecessors the Pastors of the
true Church was before us, should go about to deface the truth. But we go about
to impugn all false doctrine repugnant to the truth, as the holy Fathers of the
primitive Church did before us, against the heretics in their days, as
Ireneus, Cyprian, Ambrose, Augustine, Hierome, Basile, Gregory, Chrysostom,
with the rest of the true Pastors of the Church. And seeing that the Ministers
of this new Evangel have not only invented some heresies themselves, but also
have renewed many old condemned heresies confuted by them before (as they
cannot deny) as I shall give some examples afterward, as the heresy of Simon
Magus, of Manicheus, Pelagius, Aerius, Jovinianus, Vigilantius, with many
others; what less can we do nor impugn the same, as our predecessors did before?

M. John Welsch his Reply.
As to your answer: First, ye deny it and detest it as a blasphemy. Next, ye go
about to clear your selves from the suspicion of it. Thirdly, ye challenge us
and our doctrine with the crimes of novelty and heresy: And so ye conclud, ye
could do no less nor impugn it.

As to your denying of the defacing of the truth of God, so does the whorish
woman, Prove. 30.20. after she has eaten, she wipes her mouth, and says, she
has not sinned: which is true as well in spiritual as in bodily fornication:
So notwithstanding your Church has buried the truth of God in the graves of
darkness, and did overcover it with their traditions and glosses these many
years by gone, yet you wipe your mouths, and say, you have not sinned. But
look to it in time; for ignorance, and zeal without knowledge, will not excuse
you in the day of the Lord. That you detest it as a blasphemy, so did the high
Priest rent his clothes, and said Christ blasphemed, Matthew. 26.65. when he
spoke but the truth. As for your golden styles which you take to your selves of
Catholics, defenders of the truth, successors to the Pastors of the true
Church, and impugners of all false doctrine. Your doctrine indeed could not
deceive so many, if it were not covered with these styles: your poison and
abomination would not be drunken so universally, if it were not in such a
golden cup as this, Rev. 17.4. So these are the hyssop wherewith ye would wash
you from this iniquity, and cleanse you from this sin. But may not false
Prophets come in sheeps clothing? Matthew. 7.15. And the ministers of Satan, can
they not transform themselves, as though they were the ministers of Christ, 2.
Cor. 11.13.14. The Scriptures have foretold it: And did not the false Apostles
in Ephesus, call themselves the Apostles of Christ, and yet they were found
liars? And did not the synagogue of Satan call her self the synagogue of the
Jews, Rev. 2.4.9. (that is, the Church of God) and yet they were not so* but
the synagogue of the devil? Yea, and did not Abraham's seed, and they that sat
in Moses chair, and was the successors of Aaron, condemn the Savior of the
world, John 8.37. Matthew. 23.2. Therefore not by your styles, but by your fruits
ye must be tried, Matthew. 7.16. For if ye be Catholics, etc. ye will teach the
doctrine of that good Pastor, and chief shepherd the Lord Jesus, John 10.14. So
it is your doctrine, and not your styles, that must defend you.

SECTION II. Whither the Church of Rome is the Catholic Church?
ANd because, Christian Reader, by this style of Catholic, which they ascrive
only to their Church, they cause the simple to err, and leads many blindfold
to damnation; therefore I will take this visard from them. Ye are not the
Catholic Church, as ye style your self, and thus I prove it. Pope Pius the
fifth, who wrote a Catechism according to the decree of the Council of Trent,
(Catechism. Conc. Trident. in expositione Symb.) He there says, That the
Church which is called the body of Christ, whereof he is the head, is called
Catholic, because it is spread in the light of one faith from the East to the
West, receiving men of all sorts, containing all the faithful which have been
from Adam, even until this day, or shall be hereafter to the end of the world
professing the true faith, etc.

Now I reason thus: The Catholic Church comprehends all the faithful from Adam
till now, and that shall be hereafter to the end of the world, or else Pope
Pius, and the Fathers of Trent errs. But the Roman Church comprehends not all
the faithful from Adam till now, and that shall be hereafter: Therefore the
Roman Church is not the Catholic Church. Choose you now which of these ye will
deny. The proposition, I suppose, ye will not: for then ye should bring two
inconveniences; the one upon Pope Pius, and the Fathers of Trent, that they
have erred in defining the Catholic Church, and so the Church and the Pope may
err. The other is upon your self, who said that your Church has not erred. And
so ye lose your still of a defender of the Catholic faith: for this is a chief
point of their faith, that the Church cannot err. I hope therefore that these
are Labyrinths which ye will not wittingly cast your self into, and so you must
hold fast the proposition. All the question is then of the assumption, Whither
the Roman Church comprehends all the faithful from Adam till now, and which
shall be to the end of the world, or not? First, I say, a particular Church
comprehends not all the faithful from Adam, etc. But the Roman Church is a
particular Church, or else the Fathers of the Council of Basile, and Verratus a
Papist errs; for they call the Roman Church a particular Church. We grant, say
they, ( Basil. Council. Epist. Synod. 3 Verratus disputationum contra
Lutheranos, Tom. 6. de authoritate and potest. univers. Eccles. cap. 1.) that
the Roman Church is a principal Church among others; but while you commend a
part, forget not the whole. And they say, The Universal Church comprehends the
Roman Church. Choose you then whither will you contradict the Fathers of the
Council of Basile, and a Papist Verratus, and be so absurd as to call the arm
of the body the whole body; an arm of the Ocean sea, the whole Ocean sea; or to
go from your tittle, that the Roman Church is not the Catholic Church?

Secondly, the Catholic Church comprehends them that were before Christ: but
the Church of Rome comprehends not them; for there was a Church ere ever there
was a Church at Rome; and the Roman Church comprehends none but them that
acknowledges the Pope to be the head of the Church. But those that were before
Christ never did that: Therefore the Roman Church is not the Catholic Church.

Thirdly, the Catholic Church is invisible: for at the least, neither are they
that are glorified, neither are they that are to be born, visible. But ye will
not have the Roman Church, but always visible: Therefore the Roman Church is
not the Catholic Church.

Fourthly, if the Roman Church be the Catholic Church, then either it shall
follow, that the Pope is the head of the Catholic Church, or else that the
Roman Church wants a visible head. Choose you whither of these ye will; for the
one ye must, if ye will have the Roman Church to be the Catholic Church. But
to say that the Pope is the head of the Catholic Church, I suppose ye dare not
be so blasphemous: for the glorified Saints, and Peter himself, are of the
Catholic Church; or else (as I said before) Pope Pius and the Fathers of Trent
errs. And so then if ye will make him head of the Catholic Church, ye must
make him head of the glorified Saints, and of Peter also. So then choose you
whither will ye leave the style of Catholic, which ye claim as proper to your
Church; or will ye have the Pope the head of the triumphant Church in heaven?
Or last of all will ye have your Roman Church to want a visible head? One of
these ye must choose. So to end this point, this style of Catholic, it is like
the numbering of the people by David: for as it brought him in a wonderful
strait, when he saw it behoved him to choose, either seven years famine, or
four months flying before his enemies, or three days pestilence, 2. Sam. 24.
So this tittle of yours, if you will abide by it, brings you in a wonderful
strait: for ye have not the choice of one of three evils; but these three
things must ye either choose, or else let this style of Catholic go; one of
you fighting against another, the Church invisible, and the Pope not to be the
head of the Church. Of the which, the least of these is more able to overthrow
your Kingdom, then they all were able to have overthrown the Kingdom of David;
for they are the main pillars of your Kingdom, your unity, your visibility,
your Popes supremacy; all which you must either lose, or else let your style of
Catholic go from your Church. But how will ye wrestle your self out of this?
For if ye will believe the Fathers of Trent, and Pope Pius, in defining the
Catholic Church, ye cannot eschew these inconveniences. And if you will not
believe them, that they spoke truly in that point, ye must accuse them of
error. And so the Church has erred, the Pope has erred, and your self has
erred, that said your Church has the truth in all things. And surely as
Cajaphas being high Priest that year, spoke the truth, when he said that one
must die for the people, John 11.50. and not the whole Nation perish, suppose
in an evil sense. So have the Fathers of Trent, and Pope Pius here spoken
truly, both according to the Scriptures; for the Church is called the assembly
of the firstborn, whose names are written in heaven, Heb. 12.23. And that new
Jerusalem which is from above, which is the mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. And
also according to the Fathers, Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 7. and Bernard in Cant.
c. 78. and August. de catechis. rud. cap. 20. and Gregor. moral. in Job. lib.
28. cap. 9. who affirms that the Church is the company of the predestinat,
and all the elect are within the compass of it, and are citizens of it. So as
Christ said to the Jews, Matthew. 12.27. If I cast out devils by the prince of
devils, by whom then casts your children them out? So if we speak now by an
erroneous spirit, that says the Catholic Church comprehends all the elect,
that was, is, and shall be, and the Church of Rome cannot be the Catholic
Church. By what spirit has your Council and Pope and these Fathers spoken the
same? So not your children, but your Fathers shall be your Judges.

Ye did mark some contradiction, as ye thought, between me and some others,
unto the which I will answer in the own time. Let me therefore mark this one
now, and mark it, Reader. Ye have heard now how that all these with one voice
have said, that the Catholic Church comprehends all the elect, that was, is,
and shall be. Is it any heresy then to hold this point? I think you will not,
nor dare not say it. What will you say then to your general Council of
Constance, Sess 15. art. 1. 6. who condemned John Hus for the same doctrine,
the first and sixth article, for saying that there is an Universal Church*
which is the company of the predestinat, and as it is taken in this sense, it
is an article of our faith? For these, among the rest, was this pure innocent
condemned and burnt as an heretic, and his doctrine as heresy: which of these
will ye say now have erred, whither the general Council of Constance, or the
Fathers of Trent, Pope Pius, Gregory, Augustine, Clement, and Bernard? For
surely if the latter erred not, then not only did the Council of Constance err,
but also have brought upon themselves innocent blood, in condemning the
innocent, and the truth in him. And if the Council of Constance erred not, in
condemning these articles of John Hus, then have they condemned the doctrine of
the Fathers of Trent, Pope Pius, Gregory, Augustine, etc. and their persons,
in the person of John Hus. Choose which of them ye will. I speak the truth to
thee in Christ (Reader) be not deceived. But open thy eyes and behold the
verity it self condemned by a general Council, and the professor of it burnt
for an heretic: but his blood and the blood of the rest of the martyrs of God,
is found in this whore of Babel, and therefore one day she shall be recompensed
for all her iniquity, Rev. 17.6. and 18.24. Go out of her therefore, and save
thy soul, that thou be not tormented in the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone with her for evermore, Rev 18.45. Otherwise I call heaven and earth
to witness against thee, that thou shall die in her sin, and the smoke of thy
torment shall ascend for evermore, Rev. 14.1.

What now will you say to these things, that your Church is not the Catholic
Church, but a part of it only; and is only Catholic, because of the Catholic
doctrine that she professes? But if this be true, wherefore then did your
general Council condemn it in John Hus, and burn him for that doctrine, which
both your self must confess to be true, and is agreeable to Scripture, Fathers,
and your own Popes?

Next, I say, suppose when ye are brought to this strait, ye must say so: yet
for all this, not only call ye your Church Catholic, because of the soundness
of doctrine which ye suppose she professes, but also and specially to make the
simple believe, that there is no salvation out of her: As appears by the
Epistle of Cardinal Cusanus, writing to the Bohemians, Cochlaeus histor.
Hussitar. lib. 21. Therefore ye call it the only true Church, and the Catholic
Church: for out of the particular Church there is salvation, but out of the
Catholic Church there is no salvation.

Thirdly, I say, as the Epistles of Peter, John, James, and Jude, are
entitled Catholic, not because of the soundness of their doctrine, which is
common to the Epistles of Paul also, and all the rest of the Scripture, which
in that respect may also be called Catholic, but because they are written
generally to all: So the Church is called Catholic properly, not because of
the soundness of doctrine, for that is common to all the particular Churches
that have the purity of Religion, but because it comprehends all the
particular Churches, and all the elect. And also to put a difference between
the Church of the Jews, which did comprehend but one certain people, and the
Christian Church since the coming of Christ, which is not bound to any certain
place or nation, or people, but indifferently receives all, both Jew and Gentil
that believes, and therefore is it called Catholic: and therefore in our
Belief we say not, I believe the Catholic doctrine, but the Catholic Church.
So by this she is properly distinguished from particular Churches, as the
mother from the daughters, and the whole body from the particular members. So
then if you would speak properly of your Church, and not make your styles
snares to catch the souls of the simple, call her but a particular Church, and
a member of the Catholic Church, but yet dead and rotten, as shall be shown
afterward, by the grace of God. Otherwise, if you will but call her the
Catholic Church, you first rob the mother, for she is properly Catholic, and
also injures the rest of the daughters: For in respect of the soundness of
faith, they may also challenge the same to them.

And thirdly, ye deceive the souls of the simple thereby, by making them
believe there is not one other Church but yours. And last of all, you are
sacrilegious, in decking an adulteress with the styles of the spouse of Christ.

As to the third point, wherein ye calumniate the truth of God which we
profess, in calling it a new Evangel, and old renewed, and new invented
heresies of our own. These are indeed heavy words wherewith ye blaspheme the
word of the Lord, Acts 18.6. and 19.9. and speak evil of it to the people of
this Country. And therefore as the Apostle says of them that blasphemed his
doctrine, Your damnation is just, Romans 3.8. For a woe by Gods own mouth is
pronounced against them that call good evil, and evil good, truth falsehood, and
falsehood truth, and darkness light, and light darkness, Isai. 5.20. But as the
Archangel when he strave with Satan about the body of Moses, did not blame him
with cursed speaking, but said, The Lord rebuke thee, Jude 9. so we will not
blame you with cursed speaking, but the Lord rebuke you. For ye speak here the
vision of your own heart, and not from the mouth of the Lord: And ye are not
the first that has blasphemed the truth of God; for so did the Jews before
you, call the doctrine of the Gospel, a sect, a heresy; and the Gentiles
called it strange Gods, and a new doctrine; and the preachers thereof, a setter
forth of strange Gods, and of new doctrine, and a babbler, Acts 28. and 14. and
17. The Jews said, that Christ had a Devil; and yet as our Lord testifies, it
was they that were the children of the Devil, John 8.44. Ye say that we preach
a new Evangel, and old and new heresies; but this is the sin and the doctrine
of your Church: For to let that pass of that new and everlasting Gospel, which
your Friars invented and devised, as testifies Guliel. de sancto Amore, in his
book de pericul. noviss temp. anno 1192. wherein was contained such
blasphemies, as the heaven and earth abhorrs to hear them: That God the Father
reigned under the law: God the Son under grace: And the holy Ghost was then
that year to begin his kingdom, and to continue to the end of the world. And
that Jesus Christ was not God, his Sacrament nothing, and his Evangel not a
true Evangel. (O horrible blasphemy) the which if God had not raised up some
men in those days to have resisted it, as the Waldenses, and others which ye
call heretics and infamous men, the Gospel of Christ had been lost; and in
stead of it, we would have gotten a new Gospel, the dreggs whereof yet remains
in your Church. But I will let this pass, because the wise men of Babel (I mean
your Clergy of Rome) saw that that was too plain an iniquity, therefore they
caused it quietly to be removed and buried, and yet they not condemned as
heretics that preached it. But by the contrary, the Waldenses, and others that
withstood it, was condemned as heretics, and their books burnt. To let this
pass, I say, which testifies what the world might have looked for at your
hands, if the Lord had not provided better for his poor Church Your whole
doctrine is Antichristian, as shall be proved hereafter, your Church Babel, Rev.
17. your Kingdom that second beast, Rev. 13.11. that has two horns like the
Lamb, and yet speaks like the dragon; and your head, the man of sin, 2 Thessalonians.
2. and son of perdition. And ye are they that have renewed old condemned
heresies, and have invented new of your own, as shall be proved afterward, by
Gods grace.

SECTION III. Concerning the Churches infallibility, and immunity from error.
M. John Welsch.
SAy they, our Religion is so ancient that it has continued ever by a lineal
succession of Pastors and Bishops, from the days of Christ and his Apostles
till now, never interrupted, never spoken against, but of late since Martin
Luthers days: But yours, say they, is newly forged, and invented, never heard
tell of, but since Luther and Calvin's days. Therefore yours cannot be the true
Religion, and ours must be the only true Religion.

M. Gilbert Brown.
This objection consists partly of a truth, and partly of an untruth. It
appears by this, that either M. John knows not our proofs; or if he does, he
alters the same, that he may the better oppugn his own invention.

Our objection, or rather one of our proofs, whereby we prove that we
Catholics is the only true Church of Christ, and have the only truth in all
things, is this.

We have abundantly set down to us by the Prophets and Apostles in the holy
writ, that the kingdom and Church of Christ shall never fail in this earth, and
that the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. But shall be permanent for
ever, and shall have always the presence and assistance of the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, who shall teach it all truth, and remain with it for ever, as may be
perceived by these places noted here, which were over longsome to be set down
at length. To the which I adjoyn some of the ancient Fathers exponing the same.

Out of the Old Testament.
Psalm. 60.5. read August. upon this. Psalm. 88. v.
1.2.3.4.5.19.30.31.32.33.34.35.36.37.38. read Aug. on these places. Psalm. 104.
ver. 8. read Aug. Psalm. 110.9. Esa. 9.7. read S. Hier. on Esa. 51.7.8. read S.
Hier. on Esa. 54.8.9. read Hier. on Esa. 55.3.13. Esa. 59.21. read Hier. on
Jer. 31.3.36. read Hier. on Ezec. 37.25.26. Dan. 2.44. Dan. 7.14.27. Mich. 4.7.

Out of the New Testament.
Luc. 1.33. read S. August. upon the 109. Psalm. Matthew. 10.18. read here Saint
Hierome upon this place, Luke 22.32. John 14.16.17. John 17.18.19.20. Matthew.
28.20. 1. Tim. 3.15. Acts 5.39.

Some of the ancient Fathers.
Hilar. de Trinitat. lib. 7. August. de utili. credent. cap. 87. Ambros. lib.
9. cap. 20. Chrysostom. in sermon. de pente. Clem. Alex. lib. 6. strom. in the end.

And because the Scriptures and the ancient Fathers of the primitive Church
concurrs and agrees in one unity, I would wish M. John to consider the same,
that the Church of Christ by all men's judgments, shall never fail, nor be
interrupted, nor broken.

M. John Welsch his Reply.
I will follow your footsteps, and first answer to that part which ye say is
true, and then unto that which ye say is false. And as to the first, the ground
which ye laid down, whereupon ye go about to build the truth of your Religion,
is the Church of Christ shall never fail, nor be interrupted, etc. It is
recorded in Histories, Athenaeus dipnosophist lib. 12. of one Thrasilaus a
frantic man among the Greeks, whenever he saw any ships arrive at the haven
of Athens, he thought them all his own, and took an inventarie of their wares,
and met them with great joy: Even so it is with you, wheresoever you see the
name of the Church in the holy Scripture, and the promises of God made unto the
same, ye take all to be yours, and books the treasures of it, and boasts
thereof, as though they were your own, crying, The gates of hell shall never
prevail against it: It shall never fail: It has always the holy Ghost to lead
it in all truth. To remove you therefore out of the haven, and to give every
merchant his own ware, and his own ship, and to set the Church it self in
possession of the Church, we must distinguish the name of the Church. The
Church therefore is taken sometimes for the company of the elect and chosen,
whereof a part is in heaven triumphing with Christ their Lord; a part here in
the earth fighting her battles, lying in her camp, and awaiting for the
victory. And these are termed the invisible Church, because Gods election
cannot be discerned by the judgment of man's senses or eyes, and we cannot know
who are his chosen. And unto this Church, that is, to the chosen, appertains
all the promises set down in the Scripture, and in them only are they
fulfilled: And sometimes it is taken for the company of them who professes the
true Religion, wherein both the chaff and the wheat, the popple and the good
seed, Matthew. 3.12. and 13.24.25 the dregs and the wine, the good and the evil
are mixed together; the which suppose they be in the Church, yet they are not
of the Church, no more then the superfluous humors of the body are true and
livelie members thereof. So then if ye mean by the Church, The Church of the
elect, and if ye mean by this, That it shall never fail, nor be interrupted,
etc. only this, that it shall never be utterly abolished, but shall have always
the presence of the holy Ghost to lead her in all truth, yea and in all
holiness also, in so far, as shall serve for her salvation: We grant that with
you, as Bellarmin confesses of us; and therefore he says, Lib. 3. de Eccles.
milit. cap. 13. That many of their number spend but time, while as they go
about to prove that the Church here beneath absolutely cannot perish, or make
absolute defection: for Calvin (says he) and the rest of the heretics grant
that, but they speak and mean (says he) of the invisible Church. So if ye mean
no further but this, then Bellarmin tells you that all the testimonies of
Scripture and Fathers, that ye have heaped up here to prove the same, is but to
spend the time, and so are fetched as needless witnesses in a matter ^^at is
not doubt some, or called in question. And if ye had understood his language,
ye needed not to have cumbred your self in fetching of this mortar and stone to
build up your Babel: For this was not required at your hands. But because it is
Babel which ye are bigging, a tower of confusion, therefore the Lord has sent
such a confusion of language among you, that few of you understands what
another says; when some cries for mortar, others brings stone. Bellarmin, the
great maister-builder, cries for proofs to prove that the visible Church here
beneath cannot err, neither in the matters which are needful to salvation,
neither in the matters which are not needful, which she propones to be believed
or to be done, whither they be doctrine contained in the Scripture or extra
scripturam, that is, not contained in the Scripture. He cries to prove that,
and ye cumber your self in bringing in a number of Scriptures to prove that the
Church shall always remain till the end of the world; whereas in the
examination of your proofs, it will be found that they will go no further with
you. But if ye mean of the visible Church, that it shall never fail, etc. that
is, it shall never fail in doctrine, nor be interrupted in the same, not only in
the matters needful to salvation, but in all truth, as ye affirm of your
Church, and as Bellarmin says, as has been said before. If ye go this far, as
ye do indeed, and as Bellarmin does and your self must do, if ye be a right
defender of your Catholic faith here, or else there is no ground whereupon ye
can build the puretie and truth of your Church and Religion. Then I say, that
your ground is as false and erroneous, as the stuff that ye build upon it; for
both they have failed, and have been interrupted, as shall be proved afterward.
And mark this, Christian reader, as the Philistines Church wherein they praised
their God, Judge. 16. and mocked Samson the Lords servant, had two chief pillars
whereon the whole house leaned and was born up, so has the Church of Rome two
chief pillars, whereon the whole weight of their Church and Religion hings: the
one whereof is this, that the Church cannot err: the other, that the Pope is
the head of the Church. Take these two from them, their house must fall, and
their Religion can stand no longer. For when they are brought to this strait,
that they see they cannot defend their Religion, neither by the testimonies of
the Scripture, nor yet by the examples of the Church of God, when she was in
her greater purity and sincerity, they are compelled to lay this as a ground to
hold all their errors on, that the Church of Christ cannot err: So take this
ground from them, their Church and Religion cannot stand.

Now, as to the testimonies which ye quote out of the Old Testament, and out of
Luke 1.33. in the New Testament, they only prove that the Church and Kingdom of
Christ shall endure for evermore, and that his covenant made with her, is
everlasting. The which cannot exeem the militant Church from erring in points
of doctrine; for both the chaff and evil seed in the Church, that is, these
that are called, but not chosen, may err, and that to death and damnation, and
yet his Church and Kingdom, and his covenant, remains sure, stable, and
inviolate: for the Lord only offers his covenant unto them, and they through
incredulity reject it, and so he is not bound to sanctify or save them, much
less to keep them from error. And as for these who are called and chosen, all
these promises are made and performed in every one of them, and the covenant of
God is so sure in every one of them, that our Savior says, None of them can
perish, John 10.28. And yet for all this, every one of them may err in
doctrine, suppose not to death and damnation, which ye will not deny. And if ye
would, infinite examples not only of the Saints of God, of the laics (as ye
call them) but also of the Priests, Prophets, Apostles, yea and of Popes also,
and of your own Doctors and Bishops, as a cloud of witnesses, would stand up
and avow the same in your face. Now I gather, seeing that the militant Church
here on earth has but two sorts of persons in her, these that are called and
chosen, and these that are only called, but not chosen, and both may err in
points of doctrine, the one finally to death and damnation: the other may err,
suppose not finally to death and damnation: and yet the covenant of God remain
sure, everlasting, and inviolate with his Church. Therefore, I say, the
promises of the stabilitie of Christ's Kingdom, and the perpetuity of his
covenant made with her, cannot exeem the militant Church from erring in points
of doctrine. So ye have lost your vantguard. Let us come to the rest, and see
if they will favor your cause any better then the former has done.

The next place ye quote is, Matthew. 16.18. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I
will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And
because ye trust that there is not a testimony of Scripture which shall fight
more for you then this, let us therefore try it to the uttermost, and see how
far it can be stretched out. What argument will ye frame out of this place? For
if you gather no more but this, Christ has promised that the gates of hell
shall never prevail against the Church that is built on the Rock, that is, on
Christ: Therefore the Church that is built on him, shall never be all utterlie
extinguished and abolished by Satan. Then Bellarmin tells you that ye spend but
time in proving of this: for we grant it, That the Church of the chosen shall
never perish. But if you go further, and say; That the Church of Christ shall
never err, because Christ has promised that the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it: then, I say, either that exposition is false, or else the gates of
hell should have prevailed long since against your Church: for when it
prevailed against the rock whereon the Church was built, it prevailed against
the Church. For raze and overturn the foundation of a house, the house cannot
stand, seeing the standing of the house consists on the firmness and sureness
of the foundation thereof. Now the rock whereon ye say the Church is built,
unto whom this promise is made, is Peter and his successors the Popes of Rome,
for so ye all with one consent expone the same. Rhemists annotation upon this
place. Seeing then that they are the foundation of the Church, as ye say, and
the gates of hell has prevailed against them, as I shall prove, by the grace of
God: it must follow, if your exposition be true, that the gates of hell has
prevailed, not once only, but at many times against ^he Church.

For, first, Peter himself erred in a matter of doctrine, when he thought with
the rest of the Apostles after the resurrection of Christ, the Kingdom of
Christ not to be heavenly but earthly; not spiritual, but like the Kingdoms
of this world, proper to Israel, Acts 1.6. not common to all, by virtue of the
promise: and also he is commanded to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, doubting
nothing, Acts 10.20. Which testifies, that he doubted before, whither the
Gospel should be preached to them or not, and therefore erred in a matter of
faith, and that after he had received the promise of the holy Ghost. And also
he erred in the abrogation of the Ceremonial Law, Acts 10.14. for he believed
that some meats were unclean after the death and resurrection of Christ, and
therefore he refused to eat thereof. And this was a matter of faith also. And
last of all, the holy Ghost testifies, that he went not a right foot to the
truth of the Gospel, Gal. 2.11. and therefore was rebuked by the Apostle Paul
to his face. And as for them whom ye call his successors, the Popes of Rome,
not only may they be heretics, but also some of them have been heretics. And
therefore if your argument be good, the gates of hell both may, and have
prevailed against them. That they may be heretics, I will fetch no other
witnesses, but your own Councils, Canons, Cardinals, and your own Popes; for
they shall be your Judges in this matter. Bellarmin says, lib. 7. de Romans
Pontif. cap. 30. that the Pope being a manifest heretic, cease to be Pope,
and to be head of the Church. Caietan a Cardinal says, lib. de authoritate
Papae and Consilij, cap. 20. and 21. That the Pope being a manifest heretic,
should be deposed by the Church. Johannes de Turrecremata a Cardinal says,
lib. 4 part. 2. cap. 20. That when the Pope falls in heresy, he is deposed of
God. Alphonsus de Castro says, lib. 1. cap. 2. That the Pope, as he is a Pope,
may be an heretic, and teach heresy, which also has sometimes (says he)
fallen out in them. Innocentius the 3. sermon. 2. de consecr. Pontificis. And
Hadrian the 2. Popes; as also the 6. and 8. Synod, and their own Canon Law,
Did. 40. cap. Si Papa, do testify that they may be heretics. And also Pope
Hadrian 6. Bellar. lib. 4. de Romano Pontif. cap. 2.

And some of them have been heretics also. Zepherinus a Montanist, Tertuli. ad
prax. Marcellinus, one that sacrificed ^o Devils, the Idols of the Gentiles,
Damasus and Council. Sinuess^num. Liberius an Arrien, that denied the Godhead of
the Son, Athanas. in Epist. ad solit. vita. Hieron. in Catal. Script. Fascic.
tem. aetate sexta. Hermannus contractus. Marianus Scotus compilatio
Chronologica. Supplementum chronic. Platina. Anastasius a favorer of the
Nestorian heresy, Platina in vita Anastas. and supplement. Chronic. and
distinct. 19. cap. Anastasius. Fascic. temp. Vigilius an Eutychian, whose
heresy was, that after the incarnation of Christ, there was but one nature in
Christ, made of his Divinity and Humanity, which overthrows the foundation of
our salvation, Liberatus in Breviario, cap. 22. Honorius a Monothelite, and
therefore damned and accursed in the sixth Council of Constantinople, act. 13.
John the 22. held, that the souls of the blessed being separat from their
bodies, did not see the Lord before the resurrection, Occam. in opere 93.
dierum. Adrian de confirmatione circa finem. Gerson in sermon de Pascha. John
the 23. denied eternal life, whereof he was accused, and deposed in the Council
of Constance, Sessione 11. Eugenius the 4. deposed in the Council of Basile for
heresy, Sessione 34. I omit the rest. Seeing then these whom ye call the rock
and foundation of your Church have erred, and that in matters of doctrine and
Religion, and in the principal points thereof, and that by the testimonies both
of the Scripture, and of your own Councils, Doctors, Cardinals, and Popes.
Therefore if your argument hold forth, then I say, the gates of hell has
prevailed against your Church, because they have prevailed against the rocks
and foundations thereof; for they have erred, as has been proved; the which, I
suppose, ye will not grant. And therefore the furthest that ye can gather here,
is but this; That the gates of hell, that is, the power of condemnation shall
not (...); that is, totally and finally overcome: So that suppose they may
(...), that is be strong, and make them to fail in many things, yet they cannot
prevail totally and finally against the Church of God, that is, the elect and
chosen, who are built not on the Pope, but on the immovable Rock the Lord
Jesus. I say further, this promise is made and performed in every one of the
elect: For the gates of hell shall not prevail; that is, get the final and full
victory over any of them. And therefore our Savior says, None of my sheep shall
perish, John 10 28. and yet ye will not deny, but every one of the elect may
err. Therefore this promise does not privilege the Church of God from erring,
but the chaff and evil seed; that is these that are called and not chosen, may
err, and err finally; because this promise is not made unto them, for they are
not built upon this Rock, but upon the sand: for none is built upon this Rock,
but these who are blessed, and hears the word, and does it, Matthew. 7. as our
Savior testifies. And the good seed, which are these that are called and
chosen, may err, suppose not finally and totally.

The next place which ye quote, is that prayer of Christ for Peter, Luke 22.32.
But I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not, Matthew. 26. It is true he
prayed. It is true also that Peter's faith failed not; but yet it swooned, as it
were, when he denied his Lord, and that by perjuring and cursing of himself;
and yet he erred both in the quality of Christ's Kingdom, in the calling of the
Gentiles, and in the abrogation of the Ceremonial Law, Acts 10 14. As also, he
went not rightly to the truth of the Gospel, Gal. 2.11. as has been proved. So
this prayer was not that he should be kept absolutely from all erring; for then
it shall follow, that Christ obtained not that which he prayed for: seeing he
erred (which is impious to think) but that his faith should not decay finally
and totally.

Secondly, the Lord Jesus prayed also for all believers, John 17.18.19.20.
which place ye also quote, and yet there is not one of the believers but they
may err, as your selves cannot deny, and we have proved by examples of your own
Popes: for if any were exeemed from erring, in your judgment it should be
these that are the foundation of your Church, which ye call your Popes; but
they may err, and have erred, as has been proved.

Thirdly, I say, it will not follow, Christ prayed for Peter's faith that it
should not fail: Therefore he prayed for the Popes, whom ye will have to be
successors to Peter, that their faith should not fail (for that is the thing ye
would be at) for their faith has failed. For if by faith ye understand the
doctrine of the faith of Christ, as it is taken sometimes in the Scripture, 1.
Tim. 4. then I say your own Doctors, Canons, Councils, Cardinals, and Popes
themselves, as they have been cited before, testifies, that not only they may
err, but also that some of them have erred, and have been heretics. And if by
that faith which our Lord prayed for, ye understand that lively faith that
embraces the promises of Gods mercy in Christ, which works by love, and
shows forth the self by good works; as by keeping of Christ's commandments,
and by loving one another, Romans 3.25. Gal. 5.6. 1. John 2.4. Then I say, your
own writers, friends, favorers, and Cardinals testifies of them, Platin,
Genebrard, Crantz, that they have gone from Peter's steps, that they got the
Popedom by brybery and bargaining with the Devil: That they were monstrous and
prodigious men; yea, rather beasts and monsters. So that of all men that ever
professed the faith of Jesus, they have failed most foully in that lively
faith, as I have proved in another place concerning the Antichrist.

As to that place which ye quote John 14.16.17. where the Spirit of Christ is
promised to the Apostles to dwell with them, and to remain with them for ever:
And in the 16. chap. verse 13. that he shall lead them in all truth. I answer,
first, that was the Apostles prerogative, the Maister-builders of the Church of
Christ, that in writing and teaching the doctrine of salvation, they should be
led in all truth, and in none ever since promised nor performed in that high
measure. Secondly, this promise of the Spirit of truth to dwell and remain in
them for ever, and to lead them in all truth, is made and performed in all
believers, in so far as may sanctify them and save them: and yet ye will not
deny, but that every one of the believers may err Therefore this promise will
not reach so far as to keep the Church from impossibility of erring.

As to that place in the 17. of John, I answered to it before.

As to the 28. of Matthew, I will be with you to the end of the world; I answer
the same thing to it, which I answered to the former, that this promise is
made, not to any visible and ordinar succession (for that is to ty the promises
of God to persons and places) but to the Pastors of the Church whom he sends
forth, and to all the faithful: and is performed in them, in so far forth as
may save them, and enable them for his work. But yet this will not exeem them
from all possibility of erring.

As to that in the 1. Tim. 3. verse. 15. the Church is called the pillar and
ground of truth, therefore ye gather, It cannot err. First, I will ask you to
whom the Apostle speaks so, and upon what occasion he speaks it? Ye must say,
To Timothy, that he might know how to behave himself in the house of God,
which is the Church, 2. Tim. 3.14. for so the Apostle writes. Then I ask, Is
not that Church wherein Timothy should have behaved himself, called the ground
and pillar of truth? So the Scripture calls it, and ye cannot deny it. Now this
Church was the Church of Ephesus, then the Church of Ephesus is called, the
ground and pillar of truth. But first, the Church of Ephesus fell from her
first love, and the candlestick is threatened to be removed from her, unless she
repent, Rev. 2.5. She did not repent, but in time became worse and worse, and
so heaped fault upon fault, till Christ has now removed his candlestick from
her, and delivered her over to darkness and death, by taking his own elect to
himself and giving over the reprobat that hated the truth, to the blindness of
their own mind: so that city is left desolat to the impiety of Mahomet; and she
that was once called by Gods Spirit, the pillar and ground of truth, has now
lost the truth. Now, I say, that which may befall one Church, may befall any
other Church: Then that which is befallen to the Church of Ephesus, may befall
any other: But the Church of Ephesus was first craised, and then by little and
little utterly overthrown: and being bereft of the light of Christ, is now a
Church no longer. Therefore, I say, that there is no Church on the face of the
earth, howsoever they flatter themselves with glorious styles of Catholic,
pillars and ground of the truth: whose body (that is, the elect and chosen in
it) may not be overshadowed with darkness, and overtaken with faintness: whose
chaff, that is, the hypocrites in it, may not be wholly consumed with rottenness
and destruction, and whose whole frame and outward government, may not loose
both their strength and beauty.

Thirdly, I say, if the Church cannot err, as ye say, because it is the ground
and pillar of truth; and if the Church of Ephesus be called the pillar and
ground of truth, as the Scripture says; and seeing the Church of Ephesus. with
all the Churches of the East (as ye cannot deny) has condemned the Popes
supremacy as heresy: Therefore one of these two must follow, either that the
Church; that is, the pillar and ground of the truth, not only may err, but has
erred; or else it is an heresy condemned many hundred years ago, That the Pope
is the head of the Church, and so Popery is heresy. Judge ye which of these ye
will choose. Last of all, I say, the Church is called the pillar and ground of
truth, because it is her office and duty to hold out the word of truth, as
lanterns and light, Philip. 2.16. by preaching it, and practicing it; as the
Priest is called, the Messenger of the Lord of hosts, because his lips should
preserve knowledge, and declare the message of God, Malach. 2.7. But as there
were Priests which show not forth the message of God, but caused many to err in
the Law, and corrupted the covenant of Levi; so there may be Churches, and have
been, which have not upheld, and maintained the truth, but have fallen
therefrom.

Now I come to your last testimony of Scripture, Acts 5.39 In that counsel of
Gamaliel to the Council of the Scribes and Pharisees, That if the doctrine of
the Apostles be of God, that it cannot be destroyed. What do you gather here?
That the truth does remain for ever? Bellarmin tells you, that ye spend but
time in proving that; for we grant it unto you. It cannot (I grant) be
destroyed, but yet it can be persecuted and removed out of places where it was
before, and obscured and corrupted by men's glosses and traditions, as it has
been these 1500. years by the Jews, to whom this was spoken. That if the
doctrine of the Apostles was of God, they could not destroy it: and yet (as was
said) they banished it, and made the Lord to deprive them thereof, and to give
them over to the blindness and hardness of their hearts, because they would not
embrace the truth when it was offered.

Seeing then there is not a syllab in Gods Word that will uphold this main
foundation of your Church (that the Church cannot err) take heed to your self,
M. Gilbert, in time, and build not the damnation of your own soul, and the
damnation of the souls of many others, upon a point of doctrine that has not
God to bear witness to it in the whole Scripture. I might end here; but because
this point (as I said before) is the main pillar that upholds the whole weight
of their Church and Religion: therefore I will utterly overthrow the same, and
I will prove out of the Word of God, That the Church in all ages, both may err,
and has erred.

And first, the Scripture testifies, that it is only proper to God alone by
nature to be perfectly holy, and true, and free from all errors, Mark 10.18.
And contrariwise, man by nature is unholy, a liar, prone to deceive, and to be
deceived, Romans 3.4 9.10.11.17. and 19. verse. so that by nature he is nothing
else but a mass of blindness and corruption; so that the light he has, he has
it by free grace, by Gods Spirit, to make him see so much of his light in the
face of Christ, as may save him. But yet so long as they are in this house of
clay, they see but in part; and that part which they see, is but obscurely and
dimly, as the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 13.12. So that as long as they are in
this world, they are subject to sin, ignorance and errors. But as there are two
sorts of men in the visible Church, some called and chosen, some called, and
not chosen; and as in the diseases of the body, some are curable, whereof men
recovers; some are deadly, whereof men dies: so it is in the errors of the
militant Church, some are deadly, and some are curable. The chosen that are
called, may err, but their errors are not deadly, as the errors of the Apostles
were, Acts 1.6. and 10. and 11. Gal. 2. Rev. 19. and 22. they recovered by
grace from them. The called that are not chosen, may err, and err deadly, and
never recover; as these of whom John speaks; They went out from us (says he)
because they were not of us, etc. John 2.19. Now seeing the visible Church here
beneath stands but of these two sorts, to wit, of these that are called and
chosen, and these that are called, but not chosen, and both may err. Therefore
it is manifest, that the Church militant here beneath, may err. And to prove
this more amply, that she has erred before the Law, under the Law, in Christ's
time, and after Christ.

First, Adam being made in perfect holiness and integrity, how grievously did
he err, when contrary Gods commandment, giving more credit to the Devil then
to his Maker, he brake that first covenant? For Tertullian says, Who will
doubt to call Adams fall an heresy, Contra Marcionem, lib. 1. Now if Adam in
his full light did not stand, but so foullie erred, which is he that is come
forth of his loins, born in ignorance and blindness, that dare challenge this
prerogative to himself, that he cannot err, except the man of sin, and son of
perdition? that is, the Popes of Rome. Now, he being thrust out of Paradise,
has two sons: the elder Cain, for the murder of his brother is accursed of
God, and the author of the Synagogue of Babel, that is the wicked. The Church
of God remained in the posterity of Seth, Genesis 5. and at the last, Religion
began to be so profaned, that at length it grew to such a hight, that Religion
being contracted only in the family of Noah, it could be punished with no less
then with an universal destruction of all living creatures by the flood, except
only these that were preserved in the Ark with him, Genesis 6. Of Noah's three
children, two of them fell, both themselves and their posterity. The true
Church and Religion remained in the family of Sem; and neither were they free
from Idolatry, God calling, Genesis 12. Abraham out of his own country, serving
strange Gods, Josu. 24.2.3. His eldest son Ismael being circumcised, is
commanded to be casten out of the Church of God, Genesis 21.12. and 25.23. and
31.34. and 35.2. Isaac has two sons, the elder is refused, the youngest is
chosen, and so the elder with his posterity fell away. Jacobs family was not
clean, neither from Idolatry, being polluted with strange Gods by his wife
Rachel, till he cleansed his house. And as for his posterity, what
stiff-neckedness, what rebellion, what Idolatry was among them, so that no
threatening no blessing, no correction, nor teaching, could keep them in the
purity of Gods worship and Religion?

In the Church under the Law, the people are Idolaters, the hie-Priest Aaron
the maker of the Idol to the people, Exodus 32. In the time of the Judges after
the death of Josua, they worshipped Baal and strange Gods, Judges 1.12.13. and
every man did that which seemed good in his own eyes, when there was not a King
in Israel, which was very often in those days, and therefore they are given over
to the cruelty and tyranny of their enemies round about them. In the time of
Heli, there was no open vision, 1 Samuel 3.1. And Solomon says, Where there is
no vision, the people perish, Prove. 29.18. In Saul's time the Ark of the Lord
was not sought, 1. Chro. 13.3. and so there wanted a chief part of the public
worship of God: for God was consulted at the Ark. And in the time of Solomon,
in his old age, when his heart was turned from the Lord, the Scripture
testifies, that they forsook the Lord, and worshipped strange Gods of the
Ammonites, 1. Kings 11. Such like in the time of Rehoboam, Solomon's son, Juda
committed Idolatry, and built hie places, wherein they worshipped contrary to
Gods commandment. Jehoram King of Juda, made Juda and Jerusalem to commit
spiritual fornication and Idolatry. 1. Kings 14 22.23 as the house of Ahab
made Israel to commit Idolatry. Seeing then the worship of God was corrupted
both in Juda and in Israel, and there was no other visible Churches upon the
earth, except in Juda and Israel, will it not follow then, that all the
particular Churches on the earth may err, and fall also to Idolatry? Such like
in the time of Achaz, a strange altar is placed in the temple of the Lord, at
the commandment of the King, by Vriah the Priest: and the King with the whole
people, at the Kings commandment, offers upon that altar, and the altar of the
Lord is removed out of his place, 2. Kings 16.10.11. etc. In the time of Joash,
both the King and the Nobility forsake the house of the Lord, and worship
Idols, so that the hot wrath of the Lord was kindled against Juda and Jerusalem
for their Idolatry, 2. Chro. 24. Such like in the time of Achaz, he made hie
places in all the corners of Jerusalem, and in all the cities of Juda, and
there burnt incense to strange Gods, 2. Chro. 28. In the time of Manasses, the
whole public worship of God was so defaced, and Idolatry so universallie set
up, that the Scriptures testify, Juda sinned more hainouslie then the very
nations did whom the Lord cast out before their face, Chron. 33.9. The whole
host of heaven was worshipped in stead of the true God. I beseech thee (Reader)
to read this chapter, and there thou shall find that there was not so much as
an outward face of a Church at that time. Yea, in the very time of good Kings,
as Joash and Amasia, who both in the beginning embraced the worship of God, but
yet made defection in the end. The hie places were not removed, 2. Kings
12.3.4. and 14.4. which was an error in the worship of God. The Scripture
testifies that the feast of the Passover was not kept so preciselie, according
to the Word of God since the days of Samuel, no not in the reign of the best
Kings, as it was in the 18. year of Josias, Chr. 35.18. and there was 400.
years and more between. Also the Scripture testifies that the feast of the
Tabernacles was not so kept, as it was then since the days of Josua, which was
more then a thousand years, Nehem. 8.18. And all the time of the captivity,
where was there any public face of the Church of God, with his public worship
uncorrupted in all things as the Lord commanded it? As concerning the Kingdom
of Israel, from the time of their renting asunder by Jeroboam from the Kingdom
of Juda, they never had the worship of God in integrity; but first worshipped
God in the places where they should not have worshipped him, and after another
manner, and by other Priests then they were commanded. Next, they fell to the
worshipping of Idols, till they were transported out of their land, and
scattered upon the face of the earth. What, shall I pursue the sayings of the
Prophets, how the only visible Church in the world, is called an harlot, Isai.
1. the Temple a den of thieves, Jer. 7. the Prophets all blind guides, and dumb
dogs that cannot bark? Isai. 57.10.11. Hosea 2.

Now when God of his infinite mercy sent his only begotten Son in the world, the
light, the life, the salvation of the world, what did the Church and the
Clergy, the Scribes and the Pharisees that sat in the chair of Moses? Mat.
23. Surely Christ had none so great enemies as they were, who were the Doctors,
the lights, the successors of Aaron, to whom the Law was concredited. When
Christ testified of himself that he was the light of the world, they said, his
testimony was not true, John 8.13. When others believed in him, they said they
were deceived, John 7.47. They ordain, that if any man should confess Christ,
he should be exco^municat, John 9.22. So that many that did believe in him,
durst not for them confess him, John 12.42. They watched him, of purpose that
they might have matter of accusation against him, Luke 6.7. And when he cast
out Devils, the Scribes and the Pharisees said, that he did cast out Devils by
Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, Mark 3.22. Mat. 12.24. They said, they found
him a man perverting the nation, and forbidding to pay tribut to Caesar, Luke
32.2. They condemn him in a solemn Council as worthy of death, Mark 14.64. Yea,
as Christ testifies of them, they neither entered in the Kingdom of heaven
themselves, nor suffered others to enter in, Mat. 23.13. And yet they are
these, that if ye look to their antiquity, they have their beginning from
Abraham: if to their succession, they succeeded to Aaron: if to their callings,
they were Scribes and Pharisees, and sat in the chair of Moses, Mat. 23 if to
the place, it was to the house of God: if to the people whom they taught, they
were the only people of God: if to their prerogatives, to them appertained the
adoption, and the glory, and the covenant, and the giving of the law, and the
service of God, and the promises, of whom are the Fathers, and of whom is
Christ according to the flesh, who is God over all blessed forever. Amen. Romans
9.4.5. And if ye will look to their Council, they were solemnlie called
together, where they condemned the Lord of life, and crucified the Prince of
glory. What can you say to these? That they erred in the person of Christ, but
not in the exponing of the Law, (as some of you says) But first, Moses did
write of Christ, John 5.46. and Christ is the end of the Law, Romans 10.4. So
that if they had not erred in exponing of the Law, they had not erred in the
person of Christ, because the Law testified of Christ, and he was the end of
it. Next, the Scripture testifies that they erred in exponing of the Law, that
they both brake the Law, and teached others so to do, Mat. 5. And therefore
Christ says, Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, ye cannot enter in the Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 5.20. For whereas
the Law of God counts hatred murder, and lust adultery, and rash swearing
unlawful swearing, and our enemies our neighbors, whom we ought to love and to
do good unto: They by the contrary, taught that our friends was only our
neighbors whom we should love, and therefore they said, that we should hate our
enemies, verse. 43. That hatred was not the breaking of the sixth command, and
lust no breaking of the seventh command, and rash swearing no breaking of the
third command. And therefore the Lord Jesus in that fifth chapter of Matthew,
does vindicat the true meaning of the commandments from their false
expositions. And he testifies of them, that they did abrogat the Law of God
through their traditions, and so in vain they worshipped God, teaching for Gods
Law (which he calls doctrine) men's precepts, Mat. 15.6. which he proves there
by an example of abrogating and annulling of that duty which we ow to father
and mother, commanded us in the fifth commandment, by their tradition. And
therefore he gives charge to his disciples to beware of the leaven (that is the
doctrine) of the Pharisees, Mat. 15.6. Seeing then they who had their ordinary
succession from Aaron erred, how can the Doctors of your Church, yea, your
Popes be privileged from erring? But it may be ye grant all this; for how can
ye deny it, that the Church before the Law, under the Law, in the time of
Moses, in the time of the Judges, in the time of the Kings, in the time of the
captivity, and in the time of Christ, erred: but yet the Christian Church has
greater privileges and promises that it cannot err? Let us examine this also,
whither the Christian Church be privileged from erring, or not. And
certainly, if any Christian Church, at any time had this prerogative,
appearantlie the primitive Church which was in the days of Christ, and of his
Apostles, should have had it. But they had it not. Therefore what Church since
under the heaven can challenge it? For in the time of Christ's suffering, the
Apostles and Disciples, who only then were the Christian Church, yea, after
that they had been Apostles, and after that they had been sent to preach the
Gospel, and work miracles, yet in that time, did they not err in the article of
Christ's resurrection? Mat. 10 And erred they not concerning the estat of
Christ's kingdom after the resurrection? Acts 1.6. and 11. And concerning the
teaching of the Gentiles, after they had received the holy Ghost, Acts 10. Gal.
2. And Peter himself, as has been shown. And sundry Papists, as Alex.
Hallensis in 3. part, quaest. ult. art. 2. and Johan. de Turrecrem. in lib. 1.
de Eccl. cap. 30. 1. Cor. 3. and in lib. 3. cap. 61. says, that true faith
remained only in the heart of Marie in the time of Christ's suffering. Was not
here then an universal erring? Now to go forward, did not the Church of the
Corinthians err in building hay and stubble on the foundation, and in the use
of the Lords Supper, and some of them also concerning the resurrection of the
dead, 1. Cor. 3. and 11. and 15. And the Church of Galatia erred in being
carried away to another Gospel, and in joining the Ceremonies of the law with
grace in justification, Gal. 1. and 3. And what will ye say when the heresy of
Arrius (who denied Christ to be the Son of God equal to his Father) spread its
self so far, that it is testified by Theodor. hist. Eccles. lib. 2. and Hier.
dial. contra Lucif. cap. 7. and in chron. Athanas. Epist. de Synod. Alim. and
Seleu. that the Bishops of the whole world became Arrians: that the whole world
did grieve and wonder at it self that it was become an Arrian. What will ye say
unto all the Christian Churches of the East, Grecia, Asia and Africa, Churches
planted by the Apostles? I mean not now of them that have professed Mahometism,
but of them that admits the Scripture, acknowledges Christ their Savior, who
have their ordinar succession of Patriarks and Bishops, as well as your Church
of Rome has, who in number far exceeds these Churches which acknowledges your
Pope to be the head of the Church. For first, yours is but in Europe, except ye
will claim to the Newfound land, and not all Europe; for all the Churches in
Greece, which is a great part of Europe, acknowledges not your supremacy. Now
take the Greek Churches from you; next, the Reformed Churches in Scotland,
England, Germany* Denmark, France, Zeland, Holland, and other places, which
have gone out of Babel, which are all in Europe, your number will not be many
that acknowledges your supremacy. And next, take all Asia and Africa from you,
which is the two parts of the world, your number will be small, in comparison of
these that are against your supremacy. Now all these detests your supremacy as
tyranny, and the worship of Images, your transubstantiation in the Sacrament,
the Communion under one kind, the single life of Priests. Either therefore ye
must grant that the greatest number of Christian Churches have erred, and does
err, or else that your Roman Church does err and your supremacy; yea, your
Religion which depends upon your supremacy, is the head of heresy. But it may
be ye will say, that all other Christian Churches may err, but that it is only
proper to your Church not to err. First, therefore let me ask at you what can
be the cause of that singular privilege which the Church of Rome has beside
all other Churches which ever have been, is, or shall be? Yea, above Adam when
he was in his integrity (for he erred;) yea, above the Angels, for they
remained not in the truth, Jude 6 Above the Patriarcks, Abraham. Isaac and
Jacob: yea above Aaron, and the Church in the wilderness: above the Church
under the Law: yea above the Apostles, and Peter himself, before Christ's
suffering, in the time of his suffering, after the resurrection, after the
receiving of the holy Ghost; for they erred in all these times: Yea, above the
Christian Churches that have been founded by the Apostles, as well as yours;
that had the promise, the covenant, the service of God once in as great purity
as ever yours had; that have their ordinar succession, their antiquity, their
vocation ordinar, as well as yours has, unto this day. Great surely must be
that privilege given unto the Church of Rome, that has exeemed her from
error, others having erred. What is then your prerogative above all other
Churches?

I know that ye will say, because of Peter's chair that was there wherein the
Popes sits after him. First, then if Peter's chair has such a prerogative, that
the Pastors who sits in it, and the Church that cleaves to it, cannot err: I
think surely the Lords chair which was at Jerusalem, which was called the
Temple and seat of God, and Moses chair, wherein the Scribes and Pharisees
sat, should rather have that prerogative to free the Churches and Pastors
sitting in these chairs, from erring; yea, the Church which the truth it self
Jesus Christ founded, whom he taught with his own mouth, and among whom he was
crucified, should with far greater right claim to that prerogative. But since
all their seats have erred, for the Temple became a den of thieves: the Scribes
and Pharisees that sat in Moses chair, condemned the Lord of glory: and
Jerusalem it self cried out, Crucify, crucify him. And the Christian Church
gathered there, are long since far from the way of salvation. So that if
neither the chair of God, nor Moses, freed the Church of the Jews from erring,
nor the chair of Christ freed the Christian Church there gathered from erring:
How then can Peter's chair have this prerogative above them all, as to exeem
that Church and Pastors that sits therein from possibility of erring? What is
this but to prefer him before them all, whose seat has a privilege that
neither God, nor his sons, nor Moses seat had? O high blasphemy to be detested
and abhorred of all Christian hearts. But let us see if it has this
prerogative which they ascribe unto it, or not. And first, if it could have
exeemed any from erring, should it not have exeemed himself especially from
erring? But as it has been shown he erred, Acts 1.6. Gal. 2. therefore it
cannot exeem neither his successors, not yet the Church that acknowledges them,
from erring. Secondly, if it had exeemed any Church from erring, should it not
have exeemed the Church of Antiochia especially; for surely Antiochia has
better right to claim to this prerogative then your Church has? For first, it
was Peter's first seat. Next, the Scripture bears witness to it that he was
there, Gal. 2.11. But neither was Rome Peter's first seat, nor is there so much
as a syllab in all the Scriptures, to prove that ever Peter was in Rome. But
suppose Peter was there (for we will not examine this now) whither is this
prerogative not to err, given to your head, that is, to the Popes, or to the
body, that is, the people, or to both? If ye say to the head (as ye do indeed)
then what will ye answer to your own Writers and Fathers, to your own Councils
and Popes, to your own Canon Law, affirming that Popes may err, and be
heretics, and should be deposed, and are deposed when they are manifest
heretics? (as has been proved before.) And what will ye say to your Popes
that have been heretics indeed, one of them an Arrian, another an Eutychian,
the third a Nestorian, the fourth a Montanist, the fifth deposed as an
heretic, the sixth denying that the souls of the children of God saw Gods face
while after the resurrection, the seventh denying life everlasting, and others
giving themselves over in the hands of the Devil for the Popedom; others
repelling and abrogating the decrees of their predecessors; others such
monsters and beasts, so cruel to the dead and to the living, that your own
friends calls them monsters, and affirms of one of them that the Devil shot him
through while he was abusing another man's wife, and so died without repentance?
Dare you say, and would ye have the salvation of men's souls to lean to this
point of doctrine, that they cannot err which is the rock and foundation of
your Church, which above all others have erred most grievously? O malicious and
cruel man, that would deceive the poor flock of Jesus Christ, for whom he shed
his blood, with such heresy and abomination. Then this prerogative is not
granted to your Popes, the head and foundation of your Church. And surely if
the foundation may be turned up-side-down, and the head may become senseless and
dead, I see not how the house can stand, and the body can be whole: and one of
your greatest Papists B^llarmin plainly confesses, lib. 4 de Romans Pontif. cap.
3. that if the Pope err, of necessity, tota Ecclesia errabit, that is, the
whole Church shall err. Upon the which I reason, If the Pope may err, and has
erred, then the whole Church may err, and has erred: (so Bellarmin one of the
learnedest Papists that ever was, writ) But the first has been proved by your
own Doctors, Cardinals, Popes, Councils, Canon Law. Ergo, by your own doctrine
the whole Church may err.

Here we might stay now and go no further; for this sufficiently overthrows
this point of your doctrine, that the Church cannot err, and that by the
confession of the learnedest of your side. But yet I will pursue the rest. If
you say it is granted to the body, then it is either granted to the people, or
to the Clergy. To the people, I suppose ye will not; for if your Popes may err,
much more may your people err: And if the Apostles, and other famous Churches
may err, much more may your people err: yea, if not, it should follow that your
people were above their head the Pope, which I suppose ye will not say. If ye
say the Clergy, then either it must be your Doctors severally by themselves, or
as they are gathered together in a Council. But as they are several, ye will
not say. For your Bellarmin controversies would convince you to the face: for
almost there are few controversies which he handles (and he handles more then
300) but he brings in some of your own Writers dissenting from him, and whom in
many places he confutes. And I think if Popes have not this privilege, surely
the Doctors of your Church severally have not this privilege. But because (as
Bellarmin confesses, Lib. 2. de author. Council. c. 11.) If a general Council
err, then the whole Church may err, for it represents the whole Church. And
therefore he brings this in as a reason to prove, That general Councils cannot
err, because the whole Church cannot err: For (says he) the general Council
represents the whole Church, therefore it cannot err. Let us examine this: for
if it be found that general Councils may err, surely your cause is gone. First
then, what will ye say to thirteen general Councils, whereof seven is utterly
rejected, and the other six are in part allowed, and in part rejected, which
all have erred, as Bellarmin de Concilijs, lib. 1. cap. 6. and 7. confesses.
But it may be you answer, that these were not approved by the Popes of Rome,
and therefore they might err, and have erred; but these Councils that are
altogether allowed of him cannot err, nor have not erred. Indeed it is true
that this is your doctrine, That neither general nor provincial Councils can
err that is allowed by the Pope, Bellarm. lib. 2. cap. 2. and 5. and that
general Councils lawfully conveaned may err, unless they follow the
instructions of the Pope. And therefore Bellarmin says, cap. 11. that they may
err three manner of ways. 1. If in defining of any thing the Fathers of the
Council dissent from the Popes Legates. 2. If it be against the Popes
instruction, suppose both the Fathers and the Legates of the Council agree
together. 3. They may err before they have received the Popes confirmation and
judgment, suppose all both Fathers and Legates consent together; because (says
he) the Popes judgment is the last, from the which no man may appeal, and he
may approve and disprove the General Council, notwithstanding of their consent
with his own Legates. And therefore he says in another place, Lib. 4. de Romans
Pontif. cap. 3. That the whole strength or certainty of lawful Councils,
depends only of the Pope. So then this is your last refuge* All depends on his
instruction and confirmation, he has a privilege that he cannot err, and the
General Councils receives the same through his approbation and confirmation.
But I answer: The Pope can give no greater prerogative to others, then he has
himself: But (as has been proved before) the Popes may err, and have been
heretics: therefore they cannot give this prerogative to others And if ye will
say (as some of you do) that the Pope, suppose he may err privately, as he is a
private man, and as a private teacher, yet he cannot err as he is Pope in his
office judicially. Whereunto I answer, first, That some of your own Church, as
Gerson and Almane, de potestate Ecclesiae, Alphonsus de Castro lib. 1. cap. 2.
contra haeres. Canus, loci Theolog. lib. 6. cap. 1. and Pope Adrian the sixth,
all these teaches. That the Popes may err and teach heresy, as they are Popes.
Either therefore the Popes may err, as they are Popes judicially, and teach
heresy, or else not only these Doctors of your own Church, but also the Pope
himself has erred, and that in a point of doctrine: and so however it be, the
Popes as they are Popes, judicially may err in points of doctrine. Secondly, I
say, besides nine Popes which have been heretics, and that when they were
Popes, sundry of them have made decrees, not only contrary to Gods Word, but
also contrary one to another, and that in matters of doctrine. As for example.
Pope Celestin the third, made a decree, cap. laudabilem de conversione
infidelium, that when of married persons the one falls in heresy, the marriage
is dissolved, and the Catholic party is free to marry again; contrary to the
truth of God, Matthew. 6. and 19.9. and also contrary to the decree of Pope
Innocentius the third, lib 4. decretal. cap. Quanto. Thirdly, either your Canon
Law errs, or else Clements decrees, that all things should be common, and that
wives also should be common, causa 12 quaest. 1. Dilectissimis. Gelasius Pope
affirms de consecrat. cap. Comperimus. That the mystery of the body and blood
in the Sacrament cannot be divided, and that the Sacrament cannot be taken in
one kind only without great sacrilege: and yet the Council of Trent has
decreed the contrary, and the whole Roman Church practices the contrary. Pope
Martin decreed, did. 50. cap. Qui semel, that the Priests who are deposed for
any fault, may never be admitted to any degree of the Priesthood again. Pope
Syricus, distinct. 82. cap. Quia, and Pope Calixtus distinct. 82. cap.
Presbyter, have decreed the contrary. Pope Gregory the third, he permits one to
have two wives, if the first be sickly, decret. causa 32. quaest. 7. cap. Quod
proposuisti, contrary both to the Gospel, Matthew. 19. and to another decree of
the Canon Law, Decretal. lib. 4. tit. 9. cap. Quoniam. Pope Nicolas says,
Did. 40. cap. A quodam Judaeo, that that Baptism which is ministered without
express mention of the three persons of the Trinity, is firm and sure enough.
But Pope Zachary, Did. eadem de consecrat. cap. In Synodo, has decreed the
contrary. All these decreets are set down in their Canon Law, and has the
strength of a law in the Roman Church, not as private men's, but as Popes
decreets. And yet some of them are directly repugnant to the Word of God, that
themselves cannot deny but they are heresies, and some of them so directly
repugnant to the decreets of other Popes, that either the one or the other must
be heresy.

But it may be ye will answer, that suppose the Pope may err as he is Pope, and
that in matters of doctrine, yet he cannot err with his Council, either
Provincial or General, as Bellarmin says. Whereunto I answer, first, if
General Councils lawfully conveaned together, may err in matters of doctrine,
unless they be confirmed by the Pope, as Bellarmin grants; and if the Popes may
err themselves alone, and that judicially in matters of doctrine, as has been
proved: why may they not err also being joined together, seeing Councils have
this privilege only by his confirmation and allowance? As Bellarmin says,
lib. 4. de Romans Pontif. cap. 3. Secondly, I say, either Pope Steven the 6. with
his Council erred in condemning of Formosus and his acts which he made as Pope,
and in decreeing his ordinations to be void and null, because the man was
wicked by whom they were ordained, Sigebert in Chron. which is an error of the
Donatists, or else Pope John the 9. with his Council of 72. Bishops, erred, in
justifying Formosus and his decreets, and condemning the acts of Pope Steven
with his Council. Last of all, since General Councils that have been confirmed
by their Popes have erred, the sixth General Council confirmed by Pope Hadrian,
in epist. ad Thracium quae est in 2. action, 7. Syn. Canon. 2. has sundry
errors which they themselves will not defend, as the rebaptizing of heretics.
For the counsel of Cyprian is confirmed there, wherein this is decreeted. And
also it is ordained Canon 13. that Elders, Deacons, Subdeacons, should not
separat from their wives, contrary to the Canon of the Roman Church, as is said
there. And the marriage of Catholics and Heretics is judged null and void,
Canon 67. which your self cannot deny to be an error contrary to the express
truth of God, 1. Cor. 7.13. And the forbidding of Ministers to remain with
their wives, Canon 12. contrary to the sixth Canon of the Apostles. Either
therefore a General Council confirmed by a Pope has erred, or else the
Apostles have erred in this Canon, for they judge them to be the Canons of the
Apostles. The first General Council of Constantinople, and the General Council
of Chalcedon, which are both by their own confession approved by the Popes,
Bellarm lib. 1. de Concilijs, cap. 5. And yet both these have decreeed* that
the Bishop of Constantinople should have equal privileges of authority, honor
and dignity in Ecclesiastical affairs with the Bishop of Rome, except only the
first place or seat, the which by their own confession is an error. Therefore
either lawful General Councils confirmed by the Pope, have erred, or else the
Pope is not the head of the Church, and has not a preeminence of authority
over the rest, for they have made the Bishop of Constantinople equal with him;
or else there are two heads of their Church, the Bishop of Rome, and the Bishop
of Constantinople. I omit the rest. Augustine says, de baptismo contra
Donatistas, lib. 2. cap. 3. That Provincial Councils may be corrected by
General Councils, and of General Councils, the former may be amended by the
latter; If they may be mended, then they may err. And here he speaks not of a
matter of fact, but of a matter of faith: For he speaks of the baptism of
heretics. Now to conclud, seeing the Churches in all ages, before the Law, in
the time of the Law and in the time of grace yea and the Apostles, and Peter
himself have erred: and seeing the Church of Rome that claims this privilege
of not erring above all other Churches, has erred also, and that not only her
people which they call Laics, but also her Clergy, severally, and together in
Councils, as well Provincial as General. And seeing the head, which (as they
say) is the Rock and foundation of the Church, has erred in life, in Office,
in matters of Faith and Religion, not as private men only, but as Popes, both by
themselves alone, as also with their Councils, as well Provincial as General.
Seeing, I hope, I have proved all these things sufficiently, then may I not
with the judgment of all men safely conclud, that that main pillar whereupon
the whole weight and pillar of your Religion depends (that the Church cannot
err) that it is an error, and such a dangerous and damnable error, whereupon
all the errors of your Religion is built, that whosoever will believe it, they
hazard the endless salvation of their souls. Ground then (Christian Reader) thy
salvation not upon this, that the Church cannot err; for that is false: but
upon this that as long as she sticks to the Word of God written in the Old and
New Testament, she errs not; and when she swerves and it were but an inch broad
from the Scripture, then she errs. And therefore two learned Papists, Gerson.
de examinat. part. 1. consid. 5. and Panorm. affirms: the one says, Simplici
non authorizato, sed excellenter in sacris literis erudito, etc. that is, that
more credit is to be given to one unlearned and simple, but yet excellently
beseen in the holy Writ in a point of doctrine, then to the Pope. And such a
learned man says, he ought to oppone himself to a General Council, if he
perceive the greater part to decline to the contrary of the Gospel, either of
malice, or of ignorance. The other says, extra de elect. cap. Significasti,
That more credit is to be given to an unlearned and simple man that brings for
him the Scripture, then to a whole General Council. And this for answer to the
testimonies of Scripture which ye cited.

Now, as concerning the Fathers testimonies which ye bring in, they will serve
you no further then the Scripture has done: For they will go no further with
you, then this that the Church of Christ and his covenant with her shall endure
for ever, the which we grant, and they that will read them will find them so.
And if ye prove any further out of them, it shall be answered by Gods grace: For
it were too fashous to the Reader to set down here the particular sayings of
every one of them. And if ye had formed your arguments out of them, I should
have formed my answer, by the grace of God, to every one of them. And thus much
concerning your ground, and the proofs of it. Now I come to that which ye
gather of it.

SECTION IV. Whither the Church of Rome be the only true Church, and the
Reformed not true Churches?
OF this we collect that our Church must be the only true Church, and not
theirs, because ours has never been interrupted, nor has failed in any
substantial point of faith and Religion since Christ and his Apostles days,
and theirs has done. To confirm this, I say, that M. John, nor no Minister in
Scotland can be able to assign to us the circumstances of all mutations and
changes in Religion: That is to say,

1. The author who first began our Religion.

2. The time when it was begun.

3. The place where it began.

4. The true Church who said against the same.

5. The matter it self which was changed or begun.

6. Nor the faithful number from whom they departed.

All these things we shall assign to their Religion, and that since Christ and
his Apostles.

1. The first au^hor of their Religion, albeit not in all things, was Martin
Luther, an Augustine Friar.

2. He began his Religion in the year of God 1517.

3. He began the same in Saxony in the country of Almanie.

4. The Church of Rome, Italy, France, Spain, Scotland, England, Denmark,
Sweden, Pole, a great part of Almanie, with the east and west Indies, which
were the true Church, said against him.

5. The heads of Religion which he first said against, were Pardons. He
affirmed that man was only justified by Faith. He denied the Supper of our Lord
to be a sacrifice, etc.

6. He departed himself from all the Christian Churches in Europe, in the
Indies, and other places, and therefore he had no predecessors of his own
Religion, as we read in the Apology of the English Protestants, that he and
Zuinglius were the first that came to the knowledge of the Evangel, and
therefore none immediately before them.

Then seeing that there was none of his profession in the earth before him
immediately, neither visible nor invisible, he and his could not be the Church
of Christ: for it has ever stood, and never failed, no not the space of one
day universally, because our Savior says, I shall be with you every day to the
consummation of the world.

M. John Welsch his Reply.
As to your collection, the form of it must be this. That Church only must be
the true Church that has never been interrupted, nor failed in any substantial
head of faith and Religion since Christ and his Apostles. But say ye, yours is
such, and ours not: Therefore your Church is the true Church, and ours not. The
proposition I grant. But all the controversy lies in the probation of your
assumption. Yea, in stead of proving, ye say it is not possible to me, nor to
no Minister in Scotland to assign to you the circumstances of all mutations and
changes in your Religion, as the person, time, place, etc. And then ye attempt
to assign all these circumstances of our Religion, upon the which ye conclud
the falsehood of it. So we will first see how ye prove your own, and then see
how ye disprove ours. Indeed this argument of yours is of such account with
you, that there are not many of your Writers, but they have set it, as it were,
in the vant-guard of their host, and among the greatest of their strengths and
bulwarks, for to uphold their ruinous Babel. So Hammilton and Hay, in their
demands to the Ministers of Scotland, so Campion, so Duraeus Scotus against
Whitaker in his defense, so your Rhemists upon the 28. of the Acts, and on 1.
John 2. and so Bellarmin lib. 4. de Eccles. cap. 5. Whereby it may be seen of
what account this argument of yours is in the judgment of your Church.

But to answer to your argument: first, I say, If there be no mutations or
changes in your Religion since Christ and his Apostles, then your Religion and
doctrine will be one with that which is set down in the Scripture of God. For
you will not deny, I hope, but the Scripture does sufficiently testify, what
doctrine and Religion was in Christ's and his Apostles days. And so let it once
be put in the balance of the Scripture, and tried thereby, and then I hope it
will soon be made manifest how far it is changed. So, and you dare, M. Gilbert,
let once your Religion be set upon the panel, and let it once have an assise
of the Scripture, and then the plea will end, I hope.

Next, I say, it will not follow, We cannot assign all the circumstances of
changes in your Religion: Therefore your Religion is uncorrupted. For it
suffiseth if we can prove the first only, that is, the matter or doctrine it
self which is changed, and that by comparing it with the Scriptures of God,
suppose we could not assign all the rest of the circumstances of the mutation,
as the time, place, author, etc. for the changes of many things are most
notorious and yet all the circumstances of the change thereof not known. We say
then, it is not needful to seek the beginnings and circumstances of the decays
and corruptions in your Church, when the corruption and change it self is so
manifest, by comparing your doctrine with the written Word of God, that it
cannot be denied. For will you say, that he who is deadly diseased, is whole
and sound, because I cannot tell you the first article of time, the place, and
first occasion of the disease? When it is manifest that a city is full of
misorder and confusion, will ye say that ye will not believe it to be so,
unless you know the first beginnings and progress of these misorders? If you
saw a ruinous house, would ye say, Prove me and tell me all the circumstances
of the change of it, otherwise I will not believe it? Will ye deny that a ship
could be drowned, unless it were told you all the circumstances of the change
of the leck where through it drowned? If any found a man fallen in a pit, shall
he not believe that he is fallen whom nevertheless he sees to be there, unless
it were told him, when and by whom he was cast into the same? Even so will ye
not believe, or will ye hinder all others to believe, that your Church and
Religion is ruinous consumed, rotten, dead, drowned, and full of misorder,
heresy, and confusion, unless the first beginnings of these changes can be
told you? We say therefore it is sufficient to prove the ruin and consumption
of your Church and Religion, if by comparing your doctrine with the truth of
God in the Scripture, we make evident the direct opposition betwixt them,
suppose we could not assign all the circumstances of the change of it out of
the histories, leaving it free to Historiographers to write what they please,
and omit what they please.

Thirdly, it is manifest, that the Church of the Jews in the time of Christ
was changed both in doctrine and manners from that estat that it was in the
time of Aaron, Eleazar, and sundry others: and also the Churches of Galatia and
Corinth, that they were changed from the estat wherein they were. And yet I
suppose that neither ye, nor any Papist in the earth, is able to assign to me
all the circumstances of the mutations and changes in the same, as the first
authors, time, place, etc. and yet there was a great change in doctrine and
Religion in all these Churches, as has been proved before. And we read that
our Savior and the Apostles, convicted them of a change, and yet they designed
not the first authors, time, and place, etc. The like I say of the Church of
Greece, Asia and Africa, which in number exceeds yours. That there is a
wonderful change in their Church and Religion, ye will not deny, or else your
Religion is heresy: For (as said is) they acknowledge not your Popes
supremacy, transubstantiation, etc. And yet I suppose, ye nor no Papist in the
earth, is able to assign all the circumstances of changes in their Church and
Religion which they have presently: yea, more unable to do this, then we are
able to do the same in yours. I mean not the heresies of Arrius, Samosatenus,
Nestorius, Eutyches, Sergius, and the rest, which long ago were damned by the
Councils of the Greek Churches. (For I suppose ye shall not be able to prove
that they now maintain these heresies which they condemned and refuted long
ago.) But I mean of the present errors and corruptions in their worship and
Religion which now they maintain and profess. If then ye judge the Churches of
the East heretical, because they are not agreeable to your doctrine and
Religion of Rome, and yet not be able to assign the circumstances of the
changes and mutations of the same, will ye not grant the same liberty to us, to
account and judge your Church and Religion failed, because it is not agreeable
to the doctrine of Jesus Christ, set down in the Scripture, suppose we could
not assign to you the circumstances of the changes of the same?

Fourthly, I say, if you have read Epiphanius, there ye shall find many
heresies, which I omit for shortness, which he accounts heresies, whose
beginnings and authors are unknown.

Fifthly, there is such an universal complaint of the monstrous abominations
and decays in your Religion, discipline, and manners, and that by your own
Councils, Council. Constant. sess. 4. 5. Trident. sess. 6. Basil. sess. 2. 3.
Fathers, Bernard. in Cant. 33. Popes, Cardinals, and Friars, that I would have
thought it uncredible, unless I had read them, that either your own mouths
should have so condemned your selves, or else that the posterity afterward
should have been so shameless as to have boasted of the purity of their Church
and Religion. Therefore the Council of Trent has proclaimed it to the world in
writ, that the Church has need to be reformed in the head and members. Now, I
ask that of you concerning these abuses in discipline and manners, which ye ask
of us concerning your doctrine. Show me all the circumstances of mutation and
change distinctly, if ye can, what time, what place, by what author, etc. such
monstrous abominations first brake in in your Church and Religion? Now seeing
there is no man who has a spark of judgment, that will doubt of that
incredible change of manners and discipline in your Church, and yet the
circumstances of the changes unknown: think ye then that ye shall assure men
that no changes could fall in your doctrine, unless we knew the circumstances
of the changes of the same?

Sixthly, the Scripture testifies, Matthew. 13.27.28 that even the tares which is
the evil seed, does not appear so soon as they are sown; and that neither the
times, nor the first author of them was known, no not to the most diligent
laborers of the Lords ground at the first: and yet it was enough to know them
to be evil seed, by the difference that was seen betwixt them and the good
seed, suppose the time, place and author was unknown at the first. So it is
proof enough against your doctrine, that it is but tares, if the difference be
made manifest between it and the Lords truth in the Scripture, suppose the
circumstances of the changes of it cannot be assigned.

Seventhly, error is likened to leaven and a canker, which does not all at once
infect the whole mass, and fester the whole body, but piece and piece: so your
corruption came not in all at once, but piece and piece infected your Church,
and festered your Religion. And therefore it is no wonder suppose the
beginnings of infection and circumstances of it has not been marked: For if
they had broken in all at once, and suddenly overthrown the whole Church, it
had been no difficulty to have assigned the circumstances of the overthrow of
it. For if any having a whole constitution with a stroke were slain, if a ship
with a wave were drowned, it were no difficulty to assign the circumstances of
the sudden changes. But in a consumption, and in a leck that has come in piece
and piece in the body and in the ship, the beginnings thereof cannot be so
easily perceived: For a little leck in process of time will sink a great ship.
And if it be so hard to discern the beginnings of these things which our senses
may grope, how much more hard is it to perceive the beginnings of these
spiritual corruptions which cannot be perceived by the natural man, but only by
the light of Gods Spirit by the spiritual man?

Eighthly, if now it be so in other heresies, as the Scripture testifies of
them, that their beginnings are ofttimes unknown, even unto the most diligent
laborers of the Lords husbandry, and that they come in by little and little
and does not infect all at once, how much more is this true in your
Antichristian Religion, which (as it was foretold) should deceive all Nations,
and make them drunken with the wine of her fornication? And therefore your
doctrine is termed in the Scripture, an iniquity, but a secret iniquity: an
unrighteousness, but yet a deceivable unrighteousness: a delusion, but yet a
strong delusion, 2 Thessalonians. an abomination and spiritual fornication, Rev. 17.
but yet put in a golden cup; that is, having the show of godliness and
Religion; and your Church is called, a harlot, but yet finely decked in purple,
etc. not like a harlot, but a Queen. Your Kingdom is called, a beast that
speaks like the dragon, but yet like the lamb in his horns, resembling the
power and authority of the Lord Jesus. Seeing then your Church, Kingdom and
Doctrine, is such a mystery of iniquity; has such a show of godliness, has
such a resemblance with the lamb, has such clokes of styles, is so deceivable,
and is such a strong delusion, as the Scripture testifies of it: Is it any
wonder, suppose the beginnings of this mystery, and of the whoredoms of this
Queen, be not distinctly marked and set down?

Ninthly, it is likely enough that the great credit wherein the first Bishops
of Rome was for their piety and godliness, and the lofty estat of their
successors after them, together with their cruelty and tyranny, did so dazel on
the one side the eyes of the godly, that they were not inquisitive in marking
the changes and beginnings of their corruptions, and so bridled the mouths of
other some, that they durst not write the things they saw; and if they writ any
thing, they writ it but barely and corruptly; for the tyranny of your Church
was such, that none durst mutter against your Church and Religion, but he was
taken without further as an heretic, and condemned and executed where ever
your tyranny reached.

Last of all, suppose they had been written by the Histories of every age, and
that distinctly; yet considering the universal power, craft and policy of your
Church and Kingdom, is it any wonder suppose they be not now extant at all, but
either burnt, or else so falsified and corrupted, that the beginnings thereof
should not have been perceived? For seeing in the purer times, when the power
and dominion of your Church was not yet come to the hight, such was the
ambition and falsehood of your Popes, that in the presence of a Council of 217.
Bishops in Carthage, anno 430. where Augustine was present, they did allege a
false Canon of the Council of Nice, for to have established their supremacy,
and under one of their hands sent it to the Council by their Legates; the which
was espied and found out by the whole Council, that not only it was decreed and
ordained in that Council he should have no prerogative over the Churches of
Africa, and that none should appeal to him under the pain of deposition and
excommunication: but al^o he was rebuked by the Fathers of that Council in
their letters to him. If he was so bold then, what marvel suppose since he has
falsified and corrupted every History and Writing that he saw might bear any
ways witness of the corruptions, tyrannies and abominations of that Church and
Religion of his? And hence it is, I am sure, that we find so little written of
the beginnings of their corruptions, and of them that resisted it. And your
Index expurgatorius, devised in the Council of Trent, for blotting out every
thing in the writings of men that might testify of your corruptions, does also
sufficiently witness unto the world what ye did in the former times. So, to
conclud this, suppose we could not assign to you the circumstances of the
changes of your Religion, yet it follows not but your Religion and Church may
be corrupted and decayed.

But to satisfy your demand (suppose I hope the things already said, will
satisfy the consciences of the godly) What crave you, that all the
circumstances of changes in your Religion may be assigned to you? First then, I
say, there is nothing that may serve either to make the man of God w^se unto
salvation, or yet that may make him perfect in every good work, but the
Scripture testifies: For it is able to do both these. If these circumstances
then serve either for salvation or perfection, I say they are set down in the
Scripture, so that we need not to go to Histories to search the same.

The first then ye crave, is the time when the change began. The Scripture
tells you, That the mystery of iniquity began to work even then in the Apostles
days, and that it does already work, and so grew on from degree to degree, till
he that withheld it was removed; that is, till the Empire of Rome began to
decay, and the seat of it removed from thence, as the Fathers expounded it,
Augustine, Chrysostom, Jerome, and so the city left to the Pope, the man of
sin, for him to set his throne there: for Rome that seven hilled City, Rev. 17
9 behoved to be the seat of the Antichrist, as it was fore told by the
Scripture. So, if you will believe the Scripture, you have the time.

What crave you next? The place? I say the Scripture testifies of the same,
that that mystical Babylon, which Bellarmin lib. 2. de Romans Pontif. cap 2. Rev.
17. your chief champion, grants to be Rome, that sits upon s^ven hills, that
had the dominion over the Kings of the earth; that is the place where first
your Church and Religion began to decay. So there the place, if you will
believe the Scripture.

What crave you next? The author? The Scripture also has fore told, That the
beast that came out of the bottomless pit, and slew the witnesses of God, and
made war with the Saints, and overcame them, and made all to worship the image
of the beast and the harlot Babel (the city of Rome) the mother of whoredoms,
who made all Nations to drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, Rev.
12 7. and 14.8. That is your head and Church, they are the authors and mothers
of this decay and corruption.

What is the fourth thing ye require? The Church that said against the same?
The Scripture will tell you that too: The two witnesses of God whom she killed,
the woman that fled in the wilderness, the Saints with whom she made war, and
who would not worship the beast, nor receive his image; the hundred forty and
four thousand that John saw standing with the Lamb on mount Sion, who was not
defiled with your idolatry, but followed the Lamb whith^rsoever he went, Rev.
11. and 12 and 13. and 14. These then are the true Church which spoke against
your corruptions, who are like unto Eliahs seven thousand that had not bowed
their knees to Baal.

What crave you more? The matter it self they said against? The Scripture, and
ye will believe, will satisfy you in this point also. The doctrine then that
was said against, Was the mystery of iniquity, that deceivableness of
unrighteousness, that strong delusion, 1 Thessalonians. 2 Rev. 13. That doctrine of
the dragon, that spiritual idolatry and abomination, Rev. 17.18. That doctrine
of Devils, in forbidding marriage, and commanding abstinence of meat, etc. 1.
Tim. 4.

What crave you last? The number from whom they departed? The Scripture will
also bear witness of this, seeing your Religion is a departure from the faith,
1 Thessalonians. 2. then all these that ever professed the faith of Jesus set down in
his written Word, even the Lord Jesus the head, the Apostles, the layers of the
foundation, the primitive Churh, the woman that fled in the wilderness, the
Saints with whom ye made war, and all the elect and chosen of God that abhorred
your idolatry. These are the true Churches from whom you departed.

What now crave you more? Will not the abundance of the rivers of the
Scriptures of God quench and satisfy this your desire, but that you must go
unto the unpure fountains of men's writings, as though the Scriptures were not
sufficient, not only to make a man wise unto salvation, but to make him perfect
in every thing? These things, I am sure, will satisfy the souls of them that
love the truth. But because you give no credit to the Scriptures, but counts
them as a nose of wax; and as one of your Popes, speaking to Bembus a Cardinal,
called them a fable of Christ, and yet such a fable as has enriched your
treasures And Sylvester Prierias writing against Luther, says, That the Roman
Church and Pope is of greater authority then the Scriptures. O horrible
blasphemies of the holy truth of God. Therefore we will go to the Histories,
and see what they have testified of these circumstances. And although all
things here be not expressed to the full, yet there is so much left uncorrupted
and unscraped out (by the gracious providence of God, that would not want his
witness in all ages) out of the Fathers, and your own Writers, that I hope will
satisfy the consciences of all the modest and godly. Clemens Alexandrinus
says, lib. 1. strom. that the Apostles successors received the doctrine from
them, as the sons from their fathers. But he subjoyns, That there was very few
children that was like their fathers. Aegesippus, as Nicephorus reports, says,
lib. 3. cap. 16. That the Church remained a pure virgin as long as the Apostles
lived, unto Trajans time; but they being dead, he writes that it was speedily
corrupted. So if ye credit the testimonies of these men, ye see the Church
remains not long in her integrity. And if you would hear any thing of your
Roman Church, Socrates lib. 7. cap. 11. says, That Celestin your Pope past the
bounds of his Priesthood. Read Basilius de Spiritu sancto, cap. ult. and there
ye may see what change of Religion was in his time. Augustine testifies, epist.
119. c. 19. That the multitude of ceremonies grew so in his time, that the
condition of the Jews seemed to be more tolerable, then the condition of the
Church. Now did not this sickness, suppose ye, grow by time? And to come to
your own Writers, Bernard says, in Cant. 33. That the Ministers of Christ
(meaning of the Roman Church) serves Antichrist. And to the Pope himself,
Eugenius the 3. he says, lib. 4. And thou the shepherd goes forth being
clothed with a glorious attyr, if I durst say it: these are the feeding places
of Devils, rather then of sheep: Thy court is accustomed rather to receive good
men, then to make them good: not the evil profits, but the good decays there.
And in another place, he says, From the sole of the foot (speaking of the
Church of Rome) to the crown of the head there is no health nor soundness. And
de conv. Pauli, Psalm. 91. ser. 6. he says, What remains now (speaking of the
corruption of that Church of Rome) but that the man of sin be revealed, the man
of perdition, Daemonium non modo diurnum, sed and meridianum; that is, a
devilry not only in the day-tyde, but in the very noon-tyde. And lib. 4. to
Eugenius the Pope, he says, In these secular attyrs and powers, thou have not
succeeded to Peter, but to Constantine. The day would sooner fail me, then the
writing of his complaints against the Church of Rome.

Pope Adrian the 6. in his instructions to his Legates who were sent to the
Council of Noremberg, he grants and bids them say to the Council, That we know
that in this chair (meaning Peter's Sea in Rome) for certain years many
abominable things have been in it: the abuse in spiritual things, the excess in
commandments; and in a word, all things are changed in a worse. And the Council
of the Cardinals to Paul the third: they say, Out of this fountain (holy
Father) as from the Troyan horse, has broken so many abuses in the Church of
God, such heavy diseases, whereby we see now that she is despaired almost of
health. Aeneas Sylvius a Cardinal, who also was Pope afterward, says of your
Church, That all faith has perished in her, and love is grown yce-cold. And
Cornelius Bitontinus Bishop, who was present at the Council of Trent, says;
Would to God (speaking of your Church) that unanimes velut prorsus, etc. all
with one heart all utterly they had not declined from Religion to superstition,
from Faith to infidelity, from Christ to Antichrist, (What would ye have more?
Will ye yet be so shameless as to boast of the purity of your Church?) and from
God to Epicurism: ex Epistola 54 ad Caspar. Schlick Oration Cornelii Epis
Bitonti. 3. Dom. advent. I leave the rest, as Platin, Genebrard, Friar Mantuan,
Nicolaus Clemangis, Franciscus Petrarcha, Aventinus, and a number of others,
who are full of complaints of the abominations of your Church of Rome, that
certainly I cannot but wonder at your shamelesness in opening of your mouth,
and saying, That your Church had the truth in all things, and never failed nor
was interrupted, against such a cloud of witnesses, whose testimonies ye dare
not refuse. But I leave you to the Lord. The lips of a liar is abomination to
the Lord, Prove. 20 So your own mouths shall rise up in the day of the Lord and
condemn you that says, Your Church has not failed in any substantial point of
Religion. But you require more distinctly the time, place, and persons, etc.
that has brought in this mutation and change. If these are to be accounted
authors of your erroneous doctrines who were the chief defenders thereof; then
I say, the Popes of Rome (for the most part) are the authors of the same; for
they were the chief defenders thereof, suppose they had not been the first
teachers thereof. For otherwise Luther cannot be said to be the author of our
Religion, as ye say, because he was not the first that taught the same, and
that by your own confession. For ye say, that sundry other heretics before
Luther taught the same heads of doctrine which he taught, and which we profess
now: as that fasting should be free, that only faith justifies, that man has
not free will, etc.

Next, because it were too longsome to go through the whole heads of your
Religion, therefore I will only bring a few examples, and that in some of the
substantial points thereof. As for the sacrifice of the Mass, and the
ceremonies thereof. I have shown the authors thereof in another place,
therefore I omit that now.

The first that ever took upon him to exercise jurisdiction over the Churches
of the East, was Pope Victor anno 200. or 198. who took upon him to
excommunicat the Bishops of the East, because they would not follow his fashion
in the celebration of Easter. There the person, time, and place, resisted by
Irenaeus Bishop of Lions in France, and the Bishops of the East, and the
brethren there, Polycarpus and sundry others, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 25.26.

The first that took upon him the style to be called Universal Bishop, was the
Bishop of Constantinople, anno 581. resisted by Pelagius, and after him by
Gregorius Bishops of Rome, lib. 4. epistola 32.38 39. And yet for all this,
Boniface the 3. anno 607. obtained this style of Phocas the Emperor, the
murderer of his predecessor, Platina Sabellicus, Marianus Scotus, complained
of by the Church of Ravenna in Italy, and resisted by sundry, as shall be
proved afterward.

The first that appointed laws of fasting, was Montanus the heretic, anno 145.
Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 17. accounted heresy by Apolonius and Augustine, against
the fasting of the Manicheans. The Manicheans were the first we read of that
ministered the Communion under one kind, as the Papists do now: so forth of many
other old condemned heresies which your Church has renewed, as shall be proved
afterward.

The first that gave the rise to Transubstantiation, was Mark a notable
Magician anno 115. who by his enchantment, having first caused a cup of white
wine to bear the color of blood, made his followers believe that by his
invocation over it, that grace which is above all things, had powered his blood
into the cup, refuted by Epiphanius, Haeres. 34. and Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 8.

The first that decreed Transubstantiation in effect, was Pope Nicolaus the 2.
anno 1090. in causing Berengarius to recant, De consecrat. Distinct. 2. cap.
Ego Berengarius. but yet it was not decreed as an universal doctrine, before
Pope Innocent the 3. his time in a Council of Lateran anno 1215. as Tonstal
witnesses, de Sacramenta. The Greek Church never consented to it: Bertramus,
Berengarius, Waldensis, withstood it. The first that decreed the worshipping of
Images, was Hadrian in the 2. Council of Nice, against the express Scripture,
after the example of Marcellina an heretic, who worshipped the Image of Jesus,
resisted by sundry Fathers, and Councils, Council. Eliber. Council. Constant.
Conc. Francof. The first that imposed single life, and condemned marriage in
their Clergy, was Pope Syricius, anno 290. distinct. 82. cap. Proposuisti. as
the Manichees did before him, resisted by sundry, Sigebert. and H. Mutius. Let
these examples serve as a taste to the reader.

How strongly now ye have manned and fortified your own Church and Religion by
your proofs, let the reader judge. Now let us see, how ye disprove ours. The
question now comes in of the truth of our Church and Religion, whither it be
from Jesus Christ, or not? You say, it is not from him, but from others since
his time. If ye had gone the straight way to have proved this, and to have
satisfied the consciences of men, you would at the nearest have run to the
Scripture, and by the same have disproved it. But you in stead of this go a far
by-way, and would father our Religion on flesh and blood, dust and ashes, in
pointing us out Martin Luther to be the father and author of the same, as
though it had not an ancienter pedegre to reckon unto, nor had not the
beginning and foundation of it from the root of Jesse, the bud of the Lord,
from whom it has sprung. And for to get your self the better credit, you busy
your self in marking the circumstances of his preaching, as time, place,
matter, opposition, etc. Now that ye are so skilled and acquainted with that
history of Martin Luther, that you can assign all these circumstances, it is no
wonder, for that was the most notable and remarkable period of the decaying of
your Babel, and of the erecting up again of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, which
your head and Clergy had stamped under foot for so many years; which suppose
the beginning of it was but like a little leaven, and as a grain of mustard
seed which of all seeds is the least, yet now since it has so sowred almost
the whole mass, even the most part of the Kingdoms of Europe, which once was
under your spiritual bondage, and has grown up into such a high tree having
fair and great branches, under the which the Lords sheep may get rest and
warmness, and in the which his souls that mounts upwards to that Kingdom, does
build their nests, so that neither can all your purgations, nor yet all your
axes of fire and sword, of bulls and pardons, of preachings and writings, stay
the spreading of the one, nor cut down the branches and root of the other. That
M. Luther began at that time, and in that place, and preached against these
doctrines, we do not deny, and that is not controverted: But here lies all the
question, whither if that doctrine that he preached against, was Antichristian
or not? and whither that Religion which he neither invented, nor yet first
preached (for sundry before him did preach that same doctrine, whose names I
set down in my answer to your objection) but only raised it out of the grave of
darkness wherein ye had buried the truth of God? Here then, I say, is the
question whither that Religion which he preached has the warrant from Jesus
Christ in his Testament, or not? The which if ye ever disprove by the written
Word of God, then shall we grant you all that ye say, the which is as impossible
to you to do, no not suppose your King would call all your wise men and Clergy
together, as it was to all the wise men of Babel, to tell and interpret
Nebuchadnezar his dream: yea suppose your King would reward you gloriously with
honor and riches if ye could do it, yet are ye not able to win your wages: yea,
suppose he would tear you in pieces, and make your house a jakes, unless ye did
it, as the wise men of Babel was, because they could not tell and interpret the
Kings dream. This is therefore the point which lies in question betwixt us,
which ye should have proved, if ye could. But know ye for a truth; that suppose
he raised out of the grave the truth of God which ye had buried, yet was he
neither the inventer, nor the first preacher of it: but it has for the
beginning and Author of it, Jesus Christ the Son of God, and the foundation of
it in the New Testament of his holy Scripture. This for the Author, time, and
place which ye assign.

Now, to the Churches that spoke against him. I answer, They were but such as
was made drunken with the wine of your fornication, and deluded by your strong
delusions, being deceived by the golden cup, wherein you propined them to be
drunken out, as it was prophesied of you, Rev. 17.4. But the measure of your
iniquity being full, and the time of the lurking of the truth of God being run
out. God of his infinite mercy by his ministry, and the rest that followed
since, has opened the eyes of a great part of these Kingdoms who first said
against him, to see your Church to be the whore, Rev. 17.1. your Kingdom to be
the beast, Rev. 13.11. and your head to be the Antichrist, your doctrine to be
delusions, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.4.11. and your Rome to be that mystical Babylon, Rev.
18 4. And so the Lord has made them believe, and give obedience to that
commandment of his, Go out of her, my people, etc. That ye call these the true
Church that spoke against him, that lies in the weights and balance yet
betwixt us: For ere ye prove them to be the true Church, ye must first prove
your doctrine which they then professed to have the warrant out of the Word of
God. So let them have the name of a Church, but of an impure and corrupted
Church: of a Church infected by the pest of your doctrine, oppressed by the
tyranny of your Pope and Clergy, and consumed by the rotten humors of your
Idolatry. So then, it was not the true Church, that is, the called ones by the
light of the Gospel (for they are the true Church that spoke against him) but
only these that were infected and poisoned with your abominations, the which, I
grant, did overspread these Nations, as it was foretold of her, Rev. 17.2.
and 18.3. and 13.14.

And as for these first heads of Religion which he oppugned: Of your pardons,
justification by works, and the sacrifice of the Mass, their condemnation is
set down in the great Register and Testament of Jesus Christ the Lord of life,
as shall be proved hereafter. So that he was not the first that oppugned them.

Now as to the last, the Churches from whom he departed: he departed not from
their body, but from the consumption of your heresy that consumed the body:
Not from the Church, but from the corruptions of your Idolatry and abominations
in the Church. Not from the Commonwealth of Israel, but from your tyranny and
oppression of the Commonwealth. Not from the city of God, but from the pest of
your doctrine that infected the city. And last of all, not from the spiritual
communion and society of the Saints of God in these parts, but from the
communion with Babel, with Antichrist, with the beast, and with the dragon, and
that at the commandment of the Lord, Fly from idolatry; Go out of Babel, my
people. 1. Tim. 6.3.4.5. Matthew. 7.15. Acts 19. and 8.9. 1. Cor. 10.14. 2. Cor.
5.14.15.16.17.18. Hosea 4.15. Rev. 18.4.

Now after you have assigned the mutations of our Religion since Christ and his
Apostles (as you think) you gather the whole force of it together, and makes
the stream of your argument to run as strongly as it can upon our Church and
Religion, that the face and form of it might be so washen away, that it be not
known to be a true Church. Your reason then is this. The true Church of Christ
has never failed universally for the space of one day, because our Savior has
promised to be with it to the end of the world. But our Church was never before
Martin Luthers days: therefore it is not the true Church of Christ.

As to your proposition, if ye take failing for erring in matters of doctrine,
then I deny your proposition; for I hope I have proved sufficiently before,
that the Church both may err and has erred in all ages. But if you take
failing to be utterly abolished and rooted out of the face of the earth, then I
grant your proposition, that God has ever a Church, the Church of his elect,
with whom he will be to the end of the world. And as to your assumption, that
our Church was never before Martin Luthers days, I deny it. Let us see how ye
prove it. There was none (say ye) before his days, neither visible nor
invisible that professed his Religion. But how do ye prove that, for that is
still denied to you? For if your Religion has the Old and New Testament to
bear witness to it, and Jesus Christ to be the author of it in every point, (as
shall be made manifest by the grace of God) then I say whosoever they were from
the beginning of the world to this day, visible or invisible, that professed
the true Jesus, the true Savior, his true doctrine and Sacraments wherein
Religion stands, they are our predecessors, and are of our profession and
Religion: so then ye should first (if ye had gone squarely to work) have
disproved the heads of our Religion, not to have their warrant from the tables
of Christ's Testament, ere ye had concluded that we had none of our profession
and Religion before Martin Luther. And this is the point you should have begun
at, for it is not the Church that makes the Religion, but the Religion that
makes the Church. Have we a warrant out of the Word of God for our Religion,
then are we the true Church, and the successors of all them who ever from the
beginning of the world have professed the same. Have we not this warrant then,
I grant you we have no true Church. So there is the point of our controversy,
whither our doctrine be from God, out of his Word, or not? But how prove ye
that Martin Luther had none of his profession before him?

First, you gathered upon the former things that all the true Churches said
against him, and that he departed from them: unto the which I answered before,
that these was not the true Church, but only so many of every Nation who was
deceived by your doctrine, and whereof the Lord did cure a great many by his
ministry, and by the ministry of others whom the Lord did stir up since, so
that neither did the true Church who saw the truth, speak against, nor yet did
he depart from their society.

Next, as the Lord had a true Church in Israel in the time of Elias, even these
who did not bow their knee to Baal, 1. Kings 19 10.18. who was neither known to
Elias the Prophet, nor yet to the persecuters: so did the Lord in the midst of
your darkness and Idolatry, reserve to himself a true Church, even these
hundred forty and four thousand which John saw standing with the Lamb on mount
Sion. Rev. 14 1. who did not defile themselves with your Idolatry, and did not
worship the beast, and receive his mark: which suppose neither ye nor we had
known, yet the Lord did reserve them as he promised.

Thirdly, I say Martin Luther had sundry who professed his Religion immediately
before him, who was even known to the world, as I shall prove afterward.

Your next proof is taken from a testimony of one of our own Writers, where ye
allege that it is written of Martin Luther and Zuinglius, that they were the
first that came to the knowledge of the Gospel. I say ye are not faithful in
citing of this testimony for it says not that they were the first that came to
the knowledge of the Gospel, but these are the words, That it was an easy
thing to them (meaning of your Church) to devise against us (meaning the
English Protestants, as ye call them) these cursed speeches, when Martin Luther
and Zuinglius first came to the Gospel. The Latin words are cum Martinus Luther
and Zuinglius primum accessissent ad Evangelium. So it says not, that they
were the first that came to the Gospel, but that it was easy to you to spew
out cursed speeches when they came first to the Gospel. So that this word
primum, that is, first, is not in comparison with them that knew the Gospel
before, but in comparison with that time in the which they themselves knew not
the Gospel. It is an adverb of time, and you take it for an adjective noun. But
there is a vail over your eyes, that ye can neither see what we or your selves
writes. So then to conclud, seeing the Religion which Martin Luther taught,
has the warrant from Christ's Testament; and seeing all that ever professed the
true Religion that has Christ to be the author of it in his Scripture, visible
or invisible, are his predecessors: Therefore the Religion which Martin Luther
taught was the true Religion. And seeing your Religion has not Christ to be
the author of it in his latter Testament, but is that apostasy and defection,
that Antichristian Kingdom that was fore-spoken of in the Scripture: Therefore
I conclud, that your Church and Religion which he oppugned, is not the true
Church and Religion, but that Antichristian Kingdom. And this for the first
part of your objection. Now we come to the second.

M. Gilbert Brown.
As for the other part of the objection which he alleges to be ours; that is,
that our Religion was never said against, we say not so: for why all heretics,
and others infected with false doctrine, have ever said against the same,
almost at all times. For how soon that Christ our Savior planted the truth, the
Devil immediately sew popple in the same, according to the parable set down in
S. Matthew.

M. John Welsch his Reply.
I come now to that part which ye say is untruly alleged of you, which moved
you to say, that either I knew not your proofs, or if I knew them, that I
altered the same that I might the better oppugn my own invention. Of my
knowledge of your proofs, I will speak nothing. But let us see whither this be
my invention or not, or rather your own proof. You, for the confirmation of the
truth of your Church and Religion, brought in this as a proof, that I, nor no
Minister in Scotland, was able to assign the true Church that spoke against it.
Either then ye prove nothing, or else this must be one of your proofs, because
it was never spoken against by a true Church. Now compare these words with
mine, and see whither I speak ignorantly or untruly of your proofs. I said,
that ye affirmed your Religion to be true, because it was never spoken against.
Here our words are one, except this that ye add (be a true Church.) I
understand the same; and therefore I gave the instances: first, of Christ and
his Apostles: next, of the primitive Church: thirdly, of these that lived in
Popery, which spoke against your Religion: all which I appeal your conscience,
whither think ye that I judge them a true Church or not? Now in that ye expound
it otherwise of heretics, this is neither my words nor meaning, but your own
invention. So that by this it may appear, that either ye have not understood my
words alleging your objection, or else ye have altered the meaning of the
same, that ye might the more easily answer to your own inventions, and gainsay
my words.

M. John Welsch his Answer to the objection.
Your Religion of the Roman Church was never instistituted, nor preached,
neither by Christ, nor by his Apostles, as I offer me to prove by their
writings: which is the only touchstone whereby all Religion should be and must
be tried.

M. Gilbert Brown.
I think in this M. John takes upon him an impossibility; for it is said that
it is impossible to prove a negative proposition, except it be set down in the
Word of God, which is of authority: and that I am sure he cannot find, because
Papistry by him is not so old as the Word of God is. But in the mean time M.
John proves nothing. He offers very fair, and when ever he proves any thing
contrary to us, with Gods grace he shall get an answer. And note here, that M.
John can say nothing to our argument, for to it he gives no answer.

M. John Welsch his Reply.
In your answer to this Section: First, ye think it impossible, because of the
form of it. Next, ye say it is but an offer, and I prove nothing. Thirdly, that
I answer nothing to your argument, nor can answer nothing. Now of all these in
order. And first to the form: ye think it impossible to prove, because it is a
negative proposition. Is not this a negative proposition, that the Popes of
Rome are not the Antichrist? You cannot deny it. Again, I ask is this sentence
to be found in the whole Scripture? I suppose ye will never be able to find it.
Then, I say, if it be true that ye say, then ye your self in your book, and
this your answer, and Bellarmin lib. 3. de Romans Pont. and Sanderus 40.
demonstrations, and all the rest of you that takes in hand to prove the Pope
not to be the Antichrist, takes in hand, in your judgment, an impossibility
(and so do you indeed; not because it is a negative proposition, but because he
is the Antichrist in very truth.) What would the Pope your head think of you,
if he heard you say so? Certainly, I think he would not inrol your name among
the defenders of his Catholic faith, whereof this is the foundation.

Secondly, is there not many formal syllogisms that have the proposition or
assumption negatives; and will you say they cannot be proved if the matter be
true, because they are negatives? What is this but to raise the foundation of
Logic and Raison? Logic is not Rhetoric, and Physic is not Logic: both
these are negative propositions, and I suppose neither of them are so found in
the Scripture; and will you say that it is impossible to prove them, because
they are negatives? What you mean by this, I understand not, unless you do
(...), strive about words, prove and improve, forbidden by the Apostle, 2. Tim.
2.14.

Thirdly, ye except these negative propositions which are set down in the Word
of God, which has authority, as ye say, I assume. But your Religion in
substance is condemned in the Word of God: therefore by your own confession, it
may be proved, suppose it be negative. For Nazianzen says, lib. 5. de
Theologia, That these sentences that are collected out of the Scripture by a
necessary consequence, are of the same truth and authority with these sentences
that are expressly set down in the Scripture. And whereas ye say Papistrie by me
is not so old as the Scripture, I grant that. What then? Therefore it is not
condemned in the Scripture. I deny that. For Antichrist and his Kingdom are not
so old as the Scripture, and yet the Scripture condemned it. For not only
condemns it present heresies, but also the heresies that was to come. And
seeing Papistrie is that Antichristian Religion, as shall be made manifest, by
Gods grace: therefore it has the express condemnation of it in the Word of God
The form therefore of it, no ways will make it impossible to be proved. As for
the next thing that I prove nothing bu offers very fair. I answer, it was not
my purpose then, but I hope ye shall have a proof now of that which I offered
then. As to the third then, that I can say nothing to your argument, which ye
would h^ve the Reader to mark. When I read this, I marked this that ye would
earnestly have the Reader persuaded of the invincibleness of your argument, and
my inability to answer. But what bring ye with you to persuade him of the same?
Your reason is, because I have not answered it. Will this follow, I have not
(suppose it were so as ye say) therefore I cannot? It will not follow, I have
not answered, I cannot answer to it. But as you have a new Theology, so have
you a new Logic. But said I nothing to your argument? What is not answered
sufficiently in the same? Your argument was the antiquity of your Religion, and
continuance of it from Christ by a lineal succession never interrupted, etc.
and the novelty of ours. My answer was: Yours was not institut by Christ, nor
his Apostles in his Scripture, as ours was; and yours was gainsaid in the
chief points, by the testimonies of the Fathers the first six hundred years,
and the principal points of our Religion confirmed by sundry of their
testimonies

Thirdly, yours was that Antichristian apostasy that the Scripture fore told
should come, and in the hight of your tyranny and Idolatry was gainsaid by
many before Martin Luther, and ours was professed by sundry before him, whose
names I set down: all which I offered to prove, and now shall do, by Gods grace.
Now you say this is no answer. But is that no answer that cuts the very throat
of your Religion (if it be verified) and invalidities your argument, that it do
never stand up to under-prop your Religion again? For that Religion which is
not instituted by Christ in the Scripture, whose main foundations is gainsaid
by the testimonies of sundry of the Fathers of the first 600. year, which is
Antichristian, and which was gainsaid by the Saints that they persecuted and
slew, has not the continuance from Christ by a lineal succession never
interrupted, nor spoken against by a true Church till Martin Luthers days. This
I am sure ye will not deny. But your Religion is such as I offered then to
prove, and now have in some points, and shall in other some points by Gods
grace. The which if it be verified, then I hope ye will not deny, but that your
Religion has neither antiquity, continuance, nor succession from Christ till
Martin Luthers days. And that Religion cannot be newly forged and invented
since Martin Luthers days, which has the warrant and institution of it in the
Scripture, etc. This you cannot deny. But our Religion is such, as then I
offered to prove, and now have done in some points, and shall do in other some
points, by Gods grace. Therefore our Religion cannot be newly forged and
invented, etc. but is the only true Religion. So that this answer, if it be
proved, does sufficiently vindicat our Religion from novelty. Now if this be no
answer to your argument, then I say no more, but ye will answer it the sooner.
And because ye formed your own argument your self in your answer to me, and I
have answered to it else, therefore I will now insist no further upon it. And
as for your lineal succession of Bishops, it will come in question afterward,
therefore I omit it now.

SECTION V. Concerning the Judge of Controversies, namely whither GOD speaking
in the Scripture be Judge of Controversies?
Master Gilbert Brown.
AS for the written Word, it is true that it is a most faithful witness (and it
be not corrupted) to Christ and his Church, as our Savior testifies himself,
John 5.39. of the which opinion there is sundry Protestants, chiefly young
Merchiston, in his discourse upon the Revelation, in the 21. proposition, and
other places, 2. Cor. 3.6. John 6.63. But that it ought to be Judge to decide
all controversies in Religion, M. John has no Scripture for the same. It is
the holy Ghost that must be Judge, and the holy Writ must bear witness thereto.
For this cause the holy Ghost was given to the Church by the Father and the
Son, that he might teach it all truth, John 14.25.26. This holy Ghost gives
judgment by the Pastors of the true Church, as he did by the Apostles and
Priests at the Council of Jerusalem. It has pleased the holy Ghost, and us
(says the Apostle, Acts 15.19.28.) and so he has ever done since the
beginning of the Church, when it was troubled with heresies and false doctrine,
as the Councils of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus and Chalcedon.

M. John Welsch his Reply.
You first here decline the Scripture as Judge, to decide all controversies in
Religion. And you are not the first that have done this, but all your Roman
Clergy with you. And suppose there were not another thing to make the
consciences of men suspect your Religion that it is not found in the book of
God, yet this is a great presumption that ye give out of it your selves. For
what may all men think of the same? but that if ye were persuaded in your
conscience to justify your Religion to be from Jesus Christ in his written
Word, ye would never decline the judicatorie of it: and the declining of the
same, is an evident demonstration that ye are privy to your selves in your own
consciences that it is not from God in his written Word. But wherefore say I
that ye are privy to your selves of this? Ye have made it known to the world by
your confession in your own books, that many of the chief points of your
Religion controverted between you and us, which ye maintain, have not their
original beginning, nor authors in the Scriptures, but in your unwritten
traditions. So Petrus a Soto a Papist of great name confessed. He calls all
these observations Apostolic traditions, whose beginning, principium, origo
and author, cannot be found in the whole Scriptures, in his book against
Brentius. And then he reckons out a number of the chief and principal heads of
their Religion, saying, Of the which sort are the oblation of the sacrifice of
the altar, the invocation or prayers to Saints, the prayer for the dead, the
supremacy of the Pope of Rome, the consecration of the water in baptism, the
whole sacraments of orders, matrimony, penance, confirmation and extreme
unction, the merits of works, the necessity of satisfaction the numbering over
the sins to the Priest. Canisius a great Papist, in his Catechism, cap. 5. de
praeceptis Ecclesiae says, That the worshipping of images, the set fastes, and
the forty days of Lent, and all that are done in the sacrifice of the Mass,
prayers and oblations for the dead, and alia, and others, he says, all these
are traditions, because they are such that they cannot be defended by the
Scripture. And Lindanus another great defender of your Romish faith and
Religion, he reckons out for Traditions, lib 4. Panopliae, cap. 100. and in
fine illius libri, tab. 6. that there are seven Sacraments, the consecration of
the water and oil in Baptism; the real presence of Christ's flesh and blood in
the Sacrament, Communion under one kind, that the Lords Supper is a sacrifice,
that it should be kept and adored, private Masses, Confession of sins to the
Priests, satisfactions, pardons, Purgatory, and that Peter was in Rome.
Martinus Peresius another Papist, numbers the single life of Priests, among the
unwritten traditions. The truth is strong, that has so far glanced in the
consciences of some of you, and has opened your mouths to confess and to set
it down in writ to the world, that the principal heads of your Religion, yea
the very foundation and ground of it, (as the supremacy of your Popes, and the
sacrifice of your Mass, and the rest) are unwritten traditions which have not
the beginning, nor original, nor authority in the Lords written Word; and
which cannot be defended by the same, as some of your selves have confessed. So
it is no wonder, suppose ye refuse to have the controversies of Religion
decided by the same. Let the Reader now judge what he may think of your
Religion, that has not God in his Scripture in the principal and main
foundations thereof (as some of your selves have confessed) to be the author
and beginner thereof. So what needs any further proof against their Religion?
Out of their own mouths the falsehood of their Religion is convicted. This
therefore was the true cause wherefore ye refused to have the controversies of
Religion decided by the Scripture. And for this cause also has your Church
heaped up so many false calumnies, accusations, and blasphemies against the
same, calling it obscure, Hosius lib. 3. de authorit. and contra script.
Andradius lib. 2. orthod. explic. Lindanus in Panoplia sua, lib. 3. cap. 6.
darksome, doubtsome Bellarm. de verbo Dei, lib. 4. cap. 4.
not necessary, but only profitable, imperfect, Juel page 521. defens. Apolog.
and Lodovicus a canon.
a dead ink, a dumb and dead thing, Pigius controv. 3. de Ecclesia.
dumb Judges, Eckius.
a black Gospel, an inky Divinity, Pigius hierarch. lib. 3. cap. 3.
a nose of wax that may be drawn every way, Fox page 804.
containing in them diverse erroneous and damnable opinions, Hermannus a Papist.
which were of no greater authority then the fables of Asop, without the
approbation of the Church, and by the Pope Leo the 10. ex Juel. defen. Apolog.
page 273.
Pope himself, a fable of Christ. And for this cause also, did they hide it up
in an unknown language, forbidding the translating of it in the vulgar
language, and the reading of it by the people in their mother tongue, lest they
should have perceived the falsehood of their Religion, and so it should have
lost the credit at their hands. So ye have been wise in your generation: Sed
veritas tandem vincet: but the truth shall overcome at the last.

You grant it to be a witness, but yet you deal subtly, while as ye put in an
exception, if it be not corrupted. For if you be of that mind with your Church,
and especially with Canus lib. 3. cap. 13. de locis Theologicis. Lindanus lib.
1. cap. 11. de Optimo Genere interpret. and the College of Rhemes, you think
the Hebrew and Greek fountains of the Scripture to be corrupted. And therefore
it is decreed in the Council of Trent, the old Latin vulgar translation to be
authentic, which notwithstanding by the confession of some Papists, as
Andradius, Pagnin, and Arias Montanus, it has missed the sense and meaning of
the holy Ghost sometimes. So you not only put the Lord in his Scripture out of
the bench, that he should not judge and give out the sentence of doom against
your doctrine, but by this exception also ye remove him from the bar, that his
testimony in the Hebrew and Greek fountains against you, should have no credit.
Let all men judge now what prejudice ye give against your own Religion, when as
ye will not admit the Lord in his Word in the Hebrew and Greek fountains,
neither Judge nor witness.

But you say, I have no Scripture for me, that the Scripture ought to be Judge.
What will ye say then to Jesus Christ in John 12.48. speaking to such as ye
are, He that refuses me, and receives not my words, has one that judges
him; the word that I have spoken, it shall judge him in the last day. Unless now
ye be a man of perdition, ye must confess that the Word of Jesus Christ,
(whereof so much is written as may make a man believe, and by believing to get
eternal life) is Judge and judges presently, and shall judge also in the latter
day. Therefore the Apostle says, That God shall judge the secrets of men's
hearts by Jesus Christ, according to his Gospel. So the Gospel shall be the rule
of that great judgment in that great day, and so is it the rule of his worship
while we are in the way to that judgment. Suppose you now decline the
judicatorie of the same here, because in your conscience ye know, and your own
mouths have confessed it, that ye are not able to justify your Religion
thereby, yet nill ye will ye, ye shall be judged by the same Word in the last
day. But whom will ye have to be your Judge? Ye say, the holy Ghost. Bellarmin
says, that we and your Church agrees in that, that the holy Ghost should be
supreme Judge of all controversies, lib. 3. de verbi interpret, cap. 3. But is
not the Scripture the holy Ghosts own infallible voice and breath? So then when
the Scripture is Judge, the holy Ghost is Judge, because the Scripture is the
immediate voice of the holy Ghost; and the holy Ghost has given out, and gives
out his judgment in all controversies of Religion, in, and by the Scripture:
and the holy Ghost illuminats the eyes of those that are foreordained to life,
to see the truth in the Scripture, 2. Tim. 3.16. Romans 10.17. and works in their
heart faith to apprehend it, and believe it, and forms a spiritual judgment
in their hearts to try and judge; for the spiritual man judges all things, 1.
Cor. 2.15. And all this he works by the means of the Scripture: for it is the
only means and instrument whereby the holy Ghost works faith in our hearts.
Thus I reason therefore: He only can be Judge in controversies of Religion,
whose authority is such that none may appeal from the same, whose judgment is
infallible true, who will not be partial, nor favor parties: and who is able to
convict and persuade the conscience of the truth, and make the party to rest in
the same. But only the holy Ghost, in and by the Scripture, has these
proprieties and no other: Therefore the holy Ghost, in and by the Scripture, is
only Judge.

And whereas you say, that the holy Writ must bear witn ss to it: What will you
say then to all the chief points of your Religion almost, which the learned and
great defenders of your faith, before cited, have confessed, are unwritten
traditions, which have not their beginning nor authority from the Scripture,
nor cannot be defended by the same? Upon the which I reason thus: That doctrine
is not the holy Ghosts, which the Scripture bears not witness to: this ye say
your self; for ye say, The Scripture must bear witness to it. But all the chief
points almost of your Religion, as the supremacy of the Pope, the sacrifice of
the Mass, invocation of Saints, the five bastard Sacraments, the worshipping of
Images, Transubstantiation, Communion under one kind, Satisfactions, Pardons,
Purgatory, Merits of works, etc. have not their authority from the Scripture,
nor cannot be defended by the same, as your own Catholics (as ye call them)
testifies: Therefore your Doctrine and Religion is not the holy Ghosts, and
that by your own testimony. Now truly M. Gilbert, I fear ye lose your style,
if you defend your Religion no better then this.

And whereas you say, That the holy Ghost gives out his judgment by the
Pastors of the true Church: I grant indeed that the Pastors gives out public
sentence in controversies of Religion, because they are the Lords witnesses,
messengers, and mouths to testify, proclaim, interpret and discern his truth
from falsehood. But first, the rule of this their judgment, should be the Word
of God, unto the which they are bound in all their testimonies and judgments;
from the which if their judgments swerve but an inch-broad, they are not the
judgments of the holy Ghost: so that all their decreets and determinations in
the worship of God, and man his salvation, should only be received
accordingly as they agree or dissent from the same. For the Apostle pronounces
him accursed, suppose he were an Angel, that would preach another Gospel then
that which he preached, Gal. 1 8. And he preached nothing but out of the
Scripture, Acts 26.22. But your Roman Church by the contrary, says, That their
decreets and sentences should be taken without all trial and examination,
because whatsoever they decree (say they) in manners or doctrine, whither they
be comprehended in the Scripture or not, they cannot err. Bellar. de Eccles
lib. 1. de Consil. cap. 18. and lib. 3. c. 14.

Next, if it be asked of you whom ye judge to be the Pastors of the true
Church? You will answer (as ye do) that your Church is the only true Church,
and your Bishops and Popes the only true Pastors, so that they only must be the
Judge to end all controversies. And Bellarmin is plain in this: for he says,
lib 3. de verbi interpret. cap. 5. and 9. and lib. 4, de Romans Pont. c. 2. The
Pope is chief Judge in all controversies in Religion, either he himself alone,
or with his Council; and that in his judgment and sentence all men should
rest, and he should be obediently heard of all the faithful, in all matters of
controversy, whether he can err or not. And their Canon Law has decreeted,
That no man should rebuke him, suppose he should carry with him innumerable
souls to hell. And they teach that their decreets should not be examined of any
whither they be agreeable to the Scripture or not: but that they should be
received as the express Word of God, and the Gospel, Did. 40. cap. Si Papa,
Bellar. lib. 1. de Council. cap. 18. and Rhemist. annotat. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. v.
12. and Joannes Maria verractus editus anno 1561. and Hosius lib. de express.
verb. Dei, page 97.

But first, judge thou, Reader, in what suspicion they have their Religion in
their own hearts: They have declined the holy Ghost speaking in the Scripture,
and that not only as Judge, but in the authentic Greek and Hebrew as witness.
So their Religion cannot stand, if the Lord be either as Judge in his Scripture
to give out sentence of it, or as witness in the authentic copies, to hold his
hand at the bar, and depone against it. Now whom would they have as Judges?
Their own Pastors, and the Pope, and all their determinations to be received
without a trial, as the Gospel and express Word of God; as though their
Religion could not be justified, unless the Fathers, and forgers thereof, the
Popes and Bishops of Rome, were set on the bench to be Judges thereof. Now what
an unrighteous thing is this, both to be party and Judge? For the chief
controversy is of themselves, whither he be the Antichrist, or not? And his
Ministers and Church Antichristian, or not? But what show of reason can you
have for this? The Prince of life, the Son of God, who is the righteous Judge
of the whole world, in that great controversy wherein it is called in
question, whether he was the Messiah, or not, desired not to be the Judge: For
he said, If I testify of my self (much more if I judge of my self) my
testimony is not true, John 3.31. but referred this controversy to the
Scripture, saying, Search the Scriptures, etc. John 5.32. And yet you that are
but flesh and blood, dust and ashes, yea monsters and incarnat Devils (as your
own Writers and Councils have testified of some of your Popes) who may err, and
have been heretics (as some of your Popes have been, and that by your own
testimonies) you will not only bear witness of your selves, but also be Judges
in the controversies of your selves, rejecting the judgment of the holy Ghost
in the Scripture. All men, says the Apostle, are liars. How then shall I
certainly know but they may lie? How shall my conscience rest in their
judgment? Shall I have no better warrant for my salvation, then the testimonies
of your Bishops and Popes, who are but men, and so may lie; who are party, and
so never will condemn themselves, and who of all men have most foully erred?
What is this but to make the voice of your Bishops and Popes of greater
authority then the voice of God in his Scripture? For seeing it is the sense
of the Scripture that is called in controversy, and the sense of the
Scripture, is the Scripture it self: And your doctrine is, that I must embrace
such and such interpretations of the Scripture that are called in controversy,
and my conscience must rest in the same, without further trial, because he has
so decreed it. What is this, but not only to make him equal to the Lord? (For
God only has that privilege to be believed, because he so speaks; man's
testimony so far only is to be credited, as it may be warranted by the
Scripture:) but also to prefer his authority to the voice of God in his
Scripture, seeing he is Judge of the same; and not that only, but to hang my
salvation upon his voice and testimony? And seeing ye will have them Judges,
what is the cause that their Canons, Laws and determinations, are not as
authentic as the Scripture, and insert in the Canon of the Scripture? But let
us see your reasons.

First, you say, That the holy Ghost was given to the Church by the Father and
the Son, that he might teach it all truth. I grant this, that the holy Ghost is
given to every one of the elect, as well Pastor as people, to lead them in all
truth, in so far as may bring them to salvation. And yet ye will not make every
one of them Judges: next, every one of the elect may err, notwithstanding of
this promise, suppose not totally and finally, and therefore cannot be Judges
of Religion.

Secondly, you allege the example of the Council of the Apostles and Elders.
It is true in that controversy that arose among the Christians concerning the
observing of the ceremonies of the law of Moses, that the Apostles and Elders
with the whole Church after reasoning defined the same, and writes the same to
be observed by the Disciples every where: but first they were Apostles, and
was infallibly governed by Gods Spirit, that they could not err in teaching and
writing: but your Pastors are not Apostles, and may err. Next, they assemble
with the Elders and the whole Church, and all with one accord defines, Acts
15.12.22.23. You in your Council excludes all, except your Bishops, to be
ordinary Judges, to give out judgment, and your Popes, neither Elder nor
brethren having power of voting with you, Bellarm. lib. 1. de Council. cap. 1.
Thirdly, they define according to the Scripture, saying, As it is written, etc.
Act. 15.15. This controversy to make us to understand, if we will not be more
then blind, that this rule should be followed in all Councils to determine in
controversies according to the Scripture. Upon the which I reason, if the
Apostles who had that high measure of Gods Spirit which never man had since, so
that in writing and teaching they could not err; if they, I say, did determine
the controversies of Religion according to the Scripture, how much more then
are all Pastors since, who may err both severally and jointly together in a
Council, bound to follow the same rule? And whereas ye call their Elders,
Priests; you style them, not as the holy Ghost has styled them there, so there
they are called (...); that is Elders, and not (...). that is sacrificing
Priests, as ye suppone.

Your third reason is, the practice and custom of the Church in deciding the
controversies of Religion in Councils: we grant, that this is a very commodious
mean to search and find out the truth by the Scripture: For first, the more
they are that seek the truth, it is the more easily found. Next, the consent of
many in determining a truth, will be of greater authority to repress heretics,
then if it were agreed upon only by a few. But yet they should determine
nothing but that which is warranted by the Scripture; and their determinations
only in so far forth to be received as is agreeable to the same. And this we
grant has been done in the Council of the primitive Church. And therefore the
Emperor Constantine, speaking to the Fathers of the Council of Nice, says,
Sunt libri Prophetici and Apostolici qui aperte quid credendum sit, docent,
etc. That is, there are the Books of the Prophets and Apostles, who teaches
plainly what we should believe. All contention therefore laid aside, let us
take the sovereign decision of these things which are called in controversy,
out of the Scriptures which are inspired by God. And this we grant, and this we
require. But, that Councils ought to determine any thing of their own authority
in matters of Religion which binds the conscience, without the warrant of the
Word, that we deny.

Master Gilbert Brown.
It is a wonder that M. John will refer any thing to the written Word, seeing
that he and his have no warrant that the same is the Word of God, but by the
authority of the Roman or Papist Church. For understand, there was no Church
worthy of credit immediately before Luther, but that Church.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
You wonder that I refer any thing to the Scripture. But what a wonder is this
that ye are so far blinded of God, that you think that a wonder in me which
Abraham has done, which the Prophets have done, which our Savior and his
Apostles have done, and which the Fathers have done (for all these have
referred the infallible testimony and decision of the will of God concerning
his worship unto the Scriptures, Luke 16 29. John 5 39. Acts 26.22. Romans 12.
and 16.26. 2. Tim. 3.16 2. Pet. 1.10. Rev. 1 3. cap. ult.) yea, which your self
also has done, for ye make it a witness. But what has moved you to think this
a wonder in me, which so many, and your self also have done before me? Because,
say ye, that he and his (that is, our Church) have no warrant that it is the
Word of God, but by the authority of the Roman or Papist Church. I grant
indeed, that you and your Church are plunged in this blindness and misery,
that all the warrant that you have not only of the Scriptures themselves, that
they are inspired of God, but also of all your doctrine and Religion, is the
testimony of your Roman Church; that is, of your Pope and Clergy (for so ye
interpret the Church.) So Bellarmin grants, de Sacr. lib. 2. cap. 25. That all
the certainty of all doctrine depends upon the authority of the present Church
(meaning the Pope and his Clergy.) And Stapleton says, lib. 1 contra Whitak.
de author. script. cap. 10. That it is no absurd thing not to believe God, but
for the testimony of the Church. Pigius says, That it is not needful to
believe all that Matthew and John writ in their Gospels to be true, because
that they might fail in memory, and lie as all men may do, Ecclesiast. hierar.
lib. 1. cap. 2. And Hermannus says, That the Scripture would be of no more
authority then the fables of Esop, were not the testimony of the Church. And so
blind and miserable must you be that hangs the certainty of all Religion, and
of man his salvation, upon so small a thread as the testimony of your Popes and
Clergy. What peace in conscience can any man have that professes your Religion,
which teaches that the certainty and warrant of all the doctrine in the
Scripture, and the Scripture it self, that they are of God, but the testimony
of your Popes and Clergy? What is it to expone the certainty of the Lords
Scripture, and of all Religion comprehended in the same, to the mocking and
derision of the wicked, if this be not? Yea, is not this to prefer the voice
and authority of your Popes and Clergy to the voice of God himself? For what
is the testimony of your Church, but the testimony of men? And is not the
Scripture the testimony and voice of God himself? Do ye not therefore lift up
the authority of your Church; that is, your Popes and Clergy, above the
authority of God in his Word, which (as you say) that there is no other
warrant of the Divinity of the Scripture, but only the testimony of your
Church? But God be thanked in Christ Jesus, who has delivered us from this
blindness: for we have other warrants, whereupon the certainty of our
salvation, and the Divinity of the Scripture depends, then by the testimony
of the true Church, much less the testimony of your Church which is
Antichristian, and given over of God to believe lies, and so worthy of no
credit. But how prove ye it? Ye say there was no other Church immediately before
Luther, but that of yours, which was worthy of credit. Whereunto I answer:
first, that is false: for there was a true Church immediately before him which
ye persecuted, as I have proved else where. Next, I say, your argument will not
follow: there was no other Church immediately before him, etc. Ergo, we have no
other warrant that the Scripture is the written Word of God. For we have also
the testimony of the Church of the Jews concerning the Old Testament, and of
the primitive Church in all ages, concerning both the Old and New Testament;
which are not only other warrants then the testimonies of your Roman Church,
but also worthy of more credit. Next, I say, we have many more principal, and
more effectual warrants that the Scripture is of God, then the testimony of the
Church, either past or present: As first, the testimony of the holy Ghost,
crying, testifying, and sealing up in all consciences of the godly, not only
the truth of the doctrine contained in them, but also the Divinity of the
Scripture, which Stapleton lib. 1. de authorit. script. cap. 1.6.7. denies not;
and therefore the Scripture says, That the Spirit (that is, the holy Ghost)
hears witness that the Spirit (that it is the doctrine) is truth. 1. John 5 6.

Secondly, the testimony of the Scripture it self warranting and testifying of
it self, the whole Scripture is inspired of God. 2. Tim. 3.16. The Old
Testament warranted both by the testimony of its self, the histories and
prophesies testifying of the books of Moses, and also by the testimony of the
New Testament, both in general, 2. Pet. 1.19 Luke 24.44. and 16 29 John 5.39.
and also in particular, as the books of Moses, Matthew. 1.5. and 19.7. and 22.
John 3.14. and the historical books, as the history of the Queen of Saba,
Matthew. 12. and of the widow of Sarepta, Luke 4. and of the Psalms in sundry
places, Acts 2. and 13. and of sundry of the books of the Old Testament, Heb.
11. and Ruth also, Matthew. 1. and out of Isaiah, Ezechiel, and Jeremy, many
testimonies are cited, and out of the Books of the small Prophets. Acts 7.42.
And such like the New Testament has the confirmation of it out of the Old
Testament: For whatsoever thing were prophesied in the Old Testament concerning
the Messiah, are fulfilled in the New Testament: so if the Old Testament has
authority, the New Testament also has authority. And such like Peter by his
testimony confirms the Epistles of Paul to be the written Word of God.
Thirdly, the majesty of the doctrine which shines in it: the simplicity,
purity, and heavenliness of the speech therein, which is not to be found in
any other writings whatsoever: the ancientness and antiquity of them, as the
Books of Moses, far ancienter then any other writing. The accomplishment of the
Prophesies and Oracles in them, as they were foretold: their miracles and
wonders whereof they testify: the testimonies of the holy Martyrs that shed
their blood in the defense of the truth of them: their wonderful preservation,
notwithstanding of the rage and cruelty of sundry tyrants who sought them out
most diligently to have destroyed them, all testifying of the Divinity of the
holy Scripture. So then to conclud this, seeing we have the testimony of Gods
Spirit, sealing up the truth of them in our hearts, and the testimony of the
Scripture it self, testifying of its self so many manner of ways; and sundry
other arguments out of the Scripture it self, and the testimony of the Church
in all ages, all warranting to us the Divinity of the holy Scripture, I cannot
but wonder at the unsearchable judgment of God, in blinding you so far, that
ye have set it down in writ, that we have no other warrant of the holy
Scripture, but the authority of your Church.

SECTION VI. Concerning the necessity of Baptism to Infants.
Master Gilbert Brown.
ANd albeit here it were not necessary to me to prove any heads of our Religion
by the Word of God, because M. John has promised to improve the same by the
Word, which he is no ways able to perform: yet to satisfy the Christian
Reader, and that he may know that the Word of God is only on our side, and with
us, so that their exposition and notes be taken from the same. I will set down,
God willing, some heads for examples cause, that that same doctrine which we
teach and practice, is the same that our Savior and his Apostles preached
before, and is written in the same that he calls the touchstone.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
Howsoever ye say this, M. Gilbert, that that doctrine which ye teach and
practice in your Church, is that same which our Savior and his Apostles teached
before, and is written in the Scripture, yet in very truth there is nothing
less in your conscience. For if you and your Roman Church were so persuaded,
wherefore then should ye have declined to have it tried by the same? And
wherefore have some of your own chief pillars and defenders of your Roman
Religion who knows the certainty of the same; wherefore, I say, would they
have proclaimed it by writ unto the world, that the most part and the principal
heads of their Religion, are unwritten traditions, which have neither their
original, beginning, nor authority in the Scripture, nor cannot be defended by
the same? And wherefore would your Roman Church have heapt up so many false
accusations and blasphemies against the same? And wherefore, last of all, would
ye have set up your Pope and his Bishops to be supreme and sovereign Judge over
the same, as you do? But this you do, because you know that if ye rejected the
Scripture, as far in word as ye do in deed, the consciences of the poor people
would at the last withdraw themselves from under your tyranny, and would go out
of your fellowship for the safety of their souls: so under the cloak and
pretense of the Scripture, ye keep them in your communion. And surely, were
not for this cause only, you would regard no more of the testimony of the
Scripture, then of the testimony of the fables of Esop. For, the chief
authority, and all the surety and certainty of all Religion with you, as
Bellarmin de sacr. lib. 2. cap. 25. and Stapleton lib. 1. cont. Whitaker, cap.
10. confesses, is (not the testimony of the Scripture) but the authority of
your own Church. So I assure thee, Reader, it is but for a show that they bring
forth the Scripture to prove the heads of their Religion. Let the matter
therefore be tried betwixt us, by these examples which ye set down here.

M. Gilbert Brown.
1. We say with Saint Augustine, Epist. 28. ad Hier. that the Sacrament of
Baptism is so necessary to infants, that they cannot come to heaven without the
same, which is contrary to their negative says, where they call it the Popes
cruel judgment against infants departing without the Sacrament. First, I say,
that Christ taught the same doctrine, in these words, Except a man be born
again of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter in the Kingdom of God, John
3.5. We say this is spoken properly of the Sacrament of Baptism, because there
is no regeneration of water and the Spirit of God, but in Baptism. The same is
the doctrine of the Apostles also, When they exspected the patience of God,
says S. Peter, in the days of Noe when the Ark was building, in the which few,
that is eight souls, were saved by water: whereunto Baptism being of the like
form now saves you also, 1. Pet. 3.20.21. And S. Paul says, For as many of you
as are baptized in Christ, have put on Christ, Galat 3.27. And Ananias said to
S. Paul, And now what tarriest thou, rise up and be baptized, and wash away thy
sins, invocating his name, Acts 22.17. and 2.38. And S. Paul himself in another
place, Christ has saved us by the washing of regeneration and renovation of
the holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. Romans 6.3.4. 1. Cor. 6.11. Mark 16.16. I think there
is no Christian reader that sees these places, but he must say that Baptism is
most necessary to infants, except he will believe rather the exposition of the
Ministers, then the Word of God.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
First, ye begin at the necessity of the Sacrament of Baptism, whereof ye
affirm that it is so necessary, that infants cannot come to heaven without the
same. As for Baptism, we grant that it is a most effectual seal and pledge of
our ingrafting in Christ Jesus, and of the remission of our sins through his
blood, and regeneration through his Spirit; so that either the neglect or the
contempt of it (because it is the neglect and contempt of the covenant it self,
and of Christ Jesus the foundation of the covenant) is damnable. But that it is
so absolutely necessary to infants, that without it they cannot come to heaven;
to wit, these whom he has predestinat, it being neither neglected nor
contemned, but death preventing the receiving of it: that we allutterly deny as
impious, ungodly, and cruel.

For first, I say, there is none that is in the covenant of grace, and who has
God to be their God, and are holy, that can perish. This you cannot deny. But
the children of the faithful who are of his secret election, are such before
they be baptized. And this I prove, The Lord promised to Abraham, I will be thy
God, and the God of thy seed, Genesis 17.17. And this Peter also testifies, The
promise, says he, is made to you and to your children, Acts 2.39. And the
Apostle says, That the children of the faithful are holy, 1. Cor. 7.14.
Therefore the children of the faithful who are of Gods secret election, suppose
they die without Baptism, do not perish.

Secondly, if Baptism were absolutely necessary to salvation, then the grace of
God were bound to the Sacrament. This cannot be denied But your Master of
Sentences says, that the grace of God is not bound to the Sacraments; and it
is impious so to think, that Gods free grace and salvation is bound to the
instrument.

Thirdly, if Circumcision was not absolutely necessary to salvation in the Old
Testament, then Baptism is not absolutely necessary now, because Circumcision
was as straightly enjoined to them, as Baptism is enjoined to us, and Baptism is
suceeded in the room of the same, but Circumcision is not absolutely necessary.
For Lombardus is rebuked by the Doctors of Paris because he so thought. And
David doubts not to say of his child who died the seventh day, and so before he
was circumcised, I shall go to him, etc. and so he pronounced that he was saved:
and all the time that they were in the wilderness, almost 40 years,
Circumcision was neglected; which plainly shows, that it was not so absolutely
necessary, that salvation could not be obtained without it. Therefore Baptism
is not so absolutely necessary to salvation, as ye suppose: for the grace of God
is of no less force in the New Testament, then it was in the Old.

Fourthlie, we read of sundry that received the holy Ghost before they were
baptized, and seeing the holy Ghost where he is, regenerats to eternal life:
Therefore life eternal is not bound absolutely to Baptism

Fifthlie, what a cross and disturbance is this, that your doctrine brings to
the consciences of all these parents, whose children have been prevented by
death, before they could be offered to be baptized? If they believe your
doctrine, how often will this come in their mind, that their children are
damned? And seeing the infants themselves are not in the cause that they are
not baptized, but their death preventing by Gods providence, or the Parents
neglecting or contemning the same, or persecution, or one impediment or other
hindering, wherefore are ye so cruel to judge them to be damned for that,
whereof themselves are causeless?

And last of all, if ye be acquainted in the Histories of the Church of God in
the first age, ye will find many that delayed to be baptized, until their
latter age; which they would never have done, if they had thought it
simpliciter necessary to salvation, as ye do. And Ambrosius doubts not to say,
That Valentinian wanted not the grace of Baptism, suppose he wanted Baptism it
self: the which he would never have said, if he had thought it absolutely
necessary to salvation. And Bernard says I cannot altogether despair of the
salvation of them who wants Baptism, not through contempt, but only through
impossibility to get it. And in that same place he says; So also if our Savior
Christ for this cause, when he had said, he that believes and is baptized,
shall be saved: did of purpose in repeating the sentence, omit to say: He that
is not baptized, but he that believes not, shall be damned; for he saw that
faith only might suffice to salvation, and without faith nothing can suffice.
Justly then might your Popes sentence and your own be said to be cruel, in our
confession. But how prove ye this doctrine of yours to be Christ's? Ye cite John
3.2. where our Savior says, Except a man be born again, etc. which, say ye, is
properly meant of the Sacrament of Baptism. Upon the which ye infer the
necessity of the same. Whereunto I answer, that interpretation of yours is
false: for our Savior speaks not here of the Sacrament of Baptism: and that for
these reasons.

First, our Savior speaks here generally of all men, and not of infants only,
and therefore he says, Except a man be born, etc. speaking to Nicodemus who
was a man and not an infant, so that if your exposition were true, all men that
died without baptism, and not infants only, are excluded from heaven. But that
is false: for first the good thief was not baptized with water, and yet our
Savior said to him, This night thou shall be with me in paradise. And therefore
our Savior speaks not here of the Sacrament of Baptism: for he speaks of that
new birth by water and the spirit, without the which none can be saved: but
this thief and others, were saved without the Baptism of water: therefore he
speaks not here of it.

Next, our Savior in that place speaks of that new birth by the spirit and
water, which is so absolutely necessary to the salvation of all men, that it
admits no exception. This cannot be denied. But Bellarmin makes two exceptions
against the absolut necessity of Baptism: one of the martyrdom, the other of
true conversion and penance, whereof, says he, either of them supplies the
want of Baptism, lib. 1. de Baptis. cap. 6 Therefore our Savior speaks not here
of the Sacrament of Baptism.

Thirdly, if we will believe Christ Jesus expounding himself, and Scripture
expounding Scripture, I say, by water is not always meant the Sacrament of
Baptism; but the purifying grace of Christ, which is called the water of life;
so our Savior speaks in John 4.11. and 7.38. And in that same sense water is
here added to the spirit, to expound the more sensibly the efficacy of the
Spirit in washing and cleansing us, as fire is added to the Spirit in the third
of Matthew, 11. verse, He will baptize you with the Spirit and with fire; which
is not properly understood of any natural fire, but taken figuratively to
expound more sensibly the force and efficacy of the Spirit, in burning up our
corruption.

Fourthly, what an absurd thing were this which should follow, if your
exposition were true, that for the want of the sprinkling of a little water,
the infants should perish that are in the covenant, seeing they were not the
cause of the want of it.

Further, I say, that suppose Baptism were here meant, yet there is no such
necessity, as ye suppose; for if martyrdom and penance may supply the want
of this water (as Bellarmin confesses) how much more may the holy Ghost supply
the want of the same in infants: and if any thing may supply the want of it,
then it is not so absolutely necessary that all these infants are damned that
wants it.

2. Our Savior speaks as generally and absolutely, Unless you eat the flesh of
the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you, John 6.53. which
ye interpret of the other Sacrament: so that if your interpretation were true,
the Eucharist should be as absolutely necessary to the salvation of infants, as
you say Baptism is. But the first you will not grant. Therefore the other must
also be falfe.

3. If here ye would infer a necessity of Baptism, then I say at that same time
it began to be necessary: for he says not, He that shall not be born again,
etc. but he that is not born, etc. But Bellarmin says. lib. de bapt. cap. 5.
It was not necessary while Christ's death, yet not while the Pentecost fifty
days after his death; therefore it is not like that any necessity of Baptism is
here understood: for it had been good reason that Christ's Baptism which was
ministered while he lived in the flesh, should have been as necessary as the
Apostles Baptism which was ministered afterward But the first was not absolutely
necessary, as Bellarmin testifies, therefore neither is the second.

And last of all, lest ye should say all this is our exposition, the Master of
the Sentences expounding this place, sent. lib. 4. distinct 4. cap. His autem,
who suppose he be of this judgment with you concerning infants departed, yet
he says that this place is to be understood of them who might have been
baptized, but contemned the same: therefore this place imputes no absolut
necessity of it.

As for the rest of the places of Scripture which ye quote, they serve nothing
to prove such an absolut necessity of Baptism, as ye suppose, but only sets
down the effects of the same which are sealed up in the hearts of the believers
by the holy Ghost, as the inward worker, and Baptism as the outward instrument,
as our salvation through the death of Christ. 1. Pet. 3.20.21. Tit. 3.5. Mark
16.16. our union with Christ, Gal. 3.27. and with his death, Romans 6 3.4. and
remission of sins, regeneration, mortification of the old man, Acts 22.17. and
2.38. 1. Cor. 6.11. And therefore Circumcision, in whose room Baptism is
succeeded, it is called the seal of righteousness which is by faith, Romans 4.
Take away therefore your exposition from these places, and there will no such
absolut necessity of Baptism follow here, as ye suppose. And therefore
Bellarmin the learned of your writers, lib. 1. de sacr. bapt. cap. 4. because
he knew that these places which ye quote here could not prove such an absolut
necessity of Baptism, nor have no appearance to prove the same, does not cite
one of them for the proof of the necessity, except only the third of John,
leaving all the rest. And as for that of Augustine, we grant he was of that
mind, that Baptism was necessary to infants, but he was also of that judgment,
that the Eucharist was necessary unto them; and yet your Roman Church, nor you
neither, I hope, will subscribe to this error of his. Seeing therefore you
dissent from him in the necessity of the one, and that upon good ground of the
Scripture; why may not we also dissent from him in the other, having so many
grounds and reasons out of the Word of God to the contrary, as has been said?
And this for the first point. Now let the Christian Reader judge upon whose
side the Word of God is.

SECTION VII. Whither a man by the help of the grace of GOD, may perfectly keep
the Commandments?
Master Gilbert Brown.
SEcondly, our doctrine is, that a man by the grace of God, may keep the
Commands of God, and obey him, which is contrary to their Confession of Faith.
Our doctrine in this, is the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles. Christ says,
If you will enter into life, keep the commands, Matthew. 19.17 And again, If ye
love me, keep my commands, John 14.25 24. Matthew. 11.29 30. And in another
place, He that loves me not, keeps not my words, etc. Also, Take up my yoke
upon you, etc. For my yoke is sweet, and my burden light. Now I believe that no
man can deny, but this yoke and burden of Christ, is his Commands and Laws.
This same doctrine the Apostles teached. S. Paul says, Phil. 4.13. and 2.13. I
can do all things in him that comforts me. And before, For it is God that works
in you both to will, and to accomplish according to his good will. And S. John
1.5.3. says, This is the charity of God, that we keep his Commands, and his
Commands are not heavy. Now further then these we read that Noe, Genesis 6.9.
Abraham, Genesis 26.5. Job 1.22. were just men, and obeyed God. And S. Luke 1.6.
says, that Zacharias and Elizabeth his wife, were both just before God, and
walked in all the commands and justification of our Lord without blame. There
are many other places in the Old Testament of the same matter, of the which I
have noted some, as 3. Kings 14.8.4. and 18.3.4. and 20.3.4. and 23.25. 2.
Chron. 15.15. Now hold away from these places the Ministers Commentaries, and I
believe that all men will confess, that our doctrine in this, and the doctrine
of Christ and his Apostles is all one.

M. John Welsch his Reply.
It appears that M. Gilbert is loath that the secrets of the doctrine of his
Church should be known to the people, because he knows in his heart they would
abhor the same, their own hearts and consciences witnessing to the contrary.
Therefore he has hid up the poison of it, and covered it as secretly as he
could But that wherein you are dark, the rest of your Roman Clergy are plain.

For first, where as ye say, that a man by the grace of God, may keep the
Commands, Bellarmin expones more clearly and says, By the help of the grace of
God, Lib. de justific. cap. 10. And the Monks in that form of abjuration set
out anno 1585 says, That man by the new strength of grace infused in good
will, may keep the commands. So that whereas your words would seem to import
that the grace of God is the only cause of this obedience to Gods Commandments
in the faithful, and so I think every one almost who is not acquainted with the
doctrine of your Roman Church will take it, and so it may be ye teach them. The
rest of your brethren are more plain, in halfing it betwixt free will, and the
grace of God helping free will, as though the strength of nature were the more
principal cause, and the grace of God but a helper to it.

And secondly, whereas ye say, that a man by the grace of God may keep the,
Commandments of God, and obey them, Bellarmin says more plainly, cap. 19 page
364 and lib. 2 de justifi. cap. 3. That the Law of God is absolutely possible
unto them, and they may absolutely fulfill the Law, and keep the whole Law; and
that the works of the righteous are absolutely and simpliciter righteous, and
proceeding of a perfect holiness, without all blemish of sin, and that they
please God, not for the imputation of Christ's righteousness, covering their
imperfections, and forgiving them, but for the excellency of the work it self.
So this is their doctrine, Christian Reader. Now, as he hid his own, so has he
hid ours also. For our Confession of Faith says, That our sanctification and
obedience to Gods Law is imperfect, which word he omitted: as though it had
been our doctrine that the children of God in no measure, nor degree keep the
Commandments of God. Our doctrine therefore is this: That of our own nature we
are dead in sin, Ephesians. 2.1. and of our selves we are neither able to understand,
1. Cor. 2.14. nor think, 2. Cor. 3.7. nor will, nor do those things that are
pleasant to God, Philip. 2.13. and therefore we must be born anew again, John 3
5. ere we can do any thing that is acceptable in Gods sight, John 15.5. and
this sanctification of ours is not perfect while we are in this life, Romans 7.14
15. but imperfect, ever some darkness, some rebellion, some dregs of the old
man yet remaining in us, so that we know but in a part, 1 Cor. 13.12 and our
will is but renewed in part, and our heart sanctified in part, from the which
it comes, that first we do not all the good that we are bound to do, and would
do, as the Apostle says, Rom 7 15.16.17.18.19. 20.21.22.23 24. Next, that all
our righteousness, as the Prophet says, is but as a menstruous cloth, Esai.
64.6. ever smelling somewhat of the corruption of the old man within us: and
so, that they have need to be covered with the righteousness of Jesus Christ,
and their imperfection to be pardoned. By the only strength therefore of Gods
Spirit who works both to will, and to do in us, we begin here obedience to the
whole Law of God, but yet are not able perfectly so to keep it, as our works
may abide to be tried before the Lord in the balance of his Law: and therefore
we place the whole hope of our salvation in the only mercy of God through Jesus
Christ, who is made to us of God, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption: by whose mercy we obtain the perfect remission or our sins: and so
we conclud with David, Psalm. 32. Blessed is he whose sins are forgiven him, and
whose iniquities are covered. This now is the very simple truth both of our
doctrine and theirs in this head.

Now to answer you. Whereas ye say, That a man by grace may keep the
Commandments of God: if you mean that the only cause of the obedience of the
children of God to his Law, is the renewing grace of God, and that this
obedience is sincere and hearty, not to one, but to all the Commandments: not
only outward, but inward: suppose not in that high measure of perfection that
the Law of God requires: then, I say, you contradict the doctrine of your Roman
Church, and forsakes their error of free will concurring with grace, and of the
perfection of man his obedience here to the Law, and so shakes hands with the
truth of God which we profess in this point. And so becoms a bad defe^der of
their Catholic faith, as ye style yourself. And would to God your eyes were
opened so to see and believe, suppose ye lost that style for ever. But if ye
make free will the principal cause of this obedience (as Bellarmin calls it:)
and if ye understand a perfect obedience (as your Church teaches) then first,
tell me why did ye not speak as plainly as you thought? Were you afraid that
the hearts of men should have skunnered with this your doctrine, if ye had been
as plain in your writ, as ye are in your own judgment? Next, I say, you have
the Lord in his written Word, as contrary to this your doctrine, as light is to
darkness. For as to the first, the Scripture testifies plainly that we are dead
in sin, John 5.25. Col. 2 13. Ephesians 2.1. And that the wisdom of the flesh, is
enmity against God, Romans 8.17. and therefore we have need to be born again,
John 3.5. that is, to receive a new life ere ever we can be able to enter into
the Kingdom of God: and that it is God that works in us both to will and to
do, Philip. 2.13. and that of our selves we are not sufficient to think any
thing as of our selves, 2. Cor. 3 5. and that all the imaginations of man's
heart, is only evil continually, Genesis 6 5. Where then is there any place left
to free will?

And as to the second, the Scripture says, Eccles. 7.20. There is not a
righteous man in the earth, who does good and sins not: therefore no perfect
keeping of the Law. And who may say, my heart is clean, and I am pure from sin,
Prove. 20.9. If no man may say so, then no man can keep perfectly the whole Law.
And by the works of the Law, no flesh is justified in his sight, Romans 3.20.28.
therefore no flesh is able perfectly to keep the Law; for if he could keep the
Law, he would be justified by the Law. But the Apostle says, that no flesh can
be justified by the Law: therefore none can keep the Law. And therefore the
Scripture says, Romans 8.3. (...), That the Law is impossible, because of the
weakness of the flesh. For the which cause the Son of God took on him our
nature to fulfill this impossibility of the Law. And James calls the Law a
yoke, which (says he) neither we nor our fathers were able to bear, Acts 15.10
If they said, that they could not bear it, that is, perfectly obey it, who
obtained a higher measure of grace then ever any since did, what shall we then
say of all other men after them? And what arrogance and presumption is this in
these of the Roman Church, to say and to bear others in hand, that they are
able to bear that yoke which the Apostles was not able to bear? And JESUS
CHRIST has taught us to pray daily, Forgive us our sins, Matthew 6. which
needed not, if we were able to keep the whole Law. And beside the plain
testimony of the Scripture, every man's own doleful experience tells them of
their manifold and continual sinning. What a damnable doctrine is this then
which blinds their eyes so far, that neither they see nor feel the inward
corruptions of their own heart within them, rebelling against the Law of God,
nor yet the perfection which the Law of God requires?

Now to the testimonies of Scripture which ye quote: And first, that in the 19.
of Matthew, If you would enter into life, keep the Commandments. I answer: The
same is to be said to you who seek for life and righteousness by the works of
the Law, Keep the Commands. But that are ye unable to do, or any man else,
except the man the Lord Jesus, as has been proved: and as unable as this young
man was, to whom it was said at the last, It is as impossible to him to go into
heaven as to a camel or cable rope to go through the eye of a needle. But ye
will say, Wherefore then would our Savior Christ have commanded him to keep the
Commandments, if he would have life? I answer: Not because he was able to do
it, but to bring him to a conscience of the breach of it: For by the Law, as
the Apostle says, comes the knowledge of sin, Romans 7.7. And to cast down that
presumption that he had of himself, that he had observed and kept the Law, that
in conscience of sin, he might be brought to seek for life eternal in Christ
Jesus only.

And lest ye say that this is my exposition, therefore hear what the Apostle
says, Gal. 3.10.14. As many as are of the works of the Law, are under the
curse: for it is written, Cursed is every man that continues not in all things
which are written in the book of the Law to do them: and that no man is
justified by the Law in the sight of God, it is evident. Now this is spoken not
only of the Jews, but of the Gentiles that believed in Christ Jesus, and were
under grace. Upon the which I reason thus: If as many as are of the works of
the Law, are under the curse, and no man is justified by the Law in the sight
of God, then no man is able to get life eternal by keeping of the Law: and so
this young man to whom Christ gave his answer, neither had kept, nor could keep
the Law: but the first is said by the Apostle, therefore the second is true.
Next, the Law requires a perfect obedience with all the heart, with all the
understanding, and thought, and strength unto all the commandments, and that
continually, Matthew. 22.37. Luke 10 17. Mark 12.31. So that James says, He that
breaks one, is guilty of all, James 2.10. And the Law does pronounce them
accursed, That continues not in the doing of all things, etc. Deuteronomy. 27.16. in
this perfection. Now who is he that is come out of the loins of Adam (except
only the Lord Jesus) who has continued in the perfect obedience of all things,
without the breach of any, in thought, word, or deed? Are you able, or has
every one of your Roman Churches performed, or is able to perform this
obedience that the Law requires? Seeing therefore that none is able, and this
young man neither had performed, not yet was able to perform this perfect
obedience to the Law: therefore of necessity it must follow, that our Savior
gave him this command, Keep the Commandments, etc. not because he was not able
to keep them, but to bring him by the Law to a conscience of the breach of them.

As for the rest of the Scriptures which ye bring in, they are easily answered,
John 14.15 24. If ye love me, keep my Commandments, etc. And he that loves me
not, keeps not my word, etc. I grant, the Lord has commanded obedience to his
Commandments. And I grant, they that loves him, keeps them; and all the
children of God loves him, and begins also obedience to all his Commandments.
But yet as their love is not in that perfection which the Law requires, with
all their heart, with all their understanding, and with all their strength; so
their obedience is not in that perfection. And nevertheless the perfection of
their obedience is forgiven, being covered with the perfect obedience of Jesus
Christ, and through him is acceptable in his presence, and of him also shall be
crowned with a crown of glory, suppose freely. And to prove this: If any had
obeyed the Commandments perfectly, then surely the Apostles Paul, James, John,
Peter, should have done it: For they loved him in as great and greater measure
of love, then ever any since did. And our Savior testifies of them to his
Father, That they have kept his word, John 17.6. But the Apostle Paul testifies
of himself, Romans 7 That he did not the things he would, but the thing that he
hated, that he did, and to will was present with him, but to perform he found
it not: and he saw a law in his members rebelling against the law of his mind,
and leading him captive unto sin. And John says of himself, and of all men, 1.
John 1.8.9 If we say we have not sin, we make him a lier, and the truth is not
in us. And himself twice would have worshipped an Angel. Rev. 29.10 and 22.8.9.
contrary to the Law, Deuteronomy. 6 1. And James says, That in many things we offend
all, James 3 2. And Peter to whom our Savior said thrice, If thou love me, keep
my laws, went not with a right foot to the truth of the Gospel, Gal. 2.11 12.
Therefore none is able perfectly to keep them.

We see then there is a keeping of the Commandments, and a keeping of them in
perfection The first common to all the faithful, suppose not in an equal
measure. The second only possible to Adam ere he fell, and to the Saints in
that Kingdom

As for the 11 of Matthew, Take up my yoke etc for my yoke is sweet, and my
burden light. And the 1 John 5.3. his commandments are not grievous. I answer:
Our Savior and his Apostles calls his commandments light, sweet, and not heavy;
not because the perfection of the Law is possible to any to perform in this
life, but first, because the Lord Jesus has taken away the curse of it, and
also requires not of us that perfection which the Law requires under the pain
of the curse of the Law, if it be not satisfied. And because he by his Spirit
renews the hearts of his own, and makes them able with joy to begin that
obedience; so that what they do, they do it not upon constraint, as being under
the Law; but willingly for the love of Christ, and they delight in the same,
according to the law of their mind, as the Apostle speaks of himself, Romans 7.
But yet within they find a law in their members rebelling against the law of
their mind, leading them captive unto sin. So in these respects, are his
commandments called light and sweet. But Acts 15 the Apostles calls it, an
unsupportable yoke, which neither they nor their fathers were able to bear. And
Romans 8 it is called impossible, (...), Romans 3 20. and 7.14. etc. Gal 3.10. As
for Philippians 4.13 where the Apostle says, He is able to do all things by
him that strengthens him. The Apostle speaks not here of his ability to perform
the Law in that perfection which the Law requires: For he has testified the
contrary, both of himself, and of all others, as has been said. But only this,
that through him he is able to sustain all sorts of condition, both to abound
and to be in scarcity, to be full and to be hungry. This is not my exposition,
but the Apostle so expounds himself in the former verse: so that I wonder upon
what show ye could quote this testimony.

As for Philip. 2. it is true the Lord works in his own both to will and to
do; but yet it follows not that they are able perfectly to obey the Law. For if
that measure of grace had been wrought in any, it had been wrought in the
Apostles, but not in them, as has been shown, and that by their own testimony:
therefore in none else.

Next, what can be more clear for the overthrow of your Free Will, then is this
place of Scripture? If the Lord work in us both to will and to perform, then we
are not able to will of our selves that which is acceptable to God. As for the
examples which ye cite of Noah, Abraham, Job, Zacharias, and Elizabeth, David,
Ezechia, Josia, Juda and Asa, and these whom the Lord reserved to himself pure
from the Idolatry of your Antichristian kingdom fore-spoken there. They walked
indeed in integrity and sincerity in the commandments and ways of the Lord, and
therefore have received a good testimony and report of Gods Spirit in the
Scripture; all which we grant unto you. But that they answered the law in that
perfection that it requires; the Scripture which has registered their walkings,
and their own testimonies, will gainsay it. Noah fell in drunkenness, Abraham
was not justified by the works of the law, but by faith, Romans 4. which is a
most sure argument that he fulfilled not the law. Job says, If I would affirm
my self to be righteous, my own mouth would condemn me. Job 9 2, 3.20.
Zacharias believed not the word of the Lord spoken to him by the Angel,
therefore was stricken dumb. Luke 1.20 David fell in adultery, murder, and
provoked the Lords anger by numbering the people, 2. Sam. 12 and 24. and he
says of himself, My iniquities are more in number then the hairs of my head,
Psalm. 40.13 And in another place, If thou mark iniquity, O Lord, who can stand,
Psalm. 130.2. And enter not in judgment with thy servant, for no man living
shall be righteous before thee, Psalm. 143.2. Ezechias heart was lifted up, 2.
Chron. 32.25 Josias harkened not unto the words of Necho, according to the word
of the Lord. Asa put his trust not in the Lord his God, but in the King of
Syria 2 Chronicles 16.7 The like is to be said of these whom the Lord did reserve to
himself in the midst of the kingdom of darkness, that they did keep the
commandments of God but not in that perfection which the law required. For they
were not more righteous then the Prophet Esaias, and the Apostles were. But the
Prophet says, That we are all unclean, and all our righteousness is as a
menstruous cloth, Esai. 64. And the Apostle says. In many things we sin all,
James 3. And Augustine says All the commandments of God are accounted to be
done, when that which is not done is forgiven, ad Bonif lib. 1. cap. 7. And in
another place. Epist. 60. For the want of love it is that there is not a
righteous man in the earth that does good, and sins not. And Ambrose says,
in Gal. 3. The commandments of God are so great, that they are impossible to be
kept. And Jerome says, in Gal. 3 Because no man can fulfill the law, and do all
things that is commanded. And Bernard says, Cant. sermon 5. The commandments of
God cannot nor could not be fulfilled of any man. And Chrysostom says, in Gal.
2. No man has fulfilled the Law. And Thomas, one of the chief pillars of your
own Church, writes, in Gal 3. lect. 4. That it is impossible to fulfill the
whole Law: and Vega a Papist, says, lib 11. in consil. cap 20 That venial sins
are properly against the Law. Upon the which I reason, He that daily
transgresses the law, fulfills not, nor is not able to fulfill the law (for to
fulfill the law and transgress the law, are contrary) but your own doctrine
is, that no man can keep himself at least from venial sins; and Vega (as has
been said) says, that venial sins are against the law: Therefore if your
selves speak true, no man is able to fulfill the law. I conclud therefore, that
this doctrine of yours is contrary to the doctrine of Jesus Christ and his
Apostles, set down in the Scripture, and also contrary to the doctrine of the
Fathers, and contrary to the doctrine of the most learned, and chief Doctors
of your Roman Church. And this for the second point of your doctrine.

SECTION VIII. Whither a man by his Free Will may resist the will of GOD.
Master Gilbert Brown.
THirdly, Our doctrine is, that man of his Free Will may resist the will of
God, which is contrary to their doctrine, ratified by Act of Parliament in the
year 1560. And also against their Psalm book of Geneva. Yet our doctrine is the
doctrine of Christ. For Christ said to them of Jerusalem, How often would I have
gathered together thy children, but you would not? Matthew. 23.37. And S. Steven.
Ye stiff-necked and of uncircumcised hearts and ears, ye always resist the
holy Ghost, as your fathers, your selves also, Acts 7 51. The same was the
faith and belief of the Apostle. S. Peter says, Our Lord is not willing that
any perish, but that all return to penance, 2. Pet. 3.9. And S. Paul has, Our
Savior God wills all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the
truth, 1. Tim. 2.4. This was the doctrine of the Prophets before, Psalm 5.5
Ezec. 18.23. and 33.11. Now then if God wills that all men should return, and
yet all men does not the same, whereof proceeds it but of their Free Will which
will not work with the will of God? Therefore our Savior says in sundry
places, If thou will enter into life, keep my commands: If thou will be
perfect, go and sell all that thou have, Matthew. 19.17. He that will follow me,
let him deny himself, Luke 9.23.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
As for this third point of doctrine, I cannot wonder enough what ye mean by
it. For have you sold your self so far to untruth and lying, that for to bring
the truth of God which we profess, in hatred, you will father on us that
doctrine which never so much as once entered into our thoughts, let be to teach
it or write it Did you think when you writ this, that the truth of it would
never come to light? Or thought you that ye regarded not to be controlled of
lying at the last, so being that for a season ye might make our Religion to be
more abhorred through your calumny? But frost and falsehood (as they say) will
never have a fair hinder end. If you mean then by resisting the will of God, a
voluntary disobedience and repining against the Spirit of God, and his revealed
will in his Word, as the testimonies which ye quote here, imports: Then I say,
there was never man of our Religion that professed, taught, or writ the
contrary: and ye will not find a syllable neither in the Confession of our
Faith confirmed by the Act of Parliament, neither in our Psalm book to the
contrary. For our doctrine is flat contrary to this: to wit, that man of his
Free Will resists that that is good, and chooses the contrary. So ye fight here
with your own shadow. And if ye mean any other thing, set it down in plain
terms; and I hope by his grace, it shall be answered So I cannot wonder enough
what ye mean to write and subscribe so manifest an untruth. Now surely, M.
Gilbert, I think it had been greater wisdom to you to have saved your own
credit, and not for a little hatred to our Religion, to have blotted your self
with lying and untruth for ever. I would pray thee, Christian Reader, if thou will not credit me, read our Confession thy self: and, I hope, thou shall
wonder with me what the man meant in subscribing so manifest a calumny. This
for the third point.

SECTION IX. Concerning Transubstantiation, and Christ's real and substantial
Body and Blood in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
Master Gilbert Brown.
Fourthly, Our doctrine is, that our Savior gave his true flesh and very body
and blood under the forms of bread and wine, to be eaten of his Disciples at
his last Supper, and that to be received by their very mouth: And this I say by
the written Word, is the doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles. Christ says,
John 6.51. And the bread which I will give you, is my flesh for the life of the
world. And at the latter Supper, Take ye, and eat ye, this is my body: And,
Drink ye all of this: For this is my blood of the New Testament which shall be
shed for many unto remission of sins, Matthew 26.27.28. And in S. Mark, This is
my body, and this is my blood of the New Testament, which shall be shed for
many, Mark 14.22.24. And S Luke says, This is my body which is given for you:
and this is the calice of the New Testament in my blood, which shall be shed for
you, Luke 22.19.20 This same is the doctrine of the Apostles. For S. Paul
says, This is my body which shall be delivered for you: and this calice is the
New Testament in my blood: and whosoever shall eat this bread and drink the
calice of our Lord unworthily he shall be guilty of the body and blood of our
Lord. And after, For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
judgment to himself, not decerning the body of our Lord, 1. Cor. 11.24.25
27.29. And in the chapter befo e, The calice of benediction which we do bless,
is it not the communication of the blood of Christ? And the bread which we
break, is it not the participation of the body of the Lord? 1. Cor. 10.10.

M. John Welsch his Reply.
I come now to the fourth point of your doctrine, your Transubstantiation and
real presence. The first ye quote is the 6. of John, And the bread which I will
give, is my flesh, etc. This makes nothing for your real presence. For first,
our Savior speaks not here of that sacramental eating and drinking of his flesh
and blood in this sermon, which was not instituted a year after that: For he
speaks here of that eating and drinking of his flesh and blood, without the
which there is no life. So our Savior testifies in the 53. verse, Except ye
eat, says he, the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no
life in you. But your selves grants that men may be saved without that
sacramental eating: therefore it is not of that which he speaks here. Secondly,
he speaks of that eating and drinking of his flesh and blood; which whosoever
so does, has eternal life to themselves: so our Savior Christ promises in the
54. verse. But your own doctrine is, that the reprobat eats and drinks Christ's
body and blood in the Sacrament, and yet have no life in them: therefore he
speaks not here of that sacramental eating. Thirdly, if he speak here of the
sacramental eating, as you say, then your Church not only has erred foully,
but also has been and is the cause of the condemnation of your people these
many years, because you give them not his blood to drink. And our Savior says
not only, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, but also, except ye drink
his blood, ye have no life in you. And this reason was so effectual, that it
has moved sundry of your own Doctors, as Jansenius and Tapperus, with sundry
others, to expone this place, not of the sacramental eating and drinking of the
body and blood of Christ, but of the spiritual eating and drinking of him by
faith. For they did see that it behoved them either to forsake this place, as
not making for them, and grant that it speaks not of the Sacrament: or else to
confess that their Church has erred, and through this error, has been the
cause of the damnation of many, in ministering the Sacrament but under one kind.
And because you say, if our expositions vere removed from the Scripture, they
would ferve for you: whom therefore will you credit in exponing of this place?
If our Savior, hear then how he expon s this eating and drinking of his flesh
and blood in the 35. verse: I am the bread of life, he that comes unto me,
shall not hunger; and he that believes in me, shall never thirst. So when we
believe in Christ, we eat him: and when we come unto him (which is only by
faith) we drink him. So Augustine also expones this place, Tractat. 25. in
Johan. cap 6. Tract 26 and de doct. Christ. lib. 3 cap. 16. Believe, says he,
and thou have eaten. Clement Alexandrinus lib. 1. Padago. cap. 6. and
Hieronymus in Psalm 147. and Bernard supra Psalm. 90 verse. 3 all expones the
flesh and blood of Christ figuratively. And if ye will credit none of these,
then I hope, ye will not discredit your own chief Doctors, who affirms, That
this place is not meant of the Sacrament, but of the spiritual eating and
drinking of Christ by faith. As Biel, Cusanus, Cai^tanus, Hesselius, and
Jans^nius cited by Bellarm. lib 1 de Eucharist. cap. 5. And if ye will reply,
that many others of the Fathers have exponed this place of the Sacrament then
Janfenius and Tapperus, two Papists, will answer you; That they did it only by
way of application unto the readers and hearers, to stir them up to the often
receiving of the Sacrament. So this place can serve nothing for your
Transubstantiation; for it speaks not of the Sacrament, but of his suffering
upon the Cross for the away taking of our sins, and the purchasing to us of
eternal life.

The next place ye quote, is the words of the institution, as Matthew, Mark,
Luke, and the Apostles rehearses them. Your argument is this. Christ calls the
bread his flesh (and so Paul) and the wine his blood: therefore the bread is
changed in his body, and the wine in his blood, the outward forms of bread and
wine only remaining. This is the chief and principal ground of your real
presence and Transubstantiation.

Whereunto I answer: First, there is not a syllable here that tells us that the
substance of the bread and wine is transchanged in the body and blood of Christ
unless ye will expone this word, is my body, for, it is changed in my body,
which is a monstrous exposition: for both it is contrary to the native
signification of the word est, (Est and Fieri, sunt contraria) that signifies
to be already: (for to be already, and to be in a change, are contrary) as
also it has not the like form of speech in the whole Scripture to warrant it,
from the first of Genesis, to the last of the Revelation. Bring one instance if
ye can. And Augustine says, in Genes. quaest. 117. in Psalm. 105. supr. Number.
quaest. 95. The solution of a question should be warranted by some example of
the like speech in the Scripture, the which you are not able to do: Therefore
your exposition is without warrant.

Next, I say, by what Art of reasoning can you gather this doctrine out of
these places of Scripture? Christ says of the bread, This is my body; and of
the wine, This is my blood: Therefore the outward forms of the bread and wine
only remains, but the substance of them is gone. Never such an inkling in all
these texts of this doctrine of yours.

Thirdly, this interpretation and doctrine which results upon it, is false: and
that for these reasons. First, because it is plainly gainsaid by the
Scripture. Secondly, because it destroys sundry articles of our Faith, and many
blasphemous absurdities does follow upon it. Thirdly, it destroys the nature of
the Sacrament. And last of all, is utterly repugnant to the words of the
institution. My argument then is this: That interpretation and doctrine which
is gainsaid by the plain testimony of the Scripture, which destroys the
articles of our faith, and the fundamental points of our salvation, which has
many absurdities following upon it, which overthrowes the nature of the
Sacrament; and last of all, which is contrary to the whole institution, must be
false, blasphemous and erroneous. This cannot be denied but your interpretation
of these words, This is my body, etc. and your transubstantiation which ye
gather upon it, is such. Therefore it must be erroneous, etc. My assumption I
prove thus.

First, your interpretation is gainsaid by the plain testimony of the
Scripture. Your interpretation is, that there remains no true bread nor wine in
the Sacrament, but the substance of it is changed. But Matthew. Mark, Luke, and
the Apostles all four testifies, That Christ took bread, brake it, and gave it
to his disciples: And lest ye should say that it was true bread and wine before
the consecration, but not after, the Scripture says plainly. 1. Cor. 10.16.
that it is bread which we break, and bread which is eaten, and the fruit of the
vine which is drunken in the Sacrament. The Apostle says, The bread which we
break. etc. And as often as ye eat this bread, etc. Whosoever shall eat this
bread, etc. And let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread,
etc. And our Savior says, that after he had given the cup, and they had
drunken of it, From henceforth shall I not drink of the fruit of the vine with
you, etc. Therefore true bread and wine remains in the Sacrament, contrary
expressly to your interpretation.

Secondly, That your interpretation destroys the Articles of our Faith, I
prove it thus: If this be true that the bread and wine be really changed in the
body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament, as ye expound the words: First, It
will follow that either Christ ascerded not into heaven, because he remains
in the earth in the Sacrament: and so one of the Articles of our Belief is
falsified: Or else if ye say he ascended once but yet descends continually to
be present in the Sacrament, then another Article of our Belief is falsified,
which says, That he sits at the right hand of God his Father. And as Peter
says, abides in heaven, whom the heavens must contain, while the time of the
restoring of all things come, Act. 3.21. (...), etc.

Secondly, It will follow that Christ's body is made of the bread: for if the
substance of the bread be changed in the body of Christ, then it must follow
that the bread is become the body of Christ, and Christ his body is made of
that bread, as the wine was made of the water at the marriage of Cana in
Galilee. And so Bellarmin, lib 3. de Eucharist. fol. 399. and Pope John 22.
lib. orat. in script. antidotar, animae, and the Master of Sentences, Lombard.
lib. 4. distinct. 11. cap. 8 grants, that Christ it made of bread, and the
substance of bread and wine it made Christ's flesh and body; and so here
another article of our faith falsified, which says, That Christ his body was
made of the seed of the woman, and not of any other matter, and like to us in
all things, except sin.

Thirdly, It will follow that Christ had two bodies together, one under the
form of a man, and another under the form of bread: one speaking, and another
dumb: one giving to his disciples to eat, and another the self same thing which
was given to be eaten: yea, it shall follow, if your exposition be true, in
saying, That Christ's body and blood is under the forms of bread and wine in the
Sacrament, not only that there are two Christ's, one in heaven at the right hand
of his Father visible, glorious and in one place: and another Christ in the
earth invisible, circumscribed by no place: but also that there are as many
Chri s as there are Sacraments in the earth, yea, as many Christ's as there are
bits of bread in every Sacrament, and so the foundation of our salvation is
overturned.

Fourthly. It will follow that the body and blood of Christ are separat, as the
bread and wine in the Sacrament which is turned in them is separated.

Fifthly, It will follow that his body is separat from his soul, and so a dead
body, because the bread and wine are not changed in his soul, but only in his
body.

Sixthly, It will follow that the bread in the first Supper being changed in
the body of Christ, that the substance of the bread has suffered for us, died
for us, and risen again for us: and has a part of our redemption, which is
blasphemous to think.

Seventhly, It will follow that Christ eated his own body, and drank his own
blood, which is absurd: for Chrysostom, hom. 83. in Mar. and your Canon Law, de
consecr. did 2. Canon. Nec Moses, testifies, that he ate the same thing which
he gave to his Disciples. And also he says himself, From hence forth will I
not drink with you more of the fruit of this vine, etc. So he drank of that
which they drank of. And last of all, it will follow, that the Mass-Priest is
the creator of his Creator: and so their Breviaries and Lombardus, and
Bellarmin grants. In their Breviaries the Priest says, Qui creavit me sine me,
creatur mediante me: that is, He that created me without me, is created by my
moyen. Lombardus says, distinct. 12. lib. 4. cap. 5. The Priests are said to
make the body and blood of Christ, because by their ministry the substance of
the bread is made his flesh. And Bellarmin says, lib. 3. de Eucharist cap 24
Sacerdotes conficiunt corpus Christi ex pane, That the Priests makes Christ his
body of bread. Now if there be no blasphemous absurdities, I know not what is
blasphemy. Now choose ye whither ye will subscribe to all these absurdities,
which you with all the wit of the Roman Clergy, is not able to eschew, if ye
grant this interpretation of yours to be true: or will you forsake this
interpretation of yours, as false, erroneous, and contrary both to the plain
Scriptures of God, and the articles of our Faith, and the grounds of our
salvation.

As to the third: Your interpretation destroys the nature of all Sacraments,
and makes the Supper of the Lord no Sacrament; for every Sacrament consists of
an outward and visible sign, and of a spiritual thing signified by that sign,
the which sign has a resemblance with the thing signified. The sign is ever
earthly, and the thing signified is heavenly, as shall appear by all the rest of
the Sacraments, both of the Old and New Testament. In Paradise, Genesis 2.9. Rev.
2.7. there was a very tree for the sign, and Christ the thing signified by it.
In circumcision there was a cutting of the skin, Genesis 17.9.20. Rom 4 11. Deuteronomy.
30.6. Col. 2.11. and the cutting off of sin. In the Passover there was a Lamb
and Christ, Exodus 12. 1. Cor. 5.7.8. John 19.36. And in the Sabath there was a
day of rest, and eternal rest, Heb. 4.1 3.4.5. etc. In the Sanctuary there was
an holy Place, and heaven, Heb. 9 24. In the wilderness there was a Rock
yielding water, and Christ yielding his blood, 1. Cor. 10 4. In the apparition
there was a dove, and the holy Ghost, John 1.32. In the Manna there was bread,
and Christ, 1. Cor. 10.3. In Baptism there was very water which washes us, and
Christ's blood washing our sins, Tit. 3.5. 1. Pet. 3.21. Therefore in the
Sacrament of the Supper must be bread and wine feeding this natural life, and
resembling our communion one with another, and Christ's flesh and blood feeding
our spiritual life, 1. Cor. 10.16. 17. otherwise this Sacrament is against the
nature of all other Sacraments, which is absurd to think, and should be no
Sacrament at all, as Augustine says, Epist. 23. If the Sacraments had not a
resemblance with the things whereof they are Sacraments, they should not be
Sacraments at all. But your interpretation and doctrine destroys both the sign,
and the resemblance which they should have with the things signified in the
Supper; for there is no outward sign there which is an earthly substance, but
only accidents of color, and quantity, if your doctrine be true; and there is
nothing there to resemble either our spiritual nowrishment by the flesh and
blood of Christ, or yet our spiritual fellowship one with another: unless you
will say, that accidents feeds, and nowrishes: the which if you will say, then
to say no more to it but this. If you and your common Clergy who is so bold and
strong in maintaining this monstrous Transubstantiation of yours against the
truth of God, were fed with no better substance then accidents; then, I say,
you would have fainted long since in the defense of it. Seeing therefore your
interpretation makes the Supper to be no Sacrament, and makes it unlike all
other Sacraments, therefore it must be false and erroneous.

As to the fourth, that it is against the whole institution and use thereof, I
prove it thus. First, I will ask you, what was it which Christ took in his
hand? If you say his flesh, then the text will say the contrary, And Jesus took
bread, in all the three Evangelists, and the Apostle Paul. So it was bread
which he took, after he did take it, he blessed it: What did he bless, but the
bread which he had taken? so it is yet bread. After he blessed it, he brake it.
What did he break? If you say, it was his flesh or body, then the Scripture
will say the contrary: There was not a bone of him broken, Exodus 12. John 19.
And the Apostle says, It is bread which we break, 1. Cor. 10. So it is bread
which is broken. Then yet it is bread. After he brake it, he gave it. What gave
he but the thing which he brake? And what brake he but bread? 1. Cor. 10.17.
and 11.26. 27.28. So it is bread which he gave. After he had given it, they
received it, and did eat it. But what did they eat, but that which he gave? And
therefore the Apostle says four times, It is bread which is eaten, and whereof
we are partakers, and that after the consecration: For it is broken, given, and
received, and eaten, after the consecration. And when they did eat it, he said,
This is my body. What did he call his body, but that which they did eat, and
that was bread? So when then should this change be, seeing it is bread all the
time while he took it, blessed it, and gave it, and they did eat? For, I
suppose, ye will not say, it is changed after it is broken, and given, and in
eating.

Secondly, I will ask you, what are the words whereby this monstrous change is
made, as ye suppose, of the substance of the bread in Christ's body? If this
change be made by any word spoken in the institution of this Sacrament, then, I
say, it must either be by this word, And he blessed it; or by these words, This
is my body, etc. But not by the first: for after he blessed it, he called it
bread. And the Apostle says, it is bread which we break, therefore it remains
bread after the blessing. Not by the other words: for if they be not spoken to
the bread and wine, they cannot change their nature. But Mark says plainly,
they were spoken to the Disciples, And he said unto them, This is my blood,
Mark 14.24. Therefore they changed not their nature. And Durand a Papist,
says, in his Rationals, That this change is made by the blessing. Therefore
not by these words which were pronounced after the blessing. And these words
cannot work a change: For they are not words importing an operation, as these
are, Let light be, Let the earth bring forth fruit, Genesis 1. Come out, Lazarus
John. 12. and such like: but only signifying the things themselves, as these
are, Thou art my well-beloved Son. So if these words should have wrought any
change, they would not have been, This is my body, etc. but, let this be my
body: Therefore there is no such change at all here, as ye imagine.

Thirdly, it should follow that the cup should also be changed in his blood,
and in the New Testament, because Christ calls the cup his blood and New
Testament, as he calls the bread his body. But this you will not say. Wherefore
then are you so absurd as to say the other?

Fourthly, I will ask you whither do ye receive in the Sacrament that body
which is mortal, or that body which is glorified? For one of them you must
receive, either Christ's body as it was mortal, or his body as it is now
glorified. If ye say a mortal body; then I say, Christ has not a mortal body
to give you now in the Sacrament, for it is glorified: therefore ye cannot
receive it. If ye say an immortal and glorified body; then I say, ye must seek
another warrant then this text of Matthew, Mark and Luke. For at that time his
body was not glorified. For the Sacrament was instituted before his death, and
he was not glorified until after his resurrection: And if ye receive that same
body which the Apostles then received; then ye receive not a glorified body.
What a body is this then which ye receive, neither mortal nor glorified?

Fifthly, the text says, they who receives unworthily, receives their own
damnation. But if Christ's flesh and blood were there present, as ye say, then
all who received it should receive their salvation, because our Savior says,
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has life everlasting, John 6 54.
Now I conclud, seeing your interpretation of these places of Scripture, and
your doctrine of Transubstantiation which ye gather thereupon; first, is
plainly gainsaid by the express testimonies of the Scripture; next, overthrows
all the main foundations of our salvation, and articles of our Faith: thirdly,
destroys the nature of a Sacrament, and makes it no Sacrament at all, and like
no other Sacrament, either of the Old or New Testament: and last of all, is
contrary to the whole institution thereof, as I hope I have sufficiently
proved: therefore of necessity it must be false and erroneous

As for the 10 of the 1. Cor 16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not
the communion: and the bread which we break, is it not, etc. I answer: This
Sacrament of bread and wine, because it not only represents and seals up to us
our communion with Christ, but also by it, as by a most effectual instrument,
the holy Ghost increases and nowrishes this communion, both with him, and among
our selves: therefore it is called the communion of his body and blood But this
most clearly proves, that there is no such change here, as ye suppose: for the
Apostle says plainly, The bread which we break; and this breaking, you say, is
after the consecration: therefore after the consecration true bread remains in
the Sacrament, and so there is no transubstantiation in the same. But because
you say, the substance of the bread and wine is not there, I pray you, tell me
whither are they gone? Whither are they turned to nothing, or are they changed
in Christ's body? If you say, they are turned to nothing: First, I say, this
were a strange kind of reasoning: This is my body; therefore the substance of
the bread is turned to nothing. Next, the Apostle should not speak truly, to
call it bread which is broken, and bread which is eaten, etc if it were turned
to nothing. Thirdly, then this should not be called Transubstantiation, or
changing of one substance into another: but an annihilation of one substance,
that is, a turning of it to nothing, and a bringing in of another substance in
the room of it. And fourthly, Thomas of Aquin, your great defender of this
doctrine, is against this, lib. 4 did. 8. But if you say, they are turned in
Christ's body, which the word Transubstantiation imports; then, I say, as often as
the Sacrament has been ministrated, as often has there been some quantity of
substance added to his body: and it shall still grow in greatness and quantity,
as long as it shall be ministered: but this is monstrous to think. And to end
this, if you say there is no substance of bread and wine left in the Sacrament,
then let me ask you whose are the whiteness, and redness, and roundness that we
see? What means this taste in our mouths of bread and wine, if there be no
substance of them there? May we not say to you, as Christ said to Thomas, who
doubted of his resurrection, Put thy finger here, behold my hands; put thy hand
in my side, and be not incredulous, but believe? So, may not we say to you, who
doubts whither the substance of bread and wine be here remaining yet, touch
them, taste them, look on them, and feel them, and be not incredulous, but
believe? For behold, there would not be such a color, such a taste and smell,
and there were not substance of bread and wine here. And I pray you, tell me
what is this that rots then, and grows in worms in the bread, and souers in
the wine, if they be long kept? If their substance remains not, will you say
Christ's flesh and blood rots and consumes and souers? What is this but to make
him mortal, yea to crucify him again? And if you will not say that, then
either must you confess that their substance remains and is not changed, or
else Christ's flesh and blood is transubstantiated in these substances which
rots and souers, or else that the accidents is changed again in their
substances: and so ye shall not have one, but mo changes in your Sacrament. Yea,
if their substance be gone, and nothing but their accidents remaining, then how
could Pope Victor the 3. and the Emperor Henry the 7. have been poisoned with
them; as Fasciculus temp. Platina, Blond, testifies, accidents and Christ's
body could neither poison them, nor be capable of poison: therefore they felt
by experience that there was no Transubstantiation in the Sacrament. So we see
the texts ye brought with you, is against you, as the sword that Goliath brought
to slay David, cutted off his own head. But yet you will say, If the bread be
not his body, why then did he call it his body? this is the chief thing you
have for your doctrine; and answer this, and the plea is won. Unto this then I
answer, that in that same sense he said, This is my body: In the which he said
afterward, which is broken for you, 1. Cor. 11.24. Luke 21. (...) which is
given in the present time. But there can be no sense of these words, but this;
the bread was broken, and signified that his body should be broken with the
sorrows of death: for his body was not broken before he suffered: and the
Apostle says, it is bread which is broken: so then as the breaking of the
bread signified the breaking of his body, so the bread signified his body: and
as his body was not broken indeed when the bread was broken, so the bread could
not be his body in very deed when he so called it For the resemblance and
likeness thereof between the bread and his body, the bread it is called his
body, etc. and this phrase is very frequent in the Scripture, to give the name
of the things signified to the sign, as shall be seen afterward.

M. Gilbert Brown.
Now let the Ministers come in here with their natural reasons against the
omnipotency of Christ, that he cannot be in two places at once, and with their
figurs, signs, similituds, symbols, and spiritual eating of a natural body,
with many the like; which are the inventions of their own brains, not contained
in the written Word. And who can say but that our doctrine in this is the
doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and not theirs?

M. John Welsch his Reply.
Ye prevent our answers here, and first ye bid us hold away our natural reasons
against the omnipotency of Christ, that he cannot be in two places at once.
Whereunto I answer, that we shall bring no reason, neither natural nor
supernatural, against the omnipotency of Christ, for we acknowledge it, and
adores it. But we say to you, pretend not his omnipotency for your monstrous
imaginations, which have no warrant of his will in his Scripture. For first, we
say this argument of yours will not follow: Christ is able to make his body to
be in two places, both at once, in heaven, and in the Sacrament: therefore he
makes it to be so. For you must first prove he will do so: for your self, M.
Gilbert, can do many things which you do not, because you will not; so from can
to will, it follows not. And if you say, that Christ has willed so, because he
said, This is my body: I have answered to it before, refute you it, and all
your Roman Clergy, if you can. For you might as well say, Christ willed the cup
wherein the wine was, to be changed in his blood and New Testament, and himself
to be changed in a vine-tree, and a door, and a rock to be changed in him:
because so has he and his Apostles spoken, John 10. and 13. 1. Cor. 10 and 11.
and these speeches are as true, as that; and yet there is no change here. Next,
I say, your own Schoolmen and great defenders of Transubstantiation, Thomas of
Aquin, and others, say, lib. 1 cap. 84. and lib. 2. cap. 25. contra Gent. That
it is against the omnipotency of God to affirm that he may do any thing which
implies a contradiction in its self; for that is rather to be called a weakness
then a power. And the Scripture affirms, that God cannot lie, nor deny himself,
nor be tempted, and that yea and nay it not in Christ, Heb. 6. 2 Timothy 2. James
1.2. Cor. 1. but to Christ's body, both to be a true body, like to us in all
things (to wit essential) except sin, as the Scripture says, and to be in mo
places at once, which makes him to have not a true body like ours. For Augustine
says, ad Dardanum (speaking of Christ's glorified body) If it be a true body,
it is then in a certain place: and take away from bodies their quantities, they
are no more true bodies) implies a contradiction, and is yea and nay in him:
and Christ's body both to be visible and invisible at one time: to be in a
certain place in heaven with his own length and breadth, and not to have his
own length and breadth at once in the Sacrament, is a manifest contradiction,
is yea and nay in Christ: therefore both by the Scripture and your own
doctrine, the omnipotency of Christ cannot be alleged or pretended for this
your doctrine, which is yea and nay, and implies a manifest contradiction. So
this in very truth, is the invention of your own brain, which is alleged for
your Transubstantiation, and wants the warrant, yea is gainsaid both by the
written Word, and your own Schoolmen. Next, ye would have us to hold away our
figurs, symbols, and similituds: I answer: our own figurs we shall hold away:
but these figurs, symbols, and signs, wherein our Savior has delivered his
truth to us, we must and will acknowledge So then, obeying rather God who has
set them down in his Scripture, then you who forbids us to acknowledge them:
and what a monstrous exposition would you make of infinite places of Scripture,
if you would admit no figures in them, but all to be understood plainly and
literally as they were spoken? The Scripture ascribes to God eyes. ears, foot,
hands, and a face: and the Scripture calls Christ a door, a vine. Now if you
will admit no figurs here, but will have all these places exponed literally, as
you will have us to do in the Sacrament, then you would be reckoned in the
number of the old heretics called Anthropomorphitae, who because they saw the
Scripture speak so of God, they taking it literally and exponing it without
figurs, as you would have us to expone the Sacrament, they thought that God was
bodily: yea, you must make another monstrous Transubstantiation of Christ in a
door, and vine-tree, for so he calls himself. And to come to the Sacraments
themselves, how many transubstantiations will you make in all the Sacraments,
both of the Old and New Testament, if you will remove figurs and signs from
them, and expone them literally, as you would have us to do in this Sacrament.
Circumcision is called the covenant, Genesis 27. and yet it was but the sign of
the covenant: the Lamb in the Passover, is called the Passover of the Lord,
Exodus 12. and yet it was but the sign of the Passover: the Rock in the
wilderness, is called Christ, 2. Cor. 20. and yet it was but a sign of Christ:
the Ark is called the Lord, Psalm. 24. and yet it was but a sign of the Lord:
the land of Canaan is called the rest of the Lord. Heb. 4. and yet it was but a
sign of that rest: and Baptism is called the washing of regeneration, Tit. 3.
and yet it is but the sign of our regeneration. Do you think that the forms of
speeches in all other Sacraments are figuratively taken, and the form of speech
in this Sacrament only to be literally understood? What reason can there be of
this diversity? But it may be you think that the form of speeches in all other
Sacraments should be taken figuratively: but the phrase of speech in this
Sacrament is to be taken literally. But first, what then will you say to this
speech, This is my body which is broken for you; and this, The cup is the New
Testament in my blood, and the cup is my blood; and the bread which we break,
is it not the communion of the body of Christ? and the cup which we bless, is
it not the communion of the blood of Christ? 1 Cor. 11. Luke 22. Mark 14. 1.
Cor. 13. all figurative speeches, and to be understood figuratively: otherwise
Christ should have been broken in the Sacrament, which is both contrary to the
Scripture, and also absurd. For then he should have suffered twice; once in the
Sacrament, and once upon the cross: and not only should there be one
transubstantiation in the Sacrament, but many: as of the cup in the blood of
Christ, and of the bread and cup in the participation of the body and blood of
Christ: and so you should not only have one transubstantiation, but many. And
how, I pray you, can Sacraments which are but figurs, signs and symbols, be
understood but figuratively? And how can duo diversa individua alterum de
altero praedicari in praedicatione, and be spoken of another, without a figure,
as it is here. This bread is my body, etc. Can you or any at all of your Roman
Clergy, understand such propositions otherwise then figurativelie? What an
unreasonable thing is it then to you to forbid us to acknowledge figurs in this
Sacrament, which is but a figure and sign, seeing they are so frequentlie used
in the Scriptures of God, and especially in Sacraments, as also in this
Sacrament? So nil ye will ye, signs and symbols, tropes and figurs ye must
admit in the exposition of this Sacrament. Last of all, ye think a natural
body cannot be spirituallie eaten. Would you be so absurd and blasphemous, as
to have Christ's body naturally eaten? For then his body must be naturally
chawed, digested, turned over in our substance, and casten out in the draught,
and so be mortal and suffer again; Apage hanc blasphemiam.

Let me ask you, whither is Christ's body the food of the soul, or the food of
the body? If you say it is the food of the body to fill the belly; then, I
say, it must be naturally eaten; but you are blaspemous in so thinking. But if
you say, it is the food of the soul, as it is indeed, and as our Savior says,
John 6.35. then it cannot be eaten naturally: For as the food of the body
cannot be eaten spiritually, so the food of the soul cannot be eaten naturally,
but spiritually by faith. And if you understood this true eating of Christ by
faith, all your contention would take an end. But this is the stone which ye
stumble at, and therefore ye forbid us to come in with a spiritual eating of
Christ's natural body, as though it could be eaten otherwise then spiritually by
faith Will you neither understand the Scriptures, John 6 35. nor the ancient
Fathers, August tract. 26. in Joh. 6 and lib 3. de doct. Christ. cap. 16, and
Clemens Alex Hierom. S Basilius, Bernardus supra citat. nor your own Church.
Bellarm. de Euchar. lib. 1. cap. 7. and your Canon Law, de consecrat. did. 1.
cap. 5. who all acknowledge a spiritual eating of Christ by faith? What gross
darkness is this wherewith the Lord has blinded you above all, that ye cannot
understand it? As Christ dwells in us, and we in him, so do we eat him, and
drink him. But the Apostle says, he dwells in us by faith, Ephesians. 3. therefore
we eat him, and drink him by faith. And seeing your Church grants, that the
eating of Christ corporally does no good, and the eating of him by faith only
will bring eternal life, as our Savior says, John 6. what needs then this
corporal and real eating of Christ? And why are ye like the gross and carnal
Capernaits, who can understand no eating, but a corporal eating of him? And
what is the cause that ye cannot understand the doctrine of your own Church,
which acknowledges a spiritual eating of Christ by faith, both by the Word and
by the Sacrament also, de consecr did. 2. cap. Ut quid. I had never have
thought that ye had been so far blinded of the Lord. But I leave you to the
Lord. Let the Christian Reader now judge whether our doctrine or yours be the
invention of man's brain, and which of them have their warrant out of the
written Word of God.

M. Gilbert Brown.
And further, I say, of these words, This is my body which shall be delivered
for you, 1. Cor. 11.24. which is a true proposition, and therefore this must
follow: But there was no body delivered for us, but the natural body of Christ:
therefore it was his natural body that he gave to his Disciples to be eaten.
Then if it were his natural body, it was not natural bread. As Saint Ambrose
expounds the same, Let us prove, says he, this not to be that that nature
formed, but that thing which the blessing has consecrate, and greater strength
to be in blessing then in nature: for nature it self is changed by blessing. He
has the same more amply in the fourth book in the 4 chap. de Sacramentis.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
First, I answer, the words of the Apostle is not as ye cite them here which
shall be delivered, but (...), which is broken, and in the present time, and so
in Luke (...), which is given; so you are not faithful in translating this
place of Scripture, both contrary to the Greek and Syriak copies. Upon the
which I reason thus, this proposition is true, This is my body which is broken
for you: so the Apostle says; but Christ's body was not broken then really, for
not a bone of him was broken at all, as the Scripture testifies, Exodus 12. and
the Scripture says, John 19. and all men confesses that he suffered but once,
so only his sufferings are signified then by the breaking of the bread in the
Sacrament here: so as Christ's body was not broken then really, that is,
suffered; but his suffering only signified by the breaking of the bread, so his
body was not given really and corporally to be eaten, but only signified.
Secondly, I say, it is true, that Christ's natural body was delivered to the
death for us: but yet it will not follow upon this, that it was his natural
body which he gave to them to be eaten corporally: for his natural body was
really delivered to death for us: and it was but given to them spiritually to
be eaten. You must coin a new Logic, M. Gilbert, ere you can make these two
stick together: and the one necessarily to follow upon the other. For by that
same reason you may as well conclud, that Christ gave his natural body to be
eaten corporally in the word, for he gives himself to be eaten in his word, as
well as in his Sacrament, 2. John 6.35 Bellarmin grants this also, lib. 1. de
Eucharist. cap. 7. and also he gives that same body to them in the word, which
was delivered to death: for the self same Christ is offered and received as
well in the word as in the Sacrament. So from his bodily death, to a corporal
eating of him, it will not follow. And further by that same reason you may as
well say, that the Fathers before Christ under the Law, did eat Christ's body
corporally, for they ate that same spiritual food, and drank that same
spiritual drink, in their Sacraments, which we do now in ours. So the Apostle
testifies, even that self same Christ his body and blood which was delivered to
the death, and yet it will not follow, that they did eat his natural body, etc.
As for Ambrose, it is true he so speaks, but he expones himself in that same
chapter, while as he says, Before the blessing another form or thing is named,
but after the consecration, the body of Christ is signified. If the bread then
signify the body of Christ, it is not changed in his body. And because of this
holy use to signify the body of Christ, Ambrose says, That the nature is
changed by blessing: and that this is his meaning, his words following will
declare it, where he says, Shall not the words of Christ be of force to change
the form of the elements. In that same sense Ambrose says, the nature of the
elements is changed, in the which he says, the form of them is changed, for he
affirms both there. But ye will not say, I suppose, unless you will overthrow
your transubstantiation, that Ambrose means; that the form of the elements is
changed in substance, but only in use and signification; for you say the forms
remains, therefore you must also grant that Ambrose means not by the change of
nature, the change of the substance of them, but only the change in the use of
them, from a common use to a holy use. And because it may be you will delay to
subscribe to the truth of our doctrine, until you hear the sentence and
judgment of the Fathers. Therefore I will set them down here. Tertullian
says, contra Marc. lib. 4. This is my body, that is, a figure of my body.
Chrysostom says, in 1. Cor. cap. 10. What is that which the bread signifies,
the body of Christ. Theodoret says, dialog. 1. and 2. The bread and wine is
signs and figures of the body and blood of Christ. And he says, Our Savior in
the institution of the Sacrament enterchanged the names and gave to the sign or
symbol the name of his body: and these mystical signs of these holy things
whereof are the signs. Unto the which he answers, Are they not signs of the
body and blood of Christ? Hieronymus says, in Mat. 2.6. That Christ by taking
of the bread, which comforts the heart of man, represents the truth of his
body. Cyrillus says, ad Euop. Matthew. 11. Bas. Liturgia Nazian. in orat. 2. de
Pas. and funere Gorg. Our Sacrament avoweth not the eating of a man. Basilius
and Nazianzen calls the bread and wine in the Supper (...), figurs or signs of
the body of Christ. Cyprian says, lib. 1. ep. 6. ejus contra Adima, cap. 12.
and Psalm. 3. The Lord called bread made of many grains his body, and wine made
of many grapes his blood. Augustine says, Our Lord doubted not to say, This is
my body, while as he gave but the sign of his body. And he calls it, the figure
of his body and blood. And their Canon Law says, de conseer did. 2. cap. Hoc
est. The heavenly bread which is the flesh of Christ, is called after a manner
the body of Christ, while as it is but the Sacrament of his body. And the Gloss
there says, The heavenly bread, that is the heavenly Sacrament which
represents truly the flesh of Christ, is called the body of Christ, but
improperly. I omit the rest which is exceeding many, and because if you be a
right defender of the Catholic Faith, you will say with the rest of your
Clergy, that the Pope cannot err. Therefore a Pope, Gelasius by name, says,
de duabus natura in Christo: Neither the substance of the bread, nor nature of
the wine, cease to be any more then they were before; but remain in their own
substance. And he calls them there, An image and resemblance of the body and
blood of Christ. Now tell me, Master Gilbert, do not these speak as plain as
we? Will you avow your transubstantiation, which they so flatly deny. And as
our Savior says, A Kingdom divided against it self, cannot stand; so the
manifold divisions among your selves concerning this transubstantiation, is a
very sure argument of the falling, both of you and your doctrine. Some of you
expounds this word, hoc, this Bonaventure, Gerson contra Florentiu^, lib. 4.
of the bread. As Thomas lib. 4 seu did 8. Occam in 4 sent d. 13. q. 16.17
Some of Christ's body: Innocent 3 de offic. miss. page 3 object. 14 and Scotus
in l. 46. d. 8. q. 3.
and some calls it, an individuum vagum: Durandus rational. 4
some says, it signifies nothing: Holcot in 4. sent. quaest. 1,
and some says, it signifies a thing which is common both to terminus a quo,
and terminus ad quem.

Secondly, in the exposition of the word est, is: some for, it is: some for, it
is changed. Thirdly, some Thomas.
says, the substance of the bread and wine returns to nothing: some says The
gloss of Gratian, and the extravag, de co^secr. did. 2 cap. Species etc firmit
extr de summa Trinitate.
it passes in the body of Christ. Fourthly, some says C. non oportet, and ibi
gloss. de consecrat. did. 2. etc. Cum Martha para verum eleemos.
the water in the Sacrament returns to nothing: some says it is changed in the
blood with the wine: some says it is Thomas 3974 art. 8.
turned in Christ's vital humors: some says, it is turned in the wine, and
after in the blood: some says Durand. lib. 4. cap. 42.
they dare not define it. Fifthly, some says, Thomas Epist. 59. and 3. quaest.
79.
the worms that are bred of the Sacrament, comes of the quantity: other some
says Durand. lib. 3. cap. 41.
they are bred of the substance. Sixthly, some says, Christ Idem lib. 4. cap.
41.
consecrated by the word, he blessed: some by the M. Gilbert.
words, This is my body, and the blessing together: some Gloss. in cap. Utrum
in verbis perferri de cons. did. 2.
will have the consecration to be made in heaven: and some frankly Scotus in
repor. did. 8. qu. 2.
confesses, That they neither know the words, nor the number of them, whereby
this consecration is made. And to omit six hundred the like, I will only touch
these few: Gloss. in l. tribus.
some says, The body of Christ is taken bodily with the mouth: Cajetan. tom.
2. cap. 2. and 3. and 5.
some says, That it feeds: Gloss. ibidem.
some says, As soon as it is pressed with the teeth, the body of Christ is
caught up to heaven. Durand. rational. lib. 4.
But other some faith, It passes from the teeth to the heart, and then the
bodily presence ceases: Bonavent. 4. did. 13. art. 2. qu. 2.
and other some will have him go to the stomach, etc. but not to the mind. And
yet he says, He doubts whither he goes to the belly or not, for the variety of
opinions: and in so great variety, he says, what to hold, is hard to judge.
And suppose he holds it, That the body of Christ goes not into the belly of a
mouse, or is casten out into the draught; because, says he, the ears of well
disposed persons would abhor it, and infidels and heretics would jest at it,
and laugh us to scorn. Yet sundry others holds, as Alexander de Hales, part,
quaest. 45. and Thomas Aquin, part 3. qu. 80. art. 3. and Antonius Archiepisc.
part. 3. tit. 13. cap. 6. That not only it goes into the belly, but also
Christ's body may be vomited up or purged out in the draught, and that brute
beasts may eat Christ's body, and it may go into the belly of dogs and swine. O
filthy mouths, and unclean spirits! what heretic, what Capernait was ever so
gross and carnal; yea, so barbarous and brutish, as ye are? So not only are ye
more gross then the Capernaits, who thought that saying hard: but also like the
barbarous Canibals, who eat the flesh of man. O blind leaders of the blind,
shall myce, dogs and swine, eat and drink the precious body and blood of Christ?
Shall they then have eternal life? I think the ears of all Christians will abhor
this your doctrine, and their hearts will tremble at it. These absurdities,
together with Scriptures and Fathers against the same, has made some of your
great pillars to say, as Fisher against the captivity of Babylon, That no man
can prove by the words of the Gospel, that any Priest in these days does
consecrat the very body and blood of Christ. And others, as Lindanus Panop.
lib. 4. Canisius and Petrus a Soto supra citati. That transubstantiation it but
a tradition, which has not the author of it in the Scripture, nor cannot be
defended by the same. And others, as Tonstal de Sacramentis, That it had been
better to have left every man to his own conjecture, as they were before the
Council of Lateran, then to bring in such a question.

I have been longsome in this, but yet it so behoved me, because it is the
foundation of their sacrifice of the Mass, and their other idolatries and
abominations. So then, to conclud this, seeing your doctrine of
Transubstantiation is agreeable neither to the doctrine of Christ, nor his
Apostles, nor ancient Fathers, nor your own Canon Law and Popes, as they have
been cited: And seeing ye are at such variance among your selves concerning the
same, therefore it is to be rejected as heretical, damnable and blasphemous, by
all Christians. And this for the fourth point of your doctrine.

SECTION X. Concerning the Sacrifice of the Mass.
Master Gilbert Brown.
WE have only in our Church that heavenly action and sacrifice, which we call
the blessed Mass, that our Savior did at his latter Supper, and was Levit. 2.
per totum. and 6.20.
prefigured by the Law of Moses, and fore-spoken by the Mal. 1.10. 11. Isai.
19.19.21. and 56.7.
Prophets. For Christ being the chief Priest of all Priests, according to the
order of Genes. 14.18. Psalm. 109.4. Heb. 7.3.17.
Melchisedec in this action, and according to the order of Heb. 9.12.13.14.
Aaron upon the Cross, took Matthew. 26.26.27.
bread and wine, and having given Luke 22.19.
thanks to his Father of heaven, Mark 14.22.
blessed the same; by the which 1. Cor. 10.16.
blessing, and heavenly words, he made them his body and blood, as I said
before, and Luke 22.29.
gave, or offered himself then for them, that is, for his. And last of all,
gave the same body and blood to his Apostles to be eaten, which we call to 1.
Cor 10.16.
communicate. And when he had done the same, he commanded his Apostles, and by
them the lawful Pastors of the Church till the worlds end, to do the same, for
the Luke 22.19.
remembrance of him. And seeing that our Priests do the same, as our Savior
did, how can M. John say, that our Religion, in this, was not instituted by
Christ?

Master John Welsch his Reply.
I come to another point of your doctrine concerning the sacrifice of the Mass:
which suppose ye call blessed, yet is it most abominable idolatry, as by the
grace of God, shall be made manifest. And first concerning the word it self
MASS, you are of such variety of opinions among your, selves concerning it,
that As Doctor Bellarmin in his answer to Duplessis Mornay de Eucharist. lib.
11. cap. 1. and Genebrard. in Liturg. S. Denis from the word MISSAH, Deuteronomy.
16.10. that properly signifies sufficiency, but Bellarmin refutes this, lib.
1. de Missa, cap. 1.
some of you says, it is taken from the Hebrew; some Bulinger ibidem from
(...), that signifies a secret sanctification, from the which comes mystery.
from the Greek, some As Bellarmin ibidem, and sundry others from mitto,
missio, or dimissio.
from the Latin: and Some because the sacrifice and prayers is sent to God in
the same, as Hugo de S. Victor de sacram. lib. 2. part. 8. cap. ult.
some says, it is called the Mass for one cause, and Some because an angel, as
they say, is sent unto the same; as Lombard. in 4. sent. did. 13. and Thomas
part. 3. quaest. 83. And some because the people is dismissed, and sent forth,
as Bellar. lib. 1. de Missa, cap. 1.
some for another. I will only speak this of it, that it is usually taken by
the ancient Writers, for the dismission, or skailing, as we call it, of the
Church, after the public service was done to God, as Bellarmin grants, in the
first acception of this word Mass. And therefore in the end of your Mass, the
Deacon cries, Ite missa est; that is, Go your way, the Congregation is
dismissed. But now the Papists takes not the word in this sense, for the
skailing of the Church, or dismission of the people, after the service of
preaching, prayer, and so forth: but for that abominable sacrifice of theirs,
wherein, as they suppone, they offer up Christ his very body and blood in a
sacrifice for the quick and the dead, as M. Gilbert does here. And for this
cause they call this sacrifice, the Mass, that is; first, sent from the Father
to us, that Christ his body and blood might be with us: next, sent from us to
the Father, that he may interceed, and may be for us with the Father, as
Durandus lib. 4. ration. divin. testifies. But how can he be sent from them to
heaven, seeing he descends in the mouth, stomach and belly of the Priest, for
to be sent down to the belly of the Priest, and to be sent up to heaven, are
things contrary. So by this style of the Mass, as they take it, it is plain,
that either Christ descends from heaven in the earth daily in the Mass, which
some of them grants also. Turrian. 1 tract. cap. 11 fol. 59. which is contrary
to an article of our faith, That he sits at the right hand of h^s Father, whom
the heavens must contain until the time that all things be restored, Acts 3.21.
or else their Mass-Priests, dust and ashes, are the creators of their Creator,
which is a blasphemy.

Thus much now for the name of the Mass, which all Christians should abhor,
according to that of David, That he would not take the name of false Gods in
his mouth, Psalm. 16 4. For that word which is proponed by men for an Article of
our Faith, which is not found in the Scripture, neither in proper terms, nor
yet in substance, and by necessary consequence out of the same, should be
rejected by the Church of God, as a profane and a bastard word. But the Mass is
such: For it is proponed by the Church of Rome as an Article of our Faith: and
yet it is neither found in proper terms, nor in substance, nor by any
necessary consequence out of the Scripture: Therefore it should be rejected, as
profane and idolatrous, by the Church of God.

This for the name: Now to the matter. This is one of the greatest
controversies betwixt you and us, concerning your sacrifice of the Mass: which,
as ye account it most heavenly, so we account it most abominable, as that which
injures the Son of God, which derogats from his death and passion, which is
injurious to his everlasting Priesthood, which is idolatrous, vain, needless,
and fruitless; which hinders and overthrows the true service of God: all which
shall be made plain of it, by Gods grace.

The matter of our controversy therefore is: Whither Jesus Christ, God and
man, his body and blood be personally and corporally offered up in your
sacrifice of the Mass? as ye call it. And whither this your sacrifice be a
propiciatory sacrifice for the sins of the quick and the dead? This your Church
affirms and holds, and this we deny. Now let us see your reasons first, and
then we will set down what reasons we have for us out of the Word of God to the
contrary.

As to yours. First, ye say it way prefigured by the Law of Moses: Next,
prophesied of by the Prophets. And thirdly, done and instituted by Christ our
Savior, and commanded by him to be done to the end of the world.

As to the first, This sacrifice was prefigured by the sacrifices of the Old
Testament, for the which purpose ye quote Levit. 2. and 6.20. Unto the which I
answer, That the sacrifices of the Old Testament were figures and shadows of
that great and bloody sacrifice of Christ Jesus, ones offered up, upon the
cross, never to be offered up again, as the Apostle says, Heb. 9.25.26.27.28.
and of our spiritual sacrifices, and service to God, whereof the Apostle speaks
in these places here cited, Romans 12.1. Heb. 13.15.16. The which also were
fulfilled in that one and only sacrifice of himself upon the cross, for the
sins of the world; and are fulfilled in our spiritual sacrifices of our selves,
and of the calves of out lips continually. But that these were figures of your
abominable sacrifice in the Mass, there is not a syllable in the whole
Scripture to prove the same: For that which was prefigured in the Old
Testament, was, and is fulfilled in the New Testament. But the New Testament
has not so much as one syllable of your sacrifice of the Mass: therefore it
could not be prefigured in the Old Testament. For if it were prefigured by the
sacrifices of the Old Testament, it behoved either to be one with the spiritual
sacrifice of all Christians, or else one with the bloody sacrifice of Christ
upon the cross: for only these two sorts of sacrifices are prefigured in the
Old Testament, and recorded to be fulfilled in the New Testament: but your
sacrifice of the Mass, is one with neither of them: for it is not one with the
first sort, for they are spiritual, and you will have it external: neither is
it one with the other of Christ's sacrifice upon the cross, for there he died,
and there he shed his blood, and there he suffered the torments of Gods wrath,
and indignation for our sins: and there he satisfied the justice of God, and
merited an everlasting redemption to us. But in your sacrifice of the Mass,
your selves grants, that neither is he crucified, nor is his blood shed, nor
suffers he the wrath of God for our sins, nor satisfies properly the justice of
God for the same, nor properly merits remission of our sins in the Mass,
Bellarm. lib. 2. de missa, cap. 4. therefore it is not one with that sacrifice
of Christ upon the cross. For two several actions which have two different
forms, and are done in diverse times and places, for diverse ends, cannot be one
only, and the self same sacrifice: for it is the form that gives a thing to be,
and distinguishes it from all other things. But Christ his offering up of
himself upon the cross, and your sacrifice of the Mass have different forms,
are done in diverse places and times, and for diverse ends, therefore they
cannot be both one. Further, if they were both one, then it should follow, that
as the sacrifice of Christ upon the cross is of an infinite valor, so the
sacrifice of the Mass should be of the same valor. But Bellarmin says, lib. 2.
de missa, cap. 4 fol. 740. That the sacrifice of the Mass, is but of a finit
valor, and the sacrifice of the cross of an infinite valor. Therefore they
cannot be both one and the self same sacrifice: Therefore this sacrifice of
your Mass, seeing it is not one with neither of these two sorts of sacrifices,
is not prefigured in the Old Testament.

As for the second, that it was foretold by the Prophets: It is as true as the
former: for all the sacrifices which were foretold by the Prophets in the Old
Testament, are fulfilled in the New Testament. But the New Testament, as has
been said, makes only mention of these two sorts of sacrifices, Christ's on the
cross, and our spiritual sacrifices: and not a syllable or the sacrifice of the
Mass: Therefore it is not foretold by the Prophets in the Old Testament. As
for these Scriptures which ye quote, Malac. 1.10.11.12. Isai. 19.19.21. and
56.7. they speak of the spiritual worship of God, and of the spiritual
sacrifices, which the Gentiles being called, should offer up unto God, under the
Gospel, whereof mention is made in these places, Heb. 13.15.16. 1. Pet. 2.5.
Romans 12.1. and 15.16. For either they speak properly and literally, or else
figuratively. But if you say they speak properly of external sacrifices, then
they speak here of that legal and ceremonial worship of the Jews, and so these
places does not appertain to the New Testament. Or, if you will say, they speak
figuratively; then, I say, they make nothing for your external sacrifice in the
Mass, which you will have to be a sacrifice, not figuratively, but properly. So
howsoever ye expone them, they can no ways make for your external sacrifice in
the Mass. Either therefore must ye prove this sacrifice of your Mass in the New
Testament first (which ye will never be able to do) or else the figures and
prophesies in the Old Testament, will never prove it, seeing there is nothing
either prefigured, or foretold in the Old Testament, but that which in the New
Testament is fulfilled. Let us see therefore what you can allege for this your
sacrifice in the New Testament. You say, that Christ the chief Priest
(according to the order of Melchisedeck in this action, and according to the
order of Aaron) upon the cross instituted it, Matthew. 26.26. Luke 22.19 Mark 14
22. and commanded to be observed to the end of the world. Before I come to the
institution, there are two things to be examined, which you have written here.
The first, that you say, that Christ, according to the order of Aaron, did
offer up himself upon the cross. Unto the which I answer: first, that you
gainsay here, two great Papists, Alanus and Bellarmin, whereof the one says,
that Christ never sacrificed Aaronice, that is, according to the order of
Aaron, Alanus de Eucharist. lib 2. cap. 9. The other says, that Christ his
sacrifice upon the cross, was neither according to the order of Melchisedeck,
nor yet according to the order of Aaron, Bellarm. de Missa, lib. 1. cap. 6 fol.
626. And not only he affirms it, that it is not according to the order of
Aaron, but also he affirms, that this should be certain to all the faithful.
So, if you be of the faithful, and his doctrine be true which the Pope your
head has privileged to be printed, this should also have been certain to you,
and so you should not have gainsaid it. You had need to beware of this, M.
Gilbert, to contradict so openly the learned Fathers and Masters of your
Catholic faith; for by this doing, ye will both bewray your selves that you
have no unity and concord one with another, and also ye will bring your self in
suspicion with your head, that ye are not a defender of the Catholic faith,
seeing you so openly contradict the masters and defenders thereof. Mark this,
Reader, what concord these men have among themselves, some saying one thing,
some another. Next, I say, if you refer this also to his person, that as this
action was according to Aaron, so himself was a Priest according to his order,
in his sacrifice. Then I say, you both gainsay the plain Scriptures of God.
Heb. 5.6.10. and 7.11. and also the learned of your Church, Bellar. lib. 1.
de missa, cap. 6. For, suppose it be true, that this sacrifice of his upon the
cross, did accomplish all the sacrifices of Aaron, and put an end unto them,
according as he said, It is finished: Yet he offered up this sacrifice, not as
he was a Priest according to Aaron, (for he was not a Priest according to his
order at all) but as he was a Priest, according to the order of Melchisedeck:
and therefore the Scripture joins both together, Heb. 5.6.7.10. to assure us
that he offered up himself upon the cross, as he was Priest, not according to
Aaron, but according to Melchisedeck.

The second thing is, that you say, Christ according to the order of
Melchisedeck in this action, which you mean the Mass, did offer up his body and
blood under the forms of bread and wine. It is true indeed, that Christ,
according to the order of Melchisedeck, is an High Priest, and not according to
the order of Aaron: but yet neither is it certain out of the Scripture, that
Melchisedeck did offer up bread and wine, in an external sacrifice. For the
Scripture says only, he brought it forth. For this is the proper signification
of the Hebrew word Hotzsi, as in sundry places of Scripture, Ezech. 22. Psalm.
135. Exodus 8. Number. 30. and so the Chaldaick Paraphrast, Amena, which is, to
bring forth: and the Greek (...); and so Cyprian. Epist. ad Caecil. and
Chrysostom hom. 35. in cap. 14. Genes. and Joseph. lib. 1. cap. 19. and Ambros.
upon the 7. cap. Epist. ad Heb. he brought forth for to refresh Abraham, etc.
And Cardinal Cajetan says the same upon the 14 of Genesis There is nothing
written there of a sacrifice or oblation; but a bringing forth of bread and
wine to refresh the victors, says he, which is not to sacrifice. And it is
certain that he gave it to Abraham and his company to refresh them with, after
the slaughter of these Kings. And the Apostle, Heb 7 whereas he sets down these
things wherein Melchisedeck was a type of Christ, he does not so much as give
any inkling of this: For there he compares Melchisedeck with Christ. First,
that as Melchisedeck was both King and Priest, so was Christ. Next, as
Melchisedeck was without father and mother, beginning and ending, the Scripture
not mentioning of it, so was Christ. Thirdly, as Melchisedeck was greater then
Aaron, and had a more excellent Priesthood then the Levitical Priesthood, so
was Christ's. But never a word here of a sacrifice of bread and wine, wherein
Melchisedeck should have resembled the sacrifice of your Mass, as ye suppose.
So you find out here, that which the Spirit of God found not out: and so ye
make your self wiser then the holy Ghost in his Epistle. But we will learn not
to be wise above that which is written, and to search no further then the
Spirit of God has found out already. And suppose it were granted to you (which
ye are never able to prove) that Melchisedeck did offer up bread and wine, yet
what to do has this with your devilish abomination of your Mass, wherein ye
say the substance of bread and wine is gone away, only the forms remaining.
For if your sacrifice in the Mass be like the sacrifice of Melchisedeck, then
the substance of bread and wine should remain, as it did in the sacrifice of
Melchisedeck, and the bread and wine should be offered up, and not Christ's body
and blood, as bread and wine only were offered up in Melchisedeck his
sacrifice. So then, either Melchisedeck his sacrifice is not a type of your
sacrifice in the Mass, or else true bread and wine remains in the Sacrament,
and not Christ his body and blood which is offered up. Choose you then, whither
you will deny your sacrifice to be according to the order of Melchisedeck, or
else will you let go your real presence, your transubstantiation, and your
personal offering up of Christ Jesus in your abominable Mass, for one you must
do.

Thirdly, if Christ offered up such a sacrifice at his Supper, as was
prefigured by Melchisedeck, which you affirm here, then must it follow that
Christ fulfilled that figure perfectly; and so the same sacrifice needs no more
to be offered up again, and so here will follow the desolation of your
Mass-Priests, whose work is chiefly in repeating of this sacrifice again.

Fourthly, I would ask you, whither is this sacrifice which ye say he offered
up according to the order of Melchisedeck in his last Supper, one with that
sacrifice which he offered up upon the cross, or not? If it be one, then I say
as he died and shed his blood on the cross, and purchased an everlasting
redemption by the same: so this sacrifice of your Mass must be joined with his
death, and shedding of his blood, and must have the like virtue and effect to
redeem us, and so two absurdities will follow. The one, that Christ not only
should twice have died, once in the Supper, and afterward upon the cross: but
also dies, and is crucified continually, in your Mass, and yet the Scripture
says, he died but once. The other, that that sacrifice of his upon the cross
is superfluous: for what needed him to die again to redeem mankind, since the
first offering of himself in the Supper was a sufficient redemption? For if his
sacrifice upon the cross was a sufficient redemption, which you cannot deny:
and if the sacrifice of him in the Supper be one with that, of necessity it
must follow, that as his sacrifice upon the cross was a sufficient redemption:
even so his sacrifice in the Supper must be a sufficient redemption for
mankind. And therefore Alanus, a great defender of your Catholic faith, says,
according to the judgment of the Council of Trent, That the new Covenant is
founded on the blood of Christ offered up in the Supper, before he was
crucified: and that Christ was truly our passover the day before he suffered:
and he says, This is the foundation of all Christian doctrine, according to
the judgment of the Council, Alanus de Euchar. lib. 2 cap. 28. Now if this be
true, that he was our Passover, before he died, and the covenant was founded in
his blood which he offered up in the Supper: then, certainly, Christ died in
vain, which is more then blasphemous: and so blasphemous must that doctrine of
your Mass be, which carries with it such a blasphemy. And if you will say, it
is not the same with that sacrifice upon the cross: then, I say, First, you are
contrary to your own Church in this, who says, it is one with that sacrifice
of the cross. Next, Christ his body and blood is not offered then in the
Supper: for his body and blood was offered up upon the cross, and so your Mass
is gone, or else make two Christ's, one in the Supper under the forms of bread
and wine, which the Disciples saw not: and another who was offered up upon the
cross, which was seen of all. So whither will ye go, and unto what side will ye
turn you, M. Gilbert, for the uphold of your Mass? For there are rocks and
sand-beds on every side. So neither did Christ offer up himself in a sacrifice
at all in his last Supper, neither did he it according to the order of
Melchisedeck. But now let us see how ye prove this sacrifice out of the
institution. And seeing this point of doctrine is such a weighty point, as
whereupon the salvation and damnation of souls does hing: therefore, I pray
thee, Christian Reader, deceive not thine own soul to thy everlasting
perdition, but take good heed what ground is in the institution for this their
sacrifice; for if they prove it not here, it will never be proved by the
Scripture. You say therefore, that Christ took bread and wine; we grant that,
yet here is no sacrifice. What then? He gave thanks: yet here is no sacrifice.
What next? He blessed it. Yet here is no sacrifice. And whereas ye say, that by
this blessing, and his heavenly words, the bread and wine is changed in the
body and blood of Christ: that I have sufficiently (as I hope) overthrown
already. But to return to the words of the institution: after the blessing of
the bread, which Luke expones by giving of thanks: the text says, He gave.
What gave he but that which he took, and had blessed? And what took he, and
blessed he but the bread? And therefore the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 10. The
bread which we bless, etc. So then it was bread which he gave, and not his own
body and blood corporally. And unto whom gave he it? The text says, unto his
disciples, both in Matthew, Mark and Luke, all with one consent. Now that which
was given to his Disciples, was not properly offered up in a sacrifice: for a
sacrifice is an offering to God. And the text says here, He gave it to his
Disciples. So there is not a syllable in the institution, that can make for
your pretended sacrifice. You here corrupt the word of Jesus Christ
wonderfully: For first, you expone by giving, offering up in a sacrifice. Next,
whereas the Scripture in Matthew, Mark and Luke have but giving once, and
refers this giving, not to God, but to the Disciples: And he gave it to the
Disciples: you allege here two givings: the one to God, which is your own
invention, whereof the Scripture makes no mention: the other to the Disciples,
which is the form of a Sacrament, and not of a sacrifice: for a Sacrament is
given to us, a sacrifice to God. So all the grounds of your sacrifice of the
Mass is two: the one is, your devised transubstantiation: so one error leans
upon another: the other is, not the words of Christ, And he gave it to his
Disciples, but your own words, and your own exposition only, And he gave, or
offered up himself then for them. These are your own words, and not the words
of the holy Ghost. So this sacrifice of your Mass, has not the words of Jesus
Christ, as Matthew, Mark and Luke have set them down, to be the ground of it:
but only your own words, and your own interpretation. For how dare ye be so
impudent as to affirm that Christ gave it twice: once in an offering for his
Disciples, and another time in a Sacrament to his Disciples, seeing we will
believe Matthew, Mark and Luke, the sworn penmen of the holy Ghost, who say
only he gave it to his Disciples as a Sacrament, and makes no mention at all
that he gave it to God as a sacrifice. Do you think the Lord will never take an
account of you for such a manifest lie of the Son of God, of his Scripture, of
his Apostles, and holy Writers who writ it, they all saying, He gave it to his
Disciples; and you affirming beside that giving to them, that he gave it, that
is, offered it up for them? O sinful man! Who will venture the salvation of his
soul upon so small a thread; yea, upon so impudent a lie, as ye make of the Son
of God. O repent, or else you shall one day feel the fierceness of the Lords hot
wrath and indignation upon your soul and carcass for evermore. Leave off
therefore to be the cause of the damnation of souls, for you deceive them, and
makes them believe that this monstrous abomination of your Mass, has Jesus
Christ to be the Author of it, while it has not so much as a syllable in the
whole institution that gives so much as an inkling of it. Are you wiser then
the wisest of your generation: Bellarmin, who for all the arguments that he
brings, never so much as once gives an inkling of this your argument. For he
thought it was too plain a lie to affirm a double giving here out of the words
of the institution: and too absurd an exposition to expone, He gave, that is,
he offered it up. And therefore he has no such reasoning for his sacrifice of
the Mass. Yea, that which ye think is plain out of the institution, that Christ
offered up his body and his blood in the Supper, he says, That the action of
offering cannot be easily distinguished and separated from the other actions
which was done jointly there together by the words of the institution, Bellar.
lib. 1. de missa, cap. 12. fol. 669. And more plainly, he says, That the
Evangelists have not expressly said, that Christ offered up himself unto the
Father in the Supper, lib. 1. de missa, cap. 24. fol. 706. This is a plain
speaking. Now your sacrifice of the Mass has no express warrant out of the
institution of Christ, if you will believe him, whose controversies are allowed
by the Pope to be printed. But it may be ye thought that this your doctrine
would have been swallowed up without further trial, and therefore you regarded
not what you writ. You have stolen your self in such credit with the simple
among you, who are deceived and blinded by your lies, that ye are not ashamed
to be plain enough in speaking untruths and lies of the Word of God. But the
Lord will recompense this one day. But now to return to the rest of the words
of the institution, as ye rehearse them. And last of all, ye say, He gave his
body and blood to his Disciples to be eaten He gave it spiritually, and they
did eat it spiritually: and he gave them Sacraments of his body and blood, the
bread and wine corporally to them, and they did eat them corporally, suppose
for a spiritual use and end. For that which he gave, they did eat: he gave the
bread and wine, therefore it was bread and wine which they did eat and drink.
And therefore the Apostle says plainly, For whosoever shall eat of this bread,
etc. 1. Cor. 11. He calls it bread that is eaten. And our Savior says, Verily,
verily, from henceforth shall I not drink of the fruit of this vine with you,
Matthew. 26.29. That which he gave his Apostles to drink corporally in the latter
Supper, was the fruit of the vine, so the Evangelists says. But Christ's blood
was not the fruit of the vine: therefore it was not his his blood which they
corporally drank, but wine, which was the fruit of the vine-tree. I go forward.
And when he had done this, ye say, He commanded his Disciples, that is, the
lawful Pastors of the Church to do the same for the remembrance of him to the
end of the world. That is true, that which he did here, he commanded to be done
by his Disciples to the end of the world: but never a syllable here that he
offered up his body and blood under the forms of bread and wine in the Supper,
in a propiciatory sacrifice for the quick and the dead: Therefore he commanded
not this sacrifice of your Mass to be done to the end of the world. And whereas
ye restrict this commandment, Do this, only to the Pastors, ye have to
understand that as there is something here which Christ did, which is proper to
them, as to be the dispensers of these heavenly mysteries; so there is some
actions here, which is common also with them to the people, as to receive, to
eat, to drink these Sacraments of his body and blood in his remembrance. Seeing
therefore this commandment, Do this, is to be referred to the whole actions of
the Supper: and seeing there is some actions in the same, which the other
Christians should do also: therefore this commandment, Do this, is not to be
restricted to the office of the Pastors only, (which ye do) but common with
them to the actions of the people. Now to your conclusion: Seeing, say ye, your
Priests do the same in this sacrifice, which our Savior did: how can I say that
your Religion in this, was not instituted by Christ. If you do the same that he
did, indeed I will grant you it. But ye do not the same which our Savior did:
Therefore your Religion in this is not instituted by Jesus Christ.

The which I prove. First, Christ took bread and wine in this Sacrament, and
gave it to be eaten and drunken; and bread was eaten, and wine was drunken by
his Disciples. But your Priest takes bread and wine, and conjures the substance
Of it away by your transubstantiation, and only remains the forms of the bread
and wine behind: therefore you do not the thing which Christ did.

Secondly, Christ took bread and brake it: you take bread, and hangs it up, and
keeps it in a box, to carry to the sick, and in processions. Thirdly, Christ
took bread and gave it to his Apostles: your Priests like gluttons in the
sacrifice of your Mass, eats it up every whit himself alone. Fourthly, Christ
gave a Sacrament to strengthen men's faith: but your Priests gives a sacrifice
to redeem men's souls. Fifthly, Christ gave it to be eaten, your Priests gives
it to be worshipped. Sixthly, Christ gave bread: your Priests say they give
God. Seventhly, Christ gave the cup to his Disciples, saying, Drink ye all of
this: your Priest drinks all himself, and takes away the cup from the people,
both in your sacrifice and Sacrament. Eighthly, Christ instituted the Supper,
and commanded the Church to celebrat the same, as he had instituted it: but the
Mass has been clamped up by many sundry Popes: one made the Confiteor, another
the Introit, another the Kyrieeleison, another the Gloria in excelsis and so
forth of the rest, as shall be proved afterward. Ninthly, Christ intending to
celebrat his Supper, changes not his garment: but the Priest going to say his
Mass, does naught but clothe and unclothe, and every garment carrying a great
mystery. The Priest saying Mass, must have his head and beard shaven, and upon
his head a circle of hair, which they call a crown; imitating the Priests of
the Gentiles in this, Baruch chap. 6. v. 30. and not Christ, and his Apostles.
Tenthly, Christ in the Supper used common bread: but the Popish Priest must
expressly use other manner of bread, baken betwixt two irons, which is properly,
Wafers. Eleventhly, Christ made his Supper upon a table: the Popish Priest must
have a consecrat Altar, with some pieces of relics put in the hole of it; or
else a marble stone, in the borders whereof are little pieces of cloth, which
they call Corporales, to say his Mass on. Twefthly, Christ in the celebrating
of the Supper, preached and taught his Apostles: the Popish Priest mumbleth
betwixt his teeth certain prayers: he turns to and from the Altar, one while
his back, another while his face to the people: now goes he from one side of
the Altar unto another: now he sings with an high voice, now with a low
voice: now he lifts up his arms, now he casts them down. Briefly, he seems
to be a man wholly mad, not knowing what countenance for to use. Thirteenthly,
Christ in the Supper spoke in a vulgar tongue, that all might understand: the
Popish Priest in their Masses speaks in a strange tongue, which the most part
of themselves understands not. Fourteenthly, Christ first brake the bread. and
then gave it to his Apostles: the profane Priest first speaks certain words
over the bread in his Mass, and then breaks it (or the accidents of it, as
they say) at their pleasure. Fifteenthly, Christ after he had broken the bread,
says, This is my body: the Popish Priest speaks the words, without breaking of
the bread; and not content with the words of Christ, he adds this word enim,
unto them. Therefore you cannot, M. Gilbert, but speak against the light of
your own conscience, when you say that your Priests does the same in their
Mass, that Christ did in the Supper: And here I appeal your conscience before
the terrible and everliving God, and before Jesus Christ; that shall judge the
quick and the dead, whither ye do not speak in this against the light of your
own conscience, or not? And whether your Priests in your Mass, do the same
which Christ did in the Supper, or not? Think you not that you must stand
before the living God, and give a reckoning of these things? Repent in time,
and cease to deceive the souls of your Contrymen any more. But to conclud
this: What ado has your Mass with the Supper of Christ? What likeness is there
between the one and the other? In the Supper which Christ instituted in the
Scripture, we are remembered of his death and passion upon the cross, whereby he
appeased the wrath of God for our sins, and of our duty toward him; whereby we
acknowledge in our consciences that we are obliged to die to sin, seeing it
behoved the eternal Son of God, by his death upon the cross, to redeem us from
the same: upon the which arises an earnest thanksgiving in the hearts and
mouths of every true Christian, for so great a salvation, purchased so
wonderfully, as by the death of the eternal Son of God. In your sacrifice of
the Mass, is there any such thing? Is there any remembrance of his death and
suffering there? Is his death shown to the people in a known language, that
they may understand it? Is there any acknowledging of any duty there for his
death? Is there any true thanksgiving there? No, none. But in stead of these, a
heap of words in an unknown language, and a diversity of apish gestures, and
Morish and Juglers tricks, to feed the eyes of the poor people, which neither
the people, nor yet many of your selves do understand. In the Supper we are
also admonished of our spiritual conjunction with our neighbor, and of our duty
toward him, in that we are all partakers of one bread made of many grains, and
of one wine made of many grapes; to signify unto us that we are all renewed
and redeemed by one blood, members of one body, living by one Spirit, drawing
life, motion and feeling, all from one Head, being one with him, and so one
with others, whereby follows our mutual duties one toward another. In your Mass
there is no communion of the bread made of many grains, and of the wine made of
many grapes, to signify this conjunction and communion, either with Christ our
Head, or among our selves, the Priest eating and drinking all himself. In the
Supper, according to Christ his institution, by giving, taking, eating, and
drinking of the bread and wine by all the Disciples, whereby our bodily life is
nowrished and strengthened, is not only signified and represented our spiritual
growth in that spiritual communion with him, whereon our spiritual life
depends: but also in the same, all the faithful does truly by faith eat and
drink spiritually his flesh and blood, whereby they are made one with himself,
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, whereby they are strengthened in that
spiritual life, and confirmed in the hope of that glory. But is there any such
thing in your Papistical sacrifice? Is there any giving and taking, eating and
drinking, of bread and wine by the faithful, either to represent our communion
with Christ, and among our selves, or to strengthen us in that spiritual life
through his conjunction? Do the poor people eat or drink, either bodily, or
spiritually in your Mass? Is there any action there to stir up their
conscience? Or any instruction to increase their knowledge? Are they ought but
idle beholders of a pretended mystery, which is both dumb and deaf, and of a
Priest that eats and drinks all himself alone? So that in stead of these
heavenly dishes, which our loving Father does propine unto us, upon his table
in the Supper, what is there in your abominable sacrifices, but a feeding with
husks, an apish game, and Juglers tricks, to feed the fantasies of the poor
people, that sees but understands not; that hears, but they know not what. So
that in truth there is as great likeness betwixt Christ's Supper, and your Mass,
as is between the table of the Lord, and the table of Devils, and light with
darkness. Seeing therefore there is such a difference betwixt your sacrifice in
the Mass, and Christ his Supper, as has been seen: therefore your Priests does
not the same in the Mass, which our Savior did in the last Supper. And
therefore how can ye say, that your Religion in this is instituted by Christ?
And this is so evident, that some of your own Doctors and learned Writers, have
been forced to confess the same. As Petrus a Soto in his book against Brentius,
and Lindanus, lib. 4. Panopl. confesses, that the sacrifice of the Mass, with
many other points of their Religion, is an unwritten tradition, which has
neither the beginning nor author of it in the Scriptures of God. And Gerson a
Papist, and exponer of the Mass, says, in Floretum, that the office of the
Mass was ordained by Saint James and Basile the Bishop of Cesarea; but the
Sacrament of the Supper was instituted by Jesus Christ. And he alleges the
Canon Law, De cons. did. 1. Canon Jacobus, for him. So first there is three
hundred years betwixt Basile and James, which are the composers of the Mass.
Secondly, he distinguishes betwixt the Supper and the Mass, and he says, The
Supper is instituted by Christ, and the office of the Mass by S. James and S.
Basile. So if he speak true, the Mass and the Supper, is not both one; and the
Mass is not instituted by Christ, as the Supper is. And so out of your own
mouths, your Mass is confessed not to be instituted by Christ in the
Scripture. Shameless therefore and impudent, M. Gilbert, are ye in affirming
that your Religion in this is instituted by Christ.

Master Gilbert Brown.
There are five chief things wherein the instruction of Jesus Christ consists,
as I have showed before. Of these five, the Ministers wants three of the
chiefest in their communion. First, a lawful Priest or Minister. Secondly,
thanksgiving. Thirdly, blessing. Fourthly, giving, or offering. Fifthly,
communicating. First, a lawful Minister, as after I shall show. Secondly, the
blessing of the bread and wine, which they have blotted out of their Scots
Bibles, and put in thanksgiving for the same, as if both were one: not the
less, that both the Greck and Latin is against them, and signifies two diverse
actions, both done and said in S. Mark 14.22.23. at his Supper, (...),
benedicens, blessed, and (...), gratias agens, giving thanks. And thirdly,
giving or offering of his blessed body and blood to his Father for his
faithful, which properly is to sacrifice, as the holy Fathers writes upon the
same. And as for their thanksgiving, it is but an invention of their own head,
as may be seen in their Psalm books: and their communicating is but of bread
and wine, but ours is of the body and blood of Christ. So we only have the true
institution of Jesus Christ, and not they, and that by the trial of the
touchstone.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
As for the five chief things wherein ye say the institution of Christ
consists; to wit, a lawful Minister. 2. Thanksgiving. 3. Blessing. 4 Giving, or
offering. 5 Communicating. We grant that a lawful Minister is required, but not
a sacrificing Priest here, because there is no external and outward sacrifice
here, as ye suppone, and as has been proved. And seeing your Priests are
sacrificing Priests, of a sacrifice that has not a syllable in the Word of God
to bear witness unto it, and seeing their authority depends of the authority of
the Pope, which in Antichristian, as shall be proved hereafter: and seeing the
most part of your Priests are admitted without the due trial and examination of
gifts and manners, and the most part cannot preach the Gospel, as experience
teaches; therefore in your communion, or rather abominable sacrifice of your
Mass, (for how can it be called a Communion, where the Priest only eats and
drinks up all?) there is no lawful Minister: and seeing our offices is lawful;
to wit, the preaching of the Gospel, the administration of Sacraments, and
Discipline: and seeing our entry to the offices is lawful also, by due
examination of life and doctrine: and seeing the authority of our calling is
from God, who enables whom he calls with gifts meet to discharge the calling,
and from his Church, examining, trying, testifying, approving, ordaining, and
consenting unto the same: Therefore in the administration of our Communion,
there are lawful Ministers. As to the second, thanksgiving; we grant also it is
comprised in the institution of Christ his Sacrament, and is required in the
celebration of the same: But you say, our thanksgiving which we use, is but an
invention of our own heads, as may be seen in our Psalm books. Whereunto I
answer: If ye respect the matter contained in our thanksgiving, it has the
warrant of the Scripture, and so in that respect it is not our own invention.
If ye respect the authority, we are taught and commanded by our Savior, both by
his example, for he gave thanks: and also by his commandment, Do this, to do
the same. And so in that respect it is not our own invention. If you respect
the end, it is Gods glory, which is the proper end of all thanksgiving. If ye
will respect the form of this thanksgiving; to wit, the words and order wherein
it is conceived: I say, it is left indifferent to the Church of God to form
their prayers and thanksgiving; so being the matter, end, and authority of the
using of them publicly, have their warrant out of the Word of God So seeing
the authority to give thanks, and the matter also of our thanksgiving, and end
thereof is set down in the Word; and seeing the Lord has left it free to the
Church of God, concerning the outward form of the same, the Scriptures not
determining it, which your self, I hope, will not deny. For your Canon has
many forms of prayers, and thanksgiving in your Mass, which after that form and
order is not set down in the Word of God. Therefore, you injury the Lords
Spirit and his Church, who calls our thanksgiving our own invention.

As to the third concerning blessing, which you distinguish from thanksgiving,
and says, we have blotted it out of our Scots Bibles, and put thanksgiving in
the room thereof: and so you say, we want that part. First then, I will ask
you, Did not Luke and the Apostle Paul set down the whole form and the chief
points of the institution of that Sacrament? I suppose you will not deny it,
for it were too plain an impiety for you to say, that either Luke, the sworn
penman of Gods Spirit, or Paul, who said, I have received of the Lord, that
which also I have delivered unto you, 1. Cor. 11.23. that either of these had
omitted the history of the institution of this Sacrament, a principal point
thereof: but either this blessing is one with thanksgiving, or else they have
omitted a principal point thereof, for neither of them makes mention in these
places of blessing, but only of thanksgiving: therefore it is one with
thanksgiving.

Secondly, I say, either the whole three Evangelists, and the Apostle Paul, in
setting down the institution of the Sacrament of the Supper, omits a chief
thing: to wit, the blessing of the cup (which I suppose ye will not say) or
else the blessing of the cup is one with thanksgiving: for the Apostles Paul
and Luke makes no mention at all of blessing, but only of thanksgiving: and the
two Evangelists Matthew and Mark, makes no mention of the blessing of the cup:
but says, that after, or also he took the cup, and when he had given thanks,
etc. therefore they are one.

Thirdly, if ye will credit one Evangelist exponing another, whereas Matthew
and Mark have this word, and he blessed: Luke and Paul have these words, And he
gave thanks. And whereas Matthew and Mark have this word, blessing, after he
took the bread, they use the word thanksgiving, after he took the cup, to
signify that they are both one. And therefore if ye will believe Scripture
exponing Scripture, they are both one. Yea, what will you say to Bellarmin, who
says, lib. 1. de sacram. Euchar. cap. 10 That some Catholics contends, that
both the words (to bless) and to (give thanks) in the Scripture, signifies one
thing? and therefore they interpret thanksgiving, blessing. So if you will
credit your own Catholics, they are both one here.

And whereas you say, that both in the Greek and Latin, they signify diverse
things. I answer: Indeed it is true that sometimes they signify diverse
actions; as blessing, Numb. 6. for the petition of a blessing. But yet
sometimes also, blessing is taken in the Scripture for thanksgiving, as both I
have proved in these places; as also, if ye will deny, there is many places in
the Scripture for the contrary, as Luke 1.65. Ephesians. 1.3. 1. Pet. 1.3. And
whereas you say, that in Mark they signify two distinct actions, I have proved
before, they are both one.

And last of all, I say if by blessing you mean the words of the consecration,
this is my body which is broken for you, etc. as Bellarmin affirms, lib. 4. de
sacram Euch. cap. 13 that the Roman catechist so expones it, and the Theologues
commonly teaches the same: then I say, we want not that chief point, for we
rehearse the words of the institution. So howsoever the word (blessing) be
taken, either for thanksgiving, or for the sanctification of these elements to
an holy use, by prayer, which is comprehended in the thanksgiving, or for the
words (as ye call them) of the consecration, we have always this blessing in
our communion. And as for your hovering and blowing of the words of Christ over
the bread and calice, with your crossing and charming them, after the manner of
Sorcerers, with a set number and order of words and signs, your hiding it, your
rubbing of your fingers for fear of crumbs, your first thortering, and then
lifting up of your arms, your joining and disjoyning of thumb and forefinger,
and sundry other vain and superfluous ceremonies and curiosities, which you use
in blessing of the elements, they have neither command, nor example of Christ's
institution and action, and the Apostles doctrine and doing in the Scriptures
of God.

Now as to the fourth, giving, or offering up of the body and blood of Christ
to his Father, by the faithful: We confess a giving to his Disciples, which you
call afterward a communicating. But for another giving, that is (as you expone
it) an offering up of his body and blood to his Father, we utterly deny it, as
a thing not so much as once mentioned in the whole institution, but contrary to
the same, and Antichristian: and therefore we utterly abhor it, and detest it,
as an invention of your own, as Antichristian, as idolatry, as abomination, as
that which derogates from that blessed and only one sacrifice, whereby he
offered up himself once upon the cross, never to be offered up again, as the
Scripture testifies, Heb. 25. And Bellarmin says plainly, lib. 1. de missa,
cap. 12. and 24. That this offering up is not expressly set down in the words of
the institution, and that it cannot be easily discerned.

And as for the fifth, a communicating, we have it, and that not only of the
bread and wine, as ye here imagine, but of Jesus Christ, God and Man, his very
flesh and blood, and all his blessings by faith spiritually: seeing therefore
we have all these points which are requisite in the institution, a lawful
Minister, thanksgiving, blessing, giving, and communicating: therefore we have
the true institution of Christ in the Sacrament. And because in this your
abominable sacrifice of the Mass (as has been said) there is no communion: For
the Priest takes all: And because you affirm the personal and corporal presence
of Christ's flesh and blood in your sacrifice, and the corporal eating and
drinking of it, which is Capernaitical and more then carnal, contrary to the
Scripture, contrary the nature of a Sacrament, contrary the truth of Christ his
humanity, and contrary the Articles of our Faith, of his ascension, sitting at
his right hand, and there remaining, till his returning in the last day: all
which your sacrifice of the Mass, and transubstantiation in your communion
overthrows: Therefore you have not the true institution of Jesus Christ,
according to the Scripture.

I might end here, but because ye account the sacrifice of your Mass most
heavenly, and the principal part of the worship of God. and we account it a
most abominable idolatry: therefore I will set down some arguments against the
same; whereby, if you will, you may perceive the abomination of it.

First, I say, all lawful sacrifices have the express testimonies of the
Scripture to warrant the institution of them to be of God. But your sacrifice
of the Mass has no express testimony of the Scripture, whereby it may be made
manifest that it is instituted of God: therefore it is not lawful, What now
will you say to this? The proposition you cannot deny, for our Savior says, In
vain worship ye me teaching for doctrine men's commandments, Matthew. 15.9. And
Jeremie reproves the Jews, that they would not walk according as the Lord
commanded them, but according to their own will, Jer. 7 24. And the Apostle
condemns all voluntary Religion, Col. 2.23. Therefore this is most certain,
that that Religion or sacrifice which has not express Scripture, whereby it
may be made plain that it is instituted of God, is not lawful: For all that is
done without faith, is sin, Romans 14.23. and faith has only the Word of God to
lean to, Romans 10.17. And dare the creature be so bold as to appoint a mean to
worship God, without the warrant of his will in his Word? Now to the
assumption, what can you say to it? Bring me an express testimony out of the
Scripture, that God has instituted your Mass, and take it to you. Yea, if it
be instituted in any place of the Scripture, it is instituted in the last
Supper (for this you grant your selves:) But there is not a syllable in the
whole institution, that Christ offered up himself in a sacrifice in the same,
as has been proved: and Bellarmin the learnedest of your Church confesses
plainly, that the Evangelists have not said expressly that Christ offered up
himself in the Supper in a sacrifice, Bellarm. lib. 1. de missa, cap. 24. And
therefore others of your own Religion, Petrus a Soto, in his book against
Brentius, Lindanus lib. 4. Panopliae, Papists of great name, have reckoned the
sacrifice of the Mass among the traditions, which have not their beginning nor
author in the Scriptures. So then by your own confession, the sacrifice of the
Mass has not express Scripture to warrant it: yea, it is a tradition, which
has neither the beginning nor author of it in the Scriptures of God. And I
would ask this question of you: What can be the cause wherefore the typical
sacrifices, and all the rites and ceremonies thereof, is so expressly set down
in the Scripture of the Old Testament (which you will not deny) and this
sacrifice of yours, which ye account more excellent then all these, not to have
been expressly set down in the New Testament, neither the sacrifice, nor the
rites and ceremonies thereof, yea not so much as the very name of it? Is the
New Testament, think ye, more obscure then the Old Testament? which is absurd
to say. Shall the Old Testament be clear in setting down the sacrifices, and all
the rites thereof, which is but the shadow? And should not the New Testament
have been at the least, as clear in setting down the sacrifice of the New
Testament, which ye affirm to be the Mass, if it were such? What an absurd
thing is this? Christian Reader, assure thy self, the Lord Jesus would have
dealt as lovingly and plainly with thee, in setting down the sacrifice of the
Mass in the New Testament (if ever he had instituted such a sacrifice) as he
was in setting down the sacrifices of the Old Testament. But thou may assure
thy self, and thy conscience may lean unto it, since he has not so much as
once expressed it in all the New Testament, therefore he has never appointed
it.

Secondly, I say, in all the places of Scripture wheresoever the Apostles
speaks of the sacrifices which Christians should offer up, they ever speak of
spiritual sacrifices, and never speak of this external sacrifice of the Mass.
They never remember of this their sacrifice of the offering up of Christ in the
Mass. Look throughout the whole New Testament, and thou shall not find this, as
namely in these places, Romans 12. Heb. 1^. Phil. 4. Romans 15.1. Pet. 2. Rev. 5.
Are you and your Mass Priests more wise then the Apostles are? Whither should
we then think and speak as they spoke and thought, or as ye would have us? They
never spoke of your sacrifice of the Mass, and bring one instance, if ye can:
therefore neither should we. We will believe them rather then you.

Thirdly, that doctrine which is expressly gainsaid by the Scripture, must be
false: This you cannot deny. But this your doctrine concerning the often and
daily offering up of Jesus Christ his body and blood in sacrifice in your Mass,
is expressly gainsaid by the Scripture: For the Scripture says in sundry
places, That he has once offered up himself, never to offer up himself again,
Heb. 10.10. By the which will we are sanctified, even by the offering up of
Jesus Christ once made. 11. And every Priest stands daily ministering, and often
times offers one manner of offering, which cannot take away sin. 12. But this
man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sin, sits for ever at the right
hand of God. 10. For with one offering has he consecrated for ever them that
are sanctified. Heb. 9.24. Christ has entered into the very heaven, to appear
now in the sight of God for us; not that he should offer himself often, etc.
28. So Christ was once offered to take away the sins of many. Heb. 7.27. Christ
died once, when he offered up himself. Seeing the Scripture therefore affirms
so plainly, that Christ once offered up himself, and you affirm that in your
abominable sacrifice he offers up himself often, since the Scripture says, the
offering up of Christ is once only, and ye say it is often in your Mass:
therefore this doctrine of yours is plain against the express sayings of the
Scripture. For suppose ye will have an unbloody offering up of Christ, yet the
Scripture only acknowledges this bloody offering up of himself upon the cross.

Fourthly, I will ask you, to what purpose serves the personal sacrifice of
Christ in your Mass? It must be for one of two; to wit, either to satisfy for
our sins, (and therefore ye call it a propiciatory sacrifice) or else to apply
that satisfaction once made by his death upon the cross unto us, the which ye
affirm also of it: But for neither of these is Jesus Christ to be offered up
again: therefore for no cause is he to be sacrificed in your Mass. Not for the
first, to satisfy for our sins, because the Scripture says plainly, that he
has satisfied for our sins, by his once oblation upon the cross, never to die
again, and therefore our Savior says upon the cross, It is finished. And our
redemption and satisfaction is ascribed only to his death once made, and his
blood once shed, Heb. 1. and 6. and 10. John 19 28. And your selves will not
deny this, but the death of Christ is a sufficient ransom and satisfaction for
all the sins of the world, and therefore Bellarmine lib. 1. de Missa, cap. 25.
grants this, That the virtue of his once offering up upon the cross, is infinite
and everlasting, to sanctify us, so that there needs not another sacrifice of
the cross, or the repetition of the same. And the truth of this is manifest:
for if Christ must be offered up in the Mass to satisfy for our sins, he must
die again, and suffer again. For what is it to satisfy God, but to pay to God
that which we ow? And what ow we unto him for our sins, but death: for death is
the stipend of sin? So that to satisfy God for our sins, is to die for our
sins: and therefore we say, Christ has once satisfied for our sins, because he
has once paid our debt, which is death: that is, he has once died for our
sins. So then either Christ has not fully satisfied for our sins, by his once
death upon the cross (which is impiety to think) or else the Lord craves a debt
already paid, over again: (which is blasphemy) or else Christ needs not to be
offered up in your Mass, to satisfy for our sins. And so your sacrifice of the
Mass avails not for to satisfy for our sins.

Let us come to the next: If ye will say, He is offered up in the Mass for to
apply the virtue of the death of Christ unto us, (which your Church also
says.) First, I say, Christ is applied to us, when he is offered, not to God
in a sacrifice, but to us in the Word and Sacraments: therefore he should not
be offered up to God in a sacrifice, but offered to us in his Word and
Sacraments, that he may be applied to us: for it is the Word and Sacraments
which outwardly applies Christ and his death to us, and not a sacrifice: for in
a sacrifice, the thing which is sacrificed, is offered to God, and not applied
to us. Next, I say, if your sacrifice serves but to apply the virtue of Christ
his satisfaction unto us: then it is manifest, the satisfaction is already
made: For first, the salve must be made, before it can be applied. So your
Church here errs, which says, Your sacrifice of the Mass is propiciatory to
appease the wrath of God, and also applicatory to apply the same to us. I say,
thirdly, if Christ should be sacrificed again, that the virtue of his death may
be made effectual in us, then also should he be conceived again in the womb of
the Virgin, born again, die again, and rise again; that the virtue of his
incarnation, birth, death, and resurrection, should be applied unto us: for
will you say^ That he must be sacrificed again to apply the virtue of his
sacrifice upon the cross unto us? and what reason then can ye pretend for you
wherefore he should not be incarnat again, die again, and rise again, that the
virtue of these may be applied to us? Do you think this absurd? What is the
cause then that ye will not blush at the other? Fourthly, I say, if your
sacrifice of the Mass be an application of Christ his sacrifice, then it is not
the sacrifice it self: for the applying of the salve, is not the salve itself:
and therefore since you say that it is the applying of Christ his sacrifice,
wherefore should ye say that Christ is sacrificed in it: for these two cannot
stand together? Fifthly, in Baptism, the sacrifice of Christ, and the virtue of
his death is truly applied unto us: and yet ye will confess that Christ is not
sacrificed in Baptism. Wherefore then may not the virtue of his death and
sacrifice be applied to us in the Sacrament of the Supper, and yet he not
sacrificed again in it? And last of all, neither you, neither any creature,
should appoint or make mo means of the applying of Christ and his death to us,
then is set down in his Word: But his Word only sets down the inward operation
of Gods Spirit applying it to us, and faith upon our part apprehending it: and
the Word, the Sacraments and Discipline proponing and confirming the same unto
us. But never a syllable in the whole Scripture, that the Lord has appointed
your sacrifice of the Mass to apply the death of Christ unto us. Seeing
therefore your sacrifice of the Mass neither satisfies for our sins (for Christ
by his death has done that sufficiently) nor yet applies the satisfaction once
made by the death of Christ unto us (for that is done by the Spirit and faith
inwardly, and by the Word, Sacraments, and discipline outwardly, and that
sufficiently:) Therefore your sacrifice of the Mass is needless, and serves to
no use in the earth.

Fifthly, the Scripture ever conjoins With the sacrifice of Christ, his death:
so that he cannot be sacrificed but by dying, as the Scripture plainly
testifies, Heb. 9.25.26. Not that he should offer up himself often, for then
must he have often suffered from the foundation of the world. The same may be
seen also in sundry other places, whereof I have quoted a few, Heb. 7.27. and
9.14. So the Scripture says, if he must be often offered up, he must often
suffer. And Bellarmin lib. 1. de missa, fol. 725. says, That if there he not a
true and a real slaughter of Christ in the Mass, then the Mass is not a true
and real sacrifice. But the Scripture says plainly, that he has but once
died; and I suppose you will not say that he is to die again: Therefore seeing
he cannot die again, he cannot be offered up again: For the Scripture
acknowledges no sacrifice of Christ, but that which is joined with his death.

Sixthly, Bellarmin grants, that in all external sacrifices, the sacrifice must
be changed, lib. 1. de missa, cap. 2. fol. 693. and 604. It is also required,
says he, in a true sacrifice, that that which is to be sacrificed be utterly
destroyed. And in another place, cap. 27. lib. de Missa, fol. 726. cap. 2. fol.
604. That which is offered is ordained to a true, real, and voluntar
destruction. But Christ now being glorified, cannot be changed and utterly
destroyed: therefore he cannot be sacrificed, if your selves speak true: or
else as often as he is sacrificed in your Mass, he is utterly destroyed: which is
blasphemy.

Seventhly, the Scripture says, Where there is remission of sins, there is no
more offering, Heb. 10.18. That is, all external propiciatory sacrifice ceases:
but remission of sins is already obtained by the death of Christ, as the
Scripture testifies, Heb. 1.3. and your selves will not deny. Therefore there
needs no more oblation of Christ in your Mass for the same.

Eighthly, the Scripture says, That without shedding of blood, there is no
remission. Heb. 9 22 But in your sacrifice of the Mass, there is no shedding of
blood, as your selves grants; For ye call it an unbloody sacrifice: therefore
by your sacrifice of the Mass, there is no remission of sin.

Further, the Scripture acknowledges no other Priest of the New Testament, but
Christ only: These Priests, says the Apostle to the Hebrews 5. and 7. speaking
of the Priests of the Old Testament, were many, because death hindered them to
endure: but he (speaking of Christ) because he abides for ever, has an
everlasting Priesthood, which cannot pass from one to another. So Christ is the
only Priest of the New Testament. Now if it be true which you say, that Christ
is offered up in your Mass, and that by your Mass-Priests, then are there mo
Priests of the New Testament then Christ, which is plain against the
Scriptures. What will you say to this? That Christ is the principal Priest of
the New Testament, and yours are secondary Priests, and under him, by whose
ministry he offers up himself to God. But, first, was not the Priests of the
Old Testament only secondary Priests? This you will not deny, seeing their
sacrifices were figurs of his, and their Priesthood figurs of his Priesthood
But the Apostle oppones the Priesthood of Christ, not to another principal
Priesthood, but to the Priesthood of men, which was but secondary, and says,
it cannot stand with that secondary Priesthood in the Old Testament: therefore
it cannot stand with your Priesthood of the New Testament. And the reason which
the Apostle alleges, will not only serve to exclud the Priests of the Old
Testament, that was but secundary Priests also: but also all other sacrificing
Priests whatsoever, of the propiciatory sacrifice of the New Testament. For the
reason is, because he bides for ever, and has a Priesthood which cannot pass
from one to another; which will serve as well against your Mass-Priests, as
against them: For they are mortal, as the Priests of the Old Testament were:
and his Priesthood cannot pass from one to another, as it might have done among
the Priests of the Old Testament, and also does among your Priests. For to what
purpose should your Priesthood and sacrifice serve, seeing Christ his sacrifice
has fulfilled all the types of all the sacrifices of the Old Testament? If you
say, to signify Christ his sacrifice to come, as theirs did: then that is
false, for he is sacrificed already. But if you say, to signify and represent
his sacrifice already done: then I say, what needs him to be sacrificed again
for that purpose? For the Word and Sacraments does represent him sufficiently:
and so your Mass needs not to represent his sacrifice. And if you say it
represents his sacrifice: then I say, it is not one with that sacrifice of his
upon the cross, which you will be loath to grant: For your Church says, that
it is one with that in substance. And I say further, if your will say with
Bellarmin lib. 1. de Missa, cap. 25. That this place of the Apostle only
excluds absolutely the multiplication of Priests, in the same dignity and power
with Christ: that then they exclud yours also. For if you offer up the same
sacrifice which he offered up, then you have the same power and dignity which
he had. But this you say you do: For it is no matter of the difference of the
manner, since the sacrifice is one. Seeing therefore Christ, God and Man, which
ye say ye offer up in your Mass, is of that same dignity which he was of, when
he was offered up upon the cross: and seeing the equal dignity of the
sacrifice, makes the equal dignity of the Priest that offers it up: therefore
sacrilegious are your Mass-Priests, and excluded here by the Apostle. And
thirdly, I say, this is a vain distinction of yours, of principal and chief
Priest, and secondary Priests: For this is the nature of this sacrifice of
Christ, that it cannot be offered up by none, but by himself. And fourthly, if
your Mass-Priests be but Ministers in this sacrifice, and Christ the principal,
as you say, who offers up himself by you: then I say, as ye offer up Christ, as
instruments for your sins, and the sins of the people; it should follow that
Christ offers up himself in your Mass by you, for his own sins, and the sins of
the people: But this is blasphemy, and expressly gainsaid by the Scripture,
Heb. 7.27. And last of all, I say, seeing (as your Church says) Christ his
sacrifice in the Mass is one with that sacrifice upon the cross: therefore as
Christ offered himself upon the cross, without the ministry of secondary
Priests, so should he be offered up in your Mass without the ministry of the
same, or else it is not one with that. So your Mass-Priests are no ways to be
called secondary Priests to Christ, except in that respect that Judas with the
band of men of war, and hie-Priests, were the instruments and ministers of
Christ his taking, death, and crucifying: even so you are the instruments and
ministers of the crucifying of Christ daily in your Mass, so far as in you
lies: and in this respect keep ye your style of Mass-Priests.

And because they have a common distinction in their mouths, of a bloody and
an unbloody sacrifice: For they affirm that sacrifice of Christ upon the cross
to be bloody, and that sacrifice of him in the Mass to be unbloody: Therefore I
will take away this refuge and vain starting-hole from them. And first, I say,
this distinction of theirs of a bloody and unbloody sacrifice, of the self same
thing that is sacrificed, wants all warrant in the Word of God. For there is
not so much in the whole New Testament as a syllable, that tells us that there
is a proper sacrifice of Christ which is unbloody: and you are never able to
bring one instance to the contrary.

Secondly, I say, it is repugnant to the Scripture, Heb. 10.10. 11.12.14. for
the Scripture only acknowledges such a sacrifice of Christ as is joined with
his death, as has been proved before. See Heb. 9.24.25. Not that he should
offer himself often, for then should he have suffered often since the beginning
of the world. Now if the Apostle his argument be true, that Christ cannot be
offered up often, because then he must die often: then this doctrine of yours
is against the Scripture, that says, Christ may be offered up often, and yet
not die often. But if you will say, this is spoken of that bloody sacrifice: I
grant that: and I say the Apostle knew not, nor never spoke of another
sacrifice: and therefore your doctrine is vain, that would have another
sacrifice, then ever the Apostles in the whole Scripture have made mention of.

And I say, thirdly, this distinction of yours cannot stand with your own
doctrine: for if there be a true sacrifice of Christ properly in your Mass, as
ye say, then his blood must be truly shed, and he must truly die, for this is
the nature of all such sacrifices for sin, as Bellarmin grants it, lib. 1. de
missa, fol. 725 saying, If there be not a true and real slaughter of Christ in
the Mass, then is not the Mass a true and real sacrifice. And also, In all
true, real, and external sacrifices, the sacrifice must be a thing sensible,
and must be made holy of a profane thing, as Bellarmin confesses: and these
conditions he requires in the definition of the same: but this, I hope, ye will
not say of Christ: for he is holy always, and is insensible in your sacrifice,
and cannot be slain again: therefore properly there can be no true sacrifice of
Christ in your Mass, by your own doctrine.

To conclud this then: For these causes we reject this abomination of your
Mass. First, because Christ cannot be offered up in a sacrifice, but he must
die also, as has been proved, and the Scripture testifies that he has once
died, and all Christians confesses it. Secondly, because the death of Christ is
a sufficient satisfaction for our sins, and so we need not that he should be
offered up again to satisfy for the same. Thirdly, because the Spirit of
Christ and faith, by the outward means of the Word and Sacraments and censures,
is a sufficient mean to apply him to us, and so we need not the sacrifice of
the Mass for that end. Fourthly, because Christ only is the Priest of the New
Testament, who has no successors, and whose Priesthood cannot pass from one to
another, because he lives for evermore, and he only can be sacrificed by
himself, and therefore he only can offer up himself, which he has once done
upon the cross. Fifthly, because the sacrifice of Christ upon the cross is
perfect, and the virtue of it indures for ever; and it cannot, nor should not
be reiterat. Sixthly, because the Scripture propones Christ now sitting in
glory at the right hand of his Majesty, and not under the forms of bread and
wine in your sacrifice. And seventhly, because it is but the devise of man,
wanting God to bear witness to it in the Scripture, repugnant to that only one
sacrifice of his upon the cross, abolishing the fruits of his death and
passion, turning the Sacrament of the Supper in abominable idolatry, causing
men to worship a bit of bread, as the Son of God. And last, because it spoils
men of the fruit of the Sacrament. Therefore in all these respects it is
abominable, to be detested, and in no sort to be communicated with.

Unto this I will adjoin some testimonies of some of the ancient Fathers,
whereby it is manifest what their doctrine and judgment was concerning this
point. Clemens Alexandrinus lib. 1. Paedagog. cap. 2. and in strom. who was
near the Apostles days says, We sacrifice not at all unto God, meaning with a
real and external sacrifice, but we glorify him who was sacrificed for us. And
then he subjoins what kind of sacrifices they offered up to God; to wit, a
sacrifice spiritual of themselves, of prayer, and of righteousness: And upon
what altar; to wit, upon the altar of our souls, with the parfume of their
prayers. Justinus Martyr says, in Tryphon. and in expos. fidei, I dare, says
he, affirm, that there is no other sacrifice perfect and acceptable to God, but
supplications and thanksgiving. And he says, That Christians have learned to
offer up these sacrifices only. Tertullian says, advers. Judaeos, That it
behooves us to sacrifice unto God, not earthly, but spiritual things: so we
read, as it is written, A contrit heart is a sacrifice to God. Origin says, in
Epist. ad Romans and in homil. 2. in Cant. and lib. 8. contra Celsum. The blood
of Christ is only sufficient for the redemption of all men; what need then has
the Church of any other propiciatory sacrifice? And as for the sacrifice of
Christians, he says, They are their prayers and supplications. It was a common
reproach wherewith the Christians were charged by the Pagans three hundred
years after Christ, that they had no altars; unto the which their common answer
was, That their altars were a holy soul, not corruptible altars, but immortal
altars. If then the Christians had no material altars the first three hundred
years after Christ, as Clemens Alexandrius lib. 7. Strom. Origin ibid. contra
Celsum. Minutius Foelix lib. 2. and 4. and Arnobius, do testify: therefore it
must follow they had no external sacrifices nor Masses all that time: so there
was no Masses the first three hundred years after Christ, seeing there was no
altars. Epiphanius says, contra Marc. haeres. 42. and 55. That God by the
coming of Christ, has taken away all the use of sacrifice, by that one
sacrifice of Christ. Athanasius says, in orat. 3. contra Arrianum^ That the
sacrifice of Christ once offered up, has accomplished all things, and remains
for ever, and that he is a Priest without succession. The same says Basile in
Isaiae, cap. 1. And he says further, There is no more question of a continual
sacrifice: for there is but one sacrifice which is Christ, and the
mortification of his Saints. Because it were over longsome to set down the
sentences of the rest, therefore I will only quote them, Irenaeus lib. 4. cap
34. Cyprianus de baptismo Christi. Athenag. in Apolog. pro Christianis.
Lactant. lib. 6. cap. 26. Eusebius. de demonst. lib. 1. cap. 6. and lib. 3. cap.
4. Greg. Nazianz. in Pasch. orat. 2. Eusebius. Nissen. de coena Domini, Chrysostom.
advers Judaeos, orat. 4. and in Joh. homil. 17. and ad Heb. homil. 13. and
homil. de cruce, and spirit. 3. and in Matthew. hom. 83. and ad Heb. hom. 26 and
hom. 17 and hom. 7. Cyrillus lib. 1. contra Julianum, and ad Hebraeos, homil.
11. Ambrosius ad Heb^ cap. 10. and ad Theod. Epist. 28. and in Epist. ad Romans
cap. 12. Hieronymus in Isaiam, cap. 1. and in Psalm. 26 and 49 and 50.
Augustinus de fide ad Petrum Diacon. cap. 2. and de Trinitate, lib. 4 cap. 1.
and 14. and in Psalm. 49. and de civitate Dei, lib. 10. cap. 4. and 6 Idem de
tempore. I would desire M. Gilbert to read the same. And if he will believe
them, I am sure he will leave off to be a Mass-Priest any longer: for they all
agree in this, that the sacrifice of Christ upon the cross has accomplished
all the sacrifices of the Old Law: and that the virtue of it is everlasting,
and therefore should not be reiterat: and that the sacrifice of Christians are
not propiciatory, but only spiritual.

Seeing therefore the sacrifice of the Mass was so long unknown to the Church
of Christ, it remains now that we show by what degrees it crap in: For as after
the going down of the Sun, darkness comes not in immediately, but there is a
twilight before the darkness come: even so after the bright stars of the
primitive Church had ended their course, in process of time, and piece and
piece; first, the third part of the Sun, Moon and Stars were darkened: till at
the last, the bottomless pit was opened, and that great darkness came up, as
the smoke of a great furnace, that darkened both the Sun and the air. Out of
the which this great abomination of the sacrifice of the Mass did proceed. For
Bertram who lived between the 800. and 900. years after Christ, says, Our
Savior has done it once in offering up himself: for he has once offered up
himself for the sins of the people: and this oblation is always celebrat every
day, but in a mystery. And he says, That once oblation of Christ is handled
every day by the celebration of these mysteries or Sacraments, in the
remembrance of his Passion, Bertram. de corp. and sang. Dom. in Heb. 7. There
he oppones a real sacrifice to a mystery, and Christ's sacrifice once made, to a
daily commemoration or remembrance of his suffering. Haymo such like, reckoning
out the sacrifices of Christians, he calls there, The praises of the believers,
the penitence of sinners, the tears of supplications, their prayers and alms,
Haymo in cap. 5. Ose. and in cap. 2. Abac. and Malac. 1. Theophilact who lived
in the 900. year after Christ, he says, in Joan. cap 81. That there is but one
sacrifice, and not many; because Christ has offered up himself once. And he
says in another place, ab Heb. cap. 10. Christ has offered up himself once, a
sufficient sacrifice for ever, and we have need of no other sacrifice, to wit,
propiciatory. And Anselm who lived in the thousand year of God, and after, he
says, That which we offer every day, is the remembrance of the death of
Christ, and that there is but one sacrifice, not many: for it has been once
only offered up. And again, Our Lord, says he, bade take, eat, not sacrifice^
and offer up to God. Anselm^ in Epist. ad Heb. cap. 10. So this was the
doctrine of the most learned, who lived a thousand years after Christ, that
Christ offers up himself but once, and that sacrifice was sufficient and
everlasting, and the sacrifices of Christians are spiritual: and the Sacrament
(which they called sometimes a sacrifice) was a commemoration of Christ's one
sacrifice once offered up upon the cross. But from thence unto this time, this
abuse and sacrifice of their Mass crap in, but by diverse degrees, and by the
concurrence of many causes.

SECTION XI. Concerning the Degrees and Means whereby the Sacrifice of the Mass
crap in. First, I will set down the estat of the public worship of God in the
primitive Church, the first three hundred or four hundred years after Christ,
and then the means and degrees whereby this abominable Sacrifice crap in.
FIrst, it is manifest that in the primitive Church, the Communion or Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, was ministered ever week once, upon the Lords day: and in
some place it was ministered every day, as appears by these Authors, Justin
Martyr in Apolog. 2. and Tertull. apolog. Aug. de consecrat. did. 2. cap.
Quotidie. And therefore Ambrose who lived in the three hundred age, exhorts
to a daily receiving of it, Ambros. lib. 5 cap. 4. de sacrament. Next, from the
Communion was excluded^ first these who were not sufficiently instructed in the
grounds of Christianity, who were called Catechumeni; that is, catechized and
instructed by questions and answers. Next, these who had not ended out their
repentance^ and satisfaction to the Church, who were called Poenitentes, that
is, penitents. And thirdly, these who were possessed with an evil spirit, who
were called, (...). All these, after that the first prayer, the reading of the
Scripture, the sermon, and the rehearsing of the Creed (at the which they were
present) were ended, they were commanded by the Deacon to retire themselves,
and to depart out of the Assembly or Congregation, that place might be given to
the faithful who was to co^municat, in these words, Ite missa est: that is, Go
your way, depart. And from this first came the word Mass in the Church of God:
and this Bellarmin confesses, lib. 1. de missa, cap. 1. that the word in Latin
is called missio, or dimissio, or missa: and in the Greek, (...): For the
Pagans used that same word after their sacrifice was ended, in Apule, l. 11. de
metamorph. And the abuse easily growing in the frequent using of this word, it
came to pass by time, that all the worship of God, as the first prayers, the
singing of the Psalms, the reading of the Scripture, the preaching of the
Word, the rehearsing of the Symbol, which was performed in the Assembly before
the dimission of these who were catechized, was called Missa Catechumenorum; As
Bellarm. confesses, lib. 1. de missa, cap. 1. And the rest of the worship of
God which was done after their departure, to the demission of the faithful, as
the celebration of the Supper, etc. was called, Missa Fidelium, Conc. Valent.
cap. 1. Bellarm. ibidem. Alcuinus de officijs Eccles. cap. de celebratione
Missa. So then this word Mass which the Church of Rome ascribes now unto their
pretended sacrifice, came first from the demission, or skailing of the people
(as they call it) from the Lords service, and was never heard of in the Church
of Christ, nor read of in any Author Hebrew, Greek, or Latin, for the space of
400. years almost after Christ. And Jerome who lived in the year 422. and was
an Elder in Rome, who writ so many volumes, made no mention of this word Mass
at all. For that Commentary of the Proverbes which is ascribed unto him, where
mention is made of the Mass, is not his. See Marianus Victorius Reat, in
praefat. in 8 tom operum Hier. For beside other things there, mention is made
of Gregory, who lived almost 200. years after him. And Ambrose makes mention of
it only once, S. Augustine twice or thrice, for all the volums which they writ,
if these book be theirs. For Erasmus in his censures upon the sermons de
Tempore, says, that many of them are found under the names of others Authors,
and savors little either of Augustines learning or phrase. See James Gillotius
in praefat. ad Ambros. And that neither of them in the exponing of the matter
of the Sacrament, which they handled most largely, the one in six books, and
the other most largely and frequently, and in the foresaid places, they used
it in a far other sense, then it is taken now in the Church of Rome: for by
this word they neither understood a Sacrament, nor a sacrifice, as the Churh of
Rome does. Ambrose takes it for the whole service which was proper to the
faithful, lib 5 epist. 33. And Augustine in one place, for the demission of
these who were catechized. In sermon 237 de tempor. and in the other two places,
for the whole service, as well of the Catechumeni, in sermon. de temp. 251. and
91 as of the faithful. So rarely was it used by the lights of that age, and in
a far other sense then the Church of Rome takes it now. But what a strange
change has fallen in this word Mass, the abuse growing by time more and more?
First, from a commandment to the people to depart, Ite missa est, and that in
evil Latin: For, Ite missio, or dimissio est, it passed to signify the service
of God, and from thence to signify a sacrifice, and from thence to signify that
opus operatum, that work wrought of that abominable sacrifice of the Mass for
the quick and the dead: so that now in end, it holds that place in the Roman
Church, that Minervas image, which (as was supposed fell out of heaven in a
temple, in the city of Troy) did hold among them: so that, as they thought, it
was their only protection and forteress; and as long as they kept it, they were
in no danger to have been overcome by the Grecians their enemies. So does the
Papistical Church think of this their Mass: and this for the second point of
the form of the public worship of God in the primitive Church.

Thirdly, after the dimission of the Catechumeni, the faithful who was
commanded to remain and communicate, they did offer up of their goods, and first
fruits unto God, before they did communicate: which (for the most part) was of
bread and wine, or of their first fruits of corns and raisins, whereof so much
was taken, as did serve for bread and wine to the communicants. And the rest
that remained, was either eaten in common among the faithful, whereof also some
was sent unto them who were sick, or absent, in a testimony of their communion
with them: (from whence sprung that abuse and idolatry in the Church of Rome,
in carrying of the Sacrament, which they call, the Lord God, to the sick) or
else was distributed unto the poor. And when the Church waxed rich, as it did
after the time of Constantin, the oblations abounded, and a part thereof was
also employed unto the maintenance of the Ministry, as Jerome witnesses,
saying, Clerici de altari vivunt: altari servientes, altaris oblatione
sustentantur. The Clergy lives of the Altar, and are sustained by the oblations
thereof. The which begat avarice in them: and their avarice brought in the
sacrifice of the Mass, as we shall see afterward. Now these oblations which were
given by the faithful, for the sustentation of the Ministry, for the relief of
the poor, and furnishing materials to the Communion, was called after the
custom of the Old Law, sacrifices, Phil. 4. Heb. 13. Iren. lib. 4. cap. 32.
Cypr. de Eleemosyna. So the Apostle Paul, Ireneus and Cyprian calls them. And
Paulinus epist. de Gazophyla, page 349. calls the place where these offerings
was presented, a Table. And these was presented unto the Minister, who by
prayer did consecrat them unto God, Justin Mart. apolog. 2. as is manifest by
the prayers set down in the Liturgies: Tua ex tuis tibi offerimus: that is, Of
thy own, we offer thy own things unto thee. And, Has oblationes famulorum,
famularumque tuarum benignus assume, quas singuli obtulerunt: that is,
Mercifully receive these oblations of thy servants, which every one of them
have offered up to thee. And sundry other prayers of the Mass, which can no
ways be spoken of the sacrifice of the Son of God, without blasphemy, as shall
be seen afterward.

And this was the estat of the Church three or four hundred years after Christ.
But the love of God decaying, and the hearts of men and women waxing cold in
the worship of God the people did not communicate so often. And therefore we read
of the complaints of the Fathers, of the rarity of the communicants, and of
their vehement exhortations to the people to communicate every day; or at least
every Sabbath, Ambros. lib. 5. cap. 4. de sacram. Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Ephesians.
August. Epist. 129. But these exhortations did not profit, and therefore there
was Canons and Laws made, to bind the people to communicate, at the least every
Sabbath, otherwise to be thrust out at the Church doors, de consecratione,
distinct. 1. cap. Episcopus, and did. 2. cap. Peracta, and cap. Hi qui
intrant. And also Civil Laws for that same effect, Carol. Magnus lib. 1. cap.
138. 182. 167. But these Laws did gain but little: for whether it was the
obstinacy of the people, or that they were not preased unto it by their
Pastors, they did wax more and more negligent in communicating. And therefore
Laws were made, that if not oftener, at the least thrice in the year the people
should communicate, to wit, at Pasch, at Christs-time, and at Pentecost,
otherwise not to be reputed as Christians, Distinct. 2. cap. Seculares, and
cap. Si non, and cap. Scis homo, lib. 2. cap. 45. ad 3.38. But for all this the
people did not communicate, for the most part: So that in end a Law was made,
that at the least once in the year they should communicate; to wit, at Pasch,
Extra de poenit. and remiss. cap. Omnis. The which custom is yet kept in the
Church of Rome. So by these degrees the Communion was lost in the celebration
of the Supper among the people. First, from a daily Communion in some places,
to once in the week: and from thence, to thrice in the year, and from thence to
once in the year: so that ordinarily there did none communicate but the
Ministry and Clergy. But in process of time this corruption overtook them
also: and therefore Laws, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, was made, to constrain
them to communicate: and that at the least two or three should communicate with
the Priest, De consec. did. 1. cap. Hoc quoque, and cap. Omnes fideles, the
foot steps whereof yet remains in the Abbacy of Clugny, where the Deacon and
the Subdeacon communicats yet with the Priest And of this came the
distribution of the bread of the Sacrament in three pieces, according to the
number of the co^municants, which is yet used in the Church of Rome, suppose
they have drawn it now to signify a mystery: and these three at the last was
brought to one, and this one to the Clark that rang the bell. And at the last,
some of the Priests themselves did abstain from communicating: and therefore
laws was made, as well Ecclesiastical, de consec. did. 2. cap. Velatum est, as
Civil, Carol. Magn. lib. 5. cap. 93. and lib. 6. cap. 118. and addi. 2. cap. 7.
to constrain them to communicate at all times, after the consecration. So that
by these degrees the Communion in the Sacrament, was lost also among the
Ministry: first, from an ordinary communion which they used, it passed to
three or four, and from the three to one, and from this one to the Clark that
rang the bell: and ofttimes to the Priest himself alone.

And this losing of the Communion in the celebration of the Supper, first among
the people, next among the Clergy, was the first step to their pretended
sacrifice. Now when the people did communicate, there was so much bread and
wine, in a great quantity brought to the Table, to be consecrat by prayer, as
might serve them; then as the number of the communicants decayed, so was the
bread and wine proportionably diminished.

And as it came to this at the last, that none did communicate but the Priest
and his Clark, and oftentimes none but the Priest only: so no more bread and
wine was brought to the Table, to be consecrat, but that that served him. And
so from many breads it came to one: and from a great bread to so small a bread,
that it might be parted in three: and in end it is come to the quantity of a
denier, as Durandus a Papist says. And such like of the wine, from many great
vessels, to small pottels, from many cups, to one: and from a great cup to a
small. And this was the second step to their pretended sacrifice. Thirdly, from
the peoples negligence in communicating, proceeded their negligence in bringing
their oblations: for these two were joined together, their communicating and
their offerings, a part whereof was taken for the maintenance of the Clergy.
But the Priests they would not want their offerings, and therefore they
procured civil laws to be made, to constrain the people to bring their
offerings. Therefore Charles the Great made a law, Carolus Magnus lib. 7. cap.
94. and lib. 6. That the people might be admonished to communicate, and to bring
their offerings every Sabbath: for the one ceasing, the other ceased also: and
the Priest did demand the one, under the pretext of the other.

And here was the third step, the avarice of the Priests. But while as neither
Civil nor Ecclesiastical Laws could prevail with the people to make them to
communicate, and to bring their offerings, they devised this damnable doctrine,
and taught it to the people, That not only the Lords Supper was a Sacrament,
and so was profitable only to them that did comunicat; but also it was a
sacrifice to God, and therefore was profitable for all them that were beholders
of it, and by the merit thereof they might obtain mercy and grace: yea, that it
was not only meritorious to the beholders, but also to all these for whom the
Priest said it, as well dead as living, absent, as present, not only for the
soul, but also for all other necessities, as well of beasts, as of men, so
being they brought their offerings also to the Priest the which they ^aught be
meritorious, both for them and theirs. For to keep the people therefore in some
devotion; as we say, and for to move them to bring their offerings unto the
Priests, this doctrine of Christ's Sacrament, that it was a most meritorious
sacrifice: and of the peoples oblations, that they were profitable for them and
theirs, was first invented by the avaricious Clergy, and taught to the people.
And therefore Charles the Great in his Laws, enjoined to the Priests to make
the people to understand distinctly the force of the Mass, how far it was
profitable both for them and theirs, both for the living and the dead. And to
the people. That they should bring their offerings continually unto the Priest,
and that because their offerings to the Priest was profitable, both to
themselves, and also to these that appertained to them. Now as for the Priests
part, they needed not laws to urge them to teach this doctrine: For they were
carried, as it were, with the chariots of their avarice to the performance of
the same, for otherwise their Masses would have been left desolat. And from
thence came this their doctrine, that the Mass served to appease Gods wrath, to
obtain remission of sins, Gabriel Biel lect. 85 in expos. Canon. and in 4.
sent* did. 12. qu. 3. redemption of souls, and all spiritual grace and
salvation. And that it served for all other necessities, as well of man, as of
beast, as well for the dead, as for the living, as well for the absent, as for
the present, Missal. c. in canone, and Pap. Innocent. 3. tract, de missa, and
Thomas de Aquin. and Eckius de missa, lib. 1. cap. 10. Council. Trident. sess.
6. Canon. 2. And from hence came this threefold force which, they ^scribe unto
their Mass: the one most general for all; another more special for him that
says it; and the third after a midway, which was in the hands of the Priest,
to apply it to what person, or persons, dead or living it pleases him, equally
or unequally: and that God the Father dispenses the fruits thereof according
to the determination of the Priest, Gabriel Biel lect. 26. And from this did
spring their treasures and riches, through the abundance of the peoples
oblations: and from this came also the rich Donations, Prebends, Colleges, and
Lands, as may be seen by the common form of the if donations in their Charters:
I offer to God all the things which are contained in this Charter, for the
remission of my own sins, and of my parents, to maintain the service of God in
sacrifices and Masses. As the Scribes and Pharisees therefore taught the
people, Matthew. 15.5.6. that by offering a gift, albeit they honored not their
father and mother, yet they should be free, and have profit, abrogating the
Commandments of God through their traditions: so did the Priests teach the
people, that suppose they neglected the commandment of God in communicating in
the Sacrament; yet by their presence at the sacrifice, and by their gifts that
they offered unto them, they should be free from that sin, and should have
profit, not only to themselves, but also to all that appertained unto them. And
to content the people that they should not be offended that they were deprived
of the Communion, and received nothing for their offerings, but a bare sight,
and hearing of the Priest, eating and drinking all himself alone, they invented
their holy bread, which they distributed unto the people every Sabbath: and the
kissing of the Pax, that is, the covering of the calice, to supply the want of
the Communion, whereby they might think that they were not altogether frustrat
of the same.

And as for the people, because they received not the love of the truth (for no
exhortation or admonition, no Laws Ecclesiastical nor Civil, could make them to
reverence the Lords institution, in receiving the sweet pledges of their
salvation, as the Lord had commanded) therefore the Lord gave them over, as it
was foretold, to strong delusions, that they might believe lies. And beside
this just judgment of God, as this doctrine was most profitable to the
Priests, so was it most agreeable to their corruption, and therefore was easily
embraced and believed. For what was more easy to practice, then to hear and
see a Mass, and to bring their offering unto the Priest? This required no
examination of themselves before: no mortification of their sin: no sad and
heavy hearts, with fear and trembling to come to the same, as the Communion
did; but only their eyes to see, and ears to hear, suppose they neither knew
nor understood what was said or done in the same. And yet what was so
profitable as it was, which was able to obtain remission of sins, and
redemption of souls, to appease Gods wrath, and to obtain all grace, and to
help for all necessities, both for the living and dead, present and absent, man
and beast, as they affirmed? So this was not the strait way to salvation: for
who was not able to practice this doctrine? that is, to see and hear a Mass.
And yet our Savior says, The way is strait that leads to eternal life, and
many shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able, Matthew. 7.13. From this sprang
the abundance of their oblations, that they spared neither silver nor gold,
houses, lands, nor heritages: For what would not a man give to get salvation so
easily both to himself and to others? So it was no wonder suppose the Priests
were earnest in beating in the ears of the people such a profitable doctrine
for themselves: For it was a gold mine unto them. And suppose the people
(having forsaken the love of the truth, and being given over of God to believe
such strong delusions, for the contempt of his ordinance) embraced such a
plausible doctrine, which brought heaven to them and theirs; so easily as they
supponed: and by these degrees the pretended sacrifice of the Mass was not a
little promoved. And yet these abuses crap not in while after Gregory the
Great, who lived in the 600. year after Christ, suppose a great part of these
abuses is ascribed to him.

Hitherto now has this sacrifice been confusedly conceived, and all things
almost prepared for her birth. From these now follows other corruptions,
which did ripen this monstrous birth.

As first, where the Priest was wont to bless and cons^crat by prayer, so much
bread and wine as might serve the whole people who did communicate in the
primitive Church: the communion of the people in this Sacrament being lost, as
we heard before, and the Priest himself alone, or at the least, two or three
with him only communicating: the oblations of the people which was not only of
bread, and wine, and water, according to the express Canons of the Church, de
consecrat. did 2 cap. Non oportet, and cap. In sacramento. But (corruption
growing with the riches of the Church) also of gold, silver, of sheep and oxen,
as we read in the time of Gregory, in Dialog. These oblations, I say, was not
brought unto the altar to be consecrated by prayers to God, but only so much
bread and wine as might serve the Priest only, and which at last (the abuse
growing) he began to make himself, and to bring unto the Sacrament.

Upon the which followed other two abuses. The first, that the style of
(offering) and (sacrifice) in the Sacrament was taken from the peoples action
of offering and their oblations, for the which cause especially the Sacrament
was called a sacrifice: and therefore the prayer in the Canon was not in
Gregory's time, pro quibus tibi offerimus: for the which we offer unto thee:
but, qui tibi offerunt, who do offer to thee. And their oblation was called
sacrifices, as is manifest by the ordinance of Pope Gelasius, where it is
ordained that the sacrifices which the people should offer up in the Mass,
should be distribut in four parts. This style (I say) of offering and
sacrifice, was taken from them, and ascribed only to the Priests action: and
his action was called the sacrifice. And this was no little step to their
pretended sacrifice.

The next which did put even some life and breath in it, was the applying of
all the prayers which was used to be said and made in the sanctification of the
oblations of the people, to the sanctification of that small round bread, and
portion of wine which was reserved for the Sacrament, and appointed for the
Priest, and the few that was to communicate with him. So that here was a
manifest change, wherein they passed from the oblations of the gifts, which was
presented to God by the people, and offered to him in the Sacrament of the
Supper, which were called sacrifices, as we have proved it before; to a
sacrifice of a round bread, and a little cup of wine, which the Priest only, or
at the least with other two or three, eat and drink in the same; and
consequently from a sacrifice of the fruits of the earth offered to God by the
people, to a sacrifice of the eternal Son of God, which the Priest supponed he
offered up to God in the same. So by this means it received, as it were, some
life and breath.

This alteration is so manifest, that the prayers in their own Canon of the
Mass and Liturgies, will prouve the same: Precamur te, says the Canon, ut
accepta habeas and benedicas haec dona, haec munera, haec sancta sacrificia
illibata; that is, We pray thee, thou would accept and bless these gifts,
these presents, these holy and unspotted sacrifices. And again, Remember of
them, pro quibus tibi offerimus, vel qui tibi offerunt hoc sacrificium laudis,
pro se suisque omnibus; that is, These for whom we offer unto thee, or who does
offer unto thee, this sacrifice of praise for themselves, and all theirs. And
again, Supra quae sereno and propitio vultu respicere digneris, and accepta
habere sicut accepta habere dignatus es munera Abelis, Abrahae, Melchisedech,
etc. that is, That thou would vouchsafe to look upon them with a favorable
and merciful countenance, as thou have vouchsafed to accept of the gifts of
Abel, Abraham and Melchisedeck, etc. And again, Jube haec perferri per manus
angeli tui in sublime altar tuum; that is, Command them to be carried by the
hands of thy angel unto thine hie altar in the sight of thy Majesty. And again,
Tua de tuis; that is, We offer of thy own, thy own to thee. I would ask you, M.
Gilbert, dare ye in your conscience say, that these prayers were made of the
eternal Son of God, whom ye pretend to offer up in your Masses? For can either
the words themselves be understood of him without great absurdity? Or can they
be applied to him without horrible blasphemy? And may not every one see, that
they were conceived and made of the gifts and sacrifices of praise, which the
people did offer up to God in the Sacrament? And they speak here in the plural
number of many, and the sacrifice of the Son of God is but one.

Next, they are called gifts presents, thy own, gifts of thy own, and
sacrifices of praises, which cannot be spoken of the real sacrifice of the Son
of God, which is a propitiatory sacrifice, and are not called gifts, presents,
and sacrifices of praises of the people. Thirdly, they say, Remember them who
offers unto thee their gifts, for themselves and theirs, which cannot be
understood of any, but of the people that offered their offerings of their
fruits unto the Lord. For you will not say that the people offers up the Son of
God, but only the Priest. And what Christian heart can think that these prayers
can be applied to him without horrible blasphemy: as to dust and ashes to
interceed by prayer to God the Father for his beloved Son, to pray him to
accept in his favor, to bless and sanctify his own beloved Son, who is the
fountain of all blessing and holiness, and in whom the fullness of the Godhead
dwells: and to look upon him with a merciful and favorable countenance, and to
daign to vouchsafe to accept of him, in whom and with whom he is well pleased:
who is his Fathers daily delight and joy, and to accept of him, as he did of
the sacrifices of Abel, Abraham, and Melchisedeck; comparing that blessed
sacrifice of himself, with the sacrifices of the fruits of the earth, and
beasts of the field, as theirs was: without the which neither their sacrifices
nor persons would ever have pleased God: and to pray to God the Father, to
command the Angels (in whom, as Job says, he found no purity) to carry his own
eternal Son up to heaven in his presence; as though he were not as able now to
ascend from thence to heaven, if he were there, being glorified, without the
help of Angels, as he did after his resurrection.

Now let any Christian heart judge whither these prayers can be conceived
without blasphemy of the eternal Son of God, or not And after the consecration
they have this prayer in their Ganon, By whom thou creates, sanctifies,
quickens, blesses, and gives to us all these good things; which can no ways be
applied unto the sacrifice of Christ, unless they will have him a creature
daily made, blessed and quickened in their Mass: but unto the gifts and presents
of the people, which they offered up to God in the Sacrament. And in the
Liturgy which they ascribe to Clement, the prayer is, Pro dono oblato; that is,
for the gift which is offered up, that it would please God to receive it in his
altar, through the intercession of his Christ, in a sweet smelling savor,
Clemens lib. 3. cap. 17. which no ways can be applied unto the sacrifice of the
Son of God. For here they are manifestly distinguished, the gift offered, and
the intercession of Christ, for the which they desire God to accept of the gift
offered. So here is a most notorious corruption, wherein they apply all the
prayers, which were first conceived and made of the gifts and presents of the
people, which they offered up to God in the Sacrament, to the pretended
sacrifice of the Son of God. And from the offerings of the people which was
many, they pass to an oblation which was offered: For a Sacrament of praise, to
a Sacrament which the Priest consumes all himself: from a Sacrament to confirm
us of our salvation in Christ, to a propiciatory sacrifice of the Son of God,
for the redemption of souls: and from a commemoration of the death of Christ in
the Sacrament, to a real immolation and offering of him up again, and that not
for the living only, but for the dead also.

By these degrees then has this monstrous sacrifice been conceived, formed,
received life, and brought forth into the world. Now many other things did
concur to the strengthening of her, and the rooting of her in the hearts and
consciences of men: as first, the word sacrifice, which was frequently used by
the Fathers of the p^imitiv^ Church, taken from the Old Testament, and the
typical sacrifices there, which they ascribed unto the Sacrament of the Supper,
calling it a sacrifice. And that first because it was celebrated with
thanksgiving, which is called the sacrifice of praise. Next, because they
sacrificed themselves in a holy, lively, and acceptab^e sacrifice to God in the
same, Romans 12.1.2 3. Heb. 13 15.16 Thirdly, because of their offering and alms
which they ^ffered in the Sacrament, which are called sacrifices wherewith God
is pleased. And last of all, because it was a commemoration of that once
offered up sacrifice of the Son of God, the virtue whereof is eternal and
sufficient.

The next, was the universal ignorance, both of Pastors and people, through the
barbarous Nations of the Goths, Huns, and Vandals, which spoiled and wasted the
Empire of the West, more then an hundred years full, whereby all learning
(almost) was buried: and the lights and torches of the Church being
extinguished, their successors being born and brought up under that barbarity,
in that common and public ignorance, they were so far from chasing away that
darkness, that they rather increased the same, being given altogether to
seculare and worldly affairs, as the laws of Charles the Great do testify:
commanding them that they should abstain from seculare affairs, from the Court,
from wars, from salconry, from lechery from games.

Thirdly, the corruption of languages which entered in with these barbarous
Nations at that same time, through the mixture of people of sundry languages:
Whereby first, the language became barbarous: next, not universally understood.
And certainly were not this, Satan could not have prevailed so much, in causing
this poison of this monstrous sacrifice to be so universally drunken out by the
people. For if they had understood the language, these words which they daily
heard in their service, Sursum corda, lift up your hearts: And show forth the
death of the Son of man, and confess his resurrection till his coming. These
words might easily have kept them in this knowledge, that Christ was above, and
they should not seek him bodily in the Sacrament, because he was not there
really present, but was to come: and that the Sacrament was not a real offering
of the Son of God again, but a showing forth of his death, until his second
coming.

But two doctrines especially, which by process of time also entered in the
Church of God, brought this pretended sacrifice of their Mass to her full
perfection and strength, the one was the doctrine of Transubstantiation, that
the bread and wine in the Sacrament, by the words spoken, or rather muttered by
the Priest, was changed in the body and blood of Christ. From time this was
taught the people, then what followed but all adoration and worship to be given
to the Sacrament, where Christ is really present. Then how could it be but a
propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of the living, seeing it was that self-same
body and blood, under the forms of bread and wine, which was offered up upon
the cross for the sins of the world? The next was that of Purgatory; for
seeing, say they, that there is a fire of Purgatory after this life, where
through men must pass to heaven: and seeing in these flames their sins must be
purged, therefore a remedy must be foreseen: and where is there a remedy to be
found, but in the sacrifice of the Mass, where the Son of God is offered up,
that will relieve our souls after we are departed? These will help the souls of
our parents and friends that are there already. Upon the which was founded the
Masses and sacrifices for the dead: and from thence came the most part of the
donation of lands to the Churches, to have Masses said for their souls.

So then, to conclud, the loss of the Communion in the Sacrament of the Supper:
Next, the sanctification of the oblations of the people, which at last was
turned to that which the Priest consumed himself alone: Thirdly, the avarice of
the Priests which bred their damnable doctrine, that the Supper was not only a
Sacrament, but a sacrifice, etc. Fourthly, the applying of the prayers
conceived of the gifts of the people, unto the round host and calice, which the
Priest consumed: Fifthly, the abusing of the word sacrifice, which the Fathers
and Church used: Sixthly, the public and universal negligence and ignorance of
Pastor and people: Seventhly, the confusion of languages: And last of all,
their damnable doctrine of Transubsta^tiation and Purgatory: These were the
degrees by the which their abominable sacrifice has been created, nowrished,
entertained and perfected in that measure and strength: that at the last it
took such deep root in the hearts of all men almost, that nothing could root it
out, except only the power of the Lords Spirit by the voice of his Word. And
yet this abuse was perceived by sundry, whom the Lord stirred up, as Arnold de
Villanova, anno 1200. and Albigenses and Waldenses in France, who taught, That
the sacrifice of the Mass was a manifest abuse: and that the Masses both for
the living and the dead, was directly contrary the institution of our Lord. And
some of their own Doctors in their writings does contradict this propitiatory
sacrifice of the Mass, as the Master of Sentences, distinct. 12. lib. 4. de
consecrat. and Thomas of Aquin, in summa part. 3. quaest. 83. and 73. Lyranus
in Epist. ad Heb. cap. 10. affirming, That Christ once died for our sins, and
that once oblation is sufficient for all our sins, and that it cannot be
reiterat: and that the Sacrament is an ordinary memorial and representation of
that only one sacrifice which was offered up upon the cross: the which doctrine
of theirs cannot stand with their daily immolation, and real oblations of the
Son of God in their Mass.

And that nothing may be lacking to the manifesting of it, we will show also
the Authors and times of the entering in of the ceremonies of the same. The
mixing of water with the wine in the calice, is ascribed to Pope Alexander the
first, de consecrat. did 2. Can. in Sacram. oblat. anno 111. he also put to
this clause to the Mass, Qui pridie quam pateretur. Secondly, Sanct. sanct
sanct. Dom. Deus Sabbath, is put to by Pope Syricius the first anno 121.
Thirdly, Gloria in excelsis, is put to by Pope Telesphore the first, anno 139
Fourthly, the singing of the Creed after the Gospel, put to by Pope Mark the
first (and according to some, by Pope Julius the first) anno 335. Fifthly, Pope
Zepherin ordained that the wine should be put in glasses: and Urban the first,
ordained that the vessels should be of gold, or silver, or at the least of tin,
anno 213. Sixthly, Pope Felix the first, ordained to celebrat Masses in the
names of the Martyrs, above their graves and relics, anno 267. Seventhly, the
offerture of the Mass is ascribed to Eutychian the first, anno 270. Eighthly,
the Kyrieeleison to Sylvester the first, anno 314. Ninthly, the celebration of
Masses in linen clothes to Eusebius, and him also. Tenthly, the standing up at
the reading of the Gospel, to Anastasius the first, anno 401. Eleventhly, the
blessing of the Pax. to Innocentius the first, anno 405 did. 2. cap. Pacem
Twelfthly, the Antiphones. the Introits, and the Graduals* to Celestin the
first, anno 427. Thirteenthly, Orate pro me fratres, and Deo gratias, and
sanctum sacrificium, to Leo the first, anno 444. Fourteenthly, the nine-fold
repetition of Kyrieeleyson, and the singing of Hallelujah, to Gregory the
first, anno 593. Fifteenthly, the singing of Agnus. Dei thrice, to Sergius the
first, anno 688. Sixteenthly, the incense and offerture restored by Leo the
third, anno 800. Seventeenthly, their Transubstantiation invented by
Lanfrancus, an Italien, anno 1036. decreed in the Council of Lateran in
substance, anno 1059. And made the 13. Article of Faith by Innocent the third,
anno 1215. Decret. tit. 1. de summa Trinit. and fide, cap. Firmiter credimus. I
omit the rest, as their Canon compiled by one named Scholasticus, as Gregory
witnesses, lib. 2. and 7. and 9 and fundry other ceremonies. So that between
the first and last inventers and authors of their Mass, it is more then a
thousand years. And thus much touching that abominable sacrifice of the Mass,
which is not the Lords ordinance, but the invention of the Popes, and Clergy of
Rome.

Master Gilbert Brown.
I thought such like to have proved the ceremonies of this blessed sacrifice,
by the same holy Word: but because it were something long some, I have
continued the same till another place.

SECTION XII. Of the manifold abuses of the Mass.
Master John Welsch his Reply.
AS for your Ceremonies, you did most wisely in rejecting the probation of them
till another place: and so to hold the Reader in the half (as we speak)
because ye are never able to do it: and it is good to delay to enterprise a
thing that is impossible. But how can you be so impudent, as to write that you
will prove the ceremonies of your Mass by the Scripture, seeing the Mass it
self has not the warrant out of the same, but contrary and repugnant to the
same, as has been proved. And I can scarcely think. M. Gilbert, that you have
spoken this in earnest, when you said, you would prove the ceremonies of your
Mass by the same holy Word, which is the Scripture. For what then will you say
to the Council of Trent, Sess. 22. cap. 5. who referrs not the institution of
them to the Lord Jesus in his written Word, but to the Church by the unwritten
traditions. And to Bellarmin, who says, the Church instituted them, lib. 2. de
missa, cap. 13. and so referrs the institution of them, not to CHRIST in his
written Word, but to the institution of the Church, and to your own Doctors,
and Canon Law, and Writers, who ascribes the institution of them, to your
Popes, and others of your Church, as I have proved before. O, M. Gilbert! What
a preposterous love is this that ye bear to your abominable sacrifice, that ye
are not ashamed to write, that the very ceremonies of it has their warrant in
the same holy Word, and that contrary your own general Council of Trent, and
all your learned Doctors and Writers. I think ye thought that we had never read
your ceremonies, or never known them, that ye write so boldly of them. Shall the
Council of Trent say, they are instituted by the Church, by Apostolical
traditions, which your Church confesses are not written in the Scripture? And
yet are not you ashamed to say, they have their warrant by the Scripture, and
so openly to contradict the doctrine of your own Council of Trent. I will say
no further, but surely either they err in this point, or else ye: and if they
err, then the general Church may err, and has erred: and so one of your main
foundations is gone. Choose you whither you will take this blot to your self,
or let it fall on them.

But because ye account this Mass of yours most heavenly: and ye vaunt, that ye
only have in your Church that heavenly action: and because it is the chiefest
point of your service and worship, which ye give to God in your Church: and
also because ye so impudently affirm, that the ceremonies thereof has their
warrant out of the Scripture: Therefore I will discover here, as shortly as I
can, the abominations, absurdities, blasphemies, idolatries, vain, idle
superstitions, Jewish and Ethnic ceremonies of the same, that poor folks be
not deceived any longer therewith. For certainly, for as heavenly as ye think
it is, I dare affirm that it is nothing else, but a very sink and filthy closet
of all abominations, idolatries, and horrible blasphemies. So that as it is
said in the Proverbs, of the virtuous woman, that many women have done
virtuously, but thou surmounts them all, Prove. 31.23. So it may be said of the
Mass: Many services and worships devised by man, have been idolatrous,
blasphemous and abominable: but this sacrifice of the Mass brought in the
Church of God by Antichrist, in idolatry, abominations, and blasphemies,
surmounteth them all: so that the like of it has never been before it, nor
never shall be after it. For beside the fore: said abuses, that it is a
will worship instituted by man, that it has corrupted the Sacrament of the
Supper, which was given us to assure us of the grace of Christ, and has turned
it in a sacrifice, and that a propitiatory sacrifice, and meritorious, not to
the Priest only, but to the beholders also: and not to the present only, but to
the absent; and not only for the living, but for the dead: that it has
abolished the death of Christ, and the virtue of that one sacrifice: and that
it has spoiled Christ Jesus of his Priesthood, and communicated it unto
others: beside these intolerable abuses, it abounds and overflows with other
intolerable abominations.

As first, their altars in their Mass, whereon they think they sacrifice the
Son of God, and therefore in the beginning of their Mass, the Priest says, And
I will go in into the altar of God: whereby they renew either Judaism or
Paganism: for their material altars was a part of the Ceremonial law of the
Jews, which was abolished by the death of Christ: and Numa Pompilius 700 years
before Christ, ordained that the Ethnic Priest when he went about to offer
sacrifice that he should draw near to the altar. This entry of the Mass is said
to be the ordinance of Pope Celestin the first, about the year of God 426 And
because the Priests take the altars for the Table whereon the Supper is
celebrat, which he confounds with the abominations of the Mass; and also
because M. Gilbert said, he was minded to prove the ceremonies of the Mass by
the Scripture; therefore I will ask him, and his fellow Priests these few
things concerning their altars First, where read they that Christ did ever
institut in the New Testament, that the Table of our Lord should only be of
stone, and not of timber, or any other metal, as their altars whereon they
chant their Mass, must be according to their law? Did. 1. cons cap. Altaria si
non. Secondly, where read they in the New Testament, that the Table of the Lord
should be consecrated with oil and chrism, with a sprinkling of water, mixed of
wine and salt, of ciphers of holy water, at the four corners of the same, at
the middle part, and that none may do this but a Bishop: if a Clark do it, that
he be degraded, and if one of the Laics do it, that he be excommunicat? Canon,
Non alij. What folly is this, that a Priest has authority (as they think) to
sacrifice the Son of God, and yet he may not power a little oil upon a stone?
That the Bishop compass the altar seven times, singing the 51. Psalm. Thou
shall wash me with hysop, etc. profaning the truth of God. And there to bury
the relics of some Saints put in a little shrine, with three grains of
incense: that God for their cause may hear the prayers, and accept of the
sacrifice offered up upon that altar: And then anointing the table of the altar
with oil, and singing, Jacob erected up a stone, etc. Where, I say, read you
these in the New Testament, that Christ commanded these things to be done to
the table of his Supper, which ye do to the altars whereon ye say your Masses?
And such like, where read you that none should chant their Masses, but on such
altars as are consecrated: And such like, that your altars are not lawful,
where there is not found the bodies or relics of some Martyrs? Canon. Placuit
ut altaria, Such like, that ye dedicat your altars whereon ye chant your Mass,
to others then to Christ, as unto the Virgin Mary, Peter, and other Saints
departed? And such like, that the Priest should kiss the altar often, and
namely when he approaches unto it carrying the calice? Has Christ commanded
this? Has the Apostles used them? Has the Scripture made mention of them?
What think you will you answer to God, when it shall be said to you, Who
required all these things at your hands? And wherefore also transgress ye your
own law, in having mo altars then is necessary, seeing by it ye are commanded
by express terms, that superfluous altars be destroyed? Canon. Eccles. vel
altaria. To conclud this then with Ambros. in Epist. ad Heb. cap. 8. and 10. As
our sacrifice, says he, which is no other thing but our prayers and
thanksgiving, is not visible, but invisible: so our altar also is not visible,
but invisible.

The second abuse is in the confession of the Priest, that he says in the
entering of the Mass, I confess to God Almighty, and to the blessed Virgin, and
to all the Saints, that I have sinned. In the which are sundry absurdities.
First, that this confession is made not only to God, but also to the dead, who
neither sees the secrets of the hearts, nor yet are able to give remission. The
second is, in the prayer that is set down in the latter end of it, saying, I
pray thee, blessed Mary, and all the he Saints, and she Saints of God, to
pray to God, that I may have mercy: wherein are two horrible abuses: one, that
he makes no mention of Jesus Christ our only Mediator, 1. Tim. 2.5. and desires
him not to make intercession for him: Next, that he prays unto the Saints
departed, and makes them Intercessors and Mediators, who neither knows our
necessities, and the secrets of our hearts, neither is able to hear or help us,
which wants all warrant out of the Word of God, Romans 10.14. 1. Tim. 2.5 1. John
2. 1. Jer. 17.5. Psalm. 50.15. Jer. 29.12. Matthew. 6.9. James 1.17. Genesis 20.1.2.
2. Kings 6.6. 2 Chronicles. 6.30. Isa. 63 17. Eccles. 9.6. And seeing prayer is a
honor only due to God, and Jesus Christ is our only Mediator and Intercessor;
therefore this prayer to Saints departed is both idolatrous, and injurious to
Christ his intercession and mediation. This confession was instituted by
Pontian and Damasus Popes, anno 335. and 368.

The third abuse, is the absolution pronounced to the beholders of the Mass:
Amen, Brethren and sisters, by the mercy of our Lord Jesus, by the help and
sign of the cross, by the intercession of the Virgin Mary, by the merits of the
Apostles, and of all the he Saints and she Saints, God give you mercy. First,
this agrees not with their private Masses, where the Priest and the Clark only
are present: For how can the Priest speak truly, Amen, brethren and sisters,
since none is present but the Clark only? Next, that which is only proper to
Jesus Christ, to his death, merits, and intercession, to make the Father
merciful unto us, and to make him to forgive us our sins, is taken from him
here, and communicate unto the Virgin Mary, and the merits of all the he Saints
and she Saints: and which is most horrible, unto the sign of the cross, that
by her intercession, their merits, and the help of the sign of the cross, God
might have mercy. What horrible idolatry is this, to join such helpers to the
Son of God, who is a perfect Savior? To join the merits of flesh and blood to
his merits, as though his were not sufficient to obtain salvation? And as
though men were not only able to merit eternal life to themselves, but also had
such abundance of merits, that they served to obtain mercy for others: and so
not only to make them saviors of themselves, but of others also. And that which
is yet more horrible idolatry and blasphemy (if worse can be) to join with him
the help of the sign of the cross. Therefore in their Breviary they say, Keep
us, Lord, with thy peace, etc. whom thou have redeemed by the tree of thy holy
cross. And in a Hymn, O cross, hail; O cross, only hope, increase righteousness
to the godly, and forgive the guilty. And in their Breviary, they say, We adore
thy cross, O Lord. Now what is it to mock God, if this be not? To substitut
creatures, yea a very stock and a tree, in the room of the Son of God, and to
ascribe redemption unto it, and to pray for righteousness and remission at the
same, to adore it, and to call it their only esperance? What place is left then
to the blood and death of Christ?

The fourth abuse is in this prayer of the Mass, We pray thee, Lord, for the
merits of thy Saints, whose relics are here, to forgive me all my sins. Where
first, he makes no mention of Christ, or his merits. Next, he prays to God,
that for the merits of the Saints he may be forgiven; so he puts them in the
room of Christ. Thirdly, they have the relics of the Saints in such account,
that they have made a law, that it shall not be lawful to celebrat any Mass, but
upon such altars where the relics of some Saints are, De consecrat. did. 1.
cap. Placuit. But to what purpose is this? To make their altars commendable,
and their sacrifices acceptable? But has not the Priest (as he thinks) in his
hands, Christ Jesus, the Holy of the Holiest? And is there relics of Saints
more precious and worthy, then his blood is? yea, and what relics, I pray you,
for the most part? Not of Saints, but of harlots and brigands: yea, they have
so multiplied their relics, that they have made some of them to have mo heads
then one, to have mo legs and arms then they were born with. As for example,
Peter his whole body is buried in Rome in Vatican, Annal. Eccles. Tom. 1. and
3. and yet the half of him is in another part of Rome, Via Ostiensi, Onu. d. 7.
urb. Eccles. cap. de Basilica; another part in Constantinople, Bellar. lib. 2.
de Eccles. trium. cap. 3. and 4. and his head kept in the fourth place, Romae
Onu. ibidem; and another part of his head in the fifth place, Romae Onu.
ibidem, another part of his head in the sixth place, Pictavi^ Calv. admon de
reliq. and yet sundry of his teeth in other parts, Onu ibidem. So that if he
had as many bodies, and bones, and teeth, and heads, and arms, and legs, as are
said to be his, and are kept as his relics, his body were monstrous. And the
head of S. Barbara was shown in so many parts, that it behoved her to have
seven bodies, or at the least seven heads, Luther postil. in Evang. fest.
exalt. cruce. And that which is yet worse, they honor them, adores them, and
prays unto them: the which is so manifest by the ordinary practice of their
Church, that it needs no probation.

Unto this we may join the fifth abuse, their images upon the hosts of their
Mass, and the rest of their Idols and Images, which they call the Books of the
Laics, wherewith they fill their Temples and Chapels: which they honor, adore,
and pray unto, saying unto a stock, Thou art my father, and to a stone, thou
art my mother: not only without commandment or example in the Scripture, but
contrary the express commandment of God given out of Mount Sinay, in horror and
fear* so that the Mountain shook, and Moses himself feared: Thou shall make
thee no graven Image to worship it. And contrary the whole Scripture, Exodus 20.
Deuteronomy. 4.15. Isa. 40 15.16. Jerem. 10.3. Acts 17.29 Romans 1.23. 1. Cor. 10.14. 1.
John 5.21. Rev. 9.20. and 21.8. And also the doctrine of the Fathers, Tertull.
lib. de corona militis, Orig. contra Celsum, lib. 7. and 8. Lactant. de divin.
instit. lib. 2. cap. 29. Cyprian. de van. idol. Clemen^ lib. 5. ad Jac. frat.
Chrysostom. hom. 57. in Genes. 31. Council. Elib. Can. 36. with sundry others.

The sixth abuse, is in the prayer that the Priest says when he offers his
host upon the altar: Receive, holy Father, this immaculat sacrifice which I
offer unto thee, for my own sins, and for the sins of all the faithful, both
living and dead, that it may profit to me and them, to salvation and
everlasting life. And he prays the like when he offers the calice upon the
altar: That it may ascend in the presence of his Majesty, for the salvation of
him, and of all the world. Wherein the Priest commits horrible blasphemy, in
ascribing remission of sins and redemption, to the sacrifice of bread and wine,
for as yet the words of consecration are not pronounced: and so by their own
confession, they are yet but bread and wine: and yet the Priest says, he
offers it to God for the sins of the quick and dead, and for the salvation of
the world. Now what blasphemy is this to ascribe that to the sacrifice of bread
and wine, which by their own confession is not changed yet in Christ's body and
blood, which is only proper to the blood of Jesus Christ? John 1.29. Heb. 9.26.
and 10.12. 1 John 1.7 and 2.2. Acts 4.12 Next, that he offers this sacrifice
for the salvation of the dead, seeing the elect departed are in heaven, and so
they need no sacrifice for them: and the reprobat departed are in hell, so no
sacrifice will avail them. And as for Purgatory which they dream of, the
Scriptures knows not such a thing I pass by the mixing of the wine with water,
contrary the express institution of Christ, and the necessity of the silver and
golden vessels, or at the least tin vessels in your sacrifice.

The seventh abuse, is their magical blessing of their incense, after the
manner of sorcerers, without the warrant of the Word, and the virtue which the
Priest prays for, that it may chase away the Devil, make whole every disease:
which has no more virtue then their exorcismes and adjurations, which the
Priest makes in Baptism, and in their other services, by their holy water, by
their lighted candles, their oils, anointings, and other like ceremonies. And
in this ceremony, they either Judaize: for the Jews used this ceremony of
incense under the Law, to figure the sweet savor of the sacrifice of the Son of
God to his Father: and so makes the death of Christ of no effect to them: or
else they follow the custom of the old Roman idolaters. For we read more then
700. years before Christ, that they used incense in their sacrifices and other
services, which they did to their Idols, Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17. Some
say, that Leo the third joined to the Mass this part, concerning the incense,
about the year of God 800.

The eight abuse is, in that they make their Mass a memorial of Christ his
incarnation, circumcision, resurrection and ascension: and that they celebrat
the same to the honor of others then to God; to wit, to the honor of the Virgin
Mary, and of all the Saints, which is horrible blasphemy, to give that which is
Gods glory to his creatures. And therefore they have a Mass of our Lady, a Mass
of S. Antony, a Mass of S. Michel, etc. Now if the Mass be one with the Lord
his Supper (as they say it is) then it is properly a memorial of his death, and
it is instituted only to the glory of God, and not to the honor of any
creature: therefore our Savior says, Do this in remembrance of me, and not of
his Saints.

The ninth abuse (passing by their monstrous Transubstantiation, whereof I have
spoken in another place) is their round host, taken from the use of the old
Roman idolaters 700. years before Christ, who had little round bread which was
consecrated to the honor of their Gods, which they did eat after the sacrifice,
Pollux in Onom. lib. 6. and Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17. So it was not the
Spirit of Christ which taught you this form, but the spirit of Numa Pompilius,
the Magician, who breathed this doctrine in you: for there is no word of this
round bread in Christ's Testament.

The tenth abuse, is the lifting up of the sacrifice above their head, and the
adoring and worshipping of the same, which is abominable idolatry, to worship a
bit of bread, as the great God and Creator of all the world, contrary the
express commandment of God, Thou shall only worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve, Deuteronomy. 6.16. And how can they excuse themselves from
idolatry, according to their own doctrine: for they hold this, that if the
Priest have not an intention, (some says actual, other some habitual) that is,
a purpose to consecrat, that the bread and the wine are not changed in the body
and blood of Christ: and if he had a purpose to consecrat but the one half of
the bread, the other half is not changed, but remains common bread? Summa
angel. Euch. cap. 26. They therefore that adore it, if the Priest had not that
purpose, what do they worship but the creature, and that according to their own
doctrine? And who can be certain of the Priests intention? So who can worship
in faith that God of theirs, seeing they cannot be certain of the intention of
the Priest, upon the which this change depends? and that which is done without
faith is sin. Secondly, their own doctrine is, that the intention of the Priest
suffices not, unless it be according to the institution of Christ, Bonaventura
in compend. sacr. Theolog. lib. 6. Hugo de S. Victor, Gerardus Lorichius. Now
sundry of their own learned Doctors says, that their private Masses, where
there is no public communion, is not according to the institution of Christ;
therefore by their own doctrine, they are vile idolaters, both Priest and
people, in worshipping a bit of bread that is made of wheat, as the great God:
seeing by their own doctrine, there is no change there in their private Masses
of the bread and wine in the body and blood of Christ. Last of all, seeing
there are sundry cases, and that very ordinary, wherein the Priest (by their
own doctrine) does not consecrat at all: as if the Priest have forgotten to put
wine in the calice: if the bread be made of other thing then flowr: if the
water surmount the wine: if the wine be sour: if he left out one of the words
of consecration, Thom. p. 3. q. 83. Joan. de Burgo Pupilla, cap. 3. Gerson
contra Florent. extra de celebrat. Miss. Now what certainty can the standers by
have, that the Priest has fallen in none of these cases? So with what
assurance of faith can they worship their breaden God?

To prove this by some examples, that by their own doctrine they make the
people to commit idolatry in worshipping of their breaden God. About the year
1536. there was four Augustine Friars hanged in Sevil in Spain, who had secretly
by night murdered their Provincial. The day following, to avoid all suspicion
of the murder, they all four said Mass, but they had no intention to
consecrat, as they themselves afterward confessed, and so there was no
Transubstantiation there, by their own doctrine: and therefore, all these that
heard their Mass that day, by their own doctrine, committed idolatry, because
there was no consecration there. I will set down another example. There was a
certain Priest who being deposed for his filthy life, wherein he had continued
for the space of 30. years with a harlot: being demanded by one, if he had
truly repented him of this his abominable life, and if he had put away this his
concubine from him, with intent never to receive her again? He never had, said
he, any such purpose. Being asked again, how then said he Mass every day, and
made he no scruple to eat the bread of the Lord, and drink of his holy cup, his
conscience accusing him of such an erroneous sin? At the last, he confessed,
that to avoid the unworthy receiving of the body and blood of the Lord, he did
not pronounce the sacramental words wherewith it is consecrat. And being urged
again, how he durst commit so horrible a wickedness, as to give so great an
occasion of so horrible idolatry to the people, who kneeling on their knees,
casting themselves on the earth, lifting up their hands toward the altar,
striking their breasts, did worship the unconsecrated bread and cup? Unto whom
he answered, that it was not so great a fault as he said of it: and that he was
not alone, but many mo did the same, which thought it not so abominable an
offense, as he made of it. These two Histories I find written by a Spanish
Author, one Cyprian Valera, the title whereof is, Of the Pope, and his
authority; and of the Mass, and the holiness thereof. All these then that heard
the Masses of these men, and adored the Sacrament which they lifted up,
committed idolatry, by their own Canons and Decrees: For the last did not
pronounce the words of consecration, and the other four had not the intent to
consecrat; and therefore there was no transubstantiation there, by their own
doctrine, and so they worshipped bread and wine, as their great Redeemer and
Creator. But what a miserable Religion is this, that depends upon the intention
of another? And therefore who can be certain, by their own doctrine, whither it
be God they worship or not, in their Sacrament? And this made a certain
Inquisitor, an enemy to the truth, fearing when he heard Mass, whither the
Priest had intention to consecrat or not, to say, O Lord* if thou be there, I
adore thee: and so by this subtilty, he thought to escape committing of
idolatry. In the time of the Council of Constance, there was three Popes that
the Council for their abominations did depose, and elected another: These three
not being Popes, could not ordain Priests, nor give them authority to
consecrat; so that by their own Canons, all they that heard Masses of such
Priests as had their authority from them, committed idolatry. This same may be
said of them that heard the Masses of all these Priests that were ordained by
Pope Constantin the first, and the whore Pope John the 8. For neither of these
had power to ordain Priests, by their own Canons. And as for Pope John, there
is no controversy of it, because she was a woman, not capable of that
authority, by their own Canons. And as for Constantin the first, he was a laick
man, who without receiving any orders, was by force named Pope. He not being a
Priest himself, could not give this authority to others. And so by their own
doctrine, all these that heard the Masses of such Priests, did commit horrible
idolatry. And howsoever the Pope and his Clergy affirms it to be God, and not
bread and wine, which they adore; yet ye shall see what estimation they have
themselves of that breaden God of theirs, by some examples Pope Gregory the
seventh, used it for conjuration, and sought a response of it; and because it
would give him none, he cast it in the fire, and burnt it, and so burnt his
Creator. They use it to revenge their wrongs, hatred and malice by it: and
therefore Pope Victor the third, in the year 1088. was poisoned in the calice
by his Subdeacon. Such like the Archbishop of York, poisoned in the calice.
Such like Henry the seventh, poisoned by a Dominican Friar in the Sacrament.
They use it for an Harvenger, sending it one or mo days journey before, with
the basest sort of the people. The Dominican Friars of the town Auxerra in
France in the year 1536. did burn it, being vomit out by a Friar that said
Mass. And the Franciscans de alia Villa, burnt the Cow which had eaten up the
Sacrament out of the Priests hand, and so in burning her, did burn their
Creator with her. Molon, one of the Spanish Inquisition, 35 years since, being
to go into procession upon the day of Corpus Christi, and the host that was to
be put in the box, being so great that it could not be placed in the same, he
being impatient to await while another host had been consecrat, demanded a
pair of shears, and clipped his God and Creator, and so went on forward to
their procession. Of the which we gather two things. First, that their Popes
and Ecclesiastical rabble is without all God and Religion, that makes so light
of their God as to clip it and burn it, and use it as the instruments of their
malice and revenge. Secondly, that this consecrat bread of theirs which they
sell to the people to be worshipped and adored, is most abominable Idolatry,
whereof one day they shall give a reckoning to God. And thus much for the tenth
abuse of their idolatrous Mass.

The eleventh abuse is, that in your co^munions: First, contrary the
institution of Christ, ye give not the bread to the hands of the people to
take, but puts it in theirs mouths, as though their mouths were holier then
their hands. Next, ye spoil the poor people of a sweet pledge of their
salvation, the Sacrament of the wine, giving them only bread: contrary first*
the express command of Jesus Christ, Drink ye all of this, Matthew. 26.27. Mark
14.23. next, contrary the doctrine of the Fathers, August. in lib. seu prosp.
your own Canon Law, de consecrat. did. 2. can. Dumfrangitur hostia, Cyprian
sermon. 5 de lapsis: and Pope Gelasius, de consecrat. did. 2. can. Comperimus.
The second is, that in your Mass, suppose ye speak of a communion and
communicants, yet there is none at all; for your Priest eats and drinks out
all. And therefore have ye added to the words of Christ, eat all, drink all;
contrary the express institution of the Supper, Take ye, eat ye, and drink ye
all of this. And contrary also to the doctrine of the ancient Doctors of the
primitive Church, Hieron. in 1. Cor. cap. 11. Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. hom. 18. and
of some Councils, Council. 2. Antioc. cap. 2. Conc. 4. de Tolet. cap. 17. and
some of your own Popes also, Alex 5. Epist 1. de mist. corp. and sang. Calixtus
de consecrat. did. 2. Can. Peracta.

The twelfth abuse, is in the prayer contained in the Canon of the Mass, in
these words, Look mercifully upon these things (to wit, Jesus Christ his body
and his blood, which the Priest thinks he offers up to God: and so Biel a
exponer of the Mass, interprets the same) and accept of them, as thou accepted
of the sacrifice of Abel, of Abraham, and of Melchisedeck. And in another
place, the Priest prays unto God, to receive that sacrifice (to wit, of Christ)
and to sanctify it with the blessing wherewith he sanctified the oblation of
Abel. Now if any thing can be said to be blasphemy, certainly this must be
blasphemy, to a Mass-Priest, a sinful creature, to interceed between God the
Father, and Christ his Son; to pray the Father that he may sanctify his Son and
accept of him, as though he were not fully sanctified in himself, and were not
the fountain of all holiness to others; and as though the Father were not well
pleased in him already. And because the Mass-Priest vaunts that in his
sacrifice of the Mass he offers up the eternal Son of God in a sacrifice to his
Father, for the sins of the quick and the dead: I will ask him this: Does not
he blaspheme horribly, who vaunts that in something that he does, he is more
acceptable to God, then Jesus Christ is? This cannot be denied. But I assume
that the Priest vaunts that in his Mass he is more acceptable to God, then
Jesus Christ is: Therefore the Priest is a horrible blasphemer. And I prove the
assumption thus: The Priest vaunts that in his Mass he offers up Jesus Christ
to God his Father: the Priest also in the Mass prays the Father, that he would
sanctify and accept of his Son which he offers up: Therefore the Priest vaunts
that he is more acceptable to God in the Mass, then Jesus Christ is: for God
regards more the person that offers up, then the thing that is offered up. This
is Ireneus language, lib. 4. contra haeres. Valent. cap. 34. and for this
purpose he brings forth the examples of Abel and Cain, and their sacrifices.
For he says, They two offered up to the Lord, but they were not both accepted
of him: for Abel his sacrifice pleased God, because his person pleased him, and
that because of his faith: but the sacrifice of Cain pleased not God, because
his person pleased him not, and that because of his incredulity. Seeing
therefore that the Mass-Priest vaunts that he offers up Jesus Christ in his
Mass to the Father: and seeing the Priest must be more acceptable then your
sacrifice: Therefore it must follow, that the Priest in the Mass vaunts, that
he is more acceptable to God then Jesus Christ is, and so is a horrible
blasphemer in his Mass.

The thirteenth abuse is, that he compares the sacrifice of the Son of God,
with the sacrifice of Abel, Abraham, and Melchisedeck, which by infinite degrees
surpasses them all.

The fourteenth, what horrible blasphemy commits the Priest, when he prays that
that oblation which he thinks to be Jesus Christ, may be carried to heaven by
the hands of an Angel, as though Christ were not as powerful now to ascend to
heaven, as he was after his resurrection, and therefore has now need of the
help of an Angel to carry him to heaven? What blasphemy is this? But let me ask
you, M. Gilbert, wherefore pray ye that he may be carried to heaven, seeing ye
eat him, and makes him to descend in your belly (as ye think) and to ascend and
descend are things contrary? And if ye will say, that first it mounts to
heaven, and then descends again: then I say, first, the accidents of the bread
and wine are left there alone; for they are not carried to heaven, but remains
in your hand: and Christ's body and blood are not under them, seeing he is
carried to heaven by the hands of an Angel, and so your real presence is gone.
Secondly, seeing ye eat his body and drink his blood, it must follow that ye
must make a new transubstantiation, to cause Christ come down again from
heaven, and to make the bread and wine to be transchanged again in his body and
blood, that ye may eat him and drink him. And so these are many voyages which
ye cause Christ to make: First, to descend from heaven by the means of your
Transubstantiation, then to make him to ascend to heaven by the means of your
prayer: and then last of all, to make him again descend from heaven, that ye
may eat him and drink him. These are the blasphemies which follows on your
blasphemous Mass.

The fifteenth abuse, is in their prayer for the dead, wherein they pray for a
place of refreshment, light and peace for them who have died in faith, sleeps
in peace, and rests in the Lord; and yet in the Masses that are said for them,
they will not give the Pax to be kissed, which is a sign of peace: let them
advise how they will reconcile this. But first, I say, their prayer for the
dead, is without all warrant of the Word: next, I would know who these are for
whom the Priest prays? not for them that are in hell; for they have not died in
faith, nor sleeps in peace, nor rests in the Lord: and prayers for them are
needless; for out of hell is no redemption: not for them that are in heaven;
for what greater light, or peace, or joy can they have, then that which they
have already? Not for them that are in Purgatory; for beside that it is but the
devise of man, according to their own doctrine, they that are in Purgatory
sleeps not in peace, but are tormented in fire (if their doctrine of the fire
of Purgatory be true:) and so this prayer cannot be for them neither.

The sixteenth, is your horrible cruelty against the Son of God, in breaking
the body of Christ in three pieces in your Mass, as ye think; which is greater
cruelty then the men of war did to him upon the cross: for they brake not a
bone of him, and yet ye Mass-Priests makes no scruple to part his body in three
pieces.

The seventeenth, is your dipping a part of the host into the cup, which is
without all warrant or example of the Scripture, and is against the doctrine of
one of your Popes, Pope Julius de consecrat. did. 2. Can. Cum omne crimen.

The eighteenth, is in the prayer wherein the Priest prays, that the receiving
of Christ his body be not to his condemnation, seeing he means not here by the
body of Christ, the bread which is a seal of his body, but properly the body of
Christ: which whosoever receives, receives not to death, but to life, seeing he
is life and salvation it self.

The nineteenth, is the blowing and mumbling of the Priests on the bread and
wine, their turning of their back to the people when they pronounce the words
of consecration: their so often signing with the sign of the cross in their Mass,
25. times: their keeping and enclosing of Christ's body (as they suppone) in a
box: their burning of candles before it, The ordinance of Honorius the 3.
confirmed by Pope Innocent the 4. de celebrat. Miss. Canon. Sane. and de
custod. Euchar. cap. 1. their carrying of it in procession upon their solemn
days, which they call the Feast of God, in their Temples, Villages, streets:
their carrying of it to the sick and diseased, with these blasphemous words
spoken by the Priest to the patient, Behold, my friend, God your Creator, which
I have brought unto you: Ordinance of Pope Urban, anno 1564. What blasphemy is
this? And what a God is this that cannot come by himself, but must be brought
by another? And what comfort can this God bring to the patient, that cannot
bring himself to the patient but as he must be born by the Priest? What a
mockery of God, of his Word, of themselves, and of the poor people, is this? Do
their Priests the thing that Christ did in the Sacrament? Did he any of these
things, or commanded he them to be done? Crossed he the bread and wine? Did he
blow and mumble the words upon it? Commanded he the bread to be kept in a box,
to be carried in processions, to be carried to the sick, to burn candles before
it? What spirit has revealed to you these things, seeing the Spirit of Christ
has not revealed them in the Scriptures? You must seek therefore for a new
Gospel, to prove these ceremonies: for the Gospel of Christ makes no mention of
them: yea, this keeping of the sacrifice, it is forbidden by your own Canon
Law, de consecrat. did. 2. cap. 3. Gradibus. So ye both fight against the
Scripture, and your own Canon Law.

The twentieth abuse, is their manifold styles and titles that they give to
their Mass, which cannot be all agreeable to the same: some taken from the
persons in whose name and honor they are celebrat: as the Masses of the
Trinity, of the Name of Jesus, of his cross, crown, and five wounds; of our
Lady, of the Angels, of the Saints: some taken from the persons and matters
whereof they are said. For there are sundry sorts of Masses, for sundry sorts
of persons, and matters, as one for the Pope, another for the Emperor, the
third for the King, the fourth for a man. 5. for a woman. 6. for the
bridegroom. 7. for the bride. 8. for prisoners. 9. for them that saills* 10.
for them that goes a voyage. 11. for the dead. 12. for him of whose soul there
is doubt. 13. for the pest. 14. for the rage. 15. for the tempest. 16. for the
fire. 17. for all sorts of diseases, both of man and beast. And last of all,
some of their styles are taken from the diversity of times and seasons wherein
they are said: one sort of Mass for Summur, another for Winter: one for the
time of Lent, another for the time of flesh: one for Christmas, another for
Pasch, another for Whitsunday, and other some for other Feast days. Now these
Masses are so diverse, that the Mass that it said at one of these solemn times,
cannot serve for another: the Mass for Lent, cannot serve for the time of
flesh: the Mass for Pasch, cannot serve for Christmas, and so forth of the
rest. In the which there are many horrible abuses. First, if the Mass be one
with the Supper (as they say) then as there is but one Supper of the Lord,
which is instituted only for the remembrance of CHRIST, which is but one in
general for all, and whereof all the faithful are partakers, of whatsoever rank
they be, be they great, be they small, be they rich, by they poor, and which
serves for all times. For as our Savior did institut but one Baptism to serve
for all persons, and for all times, so he did institut but one Supper to serve
for all persons, and all times. If therefore the Mass were one with the Supper,
it should be but one for all persons, and for all seasons. But this diversity
of Masses does testify, that it is not the institution of Jesus Christ, but
the institution of Antichrist, and that it is not one with the Lord his Supper,
as they falsely allege: Yea, it does testify that they have forsaken the truth
of God, and are given over of God to believe lies, and to be deceived by strong
delusions, that they might be damned.

Secondly, what needs several Masses of the Trinity, of the holy Spirit, of the
Name of Jesus? For seeing the three persons of the Trinity are one, and they
all concur in the work of our faith, the Father giving his Son by his holy
Spirit in the Word and Sacraments: therefore this diversity as though the
persons of the Trinity were separat, is needless.

Thirdly, this would be marked: that suppose they have styled their Masses from
sundry persons, yet they have not ascribed a singular Mass to Jesus Christ,
that it might be named simply the Mass of Jesus Christ: and this, no question,
is not without the providence of God, that seeing the Mass is not the
institution of Christ, but of Antichrist; not the ordinance of God, but of
Satan; he would not that such a blasphemous and idolatrous invention should
have the same style, to be called the Mass of Christ simply, without any
further addition, as the Supper is called the Lords Supper.

Fourthly, they have a several Mass to the Name of Jesus, unto the which
Boniface the sixth has given pardon of three thousand years to them that say
this Mass devoutly, Missale Romanum; as though his Name were a thing separat
from himself: and as though there were some special virtue in the syllables and
letters of that Name, after the manner of Magiciens and Sorcerers.

Fifthly, their Masses to his cross and crown, is manifest idolatry, in
ascribing that which was proper to Jesus Christ, to the tree whereon he hang,
and to the crown of thorns which he bure; as though either they had redeemed
us, and not himself who was crucified on the tree: or else that they were one
with himself: which are both blasphemy.

Sixthly, their Masses to the honor of the Virgin Mary, to Angels, and Saints,
is manifest idolatry: For the Supper was not instituted in the honor of any
creature, but only to the honor of him who did redeem us.

Seventhly, wherefore serves any Mass for the Pope* For if he be such a one, as
himself and his Church have written of him; to wit, That his will is heavenly:
that he may make something of nothing: that he may of right dispense against
right: that he may make righteousness of unrighteousness: and that he may
deliver as many souls out of Hell and Purgatory, and place them in heaven, as
pleases him, Extra. de translat. Epist. Canon. Quanto in textu and glossa,
Clement. 6. in Bulla, he needs no Masses to be said for him. Either therefore
these sentences that are spoken of him are false, or else all Masses said for
him are superfluous.

Eighthly, if the Mass be one with the Supper, then as the Supper was only
instituted for the living, and not for the dead: and therefore our Savior in
the Supper commands, To take, eat, drink, and to do it in remembrance of him,
which the dead cannot do: so these Masses should not be for the dead. And for
what dead are these, that these Masses are said? If they say, for them that are
in Heaven or Hell. I answer, the one needs them not, and they are unprofitable
for the other. If they say, for them that are in Purgatory. I answer, this
Purgatory is but their own invention, to draw water to their own mill, and to
enrich the Popes treasures; for the Scripture makes no mention of it.

Ninthly, their Masses that are said for them that are absent, as for the
prisoners, for them that sail, and are in their voyage, etc. makes it manifest
also, that the Mass is not one with the Lords Supper: for it was instituted not
to them that were absent, but to them that were present. For in the Supper they
are commanded to take, eat, and to drink in remembrance of him, which the
absent cannot do. Indeed it is true, that these that are present at the Mass,
do eat and drink as little, as they that are absent* the only vantage they
have, is to be beholders of the Priest eating and drinking all himself alone,
and of these vain and juglers tricks of the Priest in saying of his Mass, which
the absent cannot see.

Tenthly, how can their Priests please God in saying Mass for him of whose soul
it is doubted, seeing it cannot be said with faith, and whatsoever is done
without faith, the Apostle says, is sin, Romans 4.23. And this doubting, as
James says, cannot stand with faith, James 2 6. therefore this Mass of theirs,
for his soul of whom there is doubt, cannot please God? But what is all their
Religion, but conjectures, and opinions, and doubtings.

Eleventhly, is their Masses for the pest, tempest, fury, fire, and all
afflictions and maladies, as well of man, as of beast, which contains
intolerable and vile idolatry: for every Mass has his own Saint to be a
Patron, according to the subject thereof, and every Saint has his own office.
Against the pest, the Priest says the Mass of S. Sebastian, and S. Roch, for
they are the Patrons and defenders against it: after the custom of the Pagans,
who honored Apollo and Esculapius by feasts and sacrifices, for to be saved
from the contagion of the same. Against the tempest, they say the Mass of S.
Bernard, S. Graith, S. Barbe, and others, in stead of Jupiter which the Pagans
worshipped. Against the rage or fury, they say the Mass of S. Hubert, who is
the Patron of hunters and dogs, as the Goddess Diana was the Patron among the
Pagans. Against the fire, they say the Mass of S. Antony, for they make him the
Patron of it: and they say, it is a greater oath to swear upon the arm of S.
Antony, then when one swears by the Name of God. For a woman with child, they
say the Mass of S. Margaret, in stead of Diana and Juno, which the Pagans
worshipped for women with child. For a horse, they say the Mass of S. Eloy, or
S. Antony; yea, for a poor wifes hen, if it be sick or lost. And for their
pigs, they have the Mass of S. Antony, Alanus de sacrific. Euch. cap. 32. But
first, what blasphemy is this, to have their recourse to Saints, he or she,
to obtain of them, or by their merit, or intercession, health in sickness, etc.
and such like things, which are only in Gods hands to bestow: For it is he only
that sends health and sickness, fair weather and foul weather, and so forth.
Next, the Lords Supper was not instituted to be a charm for such diseases of
man or beast, or for the fire, pest, tempest, etc. but for the remembrance of
Christ's death. So that if there were no more abuse in the Mass but these two
things, it is sufficient to make all men to abhor such abominable idolatry.

The twenty and one abuse, is their mixing of parcels of the Scripture with
their abomination and idolatries in their Mass, after the manner of those who
go about to impoyson any, who mix their poison with some good food, that it may
be the less suspected: Or rather as the Magiciens and Charmers does, who mixes
with their devilish practices, parcels of the Scriptures of God; and makes
those to serve for their devilish purposes, which was appointed to Gods honor.
So are all the places of Scripture which are read and sung in their Mass: they
are brought forth, not for the truth, but against the truth, for their idolatry
and abomination: and this they have done, that their idolatry may be less
suspected by the simple. Next, what warrant have they to prefer the Gospel (as
they call it) to the Epistles, in standing up at the reading of the Gospel, and
sitting at the reading of the Epistles, seeing they are both inspired of God,
and they both contain the Gospel of Jesus Christ? as the Apostle testifies,
Romans 1.1. and 2.16. 1. Cor. 4.15. Thirdly, the Gospel and Epistles were
appointed not to be sung and chanted in the Church (as they do) but to be read
and interpreted: for the Psalms and other Hymns in the Scripture are ordained
for that use. Fourthly, seeing the Scripture which is read and sung in your
Mass, is read and sung in an unknown language, as all the rest of your Mass is
done; to what purpose does it serve? And what is it but a mocking of God, and
abusing of the poor people?

The twenty and two abuse, is their wax candles which they have burning in the
time of their Masses, in the fair day light, mocking as it were thereby, both
God the Author of all light, and the light of the Sun. And to what purpose can
they serve to burn in the day light when the Sun is shining, but to bear
witness against them in the great Day, that in the midst of the noonday they
groped in darkness, and that they have put out the light of the Gospel, that
should have shined in their hearts? What, shall I speak of the rest of your
ceremonies, which are superstitious, idle, carnal, and Jewish? In attire like
them: for as their Priests were clad in an Ephod, a Myter, a broidered coat, a
girdle, a breast plate, and a robe, Exode 28.4. So with you your Priests must
have an Amice, an Albe, a girdle, a fannel, whereof some of them are taken from
the fashion of the Pagans. For Numa Pompilius when he used to worship, he
covered himself with a kerchief or vail: and he ordained that these idolatrous
Priests should have their Albe, and a painted colored coat above it, Ovid. in
Fastis, Alex. ab Alex. As the Jewish Priest had a lawer, whereat they must wash
before they sacrificed, Exodus 30.20. so have yours: as they lifted up a part of
the host, Exodus 29.27. so you lift up the whole host: as they sounded the
trumpets at their sacrifices, Number. 10.10. so you ring your bells. And what shall
I speak of the rest of your vain and superstitious ceremonies, in washing
often, in crossing and blessing often, in censing often, in soft speech and
whispering, in kissing of the Amice, kissing of the fannel, kissing of the
stole, kissing of the altar, kissing of the book, kissing of the Priests hand,
and kissing of the Pax, in smiting and knocking of the breast, in gesturing by
rule and measure, in bowing and becking, in spacing forward and backward, and
turning round about, and traversing of the ground: his gesture so ridiculous,
so changeable, so affectat in saying of his Mass, that a man would think a
player were coming forth upon the stage to play, when the Priest adresseth
himself to the Mass: beside de music of your Organs where it may be had, and
your threefold salutation of the Priest, Dominus vobiscum, which can have no
use in the private Masses, where the Priest is himself alone together with the
Clark? So that in truth it is more then Jewish: For in ceremonies they are
above their ceremonies, in orders more exquisite, in cautels more diligent: so
that it seems rather to be a stage play, then the worship of God. But I see it
is fulfilled in them which was foretold, that God would send them strong
delusions, that they might believe lies, that all these might be damned which
loved not the truth. Let the Christian Reader judge now, whither the Mass be an
heavenly action, or whither it be not a sink and closet of all abomination, or
idolatry, or not.

As truth confirms it self, so falsehood destroys it self: A Kingdom divided
against it self (as our Savior says) cannot stand. Therefore their divisions
and contradictions among themselves concerning this their sacrifice of the
Mass, is an evident token that that Kingdom cannot stand. Some of you says,
Christ descends daily from the bosom of the Father to the altar, and ascends
from thence to heaven again, Turrian. 1. tract. cap. 11. fol. 59. Other some
say the contrary, That he neither descends from heaven in the Mass, nor ascends
from thence to heaven, Scarga art. 11. fol. 335. 2. Bellarmin lib. 2. de Missa,
cap. 4. says, That the sacrifice of the Mass does not satisfy for our sins,
or merit properly the forgiveness of them. And yet in lib. 2. de Missa, fol.
731. he says, That Christ offered in the last Supper a sacrifice for the sins
of the Apostles, and the sacrifice of the Mass (says he) is one with that. And
their Priests say in the Mass, That he offers it up for the redemption of
souls, In Canone Miss. And the Council of Trent calls it, A true propitiatory
sacrifice for the sins of the quick and the dead, Sess. 6. Can. 2. and 3. And
Gabriel Biel, an exponer of the Mass, says, That the Mass is one in substance
with the sacrifice of the cross, and that it proceeds the self-same effects, to
wit, the appeasing of God his wrath, Lect. 85. in explic. Canon. and in 4.
s^nt. did. 12 qu. 2. If it then appease God his wrath, and be offered for the
redemption of souls, then it must both merit properly, and satisfy properly.
3. Some of you affirms, That the sacrifice of the cross, is more excellent then
the sacrifice of the Mass, Bellar. lib. 1. de Missa, fol. 626. and the virtue
of the Mass depends upon it, Vega de Missa, these. 141. And yet some of you
says, It is but one sacrifice with that of the cross, the same sacrifice, and
the same Priest in both, Vega these. 137. How then can the one be more excellent
then the other? 4. Bellarmin lib. 2. de Missa, cap. 4 says, That the value of
the sacrifice of the Mass is finit, and therefore it is often repeated. But
Caietan a Cardinal says, That the virtue, quantity, and effect of it, is
infinite, as the suffering of Christ, Tract. 7. de celebrat. Missae, cap. 2.
quaest. 1. 5. Some of them says, That Christ is offered up in the Mass by the
words of the Church, when it is said, Tua de tuis offerimus tibi, Possevinus
lib. contra Chytraeum and Volanum. Some when the words of the consecration are
pronounced: But Bellarmin agrees with neither: he says, The sacrifice is
offered up, not so much by the words, as by the putting of the sacrifice upon
the altar* Lib. 2. de Missa, cap. 11. 6. Bellarmin says in a part, That if
there be not a real and true slaughter of Christ in the Mass, then the Mass is
not a true and real sacrifice, Lib. 1. de Missa, cap 17 For, says he, to a
true and real sacrifice, is required a true and real slaughter of the thing
that is sacrificed: for the essence, says he, of the sacrifice stands in the
slaughter. Upon the which follows, that either Christ is daily truly crucified
in the Mass by their Priests, or else their Mass is not a true and real
sacrifice. And yet in another part, he says, That the sacrifice of the Mass
requires not a true slaughter of the sacrifice, Ibidem cap. 25. 7. Gaspa
Castlius says, That there are two diverse sacrifices in the Eucharist or Mass;
the one of the bread and wine, the other of the body and blood of Christ, Lib.
1. de sacr. cap. 20. And yet Bellarmin, and sundry others denies it, and says,
There is but one, Lib. 1. de Missa, cap. 27. 8. Pope Innocent says, That the
sacrifice of the Mass is offered up for original, venial, and mortal sins,
Tract. de Missa. And yet the Master of Sentences, and Gerson, says, That the
Mass purges but venial sins, Lib. 4. sent. did. 12. cap. Posthaec, in Floret.
lib. 4. And Thomas of Aquin agrees with neither of them* for he says, The
sacrifice of the cross was for our original sin, but the sacrifice of the
altar, is for our ordinary sins, Thomas de Aquaviva. 9. M. Gilbert Brown says,
That their Priests does the same in the Mass, which Christ did in the Supper.
But Bellarmin frankly grants, That Christ did not offer up the bread by the
same words that their Priests do now in the Mass, Lib. 1. de Missa, cap. 27.
Therefore they do not the same thing that Christ did. 10. M. Gilbert Brown
says, That Christ did offer his body and blood to the Father after the
consecration: But Bellarmin says, ibidem, That neither Christ nor his Apostles
in the beginning did offer up any oblation after the consecration. I leave the
rest of their contradictions, so that seeing they have no concord among
themselves, neither in the matter, nor in the form, nor in the effect, nor in
the substance, nor in the circumstances of their pretended sacrifice: but that
the Lord (as is said in Hosea) has divided their hearts; therefore their Mass
must perish. And seeing the Lord has sent such a confusion among them, that
they understand not the language one of another; some saying one thing, some
another; therefore it is Babel, the tower of confusion which they are building,
and not the house of the Lord.

To conclud this, they will have their sacrifice not a creature, but a Creator
of all creatures: and therefore they worship it with the worship of latria,
which by their own doctrine is only proper to God, Turrian. 1. tract. cap. 17.
and Antonius de Padua, ex Bellarm. de Euchar. lib. 3. cap. 8. Therefore they
sing after the consecration, It is not bread, but God and man my Savior: And
yet they say, That this Creator both begins to be where he was not before,
after the consecration: and ceases to be where he was before: and that he is
not every where as God is, Scarga art. 5. fol. 335. Turrian. tract. 1. cap. 21.
And they say, That the Priest makes Christ his body of the bread in the
Sacrament, and Christ the King is made of bread. Bellar. lib. 3. de Euch. fol.
399. Pope John 22. lib. orat. inscrip. Antidotarius animae, and in Breviario
and missalibus, Qui creavit me sine me, creatur mediante me: he that created me
without me (that is the Priest) is created by my moyen; that is, he makes that
God that made him. Now how can he be the true God, and a true Creator, which
has a beginning, and ceases to be, which is not every where, as God is, which
is made of bread and wine by a Mass-Priest, and that by their own doctrine? How
therefore shall their Church be cleared from abominable idolatry, that worships
that which they call God, Creator and Savior: and yet such a God, as by their
own doctrine, has a beginning and ending, and is not every where, and is made
of bread and wine by dust and ashes. O! woe be to their souls that worship God
which made not heaven and earth, and causes others to do the same! And how
shall their Mass-Priests be cleared from sacrilegious blasphemy, which vaunts
that in their Mass they daily creat their Creator, and that of bread and wine;
and so makes themselves Gods, and more then Gods: For God created but
creatures, but they (as they suppone) creat the Creator. And as they worship a
false Creator in their Mass, so do they worship a false Christ and Savior in
the same. For the Scripture says, That the true Christ is made of the seed of
David, and of the seed of the woman, Romans 1.3. Gal. 4.4. and not of any other
substance. But the Christ which they offer up in their Mass, by their own
doctrine, is made of bread and wine, and that by the Priest. So Bellarmin
confesses, ibidem, and Pope John 22. ibidem. For the one says, That it is no
absurd thing to the Priest to make Christ his body of bread. And the other
says, That Christ the King is made of bread. Therefore they worship not JESUS,
the son of Mary, who was made of the woman, and of the seed of David, but a
false Jesus, made of bread, and baken in the oven, and formed by the Priest:
Therefore of all Idolaters they must be the most blasphemous and abominable.
And thus much for the Mass.

SECTION XIII. Concerning Confession and Absolution by the Priest.
Master Gilbert Brown.
FIfthly, our doctrine is, that the lawful Ministers and Priests of the Church
of Christ, have power given them by Christ to forgive and to retain sins,
because Christ says to his Apostles, Receive ye the holy Ghost, whose sins ye
shall forgive, they are forgiven them; and whose sins ye shall retain, they are
retained, John 20.23. And in another place, That ye may know, says Christ,
that the Son of man has power in earth to forgive sins, etc. Matthew. 6.9. and
16.19. and 18.18. with sundry other places conform to the same. And this is
denied by the Protestants.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
As for the fifth point of your doctrine, that the lawful Ministers of Christ
have power given them by Christ to forgive sins, and to retain them. If you
mean that they have this power as Gods Witnesses, Ministers and Ambassadors,
yea, and Judges too: (For the Apostle says, We judge them that are within) to
testify and to declare, to judge and give out judgment according to Gods
Word; not only by the preaching of the Gospel, and administration of the
Sacraments joined therewith: but also by the censures and discipline, in
excommunicating the obstinat impenitent, and absolving the penitent. If, I say,
your doctrine be this, then you injury us, in saying we deny it: and you needed
not to have quoted these places, to confirm the thing which we both teach, and
also practice. But what is the cause ye would not quote the place where we deny
this doctrine? But if you mean that the lawful Ministers of Christ have an
absolut power, and full authority; not as Ministers and Witnesses only, but as
Judges and Lords over our Faith, to forgive or retain by their own authority,
and that the very pronouncing of the words of absolution, is the cause of
remission of sins: and that it so scatters the sins, and makes them to
evanish, as the blast of wind extinguishes the fire, and scatters the cloud, as
Bellarmin says, Controv. Tom. 2. If you mean so, this we utterly deny un-you,
and all men; because it is only proper unto God. The which the Jews, suppose
they were blinded, did acknowledge; and so not so blind as ye are. For it is
only God that forgives in Jesus Christ, Matthew 9. It is only his death that has
merited it, and only faith that apprehends it, and only his Spirit that seals
it up, and the Word and Ministry that declares, testifies, and confirms it.
For the Apostle says, He has committed to us the word and ministry of
reconciliation, and we are in his stead to beseech men to be reconciled to God,
2. Cor. 5.18.19.20. So we are but Ministers of this, Augustine is plain in this,
Homil. 23. It is the Spirit, says he, that forgives, and not you; meaning of
the Ministers, and the Spirit, is God: it is God therefore who forgives, and
not we. There is one argument: God only forgives sins, therefore not man. And
again, What is man but a sick man to be healed himself? Would thou be a
Physician to me, with me seek the Physician thy self. Here another argument: He
cannot be a Physician to others, who needs a Physician himself. Further, he
says, He that can forgive by man, can also forgive without man: for he may as
well forgive by him, as by another. But to what purpose do ye quote the 9. of
Matthew, That the Son of man has power to forgive sins: For will you say, that
the Ministers of the Church have that absolut authority that he had? The which
if ye do, then are ye blasphemous. As for the word Priest, wherewith ye style
the Ministers of the Church, I know that you and your Church takes more
pleasure in this style, then in all the styles which the holy Ghost has given
to the Ministers of the Church in the New Testament: For among the manifold
styles which are given to his Ministers, yet has he never given this style of
a sacrificing Priest, as proper to them, throughout the whole New Testament.
But as your office of Priesthood is not written in Christ his latter Testament,
so neither is your style of sacrificing Priests, contained in the same. But new
offices must have new styles.

SECTION XIV. Of Extreme Unction, and whither it be a Sacrament?
Master Gilbert Brown.
SIxthly, our doctrine is, to make the Priests of the Church to anoint the sick
with oil, in the Name of our Lord, and to pray over him, because it is the
doctrine of the Apostles, as we have in S. James in these words, Is any sick
among you, let him bring in the Priests of the Church, and let them pray over
him, anointing him with oil in the Name of our Lord; and the prayer of faith
shall save the sick, and our Lord shall lift him up: and if he be in sins, they
shall be remitted him James 4.15. August. tom. 4. super Levit. quaest. 84.
. And because we find here an external form, which is the anointing with oil,
of an internal grace, which is remission of sins; therefore we say it is a
Sacrament. Now take from these places the vain subterfuges of our new men, that
will have him a Mediciner for the body in this, and not for the soul, the
matter will be plain of it self.

M. John Welsch his Reply.
As to your doctrine of anointing of the sick with oil, and that not by every
man, but by a Priest; not in all sicknesses, but in the extremity of death: not
with every oil, but with oil consecrated by the Bishop: (which Bellarmin makes
essential to this Sacrament, cap. 7. de extr. unctione) and that not all the
parts and members of the body, but the five organs of the senses, and the reins
and feet: and that by this form of words, Let God forgive thee whatsoever thou
have sinned, by the sight, hearing, smelling, etc. by this holy unction, and
his most godly mercy. The which you will have to have two effects. The one, the
health of the body, if it be expedient for the soul: the other, remission of
the relics of sins that remains: and this ye make to be one of your
Sacraments. And for this purpose ye only bring one testimony of Scripture. So
that all the show of warrant you can pick out of the Scripture, is this only
place of James. For I suppose with Bellarmin, and sundry others, you have seen
that that place of Mark 6.13. which is also alleged by the Council of Trent
for the confirmation of this doctrine, would carry no show to make any thing
for you, and therefore it may be you have omitted it. But this place serves
nothing for your purpose.

For first, I say, this was a ceremony annexed to the miraculous gift of
healing, as is plain, both by the text using the word (...), and the Lord will
lift him up, which is properly spoken of the health of the body: and also by
that place of Mark 6.13. where it is written, that the Apostles anointed many
sick with oil, and they healed them. The which gift was not only given to the
Apostles, but also to the very Churches, as is plain of the 1. Corinthians. 12.
Unto another is given the gift of healing, etc. Now seeing this extraordinary
gift is ceased in the Church of God, wherefore will you superstitiously use the
ceremony? So either avow, M. Gilbert, that your Priests have this miraculous
gift of healing, which I suppose ye will not, or else leave off the ceremony.

Secondly, by this argument ye may as well make all the rest of the ceremonies
(which our Savior and his Apostles, Peter and Paul, and the believers in the
primitive Church used toward the sick, blind, lame and dead) Sacraments. As the
laying on of hands, Mark 16.18. which had both a command and a promise joined
with it, anointing of the eyes of the blind with clay, John 9.6. washing in the
pool of Siloam, etc. John 5. Mat. 9.29. Acts 3.6. and 20.10. For why should not
their examples be as well followed, as the example of the Elders of the
primitive Church? And seeing you use not these ceremonies, because ye want the
miraculous gift, which was joined with them, why do ye use this ceremony
superstitiously, seeing ye want this gift also?

Thirdly, I say, this place can make nothing for your doctrine: for this place
says, Call the Elders of the Church, and let them, etc. but you call for a
sacrificing Priest. This text says in the plural number, Call for the Elders:
your doctrine says, one Priest is sufficient. This place speaks of oil, not
mentioning a syllable of consecration, blessing of it by the Bishop, and that
nine-fold salutation that ye give unto it, Hail, O holy oil, with the bowing of
the knee, and other ceremonies. There is not a syllable in this, nor in any
other Scripture, that speaks of these things, and yet your doctrine will have
all these ceremonies. This place says, And the prayer of faith shall save the
sick: and you attribut it to the ointment. This place puts no difference of
sickness: but your doctrine is, that none be anointed, but he who is lying in
the bed, and at the point of death. This place only specifieth the anointing of
the sick, some of you reckons, as the Council of Florentine, seven parts: some
the five senses, as necessary. And therefore this moved Thomas of Aquin, lib.
4. sent. 4. did. 23. quaest. to say, That the form of this Sacrament is not
extant in the Scripture. Now if it be not extant in the Scripture, what to do
have we with it, seeing the Scripture is able to make a man wise unto
salvation, and to make the man of God perfect in every good work?

Fourthly, Beda, Ecumenius, and Theophylactus in their Commentaries upon these
places, and Thomas Waldensis, lib. 2. de sacr. and Alphonsus de Castro, de
haeresibus. two archpapists affirms, that in the 6. of Mark, and 5. of James,
the self-same unction and anointing is meaned. But Bellarmin de extr. unct. and
Jansenius, in Marc. 6. two other Papists, affirms and proves by firm reasons,
that that anointing in Mark, is no Sacrament; therefore neither is this
anointing in James a Sacrament, seeing (as said is) in both the places the
self-same unction is meaned.

Fifthly, I say, all the Sacraments the Lord has instituted, are public and
not private: but this Sacrament of yours is privately ministered: therefore not a
true Sacrament.

Sixthly, all the Sacraments of the New Testament should be ministered by them
who have the preaching of the Gospel concredited unto them; and not by private
Christians. But Innocentius the first, a Pope, says, in his Epist. 1. cap. 8
Private men may minister this in their own and others necessities: as also
Thomas Waldensis a Papist. And yet the Council of Trent accurses them that so
say: Therefore it is not a Sacrament.

Seventhly, Pope Innocent in that same Epistle cited before, calls it but genus
Sacramenti, a kind of Sacrament; therefore it is not properly a Sacrament. But
you are more bold to call it a Sacrament.

Eighthly, all the Sacraments of Christ have their warrant from the written
word: But Petrus a Soto, in his book against Brentius, calls this a tradition
which has not the warrant in the written word: therefore it is not a lawful
Sacrament of Christ.

And as to your argument: That it has an external form of anointing with oil,
of an internal grace which is remission of sins. I answer: this form or
ceremony was extraordinary, as I proved before, annexed to a miraculous gift of
healing. The which seeing it is now ceased, the ceremony also should cease.
And this promise is not made to the anointing (if ye will believe the Apostle)
but to the prayer of faith. The prayer of faith, says the Apostle, shall save
the sick. And whereas ye say that we make him a Mediciner only for the body in
this, and not for the soul: we answer: That this ceremony, as sundry others,
was only annexed to the extraordinary gift of healing of the body, and was not
seals of grace. And yet with the health of the body, the healing of the soul
was oftentimes joined, as our Savior says to the paralytick man: Thy sins are
forgiven thee, take up thy bed and walk, Matthew 9 28. Now whither these be our
vain subterfuges, or clear grounds out of the Scripture, let the Reader judge.
And whereas ye call us new men: let them be new and most recent* whose doctrine
is most new. But as has, and shall be proved by Gods grace, our doctrine is not
new, but Jesus Christ's in his Old and New Testament, and yours devised since.
Therefore this title of noveltie most justly belongs unto you. This for the
sixth point of your doctrine.

SECTION XV. Concerning Imposition of hands, and whither it be a Sacrament?
Master Gilbert Brown.
SEventhly, our doctrine is, that when our Priests (which are the only lawful
Ministers now adays) are called to that function, receives the imposition of
hands, with the grace or gift of the holy Ghost, because it is the doctrine of
S. Paul in these words: Neglect not the gift or grace that is within thee,
which is given thee by prophesy, with the imposition of priesthood. And
therefore must be a Sacrament, because it has an external form, which is the
imposition of hands, of an external grace, which is the gift given by the same.
And for this cause (a) John Calvin himself admits it to be a Sacrament: albeit
in their Confession they call it a bastard Sacrament of the Popes, and detests
the same, although (b) Melancthon has the contrary. a Institut. lib. 4. cap.
14. sect. 20. item lib. 4. cap. 19. sect. 28. b In locis com. edit. 1543. de
number. sacrament.

M. John Welsch his Reply.
As for the seventh point of your doctrine concerning the imposition of hands
in the ordination of the lawful Ministers of the Church of Christ, because it
is a ceremony which has the foundation of it in the word of God, and was
practiced in the primitive Church, as in the ordination of Timothy here, and
others: and is profitable both to put the Pastors in mind of his calling, that
he is separated of God for the discharge of the same, and also the people that
they embrace him as one sent of God to them; therefore we both acknowledge it,
and practice it. But that either the gift of the holy Ghost is inseparably
joined with it, or that it is a Sacrament of the New Testament properly (as you
affirm) that we deny. As to the first* the gift of the holy Ghost is not
inseparably joined with it; First, because that is injurious to the Lords free
grace, which is not bound to any instrument, let be to a ceremony. And also he
speaks against experience: for how many, I pray you, do receive imposition of
hands, who receive not a new grace and gift of the holy Ghost among you?
Miserable experience these many ages, both does testify it; and also one has
testified the same, saying, Our Priests do lay the word of blessing upon many,
but in few follows the effect of that blessing, Ex veteri Testam. quaest.
109. inter opera Augustini. And certainly if any gift of the holy Ghost is
joined with this ceremony, it should be an ability to preach the Word: For that
is the principal part of the office of the Minister of the Gospel. But how many
thousands are they among you in your Church who have received this imposition
of hands, and yet as unable to preach the Gospel as asses are? And last of all*
what needed that trial and examination so straightly commanded in the Scripture,
which ought to be had of them that are to be ordained, if the holy Ghost were
ever inseparably given with the ceremony? For wherefore is this trial and
examination? And wherefore is Timothy so straightly charged to lay his hands
suddenly on no man, but because it is only the holy Ghost who enables? The
which also should be well known unto his Church, ere they presume to testify
the calling of God to them. For if it were true that ye say, that the gift of
the holy Ghost were joined with the imposition of hands inseparably, then the
Apostle should rather have commanded Timothy, 2 Timothy 5.22. to lay his hands
upon many, in respect of the need that the Church stood in of all men, rather
then to have discharged him. And as for the place of Paul which ye cite here,
Despise not the gift, etc. this serves nothing for your doctrine: For if first,
the gift given to Timothy, which the Apostle speaks of, was extraordinary, and
so ordinarily does not ever follow the ceremony. 2. It is not ascribed here to
the ceremony of imposition of hands, but unto prophecy, which is given thee by
prophecy, whereby it was revealed to the Church of the ability of this man.
And so if there be any prophesies that go of you in your Clergy, that the holy
Ghost is given to you, then ye may claim unto the same: but I think ye will not
say that such like prophesies go of you: therefore ye cannot claim to this
testimony. 3. Timothy is exhorted to keep that worthy thing concredited unto
him through the holy Ghost, 2 Timothy 1.14. It was the holy Ghost therefore who
was the giver and preserver of it. And as for the ceremony, it was a sign of
the presence of Gods Spirit in them who was lawfully ordained. Now as to the
second, that ye will have it a Sacrament, because it has an external form, and
also a promise of grace. That will not follow: For then you should have
innumerable Sacraments: For prayer, alms-deeds, and the ordination of
Magistrates, and many others, have external forms, and have promises of grace
joined with them, and yet you will not say that they are properly Sacraments
For in all the Sacraments of the New Testament which properly are Sacraments,
there must be first, not only an external action, but an earthly and visible
element, as water in Baptism, and bread and wine in the Supper. And therefore
Augustine says, in Joan. tract 90. Let the word be joined with the element, and
then it is a Sacrament. Secondly, they must have their express warrant and
institution from Jesus Christ in the Scripture, as Baptism has, Matthew. 28. and
the Lords Supper, Matthew. 26. Thirdly, they must not only have a promise of
grace, but a promise of remission of sins and sanctification: For they must be
seals of that Covenant which is common to all Christians, as Baptism and the
Lords Supper is. But this ceremony of imposition of hands wants all these
three: For neither is there any earthly element, neither seals it up the
Covenant which is common to all, but proper to the Ministry only; neither has
it the express institution of Christ in all the four Evangelists And whereas in
the 20. of John, he there ordains his Apostles, we read, he breathed on them,
and said, Receive the holy Ghost. But not a word that he laid his hands on
them, or commanded them to use it to others. The which without all question he
would have done, if he had ordained it to be a Sacrament. And Petrus a Soto, a
Papist, says, That the making of the imposition of hands to be a Sacrament, is
a tradition. Therefore it is not a Sacrament properly of the New Testament.
Secondly, if the ordination of any by imposition of hands were a Sacrament, the
ordination of a Bishop by the same especially should be a Sacrament: For the
place which ye quote here is of Timothy, who was a Bishop, as your Church
affirms. And Bellarmin says, de Sacramento ordinis, lib. 1. cap. 5. If this be
not a Sacrament, then it cannot be proved by the Scripture, that ordination by
imposition of hands is a Sacrament. And he says, If this be not granted, they
will lose all the testimonies of the Ancients, to prove imposition of hands to
be a Sacrament, for they speak of the ordination of Bishops. But the ancient
Scholars and Doctors of your own Church, in 4. did. 24. and Dominicus a Soto,
a learned Papist, lib. 10. de justitia and jure. qu. 1. art. 2. affirms, That
this is not a Sacrament properly; and so neither the ordination of the rest of
the Ministry can be a Sacrament, seeing a Bishop is above the rest in your
order. Last of all, the Council of Trent, sess. 23. cap. 2. and 3. is not
against it; and sundry of the rest of your Clergy, Bellarm. lib. 1. de sacr.
ord. cap. 9. makes all the seven Orders of your Church, as Priests, which you
distinguish in two sorts; to wit, in Bishops and inferior Priests, Deacons,
Subdeacons, Exorcists, Lectors, Door-keepers, and your Acoluthyts, every one
of them by themselves, Sacraments. And your Master of Sentences, lib 4 did.
24. cap. Si autem, calls all the Orders in the plural number Sacraments. So if
ye durst let the people know the secret of this your doctrine, ye make not only
seven Sacraments, but fourteen in very deed. But this were dangerous to you to
sow abroad: For you fear it would cast your doctrine in some suspicion with
them, and be an occasion to them to examine it by the Scripture; the which if
they would once begin to do, ye know your hope were lost. As for Calvin and
Melancthon, they call it a Sacrament, taking the word in an ample sense; for
these ceremonies that have the foundation in the Word, which have a promise of
a blessing joined with them, and not in that sense that Baptism and the Lords
Supper are called Sacraments, as Calvin in that first place which ye quote,
plainly acknowledges: For these are his words, Let the Christian Church, says
he, be content of these (meaning of Baptism and the Supper) and let them not
admit nor acknowledge, desire, or look for any other third Sacrament till the
end of the world. And as for imposition of hands which the Church uses in
their ordinations* he says, I will not be against it that it be called a
Sacrament, so being I reckon it not among the ordinary Sacraments. And
Melancthon in that same place reckons up prayer, alms, marriage, the Magistrate,
in the number of these unto the which he gives this name of a Sacrament:
whereby he makes it plain that he takes this word Sacrament, amply and largely,
as has been said before, and not in that sense that Baptism and the Supper is
called Sacraments. So you play your self, M. Gilbert, in the ambiguity of this
word Sacrament, and deceives the Reader with the same. And whereas ye call your
Priests the only lawful Ministers now adays: I will answer to this more fully
afterward, only this now: First, seeing the fountain and ground upon the which
all the lawful callings in your Church depends, and is derived, as your selves
confess, is the supremacy of your Pope, whom I have proved to be the Antichrist
in my other Treatise: and seeing the office of your Priesthood in sacrificing
the Son of God, as ye suppose, is most abominable, idolatrous and
Antichristian, as I have proved also there: therefore you are not only not
lawful Ministers of Christ, but the Ministers of Antichrist. And as for the
style of Priest, I answered it before: it is not so much as once ascribed to
the Ministers of the Gospel, to signify their proper calling, in the whole New
Testament.

SECTION XVI. Concerning Matrimony, and whither it be a Sacrament?
Master Gilbert Brown.
Eighthly, our doctrine is, that Matrimony is a bond undissoluble, because our
Savior says, That which God has joined together, let no man separat, Matthew
19.6. And such like he says, That whosoever demits his wife and marries
another* commits adultery upon her, Mark 10.11.12. And in S. Luke 16.18. we
have the same. And S. Matthew 5.35. and 19.9. is of the same opinion (albeit
one may put away his wife by him for fornication) this is the doctrine also of
the Apostles of Jesus Christ: for it is written in S. Paul, That a woman that
is under a husband, her husband living, is bound to the law; but if her husband
be dead, she is loosed from the law of her husband. Therefore her husband
living, she shall be called an adulteress, if she be with another man, and so
forth. And in another place, he says, Rom 7.2.3 1. Cor. 7.39. and 7.10.11. To
them that be joined in matrimony, I give not command, but our Lord, that the
wife depart not from her husband: and if she depart, to remain unmarried, or to
be reconciled to her husband. And let not the husband put away his wife. Now
this is our Religion of matrimony, and plain repugnant to the doctrine of the
Ministers of Scotland, that will license a man to put away his wife, and marry
another. And they call the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, the Popes
cruelty against the innocent divorced, in their negative faith.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
As for your 8. and 9 points of doctrine concerning Marriage: the first, that
it is undissoluble for no cause: the other, that it is a Sacrament. As to the
first, I would scarcely have understood this point of your doctrine. if your
Council of Trent, and others of your Clergy who write of it had not been more
plain then ye. And I think, that there are few that knows not this point of
your doctrine otherwise, who can take it up by this your writing. I wonder why
ye are so dark in setting down your own doctrine. But wherefore should I
wonder: for darkness may not bide to see the light? Your doctrine then is this.
First, you make many causes of separation and divorcement, besides adultery,
Council. Trid sess. 24. Can. 8. Bellarm. lib. 1. de matrim cap. 14. (express
against the doctrine of Jesus Christ, He that shall demit his wife, except for
fornication, etc.) he makes her to commit adultery. As 1. for the vow of
continency to enter in a Monastery, or Nunry. 2. For heresy. 3. And for peril
of offending of God. Next, your doctrine is, That suppose there be many causes
of separation betwixt the man and the wife, from bed and board (as we speak)
yet the bond of marriage contracted and perfected betwixt the faithful, can no
ways be broken, as long as they both live together, no not for adultery. So
that the party innocent divorced, may not lawfully marry another, during the
life of the guilty party: And if they marry* they call it adultery; and they
will have the ground of this to be, because it is a Sacrament, Bellar. lib. 1.
c. 12. So one error follows and leans upon another. For if marriage be not a
Sacrament, then the bond may be loosed, by their own doctrine. But marriage is
not a Sacrament, as shall be proved hereafter: therefore the bond is soluble.
Our doctrine is, that the bond of marriage contracted and perfected between two
Christians, is broken by the adultery of either of the parties; so that the
innocent divorced may lawfully marry another. As for our doctrine, it is plain
in the Scripture, in the 19. and 5. of Matthew: where there the Lord in plain
terms excepts the cause of fornication, saying, Whosoever demits his wife,
except it be for fornication, and marries another, commits adultery. So then by
the contrary, he that demits his wife for fornication (which is adultery there)
and marries another, commits not adultery. And seeing the Apostle commands, 1.
Cor 7.2. That every man have his own wife, and every wife her own husband, and
that for the avoiding of fornication: and it is better to marry then to burn.
Therefore the first marriage being dissolved by divorcement justly according to
Gods Word, it is lawful to the party innocent at least to use the remedy of
marriage for the avoiding of fornication. Otherwise if he might not use it,
divorcement were not a benefit, but rather a punishment, and the innocent
should be punished without a fault.

Now, as to the Scriptures which ye quote, Matthew. 19.6. and 5.31 they have that
exception of fornication, expressly mentioned. And as for the places of Mark
10.11.12. and Luke 16.18. and Romans 7.2.3. and 1. Cor. 7 39. they are all to
be understood with that exception of fornication, that our Savior expressly sets
down in the former two places, otherwise Scripture should be contrary to
Scripture, which is blasphemy to think, and our Savior is the best exponer of
himself. And as for the 1. Corinthians. 7.10.11. the Apostle speaks not of that
separation for adultery, but of a separation for a season, for other causes or
variances, in the which case the parties separated, are to remain unmarried, or
to be reconciled together. And because ye will not credit us, nor the Son of
God so expressly speaking in his Scripture, yet I think ye will give some credit
to your own Doctors, Councils, Canons, and Popes, whom if ye be a right
Catholic, ye think that they cannot err. Cajetanus a Cardinal, in comment.
Matthew. 19. Ambrosius Catarinus, lib. 5. annot. in comment. Cajetani, Papists,
hold this doctrine with us against the Religion of your Church, That adultery
breaks the bond of marriage, and that the innocent divorced may marry another.
Pope Zachary, Decret. causa 32. quaest. 7. cap. Concubuisti. And the Council
Triburiense, ibidem cap. Si quis, and another Canon says, That incestuous
adultery breaks the bond of marriage, so that the party innocent may marry
another, Ibid. cap. quaedam. And Pope Gregory the third, suppose in a Canon he
will not have adultery to break the bond of marriage, Ibid. cap. Hi vero. so
that the party innocent may marry another, contrary to the doctrine of Christ
our Savior, yet he permits a man to marry another, if his former wife being
taken with some disease, be not able to render due benevolence unto her
husband, Ibid. cap. Quid proposuisti. So suppose this Pope will not admit that
true cause which our Savior sets down of adultery, yet he sets down causes
himself, which wants the warrant of the Word. And Pope Celestin the third, set
forth a decree, that when of married persons one falls into heresy, the
party Catholic is free to marry again, cap. laudabile^ de convers. infidelium,
confessed by Alphonsus a Papist, lib. 1 c. 4. advers. haeres. So then either
your Doctors, Canons, Councils, and three Popes err, or else the bond of
marriage may be broken, and the innocent party divorced may marry another.
Your Religion of Matrimony therefore is not only repugnant to ours and Jesus
Christ's, but also to your own Canons, Councils, Doctors, and Popes. Let them
therefore condemn your cruel ju^gement against the innocent divorced. And
therefore Bellarmin confesses, Bellarm. de mat. lib. 1. cap. 15. That in this
point they have many against them, not only us whom he calls heretics: but
also Latins, Greeks, and Catholics.

Master Gilbert Brown.
Ninthly, with S. Paul, Ephesians. 5.23. we make it a Sacrament, as sundry of the
learned Protestants do, as Zuinglius, lib. de vera and falsa rel. cap. de
matrimonio. Melancthon, in locis aeditis 1552. and 1558. and chiefly young
Merchiston, in his 22. Proposition of his discourse upon the Revelation, whose
words are these. Thirdly, bodily marriage is by S. Paul, called a symbol and a
Sacrament of the union of Christ and his Church. And yet our new Confession
detests the same, and will have it but a bastard. Such concord is betwixt
Christ, his Apostles, and our new preachers of the Gospel, and also among
themselves.

M. John Welsch his Reply.
The ninth point of your doctrine is: you will have Marriage a Sacrament of the
New Testament, and that properly, and that according to the institution of God,
unto the which the promise of the grace of justification is annexed: so
Bellarmin, lib. 1. de matrim. cap. 2. and the Council of Trent says. But mark,
Christian Reader, their ground of this their doctrine. They say, the bond of
marriage among infidels may be broken: but say they, the bond of marriage among
the faithful cannot be broken. And they make the cause of this difference to be
this, because the marriage of Christians is a Sacrament. So they reason.
Marriage among Christians is a Sacrament; therefore say they, it cannot be
broken. But what is their principal ground now, whereby they prove marriage to
be a Sacrament? Because (say they) the marriage of Christians is a bond
indissoluble; therefore it is a Sacrament which has the grace of Justification
joined with it. So mutually one error upholds another. Upon the which, I
reason: If the bond of marriage may be broken for adultery then it cannot be a
Sacrament: this your Church grants* because they make that the ground of this:
but the bond of marriage may be broken for adultery, as has been proved
before, both by the Scriptures, and also by your own Canons, Councils, Doctors,
and Popes: therefore marriage is not a Sacrament.

Secondly, in the Sacraments of the New Testament, there are earthly elements:
as the water in Baptism, the bread and wine in the Supper, and an express form
of words prescribed in the New Testament: as in Baptism, I baptize thee, etc.
and in the Supper, This is my body, etc. Matthew. 26. They have their express
institution by Christ in the same, and have the promises of remission of sins,
and justification annexed to them. But none of these things are to be had in
marriage. First, no earthly element: next, no form prescribed in the Word of
God: thirdly, no express institution of it as of a Sacrament: fourthly, no
promise of the remission of sins, and salvation annexed unto it. Therefore it
cannot be a Sacrament of the New Testament properly.

Thirdly, if marriage were a Sacrament, and such a Sacrament that signified and
gave the grace of justification with it, that is, remission of sins, then
wherefore should your Church forbid all your Clergy from the same? And
wherefore should ye abstain from that Sacrament, which is instituted of God, to
give remission of sins to you, and to make you acceptable to God? as your
doctrine says, Bellarmin lib. 1. de matrim. cap. 5. page 67. Why should ye
deprive your self of that thing which may place you in Gods favor, and purchase
to you remission of sins? (as ye say marriage may do) it is a token that either
ye believe not your own doctrine, or else prefers whoredom and adultery, which
is condemned of God, to marriage which is Gods ordinance, and honorable among
all men.

Fourthly, I say, if the marriage of Adam and Eva in Paradise, and the marriage
of all the Patriarchs, and Prophets, and Priests, and people in the Old
Testament, was not a Sacrament, neither is the marriage of Christians in the
New Testament a Sacrament. For they were symbols that represented our spiritual
conjunction with Christ, as well as the marriage of Christians in the New
Testament does: the which you will not deny. And Pope Leo says, Epist. 92.
That marriage was instituted from the beginnning, that they might have in
themselves a Sacrament of Christ, and his Church: but the first you grant your
selves was not a Sacrament, therefore neither is the second a Sacrament.

Fifthly, that which is filthiness and pollution, cannot be a Sacrament to give
forgiveness of sins: but Pope Syricius calls marriage pollution and
uncleanness, Did. 82. cap. Proposuisti, etc. Plurim. 8. Therefore it cannot be
a Sacrament, if he speak true.

Sixthly, if marriage be such a Sacrament, as ye say, to give remission of
sins, then it should be more excellent then virginity, because virginity has
not this promise: but this ye will not grant, therefore it is not a Sacrament.

Last of all, Durandus a great Doctor of your Church, says, Ut Capreolus
refert in 4. did. 26. quaest. unica, artic. 3. That marriage is not properly a
Sacrament.

As for that place in the fifth of the Ephesians which ye quote, where the
Apostle says, This is a great mystery, speaking of the mutual du^ies of man
and wife. I answer: first, he calls not marriage this great mystery, but that
band of our conjunction with Christ, as he expones himself: This is (says he)
a great mystery: and then he subjoyns, I speak of Christ and his Church.
Secondly, suppose the old Interpreter does translate this word mystery, a
Sacrament; yet you know (if you know the Greek language) that (...), is called
a secret. Thirdly, will you have all these to be Sacraments properly, which are
called mysteries in the New Testament, and which the old Interpreter and your
Rhemists, translats Sacraments? then shall you not only make marriage a
Sacrament, but also the chief articles of our faith, 1. Tim. 3.16 and the
Gospel, Col. 1. Ephesians. 3 and 1. 2 Thessalonians 27 and the seven stars in the
Revelation, chap. 1.20 and the whore o Babel, and the iniquity of the
Antichrist. Rev. 17 5 all Sacraments. For they are called (...) in the Greek,
and some of them are translated Sacraments by the old Interpreter, and your
Rhemists, as marriage is. I wonder that ye quote Melancthon, as though he were
of your opinion, seeing Bellarmin acknowledges plainly, lib. 1. de matrim. cap.
1. and 5. (that he denies it to be a Sacrament properly, as Baptism and the
Lords Supper is:) but only grants that it is a Sacrament in some respect. But
you regard not what ye write, so being it may carry any show against us The
same we answer to you of Zuinglius and Merchiston. They call it a Sacrament,
but not in that sense that Baptism and the Lords Supper are called Sacraments,
taking the word improperlie, and more amply, as Bellarmin confesses of
Melancthon. So here is no discord neither betwixt us and Christ, neither among
our selves But in very deed, you are they who are at discord both with Christ,
and among your selves. For beside this that Bellarmin and Innocentius, calls
the marriage of the Gentiles Sacraments, because you may answer that they call
them Sacraments improperly as Melancthon, Zuinglius, and Merchiston calls
marriage a Sacrament improperly. So if they be at variance with us for calling
marriage a Sacrament, so is Bellarmin lib. 1. de sacram. matrim. c. 3 and Pope
Innocent cap. gaud. de divort. at variance with your Church, for calling the
marriage of infidels a Sacrament. For as we deny marriage to be a Sacrament at
all properly, so does your Church deny the marriage of infidels to be a
Sacrament properly. But to let this pass, I say, because I will not deceive the
Reader, as ye do, with appearances of contradictions through the ambiguity of
the words, Alphonsus de Castro, lib. contra haeres. verbo nuptiae. haeres 3.
Petrus a Soto lectio 2. de matrimonio. two of your Doctors, and sundry others
say, That marriage is not a proper Sacrament of the New Testament: And yet the
Council of Florence and Trent, and sundry others of your Church, say the
contrary. 2. Durandus a great Doctor of your Church, says, in 4. did. 26.
quaest. 3. That marriage is not a Sacrament properly. 3. Some of your Church
held, that carnal copulation in marriage is a part of the Sacrament: some the
contrary, that it is neither a Sacrament, nor a part of the Sacrament: so
Bellarmin testifies, lib. 1. de sacram. matrim. c. 5. page 88. 4. Durandus and
your Canonists hold, That the Sacrament of marriage does not confer grace unto
them that receive it. And yet our common doctrine is contrary this, as
Bellarmin grants, ibidem. Last of all, Canus a learned Papist, affirms, That
every marriage lawfully contracted among Christians, is not a Sacrament; but
only that which is made by the Minister in a certain form of words: the which
Bellarmin, and sundry others deny. And you are of great diversity concerning
the matter of that Sacrament among your selves. These are not now shows of
disorders and contradictions, but they are so true and manifest, that Bellarmin
your chief campion, has confessed them, de sacram. matrim. lib. 1. Judge thou
now, Christian Reader, whither is it we or they that is at variance among our
selves. And this for the ninth point of your doctrine.

SECTION XVII. Concerning Merit of Good Works.
M. Gilbert Brown.
ELeventhly, our doctrine is, that a man in the estat of grace, doing good
works, merits or deserves a reward, which is the doctrine of the Prophets,
Christ, and his Apostles, as may be perceived in these places, and many the
like. Genesis 15.1. 2. Kings 15.7. Eccles. 16.15. and 10.31. Psalm. 118.112. Prove.
11.18. Sap. 5.16. and ^10.17. Isai. 3.10. Jer. 31.16.
Fear not Abraham, says God, I am thy protector, and thy exceeding great
reward. In another place, Therefore be ye of comfort, and let not your hands be
dissolved, there shall be a reward for your work. And in the Book
Ecclesiasticus, All mercy shall make place to every one, according to the merit
of his works. With many more in the Old Testament, then I am able to let down
here. But some of them I have noted. And our Savior says, Matthew. 5.12. John
5.29. Matthew. 10.42. and 16.1. and 16.27. and 25.34. and 20. Mark 9.41. Luke
6.35.
Rejoice and be glad, for your reward is great in heaven. And again, They that
have done good things, shall come forth to the resurrection of life: but they
that have done evil, to the resurrection of judgment. And whosoever shall give
drink to one of these little ones one cup of cold water only, in the name of a
disciple, truly I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward. And 1. Cor.
3.8.14. and 9.17.18. Ephesians. 6.8.
S Paul says, Every one shall receive his own reward, according to his labor.
And 2. John 8. Rev. 22.12.
S John says, Look to your selves, that ye lose not the things which ye have
wrought, but that ye may receive a full reward. And in his Revelation, Behold,
I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to render to every man according to
his works. With many more the like in the Word of God. What can our new men say
against this doctrine of Christ, his Apostles and Prophets, seeing that there
is no reward without merit, because merces and meritum, have relation together?
For there is no reward promised in the Word of God, but for doing and working.
And albeit God has promised to reward all our good deeds, yet this promise is
not without a cause; that is, to them that will labor and work, and to do
according to his will. For he has promised no reward to them that will not
work, but to such as deserves the same by their doings, as I have noted before
in the book called Ecclesiasticus, the 16. chapter.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
As for your doctrine of merits of works, wherein you say, That a man in the
estat of grace does merit eternal life and glory, and that as well in respect
of the work it self, as of the covenant and promise made unto it. So Bellarmin
lib. 5. de justific. cap. 17. yea, that the works are in virtue equal, and of
as great valor as the reward of eternal life is, so that there is an equal
proportion between the works and eternal life. And there are some of your
Church, and those of the learned among you, who have gone further, and affirm,
That the good works of the righteous merits life eternal, in respect of the
worthiness and excellency of the work it self, suppose the Lord had never made
a promise or covenant, as Cajetanus a Cardinal, and Dominicus a Soto, as
Bellarmin reports of them, lib. 5. de justif. cap. 19. And M. Reynold says,
page 105. That good works and evil are laid in different balance: that good
works are the cause of heaven, as evil works are the cause of hell. And Andreas
Vega says, in 5 quaest. de justific. That the reward of glory shall not be
greater then our good works have deserved. What blasphemy is this your
doctrine? And surely if in any one point of your doctrine you show your selves
to be men, who not only knows not the holiness of God, the unspeakableness of
that other life, the perfection and infinite virtue of Christ's merits, the
perfection of his Law, and man's infirmity and weakness; especially you manifest
it in this point: For if ye knew any of these things, ye would never profess
such damnable doctrine: For that our works may merit eternal life (as ye say)
and that not only in respect of the covenant, but in respect of the work it
self, there are five things required. 1. That the work be perfect according to
that measure of perfection which the Law of God requires, and the whole Law
must be fulfilled, and that perfectly and continually. 2. The works must not be
debt; that is, such works as we are bound before to do: For the paying of that
duty which we ow already, cannot merit properly a reward: For will you say,
that for the paying of that which you ow already, you deserve a reward? 3.
There must be a proportion and equality between the work wrought, and the
reward it self: For if the work be less, and the reward greater, then that
which is more then the work, is not of merit, but of liberality. 4. The persons
to whom the work is done; must be obliged and bound by right to render and
recompense the worker for the worthiness of the work, so that he is not just if
he do it not. And last of all, the work must be our own, and not another, and
the power our own whereby it is done, and not another, ere we can be said
properly to merit by the same. But all these conditions will fail in our works;
therefore they cannot be meritorious of eternal life. For as to the first, the
Prophet says, That all our righteousness is as a menstrous cloth. And James
says, We all offend in many things; and none there is that have contained in
doing all things written in the Law in that perfection which it craves of us,
as has been proved before: therefore our works cannot be meritorious of
eternal life. And as to the second, all that we can do, or is able to do, we
are bound to do it already, by the virtue of our creation and redemption, and
his other blessings already bestowed; yea, they oblige us to more then we are
ever able to pay, according to that saying of our Savior, Luke 17.10. Even so
ye, when ye have done all that is commanded you, say, We are unprofitable
servants, because we have done that which was our duty to do. Since therefore
it is duty, it cannot be meritorious of eternal life. And as to the third,
there is no proportion between eternal life and our works, the reward by
infinite degrees surpassing the work: and therefore the Apostle says, The
afflictions of this life are not worthy of the glory which shall be revealed,
Romans 8 18. Everlasting life being only the just reward of the sufferings of the
Son of God. Bernard says, What are all our merits to so great a glory, sermon.
1. de annum. And Athanasius says, in vita Antonij, Not suppose we would
renounce the whole world, yet are we not able to do any thing worthy of these
heavenly habitations. As to the fourth, the Lord is debtor to no creature: For
as the Apostle says, Who has given him first, and he shall be recompensed?
Romans 11.35. The Lord is all-sufficient in himself, and so needs none of your
labors, and so our works cannot oblige him. And therefore Augustine says, sermon.
16. de verbis Apostoli: God is made a debtor unto us, not by receiving any
thing from our hands, but because it pleased him to promise. And to the last,
the Apostle says, What have thou that thou did not receive? now if thou
did receive it, why do thou glory as if thou had not received it? 1. Cor.
4.7. Seeing therefore all our works are imperfect, and seeing we are not able
to fulfill the Law, and seeing all that we can do, is but our duty, and there
is no proportion betwixt eternal life and our works, and that the Lord is
debtor to no man, and all our ability of doing is from the Lord only; therefore
our works cannot be meritorious of eternal life. Hear further what the Fathers
say in this point. Augustine says, in manuali, c. 22. All my hope is in the
death of my Lord: his death is my merit, my refuge, salvation, life and
resurrection: my merit is the compassion of the Lord, I shall not be void of a
merit, so long as the Lord of mercies shall not want. Origin who lived two
hundred years before him, says, in Epist. ad Romans cap. 4. lib. 4. I scarcely
believe that there can be any work which may of due demand the reward of God,
for so much as even the same that we can do, think, or speak, we do it by his
gift or bounty. Then how can he ow us any thing, whose grace did preveen us.
And he says afterward, That the Apostle assigns eternal life to grace only.
Ambrose says, de bono mor. cap. 1. Everlasting life is forgiveness of sins, so
then it is not merit. Jerome says, adversus Pelag. That before God, no man is
just; therefore no man can merit. And again he says, The only perfection of
man is, if they know themselves to be imperfect: and our justice consists not
of our own merit, but of Gods mercy. I omit the rest for ^^ortness.

Now to your testimonies, and reason to prove your merit of works, which you
shamefuly abuse, bringing forth Scripture to cloak your damnable doctrine: unto
the which I answer shortly. That there is a reward laid up with God for the
works of every one, be they good, be they evil, and according to their works
shall they be tried, and every man shall be judged and recompensed accordingly,
as the Scripture plainly testifies. But that this reward of eternal life
promised, is of debt, and not of grace, and that our works are the meritorious
cause of the same, that the Scripture never affirms. For the Lord freely and of
his mere grace crowns his own works in us: and that not for the excellency of
the work it self, but of mercy freely for his Christ's sake, as both I have
proved, and the Fathers have testified. So these Scriptures serve you to no
purpose. For the controversy betwixt us, is not whither there is a reward
promised, and whither it shall be rendered accordingly to the same, for that we
grant: but whither this reward is of merit or of grace. The Apostle says
plainly in the 6 of the Romans, The wages of sin is death: but everlasting life
is the free gift of God. And in the 8 of the Romans, it is called, an
inheritance. Now if it be heritage to them that are in Christ, and they heirs
of it through him, then it is not their merit. As for the 16. of
Ecclesiasticus, it is Apocrypha, and the text has not that word merit, as the
old Interpreter whom ye follow translates it, but according to his work. As for
the 118. Psalm, and the 16 of Matthew, ye are over seen in the quoting of them,
for they have no such thing. As for your reason, that a reward has ever a
relation to a merit, that is false. For the Apostle in the 4. of the Romans,
speaks of a reward that is imputed freely, not to him who works, but to him
that believes in him, who justifies the ungodly, verse 5. And in this sense
the reward of eternal life promised and fulfilled in his Saints, is taken in
the Scriptures. And whereas you say, that there is no reward promised but to
doing and working: that is false also, for there is a reward of eternal life
promised to the believer, verse. 5. And as for the promises of reward made to
good works, it is true, it is made to them, but not as though our works were
meritorious causes of that reward, but only that they are effects to testify
of our faith in the merit of Jesus Christ, in whom only the promises are made
to us and our works, and for whose sake only they are fulfilled in his Saints.
For these causes therefore is the promise of reward made unto works; first,
because all men by nature are hypocrites, and boasts of a vain pretense of
faith, unto whom James says, Show me thy faith by thy works, James 2.18. to
take away therefore this vail of hypocrisy from hypocrites, the promises are
made to works. 2. The promise is made to works to stir us up to the doing of
them: for we would be faint in doing good, if we knew not that the Lord would
reward them. It is true he has promised no reward to them who work not,
because they in whom Christ dwells, they are not only justified, but also
sanctified, and bring forth the fruit of their sanctification. And this for the
ninth point of your doctrine, which is so damnable, that both it derogats from
the merit of Christ, and makes men to take away their confidence from Gods only
mercy and free grace: and swells them up with a vain confidence of themselves,
and binds as it were, their hearts and mouths, that they cannot with all their
heart render the whole praise of their salvation to Gods only free grace.

SECTION XVIII. Concerning Works of Supererogation.
M. Gilbert Brown.
TWelftly, we have other works that are called works of Supererogation, which
are works of greater perfection, and are not set down to us as the commands of
God (without the which we cannot be saved) but as divine counsels adjoined
thereto, they augment our glory and reward in heaven: which is also the
doctrine of Christ and his Apostles. Christ said to the young man, If thou will
be perfect, go sell the things thou have, and give unto the poor, and thou
shall have treasure in heaven* and come follow me. Matthew. 19.21. Mark 10.21. So
we find, that wilful poverty is a work of supererogation. Such like, S. Paul,
1. Cor. 7.34.38. says, And the woman unmarried, and the virgin thinks on the
things that pertains to our Lord, that she may be both holy in body and spirit.
And afterward: Therefore both he that joins his virgin in matrimony does well,
and he that joins not does better. Therefore virginity is a work of
supererogation: for albeit matrimony be good, yet the other is better: and this
was a counsel that S. Paul gave, and no command. Such like Paul wrought a work
of supererogation, when he preached the Evangel gratis, where he might have
taken justly for his labors, 1. Cor. 7.40. and 9.14.15.23.17.18.19. Christ our
Savior speaks of the same works in the parable of the Samaritan, Luke 10.35.
where he promised to the hostler to recompense him what ever he did supererogat
upon the wounded man more then the two pennies. And David the Prophet did
supererogat, when he did rise in the night to give God praise, and seven times
in the day, and so forth, Psalm. 118.62.164.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
As though your former doctrine had not injuried the merits of the Son of God,
and his free grace enough, with the which (if the Apostle be true) your merits
of works cannot stand. For the Apostle says, (speaking of our salvation) If it
be of grace, then it is no more by works, otherwise grace were no more grace:
and if it were of works, then were it no more of grace, otherwise works were no
more works, Romans 11.6. You yet add this damnable and blasphemous doctrine to
all the rest. And certainly suppose ye will not let it fall to the ground, that
your doctrine is the doctrine of the dragon, and that your Church is that
mystical Babylon, that mother of whoredoms, full of names of blasphemy: yet
this your blasphemous doctrine sufficiently declares what you are. For I appeal
your conscience, if ye have any unblotted out yet with the smoke of the
bottomless pit, and the conscience of all men who ever felt the power of sin in
them, and the free grace of God renewing them, whither this doctrine of yours
be blasphemous or not: That not only you may fulfill the Law, and do all the
duty which God has commanded you, and thereby merit eternal life: but also you
may do more then God has commanded, which ye call works of greater perfection
then the Law of God requires of us; by the doing of the which, you say you
merit a greater degree of glory in the kingdom of heaven: and as Bellarmin
says, in his preface before de monachis, lib. 2. That your religious Monks
lives a straiter, and more high kind of life, then either the Law of God or man
has prescribed. And that a man may love God with a greater and more perfect
love, then is commanded him in the Law, lib. 2. cap. 13. and 6. yea, that a man
may love God with a greater love, then he is bound to love him: and that these
works are not only meritorious of eternal life, and of a singular glory in
heaven, but also are profitable to satisfy for our sins: and that men may
communicate of the abundance of these their merits unto others. And therefore,
they have in their service books, according to the order of sarum, this form of
prayer often, That by the merits of the Saints they may obtain grace: and by
the blood of Thomas (Archbishop of Canterbury) they may ascend to heaven. All
which whither they be not words of blasphemy, and the doctrine of the dragon, I
appeal your conscience before God in the great day, and the consciences of all
men, as though it were not blasphemy enough to say, that men may merit eternal
life, and a greater degree of glory in that life to themselves by their works:
but also to communicate unto others of the abundance of their works, and so not
only to be saviors of themselves, but of others also. And here, Reader, I am
compelled to speak this to thee, suppose thou believe not that they have
written, and will maintain so horrible blasphemies, I wonder not: for I speak
the truth to thee in my conscience, I lie not, I could not have been induced my
self to have believed that ever they durst have professed such damnable and
devilish doctrine, if I had not read it my self in their own books; yea, I
durst not have been so confident as to have set it down here upon the report of
any, except I had read it my self. But if the blind lead the blind, both will
fall into the pit together. The Lord deliver his own from such damnable
doctrine, which of necessity must bring damnation upon the believers and
professors of it.

To answer you then; first, if we be not able to perform all the duties which
God requires of us in his law, then we are not able to do works of
supererogation, which is more then our duty, commanded in the law, as ye say.
But the first I have proved before: therefore the second is true.

Secondly, if the Law of God be perfect, and prescrives more then we are able
to do, then there is no works of supererogation: this you will not deny. But
David says, The Law of God is perfect, Psalm. 19. and our inability to perform
it, I have proved before: therefore there is no works of supererogation.

Thirdly, what an absurd and blasphemous thing is this to say, that God has no
commanded to us the works of greatest perfection, (for M. Gilbert calls these,
works of greater perfection) and so such works wherein he is most glorified:
but has left them in our own choice, to do, or not to do, as though the Lord
had not commanded us to glorify him in the greatest perfection, nor yet we
were bound to do the same?

Fourthly, if there be any such works of supererogation which are of greater
perfection then the Law commands* then it should follow, that the vow of
continency, wilful poverty, and monastical obedience to their superiors, should
be works of greater perfection, and so please God more, then the love of God
with all the heart, with all the soul, with all the strength, with all the
mind, with all the thought, Matthew. 2.2.37. Mark 12.29.30 For the former are
your works of supererogation, and the last is commanded in the Law: but this is
absurd: therefore there is no such works.

Fifthly, this was only proper to the Son of God to fulfill the Law of God
perfectly, and to do more then the Law required: to wit, to die for us who were
his enemies: this doctrine therefore of yours spoils him of this his glory.

Last of all, if none can merit eternal life through their works at all, then
none can augment their glory and reward in heaven by their works of
supererogation. But the first I have proved before: therefore the other must
follow. And mark this, Reader, how far God has blinded their minds: for they
deride, and they mock at that imputation of the righteousness and merits of
Christ, and they pronounce them accursed that so think: but yet they teach that
the works of supererogation which men do, may be communicate to others. Be^larm.
lib. 2. de justific. cap. 2. and Consil. Trid. can. 10. and Bellarm. lib. 2.
page 129. As for the first place which ye quote, Matthew. 19. If thou will be
perfect, etc. I answered to it before, in my answer to the second point of your
doctrine: to the which I refer the Reader. And so your wilful poverty has no
ground here. For if this man did not perfectly fulfill the Law, then was he not
able to do more then the Law required of him: But the first is true, as I
proved before in the second point of your doctrine, and as the circumstances of
the text testifies it; for he went away sad, and he put his trust in his
riches: and so it was not only difficile, but impossible for him to enter in
the Kingdom of God, as our Savior says; which had not been true of him, if he
had fulfilled the Law. And this was a special command to this man, to discover
his hypocrisy. And all Christians are bound also out of the love of their
heart to Christ, to be content to forsake all that they have, before we
renounce him, or his Word, when he so requires of us. And if wilful poverty be
such a work of perfection, as ye think, wherefore then would the Prophet have
prayed, Prove 30.8. Give me neither poverty nor riches, but feed me with food
convenient. And if this be the work of greatest perfection, what is the cause
that your Abbots, Popes, Bishops and Cardinals (For who should be perfect, if
not these?) will not sell all their revenues which they have, wherein they
surmount the Princes of the world, and so augment their glory in heaven, and be
perfect? But shall others believe and obey this doctrine of yours, when the
greatest Patrons of it believes and obeys it not? O hypocrites! who will believe
you?

As for the next work of supererogation, Virginity: It is true that the virgin
and unmarried, who has the gift of continency, thinks upon the things that
appertains to God: And it is true, that if any have the gift of continency, it
is better to be unmarried, then to marry, especially in the times of
persecution. But yet it follows not that it is a work of supererogation: For to
them who have the gift, it is a commandment: For he that has the gift, is
commanded to use it; and in losing it, he sins. And every man is bound to
glorify God to the uttermost of his power, and God is most glorified by the
single life of these, especially in the time of pe^^ecution, who have the gift:
And so it is not a counsel simply, but also a command, but to them only who
have the gift, and that so long only as they have the gift. And the Apostle
says in that same place which ye quote here, that he thinks he has the Spirit
of GOD also, and so this judgment of his was the judgment of the Spirit of
GOD, which binds and obliges all them who have the gift. But unto these who
have not the gift, the Scripture has a plain command, 1. Cor. 7.3.9. For the
avoiding of fornication, let every man have his own wife, etc. And if they
cannot abstain, let them marry, etc. And whereas ye say that Virginity is
better then Matrimony; that is not true simply, but only to them who have the
gift. And since you say it is better, wherefore make ye Matrimony a Sacrament
to give remission of sins? For shall not a Sacrament which gives remission of
sins, be better then an indifferent action, which men may do, or leave undone,
such as ye say Virginity is? As for the Apostles example, 1 Cor. 9. in
preaching the Gospel freely without wages to them. I answer: Suppose it was
lawful to him, and all the Ministers of the Gospel, to have taken wages, as
himself testifies, and proves in that same chapter, from the 4. verse to the
15. yet it was not expedient to him for the course of the Gospel among them.
And men are not only commanded to abstain from that which is unlawful, but also
from the things which are lawful, if they be not expedient: and so he did no
more here then he should have done. And therefore he says, It were better for
me to die, then that any should take my glory from me, 1. Cor. 9.15. which
cannot be said of these works which we are not bound to do. And he says, verse
8. That I abuse not my authority in the Gospel: but this would have been an
abuse of his liberty with his people: therefore he was bound to do it. And yet
we read that he spoiled other Churches, as he says himself, and took wages
from them. And also the Church of Philippi did communicate unto him twice, 2.
Cor. 11.8. Phil. 4.

As for the 10. of Luke, it appears ye are scarce of proofs in quoting this
place for your works of supererogation: For will you say that the Samaritan was
not bound by Gods law to ware more upon his neighbor in his extremity then two
penny worth? Has not the Law said, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self?
And are we not bound to lay down our life one for another, much more to ware
out for him such things as may serve for the comfort of this life in such an
extremity? And the Greek word (...), 1. John 3.16. is not to supererogat (as ye
take it) but to ware out further expenses. So your blindness is gross in this.
And as for that of David, in praising God night and day so often, he was so far
from thinking of himself that he had done more then the Law required of him,
that he never thought of himself that he had fully obeyed the Law. And
therefore how often prays he in that Psalm, that the Lord would open his eyes
to understand the Law, and give him grace to perform the same, Psalm.
119.12.17.18.27. And in other Psalms he says, My sins are mo then the hairs of
my head, Psalm. 40.12. And if thou mark iniquity, who can stand, Psalm. 130.3.
And therefore this was no work of supererogation. And if you knew, M. Gilbert
(but the Lord has blinded you) either the perfection of the Law of God, or our
inability to perform it, or the unsearchable love and kindness of God, which
has obliged us to mo duties then ever we are able to do: (For when we have
done all which is commanded us, yet we are but unprofitable servants:) you
would be so far from defending these your works of supererogation, that ye
would abhor and detest this doctrine.

SECTION XIX. Concerning Christ's descending into Hell.
Master Gilbert Brown.
THirteenthly, our doctrine is, that Christ our Savior (according to the soul)
descended to the Hells, as we have in our Belief. And this was the doctrine of
the Apostles: for S. Peter says, That God has raised him up, loosing the
sorrows of Hell, according as it was impossible that he should be held of it,
Acts 2.24. And this he proves by the Psalms of David, Behold, thou will not
leave my soul in hell (says David) nor give thy holy One to see corruption,
Psalm. 16.10. This same is the doctrine of S Paul also; And that he ascended,
what is it but because he descended also first into the inferior parts of the
earth. He that descended, the same is he also which is ascended above all the
heavens, that he might fill all things, Ephesians. 4.9.10. Ye see in these, and all
the rest of our doctrine, wherein they differ from us, that the touchstone
bears witness to us, and proves ours only to be the doctrine of Christ, and
his Apostles, and not their denying thereof.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
Bellarmin grants, that we all agree that Christ after a certain manner
descended into hell: but the whole controversy is of the sense and meaning of
it. We say, that he suffered the pains of hell in his soul upon the cross, and
lay under the bondage of death, and was held captive in the grave* which in the
Hebrew is called SCHEOL (which signifies sometime hell in the Scripture, and
sometime the grave) for the space of three days: and in this sense we grant he
descended into hell, and in this sense it is taken in our Belief. But your
doctrine is, That he descended locally into hell according to his soul; first,
to give to the souls of the Fathers essential blessedness, and to deliver them
out of that prison, and bring them to heaven, Bellarm. lib. 4. de Christo, cap.
16. And this we say is neither the meaning of that article of your Belief,
neither yet has it so much as a syllable in the whole Scripture to warrant it.
And as for the article it self, Bellarmin confesses that this article was not
in the Creed with all Churches, as he proves there by the testimonies of
Ireneus, Origin, Tertullian, and Augustine, who all exponed the Creed. And
Augustine exponed it five times, and yet never mentions this article. And
Ruffinus an ancient writer testifies, That this article was neither in the
Creed of the Roman Church, nor of the East Churches. And also it is not in the
Nicene Creed, which is more then 300. years after Christ. And Perkins, a
learned man, in his exposition of the Creed, affirms, that threescore Creeds of
the most ancient Councils, and Fathers wants this clause. Whereby it is most
clear that this article was not put in at that time, when the rest of the
articles were gathered together, but has crept in since, and that more then
300. years after the days of the Apostles. For Augustine lived in the 400.
years, and the Nicene Creed was more then 300. years after Christ. And yet
because it has continued a long time, and has been received by the consent of
the Churches of God, and does also carry with it a fit understanding and sense,
as has been spoken; therefore it is to be retained, but not in that sense as
ye expone it.

For first, if this local descension of Christ, according to his soul into
hell, were true, and that it were an article of our Faith, as ye say, then the
four Evangelists, which are the sworn penmen of the history of his death and
resurrection, and especially Luke, who (as he says himself) Luke 1 3. intended
to make an exact narration of the same, who also did amply set down the same,
with all the circumstances thereof, they would not have omitted it, being a
special article of our Faith, if your doctrine be true: seeing the end of their
writing, as John says, was that we might believe, and by believing have
eternal life, John 10.31. But they never mention it, as your selves cannot
deny. Therefore it cannot be that he locally descended into hell.

Secondly, the Scripture makes it plain that Christ's soul was in Paradise at
that time with the thief: For he says unto him, This night shall thou be with
me in Paradise, Luke 23.43. For this cannot be meant of his Godhead; for it is
every where; neither of his body, for it was in the grave. Seeing therefore his
soul was at that time in Paradise, it could not be in hell; except you will say
that Paradise and hell are both one, which I suppose ye will not say.

Thirdly, if the souls of the Fathers were not in hell, then Christ descended
not thither: For ye say, That he descended thither for that effect to deliver
them, Bellar. lib. 4. de Christo, cap. 16. but they were not in hell, but in
heaven, which our Savior calls Abraham's bosom, where Lazarus was: betwixt the
which and hell, the Scripture testifies there is a great gulf, Luke 16.23.
therefore he descended not locally into hell.

Fourthly, some of your own learned Doctors have seen this error of yours, and
have gone from it, as Durandus by name, who affirms, in 3. distinct. 22.
quaest. 3. That Christ's soul descended not to hell in substance, but in virtue,
and proves it by reasons.

And last of all, you are at such variance among your selves concerning this
point, that some of you affirms, That Christ's soul suffered pain in hell when
it was there; as Cajetan in Acts 2. and Thomas of Aquin, 3. part. quaest. 52.
art. 1. and 3. two great Papists: and yet Bonaventure in 3. distinct. 22.
quaest. 4. and Bellarmin lib. 4. de Christo, cap. 16. affirms the contrary,
That his soul was in the place of pain, and yet suffered no pain. Next, Thomas
of Aquin affirms, 3. part. qu. 52. That Christ descended only into that place
of hell, called Limbus Patrum: but Bellarmin says, It is more probable that he
went to all the parts of hell. And this is the consent which you Papists have
among your selves, not only in this point, but almost in all the points of your
doctrine. Now as to the places of Scripture which ye quote, they serve nothing
to this purpose. For the 2. of the Acts, it speaks of that bondage of the grave
which kept him under until he rose again: and therefore the Greek word is
(...), which signifies death, and not hell, as ye translate it here: and Peter
says, whom God raised up. The Apostle speaks then of that part of Christ which
had fallen and was raised up: but it was the body only and not the soul which
fell down, and was raised up: therefore he speaks of the sorrows of death,
whereby his body was kept in bondage, and not of any local descension of
Christ's soul. As for the places of the Psalms which ye quote here, Peter brings
them not in to prove this local descension (as ye say) whereof he makes no
mention: but to prove his resurrection, as he says in the 31. verse most
plainly: He knowing this before, speaking of David, spoke of the resurrection
of Christ, that his soul should not remain in grave, neither his flesh should
see corruption. So, if ye will believe the Spirit of God in the Apostle
interpreting these places, they speak of the resurrection of Christ, and not of
the delivering of the soul out of hell; for he was in Paradise, as he says
himself: and it is the body that was raised, and not the soul. And the Hebrew
word is NEPHESCH, which not only signifies the soul, but also the life, as
Genesis 37.21. Let us smite his soul; that is, take away his life. And it
signifies also the body of the dead wherein there was life, as Levit. 21.1.11.
And this word Hell, is SCHEOL in Hebrew, which most usually is taken in the
Scripture for the grave. So then the meaning is this, The Lord will not leave
his Nephesch; that is, the body wherein his life was in Scheol; that is, in the
grave: which speech is usual in the Scripture. Now as to the other Psalm 29.3.
it is spoken properly of David, where he thanketh God who had saved his life
from the hands of his enemies, which by a borrowed speech frequented in the
Scripture, is called the delivery of his soul from the grave. As for the 4. of
the Ephesians, these lower parts of the earth, is not Hell, as ye expone it,
but the earth it self, which in respect of the world, is the lowest part: and
so it is taken in the Psalm 139 15. where David says, Thou have fashioned me
beneath in the lower parts of the earth; where here it is not taken for Hell,
as you take it in that place of the Ephesians; otherwise ye must say that David
was born in Hell, which I suppose ye will not say. So hereby is meant then the
lowest and basest degree of his humiliation. So now to conclud this, neither in
these points, M. Gilbert, nor in any point of doctrine wherein ye differ from
us, is your doctrine agreeable to Christ's doctrine and his Apostles, as has
been (I hope) proved sufficiently. You must therefore provide you for better
weapons and armor, and stronger defenses for the overthrow of our doctrine, and
uphold of yours, then ye have done: otherwise your shots will be but as shots
of paper, and your bulwarks but of intempered mortar, which suddenly will rush
down at the light of the truth of God. The Lord open your eyes to see the
truth, and suffer you not to continue any longer, to cause the blind go out of
the way, as you have done. Amen.

SECTION XX. Concerning the difference betwixt Popery, and the Reformed
Religion.
Master John Welsch.
ANd our Religion which we profess, and all the particular heads of it, was
instituted by Jesus Christ and his Apostles, which I offer me also to prove
either by word or writ, against whosoever will plead the contrary. The which if
I fail in, I will be content to lose my life therefore, by his grace.

Master Gilbert Brown.
There is much promised here, but nothing done, and it is a thing impossible to
him to do. For why the difference chiefly that the Protestants differ from us,
is in denying, abhorring, or detesting, as may be seen in their Confession of
Faith, which they compel all men to swear and subscribe. As we detest and
refuse the usurped authority of that Roman Antichrist, upon the Scriptures of
God, upon the Church, the civil Magistrate, etc. except such things were
expressly contained in the Word of God.

M. John Welsch his Reply.
As for my promise and performance, I answere^ (...) that before: and whither
that be a thing unpossible (...) or not, let this my answer be a trial thereof.
You are bold enough indeed in affirming it to be impossible: but what have ye
for you? You say, because the difference chiefly that we differ from you, is in
denying and abhorring. What a raison is this? Can we not prove our Religion out
of the Scripture, because we deny yours which is contrary to the same? Is it
impossible to prove the truth, because falsehood is denied and abhorred? What
new Logic or Divinity is this? I would never have believed that ye had been
such an unskilful reasoner, if your self had not bewrayed the same. And
certainly your Church is not beholden to you: For if your reason hold forth, it
will follow that it is impossible to you, or any man else, to prove the heads
of your Religion by the Scripture: For in your Confession of Faith, and form of
abjuration set down by the Monks of Bordeaux, anno 1585. there they deny and
abhor the Protestants and their doctrine, and compel all men who desire the
fellowship of the Roman Church, and their absolution, to abjure, renounce, and
subscribe the same. But I suppose your Church will not allow this manner of
reasoning of yours. And whereas you say, that the chief difference wherein we
differ from you, is in denying and abhorring, etc. of your Religion. I ask you,
Does not our Religion differ as far from yours, as yours does from us? This you
cannot deny. For are not two contraries equally different one from another?
Does not light differ as far from darkness, white from black, Christ from
Antichrist, as darkness from light, black from white, and Antichrist from
Christ? And are not yours and our Religions contrary one to another? But your
self will not deny, and Bellarmin confesses, in his Preface before the
Controversies, and in his Preface de (...) Pontifice, that you differ from us
in the main and ^^^^tantial points of Religion; therefore of necessity we must
also differ from you in the main and substantial points of our Religion. And so
the chief difference wherein we differ from you, is not in denying and
abhorring, but in the main and fundamental grounds of our Religion. Otherwise
it shall follow that the chief difference that ye differ from us, is in denying
and abhorring of our Religion, which I think your Church will not digest.
Whereas you say, that this may be seen by our Confession of Faith: Our
Confession has not only the detesting and denying of your abominable errors in
general and particular; but also the confession of our Faith in general,
referring the particular heads thereof to that confession which is ratified and
established by Act of Parliament. And so here, M. Gilberts untruth and calumny
of our Confession may be seen. As for this form of exacting of an oath and
subscription to Religion, if you find fault with it, you not only gainsay the
Scriptures of God, impaires Princes lawful authority, and the Church of their
Jurisdiction and lawful power; the example of Moses, Deuteronomy. 29.10 and of Josua
24.25. Jehoiada the High Priest, 2. Kings 11.17. Josia, 2. of the Kings 23.3.
Asa, 2. Chron. 15.12. And of the people returning from the captivity of Babel
with Nehemias, chap. 10. But also blots your own Church; who (as may be seen in
that Confession of Faith and form of abjuration set out by the Monks of
Bordeaux, whereof we spoke before) does the same. As for this exception which
ye put in here, I answered to it before.

Master Gilbert Brown.
For if this be a true ground of theirs, that nothing ought to be done or
believed, but such things as are expressly contained in the Word of God: but
their general Confession, or their negative faith, is not expressly contained in
the Word of God; therefore it ought not to be done, nor believed.

M. John Welsch his Reply.
As for this ground which ye allege to be ours, it appears certainly, M.
Gilbert, that as ye said of me, either ye know not our grounds, or else ye
wilfully invert them for your own advantage. For our ground is, that nothing
ought to be done or believed in Religion, but that which may be warranted by
the testimony of the Scripture, either in words and sense together, or else by
a necessary collection out of the same. The which with Nazianzene, we say, Are
of the same truth and authority with the first. And according to this sense, we
say, That all the heads of our Religion, as well negative as affirmative, are
expressly contained in the Scripture, and so ought both to be believed and
practiced. These are but silly shifts, M. Gilbert, which ye bring to discredit
the truth of our Religion. You knew full well the blindness and simpleness of
the people in this Country; and therefore you regarded not how silly and
simple your reasons were.

Master Gilbert Brown.
That their faith is contained in the Word of God, so far as it differs from
ours, he will never be able to prove, neither by word nor writ. And if he will
cause our Kings Majesty to suspend his acts against us, that we may be as free
to speak our mind as he, he shall have a proof hereof. If not, let him prove the
same by writ, and he shall have an answer by Gods grace. As for his life, we
desire not the same, but rather his conversion to the truth.

M. John Welsch his Reply.
As for our ability to prove the truth of our doctrine, I answered it before:
Judge thou, Christian Reader, of the same, by this my answer. As for the
suspending of his Majesty's acts against you, that is not in our hands: and for
all the good ye could do, you have but too much liberty. And if you speak no
better for your Religion then you have done else in this your answer, your
Church will be but little beholden to you for it. And certainly, if you will
bind and oblige your self to face your own cause, and defend your Religion by
word, I hope that license of a safe passage and conduct would be granted to you
by his Majesty, to let you speak for your self, what ye have for you for the
defense of it, for that space, without any danger to your person, and that
surer, and with greater safety then John Hus had, who notwithstanding of his
safe conduct, yet was burnt. And whereas you promise an answer, do what you
can, M. Gilbert, for now it is time to plead for your Baal. And let your answer
be more firm then this, or else ye will lose more then ye will win by it. That
you desire not my life, I am beholden to you (if you speak truth) considering
the bloody generation of your Roman Church, who these many years by past, has
spilt the blood of the Saints of God, in such abundance, that if any can tell
the stars of heaven, he may number them whom your Church has slain for the
testimony of the Word of God. And as for that which ye call conversion, it is
aversion from the truth, and the losing of salvation: the which I hope shall be
dearer to me then a thousand lives, suppose they were all included in one.

Master John Welsch.
Secondly, I offer me to prove that there be very few points of controversy
betwixt the Roman Church and us, wherein we dissent, but I shall get testimonies
of sundry Fathers of the first six hundred years against them, and proving the
heads of Religion which we profess. Let any man therefore set me down any
weighty point of controversy, one, or mo, and he shall have the proof of this.

SECTION XXI. Concerning Justification by Faith.
Master Gilbert Brown.
WHom M. John calls Fathers here, I know not, except Simon Magus, Novatus,
Aerius, Jovinianus, Pelagius, Vigilantius, and such. For indeed there is none
of these, and many the like, but they were against us, and with them, in some
heads. But I am sure, S Ireneus, S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S.
Jerome, S. Basile, S. Chrysostom, with the rest of the holy Fathers, is no way
with them, and against us, as M. John will not be able to prove for all his
offer. As for example, it is a chief ground in their Religion, that only faith
justifies. This, I say, can neither be proved by the Scriptures, nor ancient
Fathers of the first six hundred years. For why the contrary is expressly
contained in the Word of God. Do ye see (says S. James) that by works a man is
justified, and not by faith only, James 2.24. with many other places that
agrees with the same, Matthew. 7.21. and 19.17. and 34.35. John 14.15.21. 1. John
2.3.4. Romans 2.13. 1. Cor. 13.2. and 1.19. Gal. 5.6. Tit. 1.16. And S. Augustine
says himself, de fide and operibus, cap. 14. That this Justification by faith
only, was an old heresy in the very time of the Apostles.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
As for this calumny of yours, the trial of it will come in afterward:
therefore I refer the answer of it to that place. And whereas you say, that you
know not whom I call Fathers, either your malice makes you to dissemble your
knowledge in this, or else palpable must your ignorance be. And where you say,
that Ireneus, Cyprian, etc. and the rest of the holy Fathers are no ways with
us, against you; and that I will not be able to prove it: I have not only
proved that already in sundry heads of our Religion, but also that sundry of
your own Popes, Cardinals, Doctors Bishops, Councils, and Canon Law have been
with us in sundry points of our Religion which we profess, against that which
ye profess. And as for that example of justification by faith only, which ye
cast in, which is one of the chief grounds of our Religion: This I will prove
both by the Scripture, and by the testimonies of the Fathers of the first six
hundred years.

Our doctrine then concerning Justification, is this: That as our sins was not
inherent in Christ, but imputed to him, 2. Cor. 5 21. which was the cause of
his death: so his righteousness whereby we are accounted righteous before God,
is not inherent in us, but imputed to us: and therefore the Scripture says,
that he is made of God unto us righteousness, 1. Cor. 1.30.

Next, the only instrument that apprehends, and as it were, takes hold of this
righteousness of Christ, is a lively Faith, which works by love, and brings
forth good fruits: so that neither is Faith an efficient or meritorious cause
of our salvation (for only Christ's death and righteousness is that) but only an
instrument to apprehend the same. Neither is every Faith this instrument; but
only that living Faith which I have spoken of: so that true Faith is never
without the fruits of good works, no more then fire is without heat: and yet
neither are our works, nor the work of Faith it self, the meritorious cause of
our salvation; but only Christ's death and righteousness: Neither are the fruits
of this lively Faith, the instrument to apprehend and take hold of Christ's
righteousness, but only Faith it self. This then is our doctrine, which is so
plainly confirmed by the Scripture, that he must be exceeding blind that sees
it not.

The places to confirm the same, are these, Romans 3.28. We conclud that a man is
justified by faith, without the works of the law. Romans 4.2. If Abraham were
justified by works, then has he wherein to rejoice, but not with God. Ephesians.
2.9. By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves: for it
is the gift of God: not by works, that none should boast. And Phil. 3.9 I have
counted all things loss, that I might win Christ and might be found in him, not
having my own righteousness which is of the law, but that which is through the
faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God through faith. And again,
Tit. 3.5. Not by the works of righteousness which we had done, but according to
his mercy he saved us. Seeing the Scripture so expressly removes all works, both
of nature and of grace, both going before Faith, and following after it (and
therefore the Apostle says, We are not saved by the works of righteousness
which we had done) and of all men, even of those who were justified already and
sanctified, as Abraham, Paul, and the Ephesians were, from our justification
and salvation, as the causes thereof: therefore we are only justified and saved
by a lively Faith, apprehending the righteousness of Christ.

Secondly, the Scripture not only removes works (as we have said) from the
cause of our Justification and salvation, but also ascribes it to Faith, as in
these places, John 3.16. Whosoever believes in him shall have eternal life. And
Luke 8.48. Thy faith has saved thee, etc. And again, Ephesians. 2.9. We are saved
through faith. And Romans 4.3.4.5. Man is justified by faith. And Romans
3.26.28.30. God shall justify circumcision of faith, and incircumcision through
faith. And Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness.
And lest ye should say, the Scripture has not by Faith only, read the 8. of
Luke, and 50. verse, where our Savior says to Jairus, (...), Only believe, and
she shall be saved. Therefore Faith is the only instrument to lay hold on the
promise of God. And lest ye should say, this was not a justifying Faith. I
answer: This Faith which Jairus had, was that same Faith which the woman with
the bloody issue had: but her Faith not only healed her body, but her soul
also, Luke 8.48. which Bellarmin grants, lib. 1. de justif. cap. 17. page 84.
and our Savior testifies, saying, Thy faith has saved thee, etc. therefore
this is a justifying Faith also. Secondly, seeing the Faith of miracles, and
justifying Faith, is both one in substance with your Church, as Bellarmin c. 5.
l. de justif. and the Rhemists annot. in 2. Cor. 12. say: and if it be a
greater work to work miracles, as they say, then to be justified: therefore if
only Faith suffice to obtain miracles, as Bellarmin grants, lib. 1. cap. 20.
page 97. why should not Faith only be also sufficient to justify? For if it
suffice for the greater work, much more for the less.

Thirdly, the Scripture ascribes our Justification to grace, and not to works,
and so oppones them, that the one cannot stand with the other in the matter of
our Justification. We are justified (says he) freely by grace, and not by
works, Romans 3.24. And to him that works the reward is imputed, not according
to grace, but to debt: but to him who works not, but believes in him who
justifies the ungodly, his faith is imputed to him for righteousness, Romans
4.4. And in another place, If it be of grace, it is no more of works, or else
were grace no more grace: but if it be of works, it is no more grace, or else
work were no more work, Romans 11.6. Seeing therefore our Justification is only
of free grace, and grace (if the Apostle be true) cannot stand with works:
therefore our Justification is not by works, or else it were not of grace: and
so not at all: and so the foundation of our salvation were overturned. I hope
therefore this our doctrine of Justification is plainly warranted by the
Scripture. Now to the Fathers, because ye say it cannot be proved by them, they
speak as plainly as we do. Origin has these words, in epist. ad Romans cap. 3
And the Apostle says, that the justification of faith only suffices (solius
fidei) so that he that believes only is justified, suppose no work be
fulfilled of him. Hilarious, Canon. 8. in Matthew. says, For only faith
justifies: fides enim sola justificat. Basilius in homil. de humil. says,
This is a perfect rejoicing in God, when a man vaunts not himself of his own
righteousness, but knows himself to be misterful of true righteousness, sola
autem fide in Christum justificatum, and to be justified only by faith in
Christ. Ambrose in cap. 3. ad Romans and cap. 4. and 9. says, They are justified
by faith only through the gift of God. And in the 4. chapter he has thrice, by
faith only, sola fides. And in the 9. chapter also, Sola fides posita est ad
salutem: that is, only faith is appointed for salvation. Chrysostom in homil.
de fide and lege naturae. says, The thief believed only and was justified. And
in homil. 3. ad Tit. If thou gives credit to thy faith, wherefore brings thou
in other things, as though faith only were not sufficient to justify?
Augustine, it is a known saying of his, lib. 1. contra duas Epistolas Pelag.
cap. 21. Works go not before justification, but follow him who is already
justified. And in another place, How virtuous soever ye report the ancient
righteous to have been, yet their virtue saved them not, but the faith of the
Mediator, August. de fide and operib. cap. 14. Cyrillus Alexandrinus lib. 10.
in Joan. cap. 18. says, Man by faith only sticks in Christ, inhaeret Christo.
Theophylactus in comment, ad Galat. cap. 3. says, Only faith has in it is self
the virtue of justifying. Bernard sermon. 22. in Cantic. in the 1200. age, says,
Man being justified by faith only, shall have peace toward thee. What more
plain now could the Fathers speak of Justification by faith only? which you
will not deny. The Reader may learn how much credit is to be given to you who
so boldly affirmed that neither Scriptures nor Fathers said with us against
you. I hope they will try you before they trust you in time to come. For dare
you say, M. Gilbert, that I have fained here ought of these Fathers, and have
not brought in their own words speaking? Deny it if ye dare. Be not so impudent
and shameless, M. Gilbert, in your untruths and lies again: for by this ye will
both discredit your self and your Religion.

As for the 2. of James which ye quote here, that by works a man is justified,
and not by faith only. I answer: This word to be justified, is taken in the
Scripture two manner of ways. First, to be accounted righteous before the
tribunal of God: and in this sense, only a lively faith apprehending the death
and righteousness of Christ justifies us: and of this is the controversy.
Next, it is taken for a declaration of ones righteousness, as in the 3. of the
Romans, verse. 4. That thou may he justified in thy words (that is, declared to
be just) when thou judges. And in this sense it is taken in this place. So that
this is the meaning of it. Ye see then, by works man is justified, that is,
declared by his works to be just, and not by faith only, that is, by the
profession of his faith in Christ. So then James speaks not of our
Justification before God which is by faith only, but of the declaration of our
righteousness before men, which he calls Justification: and that for these
reasons. 1. Otherwise James should be contrary to Paul, who says, That a man
is justified by faith without works, which is blasphemous to think: therefore
James speaks of our Justification before men, whereby our Justification before
God is declared and made manifest. 2. The scope of the whole chapter, and whole
Epistle, testifies the same. For his purpose is to cast down the arrogance and
presumption of such, who bragged of their Faith, as though the bare profession,
that they believed in Christ, were sufficient to save them, suppose they did
not bring forth the fruits thereof. Therefore the Apostle takes this in hand to
prove that they are not justified by a dead faith, but only by that faith which
brings forth the effects thereof. And therefore he says in the 14. verse, What
avails it, my brethren, when a man says he has faith, when he has no
works? can that faith save him? And in the 18. verse, Show me thy faith out of
thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my works. And because it may be ye
say, this is my commentary, therefore hear how one of your own great and chief
pillars, Thomas of Aquin in Jacob. 2. expones the same, from whose judgment, I
hope, ye will not appeal. Here he speaks, says he, of works that follows
faith, not according to that sense wherein Justification is said to be the
infusion of righteousness, but according to that sense that Justification is
called exercitatio justitiae, the practice or declaration, and confirmation of
righteousness. So if ye will believe him, Justification here is taken not for
our justification before God, but for the declaration of our righteousness. And
so the ordinary Gloss in Jacob. 2. exponing that place, writes, Abraham was
justified without works by faith only: but nevertheless the offering up of his
son, was a testification of his faith and righteousness. What can be more
clearly spoken by any? Would you have more then this? So then this place of
James speaks not of our Justification before God, and therefore serves not to
prove this your doctrine. As to the 2 of the Romans, v. 13. It is true, it is
not the hearers of the Law, but the doers of it which are justified, if rhere
were any who had fulfilled it. But the Apostle concluds in the 3. chapter, all
under sin, both Jew and Gentil: and therefore gathers that by the works of the
Law no flesh is justified. And so we will leave this to you to do, and that
also in the 19. of Matthew, spoken to the young man, Do the commands, etc. And
as for the rest of the testimonies, I wonder to what purpose ye have quoted
them, except for to make a show of Scripture and testimonies. For they speak
only of the necessity of good works, which as they cannot be separat from true
faith, so no man can attain to salvation without them: because where ever
Christ dwells by true Faith, not only he justifies them, but also sanctifies
them, and makes them fruitful in good works. The which we grant, and therefore
do urge the same continually, knowing for a truth, that without holiness no man
shall see God, Heb. 12.14. and that the ax is laid to the root of the tree, and
that every tree that brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down, and
cast in an unquencheable fire, Matthew. 3.10. They speak not therefore of the
efficient or formal, or instrumental cause of our Justification, but of our
sanctification with the fruits thereof, and therefore serves not to prove the
controversy that is in hand. As for Augustine his testimony, as you corrupt the
Scriptures, so do ye his testimony also: for this was the opinion which was
risen up in the Apostles days, as he testifies there: for these are his words:
That some thought that faith only was sufficient to obtain salvation without
works, neglecting to live well, and to hold the way of God by good works, and
being secure of salvation which is in faith, had not a care to live well, as he
says. And in the end of that chapter, he concluds the whole matter saying, How
far therefore are they deceived, who promise to themselves everlasting life
through a dead faith. The which error we condemn also with you: For we
acknowledge the necessity of good works, as the fruits of a living Faith; but
not as the efficient, formal, or instrumental cause of our justification.

SECTION XXII. Concerning the Authority of the Fathers.
M. Gilbert Brown.
FUrther, I say, since the difference chiefly in Religion betwixt us and them,
is about the understanding of the Word of God, Not we, M. Gilbert, but one of
the chief pillars of your own Church, Cajetan a Cardinal (which was sent in
Germany against Luther) the Popes Legate, who says in plain words, That the
author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, does gather insufficient arguments, to
prove Christ to be the Son of God: that the 2. and 3. Epistle of John is not
Canonical Scripture: that the Epistle of Jude is Apocrypha: that the last
chapter of Mark is not of sound authority: that the history of the adulterous
woman in S. John, is not authentical: and of S. James Epistle, that the
salutation of it is profane.
albeit they deny a great part of the same to us; what is the cause that they
will not abide the trial of the ancient Fathers of the first six hundred years,
seeing that they were of his Religion, as he affirms? If he be as good as his
word, the matter will be soon ended. And if our Religion be not sound consonant
to theirs in all things (wherein they differ from us) we shall reform the same.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
You said a little before, M. Gilbert, that the chief difference wherein we
differ from you, is in denying, abhorring, or detesting, etc. Now you say, that
the difference chiefly of Religion betwixt us, is about the understanding of
the Word of God. How well these two agree, let the Reader judge. It is no
wonder suppose you dissent from your brethren (as I have proved in sundry
points before) seeing ye dissent from your self. It is true indeed, that many
of our controversies are about the right sense and understanding of the
Scripture: but yet if Petrus a Soto, Lindanus, Peresius, Canisius, all great
and learned Papists, speak truth, the most part of the weightiest and chiefest
points of your Religion which are in controversy between us, are but unwritten
traditions, which have not their beginning nor author in the Scripture, and
cannot be defended by the same. And whereas ye would have us to refer the
controversies about the sense and right meaning of the Scriptures to be decided
by the writings of the Fathers of the first six hundred years: we receive their
monuments and writings gladly: but yet so, that we put a difference between
them, and the writings of the holy Ghost in the Scripture. For as I have proved
sufficiently before, as I hope, that only the Scriptures of God have this
prerogative, to be the supreme Judge of all controversies in Religion, and no
other; and the best way to learn the sense of the Scripture, is by the
Scripture it self: for seeing all the Scripture is inspired of God, therefore
it ought to be exponed by God in the same. For he who made the Law, can best
interpret the Law. And the Levits practiced this in the Old Testament, who
exponed the Scripture by the Scripture, Nehem. 8.8 and the Apostles in the New
Testament, who taught nothing but that which the Prophets said should come to
pass, Acts 26.28. And if a Father, yea a Saint, yea if an Angel would preach
beside that which the Apostles preached, let him be accursed. So then, nothing
can be a warrant to us of the truth of the sense of the Scripture, but the
Scripture it self. And as for the Fathers expositions, as they may not be Judge
(as has been said) because they may err, and have erred, as has been proved,
and your selves will not deny: and they dissent oftentimes one from another in
the exposition of the same. So let their expositions be taken in so far as they
agree with the Scripture. For would ye have us ascribe that unto them, which
they themselves have refused, and have ascribed unto the Scriptures only?

Hear therefore what Optatus the Bishop of the Church of Milevitan, a learned
man, who lived about the year of God 369. says, writing against the Donatists,
who claimed to themselves only the title of the Church of Christ, as ye do.
They called for a Judge, he brings the Testament of Christ for a Judge: and
speaking to them of a point of Religion that was controverted, whither one
should be twice baptized or not? He says, You, says he, affirm it is lawful,
we affirm it is not lawful; between your say it is lawful, and our say it is
not lawful, the peoples souls do doubt and waver. Let none believe you nor us,
we are all contentious men; Judges must be sought for: If Christians they
cannot be given on both sides; for truth is hindered by affection. A Judge
without must be sought for. If a Pagan, he cannot know the Christian mystery.
If a Jew, he is an enemy to Christianity. No Judge therefore of this matter can
be found in earth. A Judge from heaven must be sought for. But why knock we at
heaven, when here we have his Testament in the Gospel? Optatus lib. 5. contra
Parmenianum. And he renders a reason of this in that same Book: Christ, says
he, has dealt with us as an earthly father is wont to do with his children,
who fearing left his children should fall out after his decease, does set down
his will in writing under witness: and if there arise debate among the
brethren, they go to the Testament. He whose word must end our controversy, is
Christ. Let his will be sought in his Testament, says he. Augustine in Psalm.
21. expos. 2. urges the same reason of Optatus against the Donatists: We are
brethren, says he to them, why do we strive? Our father died not untestate: he
made a Testament, and so died. Men do strive about the goods of the dead while
their Testament be brought forth. When that is brought forth, they yield to
have it opened and read: The Judge does hearken, the Counselors be silent, the
Crier bids peace: All the people is attentive that the words of the dead man
may be read and heard. He lies void of life and feeling and his words prevail.
Christ sits in heaven, and is his Testament gainsaid? Open it, let us read.
We are brethren, why do we strive? Let our minds be pacified: Our Father has
not left us without a Testament. He that made the Testament is living for ever,
he does hear our words. He does know his own word: let us read, why do we
strive? Ireneus says, lib. 4. contra haeres. cap. 63. That the lawful
exposition of the Scripture which has no peril with it, is according to the
Scripture themselves. What can be more plain, M. Gilbert? And I ask you
further. Would you have us to ascribe more to the interpretation of the
Fathers, then the learned of your Church do? As Cajetan a Cardinal, in Praefat.
in Comment. in lib. Mosis, and Doctor Andradius: the first says, That God has
not tied the exposition of the Scripture unto the exposition or sense of the
Fathers: (If God has not bound it, as he says, why then should we bind it?)
Wherefore there he desires the Reader, Not to mislike it, if sometimes in the
expounding of them, he fall into a sense agreeable to the text, though it go
against the stream of the Fathers. If he speak truth, then that sense that is
agreeable to the text, suppose it be against the stream of their expositions,
is to be received and preferred before them. And Andradius that learned man,
says, That the Fathers spoke not Oracles, when they exponed the Scriptures,
but might therein be deceived, Defens. fid. Trident. lib. 2. And he says more,
That the oversights of the translation which they followed, must needs cause
them sometimes to miss the meaning of the holy Ghost. And yet you would have
the sense of the Scriptures to be decided by them, who sometimes have missed
the meaning of the holy Ghost. And he concluds in the end, That the holy Ghost
is the only and faithful interpreter of the Scriptures. Thus the fairest
flowers of your garden, and chiefest pillars of your Faith have written: So
that if they speak true (whom I know not if ye will presume to contradict) the
exposition of the Scripture is not tied unto the exposition of the Fathers: and
it is lawful to go with the text, against the stream of their expositions.

And whereas you say, if I will be as good as my word, the matter will soon be
ended: I am glad of it, if you think as you speak. My word was, M. Gilbert, as
your self has written it, that there be very few points of controversy
between us, wherein I will not get some testimonies of sundry Fathers of the
first six hundred years, proving with us against them (meaning your Church.)
And I desired any man to set me down any weighty point of controversy, one or
mo, and he should have the proof of it. These were my words. Now ye say, if I
will be as good as my word, the matter will soon be ended. Whither I have been
as good as my word in this or not let the Reader judge. And I appeal your
conscience, M. Gilbert, before the Lord in the great day, whither it be true or
not. For not only in that example of Justification, which ye cast in, but
almost in all the heads which are debated among us, I have brought in sundry
testimonies of sundry Fathers with us against you. Yea, I have been better then
my word in that: For I have brought in testimonies of sundry that lived after
the six hundred years: and not of these only, but also testimonies of sundry of
your own Doctors, Jesuits, Cardinals, Bishops, Canons, Councils and Popes,
proving with us in some points against your selves. I look therefore, M.
Gilbert, that ye shall be as good as your word, and that the matter shall end
here between you and me. For both you have said, that the matter would soon
end, if I were as good as my word; and also ye have promised and subscribed
with your hand, to reform your Religion in all things wherein it is not conform
to their testimonies. The which if you do, then must you renounce the supremacy
of your Pope, the sacrifice of your Mass, your Transubstantiation, your
Justification by works, your Merits of works, your perfect fulfilling of the
Law of God, your erroneous opinions that the Church cannot err, that the
Scripture should not be Judge, with sundry others. For in all these I have
brought the testimonies of sundry Fathers: and in some of them the testimonies
of your own Doctors, Councils, Canons and Popes, with us against you. Either
therefore take shame and falsehood for ever more upon you, or else keep your
word and your writ which ye have subscribed here, and reform these points of
your Religion. As for that calumny wherewith ye charge us to have taken away a
great part from the Scripture. I know you mean the Apocrypha, which bears not
the mark and stamp of Gods Spirit, as being neither written by Prophets, nor
yet the most part of them in the prophetical language the Hebrew tongue,
wherein all the Old Testament was written, except some things of Daniel and
Ezra, which were written in the Chaldaick language, which was known then to the
Jews; nor yet received as Canonical by the Church of the Jews, which your
Bellar. lib. 1. cap. 10.
Church will not deny. Nor yet acknowledged Canonical by the testimonies of
sundry Melito lib. 4. cap. 26. Eusebius. Origin. lib. 6. cap. 25. Eusebius. Athan. in
synop. Hilar. in prolog. explan. Psalm. Cyrill. in 4. catechis. Ruffinus in
expos. symboli. Hieron. in prologo galeato.
Fathers, Synod. Laodicen. Canon. 59. confirmed by the Council Trullan.
Councils, and of your Greg. Mag. in comment. in Jobum, lib. 19. cap. 16. Hugo.
Cardinalis in prolog. Josuae. Cajetan Cardinal. in fine comment. Hester. Arias
Montanus, who was present at the Council of Trent, in aeditione quadam
Hebraicorum Bibliorum interlinearium interpretationum.
selves, also Papists of great name: some rejecting all, some more, some fewer:
containing also many things repugnant to the truth of God set down in the
Canonical Scripture. Last of all, wanting that majesty of Gods Spirit, which so
evidently shines in the Canonical Scripture. And therefore most justly say we,
that ye underly the curse of God pronounced in his Scripture, Rev. 22.18. for
the adding unto the holy truth of God. And look to it, M. Gilbert, what you
will say to your Cardinal Cajetan, who has denied sundry Books and parts of
the Canonical Scripture in the New Testament.

Master John Welsch.
Now, if the first thing I offer me to prove be sound of verity; that is, that
our Religion is that self-same, and no other, then that that Jesus Christ
preached, and his Apostles, and theirs is not so: but devised by the man of
sin, and that Antichrist, that whore of Babylon, then the plea is won. But if I
prove the second also, then I hope they will never open their mouth to speak
evil of the truth of God, as though it were but a new Religion.

M. Gilbert Brown.
When M. John proves the thing that he is not able to prove, we shall do the
thing that we are not able to perform: but it is a wonder of him to put in so
many (ifs) and does nothing to the matter. For it is a true saying in
Philosophy, that a conditional Proposition proves nothing. It appears he has
been in haste, that he might not have leisure to I proved all that was required
at my hands.
prove any head for example of his promise. For we understand that M. John is a
man who may err, as many man has done before by his judgment: and therefore
he must have no I desire no credit without warrant, as your Popes and your
Church do of her disciples.
credence of us, except he bring his warrant, and ye shall be M. Gilbert is once
beguiled, for this is performed.
sure that he is never able to perform his sayings.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
This my Reply, I hope, satisfies for answer to this section.

SECTION XXIII. Concerning the Visibility of the Church, and whither the
Visible Church may make defection?
Master John Welsch.
THirdly, I answer: The Spirit of God fore-tels that when the Antichrist shall
come, the defection shall be universal, and all Nations shall be drunken with the
wine of her fornication.

M. Gilbert Brown.
Where this is written, M John tells not. For I am sure, as it is set down
here, there is no such thing in our Bibles, no not in their own corrupted
Bibles, except they have augmented them of new. That there shall be an universal
defection, it is altogether repugnant to the Word of God, as I have showed
before, in proving the Church always to continue. For the same place where I
believe he alleges to, has these words; And it was given unto him to make war
with the Saints and to overcome them: And power was given him upon every tribe
and people and tongue, and nation, and all that inhabit the earth adored it,
whose names be not written in the book of life of the Lamb, Rev. 13 7.8. Here
any man may see that the Saints of God that shall be persecute by the
Antichrist, and such that is written in the book of life, shall not make
defection, then it shall not be an universal defectio^. And also M. John
afterward in finding some of his Religion that said against the Antichrist the
Pope, the time bygone, is contrary to himself here, that the defection shall not
be universal. And where he says, that all Nations shall be drunk^n with the
wine of her fornication, the text is otherwise; Because all Nations have
drunken of the wine of the wrath of her fornication: that is, that the people
of all Nations that have obeyed her, shall be punished with the wrath of God,
and not that all the world should make defection.

M. John Welsch his Reply.
You fight against your own shadow, M. Gilbert: and whereas ye can find nothing
justly to quarrel in my words being rightly taken, and taken as the Scripture
takes them: you devise a meaning of your own brain, and would father it upon
me, that ye may the more easily have somewhat to speak against. For I neither
spoke it, nor meant it, that the elect should make defection in the time of the
Antichrist. I am so far from it, that suppose I believe assuredly that this
prophecy is fulfilled in your own Church, yet I know assuredly that the Lord
reserved his own elect to himself, who was kept free from your Idolatry, as he
promised, Rev. 14. and Histories record of some, whereof I did set down some of
their names. But this is the doctrine of one of your own Church, Dominicus a
Soto in lib. 4. sent. did. 46. quaest. 1. art. 1. who believed it assuredly,
That the faith of Jesus Christ, and Religion, should be utterly extinguished
through the persecution of the Antichrist, if Bellarmin speak true of him, lib.
3. de Romans Pont. cap. 17. And so turn the point of your sword, M. Gilbert, upon
your own brother, who so taught, and not upon me, who is far from it. And if ye
will say, wherefore then called I it universal? I answer: Because the Scripture
calls it a defection, without any addition or restraint: and your Rhemists
grant, That this defection shall be a revolting of Kings, People, and Provinces,
and the public intercourse of the faithful with the Church of Rome shall cease:
And that the daily sacrifice shall be abolished most universally throughout all
Nations and Churches of the world, by Antichrist himself, Annot. upon 2 Thessalonians.
2. And Bellarmin says, lib. 3. cap. 16. That he shall be Monarch of the whole
world. Therefore this Kingdom by your own confession shall be universal: and
seeing his Kingdom is an apostasy or defection; for as many as shall obey him,
shall make defection from the faith: therefore by the doctrine of your own
Church, it must be an universal defection. And the Scripture says expressly,
That he shall make all, both small and great, etc. to receive a mark on their
right hand, and on their foreheads: and that no man may buy or sell, etc. and
that all Nations have drunken of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, Rev.
13.16. and 14.8 and 18.3. Now whither I might call that universal, which the
Scripture calls all, and your Rhemists and Bellarmin makes so general and
universal, that it shall possess all the Kingdoms of the earth, let the
Christian Reader judge. And let me ask you, M. Gilbert, Do you not believe that
the Church is Catholic, or Universal? And do you not think with one of your
own number, to wit, Costerus a Jesuit, in Enchirid. that the Church is called
Universal because the faith of the Church is scattered in all Nations? and yet
for all this, all particular Nations, and all particular men receives not this
faith, and yet notwithstanding it is Universal, and is called Universal still.
And does not the Scripture prophecy, that in Abraham all the Nations shall be
blessed, Gal. 3.8. and yet for all this, there were and is, millions of the
Gentiles that are not blessed in him? Why then, in like manner, may not the
defection in the time of the Antichrist be called universal, although the elect
be exeemed from it? But wherefore insist I to refute this vain quarrelling of
words, which serves to no purpose? So then, this that I said is both in your
Translation, and ours in substance, and is not contrary to that which I said
afterward.

As for that place of Scripture which ye cite here, Rev. 3.7 8. it is not
spoken here of the Antichrist, but of the persecution of the Roman Emperors. As
for that calumny of yours, in calling our Bibles corrupted and augmented: this
is your sin, M. Gilbert, whereof one day ye shall make an account to the Majesty
of God, for the slandering and bearing false witness of the truth of God. And
to speak the truth, this is true of you: For both you have added to the
Scriptures of God: first, the Apocrypha; next, your traditions, which your
Church has decreed to be received with equal reverence and godliness with the
Scripture, Council. Trident. sess. 4. thirdly, the Decretal Epistles of your
Popes, which some of you have reckoned in the number of the Canonical
Scripture, Gratianus did. 19. and Alphonsus de genero. in thesauro Christ.
Relig. cap. 3. number. 5. And also you have corrupted the Scriptures of God by
your corrupt translation, especially that of the College of Rhemes. The which
to be true, if time would serve, I might soon be able to prove, which has been
sufficiently proved by that learned and worthy man of God Doctor Fulk; unto the
which, you, nor all your Clergy, have not answered as yet, for ought I know,
nor never is able to do.

And as for the last point, wherein ye say, that the text is otherways then I
set down, let the Christian Reader judge whether my words be one in substance
with this text, or not: For suppose this be set down in the preterit-time, and
I spoke it in the future time, yet it is a prophecy of a thing to come: and
your Church grants it is not fulfilled yet, therefore they are both one in
substance. And as for your exposition, where you expone this of the punishment
of the people that have obeyed her, and not of their sin in communicating with
her Idolatry, that is manifestly against the text. For this is set down here as
the cause of her punishment, which is pronounced before in these words, Babylon
is fallen, etc. Now the reason, because all Nations have drunken of the wine of
the wrath of her fornication; whereby in the Scripture is signified Idolatry;
and it is called, the wine of the wrath, etc. because her fornication provoked
God to wrath. And Aretas exponeth this fornication, a defection from every
good. And in the 18. chapter it is more evident, where after the denunciation
of her fall, this reason is subjoyned, Because all Nations have drunken of the
wine of the wrath, etc. and the Kings of the earth have committed fornication
with her: and the marchands of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance
of her pleasures. The which as they cannot be understood of the punishment, but
of the defection; so this drinking cannot be understood of their punishment,
but of their communication with her Idolatry: And yet however it be, this
proves that universal defection, of the which I spoke.

Master John Welsch.
And the Church of God shall be latent, and flee to the wilderness, and there
lurk, and be fed of God all that time secretly.

Master Gilbert Brown.
It is a wonder to hear the Word of God abused, not only with false expositions
repugnant to the words self, but also alleging the word falsely. For the text
of S. John has but this (for he notes no place, because he knows it may not
abide a trial) And the woman fled unto the wilderness, where she had a place
prepared of God, that there they might feed her a thousand two hundred and
threescore days. Here there is no word that she shall be latent, nor lurk, nor
be secret. And if M John will mean that the fleeing to the wilderness, is
nothing but to be invisible, and to ly secret, then it must follow that the
whore of Babylons self must be invisible and secret. For the same S John says,
And the Angel took me away in spirit into the desert, and I saw a woman sitting
upon a skarlet colored beast, full of names of blasphemy, having seven heads
and ten horns. This word (desert) signifies more properly to be secret or
invisible, then the word (wilderness.) It is true appearantly, that if this
woman signify the Church of Christ, that in the time of the Antichrist she
shall be redacted to a small number, as it were in a wilderness, and shall not
possess every Nation, as she had wont to do: but that she may be made
invisible, and not to be seen, there is no true Catholic that expones it so.
And such like, this time shall be but short, that is, for 1260. days, as the
text says, which is but three years and an half. And if M. John's Church had
been but so long invisible, we should have dispensed with the same. But it has
been invisible these thousand years, as it is now professed in Scotland, and
much more, as young Merchiston has in his book upon the Revelation, chap. 12.
verse. 14.

M. John Welsch his Reply.
All that you can find fault with here, is this, that I said, the Church in the
time of the Antichrist, should be latent, and lurk, and be fed secretly; the
which has stirred you up in such a choler, that you have cried out with
admiration, that I have abused the Scripture, etc. Now tell me, M. Gilbert,
whither is it because these same words are not found in the Scripture, or
because the doctrine it self cannot be warranted by the same? If the former,
then I say you are but a quarreller about words. And all the doctrine which ye
have set down in this your answer, is not set down in so many terms in the
Scripture, and yet ye will have it to be the doctrine of Gods Spirit (suppose
it be not so.) So it suffices that this which I said be warranted by the
Scripture, suppose the same terms be not found. If the other, then I say,
beside other places of Scripture, this same place which ye quote here confirms
the same. For know ye not that the wilderness is a place of refuge and
secrecy, from the tyranny of their pursuers? And they that fly to the same,
they fly to lurk there, and to be kept close and secret from the rage of their
persecuters, for the safety of their lives. So while it is prophesied, That
this woman (whereby is signified the Church) which suppose ye conditionally
expone so: yet Sanderus 40. demonstrat. one of your own number, expones it to
be the Church without all doubt shall fly in the wilderness from the face of
the dragon, and that for her safety, and there be fed. etc. Is it not then
manifest that she shall be secret and lurk then, and not be so open and visible
as she was before? And if this be an abuse of the Scripture, then not only your
self has abused it, but also sundry of your own Church, as the Rhemists,
Bellarmin and Sanderus. For your self says, That in the time of the
Antichrist, she shall be redacted in a small number, as it were in a wilderness,
and shall not possess every Nation, as she had wont to do. For what is this else
but to lurk and be latent, and to be fed secretly, in comparison of that estat
wherein she was before? And therefore the only thing that I inferred on this in
the end, was, that no man should think that the Church of God was ever open and
visible, in such a flowrishing estat as it is now. And the Rhemists annot. in
2 Thessalonians. say, That in the time of the Antichrist, this great defection or
revolt shall be of Kingdoms, People, and Provinces, from the open external
obedience and communion with the Church of Rome. So that their communion with
her shall be in heart, and the practice thereof in secret, and he shall abolish
the public exercise of all Religions, true or false, save that which is done
to himself: So that the Mass, they say, shall be had but in secret then. And
Bellarmin lib. 3. de Romans Pont. cap. 17. and 18. and Sanderus demonst. 35. and
37. is of the same mind, That his cruel persecution shall stay all public
exercise of Religion, and he shall make open warfare with the whole Church, and
shall endeavor to destroy the universal estat of the whole Christian
Commonwealth, and shall shut up the door of Sacraments, and shall suffer no man
any more to enter in the Church of Christ, and shall be Monarch of the whole
world. Now if this be true, whether shall the Church of Christ by your own
doctrine be fed secretly, or not be latent and lurk, in the time of the
Antichrist? let all men judge. But what a contradictorious spirit is this of
yours, who to gainsay the thing that I writ, cares not to involve your self in
a contradiction, not only to the truth, but also to your own Catholics. Either
therefore wonder at your own Catholics, who have spoken as much and more in
this point then I did, and at your self also, who grants as much in substance
as I meant, that ye and they have abused the Scripture, or else leave off to
wonder at me, and wonder at the vail which is hung over your own eyes, which
hinders you not only to understand the truth, but also to understand what your
self and your own brethren teach. Now as for your reason, it is not said that
Babylon was in the desert, but that John was taken in the spirit; that is,
ravished in the spirit (as in the 1. and 4. chapter) into the desert; that is,
into a solitar and heavenly contemplation of that vision which was afterward
shown him. For as this carrying of him in the sprit, signifies his spiritual
ravishing, so this desert signifies the solitariness of his contemplation. And
as that lifting up of Ezekiel by the locks of the hair of his head between the
heaven and the earth, and that carrying of him to the door of the innermost port
toward the North, to see the abominations of Jerusalem, was only in vision,
and not bodily. So I take this carrying of John in spirit to the wilderness, to
see the whore of Babylon, to have been in vision only, and not bodily. And
whereas ye say that this word desert, signifies more properly to be hid and
invisible then the word wilderness; I pray you, tell me, M. Gilbert, what is
between desert and wilderness, save that the first is driven from the Latin,
and the second is English? Must you be set to the Grammar School again? What
fancy is this wherewith ye are possessed, that you put a difference between
wilderness and desert? Is there any difference, if you understood the Greek
language, between (...) and (...); that is, between desert and desert,
wilderness and wilderness? And if ye have ever read the New Testament in Greek,
there is but the self-same word (...), in both these places, which signifies
desert or wilderness. But where have you been when ye did imagine this
difference? Appearantly ye have been dreaming in some wilderness, or else
wandering in the wilderness of your own blind imaginations. As for the
exposition of your true Catholics, we count not much of them. Always these
whom ye call your true Catholics Bellarmin, the Rhemists, and Sanderus, have
been plain in this matter, and have spoken more in this point then we do. And
as for the time of this her secrecy and lurking 1260 days, which you expound
literally to be but three years and an half. I answer, This exposition of yours
is against: first, the custom of prophesies, which are expounded figuratively,
and not literally, as these 70. weeks in Daniel concerning Christ, where there
a day is put for a year. Next, it is against the whole circumstances of the
text: For will you expound this woman figuratively for the Church, as Sanderus
does: and the wilderness unto the which she fled, figuratively for the small
number whereunto she shall be redacted, as you do; and the sun wherewith she was
clad, and the moon which was under her feet, and the twelve stars that was upon
her head, and the red Dragon which pursued her with ten heads, etc. all
figuratively? and yet will ye expound the time of her being in the wilderness
literally? What violence is this which ye will offer unto the holy truth of
God, to expound all the rest figuratively; and only the time literally? So then
a day here is set for a year, as also it is taken in the same sense in the 2.
chapter of the Reve^ation, in the Epistle to Smyrna, where it is said, They
shall have tribulation for the space of ten days; that is, for the space of ten
years. As for the invisibility of our Church, because that question comes
afterward, therefore I omit it now. Only this, as your Hierarchy and
abomination of your Church grew, so did the purity of the doctrine of Jesus
Christ in his Church decay. And as your Popes came not to their hight at an
instant, and brought not in their abominations at an instant, but piece and
piece, and by long process of time: So the purity of the truth of God decayed
not at an instant, but piece and piece and by a long process of time. For the
degrees of your exalting, was the degrees of the depressing of the truth of God
in his Church. As for our dispensation, suppose your Church uses not to give
them without money laid down, yet we will neither buy them, nor have them for
naught. So keep your dispensations at home (M. Gilbert) while we send for them.

M. John Welsch.
And the Ministers thereof shall preach in sackcloth, that is, under
persecution, all that time, and at the last they shall be put to death for the
testimony of Jesus, and for speaking against their false Worship and Religion.

Master Gilbert Brown.
It appears to me that M. John has found some new Revelation, other then that
of S. John: for he notes no place to us: and these words of his are no way in
S. John, and therefore as an invention of his own head, we will reject the
same. Indeed we have in S. John, That God shall give to us two witnesses, and
they shall prophecy 1260. days clad with sackcloth, Rev. 11.3. But this can no
ways agree with this purpose of his. For why there shall be but two of these:
and there is more then two hundred Ministers in Scotland. And these two shall
prophecy, but our Ministers are no Prophets, (albeit they foretell things
oftentimes that is not true) and all the prophesies, if they prophecy at any
time, is of evil, and not of good. These two shall prophecy but three years and
an half: but our Ministers have prophesied these 38. years, if preaching be
prophesying. And these two shall be clad in sackcloth; but our Ministers,
chiefly of Borrowstowns, is clad in fine black cloth, or silk. And so forth of
many more differences, as is contained in the 11. chapter of the Revelation.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
It appears to you that I have found some new Revelation, other then that of S.
John. So did it appear to the Jews, that the Apostle Paul taught all men every
where against the Law of Moses, Acts 21.28. and yet it was the truth, as he
himself testifies, he spoke nothing beside that which Moses and the Prophets
foretold was to come, Acts 26.22. So every appearance is not truth. It is but
the scales that are upon your eyes, that makes this so to appear to you. For
the Scripture of God, and this Revelation of S. John, is sufficient to us to
make it manifest, that your head is the Antichrist, and your doctrine is that
Apostasy that was prophesied to come, so that we need no new revelations, as
ye do: For because the revelations already made by God to his Church, and
written in his holy Scripture, does not warrant your abominable and false
doctrine, and your Popes supremacy, which is the foundation of all: therefore
you and your Church flies to unwritten traditions, and fained revelations to
prove the same. As for example, because your Church has not so much as a
syllable in the whole Book of God, to prove that Peter's seat was translated
from Antiochia to Rome, which is the whole foundation of all Popery: Therefore
your Pope Marcellinus in his Canon Law, causa 24. quaest. 1. cap. Rogamus.
grounds the certainty of this upon a fained revelation, that Peter by the
commandment of God did translate it. But to leave you with your new
revelations, what have ye for you for this your appearance? You say, first,
because I note no place: and next, because these words of mine are no ways in
S. John: therefore ye conclud it to be an invention of my own. As to the first:
Is this a good reason, I note not the place, therefore I have found out some
new revelation? You must be sent to the Logic schools again, to learn the
right manner of reasoning. I noted no place; Ergo, I could not: that will not
follow. As to the second, my words are no ways found in S. John: Ergo, I have
found a new revelation. But what if the sense be found? What if the self-same
doctrine be found in S. John, suppose not in the same words? Then it will not
follow that I have found out a new revelation, or that this is the invention of
my own brain. This place which ye quote here, Rev. 11.3. sufficiently confirms
all that I said. For your self will not deny, and Bellarmin lib. 3. cap. 6 the
Rhemists annot. in Apoc. cap. 11. and Sanderus in his Demonstrations, grant,
that these two Witnesses are they who shall preach in the time of the
Antichrist, suppose they expound them of Elias and Enoch, and that they shall be
persecuted, and put to death by him. What a blindness is this, M. Gilbert, that
has overfyled your eyes, that for the writing of that same doctrine which the
Scripture warrants, your Divines grant, and your self will not deny, you have
said, that it appeared to you that I have found out some new revelation? But
judge thou (Christian Reader) what thou may presume upon M. Gilberts
appearances. But you say, this agrees not with my purpose, and that because of
the differences between these two Witnesses, and the Ministers of Scotland.
First, I do not mean by these two Witnesses the Ministers of Scotland only, but
the Ministers of all the Reformed Churches in Europe, who have departed out of
your Babel, and have shaken off the yoke of the tyrannous bondage of your Head,
the Man of sin: and not only these who now live, but these also who now rest
from their labors, and sleep in the Lord, of whom a great many were persecuted,
and put to death by your tyranny, for speaking against your abominations. Now
as to these differences which ye mark, the fountain from the which this
springs, is your mistaking of the prophesies of God, and exponing them
literally; which according to the use of prophesies, and especially these which
are set down in this Revelation, and all the circumstances of this text, ought
to be exponed figuratively. These same two Witnesses are called two Olives, two
Candlesticks; and it is said of them, that fire comes out of their mouths, and
destroys their enemies, Rev. 11.4.5.6. etc. If you will not be so absurd and
ridiculous, as to expone these things literally, but figuratively; otherwise ye
will make them monsters, trees, and candlesticks: why then do ye expone this
place concerning their number, work, time, apparel, etc. literally, and not
figuratively, as the rest of their works and properties must be exponed? the
which if you had done, then would you have seen no difference between the
Ministers of the Gospel that resisted your Pope, and these two Witnesses here:
but the one to be the prophecy of the other, and the other to be the
accomplishing of the prophecy. As for their number then, they are said to be
but two, that is, few; and yet such a sufficient number, as may prove and
qualify any thing by the Law. For by the Law, Out of the mouth of two or three
witnesses, shall every word be established. So the Ministers of the Gospel, in
the time of your Antichrist and darkness, was but few at the beginning: and yet
so many, as served for to establish the truth of God by their testimony, in the
consciences of so many whom God had appointed to save. As for their work of
prophesying, the Scripture calls preaching, prophesying, 1. Cor. 12. and 13.
and 14. And the Rhemists annot. in 11. Rev. grant, that these Witnesses shall
preach against the Antichrist. And whereas you say, that we foretell ofttimes
things that is not true: this is your calumny and lie, M. Gilbert, and so
ought to have no credit. And the prophesies of the Ministers of this land
against your Antichristian Kingdom, ye have found by experience, that they have
been too true. And their prophesies are truer then the prophesies of one of
your Popes Hildebrand, who openly in the pulpit on the second holy day in
Easter week, in the presence of diverse Bishops, and Cardinals, and of the
people and Senate of Rome, prophesied, That the King whose name was Henry,
should die before the feast of Peter next ensuing: or at the least that he
should be so dejected from his Kingdom, that he should not be able any more to
gather above the number of six Knights. And this he preached with this
confirmation, Never accept me for Pope any more, if this prophecy be not
fulfilled, but pluck me from the altar. But he was a false Prophet in the same,
for neither was fulfilled. And whereas ye say, if they prophecy at any time,
it is of evil, and not of good: so said Achab of the Prophet of the Lord, 1.
Kings 22.8. and therefore he hated him: so you speak with the same spirit
against us, that Achab spoke with against the Lords Prophet. And what good can
be spoken of your Babel, since the Lord has foretold the ruin of it, and in
part has been accomplished? And some of your own number, as Hildegardis,
Briget, Catherine de Sens, have foretold of the destruction of your Church,
and the reformation of the Church of Christ. As for the time, it was spoken of
before; and I suppose ye have thought it too long, and yet be in patience, M.
Gilbert, for it must continue, and your Babel must down. As for the clothing of
sackcloth, it was the apparel of such as was in dolor and in mourning; whereby
is signified the sorrow and dolor that should arise to the true Ministers of
Christ through the persecution of the Antichrist and his members, and their
idolatry and abominations. The which has been so clearly fulfilled in the
Preachers of the Gospel since John Hus his days, and before also, even to this
day, that he must be blinded of the Lord who sees it not. And whereas ye cast
up the clothing of the Ministry in this land, ye have forgotten your self, and
your Clergy, and your Head the Pope, with his triple Crown, with all the rabble
of his Prelates, Abbots, Bishops, Cardinals, etc. as full of riotous pride and
pomp, as ever were the Persian Kings. See Bernard. de confid. ad Eugen. lib. 4.
Platin. de vita Pontif. in Paulo 2.

His clothes be made of precious stones, his gorgeous Miter dight
With jewels rare, with glistering gold, and with A precious stone, called a
Carbuncle, of the which kind one that fell out of the Popes Miter by a
mischance at his coronation, was worth 6000. crowns, Platin. in vita Clementis
5.
Pyropus bright.
O very Troyan trulls, no Troyans.
The pomp and glory of whose Court, does surmount all the pomp and glory of all
the Princes in Europe, as some that have seen it reports. How then can ye
justly quarrel our attire? Can you say that we pass the bounds of that modesty
and comeliness which the Apostle requires in the overseers of the Church of
Christ, seeing you will have all the outward pomp and glory of your Popes and
Prelates* according as it was prophesied of you, Rev. 17. to be comprehended
within the definition of comeliness and modesty? But you are like the Lamians,
of whom it is reported, that they had but one eye, and when they went forth,
they took it with them to look upon others, and when they came in their own
houses, they laid it beside them: You look to your neighbors, but ye over-see
your self. So for all the differences which ye have yet assigned, it remains
sure, that by these two Witnesses here, are signified the Ministers of the
Gospel.

Master Gilbert Brown.
But note here, I pray you, how well these new Evangelists agree in the
exposition of this Revelation of S. John (for all their grounds and proofs is
upon prophesies and dark speakings.) Young Merchiston in his book upon the
Revelation, chap. 11. verse 3. expones these Witnesses to be the Old and New
Testament, as he proves in the 21. Proposition, and M. John will have them the
Ministers. Merchiston says, that to be clad in sackcloth, is to preach the
Word of God with the obscurity of men's traditions, and colored glosses: M. John
says here, that the sackcloth signifies persecution for the preaching of the
Word. The notes on their Geneva Bibles printed at London, expones the sackcloth
to signify poor and simple apparel. And Bale upon the same place writes, that
this sackcloth signifies sober conversation. God knows if this and the like be
wholesome doctrine to preach to the poor people, some one way, and some another,
according to the invention of their own brains, without any proofs.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
As for these diverse expositions which ye mark in us, that have so stirred up
your affections, that ye cry out, God knows whether this be wholesome doctrine
to teach the poor people, or not. I answer; That these diverse expositions of
ours, are all agreeable to the analogy of faith, as your self will not deny:
and therefore cannot be called unwholesome doctrine. Otherwise, not only the
Fathers, but also your own Doctors, and Bishops, and Popes, have delivered
unwholesome doctrine, by your reason; for they have exponed innumerable places
of Scripture diversely: which is so manifest, that I need not prove it, and your
self also has delivered unwholesome doctrine here: for ye expone blessing and
thanksgiving, for two contrary things, and yet Bellarmin says, that some
Catholics take them both for one. And what shall I say of your diverse
expositions, which were tolerable, so being they were according to the
proportion of faith; your contradictions one to another, and that not only in
exponing the Scripture, but in the main points of your Religion; some holding
one thing, and some another, as partly has, and partly shall be marked, are
manifold? And if diverse expositions of a place of Scripture be unwholesome
doctrine, as ye say, then surely this point of your Catholic doctrine, which
teaches, that the Scripture has a five-fold sense, and that it may be five
diverse ways exponed, must be unwholesome doctrine, and then ye lose more then
you can win by this. Beware, M. Gilbert, that by this dealing ye bring not your
self in suspicion that ye are forsaking your Catholic Faith: For this is a
point of it, as Bellarmin reports, lib. 3. de interpret. verb. cap. 3. As for
your calumnies: first, in calling us new Evangelists, I answered to that
before: next, in saying that all our proofs and grounds are upon prophesies and
dark sayings. First, you injure the holy Ghost in calling his prophesies dark:
for the cause of this is not in them, but in our blindness. Secondly, ye speak
too plain an untruth: for it is more then manifest, that not only prophesies,
but also the plain and simple doctrine of the whole Scripture, is the grounds
and proofs of our Religion, as is manifest by the points of doctrine which we
have handled here.

Master Gilbert Brown.
And it follows in M. John. And at the last, says he, they shall be put to
death, etc. Here is two things to be noted. First, that the Church shall not be
invisible in the time of Antichrist: for if the Pastors of the Church be
invisible, how shall they be taken, and put to death? If the Antichrist and his
members shall slay them, how can they do the same, except they know and may see
them? To be invisible, is not to be known or seen: but they will see and know
them, or else they cannot discern them from their own, whereby they may put
them to death, and save their own. The second thing to be noted, that our
Ministers in Scotland, except they be put to death by the Pope, they bear not
the testimony of Christ. For these are M. John's own words. And S. John says,
That the beast shall slay the two Witnesses, Rev. 11.7.8. Now by M. John, the
beast is the Pope, and the Witnesses is the Ministers: therefore the Pope must
slay the Ministers: and after that, their bodies must ly three days and an
half, not in Scotland, but in Jerusalem, for there was the Lord of these two
Witnesses slain, Rev 11.19.11.12. And after, they must revive and ascend up to
heaven in a cloud in the sight of their enemies, and so forth. Which things I
trust shall come to pass to none of them in our days, nor long after the Lord
of Merchistons doomsday, in his 14. Prop.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
As for the first thing which you infer here, concerning the invisibility of
the Church, because you have the same argument afterward, I refer the answer of
it to that place. As for the second thing which ye infer, that except the
Ministers of Scotland be put to death by the Pope, they bear not the testimony
of Christ. I answer: As it is true that it is prophesied of the Antichrist,
that he shall slay the two Witnesses of God, Rev. 11.7. and that he shall make
war with the Saints, and overcome them, Rev. 11.12.13.15.17. so is it likewise
prophesied, that his cruelty shall not always continue; but at the last, The
Lord shall take his Kingdom in his own hand, and the Gospel shall be preached to
them that dwell upon the earth, and Babel that great city shall fall, Rev.
13.6.8.9. and 18.21. So that the blood which your Church has spilt of the
Saints of God already in all the parts of Europe these three hundred years by
past, and that in such abundance, that suppose the Lord may number them, yet no
man is able to number them. And the patience and suffering of our brethren, is
a sufficient evidence that both your Popes are the Antichrist, and they are the
Ministers of Christ, suppose they slay no mo of them. And although the Lord
has shortened your power, yet ye want no good will to spill the blood of the
rest. That ransacking of Germany, that cruel persecution of Queen Mary, and
bloody Inquisition of Spain in the Low Countries, and that most savage and
cruel massacre of Paris, and that Spanish Navy, which the Lord discomfited with
his own mighty and outstretched arm in the 1588. year of God, does sufficiently
testify what heart ye bear to the Ministers of Scotland, if your power were
according to your malice: But fulfill ye the measure of your fathers, that the
blood of all the righteous may come upon you. As for the Prophecy of the
ignominious handling of the bodies of these Witnesses after their slaughter, it
is also fulfilled by your Popes, and their authority, upon the carcasses of the
Saints of God, which in all parts almost where ever their blood was shed, was
most ignominiously handled, as though they had been not the bodies of men, but
the dead carions of dogs and swine. Let both Histories, and some who yet live,
bear witness of this. As for the time and place, and their reviving and
ascending up to heaven, it is to be understood after the manner of prophesies,
mystically and figuratively, as I have proved before. The time of three days
and an half, signifying all the time of your tyrannous cruelty. The place of
their ignominy, is the streets of that great City, which is here called Sodom
and Egypt, and the place where our Lord was crucified, not literally, but
(...), spiritually, as the text says, Rev. 17.9 18. And also called Babylon,
in the 14. and 17. and 18. of the Revelation, which is literally, that seven
hilled City, which has dominion over the Kings of the earth, Rev. 11.8 and 17
5. which as Bellarmin lib. de Rom Pont. cap. 2. confesses, is Rome properly. So
as this great City is neither Sodom, nor Egypt, nor Babylon (suppose it be
called so) literally, but only mystically and spiritually as the Scripture
says, and your self will not deny, for the likeness between them: Sodom, for
her filthiness and uncleanness: Egypt and Babylon, for her tyranny and cruelty
over the Saints of God, wherein she resembles them. So is she not literally the
place where Christ was crucified, but only mystically and spiritually, for the
likeness between them: that as by the authority of the Emperor of Rome, his
Deputy Pilat, our Lord was crucified, for the false challenge of treason
against the Emperor, which was falsely and wickedly laid to his charge: and
therefore is said here by the holy Ghost, to be crucified at Rome; that is, by
the authority of the Rulers at Rome: So by the authority of the Popes, who now
reign, and have reigned these many years at Rome, Christ is crucified again in
his members, because they will not receive his mark, and worship him. And as
Jerusalem boasted her self to be a holy City, and the spouse of Christ, and yet
was an harlot, a murderer, and a persecuter of the Saints: so Rome does boast
her self to be an holy City, and the spouse of Christ, and the Head of all; and
yet is now, and is long since, become an harlot, and a murderer, and a
persecuter of the Saints. And if ye will ask, When did the bodies of the Saints
ly in the streets of Rome? I answer: As by the gates in the city, in the fourth
command, Exodus 20. is not meant the gates of the City properly, but the
authority and jurisdiction of the City: so by the streets of Rome, is not only
meant the gates within the walls of Rome, but all the places and parts whither
his power and dominion has spread its self. So that all the places where the
Popes of Rome have exercised their tyranny over the Saints are called here the
streets of that great City. All these therefore who have been cruelly murdered
by the Popes authority, in England, Scotland, France, the Low Countries, etc.
and whose bodies have been cast out, and whose bodies have been ignominiously
handled they have lain in the streets of that great City. And as all the rest
of this Prophecy is to be understood spiritually: so is this, reviving and
ascending of these Witnesses to heaven in the sight of their enemies, to be
understood, not literally, but spiritually. So this is not the meaning of the
holy Ghost, that these Witnesses whom the Antichrist shall slay, shall be raised
up again in their own persons (which yet shall be at the last day in the general
resurrection:) but that the Lord shall raise up other Witnesses, endued with
that same Spirit which they were endued with, preaching the same truth, and
maintaining the same cause against Antichrist, as that Prophecy in the 3. of
Malachie, of the sending of Elias before the coming of Christ, was fulfilled as
our Savior testifies, Matthew. 11.10.14. not in the raising up of Elias in his
own person again; but in the sending of John Baptist, in the virtue and spirit
of Elias. So this Prophecy concerning the reviving of these two Witnesses,
whereby was figured the faithful Ministers of Christ who was murdered in the
time of Popery, as John Wicleff, John Hus, Jerome of Prague, M. George Wishart,
and many others, is fulfilled; not by raising up of their persons again, but of
others his faithful servants, who in their virtue and spirit, have defended and
maintained that same doctrine and cause against the Antichrist, as Martin
Luther, Calvin, Bucer, Peter Martyr, M. Knox, and sundry others, whom the Lord
has, and daily raises up in all Countries, for the overthrow of your Babel. As
for your trust what will come to pass, we pass not; for so much has been
fulfilled of these prophesies, which testifies your Head to be the Antichrist,
and the Ministers of the Reformed Church to be the faithful servants of Christ.
And the rest concerning your daily consumption and final abolition, 2 Thessalonians.
2.8. Rev. 18.2.21. and 19.20. we know assuredly shall come to pass; because the
Lord has so thought it, and said it. And as for any further proof of the
clemency and meekness of your Popes, if so the Lord will, we desire it not. For
as it is said of the wicked man, Your compassions are cruel, and your by past
cruelty testifies of what spirit ye are. And suppose you say you trust that
this (among the rest) shall not come to pass, yet I fear you long to see that
day upon the Ministers of Scotland, which your brethren rejoiced to see
fulfilled in that cruel persecution of Queen Mary in England, and in that
bloody massacre of Paris, of the Saints of God there: For we cannot think but
that ye are of the same spirit and mind which your brethren were of, otherwise
ye are not a right Catholic. As for the Lord of Merchistons conjecture
concerning the day of Judgment, he has his own probable reasons: and if you
be as good as your word, as your favorers have reported of you, we will see the
refutation of his book by you. And suppose I know the time to be uncertain to
man, or Angel, as our Savior says, Matthew. 24.36. yet his conjecture thereof is
in greater modesty and sobriety, then your determination thereof. Whereby if
the doctrine of your Church be true concerning the Antichrist, whom ye imagine
is yet to come, and the time of his reign, which ye say is to be but three
years and an half: then not only the year, but the very day thereof may be
known of them that live in those days. For the Scripture says, He shall be
abolished by the brightness of his coming, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. Yea, that which is
greater arrogance and presumption, the learnedest of your Church, Bellarmin
lib. 3. de Romans Pont. cap. 17. page 418. has taken upon him to determine the
very day of the coming of Christ to Judgment; to wit, 45. days after the
perishing of the Antichrist. It is manifest (says he) that after the death of
the Antichrist, there shall be but 45. days to the end of the world.

Master John Welsch.
Now if all this be true, both concerning the Antichrist, the largeness of his
dominion, the estat of the Church of God and his true Pastors all that time,
which I offer me to prove by the Scripture. And also that the Pope of Rome is
that only Antichrist that was to come, and is now disclosed: then, I say, no
man should think that the Church of God was ever open and visible in that
flowrishing estat as it is now.

Master Gilbert Brown.
But what if all these sayings of his be false, what shall follow then but that
M. John, and the rest of the Ministers are deceived, and deceive others, with
such vain and untrue expositions upon the Word of God? For take away M. John's
own invention, and the Word shall never have such a meaning. And although M.
John offer never so often to prove the same, I say, he is never able to do it,
nor all the Ministers in Scotland.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
If all these sayings of mine concerning the largeness of the dominion of
Antichrist, the estat of the Church of God, and his true Pastors all that time,
be false: then not only have I been deceived, but also Bellarmin, the Rhemists,
and Sanderus, the chief defenders of your Church, have been deceived, and
deceive others: For they have spoken and written as much, and further in these
points then ever I did, as I have proved before, by their own testimonies. And
yet I suppose your Head and Clergy will judge them to be as far from error, as
you are. So either you or they, must be deceived in this. And as for the
fulfilling of these prophesies in your Popes of Rome, I hope it has been
proved sufficiently, which ye nor all the Clergy of Rome, is never able to
improve. As for the rest of your answer, wherein ye prove that the Pope is not
the Antichrist, I have answered to it in the other part of my Treatise
concerning the Antichrist, therefore I omit it now.

Master Gilbert Brown.
What he means that the Pope is now disclosed, I know not: for I understand
that he has not been like their Church, that sometimes is visible, and
sometimes not: for he has always been known by the visible Church, to be the
visible head thereof in place of Christ.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
My meaning is this, That suppose in the darkness of Papistry he was taken to
have been the Vicare of Christ, yet now the Lord has smitten him, and consumed
him by the sword of his mouth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. that is, the Word of God: and
has discovered him to the full, to all these whose eyes the Lord has opened,
that he is that Antichrist which the Scripture has foretold was to come. And
where you say that he has been always known by the visible Church to be the
visible Head thereof in place of Christ: I see you regard not what you say, for
the maintenance of that Head and Kingdom of yours. For certainly either has
the Lord wonderfully blinded you, or else ye speak against the light of your
own conscience. For are you ever able to produce one syllable in the whole
Scripture to prove this? Yea, has not his Monarchy and Supremacy been
condemned: First, by the Son of God, Matthew. 18.1. and 20.25.26. Mark 10.42.
Luke 22.25. Next, by the Apostles themselves, 2. Cor. 1.24. 1. Pet. 5 3.
Thirdly, by the Fathers of the primitive Church, in their Synods and Councils,
Provincial and General, as by the Bishops of Africa, Cyprian. Epist. 55. ad
Cornel. about the year 255. By the General Councils of Nice, 1. Canon 5.6.17.
wherein was 318 Bishops, anno 327. Of Constantinople, Canon. 2.3 5. wherein was
150. Bishops, anno 381. Of Ephesine, Canon 8. where was 200. Bishops, anno 436.
Of Chalcedonense, Actio 16. anno 454. where there was 630. Bishops. Of
Constantinople 6. Canon. 36. anno 681. where there was 289. Bishops. Of Nicene
2. Canon. 1. anno 781. where was present 350. Bishops. Of Constantinople 8.
Canon. 27. anno where was present 383. Bishops, anno 870. Of the Council of
Constance, Sess. 4.5. where was a thousand Fathers almost, anno 1418. And of
Basel, Sess. 2.18. anno 1431. all General Councils, condemning your Popes
Supremacy, as your Church now affirms of him, some more, some less. And also it
is condemned by Provincial Councils, as of Antioch, Canon. 6.12.13.14.15.19.20.
and of Carthage 2. Canon. 12. anno 404. and 3. confirmed in the General Council
of Trullan, Canon. 26. and 6. and by the Council of Milevis, Canon. 22.
condemned also by the Universities of Paris, Appellat. Univers. Paris. olione
10. ad futur. Council. infastic. rerum expe. ca. fugi. and Lovane, Aeneas
Sylvius de gestis Basil. Council. lib. 1. and Colen, and Vienna, Histor. de
Europa, cap. 22. and Cracovia, Comer. de rebus Polonorum, lib. 21. So then by
the authority of Councils, General and Provincial, and of Universities, the
Monarchy and Superiority of the Pope over all General Councils is disallowed.
And suppose the Churches of France and Germany did honor them, and gave them
some preeminence, both of honor and power, being blinded at that time with the
smoke that came out of the bottomless pit: yet it may appear by their
supplication, ad Ludovicum 11. pro liberate Ecclesiae Gallicanae adversus Romans
aulam defensio Parisiensis curiae. Gravamina nationis Germaniae exhibita Maxim.
1. that they did not allow that full Monarchy of his, but misliked it, and
hated the same: yea, France made laws against it, in Conventu Bituricensi. Now
these are such whom your selves do hold for Catholics, and yet they
acknowledged not the Monarchy of your Pope. The Churches of Graecia, and of
Asia in the East, Chalcon. conc. de reb. Turc. lib. 1. and 6. and of Muscovia,
Jovius in Muscovia, in the North, and of Ethiopia in the South, Alvarez in
descriptione Aethiopiae, cap. 77. and 83. and of Boheme, Aeneas Sylvius hist.
Bohem. cap. 32. Provence, Sleydan. comment. lib. 16. Piemont, M. Fox in the
acts and monuments, lib. 7. And the Reformed Churches that are this day in
France, Flanders, England, Scotland, and so forth throughout Europe, all have
condemned your Popes Supremacy. So that if his Supremacy were to be put to
trial by the judgment and will of men, so many thousands of Pastors, Doctors,
Synods, Councils, Universities and Churches, through all ages, in all
Countries, of all sorts and estats, may suffice to put the Pope from his
Supremacy: So that I think you may blush, M. Gilbert, that has so boldly
written; that he has been always acknowledged by the visible Church to be the
visible Head of the Church, seeing his Monarchy was never fully acknowledged
until the Lateran Council, under Leo the 10. 1516. years after Christ. But
seeing the Word of God is the only just trial of it, and seeing it is not
written in the book of life: therefore I conclud, that his Supremacy is not a
citizen of that new Jerusalem, but a child of Babel; and therefore they are
blessed that shall dash it against the stones.

M. Gilbert Brown.
That the Church at any time may be invisible, it is repugnant to the Word of
God in many places, and to M. John also. For he gives examples afterward of
sundry, as he says, that was of his Religion, and opponed themselves to the
Pope and his Clergy; and that, says he, when he was come to the hight. If the
true Church opponed its self to the Antichristian Church, then it was visible
and known: and if it was known when the Popes Kingdom was at the highest, much
more when it was low: and so it was always known by M. John's self.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
Whether oppugn ye your own imagination, M. Gilbert, here, or that which I
write? If the first, then you are foolish who fight against your self, as ye do
indeed. If the second, then I say, that which I said was this: That no man
should think that the Church of God was ever open and visible in that
flowrishing estat, as it is now. For this is our doctrine concerning the
invisibility of the Church, the which because you know not, therefore you
stumble at it, and oppugns only your own invention, and not our doctrine: and
therefore your reasons and Scriptures which ye bring here, serve to no purpose,
for they make nothing against us. We say, that the Catholic Church which
comprehends all the elect, is always invisible, both because the principal part
thereof is in heaven: and also because the senses of men cannot discern who are
true members of the Catholic Church here, their effectual calling, their
faith, love, hope, and inward graces: their union with Christ their Head, their
spiritual armor, weapons and warfare, and their Head Christ Jesus, and their
whole glory is inward and invisible, and they shall never be seen all gathered
together until that great day, Ephesians. 5.25.26.27.32. Psalm. 45.13. John 10.27.
2. Tim. 2.19. Luke 11.28. Matthew. 7. Ephesians. 6.12. 2. Cor. 12.3.4. So that
suppose they may be seen outwardly, as they are men, and sometimes in respect
of their outward ministry: yet in so far as they are a part of the Catholic
Church; that is, in so far as they are chosen, and sanctified, etc. as has
been said, they cannot be discerned by the senses of men, and so are invisible.
Next, we say that the particular visible Churches are not always in one outward
estat: sometimes outwardly glorious, sometimes more obscure: sometimes openly
known, and seen by all: sometimes known and seen but by a few: sometimes
frequent, and consisting in many, sometimes rare, and consisting in few:
sometimes adorned with outward ornaments of peace, largeness, outward glory and
multitude: sometimes again wanting this outward glory under persecution: but
yet having that inward glory of these inward graces. So that when we say these
particular Churches are sometimes invisible, we do not mean as though they were
known to none (for that is not our doctrine, M. Gilbert, as ye imagine:) but
that they are not so openly known that they are patent to all to be the true
Church, but known unto them with whom they have to do, and who profess the
truth with them. Yea, sometimes some of them are known unto the very
persecuters and enemies, by their constancy and perseverance in their
sufferings, suppose they allow not their profession. And in this state was the
Church of Israel in the time of Elias, when he complained that he knew none
left but himself of the true worshippers of God, 1. Kings 19.10. And the Church
of Juda in the days of Achaz and Manasseh Kings of Judah, 2. Chron. 28.24. 2.
Kings 16.10. And such like in the time of Christ, both in the time of his
living among them, as also in the time of his death and resurrection, the
Church was brought to a small handful: The Princes, Priests, and Scribes, who
only was in dignity and authority, being persecuters of Christ, condemned him,
and crucified him. And such like in the time of the persecution of Dioclesian
the Emperor, and in the time of the Arrian heresy, which over-spred, as it
were, the whole world. The which also our Savior foretold should come to pass:
When the Son of man (says he) shall come, shall he find faith in the world?
Matthew. 18.8. and 24 11.12. And by the Apostle also, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1. Tim. 4. And
John in the Revelation, in the time of the Antichrist, Rev. 9 1.2.3.4. and
12.6. and 13 14.15.16.17 and 14 8. and 17.2. and 18.3. Confessed also by the
learned of your own Church, as Bellarmin and the Rhemists, as they have been
quoted before: and by your self also, who confessed that the Church of Christ
should be redacted to a small number, as it were in a wilderness, in the time of
the Antichrist. This now is our doctrine concerning the invisibility of the
Church, which is neither repugnant to the Word of God, nor yet to the examples
which I brought in afterward against your Religion. For both these (M. Gilbert)
are true, and neither of them repugning one another: that the particular
Churches in the time of the Antichrist, are not so openly known, and so
outwardly glorious and flowrishing, as they were before; but redacted to a small
number, more obscure and more latent: partly through that universal defection,
and partly through that extreme persecution of your Church and Head; and that
there was some that opponed themselves to the Pope and his Clergy, and that
even when he was come to the hight. If you will make these repugnant which are
not adversa, but only diversa secundum magis and minus; then I say ye are
repugnant to all rules of reasoning, and to the light of nature it self.

Master Gilbert Brown.
Of this I may justly make an argument against M. John, that the Pope is not
the Antichrist. The woman that fled to the wilderness, is the true Church: and
to fly to the wilderness, is to be invisible, as M. John says. Now young
Merchiston has, that this invisibility endured from the year of God 316. till
our days, the space of 1260. years, which was by him all the time of the
Antichrist. But by M. John Welsch, there was many in that time that opponed
themselves to the Pope, and said against him, and his Religion and Clergy, and
therefore was known. Of the which the Popes did slay many, as he says:
Therefore it must follow, that either the Pope is not the Antichrist, because
he did persecute but visible things, or else the Church was not invisible all
the time foresaid.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
Let us see the force of this argument that ye make for your Pope, that he is
not the Antichrist. The woman, ye say, that fled to the wilderness, is the true
Church. That I grant: and to fly into the wilderness, is to be invisible by
me. I answer: By me it is to be latent, and to lurk, to eschew the rage of her
persecuters, and not to be openly conversant, as that all the world may know
her: and yet not to be so latent, but that some of them are known, both among
themselves, as also to their enemies. And this is our meaning (as I have said
before) when we affirm that the particular Churches sometimes become invisible.
But you take it as though our meaning were, that the Church is so invisible,
that it is known to none; which is your invention, M. Gilbert, and not our
doctrine: and therefore you fight without an adversary in this point. But to
go forward to the rest of your argument: you say, that by me there was sundry
that oppugned the Pope, and his Clergy, and was put to death by them. This is
true: and therefore the blood of the Saints is found in your Church. Now what
will you gather of all this? Therefore, say you, the Pope is not the
Antichrist, because he persecutes but visible things, or else the Church is not
invisible. I deny that either the one or the other will follow. And because you
made an argument against your Pope (I should have said with him) that he is not
the Antichrist, which is grounded upon your own invention, mistaking our
doctrine, and therefore has no feet. I will make another for him, that he is
the Antichrist, the which you, nor all your Clergy will not be able to
disprove. He is that undoubted Antichrist, which has redacted the Church of
Christ, as it were in a wilderness, to a small handful: partly through the pest
of his damnable doctrine, partly through his extreme persecution, so that they
were compelled to lurk and hide themselves from the cruelty of his power. This
you cannot deny, because the Scripture affirms this of the Antichrist. But I
assume, that the Popes of Rome have done this these many hundred years, as I
have proved before, and in the other part of my answer: therefore of necessity
it must follow that the Popes of Rome are the Antichrist that the Scripture
fore told should come. Answer this if you can.

And as for the time of this invisibilitie, it has relation to the beginning,
and grouth, and hight of your Antichristian Kingdom: For as it grew, the Church
was more and more obscured: and when it was at the hight, the Church was in her
eclipse: and as it has decayed now since, she has accordingly spread her self
abroad. If the Apostle be true, that Mystery of Iniquity began to work in his
days, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. 1. John 4 3. For first, the manifold heresies which were
sown in the primitive Church, whereof the Popes of Rome have renewed a great
many (as shall be proved hereafter) was the first step to that Antichristian
Kingdom. Next, the loving of preeminence in the Ministry over their brethren,
as the Scripture testifies of Dictrephes, who loved preeminence, 3. of John 9.
and specially the aspiring of the Bishops of Rome, to a Domination and Lordship
over their brethren, forbidden by Christ; which was manifestly kythed in Pope
Victor, who did take upon him to excommunicat the Bishops of Asia, for a light
dissension of the celebration of Easter, anno 198. And in others, as Cornelius,
Zosimus, Bonifacius, and Celestin, Popes, who did receive to their Communion
those who were excommunicat in Africa, was the second step. Thirdly, if it be
true that these impious and superstitious Decreets which your Church ascribes
to the Popes of Rome before Constantine, be theirs: as is not likely that such
superstitions did creep into the Church of Christ, it being under persecution:
then, I say, the Popes of Rome even before Sylvester, by their superstitious
Decreets, made a further entry to that Antichristian Kingdom. And because the
Roman Empire was the let that hindered Antichrist to step up to his throne, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. (...), and the City of Rome behoved to be his seat, Rev. 18.
therefore Constantin the Great leaving the City of Rome to Sylvester the Bishop
of R me, made yet the way more easy: till at the last, they first got the
primacy of honor; next, of authority and jurisdiction over their brethren: and
then last of all, did subdue the necks of Kings and Emperors unto them. The
which they did not attain unto at the first, but piece and piece, and that not
without long and great resistance, both of the Church (as I have proved before)
condemning his Monarchy in all ages; and of the Emperors, as we shall see
hereafter. And as they ever grew in their superiority, so did the purity of the
Church of Christ decay: and as a pest infects not a Kingdom all at once, but
piece and piece: so did your Antichristian heresy: it infected not all at
once, but piece and piece, till at the last it went over all. While as then
Merchiston makes the beginning of his reign to be in the 316 year of God, and
the Church from thence to become invisible: His meaning is, that then that let,
which the Apostle speaks of, was begun to be removed, that his seat and throne
might be in Rome; and from thence, as they grew in hight, so was the Church ay
more and more continually obscured, till at the last the Lord did scatter that
darkness by the light of his Gospel, which came to pass in our days.

Master Gilbert Brown.
The Church that is set down to us in the Word of God, can no way be invisible:
for when the holy Writ speaks of the Church of Christ, it speaks of a visible
number of men and women, and no wise of Angels or spirits, as may be seen in
these examples, Numb. 20.4.3. Kings 8.14 Matthew. 16.18. and 18.17. Acts 15.3.4.
and 18.22. and 22.28. 1. Tim. 3.15.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
I come now to your arguments. First, you say, that the Church that is set down
to us in the Word of God can no ways be invisible; because, say ye, when it
speaks of the Church, it speaks of a visible number of men and women, and no
ways of Angels or spirits. I answer, This is most false: For the Scripture sets
down to us that Church which is the body of Christ, Ephesians. 1.22.23. and whereof
he is the head and Savior, Ephesians. 5.23. and which is built upon the rock, Col.
1.18. which is called, the congregation of the first born, whose names are
written in heaven, Heb. 12.23. and that Jerusalem which is the mother of us
all, Gal. 4.26. Matthew. 16.28. And this is the Catholic Church which
comprehends all the elect, as well triumphant as militant, which is invisible,
for the respects before said, as I have proved. And suppose the elect that are
here militant, may be seen, as they are men, and ofttimes also in respect of
their outward profession: yet it follows not but that they are invisible, in so
far as they are a part of the Catholic Church. And also that sometimes through
the extremity of persecution, they may be latent and lurk, so that they are not
openly visible and known to all, as I have said before. As for these places of
Scripture, to wit, Number. 20 4. 3. Kings 8.14. Acts 15.3.4. and 20.28. and 18.22.
and 1. Tim 3 15 they speak all of particular Churches, which we grant unto you
are visible, suppose not ay alike, as has been proved. As for the 16. of
Matthew, it speaks of the Church of the chosen; for they only are built upon
this rock, and against whom the gates of hell prevail not: and they are
invisible, in respect before said, as has been proved As for the 18 of
Matthew, it is quoted afterward: therefore I refer the answer of it unto that
place.

Master Gilbert Brown.
The Scripture also in many places compares the Church to visible things that
cannot be unseen: as, He has placed his tabernacle in the Sun: A city cannot
be hid set on a mountain. It is also compared to a light set on a candlestick
to lighten the whole house, and not to be put under a bed, or a bushel; with
many the like, which I have omitted for brevities cause, saving some here at
the end. Moreover, our Savior commands us to complain to the Church if our
brother offend us: and also we ought to join our selves to the true Church, or
else we cannot have remission of our sins. But how can a man complain to it, if
it cannot be seen? Or join himself to it, if it be invisible? The Church of
Christ may never want the true preaching of the Word, and right administration
of the Sacraments: but these things are always visible, because by the
Ministers they are the signs and marks of the Church: therefore the true Church
may be always known by them. To be short, not only the Word of God affirms the
Church to be always visible, as I have noted before; but also the ancient
Fathers in all their works, as partly I have marked also. Psalm. 18.6. read S.
Aug. on this, Mat. 5.15. Isai. 69.9. Dan 2.35. Mich. 4.1.2. Read Hieron. on
these places, Aug 1. tract. in Epist. Joan. item de bapt. lib. 4. cap. 1.
Matthew. 18.17. Cyprian de simpli. praelat. Jer. 1. Epist ad Damas. Aug. lib. 19.
contra Faust. cap. 11. Origin. homil. 30. in Matthew. Cyp. lib de unitat. Eccles.
Chrysostom. hom. 4. in cap. 6. Isai. August. lib. 3. contra Epist. Parmeni. cap.
3. item tract. 1. in Epist. Joan. and tract. 2. item Epist. 166. ad Donatistas.

M. John Welsch his Reply.
As for the 18. Psalm, it speaks not of the visibility of the Church there, but
of the Lords wonderful and glorious works; and specially, in disponing such a
glorious place or tabernacle, or throne, to the Sun to shine in, the which
demonstrates the glory of the Lord. As for Augustine exposition, it results of
the corrupted old Translation, which was not taken from the Hebrew fountain,
but from the version of the Septuagints: therefore Pagninus, Vatabius, and
Arias Montanus, a Papist, and Tremellius, expone it not so, but after the
Hebrew. Secondly, he means not here of the Catholic Church, but of particular
Churches, which were exceeding far enlarged in his days: but yet this hinders
not but that they should be obscured in the time of the Antichrist as it was
foretold, and your Church acknowledges. As for the 5. of Matthew, 15.16.
there, not the Catholic Church, but the Pastors of particular Churches, are
compared to this light which is set up in the candlestick, and to the city set
up upon the hill top, which cannot be hid: that is, the eyes of all is on them;
and therefore they should be so much the more wake-rife and careful, because
their doings cannot be hid. As for Isai. 2.3. and 60.20. and 61.9. and Dan.
2.35. and Mich. 4.12. they prophecy of the greatness and clearness of the
Church of Christ in the time of the Messiah, and of the propagation of the
Gospel throughout the world, and of the stability and perpetuity of Christ's
Kingdom. But yet it follows not but both the Catholic Church is invisible, as
I said before, and that the visible Churches may be obscured and darkened, as
it was foretold, in the time of the Antichrist. As for the 18. of Matthew, 17.
Go tell the Church, etc. The Church is here taken for the Pastors and Governors
of particular Churches, which we grant are visible; but yet it follows not but
that both they and the professors may be obscured and darkened, either through
heresy, or through extreme persecution, or through both together, as it was
foretold in the time of the Antichrist, and has been fulfilled by your
Church. As for the true Church, unto whom we should join our selves. I answer:
We can have no salvation unless we join our selves first to the Catholic
Church, that is, unto Jesus and his members by a spiritual communion, without
the which there is no salvation. Next, unto some particular visible Church, by
the outward communion of the Word and Sacraments etc, if we know it, and
possibly can join our selves unto it: For if either we know it, or may not, as
these seven thousand that bowed not their knee to Baal: then I say, salvation
is not perilled. As for your last reason, The true Church may never want the
true preaching of the Word, and right administration of the Sacraments. I
answer: First, there is not the like necessity of the Sacraments, as there is
of the Word. Next, suppose they have it and thereby are known among themselves,
and some of them also to their adversaries; yet it follows not that they are so
openly visible, that they are patent and known to all. As for example: There is
no question but these seven thousand that did not bow their knee to Baal, 1.
Kings 19.18. and these hundred Prophets who was hid in the caves, 1. Kings
18.13. and the Apostles when all were scattered through that persecution, as
Luke testifies, Acts 8.1. had the exercise of the Word among them. And it is
not likely that the Apostles wanted some to teach, suppose they were not known
to all, no not to their persecuters, otherwise they would have been persecuted.
And such like, we doubt not, but in the time of Queen Mary's persecution in
England, and in other parts, under that Antichristian tyranny, but the Lord had
his own, both Pastor and people, among whom the truth was preached, suppose
neither we nor their adversaries knew them all: For it is oft-times for the
safety of the Church to lurk, and to be hid, that she may escape the fury and
rage of her enemies. As for Augustine, Cyprian, Origin, Chrysostom and Jerome,
which ye quote here, they speak either of the perpetuity and eternity of the
Catholic Church, or else of the largeness and clearness of the particular
Churches which were in those days, which is neither against the invisibility of
the Catholic Church, nor yet against the obscure estat and small handful of the
Church of Christ, whereunto she should be brought in the days of the
Antichrist, as was foretold by the Scripture, and fulfilled in your Papistical
Kingdom. For we grant that in their days the Churches of Christ was frequent
and glorious, but yet they did not ay remain in that estat. For the Churches of
the East are almost overthrown by the Mahomet, and the Churches of the West by
the Antichrist. So that partly by the one, and partly by the other, the Church
of Christ has been redacted to a small handful, as has been said.

SECTION XXIV. Where our Religion was before Luther? Or a Catalogue of them who
professed our Religion in the midst of Popery.
Master John Welsch.
Last of all, I will set you down the names of these worthy men, that in the
midst of Popery spoke against their errors, and preached the same Religion
which we preach. I will but only name a few of them that was in the midst of
Popery, when it was come to the hight, anno 1158. Gerardus and Dulcimus
Navarrensis, M John has not the right diet of these his holy Fathers. Answer.
If it was so, as you write it, it was error in scribendo: and that which I writ
afterward, might have taught you this when I said this was 400. years past.
did preach earnestly against the Church of Rome, and called the Pope the
Antichrist: and taught also that the Clergy of Rome was become the whore of
Babylon, fore-spoken in the Revelation: this was 400. years past. In the year
of our Lord 1160. one This Waldus and his sect, had wives, and all things
common, and so must M. John, if he follow him. Answer. This is falsely alleged
of him, and his followers: but either your Canon Law errs, Causa 12. qu. 1.
Dilectissimis: or else Pope Clement was of this mind: and so if you be of his
Religion, you must be so: for albeit ye have no wives, yet other men's wives
have been made common to your Popes, and your Clergy, in horrible adulteries.
Waldus, a citizen of Lions in France, with a great number, taught that same
doctrine which we teach now, condemned the Mass to be wicked, the Pope to be
the Antichrist, and Rome to be Babylon. They were persecuted by the Pope, and
remained long in Bohemia. In the year 1112. the Pope caused an hundred persons
in the Country of Alsatia, whereof many were noblemen, to be burnt in one
day, for the maintaining of that same doctrine that we now maintain against the
Church of Rome. About the year of our Lord 1230. almost all the Churches of the
Grecians, which with the rest of the Churches of Asia and Africa, who do not
acknowledge the supremacy of your Pope, are mo then the Churches of Europe, who
submit themselves to him, did all renounce the Pope, and the Romish Church,
because of their execrable simony and idolatry, in the year 1240. In the
Country of Swevia, there were many Preachers that taught freely against the
Pope, and affirmed, he, and his Clergy were heretics and simoniacks, in the
year 1251. or thereabout. Arnoldus de Villanova a learned Spaniard, taught
freely against the Church of Rome; and among the rest, that the Pope led the
people to hell: for the which cause, the Pope condemned him as an heretic,
about the same time. Gulielmus de Sancto Amore, Master and chief Ruler of that
University, taught, that all the testimonies of the Scripture, spoken of the
Antichrist, should be applied to the Pope and his Clergy, and so taught them to
be the Antichrist, and the whore of Babel, anno 1290. Laurence an Englishman,
and Master of the University in Paris, proved mightily that the Pope was the
Antichrist, and his Clergy the Synagogue of Babylon. About the same time
Robertus Gallus, a man of noble parentage, taught, the Pope was an Idol, and
said the judgment of God would fall upon him, and his Clergy. Because I have
no time to write the doctrine of the rest that spoke against the Pope, I will
but note their persons, Robert Grosshed, John Gryllis, a p^eaching Friar, anno
1253. Gregory Ariminensis, Franciscus de Rupe Scissa, Taulerus in Germany,
Gerardus Rhidit, Michael de Cesena, Petrus de Carbona, and Joannes de Poliaco,
Joannes Rithetalanda, anno 1360. Armachanus, the Archbish p in Ireland 1360.
Nicolas Orem, Matthias Parisiensis, Nilus A^chbishop of Thessalonica, John
Wicleff, and the Lord Cobham, and sundry others.

Master Gilbert Brown.
M. John has set down here a number of It is false.
obscure and infamous persons, for the most part justly And this also.
condemned for heresies, without their works or books whereby they affirm this
that he alleges: and all This is also false; for Gerard and Dulcimus
Navarrensis, which I first cited, was almost 400. years before M. Luther, and
Calvin, and the Waldenses, was more then 300. years before them.
two hundred years before Calvin began their Religion, or thereabout. Of the
which I contend not, whether they spoke against the Pope or not. For all
heretics from the beginning have barked against the Pope: But our contention
is, whether such heads of Religion, as they denied, were heresies or not, which
as yet M. John has not But these heads is proven, that the Pope is the
Antichrist, and Rome Babel: they are not heretics, therefore our Religion was
before Martin Luther.
proved, nor is not able to defend these whom he calls his worthy men: for
appearantly by this all heretics are worthy men by him, albeit they be not of
his Religion in all things.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
You calumniat our Religion of novelty, and say, Martin Luther begin it anno
1517. Unto the which I answered, That our Religion has Christ Jesus in the Old
and New Testament to be the Author thereof, and has the primitive Church many
hundred years thereafter, to be the teachers and professors thereof, the which
I have proved already by some examples, and that even till the smoke of that
Antichristian darkness of yours did overspread all, as it was foretold by the
holy Ghost. At the which time also the Lord did reserve his own elect to
himself, even these hundred and forty and four thousand, which did not bow
their knees to your Baal, as it was fore-prophesied: whereof also a great many
is recorded in Histories, and of whom I set down some examples here. Upon the
which I reason: That Religion which is warranted by the Scripture, and
professed in the primitive Church, etc. and has sundry that taught and
professed it, and that even in the midst of Popery, when it was at the hight
thereof, is not a new Religion, nor invented by Martin Luther; But ours is such
as has been proved: Therefore unrighteous and blasphemous must ye be, who
slanders the Lords truth and Religion of novelty, and fathers it upon flesh and
blood, whereof he is the Author. Your answer to the first two, we have
examined: Now let us see your answer to this. First, you say they are obscure
men. I answer: If you call them obscure, because they wanted the outward glory,
wealth, and renown of this world: Then, suppose it were so, yet have they Jesus
Christ the Prince of life, who was called a carpenters son, Matthew. 13.54 55 56.
and his Prophets, of whom some were herd-men, Amos 1.2. and his Apostles who
were fishermen, Mat. 4.18.21. and his Church which consists not of many wise,
mighty or noble; but of the foolish, weak and vile of the world: for them God
has chosen to confound the wise and noble, 1. Cor. 1.26.27.28. to be
companions with them: and so they are the liker both the Head and the members.
It is true indeed, your Popes and Clergy are not obscure; for they have the
wealth and glory of the world. But as Bernard said to the Pope, In this they
succeed not to Christ or Peter, but to Constantine. But they receive their good
things in this life with the rich glutt^n, and therefore they must receive
their pain with him in the life to come. But why do you call these obscure whom
I named here? Are not some of them Friars, some of them Provincials of
Gray-Friers, some of them Masters and Rulers of Universities, some of them
excellently learned, which your own Church cannot deny; some of them Bishops
and Archbishops, some of them Noblemen; and some of them* as namely the Greek
and Eastern Churches, in number, learning, purity of doctrine and godliness,
far exceeding your Papistical Church? Who is worthy or famous, if these be
obscure? Are all men obscure and infamous to you, but your Popes, and those who
submit their necks to him? And if you think these too obscure men to be called
worthy men, then behold yet, M. Gilbert, more noble personages who have
resisted your Popes Monarchy. As King Philip le Bell of France, the Prelates of
France joining with him in his Dominions, about the year of God 1300. And
Edward the third, King of England, despised the Popes curse, and appealed from
him to God, about the year of God 1346. And also sundry Emperors, as
Constantine the fifth, Leo his son, and Constantine the sixth in the East, and
Henry the 4. and Henry the 5. and Frederick the 2. in the West. Will you call
these Kings and Princes of the whole world, obscure men? So all sorts of men,
M. Gilbert, both rich and poor, Princes and subjects, and these also within
your own bowels, being overcome with the strength of the truth of God, have
spoken against your Religion. Why you call them infamous, and heretics justly
condemned, I know not, except it be because they taught and professed the truth
of God, and condemned your Antichristian idolatry and abominations. But all are
not infamous and heretics, whom ye call so: and surely if murderers,
heretics, adulterers, Sodomites open bargainers with the Devil, and the vile
monsters of the earth, is to be called obscure, infamous and heretics, then
your Popes are to be called so; who of all men that ever the earth has born,
have been the vilest monsters and heretics, as I have proved in my other
Treatise concerning the Mass and the Antichrist.

You say, next, that you contend not whether they have spoken against the Pope
or not; for all heretics have ever barked against him, and that sore against
your heart, M. Gilbert; because you cannot deny but ye have taught this
doctrine with us: and if it be so, M. Gilbert, that these men and Churches, and
many thousands more of all sorts, have taught this doctrine with us many
hundred years before Martin Luther: for the first two which I named was almost
400. years before him: then why were you so shameless, both to write it, and
also speak it, to blind your poor Contrymen, to their and your damnation,
that our Religion was begun by Martin Luther, and never professed before him?
So leave off, M. Gilbert, to beguile the simple and ignorant people with this
sottish and blasphemous reason of yours, Martin Luther is the author of our
Religion. For now your are enforced to grant the contrary, that infinite numbers
have taught the same doctrine before him. The truth is too strong for you, M
Gilbert, that compells you to grant the thing that ye would wish with all your
heart the people never knew it. But comfort your self, M. Gilbert, for the
truth will be victorious at the last, and your darkness daily more and more
will be discovered. Indeed the least stroke that ye can give for the defense of
your Pope, is to call them all heretics who have spoken against him: For I
grant the Pope and his Clergy is not such fools, as being their own Judges, to
condemn themselves, and to justify them, who not only have taught it, but also
sufficiently did prove it, and many thousands sealed with their blood that he
was the Antichrist, and his Church Babel. But with them, they have the Son of
God, and the Apostles, Paul and John heretics: for they also did condemn his
idolatry, and tyranny, and errors. But whereabout now will ye contend, M.
Gilbert? Ye say, whether their doctrine be heresy or not? I would you and your
Church would stand upon this, and give over all your other contentions while
this were first proved, Whether their doctrine, in so far as they agree with
ours; and ours, in so far as it dissents from yours, be heresy or not? that
is, be against the Scripture or not: the which if you would do, then I hope our
contention would soon be ended. But for as fast as you run to this now, you
will flee from it as fast again, when we desire to have yours and our doctrine
tried by the Scriptures, which of them is heresy: and consequently, whether ye
or we be heretics? And therefore you ever refuse to let your doctrine be tried
by the Scripture, but run to your pretended antiquity, and successions,
Councils, and lying miracles, and many other vain starting-holes, like a wild
Fox when he is hunted out of one hole, he flies to another, and dares never
abide the fair fields. And mark their craft (Reader) when we affirm that our
Religion has Jesus Christ to be the Author of it in the Scriptures, as we
offer to prove the same, ye refuse this trial by the Scriptures, and say, That
Martin Luther invented our Religion, and we had none that professed it, and
taught it before him. When we again reply, That we had sundry of all sorts many
hundred years before him, even when your Kingdom was at the hight, and produces
their names: they not being able to deny it, they slip from that again, and
say, They contend not whether there was such that taught such doctrine or not:
but they contend whether that was truth or heresy: so they run from one
starting hole to another. But I will ask you (M. Gilbert) if it be proved that
this their doctrine was not heresy, will you contend any more then? Shall the
plea cease then? Will you ever slander our Religion of novelty, in saying,
Martin Luther was the first that began it, and we had none who professed before
him. But you will say, This you have not proved. It is true, I had not proved
it then: but now I hope I have proved it sufficiently, that your Popes are the
Antichrist, and your Rome, Babel; which was one of the principal heads of the
doctrine which ye taught, and sundry others also. Disprove you it, if you can,
M. Gilbert.

Master Gilbert Brown.
But he says, They preached the same Religion that he preaches, etc. Let M.
John name any of these his Doctors, that he will abide at in Religion, and I
shall let him see that he was not of his Religion in all things. For that is the
thing that we say, That albeit M. John and his brethren, have renewed many old
condemned heresies of heretics, yet they were not of their Religion in all
things. And therefore this that M. John calls the only truth, was never
professed in all heads, as it is now in Scotland, before in no Country, no not
by any one man, let be by a number; which thing M. Robert Bruce grants himself
in his Sermons, in these words: And God has chosen a few hearts in this
Country, where he has begun his dwelling place; for God dwells now in the
hearts and consciences of his own by his holy Spirit. And surely so has he
dwelt with (...) these thirty years, in such purity, that he has not done the
like with any Nation in the earth: he has not remained with any Nation without
error and heresy so long, as he has done with us, etc. So God dwelt in no
place without error and heresy the space of thirty years, while now in
Scotland.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
But you say, they dissent from us in some things, and is not of our Religion
in all things. Whereunto I answer: That suppose this were true, yet it will not
follow but that they are of our Religion, seeing they and we do agree in the
main foundations thereof. For we have learned to call them brethren; which do
hold the foundation, as the Apostle says, suppose they have built hay, straw,
or timber upon the same. Otherwise, if ye will be content to be measured with
that same measure wherewith ye measure us, if you will have none to be
accounted of your Religion, but these only that profess with you in all things,
as your Church does now: then not only (by your reason) shall ye want the Lord
Jesus, his Apostles, the primitive Church, as ye do indeed: and that not only
in the first six hundred years, but long after, till the thousand year, and
long after that also, to be of your profession: because not only the weightiest
points of your doctrine have not their original in the Scripture, and are
unwritten traditions, by the testimony of some of your selves: but also sundry
points of your Religion have been brought in after these days, being unknown
in the former ages, as your selves will not deny, and I have proved in some
heads, in the other part concerning the Mass. Yea, you shall want all the
Fathers, by this reason of yours. For there is not one of them but they have
their own errors, which ye your selves will not defend: and the most part of
them are with us against you, in many things, which you cannot deny: and that
which is more, ye shall want almost all the general Councils, except three or
four, and many of your own Popes, Doctors, Bishops, Cardinals and Jesuits: for
not only have some of them had errors, and some of them been heretics, by your
whole confessions; but also some of them have been with us in some points
against you, as I have proved before, so that I need not repeat them now. As
for example, Pope Gregory affirms, That the books of the Macchabees are
Apocrypha, Lib. 19. cap. 16. in morali. And so have sundry others of your
Clergy, as Sixtus Senesis, in lib. Operis Biblioth. Cajetanus in fine comment.
Veter. Test. Arias Montanus, in editione quadam Hebr. Bibli. cum interlineari.
Hugo Cardinalis, are against you, and with us, in the books of Apocrypha.
Gelasius de duabus naturis in Christo, is against your Transubstantiation, also
against your Communion under one kind: And Pope Adrian the 6. against this,
that the Pope cannot err, and teach heresies. Panormitan against this, that it
is not lawful to Ministers to marry after their ordination. Bellarm. lib. 1. de
Clericis, cap. 19. Idem lib. 2. de purg. cap. 4. Michael Bai, Gerson and
Roffensis, all Papists, against your venial sins. Bellarm. lib. de imaginibus,
cap. 8. Abulensis, and Durandus, and Peresius, Papists, against your making of
the Images of the Trinity. A great many of you, as Alexander, Thomas, Cajetan,
Bonaventure, Marsilius, Almain, Carthusianus and Capreolus, teach, That that
same worship should be given to the Image, which is given to that which the
Image represents: And yet Durandus and Alphonsus a Castro, and others, is
against this: Therefore either the one or the other is not of your Religion.
And ye your self, if ye be measured by this measure, is not a right Papist,
because you dissent from many of them in many things, as has been proved
before. And certainly (M. Gilbert) if this reason of yours hold forth, you shall
cut off from your profession such a number of Popes, Councils, Jesuits,
Cardinals and Doctors from your Religion, that it is to be feared, that they
cut you off from being a right defender of their Catholic Faith, yea from
being a member of their Synagogue, that for the defense thereof is compelled to
cut off so many from the same. And secondly, I say, your reports concerning
their doctrine, is not to be credited, but their own Apologies and Writings:
whereby it appears that it has been always your fashion, the more to discredit
them, to charge them with a number of absurd opinions, which they never held.
As for example, you charge here Waldus, and his followers, to have had their
wives, and all other things common, which is your calumny of them, and not
their practice, or doctrine. For Gulielmus Parvus writes, that their life was
commendable. And Reynerus in his Book of Inquisitions, one of your own
Religion, a Writer of 300. years ago, who was often at the examination of them,
as he himself says, confesses, That they had great show of holy life, and
that they believed all things well of God, and all the articles contained in
the Creed, and lived justly before men: and charge them that they hated and
blasphemed solam Romanam Ecclesiam, the Romish Church only. So then, if his
report be true, as I hope ye will not gainsay, they were both far from that
error; for that were neither to believe all things well of God, nor yet to have
a show of holy life, and to live justly before men: and also they were of our
Religion in all things.

And where you say that we renew many old condemned heresies. I answer: That
neither the doctrine which I affirmed they taught here, was heresies, nor yet
themselves heretics. But you and your Church who have condemned them for the
truth of God, and have renewed old condemned heresies, as shall be proved
afterward. And we have renewed no heresy at all, but only the truth of God,
which your Church has obscured and buried. Therefore your conclusion is false,
that our Religion was never professed in all points, as it is now in Scotland,
before in no Country; no not, say you, by any one man, For it was taught and
professed by Christ and his Apostles, and also by all the primitive Churches in
their days, in all points, throughout all the parts of the world where they
preached the Gospel, as it is now in Scotland, as we offer to prove by their
writings, and I have proved the same in sundry heads here. Next, the substance
thereof was continued many hundred years in the Churches of Christ, while
partly by the heresies that sprang up (for the popple was soon sown among the
good seed, and the Mystery of Iniquity began to work in the Apostles days) and
partly by the Mahomet, and partly by the darkness of Popery, it was corrupted
piece and piece. And what difference can you find between the Religion that the
Waldenses professed, and us, if ye will give credit to their Apologies, and
Reynerus testimonies of them? As for M. Robert Bruces testimony, which ye
produce, it serves no wise to confirm your purpose: but seeing ye abuse the
testimonies of Scripture, it is no wonder suppose ye abuse the testimonies of
men. For it is most true which he affirms, that the truth of God has continued
for that space in this Kingdom without heresy or schism, as we never read it
did in any Nation in the earth, in such purity without heresy and schism for
such a long space. And yet it follows not but it has dwelt in sundry Churches
in such purity before, suppose not so long together, which you omit in your
conclusion. Does it follow by his testimony, but that our Religion has been
preached and professed in all true Churches, in all points, suppose not so long
in such purity as it is in Scotland? Neither does it follow, but that the
substantial and main points of our Religion have been professed in all
Christian Churches longer then that space, suppose mixed either with some
heresies or schisms. So you must coin a new Logic (M Gilbert) before ye can
confirm your proposition by his testimony.

Master Gilbert Brown.
But here it is to be noted also, that M. John can find none before the year of
Christ 1158. that said against the Pope and his Religion, and none immediately
before Luther* the space of an hundred years, and more. So the Church was
without his Doctors eleven hundred years and fifty, or thereabout. And such
like, Martin Luther had no predecessors to whom he succeeded in his Religion.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
You not two things here which are both false: The one, that I can find none
that said against the Pope and his Religion before the year of Christ 1158. For
our Savior and his Apostles, and sundry learned Fathers in all ages, and
Councils, both General and Provincial, and some of your own Doctors and Popes,
have spoken against the Monarchy of your Pope, and your Doctrine and Religion,
as I have proved before. And Reynerus a man of your own Religion, testifies,
that some said, The Waldenses who had the same Religion which we profess, was
continued from Sylvesters days, who lived about the 320. year of God. And some
said, that it continued even from the Apostles days. Therefore the first is
false The second thing is, that I can find none before Luther immediately, the
space of an hundred years and more. I see you are not ashamed to speak any
thing for the defense of your Kingdom, were it never so manifestly false: For
if appears that either ye are not acquainted with the Histories of that age, or
else ye dissemble it of purpose: for John Wicleff he left so many behind him in
England who professed our Religion, that though your Prelates did molest them
what they could, yet they and their favorers in short time grew to such
strength and multitude, that by the year 1422. (which was an hundred years
immediately before Luther) Henry Chichesley the Archbishop of Canterbury wrote to
the Pope that they all could not be suppressed, they were so many, but by force
of war. The professors of our Religion began to gather so great force in
Bohemia, after the burning of John Hus, and Jerome of Prague, at the Council of
Constance, which was about the year 1417. (which was just an hundred years
immediately before Luther) that they were able not only to defend themselves by
force of arms against the tyranny of your Popes, but also obtained many
notable victories against the strongest power that the Pope did raise against
them. In England William Tailor was burnt, anno 1422. and two years after that
William White was burnt. And betwixt that time and 1430. Father Abraham of
Colchester, John Wadden, and Richard Hovington were burnt. And after that,
Richard Wiche, and John Goose, one Braban, and one Jerome, and others with him,
were burnt. Hieronymus Savanarola, a Monk in Italy, with two others, named
Dominick and Sylvester, were condemned to death at Florence, in the year 1500.
with sundry others, whom for shortness I omit here. Now surely, I cannot but
wonder, M. Gilbert, that ye should have been so impudent as to have set it down
in writ, that I could get none that professed our Religion an hundred years
immediately before Martin Luther. But the Reader may gather what credit he may
give to your notes: and yet with such impudent lies ye blind the poor people.
Upon the which I gather, that both these conclusions of yours, is false. For
the Church of Christ in all ages, even from the Apostles days to this day, has
ever had her own teachers and professors (unto whom Martin Luther has
succeeded in his Religion) suppose not in the like frequencie and purity, and
that by reason partly of the smoke of that bottemless pit, that is, of your
doctrine, which darkened both the Sun and the air, Rev. 9.2. that is, both
teachers and people: and partly by your extreme persecution, whereby ye made
war with the Saints of God, and overcame them, Rev 13 7. But your smoke will
evanish away at the last, and the clear light of the Lord shall shine more and
more, maugre all your hearts.

SECTION XXV. That the Reformed Churches have not renewed old condemned
Heresies.
Master Gilbert Brown.
BUt that M. John shall not think that we slander him and his ^i^h old condemned
heresies, let him read S. Augustine Epiphanius, and others noted here, as of
these, and many the like.

1. Novatus forsook the Pope of Rome, Cornelius, and caused others do the like;
as Eusebius hist. lib. 6. cap. 33. and Nicephorus report, lib. 6. cap. 30.

2. Aerus the heretic denied that offering or prayers should be done for the
dead, and that fasting should be free, as S. Augustine and Epiphane declare,
haeres. 75.

3. Eunomius and Aerius held, that only faith justifies, as Augustine. haeres.
55. and lib. de fide and operibus, and Epiphanius haeres. 76. write.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
Now are we, by Gods grace, come unto your last calumny, in affirming that we
renew old condemned heresies. This is indeed, M. Gilbert, a heavy challenge,
if it were true: but it is but like the rest of your calumnies; yea, it has
less appearance of truth, then any thing which ye have spoken against us. A
liar, M. Gilbert, shall not enter in that heavenly city, but his portion shall be
in that lake that burn with fire and brimstone, Rev. 19.20 and 22.15. And he
that slandereth his neighbor (much more then he who slandereth the truth of
God) shall not rest in the Lords holy mountain, Psalm. 15 3. But to come to the
first, Novatus intruded himself in another man's charge, and caused set up
himself against Cornelius the lawful Pastor of the Church in Rome then, and
that craftily, and withdrew many of his flock from him, which is as contrary to
our doctrine, as black to white. For we teach that every Pastor should have his
own particular flock, as Cornelius had then in Rome; and no man should intrude
himself in another man's charge, as he did. So this is a calumny, M. Gilbert.
But your Popes are like Novatus, who not only have disturbed all the Christian
Congregations in Europe almost, by setting up and thrusting down such Pastors
as they would, but also all the Kingdoms in Europe. As for this doctrine of
Aerius: I answer you, as ye did me: I contend not whether he taught this
doctrine or not, for the Scriptures have taught the same. But our contention
is; whether they be heresy or not, which you have not proved, nor ever will be
able to prove by the Scripture. It is true Epiphanius, and Augustine following
him, reckon him among heretics: but Theodoretus in his Book de fabulis
Judaeorum, and the Ecclesiastical History, reckon him not among heretics: and
he was not condemned for an heretic in any Council: that therefore which he
taught according to the Scripture, we embrace. But as for the errors of the
Aerians, which are errors indeed, and which are ascribed unto them, as the
damning of marriage, urging of continency, requiring them whom they receive to
their fellowship, to forsake their own proper things. These heresies, I say,
your Church has renewed, who damns marriage, and urges continency in your
Clergy, and receives none to your religious Orders, but such as refuse their
own proper things As to the third, the Aerian and Eunomian heresies, they
secluded holiness of life from that faith of theirs, and taught such a faith
that might stand with whatsoever sins, and with perseverance in them. Will you
stand to this, M. Gilbert, before the Lord, that we teach such doctrine? Is not
this our doctrine, that only living faith which works by love, and brings forth
good fruits, does justify? But you are like to them that know no other
justifying faith, but such a faith, as both the reprobats and the Devils may
have. So this is your third calumny.

M. Gilbert Brown.
4. Simon Magus, Marcion and Manichaeus, denied that man had free will, as
Augustine. haeres 46. Jerome, and Epiphanius haeres 42. make mention.

5. Jovinianus affirmed that Priests marriage was lawful after the lawful vow
of chastity. He moved sundry Nuns to marry in the city of Rome. He made fasting
and abstinence from meat superfluous, as Augustine writes of him, haeres. 82.
item lib. 1. cap. 7 de peccat. merit. and remiss.

6. Vigilantius denied the prayer to Saints, as S. Jerome contra Vigilantium,
writes. He despised the burning of lights and candles in the Churches in the
day time, and the relics of Martyrs.

Julian the Apostat was of the same opinion, as Cyrillus contra Julian.
declares. The same Julian despised the image of Christ and his Saints, as the
foresaid Cyrillus lib. 9. contra Julian. makes mention.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
As to this fourth heresy, they took away all the liberty and freedom of the
will in man: but this is not our doctrine. For we affirm that man has a
liberty and freedom in his will, in natural, moral and sinful actions: but not
in these things which pleases God, before he be renewed. This is your fourth
calumny.

As for the fifth, Jovinian taught, as Augustine haeres. 82. and Jerome in his
8. Epist. in his defense of his Books against Jovinian, set it down: and
Bellarmin de Ecclesia militant. lib. 4. cap. 9 reports, that the married estat
was equal with virginity. Unto the which we answer: That true and undefiled
virginity we prefer always, as the more noble and excellent gift in them to
whom it is given: but we doubt not to say, but that marriage is better in them
that cannot contain. And generally we dare prefer the honest marriage of
Christians, before the proud and fained virginity of many Monastical votaries,
as Augustine in Psalm. 99. says, Lowly and humble marriage, is better then proud
and hauty virginity. As to the second point, he affirmed indeed that the choice
of meats and fasting was no merit, and this is no heresy. But if this be
heresy, then the doctrine of the Scripture is heresy: For it teaches us,
That life everlasting is the free gift of God, Romans 6 23. as has been proved
before. This is your fifth calumny.

As for the sixth of Vigilantius heresies, if the denying of prayer to be made
to Saints be an heresy, then it is an old heresy: for it is the Lords, who is
the ancient of days, for this is his doctrine: Call upon me in the day of thy
trouble, and I will deliver thee Psalm. 50.15 Isa. 42.8. And let Augustine also
go for an heretic who says, That the Saints are not called upon. Aug. de
civitate Dei, lib. 22. cap. 20. As for the despising of the burning of lights
and candles in the Churches in the day time, I know not to what use it serves,
except to be a sign that ye are blinded of the Lord, who in the midst of the
day light your candles: Did Jesus Christ or his Apostles so? And this was the
custom of Pagans, which you have taken from them, Irenaeus lib. 6 cap. 2. As
for the despising of the relics of Martyrs: if he despised these, then he
erred: for we both teach and practice, that the bodies of the Saints should be
honorably buried, and we do not despise them. But if he taught that they should
not be worshipped, then I say he is not an heretic in this, but you are
heretics and idolaters, who express contrary the Commandment of God, do
worship the creature: Matthew 4.10. Deuteronomy. 6 13. And Vigilantius was no heretic,
nor his opinions condemned as heresies, only there was a hot contention between
him and Jerome. And as for Julian, he calumniated the Christians that they
adored dead men for Gods, and the tree of the cross. Unto whom Cyrillus
answered, That they adored not the sign of the cross, but God only. So this was
but Julians calumny against them. But if he had lived in your days, he might
justly have objected it unto you.

Master Gilbert Brown.
7. Valentinus the heretic, denied the very body of Christ to be in the
Sacrament, as Irenaeus says, lib 4 cap. 34.

8. Simon Magus, Marcion, and the Manichees, held, that God compelled man both
to do evil and good, as S. Augustine haeres. 46. Vincentius Lirinensis, S.
Clement of Rome, in recognit. and Epiphanius haeres. 42. have in their works,
which is the doctrine of the most learned of the Protestants, as Melancthon,
Calvin, Beza in lib. de praedest. contra Calv. sycophant. and others.

9. The Novatians denied penance, as S. Augustine haeres. 38. affirms.

10. The Manichees denied the necessity of Baptism, as the same S. Augustine
haeres. 46. reports.

11. Aerius, Eustathius, and the Manichees, condemned fasting days ordained by
the Church, as Leo, Epist. 93 cap 4. Epiphanius, haeres. 75. the Council of
Gangr. in praefat. as S. Augustine lib. 10. cap. 3. cont. Faust. Manich. records.

12. The Manichees used to fast on the Sunday only, as S. Augustine, haeres. and
S. Leo, ser. 4. de qua. witness. Read for this also Council. Gang. cap. 13. and
de consecrat. did. 3. ne quis. Ignatius ad Philip. de cons^crat. distinct. 3.
jejunium.

13. The Pepusians and Collyridians, denied holy Orders, and made it no
Sacrament, as S. Augustine haeres. 4.24. and Epiphanius haeres 44.79. write.

14. The Pelagians denied that confession should be made to a Priest, as our
Chronicle writer testifies, Hect. Boet. lib. 9 cap. 19. They deny also that
Baptism was needful to children or infants, as S. Augustine reports, haeres. 88.

15. The Donatists den^ed the order of Monks, and other religious persons as S.
Augustine in Psalm. 132. and S Chrysostom write, Tom. 5. against the dispraiser
of the monastical life.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
Whether Valentinus taught so or not, I contend not: but the question is of
this doctrine of the real presence, whether it be contrary to Gods Word, or
not; the which I have proved sufficiently before in the fourth point of
doctrine: and so the denying of it, is no heresy. But yet it appears not by
this testimony of Irenaeus, which ye cite here, that he taught such doctrine.

As for the 8. heresy, it is a calumny to ascribe it to us: for Melancthon,
Calvin and Beza, have no such doctrine. You are not ashamed, M. Gilbert, of
impudent lying.

As for the 9. of Novatus heresy, that is a calumny to ascribe it to us. For
Novatus denied that there was any place of repentance to these, who after they
were baptized, fell from the faith by any infirmity, or violence of
persecution, as Epiphanius testifies of him, that he said, No man who has
fallen after Baptism, can any more obtain mercy. But our doctrine is contrare
to this: for we teach that there is place to repentance for any sin, except the
sin against the holy Ghost, which is ever punished with final impenitency.

As for the 10. of the Manichees heresy, their doctrine was, as Augustine says
there, That Baptism served nothing for salvation to any: and that none who
followed their sect, should be baptized: and therefore they brought in a
contempt of Baptism, which is contrary to our doctrine. For we teach, that
Christians and their children is to be baptized: and that the contempt of it is
damnable, suppose not the want of it.

As for the 11. and 12 heresies, we contemn not fastings that are appointed by
the Church for lawful causes: but we deny that they should be tied to certain
and prefixed days, as your Church does: and we think it no heresy to fast on
the Lords day, more then other days: both to stir up our repentance, and to
make us more meet to holy and spiritual exercises, because it is not contrary
to the Word of God. As for Leo his Epistle, it is wrong quoted, for it should
be Epist. 91. and their fasting on the Lords day, is not like ours: for they
fasted on the Lords day, because they believed not that Christ was a true man,
as Leo in that same place testifies which you will not say your self that we
do; for we acknowledge him to be a true man.

As for the 13. heresy of the Pepusians and Collyridians, their doctrine was
that women might be Bishops and Elders, and might use these public functions,
as these places which ye have quoted, testify: which is not our doctrine, but
rather yours, who permit women to baptize in case of necessity. That they
denied Orders to be a Sacrament, there is no such thing to be found in these
places which ye quote here.

As for the 14. heresy of the Pelagians, if they denied that these who were
accused of any scandalous offense, and guilty thereof, should make their
confession of it to God, his Ministers, and the Congregation, for to take away
the offense of it, then they erred, and our doctrine and practice condemn this:
but if they denied the absolut necessity of your auricular confession, then is
it no error; because there is no such thing commanded in the whole Scriptures
of God. Now as for the testimony of Boethius, I have not seen it. As for their
second heresy concerning Baptism, they taught, as Augustine reports in that
place. That Baptism was not needful to children, because they were born without
original sin, as they taught: which is an heresy indeed: but this is a calumny
to ascribe it to us; for we teach that children are born in original sin, and
so should be baptized. And surely this heresy rather agrees to you, who teach,
that Mary was not born in original sin, and therefore she needed not to be
baptized.

As for the last of the Donatists, denying the order of Monks. I answer: First,
your Papistical and idolatrous Monks, are far different from these which
Augustine and Chrysostom defended, and these of the primitive Church. Bellarmin
lib. 1. cap. 2. de indulgentijs. For first, they were bound to no prescript
form of diet, apparel, or any thing else, by solemn vows of wilful poverty,
and perpetual continency, as yours are. Next, the former Monks remained in the
order of private men and laics, and had nothing to do with Ecclesiastical
charges, which was afterward broken by Pope Boniface the fourth, anno 606. But
yours are not so: they have Ecclesiastical charges, and are more then private
men. And last of all, suppose their kind of life was mixed with some
superstition; for the envious man soon sowed the popple among the good seed,
and the mystery of iniquity began soon to work: yet their Religion was not
defiled with Idolatry, worshipping of Images, prayers to Saints, opinion of
merit, the sacrifice of the Mass, and other abominations, wherewith your
Papistical Monks are defiled. Next, I say, these Monks and religious Orders of
yours, have not their foundation within the four corners of the Scripture of
God.

Master Gilbert Brown.
These and many the like new renewed heresies by the Ministers, was old
condemned heresies in the primitive Church of the former heretics, as testify
the ancient Fathers: and therefore this is a true argument. What ever was
heresy in old times, is heresy yet, and the defenders thereof heretics, as
they were of old. But these former heads that I have set down, with many the
like, was heresies in old times, and the defenders thereof heretics, as
testify the ancient Fathers. Therefore they are heresies yet, and the
defenders thereof heretics.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
Now here was all the cause (Christian Reader) that made M. Gilbert so often to
cry out of us, that we renewed old condemned heresies, whereof some are such as
we our selves condemn; and some are such which do better agree unto themselves
then unto us. And some heresies he forces upon us, which we never taught nor
maintained: and some are such, which are not heresies indeed, but agreeable to
the Scriptures of God. So that if we err in these, suffer us to err with Jesus
Christ and his Apostles Now to answer to your argument which ye bring: What
ever was heresy in old times, is heresy yet, and the defenders thereof
heretics. I answer: If ye define heresy to be an error obstinatly maintained
against the Scriptures of God, I grant your proposition. But if ye define
heresies in general, to be whatsoever any one Father or Doctor, or some more,
have rebuked as an heresy, then I deny it; for sundry of the Fathers have
maintained errors themselves against the Scripture, and have accused some
doctrine to be heresies, which have been agreeable to the truth of God, which
you will not deny, I hope. For if you would, I could prove it both of the
Fathers. Councils, and your own Popes. Now to your assumption: But these former
heads (say ye) which ye have set down, with many the like, was heresies in old
times, and the defenders thereof heretics, as testify the ancient Fathers. I
answer: That some of these are heresies indeed, and we abhor and condemn them
more then ye; and some of these as falsely laid to our charge; and some of these
are not heresies indeed, but agreeable to the Scripture. And therefore your
conclusion falls not upon us, who have renewed no old condemned heresies, and
therefore is not heretics. And where you say, many other like. I answer: It is
true they are like, for they are both calumnies, and horrible untruths, and
lies, as these have been; whereof one day ye shall make answer to the great God
that judges the quick and the dead. But the pit which you dug for others,
you have fallen in it your self. For certainly in this you do as thieves do,
who the better to eschew the crime of theft which is justly laid to their
charge, and that they may the more easily escape in a fray, do cry out and
shout out upon others, Common thieves, common thieves. Even so do you: for
these crimes whereof ye are guilty your selves, you falsely charge us with.

SECTION XXVI. That the Church of Rome has renewed and maintains old
condemned Heresies.
THat all men may see, that not we, but the Church of Rome has renewed, and
does maintain old condemned Heresies, I shall not do as you have done to us;
that is, either to lay to your charge such heresies as ye maintain not, or such
things to be heresies which are not heresies indeed, which ye did to us: But in
this I will deal sincerely with you, faining nothing neither of them, nor of
you.

1. Simoniani worshipped the Image of Simon and Selene, whose heresy they
followed, Ederus in Baby. page 5. so do your religious Orders worship the Image
of these who were first authors of their Orders.

2. The Basilidians worshipped Images, Irenaeus lib. cap. 23. and used
invocations, so do you.

3. Carpocras had some painted Images in great estimation, both of others, as
also of Christ, Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 3.24. So do the Papists paint Christ, and
say, that his form was painted by Luke the Evangelist.

4. The old Idolaters did excuse their Idolatry, that they did not worship the
Images, but the thing represented by the Image, August. in Psalm. 113. in con.
2. and Lactant. lib. 2. cap. 2. So do you excuse your Idolatry.

5. It was the custom of the old Idolaters, to afflict and whip their own
bodies, that they might please their own Gods, Iren. lib. 1. cap. 21. So do
some of you now.

6. It was their custom also to light candles at noon day, in the time of their
service, Iren. lib. 6. cap. 2. So do you.

7. Basilidians and Carpocratians kept secret their doctrine, counting all
other men dogs and swine, Iren. lib. 1. cap. 23. Epiph. haeres. 24. So do you
keep secret your mysteries from the common people, and will not suffer the
Scriptures to be read of all; lest (say ye) precious pearls be cast before
swine.

8. Marcosij they spoke some Hebrew words in Baptism, to astonish and affray
the hearers, Iren. lib. 1. cap. 18. But you are worse, who in all your service,
speak nothing but an unknown language; and that (say you) to make their
mysteries to be had in greater reverence.

9. The Heracleonits anointed their dead with oil, balm and water
superstitiouslie, August. de haeres. cap. 16. Epiph. haeres. 36. and so do you.

10. Marcion and the Pepuzian heretics, permitted women to baptize, Epiph.
haeres. 42. au. ad quod vult. cap. 27. So do you.

11. The ossenes taught, that it was not needful that prayers should be made in
a known language, Epiph. haeres. 19. ante Christum. So do you: and therefore
your prayers are in Latin.

12. The Messalians affirmed Baptism only to serve for the washing away of the
sins going before it, Theodoret. divin, decret, cap. de Bapt. So do you.

13. The Tatians, and sundry other heretics, affirmed marriage impure, Epiph.
haeres. 46 So does your Pope Siricius in their Priests, Gratianus Epist. 82.
cap. Proposuisti.

14. The Manichees damned marriage in their elect and perfect, but suffered it
in the rest, August. Epist. 74. So do the Papists in their Priests and
religious men, they damn it; but they do tolerat it in the laics: and yet the
Spirit of God calls it, A doctrine of Devils to forbid marriage, 1. Timothy
4.1.2.3.

15. The Manichees they had the Communion under one kind. So does the
Papistical Church. The Council of Constance so decreed it, against the
Scriptures, with these heretics. Such like their Fasting and your Fasting is
alike: For they made choice of meats, and abstained from flesh; but yet used
their delicats, and so do you.

16. The Manichees affirmed there was two beginnings; so does Augustinus
Steuchus a Papist, in sua Cosinopoea, in principio Genes. where he says, That
the crystallin heaven is coeternal with God. The which if it be true, then
certainly it is God: For that which is without beginning is God, and so there
are two Gods. If Calvin, or any of us had written such, how would heaven and
earth have been filled with cries against us?

17. Montanus an heretic, received the whole Scripture, but yet he denied that
it contained all doctrine need^ul to salvation, Epiph. haeres. 48. So does the
Papists. And from this error springs their traditions, their ceremonies infinite
in number, partly Jewish, partly Ethnic.

18. This Montanus was the first who prescribed certain laws of fasting, the
Scripture appointing no such thing. Apollo. apud Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 17. So
does the Papists, their fastings are upon their prefixed and set days.

19. Montanus taught, that small faults was to be suffered: for after this life
neither was the souls to be delivered from the prison, till they had paid the
utmost farthing, Tertull. de anima, in fine. So does the Papists also.

20. Such like the doctrine of the Montanists was, that Abraham's bosom was
beside Hell, or in the uppermost part of Hell.

21. That the Patriarcks before the coming of Christ, were in Hell.

22. That only the Martyrs souls go immediately to Paradise.

23. That prayers and oblations should be made for the dead.

24. That extreme unction should be given after Baptism.

25. That the sign of the Cross should be used, as testifies Tertullian in
lib. de animo, and de coron. milit. All which your Church has renewed.

26. Helcesaitae made two Christ's: one above, another beneath: So does your
Church make two Christ's; one in heaven, having a true natural body with his own
essential properties, in a certain place, visible: another in earth, made of
the bread and wine, with all the essential properties of a true body,
invisible, in the Sacrament.

27. Sampsaei kept the dust of the feet, and the spittle of two women which
they worshipped as Goddesses, which they affirmed did serve to cure diseases,
and which they used as amulets. Epiph haeres. 53. and haeres. 19. ante
Christum. So does your Papistical Church keep the relics of Saints, worship
them, and carry them about, as serving either to preserve, or to recover
health. The like also was the superstition of the Ossens.

28. Cathari gloried in the merit of their works, and affirmed that they were
made righteous with an inherent righteousness, Isid. etymol. cap. 8. de haeres.
Christ. The Papistical Church in this heresy goes beyond them: for both they
glory of their works, and affirm that we are justified with an inherent
righteousness.

29. The heretics called Angelici, and also the Caini, they worshipped Angels,
Aug. ad quod vult, cap. 39. Epiph. haeres 38. So do the Papists.

30. The heretics called Apostolici, admitted none in their number, but those
who vowed wilful poverty and chastity, August. de haeres. cap. 40. Epiph.
haeres. 61. So the Papists admit none to their religious Orders, but such who
vow both.

31. There were some heretics who went barefooted, August. ex Philastrio
quorundam, cap. 68. So do the Franciscan Friars, and those who are called
Co^digeri.

32. The Donatists denied that the true preaching of the Word was a note of the
pure Church: and therefore Augustine in sundry places, calls them back to the
Scriptures. So does your Church.

33. The Collyridians worshipped Mary, and therefore they are called Idolaters
by Epiphanius haeres. 74. So do the Papists.

34. Armenij worshipped the Cross of our Lord, and therefore they were called
(...) that is, worshippers of the Cross, Epiph. in Panoplia. So do the Papists.

35. The Pelagians affirmed Adam would have died, suppose he had not sinned. So
does Augustinus Steuchus, a Papist of great name, in his Annotations upon the 2
of Genesis. He says, Death is natural, and sin is not the cause of it: and the
infants and Adam would have died, suppose they had not sinned.

36. Also, they affirmed that after the fall, there was left in man a freedom
to will good: and so does the Papists; suppose they differ in this, that the
Papists join grace to be a preveener and worker with free will.

37. The Pelagians affirmed, that the Gentiles might by Philosophy have known
God, and been saved. So Andradius a Papist, lib. 3. orthod. explic. So
Catharinus a Papist, who was present at the Council of Trent, affirms in his
Commentary upon 1. Tim. 4. That some unfaithful men may be saved. Which is as
much to say, as some may be saved who know not God, nor Christ: Which is
horrible, and more then Pelagian.

38. Also, they affirmed that a man may fulfill the Law, and be perfectly
righteous. So do all the Papists.

39. They affirm that infants want original sin. So does Pighius a Papist, in
his Book of Controversies, in the controversy of original sin, That in them
that are baptized, original sin is taken away. And he writes also, That Mary
was born without original sin. And Thomas of Aquin writes, That Mary had the
fullness of all grace, In 3. part summae, quaest. 27. art. 7. Which is to equal
her with God. For only in him the fullness of all dwells. And many other
heresies of the Pelagians have the Papists renewed.

40. A kind of heretics, called Anomi, taught, that the obedience to the Law
was not needful. So do the Papists. First, in affirming, That concupiscence
without consent is not sin, and is not forbidden in the Law. Secondly, some of
them say, as Sylvester Prierias; It is honesty (says he) but not of necessity,
that God should be loved above all things. And so Molanus another Papist
affirms, de theolog. pract. tract. 3. cap. 16. concl. 1. number. 11. The same
Molanus also says; That it is not commanded of God that we should pray for our
enemies in special, cap. 8. concl. 3. number. 19. And yet the Scripture says most
plainly; Pray for them which persecute you. And in another place, he affirms,
That it is not commanded that we should salute our enemies with a friendly and
loving heart, cap. 16. concl. 3. And also he says, That he who does not tell
to him who is ignorant, his manifest defect, is not unrighteous, Tract. 2. cap.
20. conclus. 2. And again he says, He who gives counsel to do a less evil to
eschew a greater, sins not, Cap. 23. conclus. 5. Such like contrare the second
Command, they universally teach, That the worship of Images, is no break of it.
And they call the Cross, Their only hope. What horrible blasphemy is this? And
Torrensis a Papist, objected to Catharinus another Papist, in his book de
residentia cont. Cathar. That he denied the Law of Moses to be Gods Law, and
the precepts of Paul to be Christ's precepts. Mo also I might bring, but these
will suffice. Now of these things, I may most justly conclud, That your
Religion has renewed many of the old condemned heresies. And as you made one
argument, so I will make another. What ever was heresy in old times, is
heresy yet, and the defenders thereof heretics: this you cannot deny, because
it is your own proposition: but these former heads which I have set down
(wherein I have used no calumny, as ye have done) was heresies in old times,
and the defenders thereof heretics, as witness the ancient Fathers: therefore
they are heresies yet, and the defenders thereof heretics. And so by your own
argument, many points of your Religion, are old condemned heresies, and your
selves heretics who do defend them.

SECTION XXVII. Concerning Antichrist.
Master John's Conclusion.
ONe thing which I hope will cut off all controversy, I offer to prove the
Pope to be the Antichrist. And if this be true, then all men that profess him,
secretly or openly, as it is said in the Rev. 14.10. shall drink of the wine of
the wrath of God.

Master John Welsch, Preacher of Christ's Gospel at Kirkubright.

Master Gilbert Brown.
If this controversy of ours shall not be cut away while M. John prove the Pope
to be the Antichrist, certainly it will endure ten hundred thousand years after
the Lord of Merchistons doomsday. Then it must follow (seeing that is a thing
impossible to be done) that all these that will not openly and privately obey
the Pope, and reverence him as the Vicare of Christ, because he is chosen by
God to rule his Church here on earth, that they must drink of the wine of the
wrath of God.

Our merciful Lord illuminat M. John with his holy Spirit and grace, that he
may understand the truth, and receive the same, and so become a member of his
true Church, whereby he may be partaker of the merits of Christ, that his soul
may be safe. Amen.

Master Gilbert Brown Priest, and defender of the Catholic Faith.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
It is not impossible to prove your Popes to be the Antichrist. It has been
proved already by the learned on our side; to the which, you, and all your
Clergy of Rome is not able to answer. It has been taught and sealed with the
blood of infinite number of Christians: And I have not taken so long a term, as
you have set down here; and yet, I hope, I have proved it sufficiently. Put all
your might to disprove it, if you can. And as to that threatening of yours, M.
Gilbert, wherein ye say, that all those who will not openly and privately obey
the Pope, etc. must drink of the wine of the wrath of God. If it may be
believed, then how does this stand first with your Popes pardons, whereby he
gives men pardon or license to profess, subscribe, and swear to our Religion,
as it is reported that some of your own Religion have confessed it? Next, how
stands it with the dissimulation of your Jesuits, and seminary Priests, when
they come to any place where our Religion is openly professed? Thirdly, what
comfort is this which ye have pronounced to your own poor Countrymen, who do
not openly avow Papistrie, but have subscribed and communicate with us? Is this
an open profession, or not? And if it be not, if ye be a true Prophet, then
must they drink of the wine of the wrath of God, then must they be condemned in
Hell, by your judgment, because they profess him not openly. And last of all,
if this threatening of yours be true, then beside the many infinite thousands who
profess him to be the Antichrist you condemn to Hell all the Greek and Eastern
Churches, who in number far exceed them who obey you; and all the Churches that
have been six hundred years and more after Christ: For they obeyed not the Pope
openly nor privately as Christ's Vicare over them, as I have proved before. And
also you condemn a number of your Anti-Popes to Hell, with their Cardinals,
Bishops and Churches who followed them: For they gave out themselves to be
Popes, and did not obey the other. As also a number of the Fathers of your own
Religion, who in two General Councils, the one of Constance, where there was
almost a thousand Fathers: the other of Basel, did not obey the Pope, in
defining General Councils to be above the Pope. So, if ye speak truth, infinite
millions of Christians, in all ages, and innumerable Churches, and thousands of
your own Religion, are condemned to Hell. But this is false, M. Gilbert, and
who will believe you? And to the end now my conclusion yet holds sure, That
seeing his Kingdom is that second beast that has two horns like the Lamb, and
speaks like the Dragon, Rev. 13.11. And himself is, that man of sin, and son of
perdition, that adversary and Antichrist that was to come, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.4. And
his doctrine, is that Apostasy and abomination sore-told in the Scripture,
Rev. 17. And his seat, that Harlot, and mystical Babylon, that mother of
whoredoms, who is drunken with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. Whosoever
receives his mark on his forehead or hand, that is, openly or privately,
professes obedience unto him, shall (as the Angel proclaimed) drink of the wine
of the wrath of God, yea of that pure wine in the cup of his wrath, and he shall
be tormented with fire and brimstone before the holy angels, and before the
Lamb. And the smoke of his torment shall ascend for evermore: and they shall have
no rest day nor night which worship the beast or his image. And as for your
prayer, I beseech God (M. Gilbert) that he may open my eyes, and enlarge my
heart to understand and embrace his truth more and more, and to make me to grow
up in that spiritual communion with Christ and his members more and more. But
that which ye call truth, is heresy, and that which ye call the true Church,
is Babel: and therefore that doctrine and Church of yours, is that strong
delusion and whore of Babel; with the which, whosoever shall communicate, is
excluded from the merits of Christ, and shall be partaker of her plagues, and
finally shall be damned.

SECTION XXVIII. That the Pope is Antichrist.
Master Gilbert Brown.
IF the Pope be the Antichrist, what is the cause that M. John would not set
down some place out of the Word of God that proves the same? But, good Reader,
I will let you see how far M. John is against the Word of God in this, and that
by some examples only. First, our Savior show unto the Jews, that albeit he
came in the name of his Father, yet they would not receive him. If another
(says he) shall come in his own name, him ye will receive. This no doubt, as
Augustine expones the same, is meant of the Antichrist, that the Jews shall
receive. Now it is out of all controversy, that the Jews never received the
Pope: Therefore the Pope is not the Antichrist. Again, the Pope came never in
his own name, but in the Name of Christ; for he is called the Vicare of Christ,
and the servant of the servants of God: therefore he cannot be the Antichrist.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
I come now to prove that which I offered before to prove; to wit, that your
Popes which ye will have to be the Head of the Church of Christ, are the
self-same Antichrist that the Scripture foretold should come. Thou would
know (Christian Reader) of what weight this controversy is, Whether the Pope
be the Antichrist, or not? For this supremacy of his unto them, is the
foundation whereupon their Religion, and the safety of their whole Church
depends: so that they call it, The Rock whereupon the Church is built, against
which the gates of Hell shall not prevail, Rhemist. annot. upon Matthew. 16. And
Bellarmin calls him, in his Preface before the controversy of the Popes
supremacy, The foundation which upholds the house of God: the Pastor which
feeds his flock: the Emperor which governes his host: the Sun which gives light
to the stars; that is, to the Ministers of the Church: the Head which gives
life to his body. So that remove his supremacy, the house of God must fall, the
flock of Christ must be scattered, the host of the Lord must be discomfited;
the stars, that is, the Ministry, must be darkened, and the body must ly
still without motion. And he applies these Prophesies, Isai. 28.16. and
8.14.15. spoken and fulfilled only in the Son of God, unto him a calling him
that foundation stone in Sion, upon the which the whole Church is built: and
that proved stone, against the which the gates of Hell has never, nor never
shall prevail: and that corner stone, which joins both Jew and Gentil, as two
walls together in a Christian Church: and that precious stone, from whence the
infinite treasure of grace is most plenteously derived unto the whole Church: as
unity in doctrine, the bond of peace, the unity of faith, which is salvation it
self, and the very life of Religion: And he says, There is no way to Christ,
but by Peter, in whose room their Popes succeed: So that in their judgment,
there is no way to Christ, but by the Pope. And he calls him that rock of
offense, and stumbling stone, spoken of in Isai. chap. 8. Upon the which
whosoever shall fall, shall be broken: and on whom it shall fall, it shall dash him
in pieces. O blasphemous mouth! Let the heavens be confounded at this. And
therefore this is of such a weight, that Boniface the 8 has made it an article
of our Faith, whose words are these: We declare, we affirm, we define and
pronounce, that it is altogether needful to salvation to all creatures, to be
under the Pope of Rome: Extra. de minoritate and obedientia, cap. unam sanctam.
So that Bellarmin says, when the Popes supremacy is called in controversy,
The sum of all Christianity is called in question: and when that is
controverted, Then it is controverted whether the Church should stand any
longer or not, or fall and dissolve? Unto them therefore it is an article of
Faith, which must be believed and practiced under the pain of the loss of
salvation. And unto us he is that self-same Antichrist which the Scripture has
foretold, time has made manifest, and the Church has suffered. Unto them he
is the Head of the body of Christ, the Pastor of his flock, the Sun that gives
light to the stars, the foundation of the house of God, and a mortal God among
men. Unto us he is Gods enemy, the son of perdition, the second beast, and
false prophet, 2 Thessalonians 2.13 Rev. 13.11. the adversary of true Religion, a pest
in the body, a tyrant in the Commonwealth, and Antichrist in the Church. So
thou sees (Christian Reader) of what weight this controversy is.

Let us see then how he defends him from being the Antichrist, and then you
shall hear our reasons to the contrary. You ask, wherefore I set not down some
places of Scripture to prove the Pope to be the Antichrist? I answer: Not
because I could not, but because it was not my purpose at that time. But now I
mind to do it, God willing, after that I have answered to your arguments. Your
first reason is, The Jews shall receive the Antichrist; but they never received
the Pope: therefore the Pope is not the Antichrist. I answer: Your proposition
I deny, that the Jews shall receive the Antichrist. For first, I will ask you,
Are you of that opinion with Bellarmin lib. 3. de Romans Pont. cap. 12 the
Rhemists annot. upon 2 Thessalonians. 2. and the rest of your Clergy, that they shall
receive him as their Messiah, which they look for? If you be not of their mind,
then beside that you dissent from the doctrine of your own Church, it is not
probable that the Jews would receive him, if they thought not he were their
Messiah. And if ye be of their mind, then I say, the Jews will receive none as
their Messiah, but these who are born of the Tribe of Juda, and the family of
David in Bethlehem, and who shall reign in Jerusalem. But the Tribes are
confounded, so that they cannot know it, and the family of David destroyed by
sundry Emperors: or at the least so confounded that they cannot be
distinguished: and Bethlehem is destroyed, and the Temple of Jerusalem utterly
casten down: therefore the Messiah which they look for, will never come. And so
(if this be true) the Antichrist which ye imagine here, will never come, since
your Antichrist and their Messiah that they look for, are both one, as your
Church suppones. And I say further, Sanderus in 8. demonst, and the Rhemist.
annot. upon the 2 Thessalonians. 2. say, the Antichrist shall come of the Tribe of Dan:
if then he shall come of the Tribe of Dan (as they say) the Jews will never
receive him as their Messiah, because they know their Messiah which they look
for, shall come of the Tribe of Juda. Therefore if Sanderus and the Rhemists
speak true, the Jews shall never receive the Antichrist at all. Thirdly, I lay
this ground which you cannot deny, that the Jews are to be planted in again in
the natural olive; that is, they are to be converted to Christ, because their
fall was but for a time, as the Apostle plainly fore-tells, Romans 11.24. and the
Rhemists grant it, annot. upon that chapter. Upon the which, I ask you (M.
Gilbert) whether shall they receive the Antichrist, before or after their
conversion? If you say, after: then I say, after they have embraced the true
Messiah and the Gospel, how can it be that they will look for another Messiah,
and receive the Antichrist as their Savior. Next, we read of their conversion
in the Scripture, but nothing of their rejection of Christ after their
conversion. And thirdly, seeing (as your Church says) the Antichrist shall be
sent to them, and they shall receive him, because they received not Christ
Jesus: of force then it cannot be after their conversion. For the cause, to
wit, their hardness of heart, and refusal of the true Messiah being taken away,
this punishment should not be sent unto them after their embracing of Christ:
so not after their conversion. And if you say, before their conversion; then I
say, either must you make the reign of your Antichrist longer then three years
and an half (which your Church does) and put a greater space betwixt the
perdition of him, and the end of the world, then your Church does. (For
Bellarmin puts but 45. days between his perdition and the end of the world,
lib. 3. de Romans Pont. cap. 17.) and so overthrow your own doctrine concerning
the Antichrist, that ye may establish your imaginary Antichrist. Or else what
likelihood is there that ever they shall be converted to Christ, which is
against both the Scripture, and your own doctrine? For seeing the Jews are to
receive him as their Messiah, and seeing he is to build their Temple, restore
their ceremonies, and obtain the Monarchy of the whole world, especially by
their help (as your doctrine affirms, Bellar. lib. 3. de Romans Pont. cap. 12.
16, etc.) shall not this drive them further from Christ, and harden their hearts
more then ever it was before? And seeing he shall reign but three years and an
half, and they cannot embrace the true Savior, as long as he reigns (for they
cannot embrace both the Antichrist, and the true Christ together) and seeing
after his death the day of judgment shall come immediately, or at the least 45.
days after (as Bellarmin says:) how can it be possible that they shall ever be
turned to Christ before the end of the world, if this your doctrine be true?
Therefore they cannot receive the Antichrist before their conversion, and so
they shall never receive the Antichrist. So then to conclud this point, as the
Messiah which the poor blinded Jews look for, will never come, the true Messiah
being come already, whom they crucified; so the Antichrist which ye imagine,
will never come; for the true Antichrist (which either ye will not see, or else
if ye see, ye will not confess him) lurks within your own bosom, these many
years, whom ye labor to cover, that he should not be seen.

But how prove ye that the Jews will receive the Antichrist? Because our Savior
says to the Jews, If another shall come in his own name, him ye will receive. I
grant indeed our Savior so speaks. But first, I say, this other is not to be
restricted to the Antichrist only, but to be referred to all false Prophets,
who shall come, not being sent of God: so Nonnus, so Lyra expone it: and this
was fulfilled long since in receiving of Theudas and Cozban, and other
deceivers whom they received, Joseph. de bello Judaico, lib. 2. cap. 12. Pet.
Gala. lib. 40. cap. 21. As for Augustine, it is true, he expones it of the
Antichrist. But if Bellarmin lib. 3. de Romans Pont. cap. 12. rejects Augustins
opinion concerning the generation of the Antichrist, that he shall come of the
Tribe of Dan, because it cannot (says he) be proved by the Scripture: shall it
not also be lawful for us, not to be bound to the exposition of Augustine,
unless it be certain by the Scripture: so give us that liberty which ye take to
your selves. Your first reason then has no feet: for this place speaks of all
false Prophets whatsoever which the Jews should receive; and it has been
accomplished sundry times among them: therefore this yet remains unproved, that
the Jews shall receive the Antichrist. This for the first part of the argument.
The second part of your argument is, The Pope came never in his own name, but
in the name of Christ; therefore he is not the Antichrist. Your antecedent I
deny. For if ye will credit Franciscus Toledo, if ye know him, writing upon the
same place he says, He shall come in his own name, who truly shall have no
divine virtue, but shall fain himself to be sent of God, as the false Prophets
came in their own name, because they were not truly sent of God. And this is
that (saih he) which is said now (meaning in this place) if any shall come in
his own name, that he is not truly sent of God, neither has Gods power. So
then a false Prophet is said both to come in the Name of God, and in his own
name: In the Name of God, falsely vaunting so: in his own name, because God
sends him not; but he intrudes himself without a lawful calling. Now to answer
you then, I say, the Pope comes in the Name of Christ, as his Vicare: I grant,
he and his Clergy so vaunt; but falsely. For the truth is, he has come, and he
comes in his own name, and that truly, because the Lord never sent him, but he
has intruded himself without God his calling: therefore this cannot free him,
but he may be the Antichrist. But how prove ye that he comes in Christ his
Name, and not in his own name? Because (say ye) he calls himself the Vicar of
Christ, and the servant of the servants of God. A pretty argument: He so calls
himself: Ergo, he is so. Who will credit either you or him in your own cause?
Is this all ye can do for your Pope? He is called so: Ergo, he is so. Augustine
says, Non attendamus ad linguam, sed ad facta, Tract 3 in Epist. Joan. Let us
not take heed to the tongue, but to the deeds. For if all be asked, and all
with one mouth confess Christ, let the tongue cease a little, and ask the life:
Interroga vitam: and again, whosoever denies Christ (factis) by his deeds, is
Antichrist. The idolaters of Ephesus might have reasoned so for their great
Goddess Diana, Acts 19.27. She is called a great Goddess: Ergo, she is so
indeed. And what false Prophet yet ever came, but they said they came in the
Name of God, and they called themselves and were called by these whom they
deceived, the servants and Prophets of the Lord, Jer. 23.25. Ezec. 13.6.7. and
yet will you frame this argument for them, as you do for your Pope? All the
false Prophets said, they came in the Name of God, and were called by these
whom they deceived, the servants of God; therefore they came not in their own
name, but in the Name of God. Did not the false Apostles in Ephesus say, they
were the Apostles of Christ, and yet they were found liars? Rev. 2.2. And did
not the Synagogue of Satan call themselves Jews, and yet they blasphemed in so
speaking? Rev. 2.9. Does not the Harlot with whom the Nations of the earth have
committed fornication, say in her heart, she is a Queen, Rev. 18.7. and yet she
is that great Harlot? Rev. 17 4. And is not her cup of gold, and yet the drink
therein is abomination? And should not the Antichrist sit in the temple of God,
and yet he is the son of perdition, and an adversary to God, and to Jesus
Christ? 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. And said not the Devil of himself, that all the Kingdoms
of the world were given to him, and he would give them to whom he would? Matthew.
4.8, 9 and yet he was a liar? So if this argument of yours will follow, The
Pope is called the Vicar of Christ, and the servant of the servants of God,
therefore he came never in his own name, and so he is not the Antichrist: you
may with as good reason conclud, that the false Prophets, and false Apostles,
came not in their own name, but in the Name of God, because they are called the
servants of God, both by themselves, and also by these who were deceived by
them. Yea, you may with as good reason conclud, that the Antichrist is not the
son of perdition, and adversary to God, 2 Thessalonians 2.3.4. and that all the
Kingdoms of the world are given to the Devil, and that he has the power in his
hand of giving them to whom he will; because the Scripture foretold of the
one, that he should have horns like the Lamb, Rev. 17. and the other ascribes
this right and power to himself, Matthew. 4.9. It is good therefore that you
cannot defend your Pope from being the Antichrist, unless with him also you
defend all the false Prophets, false Apostles, false Churches, the Antichrist,
and the Devil himself, from being the thing which they are indeed. But who will
venture the salvation of their soul, upon this so silly and foolish a reason?
But, I pray you, M. Gilbert, let me ask you this; Is your Pope the servant of
the servants of God, and the Vicar of Christ, as he calls himself? Dare you
avow this in the presence of him who shall judge the quick and the dead, that he
is so as he calls himself? Did ever Christ Jesus either tread upon the necks of
Kings and Emperors with his feet? Or was he ever lifted up and carried upon the
shoulders of noblemen? Or did he ever give his feet to Emperors to kiss, as
your Popes have done, as your own Histories do witness? And have ye ever read
what one of his own Archbishops of Colen, one of his own Religion, writes to
Pope Nicolaus the first, five hundred years ago? Speaking to him, he says,
Thou pretends the person of the Pope, but thou plays the tyrant: we feel under
the habit of a Pastor, a wolf; the style belyes the parent. Thou vaunts thy
self to be God by thy deeds: while as thou art the servant of servants, thou
contends to be Lord of Lords: according to the discipline of Christ our Savior,
thou art the least of all ministers of the Temple of God; but thou by the
ambition of ruling goes to ruin: whatsoever likes thee, is lawful, Aventinus
lib. 4. annalium. This was evil in those days, but there are worse since. And
what now, Reader, shall we say of the Pope, since his own Archbishop has so
written of him? You say he is the Vicar of Christ, but Christ Jesus in his
latter Testament, did never leave him to be in his stead. For in the 4. Ephesians.
11. He gave Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Doctors, for the work
of the ministry, and the building of the body of Christ. But that he ever left
a Pope to be head of the Church in his stead, to be a Monarch in this earth, to
reign in Rome, and to be Lord over the servants of God, there is not a syllable
in the whole Book of God to prove it. And because you say, he is the servant of
servants: what service, I pray you, does he whereby he makes it manifest that
he is a servant indeed? For the principal service of the Ministry of the
Church, stands in preaching the Word, which he neither does, neither thinks
that it appertains to him to do. Yea, what is it that appertains to any Lord,
King, or Monarch in the earth, that he ascribes not to himself, and does not
also practice? Yea, as though that were too little, what either style or
properties or works, which are peculiar only to God his majesty, that he
ascribes not to himself: as, God willing, shall be proved afterward in the third
mark of the Antichrist. So that Aventinus says of the Pope, He who is the
servant of servants, is the Lord of Lords, and he desires to beas though he
were God. He speaks great things, as if he were God. He changes the laws,
establishes his own. He reaves, he spoils, he deceives, he slayes: that man of
perdition, whom men use to call Antichrist (speaking of the Pope) in whose
forehead the name of blasphemy is written: I am God, I cannot err. So what is
this else, but a horrible mocking both of God and man, to style him the servant
of servants, seeing he has lifted up himself so far above both God and man? So
then to conclud this, as Goliath his own sword slew himself, so the reason which
ye bring to defend your Pope from being the Antichrist, does most evidently
convict him to be the Antichrist. He may justly be called the Antichrist, who
under pretense of the Vicar of Christ, and the servant of servants, is Monarch
and Lord over all: this you cannot deny. Because the Scripture describes the
Antichrist to have two horns like the Lamb, to sit in the Temple of God, to
have a golden cup, and yet to speak like the Dragon; to be adversary to God,
and to lift himself above all that is called God, Rev. 13. and 17. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
But so have the Popes of Rome done, as it has, and shall be proved by their own
doctrine and practice, and which you cannot deny: Therefore he is in very deed,
that Antichrist which was to come. And this for your first reason.

Master Gilbert Brown.
Secondly, S. Paul in describing of the Antichrist, tells that he shall be but
one, the son of perdition, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. Now then, if there shall be but one
chief Antichrist, whether is this present Pope he, or some other before him?
For every man knows that there have been mo then 230. Popes, as all the Writers
of their lives restifie. They cannot all be Antichrists; for that repugns to S.
Paul, who has put him in the singular number. And if M. John will follow the
Word, as he says he does, where will he find that there shall be many chief
Antichrists and not one only? For that place of S. John, where he says, That
now are there many Antichrists, 1. John 2.18. can no ways be understood, but
of the forerunners of the great Antichrist. For at that time M. John will
grant himself, that the great Antichrist, the son of perdition, was not begun.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
Your second reason is, the Antichrist is but one singular person. The Popes
have been many: therefore they are not the Antichrist. I deny your proposition;
for there lies all the controversy. We say, the Antichrist is not this Pope,
or that Pope, a certain person: but we ascribe this name to the whole seat and
the succession of your Popes: We say, the body and the Kingdom of your Roman
Church, whereof your Popes are the heads, is that Antichrist which was to come.
So if you prove that the Antichrist should be but a particular person, and not
a body, a Kingdom, a seat and succession of men that are adversaries to God and
to Jesus Christ, I will grant you have sufficiently cleared your Pope from
being Antichrist. But content your self, M. Gilbert, this ye will never prove
by the Scripture: and therefore ye must let your Popes be accounted the
Antichrist still. And if this reason of yours be good, the Antichrist is one
certain person: therefore the Popes, because they are many, are not the
Antichrist: wherefore, I pray you, shall not this also be good; The Vicar of
Christ is one certain man, but the Popes are many: therefore they are not
Christ his Vicar? What difference, I pray you, is there between the one and the
other? And if ye will say, the Vicar of Christ is not one singular man, but a
succession of many in one office: why will ye not also grant, that the
Antichrist is not a singular man, but the succession of many in the self-same
impiety? So either choose you, whether will ye grant that the Antichrist is not
one singular man, but a succession of many; or else that the Popes are not
Christ his Vicar: For the one ye must do, if this reason of yours hold forth
But how do ye prove that the Antichrist is but one singular person? You say,
that S. Paul tells that he shall be but one. How would ye have cried out, if I
had fathered such a falsehood upon the Spirit of God, as you do here? But let
such be far from me. You say, S. Paul calls him the son of perdition, and puts
him in the singular number: therefore ye say, the Antichrist shall be but one
singular person. I fear ye take pleasure to deceive the simple with such silly
reasons. Our Savior says, That a good man, (...), out of the treasure of his
heart, brings forth good things, Matthew. 12.35. And he says, The Sabbath was
made, (...), for man, and not (...), man for the Sabbath, Mark 2.27. And also
he says, (...), man shall not live of bread only, Luke 4 4. Also that (...),
the man of God may be made perfect, 2. Tim. 3.17. And, For it behooves, (...), a
Bishop, or over-seer, etc. Here are the same phrases of speech: they speak all
of a man in the singular number, with that same Greek article (...), as the
Apostle speaks here in describing the Antichrist; and yet I suppose ye will not
be so ignorant or impudent, as to say, that our Savior, and the Apostle, speak
of one singular person in these places. So what warrant have you to gather that
here, which you dare not gather out of the like phrases of the Scripture? If
then in these places there is not a singular man understood, suppose they speak
of a man in the singular number; it will not follow that the Antichrist must be
one singular person, because the Apostle speaks of him as of one man, in the
singular number; for the phrases are all one: But the first ye must grant,
therefore the next will follow. Secondly, in the 16. of Matthew 18. our Savior
says, (...), Upon this rock I will build my Church: he speaks here in the
singular number, with the same article (...), that the Apostle speaks of, in
describing the Antichrist. Now let me use this same argument against your
Popes, that they are not this rock upon the which the Church is built, as you
say, as you have used here to prove that he is not the Antichrist. This rock
upon the which Christ promised to build his Church, is but one singular person,
because our Savior puts him in the singular number ((...)) upon this rock: But
your Popes of Rome are not one singular person, but many: Therefore your Popes
of Rome are not this rock upon the which Christ promised to build his Church.
What difference is there between your argument for the Pope, and this argument
against the Pope, seeing both are grounded upon the like phrase? Choose you
then (M. Gilbert) whether will you have the Antichrist not to be one singular
person, but a succession of many? Or will you have the Popes not to be the rock
whereupon the Church is built? For the one ye must. Thirdly, I say the Apostle
Paul says, speaking of the Antichrist, That the mystery of iniquity is begun
even now to work, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. And John says, This is the spirit of that
Antichrist which ye heard was to come, and is even now present in the world, 1.
John 4.3. And the Apostle says, The Lord shall destroy him with his presence.
2 Thessalonians. 2.8. And your doctrine is, that he shall not come while the end of the
world. Now what a monstrous man will you make him, whose spirit was in the
days of the Apostles, and who must continue till the end of the world, if the
Scripture be true, a man of fifteen hundred years of age already? Is this
credible? Or are you able to persuade men that have but the least drop of
reason left in them, and believe the Scripture, that the Antichrist should be
but one singular man, since the Scripture says, that his spirit was present in
the world, and his iniquity even then began to work in the Apostles days, that
is ^ 1500. years since, and he shall continue to the end of the world? Fourthly,
is it possible that one singular person can perform all these things, which
either the Scripture or your own doctrine tell he shall do? For the Scripture
says, He shall resemble the Lamb with horns: He shall speak like the Dragon: He
shall do all the power of the former Beast. He shall make all men to worship the
beasts image: He shall make all, both rich and small, etc. to receive his mark,
etc. so that no man shall buy or sell, but he that has his mark, etc. so that
all Nations shall be drunken with the wine of her fornication, Rev. 13 and 14.
and 17. and 18. And your doctrine is, that he shall build the Temple of
Jerusalem, which the Turks have now in possession: that he shall destroy Rome:
that he shall abolish all Religion, and all the outward ceremonies thereof: that
he shall conquer and overcome the strongest Empires in the earth, and be Monarch
of the whole world, Bellarm. lib. 3. de Romans Pont. and Rhemists annot. upon 2 Thessalonians. 2. and Sanderus in his demonstrations. Now, is it likely, or can it be,
that any one mortal man is able to perform so great and so wonderful things?
Was there ever yet any King, Emperor, or any other creature under heaven, that
ever performed so great and wonderful things, and specially in so short a time,
as ye assign to your imaginary Antichrist, as of three years and an half? That
one city of Troy kept all the Grecians for the space of ten years almost
besieging it, before they could overcome it. The Temple of Jerusalem was seven
years in building by Solomon, who had riches and wealth above all the Kings in
the earth who had an hundred fifty three thousand and six hundred workmen for
the same, 2. Chron. 2. That great Conqueror Alexander, with whom no Monarch is
comparable, neither in power, nor happy success was not able to conquer all
Asia the space of ten years, which was the fourth part of the world. And shall
we think that a miserable Jew by the help of their scattered people, being an
enemy to God, and all good men, shall be able to overcome that great Monarchy of
the Turks, against whom all the power of Christendom has not prevailed: and
not only to overcome them, but also to overcome all the Empires and Kingdoms in
the earth, and to restore the city of Jerusalem, and build the Temple again
from the foundation, and abolish all Religion, both true and false, except his
own: (For this is the doctrine of your Church concerning the Antichrist) and
that in so short a time as three years and an half, as you ascribe unto him?
Who will believe you, M. Gilbert? Will any Turk, Christian, or Jew himself
believe, that any one man, suppose his age were never so long, and his person
never so strong, can be able to accomplish and perform so many, and so
wonderful things, as your own doctrine affirms shall be done by the Antichrist?
So this doctrine of yours, that the Antichrist shall be but one singular person,
can neither stand with the Scripture, nor yet with your own doctrine concerning
the Antichrist. Fifthly, as partly has been proved, this is the common phrase
of the Scripture, in the person of one to understand a multitude. And therefore
Daniel in the describing of the Monarchies, he compares them to sundry beasts
in the singular number, to a Lion, a Bear, a Leopard, etc. and yet by them was
not signified one certain person, but a succession of Kings in the self-same
Kingdom: and therefore the Antichrist is likened to a beast, to signify a
Kingdom and succession of persons in that Kingdom, Rev. 13. Tertullian calls
the Antichrist, A City which prostituts its self to fornication, to wit,
spiritual, de resurrectione carnis. Ambrose in Apoc. 17 calls the woman clad
with purple (who is Antichrist) the city of the Devil. Augustine calls that
beast which is the Antichrist, the ungodly and body of the wicked, who fights
against the Lamb: a people contrary the people of God, which jointly with their
head, is called the Antichrist: an heretical Church, which is called Babylon.
Nonnulli non ipsum Principem, sed universum quodammodo corpus ejus, id est, ad
eum pertinentem hominum multitudinem, simul cum suo Principe, hoc loco
Antichristum intelligi volunt: Homil. 10. in Apoc. and homil. 13. and de
civitate Dei, lib. 18. cap. 2. and lib. 20. cap. 19. Gregory a Pope, says, in
moralibus, lib. 33. cap. 26 The beast is a multitude of them who preach the
Antichrist. And Thomas a Papist says, The beast (which is the Antichrist) is a
body: and so not a singular person. And the ordinar Gloss says, The head and
the body together, make the Antichrist. And Hugo a Cardinal, calls him, an
university, or commonality. So not only the Scripture and reason, but also the
testimonies of these Fathers, and some of your selves concur all in this, that
the Antichrist is not a singular person, but a body, an estat, a succession.
So, I hope, the Reader has seen nothing, either by Scripture, or by reason
alleged by M. Gilbert, wherefore the Pope may not be the Antichrist.

Master Gilbert Brown.
Thirdly, S. Paul says, He shall be an adversary, and is extolled above all
that is called God, or that is worshipped, etc. which no manner of way can
agree with the Pope. For he calls himself, the servant of God, and prays most
humbly to Christ, and desires support at his holy Mother and Saints. If he deny
this, I cannot tell what any man can say to him, but whether God will or not,
he will have the Pope to be the Antichrist, albeit it be repugnant to the Word
of God. These are no dark prophesies, but manifest sayings of Christ and his
Apostles. I would wish M. John to read S. Augustine de Antichristo, Tom. 9.

Master John Welsch his Reply.
I come to your third raison. The Antichrist shall be an adversary, and is
extolled above all that is called God. I grant that. But the Pope is not an
adversary, etc. This I deny: the which if you prove, then shall I grant he is
not the Antichrist. Let us see your proofs then, for they had need to be sure,
seeing all your Religion and safety of your Church depend upon it: and if ye
cannot clear him from being an adversary to God, and from lifting up himself
above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, then your Head and your
Religion is gone. You say, he is not an adversary to God, because he calls
himself the servant of God, and prays most humbly to Christ. We answered to
this before. It is not his styles which he sacrilegiously claims to himself,
nor yet his form of godliness, that can free him from this: for wolves will be
clad in sheep skins, Matthew. 7.15. And false Apostles and Prophets have
pretended the authority and calling of God: And the Apostle testifies, That
there are many which profess God in word, Tit. 1.16. and Satan can transform
himself in an angel of light, 2. Cor. 11.14. And it was foretold, that the
Antichrist should sit in the temple of God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. that is, in an
eminent and high room in the Church of God, and that he should have two horns
like the Lamb, Rev. 13.11. that is, as he interprets it, in Apoc. homil. 11.
two testaments, as the Church has; but yet speaks like the Dragon; that is, as
he interprets it, who under the name of a Christian, pretends the Lamb, that he
may spout in more secretly the poison of the Dragon: and that harlot who makes
all Nations drunken with the wine of her fornication, should have a golden cup;
that is, a show of godliness, that he might the more easily deceive. And Origin
says upon Matthew, treatise 28. and treatise 24. The Antichrist holds nothing
but the Name of Christ; neither does he his works, nor teaches his truth.
Christ is the truth, and the Antichrist is a disaguised truth, a disaguised
justice and mercy. He takes the testimonies of his false doctrine out of the
Scripture, for these that will not be pleased otherwise; and he sits upon
the chair of the Scriptures, showing himself as though he were God. And Cyprian
says, Epist. 7. That they teach despair under the pretense of hope, and
perfidy under the pretense of faith, and the night for the day, and perdition
in stead of salvation, and the Antichrist under the Name of Christ. So then if
ye will believe either the Scripture, or these testimonies of the Fathers,
neither the styles, nor yet the show of godliness which your Popes have, will
clear them from being the Antichrist.

And as to his humility toward men, we have heard somewhat of it before: And
as to his humility to God, we shall hear of it hereafter, whether he be so
humble as he pretends, or not. And certainly, it had not been possible that his
spiritual idolatry and abominations had been so greedily drunken out by all
Nations, if they had not been put in a golden cup, Rev. 17.4. and his delusions
had not been so strong to deceive, and they had not been a deceiveable
unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. and 11. that is, such an unrighteousness as
had the show of righteousness, that it might the more easily deceive: and the
doctrine of the Dragon had not been so easily and universally embraced, if he
had not had two horns like the Lamb, Rev. 13.11. that is, the pretense of the
Royal and Priestly authority of the Son of God. So he has taken on these
masks, that he may the more easily deceive. It is not then these visards and
masks that will be able to hide him from these whose eyes the Lord has opened.
And as for the third thing the invocation of Saints departed: I say, this
argument is so far from clearing him from being an adversary to God that if
there were no more, it is sufficient to convict your Popes and your Church,
that they are adversaries to God. For he is an adversary to God who robs God of
any portion of his glory, and gives it to his creatures: My glory (says the
Lord) I will not give to another, Isai. 42.8 But the Pope and his Church do so,
in giving invocation or prayers (which is a part of Gods glory and worship)
unto the Saints departed For the Lord says. Call upon me in the day of thy
trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me, Psalm. 50.14.15.
Therefore your Popes and your Church are adversaries to God in this point. For
we ought to call upon them only, in whom only we ought to believe, Romans 10.14.
But we ought only to believe in God, Jer. 17.5. therefore we should only pray
to him through Jesus Christ. And he only should be called upon, who knows our
necessities, and is able to hear our prayers, and to grant them. But only God
in Christ, the searcher of the heart, does these things: therefore he only
ought to be called upon. Here therefore ye give out a sufficient evidence
against your Popes and your Church, that you are Antichristian, and adversaries
unto God: For that which ye bring here to cleanse him, does fyle him.

Indeed, I will neither deny the hypocrisy nor idolatry of your Popes, for
they both agree unto them: and that which Origin says of the Antichrist, is
true of them: For they hold nothing of Christ, but his Name: They neither do
his works, nor teach his truth. And yet for all their hypocrisy and pretense
of godliness and humility, these notes and marks of the Antichrist, as the Word
of God has described him, does every way agree to them. So that if the Word of
God be true in setting down the marks of the Antichrist, your Popes who bear
these marks, of necessity must be the same. You wish me in the end to read S.
Augustine de Antichristo, tom. 9. It would appear that you think, that the
reading of that work would have altered my mind somewhat concerning your Popes,
that they are not the Antichrist: and it appears to me, by that your earnest
desire, that the doctrine set down in that Treatise, is worthy of all credit
and authority, and that your self is of that self-same judgment concerning the
Antichrist with the Author of that Treatise: for I think you would not have
wished me to read that thing, which ye your self believes not to be true, I
therefore read it, and read it over again. And beside many other things, I find
this in it, that the Antichrist should be born of a Virgin, by the help of the
Devil as Christ was born of the Virgin by the work of the holy Ghost. I
wondered that you should have wished me to read that Book, in the which there
was so manifest an error, and that contrary the doctrine of your own Church.
You should beware of this (M. Gilbert:) for if your Head and Church get wit of
it, they will not only count you a bad defender of the Catholic Faith, as you
say you are: but also it may be they suspect you of heresy, who do wish your
adversaries to read that Book wherein so manifest an error is, and that against
the doctrine of your own Church. For who will think of you, but that ye are of
that same opinion your self, seeing you are so earnest with others to read the
same. Bellarmin that great defender of your Catholic Faith, was more wise then
you in this point. For first, he says, lib. 3. de Romans Pont. cap. 12. There is
a manifest error in that treatise. Next, he says, It is certain that that
treatise cannot be Augustins; but it is probable (says he) that it is Rabanus
his work. So to conclud this, I assure you (M. Gilbert) I am of the same mind
that I was concerning your Popes, for all the reading of that work: But I am
not of the same mind toward you, that I was before the reading of the same:
for either I think you have been very foolish in wishing me to read that which
you believed not your self to be true: or else, that ye defend a manifest
error; not only against the truth, but also against the doctrine of your own
Church. And let your Pope, who is the bond of unity among you, see to this, how
to reconcile you and Bellarmin, two defenders of his Catholic Faith; you
saying that that work is Augustins, and Bellarmin flatly denying it, and
affirming that it cannot be his: you wishing your adversary to read it, and
Bellarmin confuting a manifest error in it. But betwixt you be it. Now this is
all that you have said for the defense of your Pope, which are but as figg
leaves, which cannot hide his nakedness.

Now I will let thee see (Christian Reader) what we have for us, wherefore we
affirm and teach, and is ready also (as thousands have done before us) to seal
it with our blood, that the Popes of Rome are the Antichrist, which the
Scripture has foretold should come, time has made manifest, and the Lord his
mouth has in a part consumed. And first, I will lay this ground which M.
Gilbert cannot gain say, and the conscience of all men will subscribe to. That
as the true Christ is sufficiently described in the Old and New Testament, so
the Antichrist is sufficiently described there also. And as he is to be
believed, under the pain of the endless damnation of their souls, to be the
true Christ, to whom the prophesies of the Old Testament concerning the Savior
to come, does agree, and of whom the New Testament testifies that they are
accomplished: so he must be that Antichrist which the Scripture foretold was
to come, to whom every one of the marks and properties of the Antichrist set
down in the same, do agree, and in whom they are found to be accomplished. Let
us therefore out of the Scripture search the marks of the Antichrist, and then
let us see whether their Popes of Rome be stamped with these marks or not. I
speak not now of the many Antichrists whereof John speaks, 1. John 2.18. which
were forerunners of that great defection, which was foretold should come in
the Church of God: but of that chief and great Antichrist, who not in one or
two things only, but almost in all the points of his Religion, should be
contrary to Jesus Christ, whom these places of Scripture, 1. John 4.3. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Rev. 11.13.17.18. do describe. And while as I affirm, that the Popes
of Rome are this great Antichrist: I understand it thus: That they are the
Prince and Head of that defection and apostasy, which the Scripture fore-shew
and foretold was to come in the Church. For I do not think that all the
strength and force of the Antichrist is included in the Pope; but the Pope and
his Kingdom which is contrary to the Kingdom of Christ, is most truly called
the Antichrist: whereof, because the Pope is the Prince and Head: therefore by
that figure, taking the part for the whole, I call him the Antichrist. And in
this we follow the Scripture: for the Scripture speaking of the Antichrist,
sometimes calls it, a defection, and a mystery of iniquity, and the second
beast, that has horns like the Lamb, and the Harlot: and sometimes points out
the principal and chief in this Kingdom, on whom the whole body of iniquity
does hang: as when he writes here, the man of sin, and son of perdition, which
is an adversary, who extolls himself above all, etc. which is most properly
spoken, not of the body, but of the Head. Having shown now in what sense we
take the Antichrist, we will go to the matter. And first, to that 2 Thessalonians.
2.3.4. where he is described, and that by no dark prophesies, as you say, but
by plain sayings. First, therefore, the Scripture calls him there, a man of
sin, a son of perdition. The which to be accomplished in your Popes, your own
Histories, Cardinals, Councils, Favorers, Friars, Friends, and themselves, do
sufficiently testify. So that if they speak true of themselves (which you
cannot deny) then of all the monsters that ever the earth has born, some of
your Popes have been the greatest monsters. For in this point, M. Gilbert, we
deal not with you, as ye deal with us: for ye cite our enemies as witnesses of
us, which should have no credit; and we cite your own friends, and these of
your own Religion. So that they shall be fetched out as witnesses against you in
this point, whether your Popes be the men of sin, and sons of perdition, or
not. What Commandment is there of the first or second Table, which they have
not violated in the highest degree? 1. Whoremongers. 2. Adulterers. 3.
Sodomits. 4. Incestuous. 5. Fosterers and maintainers of harlots. 6. Tyrants.
7. Devilish, and Sorcerers. 8. In pride passing all creatures under heaven. 9.
Atheists without God. 10. Perjured. 11. Burreaus. 12. Bawds, and merchants of
whores. 13. Sacrilegious. 14. Traitors. 15. Seditious. 16. Blasphemous. 17.
Parricides. 18. Poysoners of Emperors, Senators, Cardinals, yea of their own
parents and sisters. 19. Helpers of the Turks. 20. Drunkards. 21. Simoniacks.
22. Monsters. 23. Bastards. 24. Arrians. 25. Idolaters. 26. And so contentious,
that sometimes there was two, sometimes three, and sometimes four, all Popes,
striving for the Popedom together. It were longsome and tedious to bring in
their monstrous lives, as their own flatterers, Friars, Cardinals, and others
of their own Religion, have written the same. I will therefore only set down a
few for example, for the probation of this first point.

Leo the third, he by his authority allowed, and by his Bulls confirmed a false
and adulterous blood, which some lying deceivers affirmed to spring out of a
certain wooden Crucifix, to be the true blood of the Son of God, and caused a
solemn festival day to be made to the honor of it. What horrible, both
blasphemy and idolatry was this? The Devil himself could not have done that
which the devilish Pope did. The Serpent which deceived Eva, could not have
persuaded men that Christ Jesus, who (as the Apostle says) but once shed his
blood, and is now in glory at the right hand of his Father, did shed his blood
again, which this Pope confirmed and allowed.

John the 8. a woman, or rather Joan, alone of that name, before called
Gilberta, an harlot, who in the time of her procession, brought forth a child,
and died thereof, sat in the Papal seat of Rome two years and six months,
that all might understand that that prophecy of the great whore that sat on
many waters, which is spoken in the Rev. 17.1. was fulfilled in the idolatrous
Church of Rome. And because some of you deny this therefore I have cited these
Authors testifying the same. Rodolphus Monachus Benedict. lib. 5. cap. 32. and
Marianus Scotus, who died anno 1086. and Sigebertus a Monk, who lived anno
1110. and Martinus Polonus the Popes penitentiar, and Laonicus Atheniensis,
lib. 6. apodeixeos, and flores tempor. and Franciscus Petrarcha. and Joannes
Bocatius in libro de claris mulierib. cap. 99. and Antoninus Archbishop of
Florence, and sundry others, which for shortness Tomit, as Platine, Mantuanus
Baptista, and sundry others.

Steven the 6. he caused take out of the grave the carcass of Formosus, who had
mansworn himself, and spoils it of the Pontifical habit, and commands it to be
buried again in the burial of the laics, cuts off two of his fingers, and
casts them into Tyber, and abrogats his decreets, and decreed, that the
ordinances of Formosus should be void, which is a point of Donatism, as
Sigebert a Monk notes. But Romanus the first, and Theodorus the second, Popes,
his successors, they allow Formusus, and abrogat the acts of Stephanus: and so
did John the 10. by a Council of 74. Bishops, restored the acts of Formosus to
the full, and abrogated the acts of Stephanus, and condemned them. Yet for all
this, Sergius the 3. having casten down Christopher the first out of his Papal
seat, afterward did cast him in prison, where he died, and so obtained this
Satanical seat by the help of Marosia his harlot; he causes take out the body
of Formosus, which had lain eight years in the grave, degrades it from the
Pontifical honor, cuts off the three fingers which Stephanus the 6. had left,
and with them casts his carcass in the river Tyber, and abrogats his acts, and
ordained anew them which was ordained by Formosus, which is a point of
Donatism. And this most filthy adulterer, begets John the 12. an adulterous
bastard, who was Pope afterward, with Marosia his harlot.

Pope Landus he begets in adultery John the 11. before he was Pope, who
afterward was Pope, Petrus Premonstratensis testis.

John the 11. or 10. Landus his adulterous son, he by the means of Theodora,
his impudent harlot, being then ruler of Rome, was first made Bishop of
Bononia, and then Archbishop of Ravenna, and then last of all, Bishop of Rome,
with whom he wallowed himself in whoredom, Luitprandus lib. 2. cap. 13. de
imper. But he by the means of Marosia, his harlots daughter, is cast in prison,
and there smothered. And her bastard son, whom some call John the 12. whom Pope
Sergius the 3. begat with her in adultery, is set up in the Popedom, and he
governs the same in that accustomed filthiness. So the Church of Rome was
governed by harlots, as notes Luitprandus lib. 3. cap. 12. and was made an
harlot, as it was prophesied of her, Rev. 17.1.

John, whom some call the 13. of that name, he is such a monster, that I know
not if ever the earth did bear a greater, who had sold himself to all sorts of
licentiousness, adulteries, incests, and most horrible cruelties, Luitprandus
in lib. 6. declares that. Of his Cardinals, of some he cuts out their tongues,
of some he cuts off their hands, of some their noses, of some their privy
members. He is accused in a Synod of his own Bishops before the Emperor Otho,
that he did not communicate: that he ordained Deacons in stables: that for money
he made children Bishops: that he defiled virgins and strangers: that he made
the Palace of Lateran a bordel-house: that he drank wine to the Devil: that in
his gaming at the dice, he sought the Devils help: that he committed a
threefold incest, one with two sisters, another with his fathers concubine,
the third with his niece: therefore he was deposed from his Popedom. But
afterward by the help of his harlots, was restored to it again, having dejected
Leo the 8. who was placed in his room by the Emperor. And last of all, in the
very act of adultery, he is stricken through (as some say) by the Devil, God
giving out that sentence against him, and so dies without repentance. These are
evil, but yet worse (if worse can be) did follow. For from Joan the 8. who was
a woman Pope, and an harlot, for the space of 156. years, (as Cardinal
Turrecremata summa de Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 23. reckons) to Sylvester the
second, who got the Popedom in the thousand year of our Lord. For that space, I
say, the Popes, suppose they vowed holy chastity, yet they were sold to all
lusts, and lived in all licentiousness, harlotry, adulteries, incests, and in
great contentions, cruelty, tyranny, and bribery: so that they might rather be
called the Princes of Sodom and Gomorrah, then the Vicars of Christ. Genebrard
a Papist, says, that for the space almost of 150. years, from Joan the 8. who
died 884. anno, after Genebrards account, unto Leo the 9. anno 1048. about
fifty Popes did revolt wholly from the virtue of their antecessors, and were
Apostatical rather then Apostolical, and obtained the Popedom, some by money,
some by force and bribery: And so no marvel, says he, suppose they were
monstrous, and entered not in by the door, but by the postern gate: Chronol.
lib. 4. seculo 10. But from Sylvester, it appears that the Devil was then
loosed in his full strength and liberty: and the Antichrist reigned then as a
Dragon in the Church of Rome. For from him till Gregory the 7. including them
both, being 18. or 19. Popes, their own Cardinal Benno writes, that they were
all Inchanters or Sorcerers.

Sylvester the second, a teacher of these devilish arts, he by a solemn bargan
with the Devil, that if he would promote him to the Popedom, he would give him
both soul and body afterward, obtains the same. He had a copperhead in secret,
which always gave him answer of that which he demanded of the Devil. He asked
of the Devil, how long he should live? Who doubtfully answering him, that he
should not die while he said Mass in Jerusalem. He rejoicing at that, and never
being purposed to go to Jerusalem, yet not being ware of the Devil his
subtilty, on a certain day went to a certain place in Rome which was called
Jerusalem, and there saying his Mass in that Temple, is suddenly taken with a
fever, and knowing by the noise of the Devils, his death to be at hand, in the
anguish of his soul confessed his devilry: and as Benno a Cardinal writes, he
desires his hands and tongue, and (as some other write) his privy members also
to be cut off, with the which he sacrificed to the Devil, and blasphemed God.
Now judge thou (Christian Reader) whether this seat and throne, and office of
the Popedom be of God or not, which the Devil can give, and has given to men,
and which men can obtain by devilry. And judge whether these men whom they call
the Head, light, and foundation of their Church, be Christ's Vicars, or the
Devils Vicars, or not. Yea, judge whether they are the very men of sin, and
sons of perdition, and the Antichrists which the Scripture foretold should come
in the Church, or not. But yet this did not fear his successors: for they
followed his footsteps in these devilish arts, as witnesses Platina,
Sabellicus, Volateran, Benno a Cardinal, and John de Pineda, part. 3. lib. 19.

Benedictus the 9 he was so skilled in these devilish arts of Magic, that
before he was made Pope, in the woods he called upon these evil spirits: and by
his devilry caused women to follow him, for to satisfy his filthiness. He by
these his devilish arts obtains the Popedom, and makes his former companions
Magicians, his most familiar counselors. But he fearing himself, sold the
Popedom unto his fellow Magician, called Joannes Gratianus, who was afterward
called Gregory the 6. for 1500. pound. Platin says, that by the judgment of
God he is damned for the selling of his Popedom. So after he is deposed, he is
suffocat by a Devil in the woods, and so he perishes. Of whom it is reported,
that after his death, he was seen monstrously to appear to a certain Hermit, in
his body like a Bear, in his head and tail like an Ass: and being asked how he
was so monstrously transformed? He answered, I wander in this shape, because I
lived in the Popedom without reason, without a law, and without God: (Out of
thy own mouth thou art condemned.) There was such tumults, contentions, and
great slaughters for that throne, betwixt Sylvester the 3. and Benedict his
faction, that Benno a Cardinal says, The Church was rent in pieces, and by
heresies, under the color of sweet honey, was suffocat. And Platin a Papist,
says, That the good was oppressed and rejected; and they that might do most by
pride and ambition, clamb up to that throne. But Gregory the 6. buys the
Popedom (as has been said) and so at one time there are three Popes, which
have three seats in Rome, whom Platin calls, Teterrima monstra, most ugly
monsters.

Gregory the 7. called otherwise Hildebrand, that most ugly monster, he having
by the means of Brazutus poisoned six Popes his predecessors, to make a way to
himself unto the Popedom, climbs up to that devilish throne that same night,
without consent either of people or Clergy. Of whom Benno a Cardinal writes,
that he was a notable Magician: that when it pleased him he would shake his
slieves, and sparks of fire would come out, whereby he deceived the minds of
the simple. Of whom the said Cardinal reports also, that coming to Rome at a
time, he left his book of his Magical and devilish arts behind him through
forgetfulness: and remembering himself, he sends two of his most faithful
servants about it, charging them straightly that they opened not the book: but
they, the more they were forbidden, were the more curious; and so opening the
book, and reading it, behold the angels of Satan appeared to them in such a
multitude, that scarcely did the two young men remain in their wits: and the
Devils said unto them, Wherefore have ye called us? Why do ye weary us? Tell us
what we shall do, otherwise we will fall upon you? Unto whom one of them
answered, Pull down these high walls which are near Rome. Who went and did it
quickly, and so the young men came to Rome exceedingly terrified. This same
Cardinal reports of him, that he seeking by many deceitful means to put down
the Emperor, hearing that the Emperor resorted often to a certain Church to his
prayers, and having searched the place where he used to bow himself, hired a
villain to lay great stones over the beams of the Temple where the Emperor
prayed, that they falling on the Emperor, might crush him in pieces, and so it
might be reckoned for a miracle of Gods judgments. But it fell not out so: for
the stone being so heavy, fell backward upon him, and breaking a table that was
among the beams, the stone and the miserable man fell down upon the floor of
the Church, and so the miserable villain is crushed in pieces, with the same
stone which he had prepared for the destruction of the Emperor. The same
Cardinal also reports, that he sought a response of the Sacrament of the Lords
body against the Emperor (as the Pagans wont to do at their Idols:) but when he
got none, he cast it in the fire. For the which cause the Bishop of Porteous in
open pulpit says, that Hildebrand and we should be burnt quick. He
excommunicats Henry the 4. deposed him from his Empire, and set up Rodolphus
Duke of Suevia in the Empire, and sent him a Crown with this verse, Petra dedit
Petro, Petrus Diadema Rodolpho. He loosed all his subjects from their oath of
obedience to him, and forbad his Bishops and Clergy, under the pain of
excommunication, to acknowledge him. This Emperor with his wife and son, came
in the Winter, and stood before his Palace barefooted, three days, in linning
clothes, and all that time could not get access to this proud Antichrist: who
answered, that his Holiness was not at leisure. Antoninus and Vincentius say,
that he granted to a Cardinal in the time of his death, that by the instigation
of the Devil he stirred up hatred, enmity, and wars among many. Of whom also
Cardinal Benno writes, That seeing the Devil could not get Christ subverted by
the Pagans, he labored to subvert his Name under the shape of a Monk, and
pretense of Religion.

The most cruel, arrogant, and treasonable tyrant Pope Alexander the third, he
continues a debate for that Satanical Seat twenty years: first with Victor,
then with Paschalis, Calixtus and Innocentius, who were elected Popes, and
succeeded one after another. He excommunicats the Emperor Frederick and Pope
Victor. He betrays the Emperor to the Souldan, sends his picture to him, and
writes to him to cut him off, if he would live in peace. He caused him to fall
down on the ground, and to seek mercy, and then tramped upon his neck (the
Monarch of the world) repeating that sentence of the Psalm, Super aspidem and
basiliscum, etc. Thou shall walk upon the serpent, and the cokatrice, and thou
shall tramp down the lion and the dragon. (O blasphemous mouth! for this is
spoken only of Christ.) And when the Emperor answered, Not to thee, but to
Peter. He replied, Both to me, and to Peter.

Boniface the 8. that three-formed beast, of whom the common Proverb is, that
he entered in like a Fox, rang like a Lion, and died like a Dog: He most
craftily deceived his predecessor Celestin, by causing one to speak to him for
many nights through a whistle, as though it had been the voice of an Angel:
Celestin, Celestin, renounce: for the burden is greater then thou art able to
bear. The which the simple man believing, renounced the Popedom, and so he
entered in his room: And having imprisoned the simple man his predecessor, he
was such a cruel Tyrant, that he persecuted some of his Cardinals every where,
spoiling them both of their livings, offices, and their heritages. He wasted
and spoiled the places where they were reset, so that they were compelled some
of them to dwell in the woods, flying his cruelty. Some did venture upon the
cruel hearted Pirates, thinking to find greater humanity with them, then with
their holy Father the Pope. He was also without all Religion: for when the
Archbishop of Genua upon Ashwednesday, upon his knees, bare headed, doing his
service in the Temple before the people: this holy Father looking on him took a
great many of ashes and cast in his eyes, saying these words, Remember man,
because thou art a Gibellin, and with the Gibellins thou shall return to ashes.
He nowrished harlots, he begat bastards, he affirmed that no man should judge
him, though he carried a number of souls with him to Hell.

John the 23. taught, that the souls separated from the bodies, did not see
Gods face while after the resurrection. and sent Friars to preach it. He was
declared by the people of Rome (as Marius says) to be an heretic, a Tyrant in
the Church, and a perturber of the public peace of Christians.

Benedict the 12. he bought from her other brother Gerardus with great gifts, a
sister of Franciscus Petrarcha, to commit villainy with. He nowrished many
harlots, of whom it is written, Iste fuit vero laicis mors, vipera Clero,
devius a vero: He was a death to the people, a viper to the Clergy, a wanderer
from the truth.

One part of Christendom, to wit, the Romans, make Urbanus the sixth Pope:
another sort make Clement the seventh Pope, whereby was such a schism, that it
went to their successors, and continued forty years. These Popes did mutually
by their Bulls excommunicat one another: they sent infamous libels one to
another, wherein they called other mutually Heretics, Schismatics,
Antichrists, Tyrants, Thieves, Traitors, Sowers of evil seed, and the sons of
Belial, and that worthily. Now because the Church of Rome says, that the Popes
cannot err, and that their judgment is infallible, and their decreets most
sure: therefore, if this be true, by their own testimonies they are heretics,
schismatics, and Antichrists, etc. Illyricus testifies, that Theodoricus Niem,
the Pope his most inward Scribe, faithfully set down the History of the Schism
of these Popes in three Books: wherein he says, that he found the devilish
craft of the Popes and their wickedness, whereby they horribly mocked God and
Religion, vexed and tyrannized over the Church of Christ, to be such, that
suppose he had read, heard, and seen much of their wickedness before, yet
having read that Book, he saw their wickedness was ten fold more then ever he
would have suspected. And therefore he says, Truly now I assent unto the
Canonists, who affirm, that the Pope is neither God nor man: for (says he)
they are incarnat Devils, and in malice and wickedness, is worse then Satan
himself.

Urban the sixth put five Cardinals in sacks, and cast them in the sea, and
drowned them. He condemned to death three other Cardinals, commanded their
heads to be cut off, their bodies to be roasted in a furnace, and being roasted
to put them into sacks; and whenever he went from one people to another, he
carried them upon horses, as spectacles: and that they might be known to be
Cardinals, he placed their red hats upon the sacks. Collenutius writes this in
his Neapolitan History. Was ever Nero or Heliogabalus so cruel?

John the 24. after his predecessor was poisoned, threatened the Cardinals to
choose whom he would: for this cause named they many, but with none of them was
he pleased: then they prayed to name whom he would Pope. He answered: Give me
S. Peter's mantle, and I will put it upon him who shall be Pope. And when they
had given it him, he put it on himself, and said, I am Pope. He is accused
before the Council of Constance of forty weighty and grave crimes, which were
sufficiently proved against him. And Bellarmin says, lib. 4. de Romans Pont.
cap. 14. there was 35. articles proved against him: that he poisoned his
predecessor Alexander: that he was an Heretic, a Simoniack, a Liar, an
Hypocrit, a Murderer, a Dicer, and Adulterer, a Sodomit, and what not? This
also was laid to his charge, that he denied life everlasting: and therefore is
deposed, and another set in his room. In his Epitaph it is written of him:
Pestis avaritiae me caecum reddidit, aurum Plus justo sitiens munera sacra
dedi. That is, The pest of avarice made me blind; and thirsting over much for
gold, I sold holy things too dear.

Sixtus the fourth, that vile and beastly monster: Wesselu-Groningensis in his
Treatise of the Popes pardons, writes of him, that he permitted to the whole
family of Cardinal Luciae, at the request of Petrus Ruerius Cardinal, and his
brother, to use Sodomitry; (O horrible abomination!) the three months of the
year, June, July and August. Agrippa says, That among the Bawds, or
maintainers of Bordels of these latter times, Sixtus the 4. was famous: for he
built a great Bordel-house in Rome, both for whoredom and Sodomitry: he fed
troops of harlots, gaining thereby great sums of money: for every harlot of
Rome every week paid to the Pope a Julian penny, which would amount in the
year to twenty thousand Ducats. But they say it is now augmented, that it comes
to forty thousand. In his Epitaph it is written, Riserat ut vivens coelestia
Numina Sixtus, etc. That is; While he was living, he mocked God: and dying, he
believed there was no God. An adulterer, the destruction of the Town, who past
Nero in wickedness; who was all wickedness and vice together.

Alexander the 6. he made a covenant with the Devil, and gave himself over to
the Devil, that by his help he might obtain the Popedom: the which when he had
obtained, he so holily led his life, that he preased to do nothing without
first he had asked the advice of the Devil. A Simoniack, an Atheist also: of
whom it is written, Vendit Alexander cruces, altaria, Christum: Emerat ille
prius, vendere jure potest. That is; He sold the Cross, Altars, and Christ
himself: he bought them first, and therefore he might sell them again. A
traitor also, for two hundred thousand Ducats, which he received from the Turk,
he poisons the Turks brother, Gemen Bajazets, being then captive in Rome. Who
also called for the Turks to assist him against the French King. He committed
vile incest with his own daughter Lucretia, of whom it is written in her
Epitaph, Alexandri filia, sponsa, nurus. He made one of his sons Prince of
Sicile, and another a Cardinal. He gave liberty to Petrus Mendoza a Spaniard, a
Cardinal, whose lust could not be satisfied, neither with a troup of harlots,
neither with the Queen her self, to commit Sodomitry with his own bastard son
Zanathensis. (O horrible impiety!) He commanded to poison some of the Senators
of Rome, and of his own Cardinals, who were at a banquet together with himself.
But in the righteous judgment of God, the flagon being changed at unawares by
him that filled the cups, he himself was poisoned, and so perishes. His
Epitaph says, Famae contemptor honestae, etc. Contemner of honesty, and all
wickedness it self. And in another of his Epitaphs it is written, That he
destroyed Cities and Kingdoms, and wasted the world with sword, fire and
robbery, to enrich his bastard children: and that he took away the laws both of
God and men, and the Gods themselves, that he might more licentiously sin.

Julius the 2. committed Sodomitry with two youths of an honorable lineage,
which the Queen of France sent to a Cardinal to be informed. He was such a
cruel Tyrant, that by his tyranny in the space of seven years, there was two
hundred thousand Christian men slain. Of whom it is written, that when he went
to the wars, he cast Peter's keys in Tybris, with this voice, Saint Peter's keys
help not, let Paul's sword defend us. Of whose pardons it is written, Vendit
enim coelos, non habet ipse tamen: He sells heaven, but has not heaven
himself.

Leo the 10. a beastly man, born to all licentiousness, a drunkard and Atheist
without God, when one of his Cardinals Petrus Rembus was repeating a sentence
out of the Gospel, he answered blasphemously, What profit that fable of Christ
has brought to us and our Church, it is sufficiently known to all ages.
Whereby, though all the world should deny it, this horrible monster
sufficiently declares, that he is that man of sin, and son of perdition.

Clemens the 8. and after some the 7. it is written of him, that he was a
bastard, a venefician, a Sodomit, a murderer, a bawd, a simoniack, an harlot,
perjured, a sacrilegious man, a diviner, and a crafts-man of all wickedness. Of
whom Pasquillus writes in his Epitaph; Hic est per quem tot prostant in urbe
puellae, etc. That is, A defiler of maidens, a banisher of honesty and
chastity; a honorer of all unclean persons; the infamy of the world; the decay
of the Empire; a contemner of God; a man of wickedness; a public enemy; a
false and ungrate man; a Tyrant: and such a man as there was never a worse in
the world.

Paul the 3. a vile beastly monster as ever the earth did bear, he sold his
sister to be an harlot to Pope Alexander the sixth, that he might be made a
Cardinal. He deceived a certain maid of honorable parentage, and deflored her
under the hope of marriage, of whom he begat Petrus Aloysius, that vile
Sodomit. He poisoned his mother and sister, that he might enjoy all the
heritage himself. He committed incest with another of his sisters, and
afterward poisoned her, because she loved others more then him. He committed
vile incest and adultery both, with his niece Nicolaus Quercaeus his wife, who
being deprehended in the very act by her husband, was so wounded by him, that
he kept the mark thereof to his very end. He committed also incest and adultery
with his own daughter Constantia. And that he might the more licentiously enjoy
his beastly lust with her, he poisoned her husband, named Bosius Sforsia. He
exceeded Heliogabalus and Commodus in filthiness, defiling his own sister,
niece and daughter. He had 45. thousand harlots on a row, of whom he received
tribut and toll every month, who were familiar with him day and night.

Julius the third, what better was he? who against the will of all his
Cardinals, made one Innocent, with whom he had done villainy, Cardinal, and
admitted him to his domestic familiarity. Vergerius writes, he abstained not
from his own Cardinals: and that he used such horrible blasphemies, as the most
vile bawds, and the most filthy villains use in the contempt of God. When he
missed his dish of bacon which was not set at the table, at the command of his
Physician, he brast forth in this blasphemy: Bring me my dish, al dispetto de
Dio: that is, In despite of God. Again, when he missed a dish of a cold
peacock, which he had commanded to keep to him, having other new roasted
peacocks, he vomit out most horrible blasphemy against God. And when one of his
Cardinals answered, Let not your Holiness be offended at so light a matter. He
replied; If God was so angry for the eating of one apple, that he cast out our
first parents out of Paradise; wherefore shall it not be lawful to me who is his
Vicar, to be angry for a peacock, seeing it is far greater then an apple? Now
let men judge, whether the Popes of Rome bear this mark of the Antichrist, or
not; that is, whether they be men of sin and sons of perdition, or not. Much
more might I have brought for the manifesting of this point, as the thirty
Schisms among their Church, which never Church had so many, their mutual
contentions, strifes, cruelties, exercised one toward another. But I hope this
will suffice to satisfy the conscience of all men, that the Popes are that man
of sin, and son of perdition. And certainly if others had written their
abominations, then men of their own Religion, their own flatterers and friends,
it would have seemed incredible. But their own Writers have by Gods providence
so discovered their abominations, that I think the consciences of all men may
be at a point in this. This for the first mark.

The second property of the Antichrist, as he is described in that same place,
is to be an adversary to God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. For as the Devil is called Satan;
that is, an adversary to God: so his chief Lieutenant Antichrist, is called an
adversary; that is, opposed and contrary to God; and that not in life only, but
in doctrine, Religion, and government; and that not in one point only, but
almost in all the substantial points thereof. The which mark the Popes of Rome
bear, and that not only in their lives, but also in the whole substantial
points of Religion. And to make this clear, besides that which has been
spoken, we shall compare the doctrine of Jesus Christ, and the government of his
Kingdom set down in the Scripture, with the doctrine of the Popes, and the
manner of their government, that the contrariety of them may be known: so that
it shall be seen, that cold is no more contrary to heat, and black to white,
then Papism to Christianity, and the Religion of the Church of Rome, to the
Religion of Christ Jesus. The doctrine of Christ stands especially in these two
things: in the knowledge of his person, and in the knowledge of his offices.
And therefore the Apostle says, I desire to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and
him crucified, 1. Cor. 2.2. And Christ himself says; It is life eternal to
know thee to be the only true God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. John
17 3. The doctrine of the Popes of Rome overthrows both. And first to prove
this concerning his person, the Scripture testifies that Jesus Christ is
conceived of the substance of the Virgin Mary, and that he has but one true
body, made of the seed of David, and of the seed of the woman, Romans 1.3. Gal.
4. 4 and not many: and that he is like unto us in all things, except sin, Heb.
2.17. The doctrine of the Church of Rome is, that Christ Jesus his body is made
of the bread and wine in the Sacrament: and their doctrine makes him to have as
many bodies as there is bits of bread in the Sacrament; and not to be like his
brethren in all things, except sin: ( Bellar. lib. 3. de Eucharistia; fol. 399.
Pope John 22. lib. orat. in scr. antidotarius animae:) for his brethren can be
but in one place at once, with their own due proportion visibly: But their
doctrine of Transubstantiation makes him to be both in heaven and earth at
once: in heaven visibly, in earth invisibly: in heaven with his own quantity
and proportion, in earth without his natural proportion: and not in one place
of the earth only, but in innumerable places thereof at once: so that this main
foundation of man's salvation (without the which there is no eternal life)
concerning the truth of Christ's manhood made of the woman, is utterly defaced
and overthrown, by the doctrine of the Popes of Rome, in making him to have
infinite bodies, not made of the feed of the woman, but of bread and wine; or at
the least, made of two diverse substances. And as they overthrow the doctrine
of his person, so they overthrow the doctrine of his offices. His offices are
three: a Prophet, a Priest, and a King, which are all overthrown by them. As he
is a Prophet, he has revealed his Fathers whole will unto his servants, John
1.18. and has left it in register in his latter Testament; and has forbidden
to add, empair, or to alter the same, Deuteronomy. 4.2. and has pronounced a woe and a
curse unto them that adds, empairs, or alters the same, Rev. 22.18. Gal. 1.8.
and that because it is sufficient to make a man wise unto salvation, and to
make the man of God perfect unto every good work, 2. Tim. 3.15.16. and because
it is pure and perfect, and easy to all them that will understand it; Prove.
8.9. Psalm. 19.8.9 13. and 119. But they have many ways corrupted this
Testament of Christ, by mingling and adulterating the same. First, in that they
give divine authority to the Books called Apocrypha, which are humain, Council.
Trident. Sess. 4. Next, in receiving, and commanding others to receive
traditions with equal reverence and affection with the Scripture. Thirdly, in
their corrupt Latin translation, which they have made authentical, which some
of themselves confess have missed sometimes the meaning of the holy Ghost, Bud.
annot. prior. in Pandect. Andrad. lib. 4. Arias Montanus Tom. 8. Bibl. Reg. in
praefat. Fourthly, in joining with the Commandments of God, their own
commandments, and that not as things indifferent, but as necessary to
salvation, Council. Trident. Sess. 6 cap. 10. Fifthly, in condemning all sense
and meaning of the holy Scripture, but that which they hold themselves, Sess.
4. Last of all, in quarrelling the Scripture of imperfection, obscurity and
ambiguity, calling it dead and dumb, like a nose of wax. They therefore who
have altered, added, and corrupted the Testament of Jesus Christ, confirmed by
his death, which he has left in writ, for to instruct his Church in all
things, and to make her wise to salvation, and perfect to every good work, does
spoil the Lord Jesus of his Prophetical office: But the doctrine of the Church
of Rome has done so: Ergo, they spoil Jesus Christ of his Prophetical office.

Thirdly, they are no less sacrilegious and injurious to his Priesthood. His
Priesthood stands in two things. First, in purchasing unto us by the virtue of
that one sacrifice once offered up upon the Cross, an everlasting redemption.
Next, in making continual intercession for us with his Father, Heb. 9.11.12,
15.24.25.26.27.28. the which both are overthrown by the doctrine of the Church
of Rome. As to the first, it is overthrown many ways: as first, our Savior
says, That his soul was sorrowful unto the death: and that he swat drops of
blood, Matthew. 26.37.38. and he sent up strong cries and supplications, with
tears, in the days of his flesh, Heb. 5.7. Luke 22.44. and therefore he thrice
upon his knees prays, That if it had been possible, that cup might be removed
from him, Matthew. 27.39. And upon the Cross, through the sense and feeling of
that wrath, he breaks forth in that complaint, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? All which do testify, that he suffered more then a common death;
to wit, the terrors of the wrath of God, which was due to the sins of all the
elect. But the doctrine of the Church of Rome ranverseth this doctrine of our
salvation, and teaches, that Christ suffered not the wrath of God upon his
soul: which if it be true, then Christ has not paid our debt sufficiently:
for our debt was not only the natural death of the body, but the wrath of God
upon the soul: and therefore the Scripture says, The soul that sins shall
die the death, Ezech. 18.20.

Secondly, the Scripture testifies, that Christ's death and blood is a
sufficient ransom for our sins, and a sufficient satisfaction unto the justice
of God, Heb. 10.10.14. John 19.28. 1. Tim. 2.6. 1. Pet. 2.24. 1. John 1.7. They
by the contrary join to his satisfaction, the satisfactions of men, both in
this life, and in the life to come: in Purgatory, and that not only for their
own sins, but for the sins of others. What is this else, but to make themselves
in a part Saviors of themselves, and Saviors of others also? Yea, what is this
else, but to make themselves God? For who can satisfy the justice of God, but
God himself?

Thirdly, as it has been proved before, Christ offered up himself once, by
shedding of his blood upon the Cross, never to be offered up again, which has
purchased an everlasting redemption, the which is the only ground of man's
salvation. How they have overturned this by their abominable sacrifice of the
Mass, and their sacrilegious Mass-Priests, I hope has been proved sufficiently
before: so that they have both evacuat the virtue of the sacrifice of Christ
upon the Cross, in setting up another sacrifice for the redemption of souls:
And also they have spoiled him of the dignity of his Royal Priesthood, in
joining unto him colleagues and fellow-Priests, to offer up himself daily in
their pretended sacrifice.

Fourthly, as they spoil him of his Priesthood, so do they spoil men of that
redemption, righteousness, and salvation, which his death has purchased, both
in the fountain, matter, and form thereof. The Scripture testifies, that the
only fountain and efficient cause of our salvation, is Gods free love and
grace, 2. Tim. 1.9. Tit. 2.11. Ephesians. 1.5. and 1. John 3.16. They teach, That an
infidel by the works of preparation (as they call them) even done without
faith, may procure and merit Gods favor, Masuenda in disput. Ratisb. cum Bucero
and Scholast. And also they join with the grace of God, man's free will, as a
party worker with it, as though God did not renew it being corrupted, or repair
it being perished; but only relieve it, being weak, and raise it up being
faint: by the which they abolish (if the Apostle speak true, Romans 11.6. and 4
5.) the grace of Christ: for if our salvation be of grace, it is not of works;
and if it be not of works, then it is not of grace, and so not at all. As to
the matter of our justification, the Scripture ascribes it only to Christ his
obedience and his death, Romans 5.19. They by the contrary, suppose they grant
that Christ has fulfilled the Law, and perfectly satisfied God, yet they teach
that this righteousness of Christ is not our righteousness by the which we must
be justified, but they place it in our own works, and in our own merits. And of
this comes the third, that whereas the Scripture testifies, that this
righteousness of Christ is imputed unto us by faith, Romans 4.22.23.24.3.5.6.7.
They acknowledge not this imputation, but places the form of our justification
in the merit of our works: and so they spoil man of righteousness and
salvation. For Bellarmin says, lib. 2. de Pontif. cap. 2. That the imputation
of the righteousness of Christ, is not required to our justification. And the
Council of Trent. Can. 10. Accurseth them who say that we are justified, justos
formaliter per Christi justitiam, by the righteousness of Christ.

And as they have spoiled Christ of the first part of his office of his
Priesthood, so do they spoil him of the second part thereof, which consists in
his intercession, in joining with him innumerable Intercessors and Mediators,
as well of Angels as of Saints departed, at whose hands they seek all manner of
grace, which is only proper to Jesus Christ to give; and that not only for the
virtue of the merits of Christ, but for their own merits and intercession.
Every Parish almost among them had their own Patron: and every malady, disease
or calamity, their own Saint or Angel to run to.

And as their doctrine has robbed the Lord Jesus of his Priestly dignity, and
man of the benefit of eternal life purchased to him by the same: so have they
robbed him of that glory and worship that is due unto him, in plucking away his
glory from him, and giving it unto creatures. 1. As unto Angels: and 2. Unto
Saints departed, and especially unto the Virgin Mary. 3. Unto their relics. 4.
Unto images of the Trinity, of the Saints, of the Cross. 5. Unto things
consecrated, as water, oil, etc. 6. And unto the Sacrament of the Eucharist,
unto whom they give that worship which is only due unto God, as prayer, worship
vows, sacrifices etc. So that if they may be justly called the Antichrist,
whose doctrine spoils Christ of the office of his mediation, and man of his
salvation purchased thereby, and God of his due glory, which man is bound to
give him, for his creation and redemption; and sets up other Saviors and
Mediators, other Priests and Intercessors beside him, and teaches another way
of man's salvation then he has taught, and worship other Gods then the God that
made heaven and earth, and after another manner then he has commanded: Then I
say, the Popes of Rome may justly be called, and is in truth the Antichrist and
adversary to God: For they are guilty of all this abomination. And because I
know that the poor and ignorant people, and these that are blinded with the
strong delusions of that man of sin, will not believe these things of him, and
of his Church; but as Thomas said of Christ, Unless I see the print of the
nails, and put my finger in the print of the nails, and put my hand into his
side, I will not believe. Even so, unless they see their idolatry, and grope
it, as it were with their hands, they will not believe it: therefore I am
compelled, for their conviction and information (that none of them that is
ordained to salvation perish) to let them see their idolatries, and to make
them to grope their abominations, and that by their own Books. For I shall not
speak here beguess; for that were great foolishness to allege here any other
thing then that which is written in their own Books, seeing he has promised to
give an answer, lest he should challenge me of lying of them. I protest
therefore (Christian Reader) that I shall forge nor fain nothing of them, but
shall only set down those things which are to be found in their own writings.
And first, in their service and Mass Book, secundum usum Anglicanum, Horae
beatae Mariae, and suffragia, etc. printed anno 1520. they pray to the
Archangels and Angels, to defend them in battle: to defend them that none
condemn them: to keep both their soul and body from godless desires, and from
unclean cogitations: to keep their mind from pollution: to confirm them in the
fear and love of Christ. Secondly, they pray to the Saints departed, That by
their merits and intercession, they may be defended from all evils, obtain all
gifts, and get eternal life. Yea, they seek of them, Defense in this world from
all evils, and everlasting life. And they pray to God the Father, that by their
merits and intercession, they may be delivered both soul and body from Hell
fire, and may obtain through their merits, faith, patience, and everlasting
life. So not only they make them Intercessors, but Mediators; at whom, and for
whose merits, they seek salvation. And upon this ground came that Paganism
which they have brought in the Church of God, whereby every Nation, Village,
Family, every Estat, and every malady or affliction, have their own Saint to be
a Patron for them. Upon the which also has proceeded this canonizing of
Saints; that is, to make men Gods. For they say, that this canonizing of them
is, to let men understand that they should be adored, and called upon, as one
of their own Archbishops Antonius says, part. 5. summa tit. 12. For he says,
that seven things appertain to the canonizing of Saints. 1. To be reputed
publicly to be a Saint. 2. To be prayed to by the Church. 3. To have Temples
and Altars. 4. To have offerings and sacrifices offered to their honor. 5. To
have a festival day. 6. To have an Image with a candle, in sign of their glory.
7. To have their relics. And they say, That they may be directly prayed unto
with the Lords Prayer, which our Savior formed only to be said to God the
Father. Now how shall they be excused from vile idolatry in this? Pope Innocent
says, That to the worship which is only proper to God, appertains Temples,
Altars, sacrifices, feasts. And Durandus a Papist, says the same, lib. 5. cap.
4. If this then be true, which this Pope and this Papist say, how then can they
be cleared from idolatry, that give unto Saints that service, which by their
own confession is only proper to God, as Temples, Altars, Festival days? etc.
And what shall we say to Franciscus and Dominicus, two of their canonized
Saints, in whose persons they have done that lay in them to have abolished the
merit and the Name of Christ? Of this Franciscus they say in their Book of
Conformities, That he is greater then John the Baptist. And preferring him in
many things to him, they say, That John received the word of repentance of
Christ; but Franciscus, say they, received it of Christ, and of the Pope, quod
plus est, which is more. Of John it was revealed by an Angel to his father what
he should be: but of Franciscus it was revealed to his mother, and his servants
by Jesus Christ. John was like the friend of the bridegroom: but Franciscus was
like the bridegroom himself. They say, He is better then all the Apostles: for
they left but their boats; but he left all to his very hose. They call him,
Typicus Jesus, a typical Savior, a singular crucified one, who received in
vision the same wounds which Christ has, and suffered the same dolors: who is
the way of life, who is the image of Christ, as Christ is the image of the
Father. Yea, which is more, they prefer him to Christ Jesus. They say, Christ
did but pray, but Franciscus by prayer obtained. They say, The Baptism of
Christ forgives original sin, but Franciscus hood much more. It is written also
upon the port of the Cordeliers of Bloys, of this Franciscus, That his sin shall
be sought for, but it shall not be found, which is only proper to Christ. Now
these are not particular opinions, but approved by the Church of Rome: For Pope
Gregory the 9. Alexander the 4. and Nicolas the 3. ordained all the faithful,
under the pain of heresy, to believe all Franciscus marks. And their Books are
set forth by their privileges.

As for Dominicus, Antoninus who was of that Order, compares him with Christ,
and in a manner prefers him to him, Hist. 3. pars, tit. 23. cap. 1. part. 1.
and 3. Christ, says he, did raise in all but three from the dead. Dominicus
raised three in Rome, and by his prayer restored forty to life. Christ after
the resurrection being immortal, went twice to his disciples, the doors being
shut; but Dominicus (says he) having as yet but a mortal body, which (says
he) is more mavelous, went into the Church in the night the doors being shut,
that he should not waken his brethren, etc. And such like of the rest of the
miracles, wherein he not only compares, but in a manner prefers him to Christ.
Christ (says he) said after his death, all power is given to me in heaven and
earth. This power (says he) is not in a little co^municat to Dominicus, above
all heavenly, earthly and infernal things (and that in this same life) for he
had the Angels to serve him, the elements obeyed him. And in the end he applies
that which is only spoken of Christ in the 45. Psalm, He is more beautiful then
the sons of men. Also he says, That there was two Images, the one of Paul, the
other of Dominicus. At the foot of Paul's Image, it was written, Per istumitur
ad Christum: By this man is the way to Christ. At the foot of the Image of
Dominicus it was written, By this man the way is made easy to Christ. And
marvel not (says he) at this: for the doctrine of Paul, and the rest of the
Apostles, induces men to believe and to obey the precepts of Christ: but the
doctrine of Dominicus induces men to keep the counsels of Christ, and
therefore the way to Christ by him is easier. So he prefers him to Christ in
miracles, and to the Apostles. But what shall we say to that that follows? He is
called (says he) Dominicus, because he is like our Lord; and he has
possessive, and in possession that which Christ has absolutely and by
authority. Christ says, I am the light of the world. The Church (says he)
sings of Dominicus, Ye are the light of the world. The Prophets testified of
Christ, and so did they also (says he) of Dominicus, and of his Order, as in
the 11. chapter of Zachary, where it is spoken of Christ: I have taken unto me
two rods, and I called one the staff of beauty, and the other the staff of
bands. The staff of beauty (says he) is the Order of Dominicus: the staff of
bands, is the Order of Franciscus. So they abuse the Scripture. He compares him
also with Christ, and in a manner, prefers him to him. Christ (says he) was
born upon the bare earth; but lest he had been over much hurt by cold, he was
put into the crib by his mother: But Dominicus (says he) being in the custody
of his nurse, even then abhorring the pleasures of the flesh, was found
oft-times lying upon the bare earth. When Christ was born, a star appeared,
signifying that he should illuminat the whole world: But (says he) when
Dominicus was born, his Godmother saw a star in his forehead; a
prognostication of a new light of the world. The prayer of the Lord was ever
heard when it pleased him, but yet did not ever obtain that which he prayed
for: as when in the garden he prayed, that the cup might be transferred from
him: But (says he) Dominicus desired nothing of God, but that which he
obtained perfectly according to his desire. Christ loved us, and washed us from
our sins in his blood: But Dominicus (says he) not being void of that
perfection of love, he took a threefold correction out of his own hand every
day, not with a cord, but with an iron rod, even to the effusion of his blood,
and for his own faults, which were very few: another for them that were in
Purgatory: the third for them that were in the world. And so deduces this
comparison through all the parts of Christ's life. And in the end, he says,
That being to depart from this world, he comforts his disciples, saying, Let
not this trouble you, for in the place where I go to, I shall be more
comfortable to you, then if I were with you: For after death ye shall have me a
better Advocat then ye could have in this life. What blasphemies these are,
judge thou (Christian Reader) and yet they are authorized by the Church of
Rome, because they serve to establish the Popes supremacy: For Gregory the 9.
canonized him as a Saint, anno 1223. and appointed a festival day to be kept to
his honor: And he that writes these things is an Archbishop of Florence, a man
famous among them. To him that will join himself to this Order of Franciscus
and Dominicus, for to merit the Kingdom of heaven, and to redeem their own
souls, or the souls of their friends (as their Bull of Fraternity says.) The
Provincial gives him the Bulls of Fraternity, by the which is made capable of
all the merits of the Convent, and of the merits of all the Friars of that
Province, of their Masses, prayers, fastings, abstinences, devotions,
watchings, disciplins, etc. Whereby (as though it were too little for them to
be Saviors of themselves) they teach that they have such abundance of merits,
as also may serve for others. They have a prayer to Thomas Becket, in their
porteous book, who was made a Saint by Alexander the 3. in these words: Tu per
Thomae sanguinem, quem pro te impendit, fac nos, Christ, ascendere quo ille
ascendit: that is, Make us, O Christ, to ascend to heaven by the blood of
Thomas which he shed for thee. Mocking as it were the blood of Jesus.

Now as for the Virgin Mary, what title is proper to Jesus Christ, which they
have not ascribed unto her? What honor or worship is given to Jesus Christ,
which is not given to her? Damascene says, praying to the Virgin Mary, I shall
be saved by hoping in thee. Thou is the salvation of mankind. Antoninus says,
part. 3. summa tit. 12. and part. 4. tit. 15. cap. 14. para. 7. That all they
upon whom the Virgin Mary turns her eyes, are necessarily justified and saved.
And that Christ because he is both Advocat and Judge together, is too rigorous:
for this cause, says he, God has provided an Advocat (meaning of the Virgin
Mary) in whom nothing is to be found but sweetness. And he says, The Seraphims
willing to have retained Mary as she mounted to heaven: Not (says she) for it
is not meet that man should live his alone (speaking of the everlasting Son of
God, who sits at the right hand of his Father) I am given to him for to be a
help to that work of redemption by my compassion, and to that work of
glorification by my intercession: to the intent, that if he threaten to destroy
the earth, as in the time of the Deluge, I may appear before him as the
rainbow, to the intent that he may remember his covenant. And which is yet
worse (if worse can be) another Papist says, applying that which is only
spoken of Christ to her: God (says he) said to her in her birth, I have given
thee to be a light to the Gentiles, to the intent that thou may be our salvation
(applying it blasphemously to Mary) to the end of the world, and a light to be
revealed to the Gentiles. And again he says, That all graces which run down
from the Father and the Son, come by her; who (says he) is a Mediatrix between
God and men: And no grace comes from heaven, but through her hands, and all
grace enters in her, and comes out of her. And he says, She is a Mediatrix of
salvation, of conjunction, of justification, of reconciliation, of
intercession, of communication. And to be short, he says, The Father has
given to her the half of his Kingdom, the which was signified in the persons of
Assuerus and Ester: and that he has retained to himself justice, and has left
to her to exercise mercy. So that we may appeal from the Court of the Justice
of God, to the Court of the mercy of the Virgin Mary. Whereby they most
blasphemously prefer and lift her up above the Lord: for that Judge unto whom
appellation is made, must be superior unto these Judges from whom the
appellation is made: therefore they blasphemously prefer the tribunal of Mary,
to the tribunal of the God of heaven.

And what shall I speak of her Letanies, Psalteries, and Hours? Of her Hours,
where she is called, the Queen of mercy, who has bruised the Serpents head:
which thing is spoken only to the first parents of the Son of God, Genesis 3. and
the restorer and Savior of mankind: the most godly and most holy: the gate of
heaven: the shining port of life: the mother of grace and mercy: our life, our
hope; who makes the world to shine by the light of the brightness of her peace:
who only has deserved to be next in honor to the Trinity, by whom the whole
world lives, next God. She is called, the comfort of the desolat: the salvation
and hope of all them that put their trust in her: the fountain of salvation,
grace, godliness, joy, comfort. The Queen of heaven, and star of the sea, whom
the Sun honors: the promise of the Prophets: the Queen of the Evangelists: the
teacher of the Apostles: the comfort of the Martyrs: the salvation and
consolation of the quick and the dead: the bottomless fountain of all grace:
the port of paradise: the Lady of glory: the Queen of joy: the Lady of Angels:
the joy of the Saints: the only hope of the miserable, the Empress of the
Angels: the comforter of sinners: the keeper of the heart: the praise of all
the Saints. And of her is sought in her Hours and Letanies, all these graces
generally, which are only proper to God through Jesus Christ to give: as
Protection, receiving in the time of death, refuge in the time of misery,
remission of sins, the keeping of soul and body, holiness of life, staying of
the pest, calming of the seas, perseverance in grace, the eschewing of sin,
salvation and eternal life: And that by her merits and prayers their sins may
be forgiven; and that being redeemed by her, they may climb up to heaven. And
they pray to Mary and John Baptist, by the Redeemer, making Christ a Mediator
between them and them. And they pray to Christ to defend them from his anger,
and from the anger of his mother: And they pray her to give her self and her
Son unto them. What horrible blasphemy is this? Who can give Christ, but only
God the Father? They say, God will give them that worship her a reward here,
and heaven hereafter. How shall I praise the redeemed by thee? speaking of Mary.
And in the prose of the Mass, they have this prayer, Jure matris impera
Redemptori: that is, By thy motherly authority, command the Redeemer. And as
concerning her Psalteries, how horrible is it to see all that David spoke of
the Father, Son, and holy Spirit, to be transferred and applied to her, without
exception, from the beginning to the end? changing only the style of the
eternal Lord, in the style of our Lady, blaspheming, Blessed is he who loves
Mary, fears her, and praises her name, who hopes in her. The heavens declare
thy glory, and the earth and the fullness thereof. Blessed are all they who love
thee, because thou have washen their sins in thy mercies. Have mercy on me, O
mother of mercy: and according to the bowels of thy compassions, wash me from
all mine iniquities. Save me for thy names sake: Let Mary be lifted up, and all
her enemies will be scattered. Lord, give thy judgment to thy Son, and thy
mercy to the Queen his mother. Lady, salvation and life is in thy hand. O how
good is God to them that worship his mother. God is the God of vengeance, but
thou art the Queen of mercy. Come, let us worship the Lady: let us praise the
Virgin who has saved us: let us confess our sins unto her. The Lord said unto
our Lady, Sit here, my mother, on my right hand. O mankind rejoice, because God
has given to thee such a Mediatrix: and at the name of Mary, let all knees bow
in heaven, in earth, and in Hell. This Lady Psalter was compyled by a Cardinal
of Rome, Bonaventure, who was canonized for a Saint by Pope Sixtus the fourth,
anno 1470. After the same manner have they corrupted the Songs of the Prophets,
of Simeon, and of the Virgin, blaspheming after this manner, My soul rejoices
in my Lady. My soul, magnify my Lady, etc. Now letst thou, O Lord, the servant
of Mary depart in peace, because my eyes have seen the salvation of Mary. And
to put an end to these abominations, they ascribe unto the Virgin that which
the holy Ghost has spoken only of Jesus Christ, the everlasting wisdom of his
Father, The Lord has possessed me in the beginning of his way: before he made
any thing, I was ordained from everlasting, Prove. 8.22. And Pope Leo the 10.
calls her Deam, a Goddess, Epist. 17. In the General Council of Lateran, in
stead of praying to God through Christ, for the assistance of his Spirit, they
crave the help and assistance of Mary, Council. Lateran. sub Julio 2. and Leone
10. Sess. 9.10. etc. And Pope Pius the fifth, acknowledges her for the victory
of the Christians against the Turk, in their combat which was stricken on the
sea: and for that victory has ordained a yearly rememberance of her to be
kept, Martyrologium Romans act. 7. And Antoninus one of their Archbishops says,
Hist. part. 3. tit. 23. cap. 3. That Christ sitting at the right hand of God
the Father, rose up angry to have slain all the sinners in the earth; and when
none was able to resist, his mother came to him, and pacified him, till two of
his servants, Franciscus and Dominicus, might be sent to them: and that Christ
answered; Behold, I am pacified, and have accepted thy face. I appeal your
conscience, M. Gilbert, before the Lord Jesus Christ, as ye must appear before
him in that great day, whether these speeches be not the speeches and
blasphemies of the Dragon, or not? And whether this doctrine and Religion of
yours, be not idolatrous, blasphemous, and Antichristian, or not?

Not only have they spoiled the Lord Jesus of his mediation, intercession, and
of his glory due to him, and mankind of their salvation purchased by his blood,
in ascribing it to Saints, Angels, and to the Virgin Mary; but also in
ascribing them unto their consecrat things, as their holy water, the tree of
the Cross, the sign of the Cross, their golden, silver, and stony Crosses. For
unto the Cross they give the worship of Latria, as themselves testify, which
by their own confession is only proper to God. Thomas in part. 3. summae,
quaest. 25. artic. 4. and Cajet. in comment. in illum locum Thomae, and
Andradius in lib. 9. orthod. explic. And their prayer to the Cross, and the
sign of the Cross, is to help them, defend them, and save them: and they adore
it and worship it. They pray such like, that the holy water may be salvation
unto them, and that by the sparging of the same, the health of their soul, the
strengthening of their faith, the security of their hope may be given them.

Unto the Images and relics of the Saints, they offer sacrifice, in burning
incense unto them, which the Scripture calls an oblation only proper to the
living God, Mark 9 49. Therefore Ezechias brake the brazen serpent, because
they burnt incense unto it, 2. Kings 18.4. And the burning of incense to Baal
is counted idolatry, 2. Kings 23.5. They pray for their golden, silver, and
stony crosses, that as the world was purged from the guiltiness of sin by the
Cross of Christ, so by the merit of this Cross, these who offer it up, may be
forgiven of all their actual sins, Pontif. Romans part. 2 tit. de benedict. novae
crucis. Careat omni peccato perpetrato. Is not this to set up their stony, etc.
Crosses, in the room of the blood of Jesus Christ? They ascribe to the tree of
the Cross, that which is only proper to God, saying, Salva catervam: that is,
Give salvation to the assembly gathered together in thy praises, Brevia. Romans
in fest. invent. and exalt. sanctae crucis. They worship their images after the
same manner, as the Heathens did their Idols. And as the Heathens, Baruc. 6.3.
bure their golden, silver, and timber Idols upon their shoulders, so do the
Papists, Baron. nota Marti. Romans Sleidan. com. lib. 9. Jodoc. meg. peregr.
Hieros. cap. 3. Pellic. in Baruc cap. 6. The Heathens worshipped their idols:
the Papists do the same, in falling down before the images of Saints, Conc.
Trid. Sess. 25. The Heathens decked their idols with vestiments, as though they
had been men: so do the Papists with their images, which some of themselves
think to be an abuse, and would have it abolished, Molin. Epist. Valen. Salig.
Espen. hist. Eccles. Ecclesia reform, in Gallia, lib. 4. They lighted candles
before their idols, which their idols saw not: so do the Papists, Erasm.
colloq. peregrin. relig. ergo, Polyd. Virg. de invent. rer. lib. 2. cap. 23.
and lib. 6. cap. 13. There the faces of their Gods were made black through the
smoke of their incense which was burnt in their worship, as it is exponed by
some: so do the Papists burn incense to their golden, silver, and copper idols,
Miss. Romans de rit. servand. in celebrat. Missae. And to be short, in this, as
their Priests had their heads and their beards shaven, how like are the Papist
Priests in this? Pontif. 20. part. 1. Pier. Valor. pro sacerd. barbis. They
worship also the image of Christ with the worship of Latria, Thom. Aquin. part.
3. quaest. 25. art. 3. and 4. Ant. Possev. Bibl. select. lib. 1. cap. 10. which
themselves confess to be proper only to God, confessed by one of their own
number, a learned Jesuit, Gregor. de Valent. lib. 2. cap. 7. And therefore he
defends that some kind of Idolatry is lawful. And Bellarmin says, lib. 1. de
Eccles. trium. cap. 23. That the worship of Latria, is given truly to the Image
of the Cross, and the Crucifix, suppose he says, he thinks it not safe to
preach this to the people. They style the Image of the Crucifix, with the
styles only proper to God, The King of glory: the Lord that is strong and
mighty in battle: the Lord of strength, Conrad. Brun. de imagine. cap. 7. Such
like, when the Image of the Dove at the Pentecost, is let down in the Temple
with fire and water, then the Priest says, Receive the holy Ghost, Ibidem. So
do the Popes give the style of the immaculat Lamb, to the Images of wax, Sacra
cerem. Eccles. 20. lib. 1. tit. 7. The second Council of Nice, Act. 4. says of
the Image of Christ, This is Christ: And the Council of Trent. Sessio 25. And
in their consecration of their Images of wax, ibid. sacra. they pray to God the
Father, Let these immaculat Lambs (speaking of the Images) receive that
self-same virtue against all the crafts and deceits of the Devil, wherewith
that innocent Lamb his own Son Jesus Christ, delivered from the power of the
Devil our first parents. And they sing of every one of these wax Images, which
they call their Agnus Dei, omne malignum; that is, these wax Images break and
annul every sin, as Christ's blood does. And to fill up the heap of their
iniquities, not only do they worship the thing signified by the Images, but the
Images themselves, as themselves testify, Polydor. Virg. de invent. lib. 6.
cap. 13. And Pius 2. says, Comment. lib. 2. that in the Church of S. Mary,
etc. there is an Image of the Virgin, which the people worship, mira Religione,
with a mavelous Religion, as the giver of rain and fair weather. And
Bellarmin says, lib. 2. de imag. cap. 21. That the images of Christ, and the
Saints, ought to be worshipped properly and by themselves, as they are
considered in themselves, and not only as they represent another thing. And he
says, cap. 13. That the Image it self should be worshipped with that same kind
of worship properly, with the which the thing it self represented thereby
should be worshipped. The second General Council of Nice is of the same mind.
Marinaeus Siculus de rebus Hisp. lib. 5. testifies, that in Spain in a certain
Temple, the Crucifix of Christ is adored. And he says, Cujus imaginis invocato
numine; At the invocation of the Godhead of the which Image, sundry received
their health. Pope John the 22. formed a prayer to be said to the Image of
Christ's face, kept in a shirt which they call Veronica, and has granted ten
thousand days pardon to them that say this prayer devoutly, Salve sancta
facies Redemptoris nostri, etc. In the which prayer, first, these styles are
given to this Image, as the face of our Redeemer, wherein shines the brightness
of the Godhead: the beauty of the world: the glass of the Saints, wherein the
heavenly spirit; desire to look in: the strength of our Christian faith: the
destroyer of heretics, our joy in this life. Secondly, they pray to this
Image, to purge us from all the spots of our sins: to join us to the company of
the blessed: to power in light in our hearts by that virtue which is given to
it: to increase our merit, and to lead us to heaven. When shall we tumble our
selves out of the gulf of these abominations and idolatries? Blind now must
they be that see not their doctrine to be the doctrine of the Dragon. Therefore
do I strive with you (says the Lord) and with your posterity. For go through
all the regions of the earth, and see if there be the like abominations, as is
among them. For they have changed the glory of God into unprofitable Idols. O
ye heavens! be astonished at this, and be confounded, and be ye desolat. For
two evils have they done: they have forsaken the Lord, and Christ his Son, the
fountain of living waters, and have made unto themselves broken pits, which can
hold no water: that is, they have made unto themselves false Gods and false
Christ's, which cannot bring salvation unto them. They have given his glory unto
others, so that of all Idolaters that ever have been, they are the greatest. It
is no wonder therefore suppose the Lord has caused it to be proclaimed by an
Angel, That he that worshippeth the beast and his image, shall be tormented in
fire and brimstone, day and night: and the smoke of their torment shall ascend
for evermore, and they shall have no rest, Rev. 14 10.11. I hope now the second
point is sufficiently cleared, that they have spoiled Christ of his Priesthood,
and of that glory and honor that is due unto him.

Now as they have spoiled him of his Priestly office, so have they robbed him
of his Kingly office. His Kingly office stands in two things: The one is, in
the inward operation of his Spirit. The other is, in the exercise and ministry
of the Word, Sacraments and Discipline, which he has ordained for that end. As
for the first: He by his Spirit prepares the heart, by bringing us to a sight
and sense of our misery, that we may run to him to seek for mercy: And then he
by his Spirit works that living faith, which makes us fully assured of
salvation, which works by love, and brings forth the fruits of holiness and
righteousness, whereof prayer is one special. All which is taken away by their
doctrine. As to the first: No sufficient knowledge of their misery among them.
For first their doctrine is, That we are not dead in sin, but man has
free will: and then, that concupiscence after Baptism, is not sin: and that the
adoring and worshipping of Images, is not the breaking of the second command.
And that the reward of every sin, is not everlasting death. And that men even
without faith, may merit the favor of God; and that after they have obtained
faith, they may not only fulfill the Law perfectly, but also do more; yea love
God with a greater love then he has commanded, and lead a more strait and
heavenly life, then either the Law of God or man prescribes, as Bellarmin
says. And that men may not only satisfy God for their own sins, and merit
everlasting life to themselves, but also may communicate of the superabundance
of their merits unto others, Malvenda in disput. Ratisb. cum Bucero, and omnes
fere Scholastici.

Now, is it possible that these men who so lift up themselves in the conceit of
their own righteousness, can have the knowledge and sense of their misery? And
as for this full assurance of faith without doubting, they call it Presumption.
And as for the fruits of holiness, without the which no man can see God, let
their fruits of their vow of single life among their Clergy, and forbidding of
marriage, which the Scripture says, is the doctrine of Devils, bear witness:
whereby innumerable abominations, murders, adulteries, whoredoms, have been
committed in their Cloisters and Nunneries, as their visitation does testify.
And in a fish pond there was found six thousand childrens heads; which moved
Gregory to revoke that determination of his, upon this reason, that it was
better to let them marry, then to give such occasion of murder, as appears by
an Epistle of Hulderick Bishop of Ausburgh, written to Pope Nicolas the first.
And Pope Pius the 2. says, that marriage was taken away for some reasons, but
it should be restored again for greater. This is ascribed unto him. And as for
true prayers, which should be in the Spirit, with sighs and sobs that cannot be
expressed, Romans 8.26. in a known language, with words of understanding, that
men may say, Amen, to them: in stead of this, they teach vain repetition and
babbling in prayers. 1 Cor. 14. as though God were served by reckoning up their
mutterings, so many Avees, so many Pater nosters upon a pair of beads, They
teach to pray in a strange language, which is a sign not to them that believe,
but to them that believe not, which cannot edify nor build up, no not the
tower of Babel it self, suppose it be a tower of confusion. So by their
doctrine they have spoiled Christ of his spiritual government in the hearts of
his own by the work of his Spirit.

And as for the outward government by the Word, Sacraments and Discipline, they
have both spoiled him of it, and also have deprived the people of God of these
means whereby their faith may be wrought, nowrished, and confirmed in their
hearts: For as for the Word, beside their corrupting of it, what by Apocrypha,
what by traditions, what by the commandments of the Church, what by their
corrupted translation, and their false interpretations, they have starved the
people of God for the want of them, in keeping them up in a strange language,
and reading them out so in their Assemblies in a strange language; so that the
people may have eyes and not read them, ears and not hear them, minds and not
understand them, because they are kept up in a strange language. And therefore
sundry of our predecessors have been accused and burnt by them, for reading
parcels of them, being translated in the vulgar language. And as for the
Sacraments, they have increased the number of them, by adding other five unto
them: they have impaired them of their virtue, corrupted them with errors,
polluted them with ceremonies, and have spoiled the people of the fruit of
them, by reason they are ministered in a strange tongue, and they have turned
the Sacrament of the Supper in a propitiatory sacrifice for the living and the
dead. They have taken away the sign of the Sacrament. They have abolished the
humanity of Christ, by their monstrous transubstantiation. They have taken away
the Communion which should be in the Sacrament, by their private Masses: and
they have spoiled the people of a sweet pledge of their salvation, in taking
away the cup from them, by their lamed communion under one kind.

And as for the discipline of Christ, they have renversed it also, the order
whereof according to the Scripture, is, that the Church of Christ be governed
by his own Ministers, and his own laws, set down in the Word, for the salvation
of his people, Numb. 3.10. Heb. 5.4. Ephesians. 4.11. Exodus 25.30. Matthew. 28.20. 1.
Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.12. all which they have taken away. And first, concerning
the Ministers of Christ, Pastors, Doctors, Elders, Deacons, which is given of
God for the work of the Ministry and building up of the body of Christ, they
have removed them from the government of the same, and have set up other
Office-bearers, as Legates, Cardinals, Primats, Patriarks, Archbishops, Lord
Bishops, Chanons, Parsons, Vicars, Archdeacons, Priests, Abbots, Provincials,
Popes Inquisitors, Commissioners, Officers, Procutors, Promoters, and the
innumerable rout of their Monks, Friars, Jesuits; whose Sects and Orders, as
they have been reckoned by some, extends to an hundred and one, all different
in Ceremonies and Orders one from another, all unknown in the Scriptures of
God: and transformed the government of the Church of Christ into a visible
Monarchy and Kingdom of the Romans, as it is named by Turrian a Jesuit, de
Eccles. and ordinar. Minist. lib. 1. cap. 2. And the Popes having set
themselves in the room of Jesus Christ, the King of his Church, have not only
tumbled out Christ's Officers, and set in their own, of whom they exact an oath
of obedience to them: but have lifted up themselves above the higher Powers,
Kings and Magistrates, as shall be spoken hereafter. Claiming to themselves both
the Swords and authority, to give and to take Kingdoms at their pleasure,
exacting an oath of obedience of them, making them their vassals, and
tyrannizing over the Church of God. And as they have shut out the Ministers who
should rule the Church of God, so have they shut out his Laws whereby it should
be ruled. For this new Prince the Pope, has shut out the Canon of the
Scripture, from being a rule to govern his Kingdom; and in stead thereof has
set down his Canon Law, Decrees, Decretals, etc. which decretal Epistles,
Gratian, the gatherer of the Canon Law, would have reckoned in the number of
the Canonical Scriptures, Distinct. 19 in Canonicis. And to what end does he
use these laws? Not to further the salvation of Gods people, but to satisfy
his own (if yet a horse-leech might be satisfied) and his Courtiers insatiable
covetousness, ambition, and lust. For this cause, he has taken in his own hand
the election of Bishops, from them to whom it belonged. For this cause, he has
not permitted the causes of the Church to be debated where they rose, as
equity, reason, and peace would he should have done: But he has removed them
thence to be heard at Rome: what by reserving of causes to himself, what by
appellations, what by exemptions: And for the same cause, he has committed the
feeding and guiding of the flock of Christ, to brute and beastly creatures, in
giving the charge and commodities of the Church to whom he would, by
presentations, preventions, reservations, translations, provisions,
permutations, and commendations. How has he wasted and seized upon the Church
goods, with his pensions, and first fruits and appropriations, so that he has
been cried out upon of riot, pride, extortion and simony? Ammian. Marcel. lib.
27. Baptist. Mant. Fast. lib. 5. Bern. Epist. 42. Conc. Basil. Sess. 21.

And as for excommunication, he has used it not against the wicked, Bernard.
ad Eugen. lib. 1. and 3. Mantuan. sylvar. lib. 2. of whom a sink has flowed at
all times in Rome; not against thieves, of whom Rome is made a den: not against
murderers, for whom there is a sanctuary in the houses of Cardinals at Rome,
Aeneas Sylvius hist. de Asia min. cap. 77. not against adulterers, not against
whores, whereof the Pope received such tribut, as has been spoken; but against
Emperors, Estats, Nations, who would not serve him at a beck, against any man
that denied his Parish Priest a little tiends: against whole assemblies of the
faithful, whom he by most villainous cruelty and treachery (as if they had been
sheep appointed for the slaughter) has rid away by fire, by torment, by sword.

And to end this, what shall I speak of his tyrannical laws, whereby he has
oppressed the Church of God, as of single life, auricular confession, choice of
meats, apparel and days, of new and strange canonizing of Saints, of
pilgrimage to the holy Land, of the vows of Monks and Nuns, of the estates and
rites of marriage, and of innumerable ceremonies, partly unfruitful, partly
foolish, partly impious? And what shall I speak of his dispensations against the
Old Testament, against the Epistles of Paul, against all right and equity? That
a brother may marry his own brothers wife (King Henry the 8.) and an uncle his
sisters daughter ( Philip King of Spain.) And Pope Martin the fifth, approved
the marriage of one with his sister germain. That Church offices, and livings,
may be given to boys, to simonical merchants, and unlearned persons, Bernard.
Epist. 42. and de consid. ad Eugen. lib. 1. and 3. That one may have plurality
of Benefices, Did. 70. cap. Sacerdotum, cap. de mult. de praeb. That he who
has the Benefice, needs not to attend the office, cap. relatum de cler. cap.
licet, Canon. de elect. in Sexto. That promise may be broken with God and man.
That subjects may be discharged of their oath to their Princes, Conc. Constant.
Sess. 19. And last of all, what shall I speak of his Indulgences and Pardons, in
granting so many hundred and thousand years pardon of their sins, to them that
will devoutly say their idolatrous prayers? Some giving three hundred days
pardon, as Pope Celestin: Some seven hundred years pardon, as Pope Boniface:
Some ten thousand years pardon, as Boniface the 6. Some thirtytwo thousand,
seven hundred and fiftyfive years pardon: And Sixtus the 4 has doubled the
time of this foresaid pardon: And some ten hundred thousand years pardon for
deadly sins, as Pope John 22. Portuus book of Sarum, printed anno 1520. Here is
pardon for all sins. so that there be money. And as the Revelation says, The
very souls of men are made merchandise of, Rev. 18.13. And one of their own
friends says, -- venalia Romae Templa, Sacerd^tes, Altaria sacra, coronae,
Ignes, thura, preces, coelum est venale, Deusque, Baptist. Mantuan. calam,
temp. lib. 3. That is, Churches, Priests, Altars, crowns, fire, incense,
prayers, heaven, and God, are to be sold in the Church of Rome. To conclud this
then, he is the Antichrist whose Doctrine and Religion, Ministry and
Discipline, is directly contrary to the Doctrine, Religion, Ministry and
Discipline of Jesus Christ. Again, he is the undoubted Antichrist, whose
doctrine spoils Jesus Christ of the truth of his humanity, of his Prophetical,
Kingly, and Priestly Offices, and sets himself and others up in the same
offices: and whose doctrine spoils him of the glory which is due to him only,
for our creation and redemption, and gives it to creatures: and last of all, he
whose doctrine spoils men of their salvation, must be that undoubted
Antichrist. But the Doctrine and Religion of the Popes of Rome and his Clergy
(as has been proved sufficiently) are such. Therefore they are that undoubted
Antichrist, which the Scripture foretold was to come. And this for the second
mark.

The third mark of the Antichrist, is, That he exalts himself above all that is
called God, and is worshipped; that is, above all powers and majesty's, both
heavenly and earthly. He says not, Above God himself; but above all that is
called God: that is, above all powers heavenly and earthly, as has been said.
He then is the undoubted Antichrist, whom the Scripture foretold should come,
who lifts up himself above all powers, as well heavenly, as earthly: (this you
cannot deny, because the Scripture so affirms.) But the Pope of Rome have
lifted up themselves above all powers, both heavenly and earthly: the which if
it shall be proved, then of necessity it must follow, that the Popes of Rome are
that undoubted Antichrist. Now for proof hereof, we shall set none other upon
their assise, to file or cleanse them in this point, but their own Canon Law,
their own Writers, their own Bishops and themselves. Antonius Archbishop of
Florence, says, Sum. part. 3. tit. 22. cap. 5. That his power is greater then
any created power: and that it extends its self to heavenly, earthly, and
infernal things. Of whom (says he) that is true which is spoken of Christ in
the 8. Psalm 6. Thou have subjected all things under his feet, that are in
heaven, in earth, or in hell, applying it to the Pope. What needs more? This is
conviction enough. But yet we will proceed and see how far he has lifted up
himself above all these. As for them in the earth, there are two special
powers, the temporal power, and the spiritual power. He claims superiority over
both, as is manifest by their own doctrine. The Pope is over the world in stead
of Christ, Anton. in sum. part. 3. tit. 22. cap. 5. I am Caesar, all the power
in the heaven and in the earth is mine, Boniface 8. We affirm and define, that
it stands all creatures upon the necessity of their salvation, to be subject to
the Pope, Extra de majorit. unam sanct. The Pope should judge all, and be
judged of none, unless he be found an heretic. And suppose he should draw
after him innumerable souls by heaps unto Hell, yet no mortal man should be so
bold as to say to him, Lord, why do thou this? Did. 40. cap. Si. Papa,
Gloss. extravagant. ad Apost. How far he has lifted up himself above the
temporal power, Kings, Princes and Emperors, let both their doctrine and
practice bear witness. The Pope is as the Sun to rule over the day; that is,
the spirituality: and the Emperor as the Moon, to rule over the night; that is,
the temporality. And as the earth is seven times greater then the Moon, and the
Sun eight times greater then the earth; so is the Pope forty seven times
greater then the Emperor. And as the Emperor or Roman Princes take of me their
approbation, unction, and Imperial Crown; so they must not disdain to submit
their heads to me, and to swear to me their oath of allegiance and fidelity;
Pope Clement 5. de jurejurando. The Pope may depose Kings from their Kingdoms,
and absolve their subjects from their oath of allegiance, and interdict their
Kingdoms, and set up others in their room, Sext. Decretal. de sentent. and re
judicata, cap. ad Apost. item Glossa. Childerick King of France, was deposed,
and Pepin set in his room. Pope Zachary, causa 15. quaest. 6. cap. Alius. Henry
the fourth, Henry the fifth, Frederick the first, Otho the fourth, Frederick
the second, and Conradus his son, all Emperors, were exco^municat and deposed
by the Popes. Justinianus, Otho the first, Frederick the first, Henry the
fifth, Sigismundus, Carolus the fifth, all Emperors and Monarchs, admitted by
the Popes of Rome to kiss their feet. And if this had been their practice only,
and not their doctrine, this pride and arrogance might have been imputed to the
persons, and not to the seat. But his doctrine is so, Author ceremoniarum, lib.
1. and 3. The Pope of Rome does reverence to no mortal man. All men of
whatsoever dignity or preeminence they are of, so soon as they come in the
presence of the Pope, ought to kneel thrice down, and to kiss his feet. The
Emperor as soon as he sees the Pope, with his bare head, kneeling to the
ground, he worships him, and kisses his feet. The Emperor holds the stirrup,
while the Pope leaps on. So did Constantin the Great, says their Canon Law,
Did. 96. cap. Constant. The Emperor at the banquet holds the water to the Pope
to wash his hands, and brings the first dish to the Popes table. And if the
Pope be to be carried in a chair, he, or the King, if they be present, ought to
carry the Pope in the chair on their shoulders. So this is clear both by their
doctrine, and practice, how far they have lifted up themselves above the Kings
and Monarchs of the world: so that Pope Gelasius says, That Emperors are more
inferior to Popes, then lead is to gold, Did. 96. cap. 2.

Their superiority over the spiritual power of the Church of Christ, has been
shown in part before. But for the further proof of it, they say, That the Pope
is above all General Councils, and that they take their force and confirmation
only by him, Pope Marcel. did. 17. cap. Synodum. And that he is supreme Judge
in all controversies of Religion, whose judgment is also infallible, Bellarm.
de Primat. Pap. And where God has ordained all causes among men to be judged
by men, he has only reserved the Pope to be judged by himself, and that he
cannot be judged by any, neither of Kings, nor of the Emperor, nor of the whole
Clergy, nor of the people, Symmachus Pope 99.3. Aliorum. Pope Innocentius 9.
quaest. 3. cap. Nemo. And that he is Judge over all the Churches: and that
without a Council, both to absolve and condemn: and none to judge of his
judgment: and all to appeal to him, and none from him, whose judgment must
stand, as given out of heaven by the mouth of Peter himself, which no man must
break or retrait, no man must disput or doubt of, Anastas. quaest. 3. cap.
Antiquis. Item 11. quaest. 3. cap. Quamvis, and cap. Quatuor, did. 19. cap.
Sic omnes. 9. quaest. 3 cap. Pater. Pope Innocentius 2. art. 17. quaest. 4.
cap. Si quis, did. 19. cap. In memoriam. Sext. decret. tit. 7. de
renunciatione, cap. Quoniam. And that in omni re dubia, that is in all
controversies of Religion, he must obediently of all the faithful be heard,
whether he can err or not, Bellarm. de Pont. lib. 4. cap. 2. And that he may
make laws to bind the consciences of men, and cap. 15. and that he may creat
new Religions, Anton. sum. 3. part. tit. 22. cap. 5.

His power over them that are in Purgatory and Hell. According to his absolut
jurisdiction, he has power to spoil all Purgatory, by the communication of his
Indulgences and Pardons, except only them who have only the Baptism of the
Spirit, and infants who are in Limbo Patrum, Ibidem: and these who have not
friends to do for them. The Pope may absolve from an infinite pain; to wit, from
the pain of Hell, as Gregory did, who by his prayer absolved the soul of Trajan
from the infinite pains of Hell, Anton. tit. 22. cap. 5. The Pope has as great
power in Purgatory and Hell, as that he may deliver as many souls as are
tormented there, by his Pardons, and with all speed place them in heaven, and
seats of the blessed, as he pleases, Clem 6. in bulla and Anton. ibidem cap. 6.

His power over heaven and all the powers therein. All power in heaven and
earth is given to me, says Boniface the 8. The Pope has so great power in
heaven, that he may canonize any dead man, and place him among the Gods, and
that against the judgment of his Bishops and all his Cardinals: Clemen. 6.
Bulla. Troilus in tract. de canonizatione sanct. He commands the Angels to take
souls out of Purgatory, and to carry them to heaven, Clem. 6. in Bulla. His
power is greater then the power of all the Saints, Baldus. God has subjected
the Angels in heaven to the Pope, and he is greater then they, in four
respects: and no less honor is due unto the Pope, then to the Angels: and then
greater (says he) for the Pope receives from the faithful adoration, and
kissing of his feet, which the Angel would not permit to be done to him by
John, Anton. ibidem. tit. 22. cap. 5. What needs more now for the proof of this
mark? Does not he lift up himself above all that is called God, who claims
power over heaven and earth and hell? This they cannot deny: But I assume,
their own Clarks, Doctors, Popes, and Bulls testify this, which they cannot
choose but confess also: Therefore of necessity the Popes of Rome have exalted
themselves above all that is called God, and therefore they are that undoubted
Antichrist which was to come, and now is come.

And as they have exalted themselves above all heavenly powers, so have they
matched themselves with Jesus Christ: for these things are only proper to Jesus
Christ, To have all power given him: to have all things subject to him under
heaven: to be greater then all the Angels: to receive that worship which the
Angels refuse: to command the Angels: to make laws: to bind the consciences of
men: to creat and institut new Religions. And yet the Pope has arrogated all
these things to himself, as has been proved: Therefore he is that undoubted
Antichrist: For he that makes himself equal to the Son of God, lifts up himself
above all that is called God: this cannot be denied. But the Popes of Rome have
done so, in challenging to themselves these things which are only proper to the
Son of God: therefore they must be the Antichrist. Further, these things are
proper to Jesus Christ only, To be the head, the spouse, and foundation of his
Church, to be that corner stone, that precious stone, and that proved stone, to
be that rock of offense, to be the Sun that gives light to his Church, to be
the Prince of Pastors, and to have all treasures of wisdom and understanding
hid in him, and to have all power in heaven and earth given him, and to have
the fullness of power, Epa. 5.23, Col. 2.8. Ephesians. 1.21.22.23, Isa. 28.16. and
8.14. Matthew. 21.41. Malach. 3.20. Matthew. 28.18. 2. Pet. 5.4. Col. 2.3. But all
these things the Popes of Rome have arrogated to themselves, as is manifest by
these places before quoted. Bellarmin in praefat. de sum. Pontif. lib. 1.
ceremon. tit. 7. de majorita. cap. Unam sanctam de constitut. cap. licet. In
sexto. de translat. cap. Quanto. in glossa. Yea, he has not left so much unto
Christ as his style, but it is ascrived to him: For Bernard writing to him,
says, Tu es unctione Christus, that is, Thou art Christ, etc. de consider. ad
Eugenium: yea he has claimed a greater power to himself, then ever we read
that Jesus Christ the Prince of glory, and the Lord of life used, as to deliver
damned souls out of hell, and make them Saints in heaven, and that as many as
pleases him, Clement. 6. Papae Bulla. So not only has he made himself equal in
authority, in office, in styles with the Prince of glory, the Lord Jesus: but
also he has lifted up himself above him: And that there may be nothing wanting
to make it manifest, that he is this Antichrist, as though it had been too
little to him to have lifted up himself above all powers in heaven, in earth
and in hell: and to have matched himself with the eternal Son of God, both in
works, styles, and offices, and to arrogat a greater power then ever he did
exercise. He has matched himself with the majesty of the Godhead, claiming to
himself these things which are only proper to the Godhead, De translat. cap.
Quanto. As the Popes will is for reason: He has an heavenly arbitriment, he
changes the nature of things: Of nothing he makes something: He may depose and
set up in Kingdoms whom he will: He has an absolut jurisdiction that no man
may say to him, wherefore do thou this? He may, liberare ex toto sicut ipse
Deus; that is, absolve a man from the whole, as God may do: Yea, that he may do
all that God may do, except sin: the key not erring, Panormitan. de elect. cap.
licet ab. All which things are only proper to the majesty of God. And as he
has matched himself with the majesty of God himself in his judgment, will,
and power; so does he claim to him the self-same worship and adoration which is
only proper to God: This worship is only proper to God, To fall down before his
feet, and to adore him, and therefore Satan craved it of Christ, and he refused
to give him it: And John would have given it to the Angel, but the Angel
refused it. Wherefore did Christ refuse to give it, and the Angel refuse to
receive it, Rev. 22.8.9. Matthew. 4.9.10. but because it was written, The Lord
thy God thou shall worship, and him only shall thou serve? But that worship
which the Devil craved to be given to him, and which the Angel refused as
proper only to God, that does the Pope claim to him and receive from others, as
his own Archbishops and Canon Law, and men of his own Religion do testify.
Antonius says, 3. part. sum. tit. 22. cap. 5. printed Lugduni 1516. He
receives adorations, prostrations; that is, worship and falling down before his
feet, which (says he) the Angel refused to receive of John. Steuchus says, de
donat. Constant. p. 141. Constantin the Emperor worshipped the Pope as God, and
gave unto him divine honors, and worshipped him as the lively image of Christ.
And Blondus says, Lib. 3. inst. Romae, that all the Princes of the world
worship the Pope, ut summum Deum, as the most high God. And Joannes Faber
says, Praefat. in institut. the Pope calls himself by words, the servant of
servants, but yet he permits himself to be worshipped, which the Angel in the
Revelation refused. And Friar Mantua says, Cujus vestigia adorat Caesar; and
aurato vestiti murice Reges. Whose feet (meaning the Popes) or footsteps,
Caesar and the Kings of the earth adore or worship. And yet lest any should
doubt whither he be the Antichrist or not, he is not only made equal with the
majesty of God, in power, arbitriment, and adoration, but also the very Godhead
it self, and the very style of the majesty of God is ascribed to him. Aventinus
says, Lib. 7. the Popes of Rome earnestly desire domination and Divinitatem,
divinity or Godhead. And de electione, it is said, That he is taken up in the
fellowship of the invisible Trinity, Cap. Fundamento in Sexto. And Baldus
says: The Pope is a God in the earth: And the common voice of the Canonists
is, Dominus Deus noster Papa; that is, the Lord our God the Pope, Canonist.
extra. Joan. 22. cap. Cum inter in glossa. And he is called by his Doctors
Optimus, Maximus, most good in grace, most great in power. Stapleton in
praefat. in princ. fid. doct. And Aventinus says, that it is written in his
forehead, Deus sum, I am God. And Gomesius says, Vict. in tom. 4. Hieron.
praefat. the Pope, est quoddam numen, a certain Godhead, showing himself to be
a visible God in the earth. And in the Council of Lateran, one says to the
Pope, Tu es alter Deus in terris: Thou art another God upon the earth. And the
Tridentin chapter calls him, Terrenum Deum: an earthly God. And his Canon Law
says, It is manifest that the Pope was called God by Constantin. did. 96.
cap. Satis evidenter.

What needs more? He must be blinded by God that sees not the Popes to have
lifted up themselves above all that is called God, and is worshipped. But yet I
say further. He has lifted up himself above the majesty of God: First, in
making that to be Gods word, that is not Gods word, in decreeing the Apocrypha
to be Canonical Scripture. And his Canon Law reckons in the decretal Epistles
among the Canonical Scriptures of God, distinct. 19. in Canonicis. Now what is
this but to prefer his authority to the authority of God? He denies forgiveness
to them that break his law, but he sells the break of Gods law for money. It is
certain that there is no redemption out of Hell: 2. Tim. 2.13. and yet the
Popes of Rome claim that authority, to deliver souls out of Hell, and to make
them Saints in heaven. It is impossible to God, ex injustitia facere justitiam,
to make wrong to be right, because the Scripture says, He cannot deny himself,
and he cannot lie, Heb. 6.18. But the Popes Canonists say, That he may ex
injustitia facere justitiam: Of wrong make right, De translat. cap Quanto in
Glossa de concess. Praebend. cap. Proposuit. 16. quaest. Quicunque in Glossa
15. quaest. 6 authorit. in Glossa, did. 32. Lecto. His Canonists also say,
That the Pope may dispense supra jus de jure, above right. And that he may
dispense against the law of nature, against the law of God, against the Old
Testament, against the Apostles, and that he may dispense against all the
precepts of the Old and New Testament, Ut citatur a Juello, page 59. defens.
Apolog. They say, He may dispense against the degrees forbidden in the Law of
God. And that he may, according to his absolut power, Dissolve the bond of
marriage, upon the consent of both the parties, without any lawful cause. And
that he may dispense with oaths and promises made either to God or men, Fox
page 785. And some say, That he may dispense that one may have me wives then
one at once, in some cases. Now what is this else, but to exalt himself above
the Lord? And in a Sermon in the Council of Lateran, it is there spoken of him
by one of his own Bishops, That all power in heaven and earth, is given to the
Pope; Council. Later. sub Leone, sess. 10. And that which is more, That in him
is omnis potestas supra omnes potestates coeli and terrae: All power above all
powers, both of heaven and earth. And Aventinus says, That they desire to be
feared more then God. To conclud this then, He that has exalted himself above
all powers in heaven, earth and hell: he that has equalled himself with the
Son of God, the Prince of glory, and with the majesty of God, in styles,
authority, office and power: And he who has lifted up himself above the Lord
Jesus, and above the majesty of God, he must be that undoubted Antichrist,
which the Apostle Paul has described: But the Popes of Rome have done so both
by their practice, and by their doctrine, as has been proved by their own
testimonies: Therefore they are that undoubted Antichrist who was to come. This
for the third mark.

The fourth mark of the Antichrist, set down by the Apostle, is, That he fits
in the Temple of God, as God. That is, in an eminent and high place in the
Church of God. So Jerome to Gelasius, and Chrysostom upon that place, and
Theodoret, and Thomas of Aquin a Papist, expones this place, and August. de
civit. Dei, lib. 20. cap. 19 expones this Temple to be the Church of God,
wherein the Antichrist shall sit. For lest men should think that the Antichrist
should be an open enemy to God, the Apostle says, He shall sit in the Temple of
God; that is, in the Church of God: as it is taken, 1. Cor. 6.19. where the
Saints in Corinth are called the Temple of God. So the Antichrist is foretold
to be an household enemy, and not a foreign so: and he shall withstand Christ not
openly, but covertly. And though he be a deadly enemy to Christ, yet shall he
pretend that he is in the Temple of God; that is, a member of the Church: and
that he has a throne; that is, a high dominion within Gods Church. And
therefore in the Revelation, he is called, A beast which has two horns like
the Lamb, Rev. 13.11. that is, who in outward show is like the Lamb, pretending
his power and authority. And as Primasius says, exponing that same place,
Those whom he seduceth, he seduceth them by hypocrifie of a dissimulat truth:
for he says, he were not like the Lamb, if he spoke openly as the Dragon. And
Augustine says, Tract. 3 in Epist. Joannis; Let us not take heed to the tongue,
but to the deeds: let the tongue rest, and ask the life. Whereby it appears,
that they also are Antichrists, who deny Jesus Christ in their life. And
therefore (alluding to Judas) he is called the son of perdition, who not by
open warfare should oppugn Christ, but by a kiss, as it were, should betray
him. And therefore he is described also under the form of a woman, an harlot,
Revel. 17.2. These. 2 whereby is signified, that he shall not be an open enemy
in profession, but secret and dissimulat. And therefore the cup wherein she
reaches out her abomination, is described to be of gold; that is having a show
of godliness. And his unrighteousness; that is, his doctrine, is called
deceiveable, because of the show of truth that it has. And his iniquity is
called a mystery; that is, not a plain and open impiety, but secret: so colored
with shows of truth and godliness, that every one cannot perceive it. And yet
for all this hypocrisy of his, for all this dissimulation, and show of
godliness. He shall speak like the Dragon; Rev. 13.19. that is, his doctrine
shall be the doctrine of Devils. His drink shall be abomination and fornication;
that is, abominable idolatry. Now to whom can this agree? And in whom has this
been fulfilled, except only in the Popes and Bishops of Rome? For does he not
call himself, The Vicar of Christ: the head of the Church: and those that obey
him only the true Church, and true Catholics? Who has horns like the Lamb and
yet speaks like the Dragon, but he? That is, who styles themselves the servant
of servants: the Vicar of Christ: the head of the Church, etc. but they? And
yet for all this, who have ever lived, taught, or spoken so blasphemously as
they? Oraclo vocis mundi moderaris habenas: Et merito in terris crederis esse
Deus. That is; By the oracle of thy voice, thou rules the world, and worthily
is thou believed in the earth to be God. This inscription was written in Rome
to Pope Sixtus the fourth. In show of holiness, most vaunting; and yet for all
this, of all the creatures under heaven, the most monstrous. Of all idolaters,
under the show and pretense of Religion, the vilest and most abominable: and of
all creatures in the earth, they have lifted up themselves farthest above God,
and that under the pretense of humility. And therefore the Scripture says,
that the Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of God; not as a Minister teaching
and preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, in season, and out of season: but as
God; that is, claiming to himself these things that are proper and peculiar to
God. The which the Popes of Rome have done, as has been proved before. So to
conclud this: He must be the undoubted Antichrist, who suppose he has lifted
up himself above all that is called God, yet he sits in the Temple of God, as
God: who has two horns like the Lamb, and yet speaks like the Dragon: whose
abominations are drunken out of a golden cup, whose doctrine is deceiveable:
and a mystery: that is, who under the pretense of Christ, overthrows Christ:
But so it is, the Popes of Rome are such (as has been proved:) Therefore the
Popes of Rome are the undoubted Antichrist. This for the fourth mark.

The fifth mark of the Antichrist, as he is described by the Apostle, is in
these words: Ye know (says the Apostle) what withholdeth: namely, that he
might be revealed in his own time. This Tertullian de resurrect. cap. 24.
Jerome ad Gelasium, and Chrysostom upon this same place, and so also Ambrose
upon this place, and August. de civit. Dei, lib. 20. cap. 29. expone it of the
Roman Empire: the which, as long as it flowrished, and was in full strength,
the Antichrist could not climb up to this his full hight and preeminence. So
that it behoved that Empire first to be translated, and piece and piece
diminished, before the Antichrist could come up to his hight; for that stayed
him. Now it is manifest out of the 17. chap. of the Revelation, that Rome
should be the seat of the Antichrist: and Bellarmin and the Rhemists do not
deny it: and Rome was the seat of the Roman Empire before. So then it behoved
the Empire to translate his seat from Rome, that Rome which was first the seat
of the Empire, might be the seat of the Antichrist. Now the issue and event, is
a sure and clear interpretation of this Prophecy: For Constantin the Emperor
of Rome, translated his seat from Rome to Byzantium, called Constantinople in
Greece. And piece and piece that Empire of the Greek Emperor began to decay,
and was translated from the Greeks to the Frenchmen, by the Popes: and then
from them to the Germans, by the Popes also. So that both Rome, and a great
part of Italy, and at the last a great part of the Empire is fallen in the
Popes hand. So that now he vaunts himself to be Monarch of the whole world; and
all Kings and Princes gave him their oath of allegiance: and the Emperors and
Kings held their Empires and Kingdoms of him, and are but his vassals (as their
Canon Law says.) So that by the taking away of the Roman Empire, the Popes did
then climb up to their supremacy, and make themselves manifest, that they were
the Antichrist. And so this does also agree to the Pope of Rome, and to none
other. He is the Antichrist, whose climbing up was let by the Roman Empire,
and who is built up upon the ruins of the same. But the Papacy is such:
Therefore the Papacy is that Antichristian Kingdom.

It is said, sixthly, that this mystery began to work in the days of the
Apostles: that is, the foundations of that apostasy was begun to be laid in
these days, and that he shall continue to the Lords coming: for he shall not be
abolished but by the brightness of his coming, suppose he shall be first
consumed with the sword of his mouth: that is, discovered, and sore beaten by
the Lords Word. All which agrees unto Papistrie. For that Kingdom is that
Apostasy and Antichristian Monarchy, whose foundation was beginning to be laid
in the Apostles days, which should be first consumed by the Word of God, and
utterly abolished by the brightness of his coming. But the Papacy is such:
therefore it is that Antichristian Kingdom, Matthew. 18.1.2.3.4. and 20.25.26.27.
Mark 10.41. Luke 22.25. 2 Cor. 1 24. 1 Pet. 3.2.3. For the foundations of it
was soon laid, both of that Hierarchy and supremacy of the Pope, and also of
his damnable and erroneous doctrine. For that superiority of the Ministry one
over another, of Bishops over Pastors, forbidden by Jesus Christ, soon crept
in, which was the foundation, or rather stairs, by the which the Pope clamb up
to his Popedom and supremacy: and the old condemned heresies which sprang up in
the primitive Church, many of them were the foundation of these damnable
doctrines, which the Popes brought in afterward, as is proved in the end of the
first part.

And as to his consuming by the Lord his mouth, the Lord has accomplished that
already in some measure, and shall assuredly fulfill it daily more and more: For
since the time of the burning of John Hus, and Jerome of Prague, about the year
of God 1415. and since the time the Lord stirred up Martin Luther, and sundry
others his faithful servants, to preach the Gospel of Christ, which was as it
were buried in the darkness of Papistry, the supremacy of the Pope has taken
such a daily consumption, that many of the Kingdoms of Europe now have forsaken
her, and the Lord has put in their hearts to hate her: But yet we know the
dreggs of it shall not be abolished utterly, while the bright coming of the Son
of God.

It follows seventhly, the manner how his Kingdom and tyranny shall be
promoved, upholden, and established: To wit, By the effectual working of Satan,
with all power and signs and lying wonders, and with all deceiveableness of
unrighteousness among them that perish: Which the Apostle calls strong
delusions. And with this, that of the Rev. 13.13.14. (in the description of the
second beast, whereby it is meaned the Antichristian Kingdom) does agree, that
he did great wonders, and deceived them that dwelt upon the earth, by the signs
which was permitted him to do. Now certainly nothing can be spoken more aptly
of the Popes Kingdom then this: For unless the Pope had had an effectual power,
strong and devilish also, by signs and lying wonders: and unless his
unrighteousness; that is, his false doctrine, had been exceeding deceiveable;
that is, covered with a fair color of godliness: and unless his delusions had
been strong, his Kingdom had never been so far enlarged, and so firmly
established, as we see it has been: and his damnable doctrine and errors would
never have de^eived so many Nations as they have done. For what is more common
and usual in their mouths then miracles? What is it they vaunt so much of, as
of their miracles? So that they make it an infallible mark of the Church. And
how, I pray you, have a great part of their errors and superstitions, as the
praying to Saints, and worshipping of Images, and pilgrimages, and other of
their superstitions and idolatries, as Purgatory, the real presence, their
monstrous Transubstantiation, etc. how, I say, have they been so confirmed and
so rooted in the hearts of ignorant people, but by their lying wonders and
miracles, which they fain was done? Whereof their golden Legends are full, and
sundry yet live, who have been eyewitnesses of the falsehood of their miracles.
I will only set down for example, some of the false miracles of two Nuns here:
the one of Magdalena de la Cruz, Abbess of the Monastery of the Franciscan
Nuns, who was condemned by the Inquisitors of Cordoua for her enormous
offenses, and covenant which she made with the Devil, as they say in their
sentence against her. She by the aid of the Devil, with whom she made a
covenant when she was nine years old, became a singular hypocrit, and by his
help wrought many miracles, as that she appeared unto Mariners in a storm being
invocated, and so the storm calmed: that she burnt in flames like Seraphims,
and was ravished in the spirit, and heard wonders which mortal man could not
utter: (In this she was made another S. Paul) that she was lifted up in the
air, and the Sacrament went visibly out of the hand of the Priest that said
Mass, through the air, and entered into her mouth: And when the Sacrament went
by, she being in a garden, the wall of the garden opened its self, and then she
worshipped it: Such was the opinion of her holiness, that many Ladies of Spain,
and the Empress, seeing themselves at point of child birth, sent their mantles
wherein the creature should be wrapped, that she should bless them. She gave to
her beloved friends drops of her monstrous blood, and made them believe it was
the blood of Christ: she was condemned as a Witch by the Inquisitors of Spain,
about the year of God 1540. The other of a Dominican Nun, Prioress de la
Anunciada of Lisbon in Portugal, about the 1586. year of God, that she had
deserved to have Christ visible for her husband, that he appeared to her often
times, and talked with her, as one friend would talk with another: that she had
the impression of Christ's five wounds upon her. And as the history records,
other infinite miracles did she. So that many became Nuns through the opinion
which was conceived of her holiness and miracles. This story is written in
French by one Steven de Lusignan, a Dominican Friar, and dedicated to the Queen
of France, with this title, The great miracles and most holy wonders which this
present year 1586. has happened to the right reverend Mother Prioress of the
Monastery, etc. in Lisbon, approved by Friar Jews of Granada, and by other
persons worthy of credit in Paris, printed by John Bessant 1586. He alleges
three letters sent from persons of great credit for his warrant. But she was
discovered, and confessed her hypocrisy: and that she painted the wounds on
her hands, and drew blood on her side, and fained all the rest, that she might
be esteemed holy, and therefore was condemned by the Archbishops of Lisbon and
Brage, the Bishop of Guardia, the Inquisitors, and sundry others in the end of
the 1588. year, as it is to be seen in a book printed at Sevil in Spain 1589.
Let these examples suffice to prove this mark, that by lying wonders they have
established their damnable doctrine. So that certainly there is not one thing
that does more confirm this, that their Popes is the Antichrist, and their
Kingdom Antichristian, then the effectual working of Satan by lying wonders,
whereby their devilish doctrine has been promoved and established. And what
seek we further? Is it not manifest by their own Histories, that their own
Popes to the number of 20. or mo, have wrought by the effectual working of
Satan? So then to conclud this point: If the Apostle Paul be a true Prophet,
which I trust no man will call in question, and if he be the true Antichrist,
to whom all these marks do agree: that is, who is the man of sin, and son of
perdition, who has lifted up himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped, etc. which cannot be denied: then of necessity it must follow that
the Popes of Rome are the self-same Antichrist which was foretold to come,
because they bear all these marks of that Antichrist whom the Apostle
describes, and no other.

And if we will come to the Revelation, where the Antichrist is most clearly
foretold: What is there in that Revelation spoken of the Antichrist, which is
not fulfilled in the Popes of Rome? In the 13 of the Revelation, mention is
made of two beasts; by the first is signified the Roman Empire, by the which
the Saints of God were persecuted the first 300. years: by the other is
signified the Kingdom of the Antichrist, which rose up immediately after the
diminishing and destruction of the Roman Empire: the which John calls another
beast, distinguishing it from the former: which he describes first from his
outward form and shape, that he has two horns like the Lamb, but speaks like
the Dragon, which has been accomplished in the Popes of Rome. as I have showed
before. The second from his works that he does. First, that he did all that the
first beast could do before him. Secondly, that he shall cause all to worship
the first beast, whose deadly wound was healed. Thirdly, that he should deceive
them which dwell upon the earth, by the wonders and signs which was permitted
to him to do. Fourthly, that he should restore the image of the first beast.
Fifthly, that he should suffer none to buy or sell, but such as received his
mark on their forehead and hands. And the last thing from the which that
Antichristian Kingdom (which is represented by the second beast) is described,
is the number of his name. All the which are so clearly accomplished in that
Papistical Kingdom, these many hundred years, that he must be blinded of God,
that sees not that the Popes are the Antichrist, and their Kingdom
Antichristian.

As to the first: Who have exercised all the power of the former Emperors of
Rome, but they? Have not they claimed to themselves the Monarchy of the whole
world? The authority of both the swords? Have not Emperors and Kings sworn
their oath of allegiance and fidelity unto them, taking their unction,
consecration, and Crowns of them, and paid tribut unto them? Have they not
kissed their feet, holden the stirrops, led their bridles, set them on their
horse? Have not the Popes of Rome excommunicated Emperors and Kings, deposed
them from their Kingdoms, stirred up their subjects against them, set up others
in their places? And finally, what outward power or tyranny did ever the Roman
Emperors exercise over Kingdoms and Nations; yea, what cruelty, tyranny,
avarice, blasphemy against God and his Saints, did they ever exercise, which
the Popes of Rome have not done; yea, and have overcome them in all these
things? The which are so clear and manifest, and that by their own practices,
that they cannot be denied. Does he not affirm in the Canon Law, Did. 96. cap.
Constantinus, c. Venerabilem de electio: That Constantin gave the Pope all the
Kingdoms in the earth: And that all Kings reign by the Pope: And that he
transferrs the Empire from Nation to Nation, and gives them to whom he will:
And that all Kings are but the Popes vassals? Steuchus de donat Constant. And
therefore says Blondus, lib. 3. instau. Romae: Now the Princes of the world
adore and worship the Pope, as perpetual Dictator; not Cesars successor, but
Peter's successor, and the foresaid Emperors Vicar. Yea, says he, All Europe
sends greater, or at the least as great tribut to Rome, as they did in the
former times (to wit, to the Roman Empire.) And Bernard says, sermon. de
convers. They are the first in the persecution (speaking to the Church) which
appear to love the primacy in the Church, and to be Princes thereof. As to the
second, who is he that has caused all to worship the first Beast; that is,
has brought again that tyra^nous cruelty and dominion over the poor Church of
God, in setting up idolatry, and abolishing the true worship of God, which the
Heathen Emperors did, but the Popes of Rome? For was not the Emperor of the
East excommunicat, because he would not suffer Images in the Temples? Have not
they filled the world with their Idolatry, as has been proved? Who have made
war with the Saints and oppressed them in all the parts where their dominion
might reach, but they? France, Germany, England, Scotland, the Low Countries,
and all Europe, bear witness unto this. As to the third, who by lying wonders
have deceived the world, but they? And as to the fourth, who has healed the
deadly wound of the first Beast, in setting up an Empire here in the West in
the person of Charles the Great, which was more then three hundred years so
deadly wounded through the incursion of other Nations, that there was no Empire
in the West. Who (I say) did all this, but the Popes of Rome? Giving unto them
the style or bare name, but taking by little and little the substance of the
whole Empire to themselves: so that Theodorick a Niem says, lib. 3. cap. 43.
The Roman Empire is so little now in Almany, that there is some Bishops or
Archbishops, that will spend twice as much as they will do of all the lands
that is under their subjection. And some Princes have more land then the
Emperor has. And if ye will look to Rome (says he) and Italy, it was once the
seat of the Empire, but now the Emperor has nothing of it but the style. As to
the fifth: Who is he who has caused make the Image of the Beast, and given a
spirit unto it that it should speak: That is, who have set up a very Image of
the Roman Monarchy and Hierarchy, in the whole frame of their government in the
Church of God, but the Popes of Rome? So that the whole frame of their
government and Hierarchy, is a lively pattern and image of the Roman Empire.
For as in the Roman Empire, there was an Emperor whom all did worship as God:
unto whom there was joined a Senate, who was next in authority to him: so is the
frame of the government of the Papistical Kingdom. There is a Monarch the Pope,
whom all are compelled, when they come in his sight, to worship as an earthly
God, to whose sentence all must stand to, who judges all, but can be judged of
none; who has joined with him a Senate of Cardinals, who are next him in
authority. Secondly, as in the Roman Monarchy, the Emperor took upon him not
only the highest Kingly authority in all matters civil, but also the Priestly
authority, and power over Religion: and not that only, but also to be Tribuns
over the people, who had the power of forbidding and annulling of all decrees
made by other Magistrates: Even so the Popes of Rome have usurped all these
three First, the highest Royal authority over all Kings and Princes: next, to
be Lords over Religion: so that as Antoninus one of his Archbishops says,
Summa part. 3. tit. 22. c. 5. He may creat new Religions: thirdly, to be
Tribuns; that is, to disanul whatsoever decree or judgment of any Bishop or
inferior Judges; yea of Synodal and General Councils, if they be not ratified
by him. Thirdly, as in Rome was the head of the Empire, the Emperor and his
Senate with him; and as the Emperors had their Magistrates under them, in all
their Provinces, and places of their dominions, from whom all their authority
was, and who was at their beck and commandment: So in the Popes Kingdom, the
Pope who is the head, and the Senate of Cardinals, which is next him in
authority, have their seat in Rome: and they according to the old pattern of
the Roman Empire, have their Bishops, Archbishops, Abbots, Priors, Monks,
Friars, etc. in all the places of their dominion under them: who have their
whole authority from him, and who all are his sworn men. So here is then the
lively image of the former beast.

And as to the sixth, Who did kill all them that would not worship the image,
and this frame of government of Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Archbishops, etc.
and their Religion, but the Popes of Rome? The blood of infinite thousands do
testify this. And what has brought all under their bondage, both one and
other, that none might buy or sell: that is, neither brook Civil nor
Ecclesiastical offices, but those who were marked with his mark; that is, took
on them his profession, and was Catholics (as he terms them?) Is not this
sufficiently known, that none might have offices nor benefices in the Church,
but they that received his mark, and orders from him? And none might brook
their. Kingdoms and civil dignities, in so far as lay in his power, but these
that were of his profession. Rex venit ante fores, surans prius urbis honores:
Post homo fit Papae, recipit quo dante coronam, Clement. lib. 2. tit. 9. And
Erasmus says in his Adagles, That neither Baptism, nor marriage, nor
sacrifice, nor psalms, nor prayer, nor Sacrament, nor grave in the Papistical
Kingdom are given without money.

Now last of all, to what Kingdom or Church under heaven, since this Revelation
was written, does the number of the name of the Beast, here set down, agree,
but to the Latin Kingdom of the Popes, and their Latin Church? for here is set
down the name of the Kingdom of Antichrist. The number of the name of the Beast
here set down, is 666. and the l a t e i 30 1 300 5 10 n o s. 50 70 200. all
which being joined together, makes 666. letters of the name of this
Antichristian Kingdom, (...), amounts to the same number of 666. For what is
the name of the Popish Kingdom and Hierarchy? Is not the Church called, the
Latin Church? Is not all the exercises of their Religion, almost in Latin? And
suppose the Old Testament be written in Hebrew, and the New in Greek; yet, have
they not condemned the Originals as corrupted? And have they not authorized the
Latin interpretation, as only authentical? So that Papacy, is the very Kingdom
of Latins. Now the letters of this Greek word (...), which signifies Latin (for
the Revelation was written in Greek) does amount to the same number 666. And
what other Kingdom or Monarchy under heaven can show whose name is such, that
the letters thereof amounts to this number? Ireneus an ancient Writer, yea so
ancient, that he saw and heard Polycarpus, who was one of John's Disciples, who
received this Revelation, mentions, that the name of this Beast in this
prophecy, is (...), Iren. lib. 5. cap. 25. Sed and Latinis nomen 666. numerum
habet, and valde verisimile est, quia verissimum regnum hoc E ch ch l e. 5 20
20 30 8 s i a I t a. 200 10 1 10 300 1 l i e a. 30 10 20 1 habet vocabulum,
Latini enim sunt qui nunc regnant. And as the letters of this Greek word (...),
amounts to this number 666. so does the letters of these, Latin words
Ecclesia Italica, written in Greek letters, and of the Hebrew word ROMIITH,
that signifies R O M I 200 6 40 10 I TH 10 400 Romam. Is not this much now,
that this number of 666 agrees to the name of the Papistical Kingdom, both in
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. In Greek (...), that is, Latin: in Hebrew, ROMIITH;
that is, Rome: in Latin, Ecclesia Italica; that is, the Italian Church. For
Italy is called Latium; that is, Latin. What more would any man require? Will
not this suffice to make it manifest, that the Popes are the Antichrist, to
whom every thing prophesied of the Antichrist by the Apostle Paul, and this
Revelation, of the second Beast, do so fitly agree? So that there can be none
under heaven unto whom they can be applied, but only to the Popes of Rome. But
yet for the full manifestation of this point, we will go to the 17. of the
Revelation. For as his Kingdom was figured under a Beast that had two horns
like the Lamb, in the 13. chapter; so there is the principal throne and seat of
his Kingdom, figured under a great harlot, with whom the Kings and Nations of
the earth have committed fornication. The which harlot is most gloriously
decked and richly apparelled: Who has a cup of gold in her hand, full of
abomination: in whose forehead a name is written: A Mystery, that Babylon,
that mother of whoredoms, who is drunken with the blood of the Saints and
Martyrs of Jesus; which is that great city, which reigns over the Kings of
the earth, which sits upon seven mountains. For the maintenance of whose
Kingdom, ten Kings yielded up their power and authority, to fight against the
Lamb, and to overcome him. That this great City is the City of Rome, it is so
plain, that he is more then blind that sees it not. For what City did reign
over the Nations when this Revelation, was received, but Rome? And what City
since the Pope clamb up to his Kingdom has done the same, but Rome? And what
City sits upon seven hills, but Rome, whose names are yet known? As
testifies Capitolinus, Palatinus, Aventinus, Caelius, Exquilinus. Quirinalis,
Viminalis. And what City has been the mother of all spiritual and bodily
fornication; of all idolatry and abomination, but Rome? Yea, what City has
been so enriched with gold, purple and precious stones, but Rome? And what City
has been drunken with the blood of the Martyrs and Saints, but Rome? All these
things are so manifest, that not only some of the Fathers, as Jerome in
praefat, ad Didymum, and in Epist. ad Algasium, and Tertullian contra Marci.
lib. 13. advers. Judaeos, cap. 9. saw it: But some of themselves confess it,
that this Babylon is Rome. Both Bellarmin grants it plainly, and also the
Rhemists do not deny it. For that great Jesuit Bellarmin says, lib. 1. cap. 2.
That John in the Revelation every where calls Rome Babylon: and confirms this;
first, by the testimony of Tertullian, and then by the circumstances of the
text: For (says he) there was no other City at that time that did reign over
the Nations, but Rome. And it is most notorious (says he) that Rome sits on
seven hills, Lib. 4. cap. 4. What now would ye have more? And in another place;
It appears (says he) that in the time of the Antichrist, Rome shall be made
desolat, and shall be burnt, as it is gathered out of the 17. of the Revelation,
and this shall not be until the end of the world. These are plain speeches. And
I say, this great City of Rome, which is called here mystical Babylon, is not
described here as she was the seat of the Heathen Emperors, when they reigned
in her, as the Roman Church says; but as she is, and has been the seat of the
Antichrist. For in the time of the Emperors, she made not the Kings of the
earth commit fornication with her: that is, she did not pollute them with her
idolatry and Religion, as it is foretold of this Rome: for she left every
Kingdom free to use their own Idolatry and superstition: But Rome since she
began to be the throne and seat of the Antichrist the Popes of Rome have
propagated her idolatry and worship to all Nations, and have made all Nations
drunken with the wine of her fornication: and have obtruded her Religion to all
Nations, against their will, with fire and sword. And from thence have
proceeded all the wars and blood-sheds, in many Nations of Europe, because they
did go out of her, and departed from their idolatry.

Further, all the parts of her description here agrees to Rome, having the show
of Christianity, and not as she was Heathen under the Heathen Emperors, as that
purple and scarlet wherewith she was clad, that gilding with gold and precious
stones, and pearls: which the Archbishop of Ratisbon, Albertus Magnus, and the
Gloss interprets of the simulation of piety and meekness, and the spiritual
graces of God, as faith, hope charity: all which (say they) she shall in
hypocrisy pretend: but yet in truth have nothing such, but cruelty and
ungodliness, the which can no ways agree with Rome, as she was in her
Gentilism: therefore of necessity Papistical Rome is here described, and not
Heathen Rome. Thirdly, that Rome is here described, which was upholden by the
Beast, unto whom the ten Kings yielded up their power to fight against the
Lamb, as is manifest by the 12. and 13 verses of that 17 chapter. But this
Beast is not the Empire of Rome, but the Antichristian Kingdom: for these ten
Kings had not received their Kingdoms all that time that the Roman Emperors
were Heathen, and long after: Therefore Rome as it is the seat of the
Antichrist, and not as it was the seat of the Roman Empire, is here descrybed.
And the Rhemists say, in their annotations upon this place, that some expons
these ten Kings, of ten Kingdoms, into which the Roman Empire shall be divided,
which shall all serve Antichrist: therefore Rome as it is here described, m^st
be the seat of the Antichrist.

Last of all, the Revelation speaks here of that Rome that shall be burnt with
fire, and be made desolat by the ten Kingdoms, which God should stir up to hate
her: and he speaks here of that Rome which shall be casten in the midst of the
sea: after the which shall follow the day of Judgment: But this cannot be Rome,
as it was the seat of the Roman Empire, but as it is the seat of the
Antichristian Kingdom: for it is more then a thousand years, since Rome left
off her Gentilism, and yet this prophecy is not accomplished in her. Unto
these I join the testimonies of some of their own Monks Bishops, Poets, Friars
Historiographers, Emperors, and Popes also; whereby it will be verified, that
this harlot is Rome, and the Popes thereof the Antichrist. Bernard a Monk of
Cluniak, who lived about 400 years ago, writing unto Peter the Abbot of that
Monastery, speaking of the tyrannous behavior of the Clergy and Bishop of Rome,
he accuses them of sacrilegious brybery, of buying and selling of the Bishops
Pall, the Ring, and of all Laws and equity. And he says in another place,
Roma nocens nocet, atque viam docet ipsa nocendi,
Jura relinquere, lucra requirere, pallia vendi:
Non Deus est tibi Jesus perfida Roma peristi. That is,
This hurtful Rome does hurt, and teach to be wicked,
To leave all ^aw, and gape for gain, and sell a Popish Tippet.
A greedy gulf, a griping grave, a filthy jakes:
Both bottomless, unfatiat: and all alike she makes.
By drinking thou art dry, and louder thou do cry, come bring me more.
I pray thee cry, ho: but thou says, no. I hunger sore.
I think thou makes gold thy God, not Jesus Christ.
Rome, what shall I say? What shall I do, or tell thee what is done?
Wealth weakneth thee, wealth threatens thee not to be Rome.
Then let me speak it, and let me write it, Rome once thou wast.
Then let me speak it, and let me write it, Rome thou art gone.


And John a Monk, says, Curia vult Marcas, bursas exhaurit, and arcas, etc.
That is,
The Court of Rome does aim at marks; it souks the purse, and soaks the arks.
If that you mind to spare your arks, come not at Popes nor Patriarks:
But if you frankly give them marks, and with good gold stuff up their arks,
I warrant then you shall be free, from any kind of penalty.
Who is within? Who is there? I. Why, why what would ye? Come in.
Bring you ought? No. Stand still. But I do. Go ye then in.


The same Monk also says, Roma manus rodit: quod rodere non valet, odit.
Dantes exaudit, non dantibus ostia claudit.
Curia curarum genetrix, nutrixque malorum.
Ignotos notis, inhonestos aequat honestis. That is,
Rome is a raket, and spiteful hater of the empty hand.
She hears the giver, but others never, but lets them stand.
Her Court a cage of cares, of mischiefs eke the mother.
She uses knaves like honest men, and strangers like a brother.


The Archbishop of Golen and Traverse, say to Pope Nicolas the first: Thou
pretends the person of the Pope, but thou plays the tyrant. We feel a Wolf
under the weed of a Pastor: The style belies the parent. Thou by thy deeds
makes show, as if thou were God. While as thou art the servant of servants,
thou contends to be Lord of Lords. According to the discipline of our Savior,
thou art the least of all the Ministers of the Temple of God. Thou through the
desire of ruling-goeth to perdition. Whatsoever thing pleases thee, is lawful
is thee. And Gregory a Pope says; I affirm this boldly upon good assurance,
that whosoever he be that calls himself, or is desirous to be called
Universal Priest, in that hautiness of his, is a forerunner of Antichrist; in
that by swelling pride he prefers himself before others. Arnulphus
Arelatensis unto the Council of Rhemes, testifigs this of the Pope; Whom (says
he) Reverend Fathers, think ye this man to be, who fitting in an high throne,
shines in his purple and golden attire? to wit, if he want love, and be puffed
up by knowledge, he is the Antichrist, fitting in the Temple of God, showing
himself as though he were God. Bernard 400. years ago, writing to Eugenius lib.
2 Pope of Rome, in conclusion he breaks forth in these words: Thou hust more
need (says he) to have a rake in thy hand, then a scepter to perform the
office of a Prophet. And in another place, in his fourth Book to Eugenius,
after he has described and detested the pride of the Bishops of Rome; at last
he concludes the matter in these words, saying to the Pope, Herein (says he)
thou shows thy self to have succeeded, not to Peter, but to Constantin, Peter
is he who never knew what belonged to such solemn showing himself abroad, in
braveries of precious stones, or silks, or gold, or ryding upon a white
palfray, or being guarded with a troup of tall fellows, or environed with a
company of ruffling serving men. Also in another place, in his Epistle 230.
speaking of the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, he makes an exclamation in this
sort; At the first indeed (says he) ye began to play the Lords but over the
Clergy, contrary to the counsel of Peter, 1. Pet. 5.3. And within a while,
contrary to the advice of Paul (Peter's fellow Apostle) you will have dominion
over the faith of all men, 2. Cor. 1.24. But ye stay not there: ye have taken
upon you more; namely to have a peremptory power in Religion it self. Now what
remains whereon ye might further incroach, except ye will go about to bring
the very Angels under your subjection. And in another place upon the Cant.
sermon. 33. speaking of the behavior of the Romish Prelates: Hence comes (says
he) that whoorish tricking, that stage-like attire, that prince like pomp,
which daily we see in them: Hence proceeds the gold that they use in their
bridles, sadles, and spurrs; insomuch that their spurrs are more glittering
then their altars. Hence came their stately tables, their variety of dishes,
and quaffing cups. Hence issued their jonketting, banketting, their drunkenness
and sursets. Hence followed their viols, harps, and shalms. Hence flowed their
sellers, and pantries so stuffed with wines, and viands of all sorts. Hence got
they their leepots, and painting boxes. And hence had they their purses so well
lined with coin. Fie upon it. Such men they will needs be, and yet they are our
great Masters in Israel, as Deans, Archdeans, Bishops and Archbishops. These
works of theirs are little inferior unto that filthiness which they committed
in darkness. And lastly, he adds these words, For he is the very Antichrist.
Frederick the second, foretold the ruin of Rome, more then three hundred
years since, in these words, writing to Innocentius the fourth, Pope.

Roma diu titubans, longis erroribus acta
Corruet, and mundi desinet esse caput.
That is,

Rome rolling long about in errors, bound, and thral,
Shall fall at last, and cease to be the lofty head of all.
And in his verse written against the Pope, he affirms plainly, That he was
that son of perdition, and that head of the wicked fore spoken by Paul. And in
his letters to the Prelates of the world, he calls the Pope, That great Dragon,
that has deceived the whole world; that Antichrist, and that counterfeit Vicar
of Christ. Eberhardus Bishop of Salsburgh, above 380 years ago, Aventinus lib.
7. speaking of the Bishops of Rome, he says: They only desire to reign: They
cannot abide peace: They will not cease till they have stamped all under their
feet, that they may sit in the Temple of God, and be lifted up above all that
is called God, or that is worshipped. He who is the servant of servants, is the
Lord of Lords, and desires to be thought of, as if he were God. And he says,
That man whom they use to call Antichrist, he speaks great things, as though
he were God, in whose forehead that name of blasphemy is written, I am God, I
cannot err. Franciscus Petrarcha, a light of that age for his manifold
learning, calls the Court of Rome, Babylon, and that harlot of Babel that
sits upon many waters, the mother of Idolatry and whoredom, the refuge of
heresies and errors. And Petrus Joannes pronounced the Pope to be the
Antichrist, and the synagogue of Rome, to be that great Babylon. And Matthias
Parisiensis says, That Antichrist has seduced all the Universities and
Colleges of the learned, so that they teach nothing soundly now. And the Edict
of the Empire, under Lodowick the fourth, speaking of Pope John the 22. says,
Christians cannot keep the peace which is given them of God, for this
Antichrist (meaning the Pope.) And in another Edict it is written, As he is a
disaguised Pastor, so is he a mystical Antichrist: and we declars him being the
author of that Antichristian Empire, to be damned of heresy, and deposed by
our right by the Council sentence, and common consent of the Princes and
Prelates of Germany, the Priests of Italy, and people of Rome so desiring. And
Aventinus in the history of Hildebrand, writes, That almost all the plain,
just, simple, and upright have written, that then (to wit, when he was Pope)
the Empire of the Antichrist began, because they saw that come to pass at that
time, which our Savior foretold so many years before.

And to conclud this, Hadrian the 6. Pope, in his instructions of his Legates to
the Convention at Norimberg, he says: Thou shall say, that we grant freely
that God has suffered this persecution to come upon the Church for the sins of
men, and especially of the Priests and Prelates of the Church. And again, he
says, We know that in this seat (speaking of that Pontifical seat in Rome)
many abominable things have been for some years, as abuse in spiritual things,
excess in commandments; and last of all, all things changed in worse. And the
Popes Cardinals (speaking to Paul the third) say, From this fountain (holy
Father) as from the Trojan horse, so many abuses have rushed into the Church,
and so heavy diseases, wherewith (as we may see) she is brought into a disperat
estat. I omit the rest Ye may see the truth is strong that has made their own
mouths to fyle themselves. To conclud this then: He must be the undoubted
Antichrist, and his Kingdom Antichristian, unto whom the whole marks of the
Antichrist, as he is described in the Scripture by the Apostle Paul and John in
the Revelation, does agree: But they all agree unto the Popes of Rome and his
Kingdom, as has been proved. Therefore they must be that undoubted Antichrist
who was to come. Secondly, he must be that undoubted Antichrist, whom his own
Friars. Bishops, Cardinals, and some of themselves do call Antichrist, and
ascribe these things unto him that belongs properly to the Antichrist: But his
own Friars, Bishops, Cardinals, and some of themselves have so testified, as
has been proved also: Therefore out of their own mouths they are condemned to
be that Antichrist, and their Kingdom Antichristian.

Now to put an end to this my reply, That Religion is false which has neither
unity, succession, nor antiquity: this you cannot deny, because you make them
the marks of your Church: But your Religion has neither unity, for that is
broken by your manifold contradictions and dissentions among your selves,
whereof I have marked some, and the diligent Reader of your works may gather
many mo. Chrachtovius in his book called Bellum Jesuiticum, has gathered of
two heads; to wit, the Mass and Antichrist, 205. contradictions: let the
Christian Reader judge then what may be gathered of the rest: no succession,
neither personal, broken by their Popes, who was Atheists, Schismatics,
Heretics, and by a woman Pope; neither in doctrine, being direct contrary to
the doctrine of Christ: no antiquity, for the authors and origin of sundry
main points of your Religion, is set down here: and all your Roman Clergy, have
not satisfied M. Jewels challenge these thirty years ago, concerning the
novelty of twenty and seven of your opinions. Therefore, since it has neither
unity, succession, nor antiquity, it is a false Religion, by your own doctrine.
Secondly, that Religion which is contrary the Scripture, contrary the practice
of the primitive Church, which opens a door to all licentiousness, which can
bring no true peace and consolation unto the consciences of men, which blusheth
to be known and made manifest, which maintains many great absurdities,
horrible blasphemies, abominable idolatry, that is the doctrine of Antichrist,
and the doctrine of Devils, which by their own mouths is condemned, must be
erroneous and false: But the Religion of the Church of Rome is such as has
been evidently proved before: therefore it must be false. Woe therefore
belongs to their souls that profess it openly, or secretly.

REVEL. 14.8. And there followed another Angel, saying; Babylon is fallen, is
fallen, that great City, because she made all Nations drink of the wine of the
wrath of her fornication.

Verse. 9.And the third Angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, If any
man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or
in his hand,

Verse. 10.The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is powered
out without mixture, into the cup of his indignation, and he shall be tormented
with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the
presence of the Lamb:

Verse. 11.And the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever. And
they have no rest day nor night, who worship the beast and his image, and
whosoever receives the mark of his name.

FINIS.
A BRIEF DISCOVERY OF THE BLOODY, REBELLIOUS AND TREASONABLE Principles and
Practices of Papists: Wherein is evidently demonstrated,
That they teach and commit Treasons and Rebellions against the lives of
Princes, and peace of Nations; and dissolve the obligation of all Oaths and
Bonds; and making Perjury and Rebellion, duties and meritorious works; they
have been the Authors of Wars, Commotions and Combustions, both before, and
ever since the Reformation, in Kingdoms and Commonwealths; and have used
unparalleled cruelty, and unheard of inhumanity toward Protestants, where ever
they had the upper-hand. And the excuses of H.T. the Author of the Manual of
Controversies, are evidenced to be false and frivolous.

2. Tim. 3.1. In the last days, perilous times shall come: For men shall be
lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient
to parents, unthankful, unholy. Without natural affection, truce breakers,
false accusers, incontinent, etc. Traitors, heady, high-minded, etc. From such
turn away. TO THE LOVERS OF THE Reformed Religion, in Britain and Ireland,
Grace, mercy, and peace.
DEarly beloved in the Lord,
The great increase of Popery every where, is so visibly seen, and so evidently
known, that to speak any thing to prove and evidence the same, were altogether
needless: seeing he is a great stranger in our Israel that knows it not. But,
alace! there is very great decay of zeal and hatred against that Whore: that if
our glorious Predecessors (whose excellent Motto it always was, No peace with
Rome) were alive, they would wonder to see us so brutish and senseless,
indifferent, and lukewarm, in ae matter of so great moment, wherein the honor
and glory of God, the eternal happiness and felicity of our own, and our
posterities souls, and the safety and preservation of Kings, Kingdoms, our
lives, estats, and all that is near and dear to us, is so much and so nearly
concerned: Therefore for letting us see our hazard in all and every one of
these, as we have revised and republished the above written excellent Treatise
of that learned, godly, and eminently zealous and faithful servant of Christ M.
John Welsch, whose memory is very precious in the Church of Christ: who does
learnedly and plainly, to any ordinary capacity, discover the abominations of
that Whore, and solidly prove her doctrine both to be most heretical and
damnable, and her self to be the very Antichrist, that all who love the truth
of God, and the salvation of their immortal souls, may be stirred up to a just
zeal and indignation against her: So we have thought fit to subjoyn this
following Treatise, for discovering to all and every one who love the Reformed
Religion, and resolve to adhere thereto, what treasonable and bloody
principles, and inhumane and matchlesly cruel practices, are maintained and
committed by Papists, in reference both to Kings, Princes and People, who
profess the Reformed Religion; and consequently what all and every one of us
may expect to meet with, if Popery prevail: that so being convinced of our
hazard, both in body and soul, and in all that is near and dear to us, we may
be stirred up to a real hatred and indignation against that Whore, and may be
much in the exercise of prayer, repentance, and other lawful and commanded
duties, for the putting a stop to the growth of the spreading abominations of
that Whore, which is earnestly prayed for, by

Yours for the truth, M. C.

A BRIEF DISCOVERY OF THE BLOODY, REBELlious and treasonable Principles and
Practices of Papists.
SECTION I.
Showing that the principles of Papists are treasonable and rebellious against
the person and authority of Princes, and peace of Kingdoms, etc. And the
excuses of H. T. the Author of the Manual of Controversies, are proved to be
frivolous and naught.

THE Church of Rome was formerly most hateful to the Churches of Christ in
Britain and Ireland; not only because of her most damnable and heretical
doctrine, but also because of the rebellious and treasonable principles and
practices maintained and committed by her against the persons and authority of
Princes, and peace of Kingdoms: her faith being accounted faction, and her
Religion rebellion: Therefore Papists of late have endeavored by all means to
ingratiat themselves in the favor of Princes and Magistrates, making ample
profession of loyalty and fidelity, and charging Protestants with the odious
crime of disloyalty. And thus we see their late Writers, denying and disowning
the doctrine of Rebellion and Parricide, that our Divines have justly charged
them with. For H T. the Author of the Manual of Controversies, etc. printed at
Doway 1671 calls it a loud slander, to charge Papists with maintaining, that
if the Pope excommunicat a Tyrant, or heretical Prince, his own subjects may
lawfully kill him.

Therefore to unmask a little the bloody, rebellious and treasonable principles
of Papists, we shall prove: First, that it is no slander, but a real truth, that
the Church of Rome holds, that if the Pope exco^municateth a King, his own
subjects may lawfully kill him. 2. That the Pope can dispense with the
allegiance of subjects to their Princes: and if he so dispense, then they are
loosed from subjection and allegiance to them. 3. That no faith nor oath is to
be kept with Heretics. 4 That the Pope and Synagogue of Rome, have been the
Authors of wars combustions and confusions in Christian Churches and Kingdoms
all Europe over. 5. That their continual practice ever since the Reformation,
has been to plot and practice treasons and rebellions, assassinations, and
murders, both of Princes and people, who professed the Reformed Religion. 6.
That wherever they got the upper-hand and dominion in any Kingdom or
Commonwealth they have practiced most unheard of cruelties, and barbarous
inhumanities against the professors of the Protestant Reformed Religion.

For the first and second of these points; to wit, that Papists hold that if
the Pope excommunicat a King his own subjects may lawfully kill him: And that
the Pope can dispense with the allegiance of subjects to their Princes; and if
he so dispense, then they are loosed from subjection and allegiance to them. I
shall evidence it to be their commonly received doctrine, both by the writings
of their approved Doctors, and Bulls of their Popes, and their daily practices.
And lest they say we wrong them, we shall (for the most part) set down the words
of the Authors themselves.

1. I shall begin with Doctor Ranchin a Papist, and a famous Lawyer in France,
in his Book, entitled, A review of the Council of Trent, lib. 2. cap. 10. who
sets down these following positions, as commonly received in the Church of
Rome, to wit, That it is necessare to salvation to believe that every creature
is subject to the Pope of Rome. That he it set over Emperors and Kingdoms. That
he carries both the temporal and spiritual sword. That he may depose Emperors
etc. and transfer their Empires and Dominions from one line to another. That he
may absolve subjects from their oath of allegiance. That upon just cause be
may set up a King in every Kingdom; for he is the overseer of all Kingdoms in
Gods stead. That it belongs to the Pope to correct Kings when they offend.
Much more has this Author to this purpose.

2. But let us hear their own Doctors themselves. Augustinus Triumphus, de
potest Eccles quaest. 46. art. 2. (as Doctor Usher cites him) says, There is
no doubt but that the Pope may depose all Kings, when there is a reasonable
cause so to do.

Thomas Aquinas their Angelical Doctor, holds. (22. quast. 12 art. 2.) That
so soon as a Prince is denounced excommunicat for Apostasy, ipso facto, his
subjects are free from his soverainity: and absolved from the oath of
allegiance, which they are bound to him. Bannes, and Gregory de Valentia, his
scholars, hold, That not only total apostosie but partial also, such as
heresy, is here meant. Now to profess the Protestant Religion is damnable
heresy with them, and therefore consequently any Protestant Prince is here
concluded by their interpretation.

Suarez holds, That Churchmen may use a coactive power against Princes, even
to dethrone them: his words are, Pontificem summum potestate coactiva in Reges
uti posse usque ad depositionent etiam a Regno, si causa subsit. Suarez opusc.
lib. 3. de primatu sum. Pontif. cap. 23.

Azorius their great Casuist asserteth, That the jurisdiction and power of the
Emperor, has its being, existence, and dependence from the Pope. And upon this
occasion tells us, how many Emperors the Pope has deposed, and that the
Emperor is but the Popes minister, elected by him for the defense of the
Church, Azorius inst. Mor. part. 2. lib. 10.

Emmanuel Sa after he had studied the point forty years, affirms, That the
rebellion of a Clergyman is no treason: because he is no subject.

That all Clergymen are exeemed from the laws of Magistrates by a divine
positive law, is mantained by Bellarmin de Cler. lib. 1. cap. 28. and de Pont.
Romans lib. 2. cap. 26. Soto de just. and jure, lib. 5. cap. 44. art. 1. Cajetan.
Tom. 1. opusc tract. 1. de potest. Pap. cap. 27. Turrecremata lib. 2. c. 93.
Gregory de Valentia tom. 3. disp 5. quaest. 11. punct. 1. Suarez in opusc. lib.
4. de immunit. Eccles. cap. 4. number. 3. cap. 8. number 9. and the Rhemists in Romans
8.

Cardinal Baronius, informs us, by the example of Dacius Bishop of Milan, his
dealing against the Arriant, that these Bishops deserve no blame, and ought to
suffer no envy, who use all means that they may not live under an heretical
Prince. His words are, Quo exemplo satis intelligas non mereri calumniam, neque
invidiam Episcopos illos pati debere, Qui ne sub haeretico Principe degant,
omnem lapidem volvunt, Annal. anno 538.. 89. So that Papists may raise
treasons, rebellions, commit parricide on the persons of Kings, rather then
live under a Protestant Prince.

This is evil doctrine, but worse follows; for they directly maintain, that
they may any manner of way kill Kings, Princes, or people, if in the least
suspect to them of heresy, that is, of the Protestant Religion, which these
following instances prove.

M. Allen Principal of the Jesuits College at Rhemes, in a solemn Oration
said, It is permitted to us to kill Kings. Franciscus de Verone, in his
Apology for John Chastel, grants allowance to every private man to murder the
heretic as he meets him, if public means be wanting of making him away by the
Magistrate. Dominicus Bannes in. 2. quaest. 12. art. 2. resolves, that they need
not in this case, expect any sentencing of the matter by Pope, or any other:
but when the knowledge of the fault is evident, subjects may lawfully (if so be
they have sufficient strength) exempt themselves from subjection to their
Princes before any declaratory sentence of a Judge. His words are, Quando adest
evidens notitia criminis licite possunt subditi (si modo ijs vires suppetant)
eximere se a potestate suorum Principum ante Judicis sententiam declaratoriam.

Suarez maintains that an heretical King after sentence (of excommunication)
given against him, is absolutely deprived of his Kingdom, so that he cannot
possess it by any just title, and therefore from thenceforth may be handled
altogether as a Tyrant, and consequently he may be killed by any private person;
and a little after he adds, that in this a Christian Kingdom depends upon
the Pope, that he may not only advise and consent that the Kingdom depose a
King that is hurtful to it, but also command and compel them to do it. Hear his
own words: Post sententiam latam omnino privatur Regno, ita ut non possit justo
titulo illud possidere, ergo ex tunc poterit omnino tanquam Tyrannus tractari,
and consequenter a quocunque privato poterit interfici. Suarez defens. fid.
Cathol. lib 6. cap. 4.. 14. Pendet Christianum Regnum a Pontifice in hoc, ut
possit non solum consulere, aut consentire ut regnum Regem sibi perniciosum
deponat, sed etiam praecipere and cogere, utad ^aciat,. 17.

Joannes Mariana tells us, That if the Pope excommunicat a King, and declare
him a Tyrant, that he may be made away either by open force and arms, whether
by violent breaking into the Court, or by joining of battle, is a matter
confessed: yea, by deceit and ambushes too, as Ehud did in killing Eglon the
King of Moab. Indeed it would argue a braver mind to profess open enmity, and
publicly to rush in upon the enemy of the Commonwealth: But it is no less
prudence to take advantage by fraud and ambushes, because it is done without
stir, and ^ess danger, surely, both public and private. And in end he
concludes, That it is lawful to take away his life by any art whatsoever; with
this proviso only, that he be not constrained, either wittingly or unwittingly
to be the cause of his own death; yet poison him you may, if so that the venom
be externally applied by some other, he that is to be killed helping nothing
thereto: namely when the force of the poison is so great, that a seat or
garment being infected therewith, it may have strength to kill. Joan. Mariana
de Regis Instit lib 1. cap. 7.

Franciscus de Verone in his Apology for John Chastel, part. 1. cap. 7.
determines, That Kings and Princes which are not Roman Catholics, may be
lawfully killed by any private person; and that the killing of them is a
generous, virtuous, heroic exploit, to be compared with the greatest and most
praiseworthy actions: a most holy, worthy, commendable praiseful work. These
that conspire against the life of such Kings and Princes, are magnanimous
persons; their courage more then humane, heroic, divine; their punishments are
true martyrdoms, they shall receive reward in heaven. Lest Papists think we
wrong him, I shall set down his own words: Reges and Principes non Romani
Catholici possunt de jure occidi etiam a private a persona and illud factum est
generosum, cum virtute conjunctum, and heroicum, comparandum cum maximis and
summa laud dignis factis, esse sanctissimum, humanissimum, dignissimum,
laudatissimum, commendatissimum, etc. Eos, qui in vitam talium Regum and
Principum conjurant, esse animosos machinatores, fortitudinem eorum esse
plusquam humanam, supplicia eorum non nisi vera martyria appellanda. Qui sunt
aliquando praemium accepturi in vita aeterna. And again ( part. 2. cap. 12. and
15. Necessarium quocunque casu religionem confirmari, etiam morte Regum) It is
necessary in any case, that Religion be maintained, even with the death of
Kings.

Antonius Arnold in an Oration against the Jesuits, affirms, that the Jesuit
Varadius wrote to Barerius, (Non posse ab aliquo fieri ullum magis meritorium
opus, quam si Regem intersecerit.) That there could not be a more meritorious
work then for him to kill a King.

Cresuel in his Philopat. sect. 2. number. 160. 162. affirms. That subjects may
not only lawfully dethrone heretical Princes; but also are obliged by divine
precepts, yea even upon the greatest hazard of their souls. His words are,
Obligati sunt subditi ad Principos haereticos depellendos, and hujusmodi
Principes suos non tantum legitime possunt deturbare, sed etiam ad hoc
praecepto divino ac vinculo arctissimo ac-extremo animarum periculo tenentur.

But let us hear what H. T. replyeth: First, says he, art. 7. p. 100. What
this or that particular Doctor may hold, or the Popes flatterers, if he have
any, adds nothing to the creed of Catholics, nor is it justly chargeable on
the whole Church. Answer. Sir, if you had not the whores fore head that
refuses to be ashamed, ye could not write so; for this is so well known to be
the commonly received doctrine of your Church that Cresuel and Eudem
ingenuously confesses it. For Cresuel plainly avoweth, That it is the
universal opinion of your Divines, and an article of your Faith, that any
Prince who openly makes defection from the Roman Catholic Religion, and would
withdraw others from the same, does presently fall from all his power and
dignity, by virtue both of Divine and Humane law, and that before any sentence
of the Pope; and their subjects are all free of any obligation of oath to
obedience, and they ought to cast such a man out of their dominions as an
Apostat, lest he infect others. Now lest ye think we wrong him, not citing his
words faithfully, we shall set down his own words, Universa Theologorum Schola
tenet, and est certum ac de fide, quemcunque Principem Christianum, si de
Romano Catholica Religione manifest deflexerit, and alios avocare voluerit,
excidere statim ab omni potestate and dignitate ex ipsa vi juris divini ac
humani: Hocque ante omnem sententiam Pontificis, and subditos quoscunque
liberos esse ab omni juramenti obligatione quod de obedientia praestitissent;
posseque ac debere hujusmodi hominem tanquam apostatam ex dominatu eficere, ne
alios inficiat. Cresuel Philop. number. 37.

Likewise Eudem affirms, Apol. cap. 3. Non est propria Jesuitarum, sed totius
Ecclesiae, and quidem ab antiquissimis temporibus consensione recepta nostra
doctrina. That this is not the peculiar doctrine of the Jesuits, but of the
whole Church of Rome, received from ancient times.

2. But if the testimony of these two Doctors be not sufficient, I hope the
infallible judgment of two Popes e Cathedra, will abundantly convince that
this is the doctrine of the Romish Church. The first is Pope Urban, who ( Can.
23. quast. 5. Can. excommunicatorum) says, We esteem them not murderers, who
being possessed with the zeal of their mother the Catholic Church, against
these that are excommunicat, shall happen to kill any of them. The second is
Pope Sixtus the fifth, who when he heard that King Henry the third of France
was killed by the Monk, he went to his Consistory, where before his Cardinals
at Rome, Sept. 11. 1589, he had a Panegyric Oration, which he began thus:
Animo meo saepe, etc. When I pondered in my mind, and was intent upon the
thoughts of these things which lately have fallen out by God providence: I
thought I might make use of that of the Prophet Habakkuk, There shall be a work
done in your days, which none shall believe when it shall be told. The King of
France is dead by the hands of a Monk: for to that may the words of the Prophet
be rightly applied, etc. (a brave application of Scripture indeed.) And a
little after, We with grief truly did often foretell, that as he was the last
of his family, so he should have an unusual and shameful end. See more of this
Oration cited by learned Hornbeck contra Bullam Pap. Innocent. 10. Now can any
Papist for his heart disown this treasonable doctrine, which the Pope
approves, except he disown his faith and Religion? For does not the faith and
Religion of Papists depend on the Popes decrees so strongly, and with such a
spirit of delusion, that he can make the most pestilent doctrines pass with
them for Evangelical truths; and the most abominable actions for patterns of
holiness? For Bellarmin expressly affirms (and no Papist that I heard of, did
ever disallow it) That if the Pope did err in commanding vices, or prohibiting
virtues, the Church should be obliged to believe that vices are good, and
virtues evil, unless she should speak against conscience. Bellarm. lib. 4. de
Pontif. cap. 5. And that in good sense Christ has given to Peter the power to
make sin to be no sin, and that which is no sin, to be sin. Bellarm. contra
Barclay, cap. 31. We can dissent from the most eminent in our Church, when they
hold any thing contrary to the Word of God: but so cannot Papists do with the
Pope, whom they acknowledge to be infallible.

2. But let us hear what H. T. says further: We (says he) abominat and detest
that doctrine; to wit, that if the Pope excommunicat an heretical Prince, it is
lawful for his own subjects to kill him. For it is defined by the Council of
Constance, and therefore of faith with us, that it is heretical to affirm it
law^ul for a subject to kill his Prince, upon any pretense whatsoever. Sess.
15. Ans. O matchless audacity! For does not the Bulls and D^cretals of your
Popes, the Writings and Disputations of your Doctors, and your actings and
practices prove you a liar? Yea, if there were no more then the Acts of the
Parliament of Paris, who condemned the Books of Bellarmin Suarez, Mariana,
Santarella, etc. to the fire, and banished the Jesuits the Kingdom, it were
sufficient to convince you of falsehood. 2. Whereas ye say, that the Council of
Constance has declared the doctrine of King-killing heretical, it is a mere
forgery: For your great Doctor Suarez (who did write fifteen Volumes of
Divinity) says to King James of famous memory, that the Council of Constance
forbids not the killing of a King excommunicated by the Pope. His words are:
Ubi legit Rex in Concilio Constantiensi particulam illam Principis per Papam
excommunicati vel deprivati, aut illam, per suos subditos, aut alios
quoscunque. The truth is, the case propounded to the Council by Gerson, was not
about the murdering of Sovereign Princes, but about the killing of a great
Officer of the Crown, who rules tyrannically, and exalts himself above his
King. For John Duke of Burgundy, who had killed Lewis Duke of Orleans,
pretended him to have been a Tyrant of that kind. So then Tyrants are declared
inviolable persons by the Council, who by its authority strengthens them
against their King. But although it were true that is alleged, to wit, that
the Council of Constance had decreed against King-killing, yet who knows not
that Papists make nothing of its authority: for none of the Popes ever liked
it, much less confirmed it.

3. His next excuse is, That Mariana maintained the doctrine of King-killing
only problematically, and his book was condemned and burnt by a Provincial
Council of his own Order. Answer 1. Peter du Moulin tells another of your stamp
using the same excuse, that the Court of Parliament of Paris, composed of grave
heads, did not understand it so, when they condemned his Book to the fire:
neither does he speak of the murder of King Henry the third problematically,
when he exalts the murderer, in these words: Making a show of delivering
letters (to the King) he gave him a deep wound above the bladder with a
poisoned knife; which he hid in his hand. O admirable confidence of mind! O
memorable action! by killing the King, he got to himself a great name. And in
the same place he taxes the Kings servants, who presently killed that
murderer, of cruelty and barbarousness: Mariana de rege, etc lib. 1. cap. 6.

2. Whereas he says that a Provincial Council of the Jesuits condemned
Marianas book, the same Du Moulin answers. But why then did the same General
of the Jesuits, who disavowed it when destruction was hanging over the head of
his Order, approve and license it before? For the book was approved by
Aquaviva, General of the Jesuits, and Stephanus Hoyeda, Visitor of their
Society in the Province of Toledo: and the approbation mentions, that other
Jesuits had approved it before. But (says he) see what that condemnation comes
to: The Jesuits seeing their sect made odious by the writings of Mariana,
Suarez, Vasquez, and others, and more by the murdering of Kings, and for that
cause expelled France, made an order among themselves, whereby they forbade to
write or teach that doctrine any more: The words of the ratification are these,
That none teach by writing or speaking, that it is lawful f r any person, or
upon any pretense of tyranny, to kill Kings and Princes. But how gross is their
fraud in that. Order? Do they forbid their Society to believe so? by no means;
but to teach so: neither will they have the execution done upon any pretense of
tyranny, but only upon the definitive sentence of the Pope, or the States: and
how are the lives of Kings and Princes more secure then before, by their
declaring that it is not lawful to kill Kings and Princes, seeing that in their
account they are no more Kings and Princes, when they are once excommunicated
and deposed by the Pope? Peter die Moulin ubi supra, cap. 5. Truly any that
considers the Jesuits temper, needs not to think it strange that their General
both approved and condemned Marianas book; for Doctor Rivet tells us that when
the Parliament of Paris asked the Jesuits in Paris, whither they were of the
mind of their General, who had approved Santarellas book for King killing, and
judged the things that are there to be certain? They answered, That living at
Rome, he could not but approve what was there approved of. But say the
Parliament, What think you? They answer, We think the clean contrary. But say
the examiners, What would ye do if ye were at Rome? The Jesuits answered, That
which they do which are at Rome. So Jesuits have one conscience at Rome,
another at Paris. Thirdly, nor was it Mariana his alone that was guilty of
writing for King killing. For beside these before cited, D. Rivet tells us that
Ging^ardus a Jesuit, did write in praise of the murder of King Henry the third.
And Albineus another Jesuit, did hear the murderer of King Henry the fourth
confess before he did the fact, and when he was examined upon it, he answered;
That God had given him that special gift to forget, when once he had absolved a
sinner whatsoever was confessed by him. Yea, there was so much writing for, and
acting of assassinations and parricids upon the persons of Princes, that the
Parliament of Paris did not only condemn Bellarmin and Santarellas books to be
burnt, as engines of treason and rebellion: but also did expel the Jesuits the
Kingdom, and set up a pillar of remembrance of their villainies.

From all which I hope it is more then evident, that it is no slander, but a
real truth that the Church of Rome holds, 1. That if the Pope excommunicat a
King or Prince, his subjects may lawfully kill him. 2. That the Pope can
dispense with the allegiance of subjects to their Princes, and if he do
dispense therewith, they are loosed from subjection to them.

SECTION II.
Showing that no oath, nor bond can oblige a Papist: and that they hold it as a
principle, that no faith is to be kept to Heretics.

THe third thing we proposed, was to prove that no oath, bond, or obligation
whatsoever, can ty or oblige Papists, whither to their allegiance to their
Prince, or duty to their neighbors, if Protestants: which is very palpable, if
ye consider.

First, that it is beyond all controversy with them, that all Protestants are
heretics, Princes not excepted: all being condemned as such by the Pope and
Council of Trent.

2. That they all hold, that Protestant Princes being declared heretics by the
Pope, have no right to their Kingdoms, nor are their subjects bound to any
allegiance to them, which is evident both from what is said formerly, and also
from the Bull and Decrees of Pope Pius the fifth, who did depose and
excommunicat Queen Elizabeth, and loosed her subjects from their allegiance,
and gave the Kingdom to Philip the second of Spain, which Bull was confirmed by
Gregory the thirteenth, and Sixtus the fifth, his successors, and was mantained
and defended by Sanders, Parsons, Cresuel, and sundry other English Papists,
even unto death.

3. They not only loose subjects from their allegiance to Protestant Princes,
but also they hold and maintain that no faith is to be kept with Protestants
because condemned by the Pope and Council of Trent as heretics, and so are
fallen from the faith: and so forfeit all privileges wherein keeping of faith
with them might oblige others or stead them: and therefore let a Papist swear
never so solemnly, and engage himself never so strictly by oath, compact, or
covenant to a Protestant, he may break his oath, compact, and covenant to him
without sin, according to their principles. But because that brazen headed
impostor H. T. Author of the Manual of Controversies, etc denies this,
affirming that Papists esteem themselves obliged to keep faith, even with
infidels: therefore I shall prove the truth thereof.

First, who knows not that John Hus and Jerome of Prague, upon the Emperors
promise of safe conduct, appeared before the Council of Constance: But the
Council declared that the Emperor was not obliged to keep his promise to them,
because no faith is to be kept to heretics, and therefore notwithstanding of
the Emperors letters of safe conduct, they condemned them to the fire, and
accordingly burnt them. Now H. T. himself says in that same place, What is
defined by the Council of Constance, is of faith with Papists: therefore it
must be a point of faith, That no faith is to be kept with heretics.

2. Not only did the General Council of Constance decree this, but the Pope
has confirmed it. Now all Papists hold, that what is determined by a General
Council and confirmed by a Pope, is of faith, and obliges all Catholics Now
that the Pope has confirmed and allowed this, is most sure: for Pope Gregory
the 9 (whose Decree is extant in the Decretals. lib. 5 tit. 7. de haereticis,
cap. u^t.) out of his Pontifical seat decrees: Absolutos se noverint, and
debito fidelitatis dominij, and totius obsequij, quicunque lapsis manifest in
haeresin aliquo pacto quacunque firmitate vallato tenebantur ad stricti. Let
all know that they are loosed from their fidelity and obedience, and any duty
whatsoever, that they are bound to any that are manifestly fallen in heresy.

3. If to the Decree of the Council, and confirmation of the Pope, the common
suffrage of their Doctors can add any weight, then we have that too: For when
Plancius (cited by D. Hornbeck, p. 172.) had said, Dic sodes, nonne in confesso
est apud vos, Principi haeretico aut excommunicato fidem nullam deberi u^i
Pontifex jusserit Gratian. cause 15. quaest. 9. and decret lib. 7 cap. 5. and
ibi glossae. Say, if ye dare, is it not confessed by you, that no faith is to
be kept by you to a heretic or excommunicat, when the Pope commands?
Suertius answers (In confesso est: nec inventus est hactenus magn^ nominis
Theologus, qui non in hanc ierit sententiam.) It is confessed: neither is there
any Divine of note, who has not held this opinion. And Clarus lib. 5 sent.
says* that (Sententiam illam frequentiori Doctorum calculo receptam) This
opinion is received by the common suffrage of the Doctors. And Tiberius
Decianus says (Omnium consensu illam obtinere de fide haereticis non servanda.
That that tenet that faith is not to be kept to heretics, is received by the
consent of all.

Hornbeck cites many mo Popish Writers out of Plancius, Elenchi. page 7.
Gerard. confess. Cathol. lib. 1 part. 2. cap. 19. and he adds himself, that
Thuanus declares, lib 63. ad ann. 1577. that the Popish Doctors did cry out in
their Sermons, That the Magistrates were not obliged to keep faith to heretics,
according to the Decree of the Council of Constance. And he shows moreover,
that upon this pretext the contract of marriage betwixt Charles the 5. his
daughter, and the Elector of Saxonies son was declared void and null: and
Haumart the Emperors Legate openly said, that faith was not to be kept to
heretics, as testifies Sieidan and Scultetus ad an. 1527.

Finally, their daily practices confirm this. For Cardinal Ossatu^ (as Hornbeck
cites him) tells us in his 87. Epistle ad D. de Villeroy, that Pope Clement
the 8. did press the King of France to join with Spain in the invasion of
England: and the Cardinal answered, that the King was tied by an oath to the
Queen of England: to which the Pope replied, that ( That the oath was made to
an heretic, but he was bound in another oath to God and the Pope: and in end
he alleged the saying of Franciscus Maria Duke of Urbin, that indeed every one
does blame a Nobleman, or great man that is no Sovereign, if he keep not his
covenants or fidelity, and they aucount him infamous: but supreme Princes may
without any danger of their reputation make covenants, and break them, lie,
betray, and commit other such like things. Also Pope Innocent the 10. in his
Bull against the Peace of Germany, anno 1651. does annul and abrogat the oaths
for confirming of Peace.

3. As the Popes practices is a good example to Papists, so they follow their
example to purpose, as I shall show in some few instances. In Queen Mary's time
in England, the Suffolk-men did aid, assist, and advance her to the crown; she
swearing to them that they should enjoy the liberty of the Protestant Religion:
but this principle, that faith should not be kept to heretics, induced her not
only to break her promise; but also to imprison some of them for minding her of
it. How many fair promises did Katherin de Medicis Queen of France, and her son
Charles the ninth, make to the Protestants; and yet this hellish principle
induced them not only to break their promises; but also under the greatest
pretext of friendship, to massacre them all at Paris, anno 1572. It was this
devilish principle that made Don Frederick son to the Duke d' Alva, after he
had taken Harlem upon composition, that the citizens should give 24000. florins
to redeem themselves and town from spoil, to plunder the whole town contrary to
promise, and to hang some, drown others, and starve others. It was this wicked
principle that caused the Segnior Noucarmes, when the inhabitants of
Valenciennes in Hainault, surrendered the city upon good conditions, to keep the
gates of the city shut for diverse days, and most perfidiously and barbarously
to hang up all the French soldiers, with all the Ministers, and Protestant
merchants, and confiscat their goods. Many mo instances might be given, but
this may suffice.

Notwithstanding of all this, H. T. is so shamelesly impudent as to say that
the Council of Trent has declared, That to violate any least point of public
faith given to heretics, is a thing punishable by the law of God and man,
Sess. 15.18. Ans. I have consulted Petrus Suavis on Sess. 15. and 18. and I can
find no such declaration, only there is a safe conduct granted by the Council
to Protestants to come to the Council: But they fearing lest it was like the
safe conduct given to John Hus, did not accept thereof.

The fourth evidence, to prove that no oath nor obligation can bind Papists is,
Because, let Papists swear never so solemnly, whither for performance of
fidelity to their Prince, or of keeping covenant and bargain with their
neighbor, yet the Pope (according to their principles) may dissolve that oath,
and free them from the obligation thereof. I might bring several proofs of
this, but I shall only bring one very observable. After the Gunpowder treason
King James appointed that all Papists should swear the oath of allegiance. But
hear how Paschenius in his answer to King James his monitory Epistle, scoffs at
it (as D. Usher cites him in his Sermon before the House of Commons, Feb. 18.
1620.) Vide in tanta astutia quanta sit simplicitas. See (says he) in so great
craft how great simplicity does bewray its self: When he had placed all his
security in that oath, he thought that he had found such a manner of oath, knit
with so many circumstances, that it could not with safety of conscience by any
means be dissolved by any man. But he could not see that if the Pope, N. B. did
dissolve that oath, all the tyings of it, whither of performing fidelity to the
King, or of admitting no dispensations, would be dissolved together. Yea, I
will say another thing that is more admirable: You know that an unjust oath if
it be evidently known or openly declared to be such, binds no man, but is
void ipso acto. That the Kings oath is injust, has been sufficiently declared
by the Pastor of the Church himself: Ye see therefore that the obligation
thereof is vanished into smoke, so that the bond which by so many wise men was
thought to be of iron, it become less then of straw. So we may see that an oath
upon the conscience of a Papist, is like a collar upon an Apes neck, that he
will slip on for his Masters pleasure, and slip off again for his own. Hence we
may see what trust and credit to give their pretenses to loyalty, and their
taking the oath of allegiance. For let Papists pretend to never so much
moderation, yet they acknowledge the Pope as supreme in all spirituals and
Ecclesiastics, and profess obedience to him before all the world in things of
this nature. Now they all know that the Pope does profess and publish both by
doctrine and practice, that he has power to excommunicat the greatest
Potentats, if heretics, and to command all Catholics in all things, in ordine
ad spiritualia. That all Catholics are bound to obey him under pain of
damnation, in opposing their Sovereign without disputing his commands: And so
soon as a Prince is excommunicat by the Pope for heresy, he is forthwith
deposed and deprived of his Princely dignity and soveraignity, and his subjects
are discharged from all allegiance, and are accursed if they further obey him,
as is evident from the before mentioned Bulls of Pius the 5. Gregory the 13. and
Sixtus the 5. against Queen Elizabeth, and the writings of Bellarmin, Suarez,
Allen, Sanders, Parsons, Cresuel, and sundry others English Papists; who have
defended these Bulls and positions even to death. In this case, a Papist must
either cast off his allegiance, or incurr the Popes curse, and consequently run
on certain damnation. From which we see that (according to the principles of
Papists) the Pope has power to dissolve all bonds, covenants, leagues and
oaths, as he shall find conducing to the advancement of the Catholic faith: so
that if he list, no bonds, humane or divine, no oaths never so solemnly taken,
shall bind Papists: for when occasion serves, the Pope can and will relieve
them from all obligations of God or conscience of nature and Nations, and they
must submit to him without contradiction or limitation. So that one cannot be a
Papist, but if he understand his own principles, he must be a traitor.

Object. But it may be said, Although Papists maintain such principles in
reference to them who persecute and extirpate Popery: yet if a Prince be
favorable to Popery, and seek reconciliation with Rome* there is no fear from
them. Ans. Let Simancha a Popish Doctor determine this. If Kings (says he) or
other Christian Princes be turned heretics, their subjects are presently fred
from their dominion, neither shall they receive their right again, though they
be afterward-reconciled to the Church. And as a King loses his Kingdom by
heresy, so his children lose their right of succession. His words are, Si
Reges aut alij Principes Christiani facti sint haeretici protinus subjecti and
vassalli ab eorum dominio liberantur, nec jus hoc recuperabunt quamvis postea
reconcilientur Ecclesiae. Et propter haeresin non solum Rex regno privatur, sed
etiam ejus filij a regni successione pelluntur.

To omit other instances, had not King Henry the 4. of France experience of
this in his own person? for he being a professed Protestant and persecuted by
the Leaguers, that he might enjoy the Kingdom in peace, was reconciled to the
Fope, and went to Mass. But was he the more secure or safe for all this, surely
no: for not long after he was stobbed in the mouth by a Jesuit. After which,
for this and other of their treasonable practices and writings, they were
banished France, and a pillar of remembrance of their villainies set up. But he
to gratify the Pope caused demolish the pillar, and called them in again,
telling the Parliament that the peril of it should be on him: and so it was;
for it cost him his life, being stobbed by Ravillac through the very heart. And
truly God ordinarily turns this policy to folly, whereof many instances might be
given: I shall name but a few. The Eastern Emperors Justinian and Phocas, the
better to recover and keep Italy, did the Popes much honor, and greatly
furthered their supremacy: But they in requital soon after (by Gods just
judgment) setting themselves against their successors in the cause of Images,
made the greatest part of Italy revolt from the Emperors obedience. After this,
Constantin the 7. and his mother Irene, to get the Popes favor, and to recover
the Western Empire, or at least to keep what they had from revolting, with
strong hand established worshipping of Images in the second Council of Nice.
But within twelve years the Pope crowned Charles the Great Emperor of the West,
and so they lost the Western Empire. Likewise John Paleologus Emperor of
Greece, to procure the Popes favor against the Turks, by the strong hand
induced the Greek Church to reconcile with Rome, and to acknowledge the Popes
supremacy in the Council of Florence anno 1439. But this was so far from
advantaging him, that the Empire was lost within 14. years after.

Thus we see that God in his righteous judgment turns such temporizing with
the Pope, to the ruin of them that do it. The only way of safety, is to stand
at the swords point. The eyes of the Lord run to and fro to show himself strong
in the behalf of them; whose heart is per^ect toward him, 2. Chron. 16.9.
Whereas politic compliance turns to the ruin of complyers. We all know what
Jeroboams policy did: he to preserve his own Kingdom, Set up Ido^s stretched
out his hand against the Prophet, made Priests of the lowest of the people, and
ordained high places, 1. Kings 12.27.28. But what was the event? The text tells
us, This thing became sin unto the house o^ Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and
to destroy it from the face of the earth, 1. Kings 13 33 34 Thus we see what
treasonable rebellious and bloody principles Papists hold. Let us in the next
place see if their practices have been answerable thereto.

SECTION III.
Showing that the Pope and Synagogue of Rome have been the grand Authors of
wars and combustions, and confusions in the Christian world always, both
before and since the Reformation.

WE come now to the fourth thing proposed; to wit, that the Pope has been the
grand Author of wars, combustions and confusions in the Christian world
always, both before and since the Reformation. This is so evident, that he is
very unseen in Histories that will deny it: therefore I shall give only a
passing taste of what is recorded at large by Historians.

I. I shall begin with Gregory the first, who approved Phocas in murdering his
Sovereign Mauritius, who killed his children before his eyes, and usurped the
Empire: for he writes a gratulatory Epistle to him, in which he thus speaks,
Benignitatem pietatis vestrae, etc. We are glad that the benignity of your
piety has attained to the Imperial dignity. Let the heavens rejoice, and let
the earth be glad, and let the people of the whole Republic be joyful for your
gracious deeds.

II. Gregory the 2. rebelled against his Sovereign Leo Isaurus, and made Rome,
and the Roman Duchy do the same, because he prohibited the adoration of
Images* and pulled them down every where: and being sore afflicted with the
wars of the Saracens in the East the Pope seized on Rome, and made himself
Lord of that part of the Emperors dominions in Italy, which was the beginning
of his temporal Principality, and is the title whereby he holds Rome, and the
Territory of it to this day, even rebellion, and tyrannical invasion of the
Emperor his Sovereigns Estat and Dominion.

III. Gregory the 3. his successor came yet a further length: for Platina
writes of him, Hic statim, etc. That so soon as he attained to the Papal
dignity, by the consent of the Roman Clergy, he deprived Leo the 3. Emperor of
Constantinople hoth of his Empire and the communion of the faithful, because he
had razed Images out of the Churches.

IV. The next instance I shall mention, is of Pope Stephen the 2. who stirred up
Pepin King of France to expel the Exarchs out of Italy: and when he had done,
he obtained the Exarchat for himself, though belonging to the Emperor of
Constantinople his lawful Sovereign; in which action there was both rebellion
and robbery.

V. But Gregory the 7. (alias Hildebrand) surpassed all the rest; for he was
wholly compounded of blood shed, treason and rebellion: for he excommunicated
the Emperor Henry the 4. and deposed him, and gave his Empire to Rodolph Duke
of Suevia. But the Emperor vanquished Rodolph in battle, who dying acknowledged
that his right hand was deservedly cut off in battle, because he had sworn with
it lifted up, allegiance to the Emperor. Rome was taken by the Emperor, and
Pope Gregory died for grief.

VI. But Urban the 2. his successor, was nothing afraid of what had happened to
Gregory his predecessor, but did also excommunicat and persecute him. This is
that Urban that made that famous Decree, That an oath made to an excommunicat
person, must not be kept.

VII. But the Emperor was most of all afflicted by Pope Paschal the 2. who
succeeded Urban; for he made his own son to take up arms against him, where he
was overcome in battle, and deposed in a Synod held at Mentz by the Popes
command; and the Crown, and other Imperial ornaments, were violently taken from
him by the Bishops of Mentz, Colen and Worms, and given to his son, and for
grief he died soon after. But although we say, Livor post fata quiescit. yet
the Popes wrath did not cease against him after he was dead; for he would not
suffer his son to bury him, so that he lay five years unburied. Cardinal
Baronius commends this fact, saying. Quis negare potest summum fuisse hoc
pietatis genus? etc. Who can deny that it was the highest kind of piety, to
have showed himself cruel in this case? And again, Nihil habes in quo damnes
filium, magis quam si insanienti furientique pius filius vincula injiciat
patri. You can no more condemn the son, then if a pious son should bind his
father who is fallen mad.

VIII. But the son felt the Popes no better friends to him then they were to
his father; for although Pope Paschal granted to him the collation of
Benefices, and confirmed it with an oath, yet he brake the oath, although when
he swear he divided the consecrated host betwixt him and the Emperor, saying,
Sicut pars, etc. As this part of the vivifying body is divided, so let him be
divided from the Kingdom of Christ who will go about to break this compact. And
Calixtus the 2. his successor excommunicated him, and forced him to compound.

Pope Adrian the 4. caused Frederick the 1. to hold his stirrup, and quarrelled
him for taking the left in stead of the right. But the next Pope Alexander the
3. trod upon his neck when he stooped to kiss his Holiness foot, using these
words of the Psalm 91. Thou shall tread upon the Lion and Add^r: the young Lion
and Dragon shall thou trample under foot. And when the Emperor said, Not to
thee, but to Peter do I this submission. The Pope treading on him again, said,
Both to me and Peter.

IX. I spare to speak at large of Pope C^lestin the 3. who crowned the Emperor
Henry the 6. with his foot, and after he had crowned him; cast down the Crown
to the ground, thereby signifying that he had power to cast him down from the
Empire* if he deserved it; which Baronius highly commends. But his successor
Innocent the 3. is not to be forgotten, for he excommunicated John King of
England, deposed him, absolved his subjects from their allegiance to him, and
did cast an interdict upon the Kingdom, which lasted six years, and gave it to
Philip August the French King, if he could take it, which made the subjects to
despise him, the Clergy to revile him, the Barons to rise in war against him,
and the French King to fall upon him, so that he was brought to such extremity,
that to purchase his peace he gave the Kingdom to the Pope, and in end a Monk
poisoned him. It would fill a volume to speak at large, how Henry the 3 King of
England, was abused and tyrannized over by the Pope, and how Pope Innocent the
3. excommunicated the Emperor Otho, and deprived him of the title of the
Empire, and how Honorius and Pope Gregory the 9. and Pope Innocent the 4.
excommunicated, and deposed the Emperor Frederick the 2. and sent an army into
Appulia, and seized upon his lands: and of the contest betwixt Philip the Fair
King of France, and Pope Boniface the 8. who excommunicated Philip, and
deposes him of his Kingdom, and gives it to the Emperor Albert, and laboreth
to arm Germany and the Netherlands against France. But the King took him
prisoner and brought him to Rome* where he died shortly through grief.

X. It would also be tedious if I should relate how John the 23. and Benedict
the 12. and Clement the 6 excommunicated and deprived Ludovicus Bavarus, and
elected Charles, son of the King of Bohemia in his slead: Hence ensued a great
and bloody war, and the Emperor Ludovicus Bavarus was poisoned by Pope Clement,
as some Authors write. And how Benedict the 13. excommunicat Charles the 6. of
France, and how Pope Julius the 2. excommunicat Lewis the 12. King of France,
and puts the Kingdom to interdict: excommunicats the Venetians, gives their
Dominions to any that will take them: drives the Bentivogli out of Bononia:
excommunicats the Duke of Ferrara, and invades his Country by arms, going to
war in his own person: makes the English, Spaniards and Switzers to fall upon
the French, takes many Imperial Cities: excommunicats the King of Navarre, and
gives his Kingdom to the King of Arragon, who upon that invades and takes it,
and possesses it to this day. It is thought that this Pope was the death of
200000. Christians in seven years.

XI. But passing these, I shall come to the time of the Reformation happily
begun by Luther, at which time we find Clement the 7. the great fomenter of the
war between the Emperor and the French King, joining sometimes with the one,
and sometimes with the other, and playing false with both. He thundered out his
exco^munications against King Henry the 8. the which his successor Paul the 3.
confirmed, but it did him no harm.

XII. I shall show more particularly afterward, how Pope Pius the 5.
excommunicated Queen Elizabeth, and stirred up not only her own subjects, but
also the King of Spain against her, who prepared a great Navy to invade England
anno 1588. yea, this Pope was so active in raising war against Queen Elizabeth,
that when he published the Bull, he laid down an hundred thousand crowns to
raise war, and promised fifty thousand more, yea, and to bear the whole charge
of the war. He also used all means to stir Spain, France, and the Netherlands
against England.

XIII. Gregory the 13. who succeeded to Pius the 5. was no less active in
plotting and stirring up war against Queen Elizabeth; for he gave to Thomas
Stukly a commission to help the Irish rebels, and get the Kingdom of Ireland
for James Boncompagnon his own bastard son; and gave him the command of eight
hundred Italians, to join with Sebastian King of Portugal, who had engaged to
the Pope to serve him with his whole forces against Queen Elizabeth, and had
raised a great army for that expedition: But when Stukly came to the King of
Portugal, he was upon a new design, to wit, to help a Moor King of Fez, against
another Moor King, who kept him out of possession, and to get the Kingdom from
them both; to which war he invited Stukly, promising immediately after that work
was done (which he held forth as most easy) they should accomplish the Popes
desire. So they sailed over to Africa, where the King of Portugal and his whole
army were destroyed, and with him Stukly and the Popes Italian soldiers.

XIV. The Pope had a great hand in the unparalelled massacre of Paris anno
1572. for neither his predecessor Pius the 5. nor himself, would consent to the
marriage, by reason of their difference in Religion, while the Cardinal of
Lorain told him that it was intended as a trap to destroy the Protestants, and
then presently he granted a dispensation for celebrating of it, and gave all
encouragement to the design: and when the news of the massacre came to Rome,
there was nothing but triumphing and joy, and Cardinal Ursin was sent to France
to commend and extol the Kings piety and wisdom in that great action, and to
bestow blessings and spiritual graces upon the King, the Duke of Guise, and the
rest of the Actors of this horrid Tragedy. Not long after, this Pope sent to
Henry the 3. the French King, and to his people, Indulgences for millions of
yea^s* if they would be diligent and zealous in extirpation of Protestants.

XV. This Pope laid a claim to the Kingdom of Portugal (all the males being
extinct) as depending from the Sea of Rome, and would have the Kingdom rising
in arms for him, against the heir from the females: but his claim was rejected.

XVI. In the year 1580. he made a new assay upon Ireland; for he sent an
Italian, called San Josepho, with some Italian troops there, to join with the
Iris^ Rebels, for gaining the Kingdom to his Bastard, or else to the King of
Spain.

XVII. About the year 1588. Pope Sixtus the 5. to favor the enterprise of
Philip the 2. King of Spain, renewed the excommunication of Queen Elizabeth,
pronounced by Pope Pius the 5. deprived her of her Kingdom, absolved her
subjects from all allegiance to her, and gave plenary Indulgence to all that
would make war against her; whereupon followed that great Armado of Spain,
which the Lord in mercy did wonderfully discomfit.

XVIII. This Pope did also excommunicat King Henry the 3. of France, and
absolved his subjects from their allegiance, although he was a Papist, and was
a plotter of the Massacre of Paris; yet because he did not zealously enough
prosecute the Popes design in rooting out Protestants, and was no friend to the
holy League, he was excommunicat; whereupon many of his subjects rebelled
against him, especially the City of Paris, and he was slain upon that account
by a Dominican Friar: which action was highly commended by the Pope (as we told
you before) in a full Consistory at Rome, and forbade that any should pray for
his soul; for the Pope was not content that he had slain the King by his Bull,
but would also damn his soul.

XIX. His successor Gregory the 14. excommunicated King Henry the 4 of France,
forbidding all Peers, Noblemen, Cities and Commons, to yield him obedience, and
declaring him incapable of the Crown, as an heretic and a relaps. Pope Clement
the 8. did the same over again: and although many of the French did adhere to
him, yet the City of Paris, and the Guisian faction did violently oppose him,
and would not acknowledge him for King, and several attempts were made to take
away his life, first by a woman next by Peter Barriere, and thirdly by John
Chastel; all denying him to be King, because excommunicat by the Pope. And
although he turned Papist, and procured absolution from the Pope, yet it was
his death: for Ravillac who killed him, alleged at his examination, that the
King was an heretic in his heart, and deserved to be slain, as an enemy of the
Church.

XX. Pope Paul the 5. was as turbulent as his predecessors, as witnesses his
quarrels with the State of Venice, which he excommunicated, and put their State
in interdict, because they had stopped by Edict the giving of lands to the
Church. About the beginning of this Popes reign, was that hellish Gunpowder
plot hatched at Rome, and should have been effectuat in England by blowing up
the King* Prince, Nobles and Commons, all at one blow. This horrid treason was
the fruit and effect of the Popes Bulls; for not only was Queen Elizabeth
excommunicat, once and again (as we said before) and the Kingdom interdicted:
but also King James, was by a Bull sent unto England a little before Queen
Elizabeth's death, excluded from the Crown, and all that were not Roman
Catholics, were declared incapable of, and excluded from the succession:
whereof his Majesty complains in his Apology. For B^llarmin tells King
James, Tort page 19 That the Pope claims a d^uble right to England, one by
reason o^ his Apostolic power, which he extends over all men, according to
that (Charter) Psalm. 44. Thou shall establish them Princes over all the earth.
The other proper by a right of Dominion: for, says he, England and Ireland are
the Churches Dominions, the Pope is direct Lord, and the King his vassal.

XXI. Neither were they less active in stirring up wars and combustions in
other Kingdoms; for a Priest of their own named John Brown, aged seventy two,
in his voluntary confession to a Committee of Parliament (set down by M. Prin
in his introductio^ to Canterburies doom p 202. says, That the Jesuits (who
are the Popes agents) were the only cause of the troubles which fell out in
Muscovia, when under pretense to reduce the Latin Church, and plant themselves,
and destroy the Greek Church, the poor King Demetrius and his Queen and these
that followed him from Polonia, were all in one night murdered by the usurper
of the Crown, and the true progeny rooted out. That they were the only cause
that moved the Sweds to take arms against their lawful King Sigismund, and
chased him to Poland; and neither he nor his successors were ever able to take
possession of Sweden; for the J^suits intention was to bring in the Romish
Religion, and root out the Protestants. They were the only cause that moved the
Polonians to take arms against the said Sigismund, because they had persuaded
him to marry two sisters, etc. They were the sole cause of the war in Germany
and Bohemia, which began anno 1619. which caused the death of many thousands.
They have been the cause of the civil wars in France, moving the King to take
arms against his own subjects the Protestants, where innumerable people have
lost their lives: for the Jesuits intentions were to set their Society in all
Cities and Towns conquered by the King, and quite to abolish the Protestants.
They were the cause of the murder of the last King of France. They were the
only projectors of the Gunpowder treason, and their penitents the actors
there^f.

XXII. M. Baxter in his key for Catholics, chap. 45. 46* 47 48 49 proves at
large by good evidence, that the Jesuits had a special hand in the late Civil
War that burnt in the bowels of these three Nations, till it had near consumed
them: Whose evidence I entreat that the Reader would read and seriously ponder.

From all which I hope it is evident enough, that the Pope and Church of Rome,
have been the continual Authors and instigators to wars and combustions in
Christian Churches and Kingdoms.

SECTION IV.
That the continual practice of Papists ever since the Reformation, has been
to plot and practice bloody and treasonable Conspiracies, Assassinations and
Murders, both of Princes and People, who profess the Reformed Religion.

IN the former Section we have proven that the Pope and Synagogue of Rome, have
been the grand Authors of wars, confusions and combustions in Christian
Churches and Kingdoms: In this Section we are to prove that not only have they
been the Authors and instigators to bloody wars and confusions in Christian
Churches and Kingdoms; but that in all Protestant or Reformed Churches,
Kingdoms, or States, they have been secretly and underhand always plotting and
practicing bloody and treasonable conspiracies, assassinations, and murders,
both of Princes and people, who profess the Reformed Religion.

It would be too tedious to declare at large what plots and conspiracies the
Pope and his dependers and vassals have had in all the Reformed Churches, ever
since Luthers Reformation: we only shall instance some few not our near hand, in
France, Ireland, and in Britain.

I. I told in the former Section how the Pope and his sworn vassals, were the
Authors of the massacre of Paris anno 1572. which was surely hatched in hell,
and carried on with all the subtilty of that old Serpent: for when the Pope and
Court of Rome, and Queen Catharin de Medicis, and Charles the 9. her son, saw
that fire and faggot, and force of war could not undo the Protestants, they
said, come and let us deal subtily with them, and ensnare them, by pretenses of
friendship and flatteries, therefore they not only concluded a peace with them;
but gave the sister of the King of France to the King of Navarre in marriage,
that so they might massacre the Protestants at the marriage; and they
suspecting no treachery, came to the City of Paris, where the Queen of Navarre
was poisoned by a pair of perfumed gloves, and the Admiral, and the greatest
part of the Protestant Nobility were all massacred in a morning: the massacre
was so cruel, that it made the river run with blood, and there were thirty
thousand Protestants killed in one months time, of which more afterward.

II. We also hinted before how King Henry the 3. of France, although he lived
and died a Papist, and while he was Duke of Anjou, had foughten several battles
against the Protestants, and was one of the plotters in the massacre of Paris,
yet because he did not join with the holy League, and obey the Popes will in
all things, the Pope excommunicated him, and stirred up James Clement a Jacobin
Monk, to commit that horrible parricide upon his Royal person.

III. We did also a little touch how his successor King Henry the 4. was
opposed and molested by the Pope, and the holy League, his sworn servants, and
excommunicat, and the Spaniards brought in the Kingdom to join with the holy
League to his ruin: But God so blessed his enterprises, that he foiled them
often; but he being weary of war, and consulting with flesh and blood, for
peace and ease to himself and quiet to his Kingdom, turned Papist, and sought
absolution from the Pope, and at length obtained it: But because they thought
him not a heart Papist, and cordial for them in all things, they plot his death
by secret assassination; and after several attempts, one whereof wounded him in
the mouth, R^villac stroke him through the very heart: although to please the
Pope, he caused recall the Jesuits, which for their bloody principles and
practices were banished the Kingdom. So this is the Pope and his Jesuits
method, when they cannot overcome any Prince, that they think no cordial
favorer of theirs, by open hostility; they excite and stimulat some scholar or
other of theirs, secretly to assassinat him. For John Chastel, a scholar of the
Jesuits, who stroke King Henry the fourth of France in the mouth, and broke out
one of his teeth, intending to have cut his throat; when he was examined,
confessed that he being guilty of a great crime, was kept prisoner by the
Jesuits in the chamber of meditations; where, after they had long terrified his
soul, they propounded to him a way to lessen his torments in hell, to wit, to
kill the King, which the miserable wretch promised and attempted: Whereupon the
College of the Jesuits was searched, and many persons seized on, among which
was found a book in the praise of James Clement, the murderer of King Henry the
3 written by the Jesuit Guignard; containing many arguments and reasons to
prove it was lawful and just to kill King Henry the 3. together with many
incitements and motives to make away his successor King Henry the 4. then
reigning, The themes given to young scholars, were found to be about King
killing, with praises of the attempt and exhortations to it. Likewise Bariere,
another wretch who had attempted to kill King Henry the 4. being examined,
confessed that the Jesuit Varadius, Rector of the College of the Jesuits, had
incited and adjured him upon the Sacrament of confession, and the communion of
the Lords body, to kill the King* assuring him, that if he suffered for it he
should obtain martyrdom. Moreover, Ravillac in his examination showed
sufficiently by whose instructions he was persuaded to murder King Henry the
4. for he gave this reason why he did it, because the King would make war with
God, in as much as he prepared war against the Pope who is God: which is the
plain doctrine of the Church of Rome. So the Jesuits at the Popes instigation,
never ceased till they had assassinated both these Kings of France, Henry the
3. and Henry the 4. So Peter du Moulin, chap. 5.

IV. William Prince of Orange, being one of the blessed instruments the Lord
employed for the delivery of the Netherlands from the Spanish tyranny and
Popish idolatry; therefore the Popish faction carrying an implacable hatred to
him, they stirred up one Joanville to kill him; and for encouraging him in this
devilish attempt, a Friar persuaded him that he should go invisible: and for
that effect he gave him some characters in paper, and little frogs bones, and
other conjurations, whereby he being animated to that wicked deed, went and lay
in wait, and shot the Prince with a pistol through the throat: But he through
Gods goodness recovering, they stirred up Baltazar Gerard to make a second
attempt upon him, who shot him through the stomach and vital parts, so that he
presently died.

V. But leaving these foreign instances, let us come home to Britain, where we
will see a wonderful Tragedy of secret bloody treasons, plotted and carried on
for the ruin of Queen Elizabeth, King James, etc. and the whole Reformed
Religion professed in these lands. For so soon as the Pope perceived that Queen
Elizabeth intended in earnest to shake off that Romish yoke, and that all his
flattery and fair dealing could not reduce her to his obedience, she refusing
to permit his Nuncio to enter her Kingdom, he falls to his old course, and anno
1569. Pope Pius the 5. excommunicats her (as we said before) absolving all her
subjects from her obedience, and ^ursing all that should longer obey her,
giving her Kingdom to the King of Spain. But fearing that a war might be
dangerous, and of doubtful event, he thought the most compendious way to ruin
her, was to send over his Agents to England, to cause proclaim his Bull there,
and to excite the Papists in England to rebellion against her, and to endeavor
by all means to assassinat her: For he thought this would either win her, or at
least it would strengthen the King of Spains hands, when he knew that there
were secret plottings in England for to accomplish his design. Therefore he
sent over his Bull declaratory by one Morton an English fugitive, who bringing
it to Rodolf a Florentin, diverse copies of it were first secretly scattered
among the Papists, and then the Brieve it self fixed on the gate of
London-house; by which time, the Priests, and other Agents for Rome, had
wrought so far with sundry Nobles and Gentlemen of eminency, whom they either
found or could make discontented with the Reformed Religion, or Government, or
whom they discerned to be ambitiously affected, that they never rested,
plotting one treason and rebellion after another. For in that same year wherein
the Popes Bulls was here scattered among the Papists, the Earls of
Northumberland and Westmerland, and sundry other their accomplices, fell out in
actual rebellion. But that not taking effect, they used more secret and hidden
ways for carrying on their mischief: For L. Aubespine, a French Ambassador of
the Guisian faction, solicited one Mocdy to kill the Queen, by laying gun
powder under her chamber, and secretly firing it. But although that was
discovered, yet they did not cease, but all that Queens time they were still
plotting treasons; such as the treasons of Stuckly in Ireland, of the Stanlies
in Darbishyre, of John Trogmorton and Brook, of Sanders and Bristow, of the
Nortons, Barn and Mather, of Doctor Story* and Shirwin, Parsons, Campian, and
Kirly, and many other Priests and Jesuits, to the number of 120. of Somervail
and his adherents: of Mayn, Nilson, Thomson, and the rest of that crew: of Pain
and his fifty resolutes hired by the Pope to murder the Queen. Of Francis
Throgmorton, Paget and Englfield. Of bloody Pary, of Babington, Tichburn, and
the rest of that pack. Of the same Babington, Charnock and Savace, on a second
devilish design. Of Lopoz* of Stanly, of Cullen, of York and Williams, etc.
with infinite mo that never came to light; yea, Garnet, Winter, Catesby,
Treshame, and others, in the last year of Queen Elizabeth, traveled with the
King of Spain to join with the Papists in England to depose the Queen, and to
extirpat Religion. Thus they never rested all the time of that Queen, to plot
treasons and rebellions against her. And is it not well known, how the Duke of
Guise, and his faction in France, did enter in the holy League, to root out all
the Protestants? In prosecution whereof, they warred and rebelled against their
natural Sovereigns King Henry the 3. and King Henry the 4. while several
hundreds of thousands of the subjects were killed and destroyed* and the whole
Kingdom almost wasted and depopulated, and way made for the Spaniard to conquer
the Kingdom, with whom the Leaguers joined, and brought his forces unto the
Kingdom. And if his wars in the Netherlands, and the loss of his Armado anno
1588. had not weakened him, he might have conquequested all France. But did King
James feel them any quieter in Scotland? Surely no. For beside the hazard he
was in from them in his infancy and minority, he felt also their treasons and
rebellions, when come to age: For the Earls of Angus, Huntly and Arrol, the
Lords Maxwel, Hares, and others, made a conspiracy for bringing in the
Spaniard, with whom they were to join forces for the ruin of King and Kingdom,
and afterward brake out in open rebellion at the bridge of Dee; as is proved at
large in a Treatise, entitled. A Discovery of the unnatural and traiterous
conspiracy o^ Scottish Papists, etc. printed by King James special command
1592. And as soon as he entered England, Watson and Clerk instilled treasons
unto sundry Nobles and Gentlemen against the King and Prince before the
Coronation: But that not succeeding, they fall next to the Gunpowder treason,
designing to blow up King and Parliament, and all at one blow: they hiring the
cellers of the Parliament House in which they laid 36. barrels of gunpowder,
and 1000. billets, and 500. fagots; and if God had not discovered their
wickedness by a singular providence, both King, Queen, Prince, Nobles, Knights,
Citizens, Burgesses, yea the whole Parliament, had all gone with at one blow. I
spare to speak of the continual treasons and rebellions in Ireland, both in
Queen Elizabeth and King James reign; Or of that memorable design of the
Spanish Armado anno 1588. Which however it was attempted by Spain, yet all men
may know that the English and Scottish Papists kept continual correspondence,
and were combined with the Spaniard: And of the thundering Bull of Pope Sixtus
the 5. then sent abroad for confirmation of the several Bulls made by his
predecessors Pius the 5. and Gregory the 13. against Queen Elizabeth, to the
end our Papists might more cheerfully assist in that bloody enterprise. Nor
were the Papists less active in King Charles the first his reign; as M Prin and
M. Baxter have evidenced at large. Prin in several treatises (especially in a
treatise entitled Romes Masterpiece) shows what great plots they had, either
to ruin King and Kingdom or to procure liberty for the profession of Popery.
M. Baxter in his Key of Catholics, chap. 45. and seqq. proves at large, that
they plotted, contryved, and carried on that late change of Government in the
State, and that cruel and abominable parricide committed on the Royal person of
King Charles the first. Peter du Moulin junior, Chaplain to the Kings Majesty,
in his vindication of the sincerity of the Protestant Religion, in the point of
obedience to Sovereigns, chap. 2. page 58.59 testifies, That the year before
the Kings death, a select number of English Jesuits were sent from their whole
party in England, first to Paris, to consult with the Faculty of Sorbon, then
altogether Jesuited, to whom they put this question in writing: That seeing the
State of England was in a likely posture to change Government, whither it was
lawful for the Catholics to work that change, for the advancing and securing
of the Catholics cause in England, by making away the King, whom there was no
hope to turn from his heresy? Which was answered affirmatively. After which
the same persons went to Rome where the same question being propounded and
debated it was concluded by the Pope and his Council, that it was both lawful
and expedient for the Catholics to promote that alteration of State. What
followed that consultation and sentence, all the world knows. The same Author
relates, That when the news of that horrible execution came to Roan, a
Protestant Gentleman of good credit, was present in a great number of Jesuited
persons: where after great expressions of joy, the greatest of the company, to
whom all gave ear, spoke much after this sort: The King of England at his
marriage had promised us the reestablishing of the Catholic Religion in
England, and when he delayed to fulfill his promise, we summoned him from time
to time to perform it: We came so far as to tell him, that if he would not do
it, we should be forced to take these courses which would bring him to his
destruction. We have given him lawful warning, and when no warning would serve,
we have kept our vow to him, since he would not keep his word to us. The said
Author likewise relates, That in pursuance of the forementioned conclusion at
Rome, many Jesuits came over, who take several shapes to go about their work,
but most of them took party in the army. About thirty of them were met by a
Protestant Gentleman, between Roan and Deep, to whom they said (taking him for
one of their party) that they were going to England, and would take arms in the
Independent army, and endeavor to be Agitators. Much more has he to this
purpose.

M. Baxter likewise proves that many Jesuits did enter in the army, and
swarmed through the Country, under the name of Independants, Seekers, Quakers,
Levellers, etc. endeavoring to ruin the Reformed Religion, by railing against
the Church, Ministry, Ordinances, etc.

From all which it is evident, that the grand work of the Pope and Jesuits his
Janisaries, is to plot and carry on treasons and bloodshed in Protestant
Kingdoms and Commonwealths, which they have been still about since the
Reformation: And no wonder the Priests and Jesuits lay life and all at the
stake, to accomplish bloody and traitorous designs, seeing they are sworn and
engaged by oath to make this their work: For the Pope binds all the Jesuits,
and Priests by oath to inculcat their principles of treason into their
proselyts, and to stir them up upon all occasions to act it, as will be evident
to any who will but read the rules of Ignatius Loyola, the father of the
Jesuits: Or the testimony of Pope Urban the 8. in his Bull of Canonization of
Ignatius Loyola: Touching that Society, that beyond all other fraternity, they
are the chief and most strenuous propugners of the Popes authority. And how far
do the Jesuits extend their vow of blind obedience? Even to the killing of
Kings, raising of treasons and rebellions wherever they can have access. So
that Watson in his Quodlibets, and other secular Priests, have proven and
concluded the Jesuits traitors, both for tenets and practice. But not only are
the Jesuits bound by oath to assassinations and rebellions, but also the
secular Priests themselves (who are not Jesuits) are bound unto the Pope
himself (in his Constitutions for ordering of the English College at Rome) by
oath to propagat rebellion: For thus speaks Martin Aspilcueta. Doctor Novarrus,
lib. 3. consil. and resp. council. 1. de regular. (cited by Doctor Burges) At
Rome in the College of the English, it is a Statut and Papal Constitution,
that whoever will be admitted into that College, he be tied to swear, that
after so many years he will travel unto England for defense of the Catholic
faith, and there preach it both in public and private. Now what Faith it is
that they are bound to preach, the treasons and rebellions raised by them can
best evidence. Now their great work is to corrupt the judgments of their
followers, and instruments of assassination and treason, with poisonous
positions touching the nature of such facts, and bribe their consciences with
strong baits of reward and glory, to all that will undertake the acting of
treasons and rebellions at their instigation, which is a strong incentive to
them: For men that are either sensible of Religion, or desirous of glory, will
easily be induced to any attempt, which is pronounced not only lawful, but
noble and meritorious, for advancement of their Religion. And the Priests and
Jesuits persuasions, are the more forcible, by reason of the great influence
they have upon Papists of both sexes, and the power they exercise over their
consciences, and the esteem and honor they have among them, because that they
do hazard their lives to do them service, which does exceedingly endear them to
them, and makes them more apt to drink down any poisonous principles that they
infuse. And so under pretext of Religion, they at their pleasure involve them
in desperate treasons. For whither will they not lead them by advancing the
Popes authority over all, in ordine ad spiritualia, and by daily telling them
that the Protestants are a pack of excommunicat and damnable heretics, which
all Catholics are to look upon as such, and ought to prosecute them as the
Pope shall command and direct? It would be too tedious to show how often, and
with what arguments they have excited up their followers to treasons and
rebellions. For what rewards have been promised to traitors, if they do the
deed, and what glory of Martyrdom they purchase in heaven, in case they
miscarry, is better known then I can declare. I shall only bring a few instances.

First, one William Parrey a Popish traitor, acknowledged, That he had promised
at Rome to kill Queen Elizabeth, about which he was much troubled in his
conscience, till he lighted upon D. Allens book, which taught that Princes
excommunicat for heresy, were to be deprived of Kingdom and life: which book
(says he) did vehemently excite me to prosecute my attempt.

Secondly, when the Gunpowder treason was hatching, Catesby, and some others,
at first had scruples of the lawfulness of it; upon which they consult father
Garnet, and others of their ghostly fathers, who all pronounce it lawful, and
full of merit, and encourage them in it. Catesby had also grounded himself upon
the doctrine of father Cresuel in his Philopater, who asserteth, That a Prince
manifestly heretical, falls from all Princel^ power and authority, even
before any legal sentence pass d by the Pope against him. To both which he
added the infallible jugement of Clement the 8. who in two several Breves, one
directed to the Catholic Nobility and Gentry of England; the other to father
Garnet, enjoined them not to permit any but a Catholic Prince to succeed Queen
Elizabeth. Hence he concluded, He who then might lawfully he kept out, may now
as lawfully be thrust out* Pope Clement enjoined the former: Ergo, we may do
the latter. And thus armed with poisoned Divinity, he and his followers,
resolved most desperately to go on with that wickedness.

Also Oneil first, and Tyron afterward, had the public approbation of the
University of Salamanca in Spain, before they displayed their rebellious
banners.

From all which, the Reader may perceive in what a poor case any Prince or
Republic stands into where Papists have any power or strength. Is not both the
Kings life and his Kingdom and posterity in daily hazard of utter ruin and
undoing?

Object. But lest it should be said, that these were the the facts of some
treacherous spirits, especially the Jesuits, who have been incendiaries, as
well in their writings, as in their practices, yet the more moderat Catholics
have ever condemned these facts and writings: and many of them have been
content to have granted to the King, all that the Sorbon Doctors and Parliament
of Paris have granted to the King of France.

Answer 1. These treasons and rebellions have not only been done by some
obscure hot-brained Papists and Jesuits, but also approved by their most
learned and approved Writers; yea commended by the Pope himself, who (in their
judgment is infallible:) For did not Pope Pius the 5. excommunicat and depose
Queen Elizabeth, and gave her Kingdom to Philip of Spain (as we hinted before)
which Bull of excommunication was confirmed by his successors Gregory the 13.
and Sixtus the 5? And not only does the Pope excommunicat and depose Kings, but
also he does approve of killing of Kings. For we told you before, that Pope
Sixtus the 5. gave thanks unto God in open Consistory, for the horrible murder
and assassination committed by James Clement upon Henry the third of France;
which Oration was published by the Papists and printed at Paris by Nicolas
Neville and Rollin Thory, with approbation of their Doctors Boucher, de Creil,
and Ancelin. And is not the forecited resolution of Pope Urban, half an
approbation of King-killing, when he says, He esteemed them not to be
murderers, who possessed with the zeal of the Catholic Church against these
that were excommunicat, should happen to kill any of them? And did not Pope
Paul the 5. permit Garnet and Oldcorn (who were taken and executed in England
for the Gunpowder treason) to be put in the Catalogue of Martyrs, their
picture to be worn in medals, their image to be set upon the Altars in
Churches, and their bones worshipped as holy relics? And Gerard, another of
the Gunpowder traitors who fled, was permitted publicly to take confessions
in S. Peter's Church at Rome. And Tosmond (another of these hellish
conspirators) was made public Penitentiary at Rome, and Confessor to the Pope
himself, after they were fled for that hellish Gunpowder plot. And does not
Franciscus de Verone write an Apology in defense of John Chastel, who attempted
the murder of King Henry the 4. of France? Now either the Papists must
acknowledge these assassinations and murders to be lawful* or they must condemn
the Pope as erring in approving of them, which will strike against the
foundation of their Religion to wit, That the Pope cannot err. Now therefore
albeit some Papists in words profess a dislike of Jesuitical practices* yet
still they hold of the Pope for the whole frame of their Religion, and vow
obedience to all his public definitions, and so must approve of the most vile
parricide imaginable, if the Pope command or approve of it.

2. It is an ordinary stratagem of Papists to profess to abhor Jesuitical
tenets to lull us asleep, to get their wickedness acted with less suspicion.
Among many, instances might be given: I shall give one in Queen Elizabeth's time,
when after that Pope Pius his Bull came out against her, some seminary Priests
admired and extolled that Bull, and blasphemously said, It was indyted by the
holy Ghost: yet presently after they set out a book (on purpose to lull the
Queen and State asleep) to admonish the Papists of England, not no practice any
mischief upon the Queen, because Catholics might use no other arms, but
tears, prayers, watchings and fastings, against their adversaries, and yet in
the mean time they never rested plotting one treason after another. A list
whereof I set down before. And even Watson and other Priests, who did write
against the Jesuits rebellious practices, were the desperate propounders and
ringleaders of that treason against King James and Prince Henry, at his coming
to England; for which the said Watson and Clerk suffered the reward of
traitors. So that H. T. and other Papists, are not to be believed; for they
will say any thing, maintain any assertion, that they may make for the
advancement of their cause.

3. What is the matter although they pretend to grant to the King all that the
Sorbon Doctors and Parliament of Paris grant, yea what although they profess to
swear their allegiance, are we the safer, seeing they change their principles
according as they see occasion, and seeing they hold that the Pope can dispense
with any oath, even after they have taken it, as I have proven before? And did
not Parsons and Campian anno 1580. (notwithstanding of their strict oath to
obey the Pope in all things) procure a dispensation to free all Catholics from
obeying the Popes own declaratory Bull of excommunication against Queen
Elizabeth, till a better opportunity? So you see they can get a dispensation
from the Popes own Bull, if they find it not seasonable. What oath then will
bind them, especially to these they account heretical? For that is one of their
principles. No faith is to be kept to heretics, (as we showed you.) They can
change themselves Proteus-like in any form. When there is no remedy, they will
yield to any thing; But when they see their time, they will do any thing.

I shall close all with the testimony of two great Doctors and Bishops in King
James time, the first whereof is Doctor Andreus Bishop of Winchester, who in a
sermon on Nov. 5. 1616. speaking of the reason that Bellarmin gives, why the
primitive Christians did not rise up against persecuting Emperors. id fuit quia
deerant vires; He makes this collection, that is as much as to say, if they now
in these days be so as they were then, and carry themselves quietly, it is quia
non sunt vires: and to hold no longer, then donec erunt: And then you are like
to hear of them, to have them go again with such another birth. Ye shall have
them as myld as Gregory the first, when they have no strength: But as fierce as
Gregory the 7. when they have: and afterward thus.

See ye not next under God, whereto to ascribe your safety? even to non erant
vires, there is a point hangs on that: for while that lasts, while ye keep them
there, ye shall have the primitive Church of them: have them to ly as quiet, as
still, as ever did the barrels in the vault, till vires, like fire come to
them, and then off go they: then nothing but depose Kings, dispose of Kingdoms,
assoil subjects, arm them against their Sovereigns: then do they care not what:
But if the powder take not fire, then shall you straight have books tending to
mitigation; then all quiet again: certainly, thus standing it were best to hold
them in defectu virium, to provide, ut ne sint, to keep them at non sunt vires,
till time they be better minded in this point: and we have good assurance of
it: for minded as they are, they want no will, no virus, they tell us what the
matter is; strength they want; they write it, they print it: and si adessent
vires, they would act it in earnest. Thus he.

The second is Doctor Prideaux in a Sermon on Nov. the 5. who having reckoned
up a Catalogue of the damnable doctrines of Popery, professes to have done it.
To make it appear to these that would willingly be better persuaded of their
doctrine, that the doctrine it self directly warranteth treason. Let the
traitors be what they will, and that none can be an absolut Papist, but (if he
throughl^ understand himself, and live under a Christian Prince, that has
renounced the Popes authority) must needs, being put unto it, be an absolut
traitor.

Thus I hope ye have it proved, both from their principles and practice, that
if Popery or Papists, get any strength or footing in a Kingdom, it will tend
undoubtedly to the ruin of both King and Kingdom. Yet the Papists are grown so
impudent of late, as to charge the Protestants integrity of rebellion, and
rebellious principles, and excuse their own rebellious principles: As in a
Treatise, entitled, Philanax Anglicus, dedicated to the Archbishop of
Canterbury: But Peter du Moulin, has learnedly answered it. And truly herein
they deal with us as Verres did with Tully: Verres himself was a very notorius
thief, and knew that Cicero had much against him in that kind, and therefore he
knavishly and impudently calls Cicero the thief first, though a very true man
and noble Orator. It is just so in this case. Now I pray, what case may both
King and Kingdom expect to be in, if Papists get any strength or power? Have
they not given infinite proofs both of old and late, of their rebellious
disposition and treasonable practices?

SECTION V.
Containing some instances in particular of the barbarous, and inhumane cruelty
of Papists to Protestants, where they had the power over them.

I Have hitherto shown that both the principles and practices of Papists, tend
to treasons, rebellions, war, and bloodshed: I shall in this Section, to detect
their cruelty, give some instances in particular of their barbarous and
inhumane cruelty to Protestants, where ever they get power and authority, or
the upper-hand over them. This is so well known, that none that knows any thing
of History are ignorant of it. Ought ever the sad and deplorable case of
England in Queen Mary's time to be forgotten, when either the soul behoved to
be ruined by Idolatry, or else the body to be burnt in a fire? This was an
unanswerable Dilemma, either soul or body must perish. How many hu^dreds of
Martyrs were burnt in one year all the Country over.

Their inhumane cruelties executed on Protestants, are so many and terrible,
that they would make up many Volumes, and make the hair to stand, and the ears
to tingle. What greater torments are imaginable then is used in the Inquisition
of Spain and Italy, as it is described by M. Clerk in his Martyrologie? But
that the Reader may know ex ungue leonem, their cruel and inhumane carriage to
Protestants, I shall set down a few instances.

I shall begin with the Waldenses in Provence, against whom Meinerus President
of Oppede anno. 1545. raised war, and coming to Cabriers, in which there were
only 60. poor sick pesants, who offered to open the gates and quite the
Country, leaving all their goods behind them; but he entering the town caused
all the men to be brought in a field and to be cut in pieces: The soldiers
striving who should show the best manhood in cutting of heads, arms and legs.
The women he caused to be locked in a barn with much straw, and so put fire to
it, where many women great with child were burnt. One soldier moved with
pity, opening a hole in the wall that some of them might come out, Oppede made
them to be beaten back to the fire with picks and halberts: some of them that
came forth, he slew with his own hands, ripping open their bellies, so that
their children came forth, whom he trod with his feet. It is too tedious to
tell the hellish and unparalleled cruelties that he used upon that people. See
Sleydans Commentaries, and M. Clerks Martyrology, page 133. Another instance of
their inhumane cruelty was in Italy anno 1560. in Calabria: where 88.
Protestants being shut up in a prison, the executioner comes in, takes out
one and blind-foldeth him, and so leads him forth to a large place adjoining,
where commanding him to kneel down, he cuts his throat, and leaving him half
dead, he takes his butchers knife all bloody, and goes back to the rest; so
leading one after another, he dispatched them all. This was such a sad
spectacle, that he that writes of it, could not repeat it without tears. See
Clerks Matyr. page 238.

The next instance of their inhumane and bloody c^uelty shall be the Massacre of
Paris, anno 1572. where when the Papists could not get the Protestants subdued
by war, they conclud a peace: And for security of it, the King gives his own
sister to the King of Navarre, and all the Protestants are invited to the
marriage: But in the mean time, the Queen of Navarre is poisoned and dies, and
upon Bartholomews day, anno 1672. the gates were shut (under pretense of
searching for one that shot the Admiral, but really to keep all the Protestants
within the City) and they came in first and killed the Admiral, and threw his
dead body into the streets, and sent his head as a present to the Pope: And
then to work they went, and slew that night, and the two days following to the
number of ten thousand in Paris. In this massacre their cruelty was so great,
that they spared not young children in the cradle, nor infants in their mothers
wombs, so that the streets were covered with mangled bodies, gates and doors
filled with blood, shoutings and howlings of the murderers, mixed with the
cries and groans of the dying; the breaking open of doors and windows, with the
noise of guns and pistols, all which made an hellish noise: multitudes of dead
bodies were thrown into the river, which was dyed red with their blood:
presently after the King sending letters to Meaux, Troys, Orleans, Angiers,
Roan, Toulouse, Bourdeaux, and other places, where they murdered all the
Protestants most barbarously and inhumanely, and cast out their dead bodies
naked without the honor of burial, or threw them in the water, so that the
rivers were dyed with their blood. The number that were massacred in France in
a few weeks, amounted to thirty thousand and above. Whosoever desires to hear a
more full Relation of the mischievous and horrid cruelty used in this Massacre,
let them read Fox his Acts and Monuments, Vol. III. and Clerks Martyrology, p.
310. etc.

The next instance I shall give, shall be of their persecution in the Valtoline,
anno 1620. where setting upon the people as they were at Sermon, not dreading
any such thing, they murdered them all, not regarding sex nor age: After which,
they marched to Sanders, where the Papists in that place hearing of their
coming, went to the Justice, protesting that they should guard him from danger,
and that they would not permit such villainies to be committed among them then
did they arm themselves, under pretense of defending and securing the
Protestants; who trusting to their promises; mixed themselves among them to
stand to their own defense. But they treacherously betrayed them, and joined
with the other Papists in murdering them all wherever they met with them.
Their cruelty was monstrous for they put a gag in the mouth of some, and then
filled their mouth with powder, and put fire to it, which tore their head
miserably. Some had their mouths slit up to their ears others had the flesh
cut from their faces, others were slashed in other parts of their body till
they died, and others were often put to the strapado, and then hewn in pieces.

The next instance is more recent and fresh in memory, in the late wars in
Germany, since anno 1630. where the Sweds possessed of a town, called Pasewalk,
the Imperialists took it by storm, beat, killed and drove out the Sweds; and
not content therewith, they fell to torturing of the Towns men, ravishing women
and girls in the open streets, and Churchyard* yea women in child bed; where
they killed the men, fired their houses, and burnt many in them. Thurst straw
into cellars where children were hidden, and so burnt and smothered them. Then
they burnt the Churches, and massacred the Ministers, and at last burnt down
the whole Town.

The like cruelty was used against the city of Magdeburg, famous for Religion,
which being taken by Tilly anno 1631. was in twelve hours space wholly turned
into ashes, except 139 houses: No mercy was shown to any age, sex, or
condition; about twenty thousand persons were slain* burnt and smothered to
death; six thousand were drowned in the river: Ladies and Gentle-women like
beasts were yoked together, and led about the Country, and driven into woods
to be ravished; and such as resisted, were stripped stark naked, whipped, had their
ears cropped, and so were turned off.

The Popish army having taken the town of Hoxter anno 1634. they spared neither
man, woman nor child, most inhumanely butchering, and hewing in pieces all,
without respect of age, sex or condition; and what the sword could not spoil,
they caused the fire to consume, and the dead corpse they cast into the river
Weser.

Their rage was so great against the professors of the Gospel, that neither
Turks nor Heathens did ever exceed them. In Saxony, Tillies soldiers tortured
the Protestants, by half strangling them, and pressing their thumbs with
wheels. In Pomeran they forced the people to eat their own excrements; and if
they refused, they thrust them down their throat, whereby some of them were
choked. They tied about the heads of some, strong matches or cords, and with
short truncheons twisted them while blood came out of their eyes, ears, and
noses, yea sometimes till their eyes started out of their heads: to others they
tied burning matches between their fingers, yea, to their eyes, ears, noses,
tongues, cheeks, breasts, legs, and secret parts; yea, such parts as nature
hides, they either stuffed with gunpowder, or hung bags of powder to them,
and so giving fire to it, in an horrible manner they burst their bellies, and
killed them: with bodkins they made holes, or with knives they cut the skin and
flesh of many. They drew strings and cords through the fleshie parts of some,
and through the muscles of their thighs* legs* arms, etc. or through their
noses* ears, lips, etc. Some they hung up in the smoke, drying them with small
fires, and sometimes refreshing them with small drink or water, taking care lest
in their torments they should die too soon. Some they put into hot ovens,
roasting or smothering of them there. Some they roasted with fires of straw:
some they stiffled, strangled or hanged, and this was a great favor, so soon to
rid them out of pain. Of many they bound their hands and feet, that the blood
spitted out of their fingers and toes ends. Of some they tied their hands and
feet backwards together, stopping their mouths with clouts, to hinder them
from praying. Some they hung up with ropes fastened to their privy parts; and
hearing their cries, strove by their roarings to drown their cries, as in
sport. Many they drew up on high, hanging great weights at their feet, to pull
their bodies out of joint. Of some they plained their faces with chissels. Some
men they openly gelded in presence of their wives and children. The mouths of
some they set wide open with gags, and then powered down their throats stinking
water, urine, and other liquid things, till they grew sick, and their bellies
swelled like tuns, whereby they died leasurely with greater torment. Down the
throats of some they violently thrust knotted clouts, and then with a string
pulled them up again, whereby they displaced their bowels, and put them to
miserable torment, in so much as some were made dumb, others deaf, others
blind, and others lame. If the husband entreated for his wife, or the wife for
the husband, they would take the intercessor, and torture him in the same
manner before the others eyes; and when any of these poor creatures in their
torments or agonies of death, called and cried unto God for mercy, they would
command and seek to force them to pray and cry unto the Devil. Yea their
devilishness proceeded so far, that they studied to find out new and unheard of
torments. Some they bound, hung up and sawed off their legs; of others they
rubbed off the flesh of their legs to the very bones: of others they tied the
arms backward, and so ^anged them up by these distorted parts, many they drew
through the streets of the city stark naked, then brake and wounded them with
axes and hammers; and generally used them with such barbarous cruelty that many
begged to be shot or slain instantly, rather then to live and be partakers of
such miseries. Rapts and ravishings they committed beyond all humane modesty:
maids and matrons, wives and widows they forced and violated without
distinction; yea, in the presence of their parents, husbands and neighbors;
yea, women great with child, and others in childbed, their beastliness was
such, that no pen can write it, no faith can believe it.

In Hessen land they took diverse poor women, some mad, some dumb, some lame,
and tying up their coats about their ears, so used them as a modest pen cannot
express. In Pomeran they took the fairest maids, and ravished them before their
parents faces, making them sing Psalms the while: One beautiful maid being hid
by her parents in a dunghill, they found her out, had their pleasure of her,
then cut her in pieces, and hung up her quarters in the Church; yea very girls
of ten years old and under, they ravished, till some of them died. Virtuous and
chaste women they would threaten to kill, or throw their children into the
fire, if they would not yield to their lusts. Diverse maids and women to avoid
their lusts have leapt into rivers and wells, and some have otherwise killed
themselves: and that which was never before heard-of, they did not only violate
sickly and weak maids and women till they died, but committed the like
filthiness with the dead corpse. Who desires to see more of this, let him peruse
Clerks Martyrology, page 275 and seqq.

The last instance of the unspeakable ruin and misery of Protestants under the
merciless rage of Papists, where they are masters, is a homebred one in our
own days, and fresh in memory, and of our own brethren, to wit, the English and
Scottish Protestants in Ireland, in that late persecution raised by the Irish
Papists against them, anno 1642. commonly called, The Irish rebellion. To make
a full Relation of their horrid and barbarous cruelty, it would fill a whole
Volume it self, there being several Volumes written on that subject. I shall
only name some few particulars. And first, when their plot was ripe, the
Priests gave the Sacrament unto diverse of the Irish, upon condition that they
should neither spare man, woman, nor child of the Protestants, saying* that it
was very meritorious to wash their hands in their blood. One Halligan a Priest,
read an excommunication against all these that from thenceforth should relieve
or harbor any English, Scots, or Welsch Protestants, or give them alms at their
doors, whereby many were famished to death. The Friars with tears exhorted them
not to spare any of the English. They openly professed that they held it as
lawful to kill a Protestant, as to kill a sheep or a dog. One of their Priests
said, that it was no more pity or conscience to take the lives or estats from
them, then to take a bone out of a dogs mouth.

The day before this Massacre was to begin, the Priests gave the people a free
dismiss at Mass, with free liberty to go out and take possession of all their
lands: as also to strip, rob and spoil them of all their goods and cattle, the
Protestants being as they told them, worse then dogs; for they were Devils, and
served the Devil, and therefore the killing of such was a meritorious act, and
a rare preservative against the pains of Purgatory; for that the bodies of such
of them as died in the quarrel, should not be cold before their souls should
ascend up into heaven, they should not fear the pains of Purgatory. And that
caused some of them to boast, after they had murdered many, that they knew that
if they should die presently, they should go straight to heaven.

When this persecution first began, many of the Irish Gentlemen persuaded many
of their Protestant neighbors to bring their goods and cattle to them, and they
would secure them; and gave deep oaths and protestations to many, that if they
would deliver their goods, they would suffer them, with their wives and
children, to depart the Country: yet having got their goods, they murdered
some of them; others they stripped stark naked, man, woman and child, and so
turned them out of doors; not suffering them so much as to shelter themselves
in bushes, or in the woods. And they prohibited any of the Irish, under great
penalties, to give them any relief: And their design was, that these whom they
would not cruelly murder in cold blood, might miserably perish through cold,
nakedness, and want: And therefore when any got any rags to cover their
nakedness, they stripped them again and again, and drove them to the wild woods,
in frost and snow, so that many of them starved, and fell down dead on the high
ways. Others that got to any English town, died so soon as they came there, by
reason of the cold and famine suffered in the way. But these were but the
beginnings of sorrows; for they fell on and murdered in cold blood, some at
plough, others in their houses, others traveling in the way without
provocation.

In the Castle of Lisgool there were about 152. persons consumed with fire. At
the Castle of Monea were an hundred slain together. All that was in the Castle
of Tullah, were all cruelly murdered, after the Castle was yielded upon
composition, and faithful promises of fair quarter.

At Lissenkea they hanged and killed above an hundred of the Scots Protestants:
Some they caused upon hopes of life, to hear Mass, and to swear never to alter
from it, and presently thereafter hanged or killed them.

At Portendoun-bridge they drove a thousand persons into the river, and drowned
them all; yea in that County they drowned four thousand persons, driving them
to the river: and if any were slack in their pace, they pricked them forward
with their swords and picks: and to terrify the rest, they killed some, and
wounded others: and if any essayed to swim to the shore, they stood and shot at
them. Some they gave passes, and sent of the Irish with them, under the
pretense of safe-conducting them, while they came to some place fit for
execution, where they either murdered or drowned them.

At Armach, Onel got together all the Protestants thereabout, pretending to
conduct them to Colrain; but before they were gone a days journey they were all
murdered, and so were many others, though they had Oneals protection. In Armach
town there were 500. persons murdered and drowned. In Kilmore all the
inhabitants were stripped and massacred, being 200. families. The whole County
was a common butchery, where many thousands perished in a short time, by sword,
famine, fire, water, and all other cruel manner of deaths that rage and malice
could invent: yea, their cruelty was so great, that they would not grant them
so much liberty as to pray before they murdered them. Some when they were
kneeling and praying, they would cut off their head. When some on their knees
begged but leave to pray before they were slain, they would bid them bequeath
their souls to the Devil. Others would ask them, Why do you desire to pray,
your souls are already with the Devil? and so would immediately slaughter them.
Some they put in filthy dungeons, full of dirt and mire, and there clapping
bolts on their legs, suffered them to perish at leisure. Some they barbarously
mangled, and left them languishing upon the high ways, crying out but for so
much mercy as to be dispatched out of their pain. Some they buried alive. Some
when they were half hanged, they cast into pits, covering them with a little
earth, where they sent out most lamentable groans for a good while after. Some
they hacked, slashed, and wounded and then put and kept them under with stones,
where they lay languishing and groaning, while their own wives stopped their
breath with handkerchiefs to put them out of pain. Some they buried alive, yet
so as their pityful cries were heard afar off. Some were deadly wounded, and so
were hung by the chocks upon tenter hooks. Some with ropes about their necks,
were drawn through the water. Some with ropes about their middles, were drawn
through woods and bogs. Some were hung up by the arms, and then with their
swords they made experiment how many blows an English Protestant would endure
ere he died. Some had their bellies ripped up, and so were left with their guts
running about their heels.

Many women great with child they hung up, then ripped their bellies and let the
infants fall out, and gave them to be devoured of dogs and swine. Many children
they took by the heels, and dashed their brains out against a tree. Many they
pucked and stabbed with their skeens, forks and swords, slashing, cutting and
mangling them, in their heads, faces, breasts, arms, and other parts yet killed
them not, but left them wallowing in their blood* to languish, starve, and pine
to death; and when they desired them to kill them out of their pain, they
refused; yet sometimes after a day or two, they would dash out their brains
with stones or clubs, which they accounted as a great favor. In the cold
weather many thousands of Protestants of all ranks, ages and sexes, being
turned out stark naked, perished of cold and hunger Thousands of others were
drowned, cast into ditches, bogs, and turff-pits. Multitudes were enclosed in
houses, which being set on fire, they were burnt miserably. Some that lay sick
of fevers, they drew out of their beds, and hanged them. Some men, women and
children, they drove into boggy pits: and if any of them endeavored to get out,
they knocked them on their heads. Some aged men and women, they forced them to
carry their own children to the river, where they were drowned; yea some
children were compelled unnaturally to be the executioners of their own
parents. Wives were forced to help to hang their own husbands, and mothers to
cast their own children into the water, after all which themselves were
murdered In Slego they forced a young man to kill his own father, and then
hanged him up. In another place, they forced a woman to kill her husband, then
caused her son to kill her, and then immediately hanged the son: and this they
did that they might destroy both soul and body: yea, the women were as bloody
as the men, killing women and children; yea, they boiled a child of twelve
years of age in a caldron: and in some places, the women stoned the English
women to death. In some places they plucked out the eyes, and cut off the hands
of the Protestants, and so turned them out into the fields to wander till they
perished.

Neither did their cruelty end with the lives of the Protestants, but extended
after death, to the denying burial to their carcasses, casting some into
ditches, leaving others to be devoured of ravenous beasts and fowls; yea some
that had been formerly buried, they dug up, and left them as dung upon the
face of the earth; and they vowed if any parents, or wives dug graves to
bury their husbands or children in, they should be buried therein themselves.
Yea, they abused and triumphed over the dead; for at Kilkenny, when they had
committed many cruel murders, they brought seven Protestant heads, among which
was the head of a Minister, all which they set on the Market Cross, on a Market
day, triumphing^ slashing, and mangling of them, and putting a gag into the
Ministers mouth, they slit up his cheeks to his ears, and laying a leaf of the
Bible before it, they bid him preach, for his mouth was wide enough. When they
put many Protestants in houses, and set fire in them, and burnt them, they
exulted over them, imitating in scorn their cries, and saying, O how sweetly do
they fry. Yea, they made their, boast how many Protestants they killed; yea,
they burnt and blasphemously abused the Bible. At Slego they put all the
Protestants in the Goal, and about midnight they were all stripped stark naked,
and there most cruelly and barbarously murdered, with swords* axes, skeens:
some of them being women great with child, their infants thrust out their arms
and legs at their wounds; after which execrable murders, they laid the dead
naked bodies of the men upon the dead naked bodies of the women, in a most
immodest posture, where they left them while the next day, to be looked on as a
delectable spectacle to the Irish.

About Dunganon were 316. Protestants in the like barbarous manner murdered:
about Charlmont above 510. about Tiron 250. One M. Crew, murdered 31. in one
morning: Two young villains murdered 140. poor women and children: An Irish
women with her own hands murdered 45. At Portendown-bridge were drowned above
300. At Lawgh were drowned above 200. In another place 300. were drowned in one
day. In the Parish of Killamen there were murdered 1200. Protestants. In the
County of Antrum they murdered 954. Protestants in one morning, and afterward
about 1200 more in that County. Sir Philem Oneal boasted that he had slain
above 600 at Garvagh, and that he had left neither man, woman, nor child alive
in the Barrony of Munterlong. In other places he murdered above 2000. persons
in their houses, above 12000, were slain in the high ways, as they fled
toward Down.

Not only the men, but also the boys murdered Protestants, for there were 15.
Protestants all murdered in one night by a Popish boy of 14. years, who slew
them with his skeen, they being imprisoned, and their feet in the stocks.

Another of twelve years killed two women. An English Papist woman killed seven
men and women of her neighbors in one morning; and it was usual for the Papists
children to murder the Protestants children; and sometimes with their wooden
swords, sharp and heavy, they would venture upon people of riper years. An
English woman who was newly delivered of two children, some of these vilains
violently compelled her in great pains and sickness, to rise from her bed, and
took one of the infants that was living, and dashed his brains against the
stones, and then threw him into the river. The like they did with many other
infants. Many others they hanged without all pity; yea many young children they
cut into quarters and goblets. Eighteen Scots infants they hanged upon a
clothiers tenter-hooks. One fat man they murdered, and made candles of his
greass. Another Scottish man they ripped up his belly, and an end of his small
guts tied it to a tree, and forced him round about it, till he had drawn them
all out of his body, saying they would try whither a Scots-man or a dogs guts
were the longer. They took one M. Watson, and cutting two colops out of his
buttocks, they roasted him alive. They ripped up a Scottish woman great with
child cut the child out of her womb, and so left it crawling on her body. They
used also to send their children abroad in troops, armed with long watles and
whips, wherewith they use to beat dead men's bodies about the privy members,
till they beat them off. They brake the backbone of a young youth, and so left
him in the fields; and some days after, he was found, having like a beast,
eaten all the grass round about him; yet neither then would they kill him
outright, but removed him to a place of better pasture.

These and many mo cruelties were used among the poor Protestants: who desires
to see their monstrous, and more then barbarous cruelties at more length, let
him peruse a book written on purpose, called Irelands tears, and M. Clerks
Martyrology, from page 347. to page 369. which books never Papist could
convince of falsehood.

Now lest any should think this was a natural quarrel that the Irish had
against the English. Ans. Certainly that could not be, because they were no
more merciful to the Scottish, whom all acknowledge to be of their own Nation.
2. The English Papists were no whit inferior, but rather exceeded the natural
Irish, in their cruelty against the Protestants that lived among them within
the Pale, being never satisfied with their blood till they had seen the last
drop thereof.

Now was ever such inhumane cruelty heard or read of among Turks or Heathens,
as they exercised against the poor Protestants, who never provoked them
thereto, yea, that had always lived peaceably with them, administering help and
pity to them in distress, cherishing them as friends, and loving neighbors?
yet they showed them no favor nor pity: Alace! who can conceive the fears,
terrors, anguish, bitterness and perplexity that seized upon the hearts of the
poor Protestants, finding themselves so suddenly surprised without remedy, and
inextricably wrapped up in all kind of outward miseries, which could possibly by
man be inflicted upon humane creatures? What sighs and groans, trembling and
astonishment? What schricks, cries, and bitter lamentations of wives, children,
servants and friends, howling and weeping, finding themselves without all hope
of deliverance from their present miseries? How inexorable were their torments
without all bowels of compassion? The most barbarous Nation never used more
cruelty, then they did upon the poor Protestants all the land over. I believe
the Irish in this massacre destroyed by several sorts of torments several
hundred thousands: for there were given up upon oath 150000. put to several
sorts of death in the Province of Ulster. What the number of the slain was in
the three other Provinces, is not on record, but certainly it was very great.
As among other things, the Remonstrance of the distressed Protestants in
Munster, set down in M. Clarks Martyrology evidenceth.

By all that is said, I hope it is sufficiently proved, that the principles and
practices of Papists are bloody, treasonable, cruel and inhumane; yet they are
not only so impudent as to deny this, calling it a loud slander, but also to
charge Protestants of integrity (as they call us) with treasonable and
rebellious principles. Whereas we in all our Confessions acknowledge that
Magistracy is an ordinance of God, and that every soul is to be subject to the
higher powers, and that fidelity and obedience is due to them, in, and for the
Lord. The public Confessions of our Churches, plead for this. See the
Augustan, French, Belgic, Helvetick* Bohemian, Saxonick, Suevick, Scottish,
English, and the Assemblies Confessions.

Did ever any of our Divines teach any such doctrine? or to commit any such
practices as Papists teach? Do we not all hold that an oath is strictissimi
juris, of most strict obligation, and can be dispensed by none under heaven,
and ought to be kept even to heretics, infidels, or any other whatsoever? We
acknowledge that Churchmen, as well as others, are subject to the Magistrate,
according to the Word of God, Romans 13.1. None of us did ever teach, that the
Pope, or any Churchman may dethrone Kings, and alien at their Crowns to
others; neither do we teach that Church men are loosed from the positive laws
of Emperors and Kings; much less do we hold, that the Pope may loose all
subjects from their oath of loyalty, and command that a Jesuit stob, or poison
a King, when he turns enemy to the Roman faith. Satan himself cannot charge
us with these; therefore we entreat that none would hearken to the Author of
Philanax Anglicus, or the like, who endeavor to traduce and calumniat us, as if
the Protestants of integrity did teach and practice rebellion, etc. Look to our
Confessions and the approved writings of our Doctors, and to the practices of
Protestants in the Kingdoms and Commonwealths where they live, and they will
be forced to confess we own no such doctrine. Who more loyal subjects then the
Protestants in France to King Henry the third, and King Henry the fourth? They
owned them* assisted and fought for them, when almost all others abandoned
them? How faithful were our predecessors in Scotland to King James, they
crowned him in his cradle, they preserved him, owned and assisted him, and made
him a glory to Europe, for understanding, learning and wisdom?

I shall not insist further on this, seeing Peter du Moulin has learnedly
vindicated the Reformed Churches from this false aspersion hatched in hell, of
purpose to alienat the affections of the Magistrate from us. But this only say,
as we desire to render to God the things that are Gods; so we desire to render
to Caesar the things that are Cesars.

But to conclud, Does not the truth and honor of God, (which ought to be dearer
to us then our own salvation) our own and posterities welfare and safety in
body, soul, and all that is near and dear to us, call us to consider and
seriously to lay to heart the increase and prevalency of Popery? Since the
Reformation, there was never generally more prevailing of Popery, and more
hazard of being ruined thereby, then now, and yet never less sense thereof, and
zeal against it. In former times, the least appearance of the prevalency of
Popery did alarm all, to deal according to their place and station, most
seriously, for suppressing thereof. I shall not insist in showing how zealous
our predecessors in Scotland were against Popery, and how they left no mean
unessayed for total extirpation thereof out of the land; nor how ready they
were upon the least appearance of any danger, to discover the danger, and
petition and supplicat the Kings Majesty and Estats of Parliament for remedy.
For instance, when news came of the preparation of the Spanish Armado 1588.
what fasting, praying, and humiliation was all the Land over; and all other
means essayed for preventing that dismal-like stroke? And anno 1592. when the
plots of the Popish Lords, who had conspired to bring in the Spaniards in the
Kingdom, was discovered; what zeal and forwardness did all the Land show for
defense of the Reformed Religion, and suppressing of Popery? I will not, I say,
insist at large on these, seeing the Acts of our Parliaments (wherein there are
so many excellent statuts and laws made against Popery) and the Histories of
these times does abundantly declare what ze^l and hatred all ranks and degrees
had against that Romish Whoor. But I shall only make this inference. If they had
such love to the truth, and such zeal against Antichrist, who had not such
light, and were not so strongly engaged, as we are; shall they not arise in
judgment against us, and condemn us? For should not the truths of God be as
precious to us, as to our predecessors? Are there not as many obligations lying
upon us, as was upon them? Is not Popery that same damnable Antichristian
idolatry now, that it was then? Why then are we so dreadfully lukewarm and
indifferent, and so little zealous against it? Should we be silent when Christ
suffers? If in any thing, and at any time we be obliged to confess him before
men, and to contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the Saints; is it
not in this thing, and at this time, when Antichrist is endeavoring to rob us
of the purity of the Gospel, and to entangle us with the yoke of his Idolatry
and superstition? Do we not see what we may expect, if Popery prevail,
notwithstanding of all their specious pretenses, and fair and plausible
insinuations.

The massacre of Paris, the Spanish Inquisition, and their unheard of cruelty
in Ireland to our own flesh and blood, together with the Marian days in
England, ought never to be forgotten by us, but always raise in us a perfect
detestation of, and holy zeal and indignation against that Scarlet Whoor. What
may we expect if Popery prevail, but that sad Dilemma, either to be burnt at a
stake, or loose our souls and bodies eternally: for the portion of these that
worship the Beast, and receive his mark, is to be casten in that lake that
burns night and day, Rev. 14.10.11.

THE CONCLUSION.
NOw, although we can expect nothing but either loss of life, and all that is
near and dear to us, or to loose our souls eternally, if Popery prevail: yet
how little concerned are we in these matters? How luke warm and indifferent are
we in this age and generation, as to any Religion? How few are they that are
stirred up to deal with God by prayer and supplication, for continuing of the
Gospel in purity with us, and to lay seriously to heart the abounding iniquity
of these days, that may justly provoke the Lord to give us up to the tyranny of
Antichrist? It is true many apprehend no hazard from Antichrist, and think that
all the noise that is made of the prevalency of Popery, is without any real
ground and cause: But let such think what they please, yet really our hazard is
not so little as is apprehended, if we consider the diligence, activity, and
vigilance of Antichrist upon the one hand, and the lightness, unstability,
lukewarmness, and Gallio-like temper of this generation, together with the
dreadful evils whereby the Lord is provoked to remove the candlestick, and give
us up to strong delusions to believe lies, on the o her hand.

I. First, I say, if we consider the diligence and activity of Antichrist; for
is not Antichrist as active and diligent as ever? Has he not been still
endeavoring by all manner of way to get his deadly wound cured, and the
Reformed Churches brought again under his subjection, and especially Britain
and Ireland, which he looks upon as his great eyesore? Therefore he has
erected for educating of the children of Scots and English Papists, a College
at Doway in Flanders, another at Rome, the third at Valladolit in old Castile,
a fourth in Sevil in Spain, a fifth in S. Omers in Artois, a sixth in Madrid in
new Castile in Spain, a seventh in Lovain in Brabant, an eight in Liege in
Luikland, a ninth in Ghent in Flanders. Now these that are educated in these
Colleges (especially at Rome) they are bound by oath to come over to Britain
and Ireland for propagating of Popery; and accordingly some comes over to
preach and say Mass to Papists: Others comes over under the notion of gallants,
and offers their service to Noblemen, that so they may engyre themselves into
their favor, and know affairs. Others give out themselves to be Seekers,
Quakers, etc. and rail against the Ministry and ordinances, and diffuse Popish
doctrine: and in these employments they use undefatigable diligence: They do
not weary in their work: They are as active now as any time heretofore, walking
and acting most politically and under ground: For their great work now a days
is to destroy the Reformed Churches by underhand dealing, and legerdemain
(as they call it) so that we shall not know nor see who hurts us, while we be
utterly ruined. Adam Coutzens a Jesuit of Mentz, a great Politician, wrote a
great Book of Politics, and in his 2. Book, chap. 18. he gives several rules
to his fellow Jesuits, for cheating a people of the Reformed Religion by slight
of hand and legerdemain.

1. The first is, To proceed as Musicians do in tuning their instruments, who
proceed gradually, straining their strings with a gentle hand, and setting them
up by little and little. Or as Physicians do in curing diseases, who abate
noxious humors by degrees and pauses. So Jesuits will not discover all their
doctrine at first, but bring in corruptions by degrees.

2. The second is, To press the examples and practices of some eminent men, as
a good mean to draw on the rest. Thus they cry out such a Nobleman, or great
man, has embraced the Roman Religion, why may you not do the like?

3. The third rule is, That Arch-hereticks, and such as are Teachers of heresy
(meaning the zealous Ministers, and others that propagat and defend the
Reformed Religion) must be banished the Commonwealth at once, if it may safely
be done; but if not, by degrees. This way they followed in Bohemia, banishing
the Ministers by degrees, and their great hatred is still against the Ministry.

4. His fourth rule is, That these that are adversaries to true Religion (to
wit, Popery) be put from their dignities, places and offices, and not trusted
with power or public employment. Hence Jesuits insinuat themselves much,
ordinarily on Statesmen, and these who have the disposal of places of trust,
and use all means to keep zealous Protestants from trust and power.

5. The fifth rule is, To make the Protestant Religion odious, by laying load
upon such tenets as are most subject to harshest construction; and rendering
the persons of these that maintain them contemptible. Hence it is the great
work of Papists to raise calumnies on our Religion, and the professors thereof:
for example, That we make God the Author of sin; revive old condemned heresies,
etc. and they have raised a great heap of lies, reproaches and calumnies upon
our first Reformers, Luther, Calvin, etc.

6. His sixth rule is, To foment the quarrels that are among Protestants, and
strengthen the party that is nearest a compliance with Rome. So any difference
that is among us, they cast oil to the fire, and play their own game thereby.

7. The seventh rule is, That all private Conventicles, and public meetings
must be forbidden. This they did in Bohemia; for the Pope and his Cardinals had
a consultation what they should do with the Bohemians and Germans? It was
resolved, that seeing their former strong purges which they had used to expel
heretical humors, had not proved effectual, they therefore resolved to take a
milder course; and in prosecution thereof, they used several stratagems; one
whereof was, to prohibit all meetings of the Protestants.

8. His eight rule is, Severity of laws and punishments, to compel the obstinat
unto duty, and yet the rigor of the law must be slowly drawn out, and not
against all; but only such as be most dangerous: For (says he) although
compulsory reformation will do no good to old standers, yet it will render the
younger sort Catholics.

9. The ninth and last rule is, That such as are in authority, and have the
public management of Ecclesiastical affairs, do religiously practice and
maintain integrity and purity of manners. From all which we may see that we may
be in great hazard of being ruined by the policies of Priests and Jesuits.

II. But, alace! although they be nothing abated in their activity and
diligence to undo and ruin us; yet we are wonderfully abated of our zeal and
hatred of them and their doctrine. Our predecessors had their zeal raised very
high against them, and were very active and diligent in resisting and opposing
them; but how indifferent and lukewarm are we in this generation? some of a
Cassandro-Grotian temper, that are for complying and uniting with them; others
of Gallios temper, that is not much concerned in any Religion, if they can
secure their own civil concernments: others are ignorant, light, unstable, and
unfixed in the principles of Religion; so there are but very few that have any
sense of the evil or danger of Popery upon their spirits.

III. But that which may most of all alarm us, is our heinous provocations and
transgressions, whereby the Lord is dreadfully provoked to give up with us, and
remove our candlestick out of its place, and to give us up to the delusions of
Antichrist; may we not tremble for fear of this, if we consider what God has
done for us, and what requital we have given him.

God has done many wonderful things for us in these lands, both of old and of
late; for according to the promises made of old to his Son, That he would give
the heathen for his inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for his
possession, and that the isles should wait for his law, was graciously pleased
many hundred years ago, and early after the rising of the Sun of righteousness,
to give light unto the Gentiles, to pity our forefathers then mancipated to the
service of Idols, which were not God, and visit them with the light of the
glorious and blessed Gospel; which he so blessed* that in a short time both
King, Nobility, and people embraced it, and the whole Nation became Christians,
and for sundry generations the land was blessed and honored of God with many
Professors and Pastors famous for learning, holiness and piety; and for their
pains and success in the work of the Gospel, both at home and abroad, until at
last, with the rest of most of the Christian Churches in Europe, it was
involved in the darkness of Popish superstition and idolatry; to which the
greatest part were in bondage for many years: but there was a remnant, who kept
their garments pure, and did not receive the mark of the Beast. Likewise when
the Lord with a high hand and a mighty stretched-out arm did discover (by his
servant Luther, and other worthy instruments whom he raised up) the
abominations of that Whoor, he was graciously pleased in the days of our
fathers, to redeem us from that Antichristian tyranny, and superstition and
idolatry, and again to cause the light of the Gospel shine among us; which
mauger many oppositions, he has always kept among us in purity to this day,
expecting that we should have brought forth the fruits thereof. But, alace! was
ever a people followed with so much mercy; and gave such evil recompense and
unanswerable dealing to the Lords goodness, as we have done? Was ever more
wickedness and prophanity among a people, then is among us? Is not many very
ignorant of GOD, and the way of salvation holden out in the Gospel,
notwithstanding of all the pains that have been taken on them? Has not
prophanity, like Jordan, overflowed all its banks? I know not if there be so
much swearing, drinking, whooring, blasphemy, revelling, etc. among Heathens,
that never heard of the Gospel, as is among us. And is there not an universal
almost contempt and undervaluing of the Gospel, and a deriding and mocking of
Religion? Many are now grown so Atheistical, that they have casten off all fear
of GOD, Heaven, Hell, or regard of salvation, or damnation. Did GOD threaten to
remove Ephesus candlestick out of its place, because of falling from her first
love? And ought we not to tremble, lest ours be removed? Did he threaten to
spew Laodicea out of his mouth, because of lukewarmness, and being neither cold
nor hot; and can we conceive that he will spare us who are so universally
lukewarm? Did GOD cut off the Jews, who were the natural branches, for their
unfruitfulness, and other sins: and suppose we that he will spare us? Is it
enough to constitut a Reformed Protestant to cast off the idolatry error and
superstition of the Church of Rome, and not also to reform from the prophanity
and wickedness that reigns in the world; and to use all endeavors to have our
conversation according to the Gospel? For the great end of the appearing of the
grace of GOD in the Gospel, is to teach us to deny all ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present life, etc.

The Magdeburg Century-Writers ( in praefat. ad Cent. 5.) observe* that before
Antichrist came to his hight, and infected the Christian world with his
idolatry, these following iniquities reigned every where. Verbi Divini
contemptus, etc. The contempt and depravation of the Word of the LORD: the
inventing and defending of corruptions: the toleration and reverencing of
seducers: the persecution and oppression of faithful Teachers: and finally,
Epicurism and collusion with the ungodly: upon which followed, as a deserved
punishment, the substitution of humane traditions, in place of GODS Word: the
giving liberty and rewards to impostors: the hindering the confession of the
truth: the giving over to a reprobat sense, and to blindness; and being
deceived by the efficacious illusions of the Devil, which punishments were
accompanied with idolatry, superstitious worship, Phanatick and more then
Ethnic furies; also civil punishments and calamities on the Kingdoms and
Commonwealths, in which these sins did abound.

The Author of the Book, entitled, Consideratio causarum Belli Bohemici,
points out the abounding among them, of the subsequent sins, as one main cause
of the destruction of Bohemia by Antichrist. The chief sins (says he, part. 2.
page 24.) that abounded in Bohemia before its devastation, were (as the godly
often confessed) ingratitude and unthankfulness for the Gospel, and contempt of
the Ministry, that they did not esteem it as became: excess in meat and
clothing, especially in great persons: oppression of their subjects, and small
care of the poor: doing to their neighbor what they would not had them doing to
them: remissness and slackness in discipline, and giving a license to sin: but
especially cold rifeness and lukewarmness, in reference to the interest of
Christ, and defense and maintenance of the Gospel.

Now if God was so provoked by these abovementioned sins, that he gave up
almost all the Christian world to the delusions of Antichrist, and removed his
Candlestick from Bohemia, which was such a famous Church, and had witnessed for
the truth against Antichrist for so long a time; may we not tremble, lest he be
provoked to give up with us? Is not the Word and Ordinances much contemned and
despised among us? Have not many errors and corruptions sprung up, and like a
flood overspred many places in these Lands? Was there ever more ingratitude,
and unthankfulness for the Gospel, and contempt of the Ministry among a
people, then is among us? Is not gluttony, drunkenness, vanity of apparel and
oppression, turned Epidemick, among all ranks and degrees of persons? Were ever
any more coldrife and lukewarm in reference to the interests of Christ, then we
are? Yea, we are guilty of many of these things, for which the Lord threatens
to depart, and to remove his Candlestick, as will appear, if we a little
consider some of the special sins that the Lord threatens with his removeal.

1. Ignorance of God, and of the necessary truths of the Gospel, is threatened
with his removeal, Jer. 6.8. Be instructed, O Jerusalem! lest my soul depart
from thee, etc. Isai. 27.11. It is a people of no understanding; therefore he
that made them, will have no mercy on them: and he that formed them, will show
them no favor. Now for all the light of the Gospel that has shined among us
these hundred years and above, the Word being line upon line, precept upon
precept, etc. yet what gross and palpable ignorance is every where to be found;
the generality of people ignorant even of the fundamentals of Religion?

2. Barrenness and unfruitfulness under the Gospel, is threatened with the
removeal thereof, Isai. 5.6 7. I looked for grapes, but behold wild grapes. And
now go to, I will tell you what I will do to my vineyard; I will take away the
hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up: and breakdown the wall thereof, and it
shall be trodden down. And I will lay it waste: it shall not be pruned, nor
dug, etc. The fig tree that was three years fruitless, is commanded to be
cut down, Luke 13.7. And the earth that drinks in the rain that comes often
upon it, and brings forth nothing but thorns and thistles, is rejected, and
near unto cursing, Heb. 6.8. Now, was ever people more rained upon then we? And
yet is there any that is more barren and unfruitful then we are? Are not the
most part of us empty vines, that bring forth fruit to themselves? How few are
there that the grace of God that brings salvation, has taught to deny all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly; to
be crucified to the flesh, with the lusts and affections thereof, to have their
conversation in heaven?

3. Slighting, loathing and wearying of the precious things of God, and of his
Ordinances, is a sin, for which the Lord threatens to remove from a people,
Amos 8.4.5.6.9 11.12. Hear this, O ye that swallow up the needy, etc. saying.
When will the new Moon be gone that we may sell corn: and the Sabbath, that we
may set forth wheat, etc. Verse. 9. I will cause the Sun to go down at noon, and
darken the earth in the clear day. And I will turn your feasts into mourning,
and all your songs to lamentations, etc. And verse. 11. I will send a famine in
the land; not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the
Word of the Lord. And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the North even
to the East; they shall run to and fro to seek the Word of the Lord, and shall
not find it. Zech. 11.8. Their soul abhorred me: then said I, I will not feed
you; that that dies, let it die. Now is not the wearying, despising, slighting
and contemning of the Ordinances of Christ, so evident among us, that he that
runs may read it?

4. A fourth sin, for which the Lord threatens to give up with folk, is
formality and lukewarmness; contenting themselves with a form of godliness
without the power thereof. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.11.12. Because they received not the
love of the truth, that they might be saved: and for this cause, God shall send
them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie, etc. And Laodicea is
threatened for her lukewarmness, to be spewed out of Christ's mouth, Rev 3.16.
Now what age or generation could ever parallel this for formality and
lukewarmness in the matters of God? And may we not be justly given up to the
delusions of Antichrist?

5 A fifth sin, is unbelief and disobedience to the call of God in the Gospel,
Hosea 9.17. My God will cast them away, because they did not hearken unto him:
and they shall wander among the Nations. Was it not for this sin, that the Lord
upbraided those Cities, wherein most of his mighty works were done, and
threatens to bring desolation on them? Matthew. 11.21.22.23.24. Were not the Jews
cut off for their unbelief? Romans 11.20. And is there no sad evidences and
symptoms of this sin every where? How few are they that have received Christ by
faith, and is endeavoring Gospel-obedience? And may we not fear lest the
judgment of Chorazin, Capernaum and Bethsaida be ours?

6. A sixth sin, for which the Lord threatens to remove the Candlestick, is
falling from our first love, Rev. 2.4 Now have we not declined, not only from
the love and zeal which our fathers had; but also even from that love, zeal and
diligence in duty that once we our selves had?

7. A seventh sin, is stupidity and impenitency under all Gods dispensations,
whether of mercy or judgment, Jer. 8.5.6 7. And is not this sin so manifest,
that he that runs may read it? Who is smiting on his thigh, and saying, What
have I done? How few are noticing what God is contending for, or laying their
iniquities to heart?

Several others might be instanced, but these may suffice to show us what
ground of fear we may have of Gods giving us up to the delusions of Antichrist:
yea, is he not in a great measure departed from us? Has he not sore cracked,
if not broken, the staves of beauty and bands, our unity and authority? We are
divided in his anger, and contempt is powered upon us. Is not the blessing of
Ordinances much restrained? How few are converted and built up by the Gospel?
Yea, what deadness, decay and withering is upon all, even the Lords people? And
how many are content to live without God, and suffer him to be gone?

Now lay all these together, and we will see that the ground of fear is greater
then is apprehended by many: Therefore let us be laying the hazard of the
Church, and of our selves and posterity to heart, and let us be stirring up our
selves to deal with the Lord by mourning and repentance, prayer and
supplications, for the turning away of his wrath, and for the pouring out of
his vials upon Antichrist. If ever there was a time wherein repentance and
mourning for our sins, and the sins of the Land was called for, it is now: For
are not our sins very great? And is not the cry of them come up to heaven? And
is not the Lord harkening and hearing if any man will repent him (...) the evil
of his doings, and say, What evil have I done For he is waiting to see what we
will do, before he leave us altogether: For he has in a great measure left us
already. For are we not stricken with blindness, confusion and astonishment,
and trembling of heart? Is he not in a great measure departed from his
Ordinances? For is not that light darkened, that life withered, that strength
abated, that presence evanished, that tenderness gone, these influences
withholden, that sometimes were wont to be felt in Ordinances? Yea, is not
prayer restrained and love waxed exceeding cold, and hardness of heart grown
universal, delight in God and in his Word, and in the exercises of godliness
grown exceeding rare? Does not God hide his f^ce from us, and answer us with
terrible things in righteousness? All which speak, that the glory of the Lord
is departed from the Temple to the threshold. Let us therefore lay these things
seriously to heart, and break up our fallow ground, and circumcise our selves
to the Lord, and take away the fore-skins of our hearts, lest his fury break
forth like fire and burn, that none can quench it, Jer. 4.3. For is he not
crying, both by his Word and dispensations, Be instructed, O Jerusalem! (O
Britain!) lest my soul depart from thee, lest I make thee desolat, a land not
inhabited? Jer. 6 8. Repentance and Reformation is only the mean to prevent our
ruin: therefore let us be dealing with him who is the Prince exalted, to give
repentance and remission of sins, for the pouring out of that spirit upon the
land. O! if we were all about this work! then there might yet be hope in Israel
concerning us. The Lord who is rich in mercy, grant us mercy, so as to be
stirred up to true mourning and repentance, and to be laying more seriously to
heart, the grounds of his contention. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 1. line 7. for Churches, read Church, p. 9. r. Rev. 14.11. p. 33. l. 19.
r. Arim. p. 37. l. 30. r. Bellarmins, p. 58. l. 32. r. Sacramentis, p. 92. l.
23. r. imports, p. 128. l. 5. r. naturis, p. 151. l. 9. r. is, p. 172. l. 18.
r. books, p. 212. l. 9. r. The eleventh, p. 388. l. 7. r. if it be of works, p.
393. l. 32. r. one, p. 413. l. 33. r. Ephesians. p. 443 l. 6. r. so great, and l.
13. r. King, p. 481. l. 33. r. gravest, p. 484. l. 10. r. persecute, p. 489. l.
22. r. Protestants of integrity.


